[1747]

Dear Sir,

I am ashamed of being so long in writing to you. If I should plead laziness, you would say I am much alter'd: if multiplicity of business, you would scarce believe me : if forgetfulness of you and our friendship, I should tell a gross untruth. I can therefore plead nothing but idleness, and a gay, pleasurable life, which steals away hour after hour, and day after day; and leaves no time for such occupations as one's sober reason may approve most of. This is our case, while on shore; and even while on board, as far as one can have much enjoyment in that situation.

I wrote my brother from the coast of Brittany; giving him some account of our expedition, and of the causes of our disappointment. I suppose he received it after you had left the country; but I doubt not he has informed you of it. We were very near a great success, the taking of L'Orient, perhaps Port Louis, which would have been a prodigious blow to France; and, having an open communication with the sea, might have made a great diversion of their forces, and done great service to the common cause. I suppose you are become a great general, by the misfortune of the seat of war being so long in your neighbourhood. I shall be able when we meet to give you the just cause of our failure. Our expedition to North America is now at an end; we are recalled to England; the convoy is arrived, and we re-embark in a few days. I have an invitation to go over to Flanders with the General, and an offer of table, tent, horses, &c. I must own I have a great curiosity to see a real campaign; but I am deterred by the view of the expense, and am afraid, that living in a camp, without any character, and without any thing to do, would appear ridiculous. Had I any fortune which could give me a prospect of leisure, and opportunity to prosecute my historical projects, nothing could be more useful to me; and I should pick up more military knowledge in one campaign, by living in the General's family, and being introduced frequently to the Duke's, than most officers could do after many years service. But to what can all this serve? I am a philosopher, and so, I suppose, must continue.

I am very uncertain of getting half-pay, from several strange and unexpected accidents, which it would be too tedious to mention; and if I get it not, shall neither be gainer nor loser by the expedition. I believe, if I would have begun the world again, I might have returned an officer, gratis; and am certain, might have been made chaplain to a regiment gratis; but . . . I need say no more. I shall stay a little time in London, to see if any thing new will present itself. If not, I shall return very cheerfully to books, leisure, and solitude, in the country. An elegant table has not spoilt my relish for sobriety; nor gaiety for study; and frequent disappointments have taught me, that nothing need be despaired of, as well as that nothing can be depended on. You give yourself violent airs of wisdom, you'll say, Odi hominem ignava opera, philosophica sententia. But you will not say so, when you see me again with my Xenophon or Polybius in my hand; which, however, I shall willingly throw aside to be cheerful with you, as usual. My kind compliments to Mrs Home, who, I am sorry to hear, has not yet got entirely the better of her illness. I am, my dear Sir, Yours sincerely,

David Hume.
