Dear Smith

I have got down a few Copies of my Dissertations lately publish'd at London; & shall send you one by the first Glasgow Waggon. I beg of you to do me the Favor of accepting this Trifle. You have read all the Dissertations in Manuscript; but you will find that on the natural History of Religion somewhat amended in point of Prudence. I do not apprehend, that it will much encrease the Clamour against me.

The Dedication to John Hume you have probably seen: For I find it has been inserted in some of the weekly Papers, both here & in London. Some of my Friends thought it was indiscreet in me to make myself responsible to the Public for the Productions of another: But the Author had lain under such singular & unaccountable Obstructions in his Road to Fame; that I thought it incumbent on his Wellwishers to go as much out of the common Road to assist him. I believe the Composition of the Dedication will be esteemd very prudent; & not inelegant.

I can now give you the Satisfaction of hearing, that the Play, tho' not near so well acted in Covent Garden as in this Place, is likely to be very successful: Its great intrinsic Merit breaks thro all Obstacles. When it shall be printed (which will be soon) I am perswaded it will be esteem'd the best; & by French Critics, the only Tragedy of our Language. This Encouragement will, no doubt, engage the Author to go on in the same Carrier. He meets with great Countenance in London: And I hope will soon be render'd independant in his Fortune.

Did you ever hear of such Madness & Folly as our Clergy have lately fallen into? For my Part, I expect that the next Assembly will very solemnly pronounce the Sentence of Excommunication against me: But I do not apprehend it to be a Matter of any Consequence. What do you think?

I am somewhat idle at present; and somewhat undetermin'd as to my next Undertaking. Shall I go backwards or forwards in my History? I think you us'd to tell me, that you approvd more of my going backwards. The other woud be the more popular Subject; but I am afraid, that I shall not find Materials sufficient to ascertain the Truth; at least, without settling in London: Which I own, I have some Reluctance to. I am settled here very much to my Mind; and wou'd not wish, at my Years, to change the Place of my abode.

I have just now receivd a copy of Douglas from London: It will instantly be put in the Press. I hope to be able to send you a Copy in the same Parcel [with the Dissertations].

 I am Dear Sir . . .

 [Feby or March, 1757.]

Pray why did we not see you this Winter? We shall excuse you for no other Reason but because we hope you were busy. But you must not only have Industry: You must also have Perseverance.
