Dear Sir



I have been detain'd so long in London, that Dr Armstrong has left me above a Fortnight ago; and now I am hurryd down to Scotland, and by another Road & in another Company; so that it will be impossible for me to pay you a Visit at Davenport. I assure you, that I regreat this Accident very sincerely: I proposed to myself a great deal of Pleasure in passing some days with you in your Country Seat; and I wanted very much to show you the whole Train of Correspondence between your Guest & me. I am sorry, that that Affair has made so great a Noise all over Europe: But I found myself obligd to make the Rupture public, in order to prevent the Effects of his Malice against me: He is writing his Memoirs, and intends to blacken me, as much as possible: He threatens me in a Letter with this Vengeance; and I forsaw, that these Memoirs might be published either after my death or after his. In the former Case, there wou'd be no body to tell the Story or to vindicate my Memory. In the second Case, my Apology, being wrote against a dead Man, wou'd lose much of its Authenticity. For this Reason, I have drawn a Narrative of the whole Transaction, inserting all the Letters on both Sides, which indeed compose the far greater Part of the Piece: Among the rest, I insert that long Letter of Rousseau, which contains a full Detail of his Grievances against me, and which I have already mentioned to you. I intended to have shown you the whole Narrative. I have made one Copy, which I have deposited in a sure hand at Paris: I have given another to Lord Hertford, and I keep another to myself. These will remain in Reserve, till Rousseau attacks me, which I expect every day; and I wonder indeed he has delay'd it so long. I know not whether so much Precaution  on my part be not superfluous; tho' the Malignity and Talents of your Guest render him very dangerous. There is scarce, however, a Person in Europe, who does not look upon him  at present as very mad or very wicked, or as both; and if the public Voice were not apt to be soon obliterated, I might safely rest my Defence upon it.



When I say, that he is a very dangerous Man, I do not mean, that he is likely to prove so to you: As you have been so happy as never to make Yourself known to the Public as an Author, he is less likely to entertain any Jealousy against you; and he may submit with the less Repugnance to the great Obligations, which he owes you. Your living at such a Distance from him will also serve not a little to preserve your mutual Friendship. For these Reasons, I shall use the Freedom to repeat my Exhortations to you, that you continue, as long as possible, the same good Offices towards him, which you have so charitably begun. Notwithstanding his atrocious Conduct towards me, I should be sorry to see him abandoned by all the World: Your Knowledge of his Character will only serve you to use the greater Precautions against him: And he is now a better Object of your generous Humanity, that he has been  in this Instance so unfortunate in his Behaviour.



He must now expect to live altogether on his own Funds without any Pension. Unhappy Man! to deprive me so cruelly of the delicious Pleasure I felt in serving him; and at the same time to oppose so violently his own Interest. I was oblig'd to show the whole Train of the Correspondence to General Conway, which cuts off all his hopes from that Quarter. But what is more; the King has heard of the Affair, and express'd a great Curiosity to know the whole of it; so that I was oblig'd to send my Narrative to His Majesty. Rousseau needs not complain, that only one Side is shown: For as his long Letter is inserted, his Pleading is very fully heard against me.



If you do me the Favour to write me, please to direct to me as usual. For I shall not probably be long in Scotland; and my Landladies have Directions to send my Letters after me. I am Dear Sir with great Sincerity

Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume

Lisle Street, Leicester Fields 2 Septr 1766
