Dear Brother

I hope you will excuse my not writing, immediatly upon my Arrival. I knew, that the Papers wou'd inform you of that Event; and I had nothing to say, but what was Matter of mere Curiosity and might be delay'd till our meeting. You are acquainted with my usual Indolence in writing, to which the Hurry of my removal and coming into a new Scene gave some Excuse. As you know, that I never left any place without Regreat, you may imagine, that I did not leave Paris altogether willingly, after having been so long accustomd to it. I do not find this new Scene near so much to my Taste, and I shall be long ere I am reconcil'd to it. Perhaps, Edinburgh may please me better: I promise myself at least some Satisfaction in my Nephews, of whom I hear a very good Account: And it is surely more suitable to one of my Years to seek a Retreat in my native Country, than to pass the Dregs of Life, among the Great and among People, who, tho' they seem to have a Friendship for me, are still Strangers. I accustom myself, therefore, to this Idea without Reluctance; and since I have cross'd the Seas, I find my Regreat for the good Company I left behind me, less pungent and uneasy.

You give me bad Accounts of the Loss of my Money: This is a Favour I owe that Rascal, Tom Cockburn, who coud not but know something of Haliburton's Affairs. I doubt not but Davie Anderson will do all he can to save something, if possible. I have sold out my four per cents in the Stocks, at 1545 pounds. I keep only the long Annuities, which I coud sell for between 4 & 500 pounds; so that I am a Gainer near 500 Pounds by the Stockjobbing. I have remitted the Money to Scotland, and shall imitate your Example in settling it.

Tell Lady Stewart, that I wrote her an Answer by Jemmy Coutts, who did not go to Scotland, as he intended. I coud give her Friend no Encouragement to go to Paris. I shall write to the Bishop of Downe and Connor about Wilson; but my Success is very little to be depended on, as I know the Government in Ireland is as much straiten'd as that of England. His Money is too little to buy a Chaplaincy. On the whole, Carlysle writes me, that Wilson is for the present very well with him, if he coud be contented; but this shall not hinder me from doing him all the Service in my power.

You will have heard by this time, that I have brought over with me the famous Rousseau, the most singular Man surely in the World. He applyd to me last Summer to take him under my Protection in England, as he calld it; but in the mean while, he was chac'd out of Switzerland, and came to Strasbourg, with an Intention of going to the King of Prussia, who pressd him earnestly to live with him. At Strasbourg my Letter reachd him, making him an Offer of all my Services, upon which he turn'd short, and having obtaind the King of France's Passport came and joind me at Paris. I have liv'd with him ever since: He is a very modest, mild, well-bred, gentle-spirited and warm-hearted Man, as ever I knew in my Life: He is also in appearance very sociable: I never saw a man who seems better calculated for good Company nor who seems to take more Pleasure in it; yet is he absolutely determind to retire and board himself in a Farmer's House among the Mountains of Wales for the sake of Solitude. He has refus'd a Pension from the King of Prussia and Presents from hundreds: I have been offerd great Sums for him, if I cou'd have prevaild on him to accept of them: Yet till within these three Months he was in absolute Beggary: He has now about 70 pounds a [year] which he has acquird by a Bargain, for his Works. It is incredible the Enthusiasm for him in Paris and the Curiosity in London. I prevaild on him to go to the Play-house, in order to see Garrick, who placd him in a Box opposite the King and Queen. I observd their Majestys to look at him, more than at the Players. I shoud desire no better Fortune than to have the Privilege of showing him to all I please. The hereditary Prince payd him a Visit a few days ago; and I imagine the Duke of York calld on him one Evening when he was abroad. I love him much and shall separate from him with much Regreat.

 I am Dear Brother 
Yours sincerely



David Hume

London 2d Feby 1766
