London 24 May, 1768.

I should not have delayed so long, dear Madam, the answering your very obliging letter, had I not thought it essential to answer a part of it to your satisfaction. I mentioned to Lord Ossory the debt due by poor Tavistock to M. de Puységur: he told me that he knew of it already, that Lady Tavistock had told him of it, and desired him to remit the money; but his indolence and forgetfulness had hitherto prevented him; he would however give immediately orders to that purpose: these immediate orders did not follow immediately; but at last, by my reminding him frequently, the affair is executed. The twenty louis-d'ors are sent over to M. Panchaud the banker; and M. de Puységur has nothing to do but send for them to Panchaud, or draw upon him to that amount, only desiring him to place the money to the account of Mr Coutts, banker, in London. I hope, when you give this information to M. de Puységur, you will not fail to let him know how much I desire a place in his memory.

Nothing gives me greater pleasure than your telling me, that I am not forgot by my friends at Paris. I cannot but recollect with great satisfaction, the agreeable society which I enjoyed there; and shall ever reflect on it as the happiest period of my life. I have not, however, any great prospect at present of settling there, as once was my intention, though I hope still to pay you frequent visits. I find the chains, which attach me to this country, multiply upon me. The King has given me a considerable augmentation of my pension, expressing at the same time his expectation, that I am to continue my History. This motive, with my habits of application, will probably engage me in this undertaking, and occupy me for some years.

I am glad you see, from time to time, our friend at the Temple. I find by her letters that she is not quite happy in her present condition, and yet her farther elevation would be the source of greater chagrin to her. I hear she has found an advantageous marriage for her son, which will be a real and durable satisfaction to her. I am told the little Count is well spoken of, and our friend, I find, is much in conceit with him; which is a very happy turn; for she used not formerly to be over-partial in his favour. Be so good as to inform her of the King's goodness to me.

I hear less mention, than formerly, of the establishment of your young princess; which I wish earnestly, on your account. Your way of life is much too confined for a person accustomed to so much liberty. But the solidity of your character enables you to enjoy yourself in any situation, and to accommodate yourself to every course of life. I should only be afraid that, were I to pay you a visit at Paris, I should have much more difficult access to your company than formerly. Pray, is not your son a very fine young gentleman? He promised very much when I saw him; and in spite of the partiality of a mother, I can almost rely on your judgment.

There have been this spring in London a good many French gentlemen, who have seen the nation in a strange situation, and have admired at our oddity. The elections have put us into a ferment; and the riots of the populace have been frequent: but as these mutinies were founded on nothing, and had no connexion with any higher order of the state, they have done but little mischief, and seem now entirely dispersed. I believe most of your countrymen return very happy, that they are born under a government not liable to these inconveniences; which is a fortunate way of thinking. You ask me about M. de Chatelet: he lives very splendidly; behaves obligingly to all the world; and would, I believe, be very popular, were it not for the prepossession entertained that he does not like us. The truth is, no foreign minister has much reason to like us. We are so taken up with our own cabals, and projects, and societies, that scarce any of them ever get into intimacy with any of us; and they leave the country, after having been strangers in it for several years. M. de Guerchy overcame these difficulties as much as possible, and was beloved. I hear some people are displeased with the present Ambassador, for speaking, as they pretend, disrespectfully of M. de Guerchy's memory.

Allow me to take this opportunity of renewing my compliments to Madame de Vierville and Madame de Mauri; and I beg of you to believe me, with the most sincere attachment,

 Dear Madam, 
Your most obedient and most humble servant,



David Hume.
