Edinburgh 29th Sept. 1757

Dear Edmonstoune,

I believe it is a rule in law, that any summons prevents prescription; and in like manner, that the wakening a process keeps one's rank in the Lords' Row. It is with some such view that I now write to you; not to send you a formal letter, which would require a formal answer, and would therefore get no answer at all: but just to take a shake of your hand, and ask you how you do, and speak a little nonsense to you as usual, and then fall into s[ilence] without giving myself the trouble of supporting the conversation any lon[ger]; and, in a word, keep you from forgetting that you have some such friend in the world as myself.

But pray, why did you not write me as you promised, and give me your direction? Was you afraid I should write to you? You see I can find out a method of directing to you without your information.

Tell me about the Epigoniad. Was there ever so much fine versification bestowed on so indifferent a story? Has it had any success in Ireland? I fancy not; for the criticklings in Dublin depend on the criticklings in London, who depend on the booksellers, who depend on their interest, which depends on their printing a book themselves. This is the cause why Wilkie's book is at present neglected, or damned, as they call it: but I am much mistaken if it end so. Pray what says the Primate of it? I hear he has the generosity to support damned books till the Resurrection, and that he is one of the saints who pray them out of Purgatory. I hope he is an honest fellow and one of [us]. Captain Masterton told me, that he was not quite of my opinion with regard to the Douglas, and that he blamed my dedicatory address to the author. But I persist still, and will prove in spite of him and you, and of every man who [wears eit] her black or scarlet, that it is an admirable tragedy, comparable [to the exce] llent pieces of the good Age of Louis Quatorze. The author is here at present, and is refitting his Agis for the theatre, which I hope will have justice done it. Il est le mieux renté de tous les beaux esprits. He has a pension from his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, as you have probably heard.

I hear sometimes from the Doctor, who desires me to tell him something about you. But I am no necromancer; only, as the ancients said — prudentia est quaedam divinatio. I conjecture that you are lounging, and reading, and playing at whist, and blaming yourself for not writing letters, and yet persisting in the neglect of your duty.
