I have given, my dear Sir, to M. Francis three Books sent me by Dr Tucker, who desired me to make his Compliments to you. When he was in France, he had frequently enquired concerning his Translator; but cou'd meet with no-one, that cou'd give him Information. He is very proud, that he has so much reason to value himself on that head. The thin Quarto, which he sends you, was never published; tho‘ the Author printed off about a hundred Copies near fifteen Years ago: He sent Copies about to his Friends and to Persons for whom he had an Esteem; and he desired them to return the Copy with their Remarks on the Margin, which was left large on Purpose. He desires the same Favour of you, and does not limit you to any time. On my Suggestion, he permits you to communicate the work to M. de Montigny and to the Abbé Morrellet, who, he hopes, will also be so good as communicate their Remarks. I think there are Passages, which may be useful to the Abbé in his Dictionary.

I am sorry to find, that Dr Tucker has little Intention of finishing and giving to the Public this valuable Work. He was extremely discouraged with the bad Reception given to this Pamphlet against War, of which he sends you two Copies. There were not fifty Copies of it sold; tho‘ surely it merited a much better Fate. But it was wrote, as I told him, when the Public were intoxicated with their foolish Success; and a Pamphlet, if it does not take during the first Moment, falls soon into Oblivion, and very often indeed, tho‘ it does take. But this is not the Case with a greater Work to which the Public always, sooner or later, does Justice. You will see, that Dr Tucker is no friend to the new Theory of Finances, which has made so many respectable Proselytes in France. I have a Purpose of visiting my Friends in France this Autumn; when we shall talk over these Subjects; and if you have then finished Dr Tucker's Book, you will restore it to me. If not, it may be sent me afterwards. I am with great Truth and Sincerity My dear Sir

 Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume

London 8 of July 1768
