5 of May, 1769.

I was yesterday, dear Madam, very much alarmed, by a piece of intelligence, which I received from Madame de la Vaupalliere: that having engaged your daughter-in-law to submit to inoculation, the success had appeared very doubtful: she had a great number of pustules; her face was much covered with them, her life was not out of danger, and the consequences in general were much apprehended. You may easily imagine to what degree I interest myself in this event. I foresee that, if any sinister accident happen, you will be inclined, besides regretting a person, to whom you are so much attached, to blame yourself for an advice the best founded in reason and experience. As the issue must now be perfectly known, I beg to be informed of it: I cannot forbear hoping, that your anxiety has exaggerated the danger; and that all will still end happily.

We have had this winter two countrywomen of yours, very amiable persons, to whom I pay my court frequently, Madame de Chatelet and Madame de Damas. The manners of the latter are generally taking, and she is very popular: the former, with a very superior merit, is better calculated for every situation, than that in which she is at present engaged, namely representation, in such a crowd as this town affords, and in such a hurry as everywhere presents itself: her good sense, and her frank easy humour, with her utter inability to dissemble, render her the best companion of the world in private society. I only regret in these two ladies that, having never had much commerce with you, I have not the satisfaction of hearing your name mentioned among them so frequently as I should be inclined to.

But I am afraid, dear Madam, of entertaining you with indifferent subjects, perhaps at a time when all your attention is engaged in the most interesting event: I shall therefore conclude; but with representing to you, that there was more sharpness in your last letter, than I ever thought should have passed between us. Certainly, I was not blameable in ascribing to you a great desire of liberty and leisure, both because that sentiment is natural, and even laudable; and because I am myself so much possessed with it, that I think nothing can be compared to these blessings. In all cases, my mistake was innocent; and as I never meant to offend you, I doubt not, but, upon reflection, you will again restore me to your good graces, on which I set so high a value, and which, on that account, it is impossible for me ever to deserve to forfeit.
