[Edinburgh December 1766]

Sir

I have no objection to your joining M. de Voltaire's Letters to mine: You have certainly a Right to dispose of them as you think Proper.

I cannot imagine that a Piece wrote on so silly a Subject as mine will ever come to a second Edition; but if it shoud, please order the following Corrections to be made.

Page viii of the Advertisement, in the Note say The original Letters of M. Rousseau will be lodged &c.

Page 4 Read Hic domus, hac patria est.

Page 6 The Passage of the Note which names Mde de Verdelin must be suppress'd.

Page 18 read on condition only that the Affair shoud remain a kind of Secret.

Page 21 instead of out of regard to me, read, agreeably to the usual Politeness & Humanity of his Character.

Page 34 There is a Note ommitted here, which shoud be restord from the French Edition.

Page 38 In the Note instead of is equally contemptible read, is equally mistaken.

Page 70 Add to my Note, these Words: Since the publication of the first Edition, I receivd a Letter from a Foreigner, residing in London, who expresses his extreme Surprize at Mr Rousseau's ascribing this Piece to me, together with that mentiond in page 65. For this Gentleman, whom I never saw, confesses that he wrote both for his Amusement: He then conceal'd his Name, because he did not care to appear as the Author of such trifles: But he very genteely offers to allow me to publish his Letter, if I think it necessary for the Vindication of my Character: But really I do not think it necessary, and I do not judge it proper to take the Gentleman from his Retreat by giving his Name to the Public. Nothing but new Defiances on the part of M. Rousseau shall oblige me to make use of the Freedom, which the Gentleman allows me.

Page 71 Ommitt the Translator's Note.

Page 79 Add to my Note, these Words. If M. Rousseau consult his Plutarch, he will find, that when Themistocles fled into Persia, Xerxes was so pleas'd with this Event, that he was heard to exclaim several times in his sleep, I have Themistocles, I have Themistocles. Why will not M. Rousseau understand my Exclamation in the same Sense?

Page 86 Ommitt Mde de Boufflers Name.

Page 94 read on whom the public Suspicions have never fallen.

 I am Sir Your most humble Servant

David Hume
