Paris 3d of October 1765

Sir

I sent the enclos'd Memorial to the Duke of Praslin the day after I was honourd with Yours of the 20th of September by Mr Violars; and I sent it in English, both because the Duke had told me it was the same thing whether I sent any Paper to him in French or in English, and because I was willing, in transmitting Proposals that concern'd the private Interest of so many Individuals, to employ, as far as possible, their own Terms. I expected, that, after six days Interval, he wou'd have no Scruple to enter into Reasoning on the Subject: But, tho'he told me, that my Memorial had instantly been translated, he said, that it had been sent to the Duke of Choiseul's Department, and thence to the Commissaries for settling the Canada Paper Money; and that it was propos'd to answer it in writing without delay. The Duke only observ'd father in Conversation, that this Demand was in effect the same with the former Proposal of the Merchants, who had insisted on fifty per cent for all the Cards and Billets of Ordonnance; and that nothing was chang'd but the Terms and Modes of Expression. I desir'd him to remark a very material Difference: For that the present Proposal contain'd a Remission of all that any Canadians cou'd claim as a Compensation for Hardships of any kind, which they might have suffer'd from the French Government, and which His most Christian Majesty had promis'd in the Arret itself to repair. I observ'd to him, that these Cases were so numerous and important as to deserve Attention, and to challenge such a Compensation as was now insisted on; and that besides the several Hardships, which the Proprietors of the Paper Money had been expos'd to, this Article alone was an Equivalent for the Sum demanded. He still declin'd entering farther into the Argument; and only said, that he cou'd not fortell what might be the Resolution of the Council; but he never cou'd for his Part give his Consent, that France shou'd submit to such unreasonable Terms. He added, that, were the Matter to be decided, like a private Cause, before any Court of Judicature or by Referees, Sentence cou'd not fail in this Case to be given in favour of the French.

As the Duke had promis'd me in the enclos'd Letter an Answer in writing to my former Memorial with regard to the Newfoundland Fishery, I told him, that it wou'd be expected by my Court.

I sent off to Mr Huske the Duke of Praslin's Letters to the Commandants of Dunkirk, Calais and Boulogne, as soon as I receiv'd them. I observ'd to the Duke of Praslin, that the Chevalier de Mezieres was still Commandant of Dunkirk; he said it was so; but that Arrangements were taking for his Removal.

The Assembly of the Clergy, after voting their free Gift, have been prorogued till May next. No body thinks, that they will be allow'd to meet at that time.

The Dauphin seems to me in somewhat a better State of Health than when I saw him on Tuesday last Week; tho'he is still believ'd to be in a very dangerous way. The King sets out for Fontainebleau next Saturday. I have the Honour to be, with the greatest Regard Sir

 Your Excellency's most obedient and most humble Servant

David Hume

Mr Secretary Conway
