[Summer 1764.]

Since receiving your Favour I have carefully perus'd all the dispatches that pass'd between the English Ministers and the Duke of Bedford during his Graces Residence at Paris in the years 1762 and 1763. I find that the paper you mention of the East India Company dated the 3d of Decr 1762 with the Letter of the Chairman to Mr Wood was transmitted on the 6t by the Earl of Egremont to the Duke of Bedford. The Plan, therefore of a new Epoch, namely the first of January 1749 instead of the commencement of hostilities in that year (the Epoch said by the Preliminaries) came originally from the East India Compy. and from the English Ministers. But notwithstanding this fact I find that Mr Pinto's merits towards the Company are very considerable, as they have always been represented by the Duke of Bedford, and by Mr. Neville. For in the Letter from the Chairman to Mr. Wood, no other reason is assign'd for the Change of Epoch but the danger of Dispute or Ambiguity concerning the time of the Commencement of Hostilities. The Directors thought with great Appearance of reason that if they had discoverd the real state of the Case to the Ministry, the Secret might have taken Air, and come to the knowledge of the Enemy, who in that Case wou'd undoubtedly have adher'd with Firmness to the Epoch Established by the preliminaries. But tho' the reserve was founded on very plausible grounds, the necessary Consequence was that the Duke of Bedford finding the french Ministers exclaim against all Innovation in the preliminaries despair'd at first of obtaining the point; and not being apprized of its Importance, thought that he would be oblig'd to sign the Treaty, without making any Alteration in this particular. In this Critical moment, The Duke consulted Mr. Pinto, who had, it seems some Connexions in India and having very lately perus'd Dupleix's Memoirs was perfectly well acquainted with the State of Affairs in that part of the World: He first told his Grace, that Hostilities between the Companies did not commence till the 15th July 1749, and that, therefore, had the Epoch fixed by the Preliminaries been follow'd in the definitive treaty, all the Acquisitions of the french E: I: Company, preceding that date must have been restor'd to them. But on the first of July in the same year, the Subah of the Carnatic (if I remember right) had made to that Company very large Grants to the annual Amot as Mr. Pinto calculates them of £700,000 all which if the Epoch was changed, must become the property of the English Company. The Duke of Bedford now sensible of the Importance of the dispute, which was unknown to the french Ministers, insisted Strenuously on the Change of Epoch & prevaild. This is Mr. Pinto's real merit as I apprehend it. He did not point out the new Epoch, but he discover'd its Importance and prefer'd the Interests of England in a very Material point to those of France. At the same time the Duke of Bedford's vigilance deserves great praise, for seeking & finding the best Intelligence from all Quarters and for knowing how to profit by it.

I have the honor to be with great regard Sir

 Your most obedt hble Sert

David Hume
