Dear Brother

Were my present Situation any Object of Anxiety, I shoud have been very unhappy of late; so uncertain has my Continuance appeard every Moment, and so near did my ministerial Functions seem to draw towards their Conclusion. But as the Matter was very nearly indifferent to me, I neither felt Anxiety for my past danger, nor so I experience any Joy from my present Establishment. For we are now establishd, for some time at least; and all Apprehensions of a Change are remov'd to a Distance. The History of our late Transactions is in short, as follows. About this time twelvemonth, when the last Revolution of Ministry took place, Mr Conway stay'd in, tho' Lord Rockingham and most of his Friends were turn'd out; but it was with Reluctance, and only on the earnest Entreaties of the King & Lord Chatham, and on their giving him a Promise, that several of his Friends & Party shou'd still continue to hold their places. This Engagement was broke last Winter: Some of these Gentlemen were turn'd out: And Mr Conway, after protesting against this Usage, declard, that, tho' he wou'd keep his Office during the Session, not to disturb the King's Business, he wou'd resign as soon as the Parliament shoud rise. He accordingly desird the King, about six Weeks ago, to provide him a Successor, and was entreated only to keep the Seals, till a proper Person shou'd be thought of. When the Matter came to be discuss'd, it was found very difficult. The Duke of Grafton declard, that, being deprivd of Lord Chatham's Support, he coud not continue to serve without Mr Conway; and a total Dissolution of the Ministry seemd to be the Effect of this Incident. Negotiations were accordingly set on foot with the Leaders of the Opposition; and a great Meeting of them was held last Week at Bedford House: It was found, that they cou'd not by any means agree in their Demands; and they separated in mutual Discontent. Every body thinks, that Mr Conway has now satisfy'd to the full the point of Honour, in which he is very scrupulous; and that he will cordially resume his Functions; especially as he stands so well with the King and his Fellow Ministers, and has brought it within the Choice of his old Friends to accept of the Ministry, if they had thought proper. I was beginning to wish for our Dissolution; but upon this turn of Affairs, I resume my Occupations with Cheerfulness.

My present Situation revives those Reflections, which have frequently occurr'd to me, concerning the Education of your Son's, particularly of Josey, whose Age now advances, and seems to approach towards a Crisis. The Question is, whether he had better continue his Education in Scotland or in England. There are several Advantages of a Scots Education; but the Question is whether that of the Language does not counterballance them, and determine the Preference to the English. He is now of an Age to learn it perfectly; but if a few Years elapse, he may acquire such an Accent, as he will never be able to cure of. It is not yet determin'd what Profession he shall be of; but it must always be of great Advantage to speak properly; especially, if it shou'd prove, as we have reason to hope, that his good Parts will open him the Road of Ambition. The only Inconvenience is, that few Scotsmen, that have had an English Education, have ever settled cordially in their own Country, and they have been commonly lost ever after to their Friends. However, as this Consequence is not necessary, the superior Recommendations of an English Education ought not to be neglected. I have been making Enquiries for some time; and on the whole, I find Eton the best Place for the Education of Youth. He woud there be able to form Connexions with many young People of Distinction; tho' the whole Expence woud scarcely exceed 70 pounds a Year, which I fancy is little more than he costs you at present. I suggest, therefore, this Idea to you, that you may weigh it at Leizure, and determine upon it: I know you do not like to be hurry'd, and therefore, the more time for Reflection the better. His Friend & Companion, young Adam, is coming up soon; but is going to Westminster School, which is a place I find some Objections to.

I hope Mrs Home is perfectly recoverd: I am glad to hear such good News of Jock. I had a Letter from Davie last Week, which gave me Pleasure. I am Dear Brother Yours sincerely

David Hume

London 28 of July 1767
