Bath 15 June, 1776

Your very friendly letter, dear Crawford, gave me much satisfaction. I should have been very happy in your company here, and to have improved you (and myself at the same time) in health, in philosophy, and in whist; but I leave this place in a few days, as the waters do me no service, and all the company are gone or going. I am, however, rather better than when you saw me, and the true cause of my distemper is now discovered. It lies in my liver, not in my bowels. You ask me how I know this; I answer, John Hunter, the greatest anatomist in Europe, felt it with his fingers, and I myself can now feel it. The devil's in it if this do not convince you. Even St. Thomas, the infidel apostle, desired no better authority than the testimony of his fingers. They tell me that I have gained a great deal by this change of the seat of war, from the bowels to the liver; but however able the generals, I expect little from this campaign, still less from our American hostilities. They also tell me that motion and exercise are my best remedies, and here I believe them, and shall put the recipe in practice.

The same remedy would serve you. Will you meet me positively, and as a man of honour, this day month, the 15th July, at Coventry, the most central town in England, and let us wander during the autumn throughout every corner of that kingdom, and throughout the Principality of Wales? You will find me in as good spirits as ever you knew me, if not in better, and resolute to set all the doctors and parsons at defiance. We may quarrel sometimes, but shall never tire of each other, I shall not travel above two or at most three stages a day, which will be an admirable trial of your patience. But your only real substantial grievance will be, that in this way of living you will not be able to spend as much a day as a fine gentleman ought to do, but you may lose as much to me in the evening at picket as is proper, which will be some compensation, for a sudden costiveness after a violent flux may be dangerous.

Pray send me two or three franks directed to Dr Gusthart at Bath. All the Members have left this place. Lord Abingdon took his leave of me to-day; I found to my grief that he has become a great man for the Turf, for which his caution, cunning, sagacity, secrecy, avidity, and selfishness so eminently qualify him. He told me that the place in Europe (for he did not comprise America) in which there is the most honour and truth and fair dealing assembled is Newmarket and the neighbouring fields during the season. Pray is Lord Ossory of the same opinion? Yours most sincerely, and with even more than Newmarket faith,

David Hume.
