Dear Sir

I have two of Yours before me, & shoud have answer'd them sooner, had not Mr Dalrymple told me, that he wou'd come to a Resolution in a few days, about the Method of printing his Volume. As soon as he does so, I shall write you.

I am certainly very well satisfy'd with your Sale, which I hope continues. Lord Lyttleton's Objection is not well grounded. I have not contradicted that Story betwixt Shaftesbury & Clifford: I have only omitted it. It stands only on Burnet's Authority, who is very careless & inaccurate. I believe I cou'd convince both you & him that it was without Foundation.

I am very glad that Mr Mallet has mark'd those Expressions, which appear'd Scotticisms. You cou'd not do me a greater Pleasure, than to procure me a List of them. I beg of you to employ all your Interest with him to that Purpose. I am very anxious to see them soon, that I may examine them at Leizure, & correct them in all my Writings. A very little time, woud suffice for him to take down the Page & the Line & the Expression: If counting the Line were too troublesome, he wou'd oblige me by only marking the Page & the Expression: I coud easily find it.

I had a Conversation yesterday with Messrs Kincaid & Donaldson, where I made them a Proposal, which I hope will be for both your Advantage. They told me, that you had only about 400 compleat Sets of my philosophical Writings. I am extremely desirous to have these four Volumes, with that which you will publish this Winter, brought into a Quarto Volume. They said, that the small Size was rather more proper for their Sale; and therefore, they woud gladly take at present 200 Sets of the four Volumes, to be pay'd for by so many of their Shares in the Quarto Edition as woud be an Equivalent. That is, if the Quarto Volume were sold at the same Price with the four Volumes, then Set for Set: If at more, then such Allowance to be made as upon Calculation wou'd appear to be an Equivalent. If the History meet with Success, it will certainly quicken the Sale of the philosophical Writings; & the taking two hundred Sets from you leaves you so small a Number on hand, as gives you a certain Prospect of coming soon to a new Edition. Tho' some odd Copies of particular Volumes remain on hand, there is no great Matter, as they may be dispos'd of with a small Discount. If you agree to this Proposal, they empower'd me to desire you to put the 200 Copies on board a Ship with the first Occasion, and to write them a Letter by which they may be sure, that there is no Mistake in the Conditions. The bringing these scatterd Pieces into one Volume will of itself quicken the Sale; & every new Edition has naturally that Effect.

I again recommend to you very earnestly the procuring me that Favour from Mr Mallet. It is not possible, that he can refuse you. I wish I had desir'd you to ask the same Favour of Mr Reid, to whom please to make my Compliments. I am Dear Sir

 Your most obedient Servant

David Hume

Edinburgh. 4th of Decr. 1756.

P.S. The Copies are not yet arrivd here but are daily expected.
