Lisle Street Leicester Fields 25 of July 1766

Tho' I have great Reason, Madam, to be ashamed, when I am prevented by you, in writing, I own, that your Letter gave me a sensible Pleasure: I am happy in retaining some Share in your Memory and Friendship; and I hope, that the same Disposition will incline you to have Indulgence for me in my very culpable Silence. But my Indolence in this particular is unaccountable even to myself. You know, I lived almost with M. de Montigny and his Family and that there are no Persons in the World for whom I have a greater Value: Yet except one Letter to Mde Dupré, I have given them no Testimony of my Gratitude or Esteem. I cannot possibly tell a stronger Instance of my ill Behaviour in this particular.

You desire an Account of my Transactions with M. Rousseau, which are certainly the most unexpected and most extraordinary in the World. I shall endeavour to abridge them as much as possible. It is needless to give you a long Detail of my Behaviour towards him while he lived here and in this Neighbourhood, the Marks of Affection and Attachment which I gave him, my Compliance with all his Humours, my constant Occupation in his Service. I was blamed by all my Friends for giving him so much of my Time and Care, and was laughed at by others. All the Letters, which I wrote to any part of the World, were honourable and friendly for him; and he, on his part, gave me the warmest Testimonies of Gratitude, seemed transported whenever he saw me, and after he went to the Country, he wrote me Letters, which I have happily preserved, and which contain Expressions of Friendship that even the Energy of his Pen cou'd not carry farther. I settled him in a most beautiful Country.... I received no Answer for above three Weeks, tho' the Post cou'd have brought me the return of my Letter in four Days. It was then I broke out, and told the Affair to my Friends: I needed but to have told it to one Person: The Account flew like Wildfire all over London in a Moment. Every body's Surprize at his Ingratitude to me, whose Friendship towards him had been so generally remarked; the Singularity of the Man and of his Conduct; his Celebrity itself and any Degree of Reputation I may have attained; all these Circumstances made the Story the Subject of general Conversation. I find the same thing has happened at Paris from my Letter to the Baron, which I never desired him to conceal. I have also sent to M. D'Alembert a Copy of Rousseau's Letters and of mine. I had many Reasons for not concealing the Affair. I know Rousseau is writing very busily at present, and I have Grounds to think that he intends to fall equally on Voltaire & on me. He himself had told me, that he was composing his Memoirs, in which Justice wou'd be equally done to his own Character, to that of his Friends, and to that of his Enemies. As I had passed so wonderfully from the former Class to the latter, I must expect to make a fine Figure: And what, thought I, if these Memoirs be published after his Death or after mine? In the latter Case, there will be no-one to vindicate my Memory: In the former case, my Vindication will have much less Authenticity. For these Reasons I had once entertained Thoughts of giving the whole instantly to the public; but more mature Reflection made me depart from this Resolution, and I am glad to find, that you concur in the same Opinion.

When I had come to this Part of my Narration, I receive unexpectedly a Letter from Rousseau which had been extorted from him by the Authority of Mr Davenport, the Gentleman with whom he lives. It consists of 18 Folio Pages, in a very small hand, and wou'd make a large Pamphlet. Never was there such a heap of Frenzy and Wickedness united.... This is the Substance of the Letter: But wou'd you believe it, that in a Piece so full of Frenzy, Malice, Impertinence & Lyes, there are many Strokes of Genius and Eloquence; and the Conclusion of it is remarkably sublime. The whole is wrote with great Care, and I fancy he intends it for the Press. This gives me no manner of Concern: The Letter will really be a high Panegyric on me; because there is no-one who will not distinguish between the Facts which he acknowledges, and the Chimeras which his Madness & Malice have invented: He even says, that, if my Services were sincere, my Conduct was above human Nature; if they were the Result of a Conspiracy against him, it was below. I own, that I was somewhat anxious about the Affair till I received this mad Letter; but now I am quite at my ease. I do not however find, that, in other Respects he is madder than usual; nor is his Conduct towards me much worse than toward M. Diderot about seven Years ago. I beg my Compliments to Monsr de Menieres to whom I wish you woud explain this Letter. The President de Brosses can read it in the Original: Please mark to him my Respects. I coud wish also that Monsr de Montigny saw it. I have not room to subscribe myself regularly as I ought.

David Hume
