Dear Sir

I can easily perceive that your Friends were no Lawyers, who said that there was no Statute in Henry the VII's Reign, which facilitated the Alienation of Lands, & broke the antient Entails. It is 4 H. VII cap. 24; but a man may read that Passage fifty times, and not find any thing that seems, in the least, to point that way. I shou'd certainly have overlook'd the Meaning of it, had I not been guided by Lord Kames. You must know that it was a Practice in the Courts of Justice, before Henry the Seventh's time, to break Entails by a Device which seems very ridiculous, but which is continu'd to this day, and first receiv'd the Sanction of Law during the Reign of that Prince. You have an entail'd Estate, I suppose, & want to break the Entail: You agree with me that I am to claim the Estate by a sham Title, prior to the first entailer: You confess in Court that my Title is good & valid: The Judges, upon this Confession of the Party, adjudge the Estate to me: Upon which I immediately restore the Estate to you, free & unencumber'd; & by this Hocus-Pocus the Entail is broke. Such was the Practice, pretty common before Henry the Seventh: All that the Parliament then did, was to regulate the Method of Proceeding in this fine Device, & to determine that the Titles of Minors, & femmes couvertes, were not to be injur'd by it. As to other People, who had an Interest to preserve an Entail, & who had any good Reason to plead in their own Favor, they woud naturally appear for themselves. This Practice is calld a fine, & a Recovery. Fine, from the Latin word finis; because it forecloses all Parties, & puts a final Issue to their Claims & Pretensions: A Recovery, because a Man thereby recovers his Estate, without the Encumbrance of an Entail.

By the bye, I am told, that there are many of these Practices still continu'd in the Law of England; which are as foolish, juvenile, & ridiculous, as are to be met with in — I mean in — I woud be understood to mean in — any Craft or Profession of the World.

I am writing the History of England, from the Accession of Henry the 7th, & am some Years advanc'd in Henry the 8th. I undertook this Work because I was tir'd of Idleness, & found reading alone, after I had often perus'd all good Books, (which I think is soon done) somewhat a languid Occupation. As to the Approbation or Esteem of those Blockheads who call themselves the Public, & whom a Bookseller, a Lord, a Priest, or a Party can guide, I do most heartily despise it. I shall be able, I think, to make a tolerable smooth, well told Tale of the History of England during that period; but I own I have not yet been able to throw much new Light into it. I begin the Reformation to morrow.

I find the Public, with you, have rejected the Epigoniad, for the present. They may do so if they please: But it has a great deal of Merit, much more than any one of them is capable of throwing into a Work.

I disapprove very much of Ferguson's Scruples, with regard to entering into Lord Bute's Family, with the Inspection of more than one Boy: But I hope Lord Bute will conform himself to his Delicacy, at least if he wants to have a Man of Sense, Knowlege, Taste, Elegance, & Morals, for a Tutor to his Son.

I am much oblig'd to you for your good Intentions, with regard to my Cousin; but you must express yourself otherwise, than by saying that you will concur with the rest of my Friends in endeavouring to promote him.

For now that Oswald is out of Court, whom have I besides to apply to? I am Dear Sir Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume.

Edinburgh 9 Aug 1757
