Dear Sir Gilbert

After all, the Minister of Roberton is not dead, nor dying, for the present. He had been very ill, and reported to be dead; so that Lord Alemore wrote to his Brother upon that Supposition; and many Applications were made to Lady Elliot for her Interest with you. I must therefore excuse my young Man for being misled; tho the Mistake is very unlucky, in every thing, except that it gives me a new Proof of your Desire to oblige me. I assure you I am very sensible of it. I believe I coud have accommodated matters with Lord Alemore. The Kirk is strictly speaking in the Forrest; but the greatest part of the Parish is in Teviotdale.

I am glad of your Victories; tho' I look upon them all as temporary and imperfect, like the fallacious Recoveries of a hectic Person who is hastening to his Dissolution. Our Government has become a Chimera; and is too perfect in point of Liberty, for so vile a Beast as an Englishman, who is a Man, a bad Animal too, corrupted by above a Century of Licentiousness. The Misfortune is, that this Liberty can scarcely be retrench'd without Danger of being entirely lost; at least, the fatal Effects of Licentiousness must first be made palpable, by some extreme Mischief, resulting from it. I may wish that the Catastrophe should rather fall on our Posterity; but it hastens on with such large Strides, as leaves little Room for this hope.

I am running over again the last Edition of my History in order to correct it still farther. I either soften or expunge many villanous seditious Whig Strokes, which had crept into it. I wish that my Indignation at the present Madness, encourag'd by Lyes, Calumnies, Imposture, and every infamous Art usual among popular Leaders, may not throw me into the opposite Extreme. I am, however, sensible that the first Editions were too full of those foolish English Prejudices, which all Nations and all Ages disavow.

The present firm Conduct of the King, and his manly Resentment, afford some Glimpse of hope. We at a Distance are not acquainted with these matters, and few even at London: But there still appears something mysterious in the Duke of Grafton's Resignation. I hope it proceeded only from his Discontents with Bedford House.

But I detain you too long. I shall only conclude, that, tho' I reckon myself among the Sepoliti, I cannot forbear expressing my hearty good Wishes to your Cause and you. I am very sincerely Dear Sir Gilbert

 Your obligd humble Servant

David Hume.

Edinburgh 21 of Feby 1770
