Dear Robertson

Among other agreeable Circumstances, which attend me at Paris, I must mention that of having a Lady for a Translator, a Woman of Merit, the Widow of an Advocate. She was before very poor and known but to few; but this Work has got her Reputation and has procurd her a Pension from the Court, which sets her at her Ease. She tells me, that she has got a Habit of Industry; and wou'd continue, if I coud point out to her any other English Book she cou'd undertake, without running the Risque of being anticipated by any other Translator. Your History of Scotland is translated and is in the Press: But I recommended to her, your History of Charles V, and promis'd to write to you, in order to know when it wou'd be printed and to desire you to send me over the Sheets from London as they came from the Press: I shoud put them into her hands, and she woud by that means have the Start of every other Translator. My two Volumes last publish'd are at present in the Press. She has a very easy natural Style: Sometimes she mistakes the Sense; but I now correct her Manuscript; and shou'd be happy to render you the same Service, if my Leizure permit me, as I hope it will.

Do you ask me about my Course of Life? I can only say, that I eat nothing but Ambrosia, drink nothing but Nectar, breathe nothing but Incense, and tread on nothing but Flowers. Every Man I meet, and still more every Lady, wou'd think they were wanting in the most indispensible Duty, if they did not make to me a long & elaborate Harangue in my Praise. What happend last Week, when I had the Honour of being presented to the Dauphin's Children at Versailles, is one of the most curious Scenes I have yet pass'd thro. The Duc de Berry, the eldest, a boy of ten Years old, stept forth, and told me, how many Friends & Admirers I had in this Country, and that he reckond himself in the Number, from the Pleasure he had receivd by the reading of many Passages in my Works. When he had finish'd, his Brother, the Count de Provence, who is two Years younger, began his Discourse, and informed me, that I had been long & impatiently expected in France; and that he himself expected soon to have great Satisfaction from the reading of my fine History. But what is more curious; when I was carry'd thence to the Count d'Artois, who is but five Years of Age, I heard him mumble something, which, tho' he had forgot it in the way, I conjectur'd, from some scatterd Words, to have been also a Panegyric dictated to him. Nothing cou'd more Surprize my Friends, the Parisian Philosophers, than this Incident: For the Duke de Vauguion, the Governor & the Countess de Marsan, the Governess, have that Character, that a Panegyric on such a Fellow as Bumbo or Sandy Webster was more to be expected from them than one on me. Whence it is conjecturd that this Honour was pay'd me by express Orders from the Dauphin, who indeed is not, on any Occasion, sparing in my Praise.

All this Attention and Panegyric was at first oppressive to me; but now it sits more easy. I have recoverd, in some measure, the Use of the Language, and am falling into Friendships, which are very agreeable; much more so than silly, distant Admiration. They now begin to banter me and tell droll Stories of me; which they have either observd themselves or have heard from others; so that you see I am beginning to be at home. It is probable, that this place will be long my home. I feel little Inclination to the factious Barbarians of London; and have ever desir'd to remain in the Place where I am planted. How much more so, when it is the best Place in the World? I cou'd here live in great Abundance on the half of my Income: For there is no place, where Money is so little requisite to a Man who is distinguishd either by his Birth or by personal Qualities. I cou'd run out you see in a Panegyric on the People; but you woud suspect, that this was a mutual Convention between us. However, I cannot forbear observing, on what a different Footing Learning & the Learned are here, from what they are among the factious Barbarians abovemention'd.

I have here met with a prodigious historical Curiosity, the Memoirs of King James II, in fourteen Volumes, all wrote with his own hand, and kept in the Scots College. I have lookd into it, and have made great Discoveries. It will be all communicated to me; and I have had an Offer of Access to the Secretary of State's Office, if I want to know the Dispatches of any French Minister that resided in London. But these Matters are much out of my head. I beg of you to visit often Lord Marischal who will be pleasd with your Company. I have little Paper remaining & less time; and therefore conclude abruptly by assuring you, that I am Dear Dr Yours sincerely

David Hume

Paris 1 Decr 1763
