London, 27 of May 1767

Dear Doctor

. . . Since you are curious to hear Rousseau's Story, I shall tell you the Sequel of it. A few days after his letter to the Chancellor, of which I inform'd you, I got a Letter from Davenport, who told me, that he had just receivd a Letter from Rousseau dated at Spalding, wherein that wild Philosopher (as he calls him) appeard very penitent & contrite and melancholy, and express'd his Purpose of returning immediately to his former Retreat at Wootton. The same day and nearly the same Hour, General Conway receivd a long Letter from him dated at Dover, about 200 miles distant from Spalding. This great Journey he had made in two days; and had probably set out immediately after writing the Letter abovemention'd to Davenport. His letter to General Conway is the most frenzical imaginable. He there supposes, that he was brought into England by a Plot of mine in order to reduce him to Infamy, Derision, and Captivity: That General Conway and all the most considerable Personages of the Nation and the Nation itself had enterd into this conspiracy: That he is at present actually a State Prisoner in General Conway's hands, and has been so, ever since his Arrival in the Kingdom: He entreats him, however, to allow him the Liberty of departing: Warns him, that it will not be safe to assassinate him in private, as he is unhappily too well known, not to have Enquiries made, if he shoud disappear on a sudden: And promises that,  if his request be granted, his Memoirs shall never be printed, to disgrace the English Ministry and the English nation. He owns, that he has wrote such Memoirs, the chief Object of which was to deliver a faithful Account of the Treatment he has met with in England; but He promises, that the Moment he sets foot on the French Shore, he shall write to this Friend, in whose hand the manuscript is deposited, to deliver it to the General, who may destroy it, if he pleases. He adds, that as it may be objected, that after recovering his liberty he may do as he pleases, he offers, as a Pledge of his Sincerity, to accept of his Pension: After which, he thinks, no one will imagine he coud be so infamous as to write against the King's Ministers or his People. Amidst all this Frenzy, he employs these terms, as if a ray of reason had for a Moment broke into his Mind: He says, speaking of himself in the third Person, Non seulement il abandonne pour toujours le projet d'écrire sa vie et ses mémoires, mais il ne lui échapera jamais ni de bouche ni par ecrit un seul mot de plainte sur les malheurs qui lui sont arrivés en Angleterre; il ne parlera jamais de M. Hume ou il n'en parlera qu'avec honneur; et lorsqu'il sera pressé de s'expliquer sur quelques indiscrètes plaintes, qui lui sont quelquefois echapées dans le fort de ses peines, il les rejettera sans mystère sur son humeur aigrie et portée à la défiance et aux ombrages par ce malheureux penchant, ouvrage de ses malheurs, et qui maintenant y met le comble.

We hear that notwithstanding his imagined Captivity he has passed over to Calais; where he is likely to experience what real Captivity is. I have however us'd my Perswasion with Monsr de Guerchi to represent him to his Court as a real Madman, more  an Object of Compassion than of Anger. We shall no doubt see his Memoirs in a little time which will be full of Eloquence & Extravagance; tho' perhaps as reasonable as any of his past Productions. For I do not imagine he was ever much more in his Senses than at present. I think I may be entirely without Anxiety concerning all his future Productions. . . .
