Dear Sir

I do not know whether I can heartily congratulate you on your withdrawing so much from Business. I shall wait till you have had a twelvemonths Experience of your new Scene of Life. Your plan for passing your time seems very agreeable both for Health and Amusement; and as you reserve still a share in Business, you are not likely to fall into absolute Inactivity, which, after a Life of such Industry, woud not probably have suited your Temper. But you have had before your Eyes so many Examples of industrious Men, who have quitted Business from a fond Love of Ease, and have tir'd of Ease from their former Habits of Business, that you are not likely to fall into the same Error.

It is certain, that nothing cou'd be a greater Inducement to me to continue my History, than your desiring so earnestly I shoud do so. I have so great Reason to be satisfyd with your Conduct towards me, that I wish very much to gratify you in every thing that is practicable; and there want not other Motives to make me embrace that Resolution. For tho' I think I have Reason to complain of the Blindness of Party, which has made the Public do Justice to me very slowly and with great Reluctance, yet I find, that I obtain support from many impartial People, and hope, that I shall every day have more reason to be satisfy'd in that particular. But in my present Situation, it is impossible for me to undertake such a Work; and I cannot break off from Lord Hertford, as long as he is pleas'd to think me useful to him. I shall not however lose sight of this Object, and any materials, that cast up in this Country, shall be carefully collected by me.

I am glad you are satisfy'd with the publication of the new Edition of my Essays. I shall be oblig'd to you, if you will inform yourself exactly how many Copies are now sold both of that Edition and of the Octavo Edition of my History. I think both these Editions very correct.

I did little more than see your Friends, Mr Buchannan & Mr Wilson, at Paris, and present them to Lord Hertford: We returnd not from Compiegne till a few days before they left Paris. I am sorry that I am oblig'd to return this other Copy of Coke's Institutes: It is all in the Saxon Character which no body can read in France. I woud not have you send any other Copy.

Rouet has not yet arrivd at Paris, tho' we expect him every day. I hear good things said of his Pupil Lord Hope, which gives me Pleasure. I am glad that Rouet will have Credit by him. I think the Dutchess of Douglas has chosen well in making Mallet one of her Commissioners. I have no good Opinion of that Cause. Mrs Mallet has retir'd into the Forrest of Fontainebleau with a Macgregor. I fancy she is angry with me, and thought herself neglected by me while in Paris. I heard of her thrusting herself every where into Companies, who endeavourd to avoid her; and I was afraid she woud have laid hold of me to enlarge her Acquaintance among the French.

I have not yet executed your Commission with Monsr le Roy; but shall not forget it.

I am very glad that Mrs Millar is so good as to remember me. I shall regard it as one agreeable Circumstance, attending my return to England, that you & she will have Leizure to give more of your Company to your Friends; and I shall always be proud to be rankd in the Number.

The lowness of Stocks surely proceeds not from any Apprehension of War: Never was a general Peace establishd in Europe with more Likelihood of its Continuance: But I fancy your Stocks are become at last too weighty, to the Conviction of all the World: What must happen, if we go on at the same Rate, during another War? I am with great Sincerity

 Dear Sir 
Your most obedient humble Servant



David Hume

Paris 3d Septr 1764
