Dear Will.

I shall tell you how my Affair stands. Dr. Pringle has been absent two Years by Allowance; & about six Weeks ago wrote a Letter to the Provost, in which he seem'd, in a manner, to have resign'd his Office, & desir'd the Council, if they thought the University any way a Sufferer by his Absence, to send him over a Resignation in form, which he wou'd sign; & then they might proceed to the Choice of a Successor. Mr. Couts upon receiving this, mention'd me to several of the Council, & desir'd me to mention myself as a Candidate to all my Friends, not with a View of solliciting or making Interest, but in order to get the Public Voice on my Side, that he might with the more Assurance employ his Interest in my Behalf. I accordingly did so; & being allow'd to make use of the Provost's Name, I found presently that I shou'd have the whole Council on my Side, & that indeed I shou'd have no Antagonist. But when the Provost produc'd the Doctor's Letter to the Council, he discover'd, that he had in secret wrote differently to some of his Friends, who still insisted that the Town shou'd give him Allowance to be absent another Year. The whole Council, however, except two or three exclaim'd against this Proposal, & it appear'd evidently, that if the Matter had been put to a Vote, there wou'd have been a Majority of ten to one against the Doctor. But Mr Couts, tho his Authority be quite absolute in the Town, yet makes it a Rule to govern them with the utmost Gentleness & Moderation; & this good Maxim he sometimes pushes even to an Extreme. For the sake of Unanimity, therefore, he agrees to an Expedient started by one of the Doctor's Friends, which he thought woud be a Compliment to the Doctor, & yet wou'd serve the same Purpose as the immediate Declaration of a Vacancy in the Office. This Expedient was to require either the Doctor's Resignation, or a Declaration upon Honour that, whether it were Peace or War or in any Event, he woud against Novr 1745 return to his Office, & resign his Commission of Physician to the Army or any other Employment incompatible with his Attendance in this Place. This last Condition, Mr Couts thinks it impossible he will comply with: Because he has a Guinea a day at present as Physician to the Army, along with a good deal of Business, & half pay during Life: And there seems at present to be small Chance for a Peace before the Term here assign'd. I find, however, that some are of a contrary Opinion; & particularly, several of the Doctor's Friends say, that he will sign the Obligation abovemention'd. We shall receive his Answer in a Fortnight, upon which my Success seems entirely to depend.

In the mean time I have receiv'd another Offer, which I shall tell you as a Friend; but desire you may not mention to any Body. My Lord Garlees receiv'd a Commission from Mr Murray of Broughton to look out for a travelling Tutor to his Son, who is at present at Glasgow. My Lord inclines to give me the Preference, but I coud not positively accept, 'till I had seen the End of this Affair, which is so near a Crisis. Please to inform me of any Particulars, that you know with regard to the Young Man, his Family &c, that in Case the former Project fail, I may deliberate upon the other.

The accusation of Heresy, Deism, Scepticism, Atheism &c &c &c. was started against me; but never took, being bore down by the contrary Authority of all the good Company in Town. But what surprizd me extremely was to find that this Accusation was supported by the pretended Authority of Mr Hutcheson & even Mr Leechman, who, tis said, agreed that I was a very unfit Person for such an Office. This appears to me absolutely incredible, especially with regard to the latter Gentleman. For as to Mr Hutcheson, all my Friends think, that he has been rendering me bad Offices to the utmost of his Power. And I know, that Mr Couts, to whom I said rashly, that I thought I coud depend upon Mr Hutcheson's Friendship & Recommendation; I say, Mr Couts now speaks of that Professor rather as my Enemy than as my Friend. What can be the Meaning of this Conduct in that celebrated & benevolent Moralist, I cannot imagine. I shall be glad to find, for the Honour of Philosophy, that I am mistaken; & indeed, I hope so too: And beg of you to enquire a little into the Matter; but very cautiously, lest I make him my open & profess'd Enemy, which I woud willingly avoid. Here then it behoves you to be very discreet.

Tis probable Mr Murray of Broughton may consult Mr Hutcheson & the other Professors of Glasgow, before he fix absolutely on a Tutor for his Son. We shall then see whether he really entertains a bad Opinion of my Orthodoxy, or is only unwilling that I should be Professor of Ethics in Edinburgh; lest that Town being in the Neighbourhood of Glasgow, shou'd spread its Contagion all around it, & even infect the Students of the latter University.

I have past a Week with Mr Oswald at Kirkaldie. He makes his Compliments to you. He has shown me the whole Oeconomy of the Navy, the Source of the Navy Debt; with many other Branches of public Business. He seems to have a great Genius for these Affairs; & I fancy will go far in that way, if he perseveres.

I find with pleasure, but without Surprize, that you have acted like a true Friend in your Letter to Archy Stuart.

I go out of Town to morrow. Please to direct to me at Ninewells near Berwick. My Compliments to all your Family.

Edinr. Augst. 4. 
1744.
