I shall answer your Story of Charles Townsend very fully by another Story of the same Gentleman. Three Years ago when I was in London, I was told by a Friend, that Mr Townsend said, that my History of the Stuarts (the only one then publishd) was full of gross Blunders in the Facts: He had consulted all the authentic Documents, particularly the Journals of the House of Commons, and found it so. When I made light of this Information, as knowing somewhat of Mr Townsend's hasty manner of speaking, my Friend said, that I ought not so much to neglect the Matter; because Mr Townsend had told him, that Mr Dyson, Clerk to the House of Commons, a Man of Knowlege & Solidity, had made to him the same Observation. I was a little surprizd & alarm'd at this; and I went to Mr Elliot, whom I desird to speak to Mr Dyson, & to tell him, that there was nothing in the World I desird so much as to be informd of my Errors, & that he woud oblige me extremely by pointing out those Mistakes. Mr Dyson reply'd, that he had never in his Life spoke of the Matter to Mr Townsend; and that tho' he differed from me in my Reasonings & Views of the Constitution, he had observd no Blunders in Facts, except one with regard to the dispensing Power: Which by the bye, was the one also remarkd to me by the Speaker & which I corrected in the 2d Edition. It was not an Error with regard to the Reign of James II, but with regard to that of K. William which I had not sufficiently examin'd.

I assure you there is not a Quotation that I did not see with mine own Eyes, except two or three at most, which I took from Tyrrel or Brady because I had not the Books refer'd to. That there is no Mistake in such a Number of References, woud be rash or even absurd to affirm: That the Printer also has not sometimes made Mistakes in the Name of the Author or in the Number of the Page quoted, is what I dare not aver: For I only compard the Sheet now & then with my Manuscript, and was contented to be as correct as possible in the Text. I knew that these Mistakes could neither be frequent nor material. But if People, finding a few here & there, point them out, and give them as a Specimen of the whole, I know no remedy for this Malice, but to allow them to go on. Men of Candour will judge otherwise without Scrutiny: And Men of Diligence & Industry will find that the Case is otherwise upon Scrutiny.

I have heard of Charles Townsend's extolling & decrying me alternately, according as the Humour bites; and all the World knows this to be his Character. He is perhaps angry with me at present; because I did not wait of  him when I was in London. It is strange, that Great Men in England should slight & neglect Men of Letters when they pay court to them; & rail at them when they do not. I have a Regard to Mr Townsend as a man of Parts; I believe, of very great Parts: But I attatch myself to no great Man, and visit none of them but such as happen to be my Friends, and particular Acquaintance. I wish they woud consider me as equally independant with themselves or more so. However, there is no Necessity of enraging Mr Townsend farther by the Story I told you in the first Paragraph; and therefore I wou'd not have you communicate it to any body, except a very particular Friend whom you can trust. You may read the 2d Paragraph to every body.

Mr Bell swears to me, that he sent up none of the last Edition of my Essays to London, & Donaldson owns only twenty. I do not think the Sale has been bad in the last two Years: For you & they have sold above six hundred of both Editions. If my History take a great run, it will quicken the Sale of the other.

I shall send off the three Volumes, corrected, by the Waggon to morrow. Please tell Mr Strahan, that I hope he has kept all the detachd Bits of Manuscript, which were inserted in the Stuarts, and that he will do the same with the Tudors, & will pin them to the Page, to which they belong as I have done. If he has already lost those of the Stuarts, it is only having recourse to this new Edition for these Passages, when he comes to print the Octavo Edition: But for the rest let him follow the second Edition as I have now given it him corrected.

Mr Kincaid sent me a Copy of the antient History in which there wants two Sheets of the first Volume viz B and Ff. There were also two Copies of B of the second Volume, of which I have returnd one enclosd in one of the Volumes, which I send up by the Waggon. I beg it of you to send me these two Sheets in a post Letter, otherwise this Copy will be lost.

Pray is there any hope of seeing Lord Lyttleton's History this Season? I shou'd be glad to have had the Benefit of it for correcting this new Edition: Tho my Lord told me, that he observd no Mistakes in Authorities, & none in Facts, except one, where I tell a Story of Thomas a Becket after his Secretary; whereas His Lordship had a Manuscript, which puts the Matter in a different Light: But this I could not know; and I still think it doubtful, which Authority I should follow.

I was extremely obligd to you for advancing the Money in order to enable me to take part in the last Subscription. I shall certainly keep it till the Peace, which seems now to be in a tolerable good way; and then I shall be a considerable Gainer.

I beg my Compliments to Mrs Millar; and am with great Sincerity

 Dear Sir Your affectionate Friend & Servant

David Hume

Edinburgh 
 8 April 1762
