Edinburgh 16 of January 1773.

Dear Sir

I always thought the Manuscript, which you committed to Print, and have since communicated to the Public, extremely curious; and esteemd myself much oblig'd to you for the Perusal of it, while I was in London. I made at that time some Extracts from it, which I thought I had communicated to you: Sure I am, I intended it, and mention'd it to you. Since I came down, I perus'd again the Copy, which you were so good as to leave in my hands, and above a twelvemonth ago, compos'd that Note, which you seem to think exceptionable in many particulars. At that time, I sent it up to Mr Strahan, the Printer, who was making a new Edition, to which I thought these Extracts woud be an Ornament. It never was my Idea, that the Earl of Northumberland was more niggardly or more stately than other Men of his Rank in England: On the contrary, the chief Curiosity of his Household Book is, that, by giving us a general Insight into the Manners of the Age, it throws a great Light upon that Period. You see, that I introduce my Note with a Remark to that Purpose, and conclude it with a Comparison between the Nobility of England and even of France on the one hand, and the Nobility of Italy, on the other, who regarded with some Reason all the ultramontaine Nations as Barbarians. My Notion is, that the uncultivated Nations are not only inferior to civiliz'd in Government, civil, military, and eclesiastical; but also in Morals; and that their whole manner of Life is disagreeable and uneligible to the last Degree. I hope it will give no Offence (and whether it do or not, I must say it) if I declare my Opinion, that the English, till near the beginning of the last Century, are very much to be regarded as an uncultivated Nation; and that even When good Queen Elizabeth sat on the Throne, there was very little good Roast Beef in it, and no Liberty at all. The Castle of the Earl of Northumberland, and no doubt that of the Earl of Warwick, the King Maker and others, was no better than a Dungeon: No Chimney to let out the Smoak; no Glass Windows to keep out the Air; a glimmering Candle here and there, which coud scarce keep their Ragamuffins of Servants and Retainers from breaking their Shins or running foul of each other: No Diet but salt Beef and Mutton for nine Months of the Year, without Vegetables of any kind: Few Fires and these very poor ones.

If I had perus'd your Preface, I might perhaps alter my Opinion in these particulars. I have a great Curiosity to see it and shall apply to Dr Blair for it: But in the mean-time, I am obligd to follow the Lights which I had before me. The Spencers, who were as great Barons, as ever were in England in the Reign of Edward the 2; livd in just such a manner. When Queen Catherine of Arragon had a Fancy to eat a Sallad, she coud not find one in all England, she was obligd to send a Messenger to the Low Countries for that Purpose: And I suppose when her Tyrant of a Husband thought she was with Child, and that the Life of his royal Issue depended upon it, he woud indulge her in that Caprice. Be so good as to look into the End of the fourth Volume of this new Edition, and you will see the Account which Erasmus gives of the way of living in England at that time: Please also to peruse a Note from Harrison or Holingshed to the same purpose. For my Part, I shoud rather chuse, for the Gratification of every Appetite and Passion, except that of Pride, to be a Footman in the present Family of the Duke and Dutchess of Northumberland, than to be at the head of it in the Reign of Harry the VII and VIII; And even on the head of Pride, I shoud expect in that humble station, from the courtly Demeanor of these two noble Persons better treatment, than the first of their Vassals at that time thought themselves entitled to. If these be Truths, why shoud they be conceald? Why still exalt Old England for a Model of Government and Laws; Praises which it by no means deserves? And why still complain of the present times, which, in every respect, so far surpass all the past? I am only sorry to see, that the great Decline, if we ought not rather to say, the total Extinction of Literature in England, prognosticates a very short Duration of all our other Improvements, and threatens a new and a sudden Inroad of Ignorance, Superstition and Barbarism. There cannot be a stronger Symptom of this miserabl[e] Degeneracy, than the Treatment which I have met with for telling them Truth in these particulars.

There is nothing I shoud more avoid, than to give Offence, especially to a Person for whom I have so great a Value as Yourself; and the obliging Manner in which you express Yourself, still more summons up my Attention. I shoud certainly endeavour to rub off any rough Corners which you observe in my Extracts, if I were not sensible that it is now too late: For the Bookseller told me, that this new Edition was ready for publication, and waited only till I shoud give him the Errata, which I sent above a month ago: So that the Book, I presume, is now in the hands of the Public. I beg of you to regard it with Indulgence; and be perswaded, that all my Inferences are general, and nowise point at any particular Nobleman whose domestic Oeconomy coud not have merited the Attention of the public in a general History. As to his Pension to the Lady of Walsingham, I thought it amusing that the Earl gave a Groat a Year to the Virgin Mary, as a retaining Fee for her Interest with her Son in Heaven; a Pleasantry which I hopd woud not give Offence to any Protestant.

 I am with great Regard Dear Sir 
Your most obedient and most humble Servant



David Hume
