Dear Sir,

I had a letter from Sir Harry Erskine last post, who tells me, that you have met with unsurmountable difficulties in that affair of my half-pay, and that we must despair of success. The difficulties, however, are no other than what I knew and desired Mure to inform you of; tho' he has probably forgot. There are no precedents for a Depute Judge-Advocate having half-pay. This we found on examining the matter at the end of the former war; but, at the same time, we found, that no Judge-Advocate had ever been refused half-pay, because no one had ever been entitled to it; that office had always been supplied from among the officers of the Army, who consequently could never claim half-pay as Judge-Advocate. But in reality, every one who has ever received half-pay upon the King's commission, is a precedent for the Judge-Advocate, the Commissary of Stores, the Commissary of Musters, the Director of the Hospital, the Physician, the Surgeon, the Chaplain. The general principle is (and it is founded on a Vote of the House of Commons) that whoever bears the King's Commission in a military station is entitled to half-pay; and there cannot possibly be a reason why the Judge-Advocate should be the only exception. If I be the first Judge-Advocate who was not an officer of the Army, or had not some other office, I am also the first entitled to half-pay; and consequently ought first to obtain it.

I remember Jemmy Pringle was made Controller of the Hospitals in Flanders during the former war. It was an office newly created; but he obtained half-pay on the general principle, without any precedent.

John Mackenzie was surgeon to the staff on Genl St Clair's expedition. There was no precedent for any one in that office obtaining half-pay; yet he got it, and got it above twelve years after the expedition was finished. So that he surmounted both the objections that lie against me and he surmounted them by no greater interest than that of Lord Fortrose. If I fail, I must be worse supported than is likely to be the fate of any man whom you call your friend.

I believe it will be allowed to be singular and not a little remarkable, if I should be the only commissioned officer since the Revolution, who has not obtained half-pay, which however will be the case if I be disappointed.

I shall add, that it is the only thing in my life I ever asked: It is the only thing I ever shall ask, and consequently it is the only thing I ever shall obtain. Those who assist me in procuring it do me a great favour; and I very willingly stand obliged to my friends for their good offices: But of the Government and Ministry, I ask it as my due. I imagined, that after Lord Bute's consent was obtained, all difficulties had been surmounted.

Pray whom does the affair now depend on? Is it the Secretary at War? Who is he, and who does he belong to? If I knew his connexions, I might probably be able by some means to facilitate your application; tho' to tell you the truth, I have the most extreme reluctance to go beyond you, and ask this, or any favour of any other man. Yet I doubt not, if Lord Shelburne be connected with the Secretary at War, but he would, of himself, second your applications: Or perhaps Elliot, or Wood, or some other of our friends. I own, that I sometimes feel so much indignation at being obstructed, and in danger of being refused in this trifle, that I am inclined to throw up altogether, and to turn my back on those barbarians (your great men, I mean) with disdain; and as I can now be more indifferent about their favours, I believe it were my best course: But still, if you think the matter feasible, we shall make this single trial; and if we fail, spes et fortuna, valete.

 I am Dear Oswald 
Yours sincerely



David Hume.

Edinburgh, 
 3d April, 1763.
