I have read Mr Leechman's Sermon with a great deal of Pleasure, & think it a very good one; tho' I am sorry to find the Author to be a rank Atheist. You know (or ought to know) that Plato says there are three kinds of Atheists. The first who deny a Deity, the second who deny his Providence, the third who assert, that he is influenc'd by Prayers or Sacrifices. I find Mr Leechman is an Atheist of the last kind.

I think the Language very correct; tho' there occurd to me a few doubts as I went along, which I shall here mention, that if you or he think them well founded you may make Use of them. I think myself very ill qualify'd to advise Mr Leechman; but as he was once pleas'd to desire my Sentiments, with regard to his Language, I am resolv'd not to lose the Honour of such a Pupil, tho the Subject be but a Trifle & tho I owe that Advantage more to his Modesty than my superior Skill . . . .

These are all the minute Faults I cou'd observe in the Sermon. Mr Leechman has a very clear and manly Expression, but in my humble Opinion he does not consult his Ear enough, nor aim at a Style that may be smooth & harmonious; which, next to Perspicuity is the chief Ornament of Style. Vide Cicero, Quinctilian, Longinus &c, &c. If this Sermon were not a popular Discourse, I should also think it might be made more concise.

As to the Argument I coud wish Mr. Leechman wou'd in the second Edition answer this Objection both to Devotion & Prayer, & indeed to every thing we commonly call Religion, except the Practice of Morality, & the Assent of the Understanding to the Proposition that God exists.

It must be acknowledg'd that Nature has given us a strong Passion of Admiration for whatever is excellent, & of Love & Gratitude for whatever is benevolent & beneficial, & that the Deity possesses these Attributes in the highest Perfection & yet I assert he is not the natural Object of any Passion or Affection. He is no Object either of the Senses or Imagination, & very little of the Understanding, without which it is impossible to excite any Affection. A remote Ancestor, who has left us Estates & Honours, acquir'd with Virtue, is a great Benefactor, & yet 'tis impossible to bear him any Affection, because unknown to us; tho in general we know him to be a Man or a human Creature, which brings him vastly nearer our Comprehension than an invisible infinite Spirit. A man, therefore, may have his Heart perfectly well disposd towards every proper & natural Object of Affection, Friends, Benefactors, Countrey, Children &c, & yet from this Circumstance of the Invisibility & Incomprehensibility of the Deity may feel no Affection towards him. And indeed I am afraid, that all Enthusiasts mightily deceive themselves. Hope & Fear perhaps agitate their Breast when they think of the Deity: Or they degrade him into a Resemblance with themselves, & by that means render him more comprehensible. Or they exult with Vanity in esteeming themselves his peculiar Favourites. Or at best they are actuated by a forc'd & strain'd Affection, which moves by Starts & Bounds, & with a very irregular disorderly Pace. Such an Affection can not be requir'd of any Man as his Duty. Please to observe, that I not only exclude the turbulent Passions, but the calm Affections. Neither of them can operate without the Assistance of the Senses, & Imagination, or at least a more compleat Knowledge of the Object than we have of the Deity. In most Men this is the Case; & a natural Infirmity can never be a Crime. But secondly were Devotion never so much admitted, Prayer must still be excluded. First The Addressing of our virtuous Wishes & Desires to the Deity, since the Address has no Influence on him, is only a kind of rhetorical Figure, in order to render these Wishes more ardent & passionate. This is Mr Leechman's Doctrine. Now the Use of any figure of Speech can never be a Duty. Secondly this Figure, like most Figures of Rhetoric, has an evident Impropriety in it. For we can make use of no Expression or even Thought, in Prayers & Entreaties, which does not imply that these Prayers have an Influence. Thirdly. This Figure is very dangerous & leads directly & even unavoidably to Impiety & Blasphemy. Tis a natural Infirmity of Men to imagine, that their Prayers have a direct Influence, & this Infirmity must be extremely foster'd & encouragd by the constant Use of Prayer. Thus all wise Men have excluded the Use of Images & Pictures in Prayer; tho they certainly enliven Devotion; because tis found by Experience, that with the vulgar these visible Representations draw too much towards them, & become the only Objects of Devotion. — Excuse this Long Letter, make my Compliments to Mr Leechman & all Friends, & believe me to be Yours sincerely D. H.

 June. 30 [1743].

I have frequently in Edinr enquir'd for the Dialogues on Devotion publish'd at Glasgow some time ago; but coud not find them. If you have a Copy send it me, & I shall restore it with the first Occasion. It may be a means of my Conversion.
