Bath 13 of May 1776

My dear Doctor

You have frequently heard me complain of my physical Friends that they allowed me to die in the midst of them without so much as giving a Greek Name to my Disorder; a Consolation which was the least I had reason to expect from them. Dr Black, hearing this Complaint, told me, that I shou'd be satisfy'd in that particular, and that my Disorder was a Hæmorrhage, a word which it was easy to decompose into αιμος and ρηγνυμι . But Sir John Pringle says, that I have no Hæmorrhage; but a Spincture in the Colon, which it will be easy to cure. This Disorder, as it both contained two Greek Appellations and was remediable, I was much inclined to prefer, when behold! Dr Gustard tells me that he sees no Symptoms of the former Disorder, and as to the latter, he never met with it and scarcely ever heard of it. He assures me, that my Case is the most common of all Bath Cases, to wit, a bilious Complaint, which the Waters scarcely ever fail of curing; and he never had a Patient of whose Recovery he had better hopes. Indeed, the Waters, in the short trial which I have made of them (for I have been here only four days) seem to agree very well with me; and two days ago I found myself so well, that, for the first time, I began to entertain hopes of a Reprieve. Yesterday I was not so well, from a Misunderstanding, in new Lodgings, with regard to my Bedding: My whimsicalness in this particular surprizes Dr Gustard, and he knows not what to make of it. By the bye, this Dr Gustard is an excellent kind of Man, very friendly and I believe very intelligent: He assures me (as do several others) that the Summer is the best time for Bath Waters; and if they continue to agree with me, I shall probably pass here that Season. I promised to General Conway and Lady Aylesbury, that, if I had recovered so much Health as to venture myself in Company, I shoud pass some weeks of the Autumn at Park-place: this is the only Retardment I can forsee to my return to Scotland before winter. My wishes carry me thither; though the grievous Loss we have suffered in Friends makes the Abode in that Countrey less pleasing to my Fancy than formerly.

You must have heard of the agreeable Surprize, which John Home put upon me. We travelled up to London very cheerfully together, and thence to this place, where we found Mrs Home almost quite recovered. Never was there a more friendly Action, nor better placed: For what between Conversation and Gaming (not to mention sometimes squabbling) I did not pass a languid Moment; and his Company, I am certain, was the chief Cause, why my Journey had so good an Effect; of which, however, I suppose he has given too sanguine Accounts, as is usual with him. My good Spirits and tolerable Appetite are capable of deceiving any body, even my Physicians, who, though able, are, I am perswaded, still groping in the dark. If I have any secret Disorder, it has not yet betrayed itself by any Symptoms, that are quite decisive.

But to leave this disagreeable Subject of my own Ails, about which, however, I know, you are interested, I learn that Willie Robertson is Candidate for the Office of Procurator to the Kirk. How I lament my Absence at so critical a time! Yet I allow you to employ my Name and Interest, in all Sollicitations with the Members of the Assembly, which will, I hope, have the same Effect as my personal Applications. Be so good as to read this Letter to Dr Black and to Mr Ferguson. When I write to one, I suppose myself writing to all my Friends; and I also wish to comprehend the Principal in the Number. Pray tell him, that Mrs Macaulay is settled in Bath; and though her Muse seems now to be mute, she is, if not a more illustrious, yet a more fortunate Historian, than either of us. There is one Dr Wilson, a man zealous for Liberty, who has made her a free and full Present of a House of £2000 Value, has adopted her Daughter by all the Rites of Roman Jurisprudence, and intends to leave her all his Fortune, which is considerable.

Two Ladies of my Acquaintance have laid a Scheme of bringing Lady Huntingdon and me together for her or my Conversion. I wish I may have Spirits to humour this Folly.

I beg my sincere Compliments to Mrs Blair; and am [Dear] Doctor

 Yours usque ad aras.

David Hume
