St. Andrew's Square 28 Jan. 1774.

I was told yesterday by Mr Ross that he had just come from your father, who regretted very feelingly his never hearing from you, which he ascribed, not to your indolence, the true cause, but to your neglect of him and your prejudices against him. In the fullness of his heart he opened up all his friendly intentions towards you, and declared that, except a reasonable provision for your sister, and a small annuity to your brother after purchasing his commission, he intended you to be the sole heir of all his remaining property. He wanted nothing from you except your friendship, which he was sorry he could not obtain, and it was the circumstance that embittered his remaining days. I was really so much affected by Mr Ross's account of the conversation, that I promised to write to you on this head, which I hope you will take in a friendly part. Your father at this time is more particularly jealous on account of some late transactions; but as your vehemence must be abated by success, I hope you will now regard them with more indulgence, indeed with that indulgence which the common maxims of the world (I mean of the prudent and discreet world) will allow them. In all cases it is your duty, as well as your interest, to write to him frequently, and with all possible marks of confidence and friendship. Humanity as well as duty (and humanity is duty) should lead you to adopt this measure. Let not indolence be an obstacle. But I trust that I need say no more on this head.

Yesterday Baron Mure told me that, by your directions, he was to make me a voter in the county of Renfrew. Had you ever mentioned to me this intention, I could have given you invincible objections against it, the least of which is, the taking a journey which I am always averse to, and the living either in Mr Ross's house or the Baron's at the most disagreeable time, that of an election; and all this for no manner of purpose, as any other person (and the Baron or you must have great choice) can equally do the business. I could have got over all objections were it to be of any service to you, but as the matter is a mere formality, I know you will have no difficulty to excuse me.

In the business which I entrusted to you in my last letter, I must entreat you to proceed with all manner of — of (what do you think I was going to say) with all manner of indifference. It cannot be less than my concern about it, or than my hopes of success. Let it be just proposed, and then dropped, if it be not immediately gone into. I have already reaped the most agreeable circumstance of the affair, your entering into it with friendship and alacrity.

Pray is it true that Lord Holland has paid Charles Fox's debts? And will Charles now draw the line and reform, and be frugal and virtuous? I hope you excuse the prolixity of my style, in employing synonimous terms, I shall make you amends in my subscription, for I shall neither be your humble, nor obedient, nor obsequious, nor devoted servant, but yours sincerely

David Hume.

Write to your father; I excuse your not writing to me.
