Compiégne, 29 of July, 1764.

You had great reason, dear Madam, to say that your letter would give me pleasure; for surely I never felt more than I received from it. What amiable, what unaffected, what natural expressions of good-will and friendship! I can only deserve them by my sincere attachment to you; and if that will give me a title, I am fully possessed of it. Still, I am uneasy (you will wonder that I can now have any complaint), but I am uneasy, that, notwithstanding all you can say, I should not have the prospect of passing much of my time with you. Our connexions and course of life led us into very different roads: but my comfort is, that these may alter: my regard for you is unalterable: I shall firmly believe the same of your indulgence towards me.

I set out in a few hours for Villers-Cotterets, to pass a day or two there. You will guess some part of my conversation with Madame de Barbantane. Poor Tiepolo, the Venetian Ambassador, left us a few days ago: he seems to me in a very dangerous state of health. I asked him if he did not leave France with regret. Yes, said he, I leave many persons there with regret, but above all one lady, whom I esteem the most accomplished in it, and whom I was just beginning to make acquaintance with: I regret that I had not seized sooner the opportunities of cultivating her friendship. I believe him quite sincere in this declaration, nor do I suspect that he talked so in order to flatter me. The Prince de Conti passed two days here, and I was twice at his door to pay my court to him; but had not the good fortune to find him at home.

The Duke of York writes, that he is to be in France the latter end of August, in order to pass two or three months with us. His lodgings are already hired in Paris. His company will do us a great deal of honour, but honour is not to be bought without some sacrifices. I hope his Royal Highness is of your acquaintance, and that he will choose me for his conductor when he waits upon you. I kiss your hands, my dear, my amiable friend, with the greatest devotion and most sincere affection. Among other obligations, which I owe you, without number, you have saved me from a total indifference towards every thing in human life. I was falling very fast into that state of mind, and it is perhaps worse than even the inquietudes of the most unfortunate passion: how much, then, is it inferior to the sweetness of your commerce and friendship! I bid you again adieu.
