Dear Sir,

I received a letter, a few days ago, from a lady in the Court of France, with whom I have been for some time in an epistolary correspondence, and who bears a very high character for knowledge and merit. She had wrote to me on the supposition I was still in London, because my last letter to her was dated from that place; and she recommends to me, in very earnest terms, the famous Rousseau, who is obliged to fly France, on account of some passages in a new Treatise of Education which he has published. You may believe, that it gave me great uneasiness, that I could not fulfil a duty, which would have been so agreeable to me, and which would have connected me with a man, whose character and talents I so much admire. I do not remember whether I have ever had a conversation with you on the writings of that author, and I know not whether you esteem them as much as I do: For my part, though I see some tincture of extravagance in all of them, I also think I see so much eloquence and force of imagination, such an energy of expression, and such a boldness of conception, as entitles him to a place among the first writers of the age. As to his personal character, I shall give it you in the words of my correspondent, after remarking that all the world speaks of him in the same style. [.\ .\ .]

I own that I was extremely struck with the situation of so extraordinary a man; and having a great desire of being of some use to him, though absent, I have ventured to give you this trouble. Our present King and present Minister are desirous of being thought encouragers of learning: Can they have a more proper opportunity of showing to the whole world that they are in earnest? Monsieur Rousseau is now thrown out of his ordinary course of livelihood; and though he rejects presents from private persons, he may not think himself degraded by a pension from a great monarch: and it would be a singular victory over the French, worth a hundred of our Mindens, to protect and encourage a man of genius whom they had persecuted. I beseech you to advance this topic in places where your opinion may be able to produce the desired effect. It would be a favour to the ministers to suggest such an action to them. I fancy Rousseau's crime is only some sallies of Republicanism, and Protestantism, and satire against French manners: For I do not find that, in any of his writings, he has ever gone farther.

I have hitherto been a wanderer on the face of the earth, without any abiding city. But I have now at last purchased a house, which I am repairing; though I cannot say that I have yet fixed any property in the earth, but only in the air: For it is the third story of James's Court, and it cost me 500 pounds. It is somewhat dear, but I shall be exceedingly well lodged. On comparing my situation with poor Rousseau's, I cannot but reflect how much better booksellers we have in this country than they in France.

I am, Dear Sir,

Yours sincerely, David Hume

Edinburgh, 5 July 1762.
