It is but a few days ago, since General Conway recovered His Health so well as to come to town. Immediatly upon his arrival, I informed Him of Lord Mareschal's Answer, and reminded him of renewing his Applications to his Majesty. I received this Letter from him yesterday, which I transmit to you. I fancy, that it will be necessary for you to write to Mr Conway, both to notify to him your Acceptance of his Majesty's Bounty, and to thank him for his good Offices. As the Characters of our Ministers may probably be unknown to you, I must inform you, that there is no man in the Kingdom of more approved morals than Mr Conway, and more noted for Probity and Honour; so that you need not fear, lest any Marks of Esteem you may give him, will be prostitute or be dishonourable to you.

I shall inform myself of Mr Conway concerning the proper Methods of your receiving this Pension, and shall inform you. Mean-while you may think of some Banker or other person into whose hands you will choose to consign the Money.

It gives me great Satisfaction, My Dear Friend, to hear, that your present Situation is agreeable to you. I cou'd only have wished, that you and Madlle le Vasseur had taken the Management of your Family into your own hands. It wou'd have been an Amusement to you: You wou'd have had every thing more to your mind: And as Mr Davenport had taken his Measures for that purpose, it wou'd have been no Inconvenience to him. But as he is to be with you in a few days, I shall say nothing farther on that head.

Permit me to express, in a few words, my Regreat of a Passage in one of your Letters to Mr Davenport: You suppose, that there are Calumnies spread concerning your Morals in London, and that these Calumnies gain Credit. I cannot imagine who gave you this Intelligence, but be assured, that it is entirely groundless. There is indeed a satyrical Letter of Voltaire's very incorrectly printed, which probably you have seen: But even that Letter contains nothing against your Morals, except a hint of your loving Wine, which is founded only on a Passage of your Letter to M. Dalembert. But, my dear Friend, if you must fly from Mankind, do not at once renounce the Amusement and Consolation of Society, and feel all the Pain which may result from the idle Opinions of Men and those mis-represented. The Expressions contained in this Letter of General Conway may convince you in what Estimation you are held by all Men of Character in England. We only wish, that you wou'd like our Company as well as we do yours.

Lord Mareschal has sent me the enclos'd, which is a piece of Raillery of the King of Prussia's and seems to me but an indifferent Performance.

I had a Letter lately from Mde de Boufflers, who is well, and desires to be remembered to you. My Compliments to Mlle Le Vasseur.

Lisle Street, Leicester Fields 3 of May 1766
