London 6 Oct. 1763

My dear Sir,

I am very glad you have undertaken the task which I used the freedom to recommend to you. Nothing less than what you propose will serve the purpose. You need expect no assistance from Macpherson, who flew into a passion when I told him of the letter I had wrote to you: But you must not mind so strange and heteroclite a mortal, than whom I have scarce ever known a man more perverse and unamiable. He will probably depart for Florida with Governor Johnstone, and I would advise him to travel among the Chickisaws or Cherokees, in order to tame him and civilize him.

I should be much pleased to hear of the success of your labours. Your method of directing to me is under cover to the Earl of Hertford, Northumberland House. Any letters that come to me under that direction, will be sent over to me at Paris.

I have no present thoughts of publishing the work you mention; but when I do, I hope you have no objection of my dedicating it to you.

I beg my compliments to Robertson and Jardine. I am very sorry to hear of the state of Ferguson's health. John Home went to the country yesterday with Lord Bute. I was introduced the other day to that Noble Lord, at his desire. I believe him a very good man; a better man than a politician.

Since writing the above, I have been in company with Mrs Montague, a lady of great distinction in this place, and a zealous partizan of Ossian. I told her of your intention, and even used the freedom to read your letter to her. She was extremely pleased with your project; and the rather, as the Duc de Nivernois, she said, had talked to her much on that subject last winter, and desired, if possible, to get collected some proofs of the authenticity of these poems, which he proposed to lay before the Academie des Belles Lettres at Paris. You see, then, that you are upon a great stage in this enquiry, and that many people have their eyes upon you. This is a new motive for rendering your proofs as complete as possible. I cannot conceive any objection which a man even of the gravest character could have to your publication of his letters, which will only attest a plain fact known to him. Such scruples, if they occur, you must endeavour to remove; for on this trial of yours will the judgment of the public finally depend.

Lord Bath, who was in the company, agreed with me, that such documents of authenticity are entirely necessary and indispensable.

Please to write to me as soon as you make any advances, that I may have something to say on this subject to the literati of Paris. I beg my compliments to all those who bear that character at Edinburgh. I cannot but look upon all of them as my friends. I am,

 Yours sincerely,

David Hume

 6th October 1763.

I depart hence in eight days.
