Bath 10 of May 1776.

My dear Sir

I was very sorry not to see you again before I left London, both because I did not see you again and because of the Cause, your being confin'd. I arriv'd here on Wednesday Evening; improv'd, as before, by the Journey; And the short Trial which I have made of the Waters, seems to succeed wonderfully. Dr Gustard, with whom I am much taken, says, that he never saw a Case so much what may be calld a Bath Case, and in which he is more assur'd of the Patients Recovery. To tell the Truth, I feel myself already so much reliev'd, that, for the first time these several Months, I have to day begun to open my Mind to the Expectations of seeing a few more Years: But whether this be very desirable at my Age I shall not determine. I have not ventur'd to write any thing to Sir John Pringle till we have made a further Trial.

You have probably or soon will have some Letters directed to me under your Cover. Please direct them to this Place. I hope you will be able to give me the same good Accounts of your Health that I have given you of mine. I believe, I told you, that I had sent to the Newcastle Waggon at Edinburgh, near four Weeks ago, the corrected Copy of the four last Volumes of my History, directed to Mr Cadell. The great Pains, that these Corrections cost me, make me anxious to hear of their safe Arrival.

When we pass'd by Spine Hill near Newbury we found in the Inn Lord Denbigh, who was an Acquaintance of my Fellow Traveller. His Lordship inform'd him, that he, Lord Sandwich, Lord Mulgrave, Mr Banks, and two or three Ladies of Pleasure had pass'd five or six Days there, and intended to pass all this Week and the next in the same Place; that their chief object was to enjoy the trouting Season; that they had been very successful; that Lord Sandwich in particular had caught Trouts near twenty Inches long, which gave him incredible Satisfaction; but that for his Part, being a great Admirer of Sea Fish, in which Bath abounded, and hearing that Friday was the great Market day there for Fish, he commissiond my Friend to send him up by the London Fly a good Cargo of Soles, John Dories, and Pipers, which wou'd render their Happiness compleat. I do not remember in all my little or great Knowledge of History (according as you and Dr Johnson can settle between you the Degrees of my Knowledge) such another Instance; and I am sure such a one does not exist: That the First Lord of the Admiralty, who is absolute and uncontrouled Master in his Department, shou'd, at a time when the Fate of the British Empire is in dependence, and in dependance on him, find so much Leizure, Tranquillity, Presence of Mind and Magnanimity, as to have Amusement in trouting during three Weeks near sixty Miles from the scene of Business, and during the most critical Season of the Year. There needs but this single Fact to decide the Fate of the Nation. What an Ornament woud it be in a future History to open the glorious Events of the ensuing Year with the Narrative of so singular an Incident.

 I am Dear Sir Yours sincerely

David Hume.
