St Andrews Square 19 of Feby 1774

Sir

I desire you to appear for me before the Baillies in consequence of the [enclos'd] Summons. The Story is this: I have a House in James's Court, which I Let in [lease] to Mr Boswal, Advocate: He left it last Whitsunday before the Expiration of his Lease, and let it to Lady Wallace. As there was some Plaister broke down in the Kitchin, Mrs Boswal, that she might leave things in good Repair, sent for this Gillies, who summons me, in order to throw a little Plaister on the Walls. The Fellow, having thus got into the house, went about teizing Lady Wallace, and telling her, that this and the other thing was wrong, and ought to be mended. She told him, as she informs me, that everything was perfectly right, and she wou'd trouble the Landlord for nothing. Yet the Fellow had the Impudence to come to me, and tell me that he was sent by Lady Wallace to desire that some Stone Pavement under the Coal Bunker shoud be repair'd. I, having a perfect Confidence in Lady Wallace's Discretion, directed him to repair it, as she desir'd. Having got this Authority, which cannot be good as it was obtain'd by a Lye, he not only pav'd the Bunker anew, but rais'd a great deal of the other Pavement of the Kitchen and laid it anew, nay, from his own head, took on him to white-wash the Kitchin: For all which, he brought me in an account of 30 Shillings. [I] spoke to Mrs Boswal, who assures me, that every thing was in good Repair in the house, except the little Plaister in the Kitchin. I spoke to Lady Wallace who affirms the same thing, and says, that the Fellow came over to me, not only without her Authority, but directly contrary to it. Nay, Lady Wallace's Servant assures me, that, when Gillies was raising the Pavement in different Places, she ask'd him what he meant; for the old Pavement was in very good Order. Mr Gowan, the Mason, to whom I told the Story, says, I coud get him punishd for meddling with my House, without my Authority: But I am content that his Suit be dismiss'd. Even the little Plaister was done by Mr Boswal's Authority, and ought to be pay'd by him, leaving us to adjust the Matter, when he comes to pay his Rent.

 I am Sir 
Your most humble Servant



David Hume
