Horse Wind 4 of Feby 1773

Honoured Sir

You need not doubt, that I, as your Deputy, was extremely pleas'd with your successful Attack on your capital Enemy, and with the Approbation, which it meets with here from all the best Judges, both in Style and Argument. However, if one in my humble Station may presume to give my Opinion to a man so much superior to me in every respect, I shoud think, that almost all between the 11th and 22d Pages of the third Letter had better be retrench'd, or at least reduc'd to one Paragraph which shoud indicate in general the Contents of the whole. That passage is really too minute as well as intricate, and throws a Languour on that part of your performance. The word circumstantiate wou'd also be better supply'd by circumstantial.

I am sorry to tell you, honoured Sir, that David Hume, whom perhaps you look on as your Friend, goes about railing at you in every Company: Son of a Whore and Son of a Bitch are the best Appellations he can afford you. He says, that it is intolerable, that this damnd Fellow, who was bred to nothing but drawing of Bonds and Leases, or at best Settlements and Entails, which are the sublime of his former Profession, shoud turn Author, and at once surpass him and all his Brethren: I am told that he has engag'd the Principal, who, I hear, has the same Opinion of your Performance, to speak the same Lan[guage.] Such is the base Envy and Malignity of these low Minds!

I am told by one who saw your Manuscript in London, that there was a Passage in your last Letter concerning the Change of Topics, both at the Bar and on the Bench, and the throwing out Suspicions above with regard to Subornation and Perjury which had never dard to be mentiond here. This Passage my Friend thought very much to the purpose, and ought not to have been omitted. But I ask pardon for pretending to give Advice to a man so much above me. I am sensible, that my Talents are better fitted to arrange a Dinner or Supper than a Discourse; and tho' Paullus Emilius in Plutarch, says that the same Genius which can marshal an Army will qualify a Man for disposing a Meal and vice versa, I am conscious, that there is a great Difference between the Cases. I have the Honour to be, with the greatest Deference and Regard, Honoured Sir,

Your most humble and most obedient Servant and Deputy 
David Stuart-Moncrief.



P.S.

I beg Pardon for writing on so bad paper to your Honour.
