Edinburgh 27 Octr 1760

Dear Sir

Our Friend, Mr Millar, informs me, that the Clarendon Papers are entrusted into your hands; and that among the rest, there is one which clears up the Question of Glamorgan's Transactions. He referd me to Dr Robertson for further Information; but I found that the Dr had read the Paper in so cursory a manner, & was so little acquainted with the Controversy, that he coud give me no Satisfaction about it. This is the reason of my giving you the present Trouble; and I do it the more willingly, that it affords me Pleasure to embrace any Opportunity of renewing our Acquaintance & Correspondence, which gave me so much Entertainment when I was in London.

The Question is, what Point is cleard or wants to be cleard in this Affair. King Charles never deny'd, that he had given Glamorgan a Commission to conclude a separate Treaty with the Irish Rebels: He only asserted, that the Marquess of Ormond was to be secretly consulted in it & his Consent obtain'd. In virtue of this Power, Glamorgan concluded a Treaty with the Irish without consulting Ormond, & he made a great Sacrifice of the Interests of the Protestant Religion in Ireland. The King, as soon as he knew it, refused to ratify this Treaty; and Glamorgan with his Approbation concluded a new Treaty on more moderate Terms. The first Treaty was in the beginning of the Year 1645: The other was in the latter End of that Year or the beginning of the subsequent. Now, it is no Detection of King Charles to prove, that he gave Powers to Glamorgan; but only that he gave them, independant of Ormond: Which indeed I shoud be extremely surprizd to find; for I think there is Demonstration to the contrary. If Glamorgan only says in general to Clarendon, that he had the King's Authority for what he did in Ireland; this will very naturally be understood of the second Treaty, which alone took effect, was ratifyd, concluded, & did the King some Service, at least might have done it, if his Affairs had then been capable of being retriev'd.

In my Opinion, Dr Birch has totally mistaken the Point in Question. Do we live in so bigotted an Age as to think it any Reflection on the King, that in order to save his own Life, his Family, his Party, his Friends, the English Throne and Church he should grant considerable Advantages to Papists, and sacrifice some of the protestant Establishments in Ireland, which he had not Power to support? But as he deny'd to the Parliament, & what is much more, denyd it solemnly to the Marquess of Ormond, his best Friend, in a private Letter, that Glamorgan had got any Powers, independant of that Nobleman; it woud be some Reproach, I own, to his Character of Sincerity, if he coud be detected in a Falsehood in this particular. Dr Birch's Style suits well enough those puritanical Times, when Popery was the Height of all Reproaches; but will scarce be admitted at present, and a man of his Judgement coud not have fallen into it, had he not been very much immers'd in reading Books & Papers of that Age. Please to peruse that Passage in my second Edition of K. Charles's Reign: For it is there alterd in some particulars from the first: And then tell me whether you think from these Papers, that I have fallen into any Error: For I am willing to retract it, if I have, & shoud even glory in the Recantation.

But perhaps, if there be no more than a single Letter, I had better ask you to get it transcrib'd & send it to me. For tho I hear with great Satisfaction, that you are to publish the whole; & I expect great Entertainment & Instruction from it, yet my Impatience prompts me to anticipate a little the Publication; and as Mr Millar speaks of a new Edition, it may be requisite to alter some Particulars.

Do you intend to publish all Clarendon's Papers, or only the more material ones? I shoud think the last Method more satisfactory to every body except to Historians: And even they woud not be displeasd that you spare them a great deal of superfluous Reading. Had Thurloe's Papers been reducd to one Volume, they had been more useful as well as more entertaining.

Before I leave the Subject of Glamorgan, I shall observe to you, that his Commission, as publishd by Dr Birch, & I think by Rushworth, bears, that the King had granted it to him, because it woud probably be necessary for him to agree to Terms, which it woud not be convenient for the Marquess to be seen in: These are the Terms. He informs Ormond in a Letter publishd by Carte, that he had employd Glamorgan; but warns the Marquess to beware of that Nobleman's shallow Understanding. Glamorgan therefore, according to the King's Intention, was to take the Odium of the Treaty upon him; which was nothing to him, that was a Papist: But Ormond, without appearing, was to direct secretly the Negotiation. Does there any thing appear contrary to this State of the Case? The Charge of Popery upon K. Charles was well suited to the Mob; but is now known to have been absolutely false; & it is wasting Ink, to write any further either for or against it.

Pray have you found anything to decide the Question with regard to the Author of Icon Basilike? For that is the most interesting Question of that Age, which is not yet fully decided; tho' in my Opinion there is a very great Over-ballance of the Arguments on the Side of the King.

 I am Dear Sir 
You most obedient humble Servant



David Hume.
