Dear Sir

I receiv'd the enclos'd from my young Cousin, Lieutenant Alexr Edgar, whom you was so good as to take under your Protection. It contains a short Account of a short Engagement; and as he is naturally a very modest young Fellow, I take the little Exultation, which it contains, to proceed from his Joy, at finding himself upon Tryal a Man of Courage. You will see by it, that he is to be pay'd off, & will again stand in Need of your Patronage. I know that it is the Maxim of your frugal Administration not to allow half-pay Officers, who are able and willing to serve, to lie long idle; and therefore I hope you will soon reinstate him in some Command, where he may give Proofs of his Valour. Coud it be possible to put him in Lieutenant to your Brother? His Obligations to your Family, join'd to his own natural Spirit, wou'd, I hope, engage him to exert himself in an extraordinary manner; and the Example as well as Testimony of such an Officer as Captain Elliot woud be of infinite Service to him. But this perhaps is too great a Favor to ask for him; or may not be, at present, in your Power to grant. In all Cases, I hope you will excuse the Freedom I use in again desiring a Renewal of the Obligations, which he and I owe to you.

I have the Prospect of paying my Respects to you this Autumn, in London. I am now come within Sight of Land, & am drawing near to a Period of that Volume which I had undertaken. I find the Subject curious; and I believe that this Volume will contain some Novelty, as well as greater Accuracy of Composition, than is employ'd by our ordinary Historians. I may add, greater than is requisite to please the Taste of the Public; at least if we may judge by the vast Success of Dr Smollet's History. Vanitas vanitatum, atque omnia vanitas, says the Preacher: The great Object of us Authors, & of you Orators & Statesmen, is to gain public Applause; and you see at what Rate it is to be purchas'd. I fancy there is a future State, to give Poets, Historians, & Philosophers their due Reward, and to distribute to them those Recompenses which are so strangely shar'd out in this Life. It is of little Consequence that Posterity does them Justice, if they are for ever to be ignorant of it, & are to remain in perpetual Slumber in their literary Paradise. However, it is some Comfort, that Virtue is its own Reward, & that a man cannot employ himself in the Cultivation of Letters without reaping a real present Satisfaction from his Industry.

I am Dear Sir Your most obliged humble Servant

David Hume.

Edinburgh 11 May, 1758.

P.S.

I am sorry to hear that the Bill for the Importation of Irish Cattle is rejected. Besides other Arguments for it, I remember a strong Argument which was us'd in Charles II's time against the Prohibition, when it was first lay'd on. It was affirm'd that the Shipping employ'd in that Commerce was nearly equal to that which serv'd for the Carriage of Coal from Newcastle to London. It is not improbable that this Argument has, at present, escap'd all the Reasoners on that Subject; and I thought it a proper one to be suggested to a Lord of the Admiralty. It is to be found, if my Memory do not deceive me, in Carte's Ormond, and was employ'd by that Duke.
