[Paris ? December, 1763]

Dear Dr

I write every thing in haste, except on public Affairs, which are the only serious Matters I have Leizure to mind: So excuse this Letter if it prove a Scrawl. I approve very much of your Plan for ascertaining the Authenticity of Ossian's Poems; and I doubt not of your Success. I do not think you can publish all the Letters you receive, which no body woud read. A Summary of them will do better; but endeavour to be as particular, as you can, with regard to Names of Persons and Passages: For the Force of your Argument will lie there. I have met here with Enthusiasts for Ossian's Poetry; but there are also several Critics who are of my Opinion, that, tho' great Beauties, they are also greater Curiosities, and that they are a little tedious by reason of their Uniformity.

You desire to know the particulars of my Reception here & my Course of Life. I own I write little upon this Subject, and always with some Desire of Secrecy, both because I wish to have such Intelligence convey'd by others rather than myself and because I am somewhat indifferent whether it be convey'd or not. However, I wrote some Circumstances to Robertson, which I allow him to communicate to you. I suppose, this, like all other violent Modes, will pass; and in the mean while, the Hurry & Dissipation, attending it, gives me more pain than Pleasure. Never was there a stronger Instance of the Vanity of human Wishes. But this Embarassment proceeds chiefly from my own Fault, and from a vain Anxiety to give no Offence nor Displeasure to any body.

The Men of Letters here are really very agreeable; all of them Men of the World, living in entire or almost entire Harmony among themselves, and quite irreproachable in their Morals. It woud give you & Jardine & Robertson great Satisfaction to find that there is not a single Deist among them. Those whose Persons & Conversation I like best are d'Alembert, Buffon, Marmontel, Diderot, Duclos, Helvetius; and old President Henaut, who, tho' now decaying, retains that amiable Character, which made him once the Delight of all France. He had always the best Cook & the best Company in Paris. But, tho' I know you will laugh at me, as they do, I must confess, that I am more carry'd away from their Society than I shoud be, by the great Ladies, with whom I became acquainted at my first Introduction to Court, and whom my Connexions with the English Ambassador will not allow me entirely to drop.

Nothing can be more easy & agreeable than my Situation with Lord Hertford, who is a man of strict Honour, an amiable Temper, a good Understanding, and an elegant Person & Behaviour. He takes very much in this Place. He has got an Opinion, very well founded, that the more Acquaintance I make, & the greater Intimacies I form with the French, the more I am enabled to be of Service to him: So he exacts no Attendance from me; and is well pleasd to find me carryd into all kinds of Company. He tells me, that if he did not meet me by Chance in third Places, we shoud go out of Acquaintance. Thus you see my present Plan of life sketcht out; but it is unsuitable to my Age & Temper; and I am determin'd to retrench, and to abandon the fine Folks before they abandon me.

I am glad to find by Yours & my Sisters that you are my Tenant. You have got an excellent House for its Size. It was perfectly clean of Vermine when I left it, and I hope you will find it so. I woud advise you not to put a Bed in the little Closet near the Kitchen: It wou'd be stiffling to a Servant & woud certainly encourage Bugs. The Garret is neatly fitted up for a Man-Servant; and the other Closet will suffice for two Maids. Never put a Fire in the South Room with the red Paper: It is so warm of itself, that all last Winter, which was a very severe one, I lay with a single Blanket; and frequently, upon coming in at Midnight, starving with Cold, have sat down & read for an hour, as if I had a Stove in the Room. The Fires of your Neighbours will save you the Expence of a fire in that Room. You have an excellent Cellar for Wine; but there is a little Inconvenience about having your Coals and small Beer in it at the same time, which my Sister woud explain to you.

You think it inconvenient to take this House only for an Interim: Alas! my Prospects of being home are very distant & very uncertain. I am afraid I might say worse. My Connexions with Lord Hertford must probably last for some Years; after which, I shall be rich enough to live in Paris or London as I please, or to retire to a Provincial town in France or to Bath or God knows whither. I like to keep my House in case of Accidents, and therefore neither choose to sell it, nor let a lease of it; but there is no great Chance for your being disturbd in it for some time. Please send the enclosd to my Sister. I am, Dear Doctor

 Yours sincerely

David Hume

P.S.

Pray, do you not all pay Court to Lord Mareschal? Do you imagine, that you ever saw so excellent a Man? Or that you have any Chance for seeing his equal, if he were gone?
