I have delayed answering your Letters, that I might be able to do it to purpose, and give you Satisfaction. The Offer, you make from Parma, is certainly very alluring to a young Man, who has Curiosity and Ambition: But it requires so many Qualities in the Person, that I found it difficult to discover one that cou'd correspond to your Expectations. Some that I thought of, I found engaged in other pursuits; but having wrote to a young Man in Edinburgh, I received the enclosed Answer, which I use the Freedom to transmit to you. You see there are Objections; but to find a Person entirely satisfactory, is not easy; I am perswaded, that Mr Liston's Objection, with regard to his not having a full Acquaintance with English Authors, is founded less on reality than on his own Modesty. He is a young Man of very good Conduct and Morals and of an excellent Disposition. He lived about a Year and a half at Paris; and had the Care of Sir Gilbert Elliot's two Sons, whom I settled at Abbé Croquar's Academy, Barriere St Dominique: So that, if you will take the Trouble of calling on the Abbé, you may hear a more particular Account of him. I shall only add, that being a Scotsman, it is impossible but he must have something of the Accent of that Country; but he lived several Years in England, and has, I believe, a very tolerable Pronounciation. On the whole, the sooner he sets out the better; that he may perfect himself in the Italian without Loss of time.

Dr Tucker is in the Country, and I wrote to him long ago, desiring him to give you Satisfaction on all the Points, concerning which you desire to be informed. I have received no Answer from him; which makes me conclude, that he is not at his own house. As soon as I hear from him, I shall be sure to inform you.

I know you are one of those, who entertain the agreeable and laudable, if not too sanguine hope, that human Society is capable of perpetual Progress towards Perfection, that the Encrease of Knowlege will still prove favourable to good Government, and that since the Discovery of Printing we need no longer Dread the usual Returns of Barbarism and Ignorance. Pray, do not the late Events in this Country appear a little contrary to your System? Here is a People thrown into Disorders (not dangerous ones, I hope) merely from the Abuse of Liberty, chiefly the Liberty of the Press; without any Grievance, I do not only say, real, but even imaginary; and without any of them being able to tell one Circumstance of Government which they wish to have corrected: They roar Liberty, tho‘ they have apparently more Liberty than any People in the World; a great deal more than they deserve; and perhaps more than any men ought to have. The same Perfection of our Government, carryed to an Extreme, has a bad Influence on our Ministers: There is too little Difference between the Governors and Governed. A Minister here can amass no Fortune, being checked in every Abuse; he can very little give Employments to his own Friends, Favourites and Flatterers, but must bestow all Offices on those who by their Votes and Credit may support Government; and he can revenge himself on none of his Enemies; because every one is so entrenched in Laws and Privileges, as to be able to set all the World at Defiance. Hence men of great Rank and Fortune are very indifferent about being Ministers; being sensible, that they are more exposed to Obloquy on account of their power, and derive no consideration from it. They either decline high Offices, or behave negligently in them; and express every moment their Wishes of being free of the Trouble and Subjection, attending them. These Sentiments loosen the Attachment of their Inferiors. You will say, perhaps, either that all these Evils are Trifles: So perhaps they are; but they tend to great Mischiefs: Or that they proceed from the still imperfect State of our Knowlege: That is very true; but will Men ever reach a much more perfect State; while the rich have so many more alluring Appetites to gratify than that for Knowlege, and the poor are occupyed in daily Labour, and Industry. I mention not the Disturbances arising from foreign Wars, an incurable Evil, which often springs from the greatest & most unexpected Absurdity, and discourages every Project for serving or improving human Society. You see, I give you freely my Views of things, in which I wish earnestly to be refuted: The contrary Opinion is much more consolatory, and is an Incitement to every Virtue and laudable Pursuit.

Since I wrote the above, I have seen Sir Gilbert Elliot, who tells me, that Mr Liston has a remarkable Talent for Languages; so that he will certainly, in a very little time, render himself Master of the Italian. My compliments [to] L'Abbé Le Bon, my old Antagonist. I beg of you to believe me, with the most sincere Regard, My dear Sir,

 Your most obedient and most humble Servant

David Hume

London 16 of June 1768
