My dear Sir

I believe I need not inform you how little I have been always inclin'd to sollicit the Great, or even my Friends, for any thing that regards my own Fortune. I may venture to say, that, hitherto, I have never once made any Applications of this Nature; and you may wonder that now, at my Years, when the greatest Part of Life is past, and I may esteem myself, in other Respects, pretty much at my Ease, I shoud submit to prefer Requests which I declin'd at an Age when Ambition ought naturally to be stronger, and when my Circumstances much more powerfully calld for Assistance. But the Step I take at present is at Lord Hertford's Desire; who, being determin'd to make it a Point that I shoud have the Credentials & Appointments of Secretary to the Embassy, expressd his Wish that I shoud also apply to all my own Friends on the same Subject. My Obligations to him are so great, that, even were I more reluctant, I coud not have declin'd Compliance; and surely I can have but small Reluctance to apply to you, one of my best Friends, with whom I have long liv'd in a Course of Intimacy & good Correspondence.

I remember that the last time I had the Pleasure of seeing you, you said, that I no doubt wonder'd how it happen'd, that while the Prime Minister & Favourite, who inclin'd to be a Maecenas, & who bore me no ill Will, was surrounded by all my most particular Friends, I shoud never have experienc'd any good Effects from their Credit. I own that I never was surprizd; not from any Diffidence of them, but from some obvious Objections. Now all these Objections are remov'd by Lord Hertford's Friendship: Nobody, henceforth, need be afraid to patronise me, either as a Scotsman or a Deist. This Circumstance encourages me in my present Application to my Friends.

Surely it is impossible to give them a juster & more plausible Cause to support than mine? I do the Functions here of Secretary to the Embassy. Is it not scandalous that another should live in London & draw the Sallary?

Is it for the Credit of Government, that such Abuses shoud appear to foreign Nations? Is it good Policy to send an Ambassador to the most important of all foreign Employments, & yet declare that he has so little Credit at home, as not to have the Choice of his own Secretary?

I shall not say that the Partiality I meet with here will make these Abuses more remark'd, than if another Person, less known, were concern'd. But surely the Government puts me in a Situation which ought to render me entirely useless to Lord Hertford, by refusing me a Character which shoud have appear'd necessary, in order to gain me Admittance into Company.

Allow me to inform you of another Circumstance, which renders my prevailing in this Point the most material Step to my future Fortune. When I came to London, & found, contrary to Lord Hertford's Opinion, that Mr Bunbury was likely to keep his Appointments, I declin'd going abroad, unless something certain was fix'd in my Favour. My Lord said, that he woud obtain me, from the Public, a Settlement of 200 a Year for Life, or woud give me as much from his private Fortune. He apply'd to the King, who agreed; to Mr Grenville, who also consented. Two days before we came off, my Pension was fix'd on the most precarious Footing of all Pensions, by a simple Order from the Treasury to their Secretary. Yet Mr Grenville told my Lord, that this was equivalent to a Settlement for Life. My Lord believes so still; but I well know the contrary, tho' I said nothing, perhaps from a foolish Delicacy, as the time of our Departure so near approach'd, & it was difficult then to correct the Blunder. Were I to return to England, on my present Footing, I shou'd regard this Pension as absolutely insignificant, not worth two Years Purchase, and never coud form any Plan on the Supposition of its Duration. But had I obtain'd the Rank & Character of Secretary to the Embassy, there are certain Pensions annex'd, by Custom, to certain Employments; and I believe I might more depend upon it.

You see then how materially my Interests are concern'd. I have wrote to others of my Friends, Sir Harry, Oswald, & John Hume, in the same Style, that an Effort may be made, all at once, in my Favour. I own that, notwithstanding all the plausible Appearances, my Hopes of Success are but moderate. I have been accustom'd to meet with nothing but Insults & Indignities from my native Country: But if it continue so, ingrata patria, ne ossa quidem habebis.

I am My Dear Sir 
Yours sincerely 
David Hume .





Paris 27 March 1764.
