Dear Sir

I am at present two Letters in your Debt. I did not immediatly answer your first; because I did not conceive myself very capable of giving an Opinion with regard to it, and am sensible, that your Judgement is much more to be rely'd on in the question of the propriety of publishing the Octavo Edition of my History. However, since you are pleasd to ask my Sentiments, I should rather incline to think it best to publish it as soon as it is ready; as we may hope, that a cheap Edition may contribute to its Dispersion, and may forward its Reputation, which, I see, has not yet prevaild over all Prejudices. But this matter I submit entirely to your better Judgement.

I was applyd to lately by Kincaid & Donaldson with regard to the Duodecimo Edition of my Essays. I told them, that I did not believe they would come to a new Edition this twelve-month, and that if they wanted any Copies they might apply to you, who would afford them at the same price as to other Bookseller, but, I imagind, would not give them any cheaper. They said, that this would do for their Shop Sale, but they could not afford to furnish other Booksellers at that Rate; and if you would give them Encouragement by abating somewhat of the Price, they would take a considerable Number off your hand. I desird them to give me their proposals, which I offerd to transmit to you. They said, that they would take a hundred Copies at 6 shillings a piece & a twelvemonths Credit: Your ordinary Price they said, was 7 shillings. I am sensible, Dr Sir, that they have no manner of Title to make such a Demand, or rather make it with the worst Grace imaginable, after having interferd with your Sale in London, and sold their Copies at the full Price to your Neighbours: But yet I own, that I wish you could think it proper to accept of this Offer. Such a considerable Number taken off your hand might enable you to bring the Book to a new Edition next Winter, when I propose to make some pretty considerable Improvements on it; and perhaps you might regain by this means, as much as you lose by this Diminution of the Price. They affirm, that they sent very few Copies to London; and seem resolvd (but I shall not answer for the performance) never to send any more of any future Edition. If you agree to the proposal, you may send down the Copies by the first Ship.

This Edition of my History seems to me very correct, and I desire you to give Mr Strahan thanks in my name for his Care in executing it. I shall speak to Dr Robertson on the Subject you mention.

I sympathize very heartily with your Distress and Mrs Millars. I am glad, however, to find, that she has a greater Stock of Health & Strength than she was aware of; and I hope it will be able to bring her down to Scotland this Summer.

I am in a good measure idle at present; but if I tire of this way of Life, as is probable, I shall certainly continue my History, and have no Thoughts of any other work. But in this State of Affairs, I suppose your People of Rank & Quality woud throw the Door in my Face, because I am a Scotsman.

I reckon myself much beholden to Mr Ruffhead for his Letter, and, as I conjecture from yours, for his favourable Opinion, expressed on other Occasions. I beg of you to send him the enclosd. I am very sincerely Dear Sir

 Yours

David Hume

Edinburgh 10 March 1763
