Edinr. 28 March 1763

Dear Sir

I am extremely oblig'd to you for paying so much Attention to my Request; but I sincerely desire you much rather to follow your own Judgement, which is much more to be depended on. I am very uncertain whether my last proposal of publishing the Octavo Edition this Season will contribute to the Credit of the Book: It is perhaps better not to glut the Market, and to wait till the Demand of the Public bring it out: Therefore I would not have venturd to propose my Opinion, if I had not thought, that you would very freely have taken upon you to follow your own Opinion and lay no more weight on my Desire than I did myself.

I never lose view of the Project of continuing my History: I may perhaps very soon gather silently together the Books which will enable me to sketch out the Reigns of K William and Q. Anne; and shall finish them afterwards, together with that of George I, in London. But to tell you the Truth, I have an Aversion to appear in that Capital till I see that more Justice is done me with regard to the preceding Volumes. The languishing Sale of this Edition makes me conjecture that the time is not yet come; and the general Rage against the Scots is an additional Discouragement. I think the Scotch Minister is obligd to make me some Compensation for this.

I am told, that Mr Ralph is dead, who had certainly made a large Collection of Books and Pamphlets for his Work. I should be glad to know into whose hands they are fallen, and would purchase them, if they could be got at a reasonable Price.

Kincaid & Donaldson agree to your Proposal of paying the Money at 6 months Credit & of giving [a] bill for it: So that you may ship off the Copies to them. I am sorry to see so many of the Quartos on hand; and to be sure you cannot print a new Edition till they be more diminishd. I should be pleas'd to know how many of the Octavos you have, after these hundred Copies are taken off your hand.

I spoke some time ago to Dr Robertson about Mr Orr's Degree. He told me that he would write you soon, which I suppose he has done.

Your Index maker has committed a Mistake. In all the Passages quoted from the Reign of Elizabeth, he always marks the Page as it stood in the first Edition, where that Volume was printed to make one with the preceding.

I hear Dr Armstrong has sent you over a most violent Renounciation of Wilkes's Friendship. Wilkes is indeed very blameable in indulging himself so much in national Reflections, which are low, vulgar, & ungenerous, and come with a bad Grace from him, who conversd so much with our Countrymen. My Compliments to Mrs Millar, who, I hope, will favour us with a visit this Summer. I am Dr Sir

 Yours sincerely

David Hume
