Edinburgh 22 of July 1771.

Dear Sir

On Saturday last, the 20th of the Month, I deliverd to the Newcastle Waggon the eight corrected Volumes of my History, directed to Mr Cadell. I chose to direct the parcel to him rather than to you, because his Shop was easier found, and the Waggoner told me, that he often carry'd up Parcels to him. Please to tell Mr Cadel, that he may call for it, if it be not deliverd to him about three Weeks hence. You will see that I have made many considerable Improvements, most of them in the Style; but some also in the matter. I fancy you might be able to send me a proof Sheet about a month hence; and I shoud have been here ready to receive it; But I am assurd that Lady Aylesbury and Mr Conway are to be with the Duke of Argyle this Summer; which will oblige me to leave the Town for a fortnight and go to Inverara. But I shall fix to you precisely the day when I shall be ready to receive the first proof Sheet; and you may depend upon my punctuality afterwards. Mean-while, you may proceed to print the last four Volumes at your own convenience. You told me that you proposd to make this new Octavo Edition in ten Volumes. Each four of the Quarto must therefore be divided into five, and you may cast them accordingly. I woud have you mind nothing but to finish the Chapter with each Volume, without forgetting the Index. You may send me down the Quarto Sheet with the Proof Sheet; and where it contains any Note that it is to be printed at the End I shall return it by the Post. I hope the Sale of the Quarto is pretty well advancd: For this new Edition may a little discredit it. I know not whether the former purchasers may complain of my frequent Corrections; but I cannot help it, and they run mostly upon Trifles; at least they will be esteemd such by the Generality of Readers, who little attend to the extreme Accuracy of Style. It is one great advantage that results from the Art of printing, that an Author may correct his works, as long as he lives. But I have now done with mine for ever, and never shall any more review them, except in a cursory manner. I expect for my pains six Copies, over and above the six that are due me by Agreement. I believe I coud have writ more than a Volume with much less trouble than I have bestow'd on these. If you have leizure to peruse the Sheets, and to mark on the Margin any Corrections that occur to you, it will be an Addition to the many Obligations of the same kind, which I owe to you. But this I cannot expect, considering the many Avocations which you have, unless it prove an Amusement to you in this dead time of the Year. I fancy this Edition will not be publishd till after the New Year. As soon as the new Edition of my philosophical Pieces is printed, I shall be obligd to you to have six Copies of it. It is a great Relief to my Spirits, that I have at last a near Prospect of being fairly rid of that abominable Octavo Edition of my History.

 I am Dear Sir Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume.
