Dear Sir

I give you a great many thanks for thinking of me in your Project of a weekly Paper. I approve very much of the Design, as you explain it to me; and there is no body I wou'd more willingly engage with: But as I have another Work in hand, which requires great Labour & Care to finish, I cannot think of entering on a new Undertaking, till I have brought this to a Conclusion. Your Scheme wou'd require me immediatly to remove to London; and I live here at present in great Tranquillity, with all my Books around me; & cannot think of changing, while I have so great a Work in hand as the finishing my History.

There are four short Dissertations, which I have kept some Years by me, in order to polish them as much as possible. One of them is that which Allan Ramsay mentiond to you. Another of the Passions; a third of Tragedy; a fourth, some Considerations previous to Geometry & Natural Philosophy. The whole, I think, wou'd make a Volume a fourth less than my Enquiry; as nearly as I can calculate: But it wou'd be proper to print it in a larger Type, in order to bring it to the same Size & Price. I wou'd have it publish'd about the new Year; I offer you the Property for fifty Guineas, payable at the Publication. You may judge, by my being so moderate in my Demands, that I do not propose to make any Words about the Bargain. It wou'd be more convenient for me to print here; especially one of the Dissertations, where there is a good deal of Literature, but as the Manuscript is distinct & accurate, it wou'd not be impossible for me to correct it, tho' printed at London. I leave it to your Choice; tho' I believe, that it might be as cheaply & conveniently & safely executed here. However, the Matter is pretty near indifferent to me.

I wou'd fain prognosticate better than you say, with regard to my History; that you expect little Sale till the Publication of the second Volume. I hope the Prejudices will dissipate sooner. I am Dear Sir

 Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume.

Edinburgh . 
 12 of June. 1755.
