Lisle Street Leicester Fields 22d of July 1766

Sir



I shall answer onely one Article of your long Letter: It is that which regards the Conversation between us the Evening before your Departure. Mr Davenport had imagined a good natured Artifice, to make you believe, that a Retour Chaise had cast up for Wooton; and I believe he made an Advertisement be put into the Papers, in order to deceive you. His Purpose only was to save you some Expences in the Journey; which I thought a laudable Project, tho' I had no hand either in contriving or conducting it. You entertained however, Suspicions of his Design, while we were sitting alone by my Fireside; and you reproached me with concurring in it. I endeavoured to pacify you and to divert the Discourse; but to no purpose: You sate sullen and was either silent or made me very peevish Answers. At last, you rose up, and took a Turn or two about the Room; when, all of a sudden and to my great Surprize, you claped yourself on my Knee, threw your Arms about my Neck, kissed me with seeming Ardour, and bedewed my Face with Tears. You exclaimed, 'My Dear Friend, can you ever pardon this Folly? After all the Pains you have taken to serve me, after the numberless Instances of Friendship you have given me, here I reward you with this ill-humour and Sullenness. But your Forgiveness of me will be a new Instance of your Friendship and I hope you will find at bottom that my Heart is not unworthy of you.' I own, that I was very much affected; and I believe there passed a very tender Scene between us. You added, by way of Compliment, that tho' I had many better Titles to recommend me to Posterity; yet perhaps my uncommon Attachment and Friendship to a poor unhappy persecuted Man wou'd not altogether be overlooked.



This Incident, Sir, was somewhat remarkable; and it is impossible, that either you or I cou'd so soon have forgot it. But you have had the Assurance to tell the Story to me twice in a manner so different or rather so opposite, that when I persist, as I do, in this Account, it necessarily follows, that either you or I are a Lyar. You imagine, perhaps, that because the Incident passed privately, without any witness, the Question will lie between the Credibility of your Assertion and of mine. But you shall not have this Advantage or Disadvantage, which-ever you are pleased to call it. I shall produce against you other Proofs, which will put the Matter beyond all controversy.



(1) You are not aware, that I have a Letter under your hand, which is totally irreconcileable with your Account and confirms mine.



(2) I told the Story next day or the day after to Mr Davenport, with a friendly View, of preventing any such good-natured Artifices for the future. He surely remembers it.



(3) As I thought the Story much to your honour, I told it to several of my Friends here: I even wrote it to Mde de Boufflers at Paris. I believe no one will imagine, that I was at that time preparing beforehand an Apology, in case of a Rupture with you; which, of all human Events I shou'd then have thought the most incredible, especially, as we were separated almost for ever, and I still continued to render you the most essential Services.



(4) The Story, as I tell it, is consistent and rational. There is not common Sense in your Account. What! because sometimes, when absent in thought, I have a fixed Look or Stare, you suspect me to be a Traytor, and you have the Assurance to tell me of such black and ridiculous Suspicions! Are not most studious Men (and many of them more than I) subject to like Reveries or Fits of Absence, without being exposed to such Suspicions? You do not even pretend, that, before you left London, you had any other Ground of Suspicion against me.



I shall not enter into any Detail with regard to your Letter. The other Articles of it are as much without Foundation as you know this to be. I shall only add in general, that I enjoyed, about a month ago, an uncommon Pleasure, when I reflected, that, thro' many Difficulties and by most assiduous Care and Pains, I had, beyond my most sanguine Expectations, provided for your Repose, Honour, and Fortune. But I soon felt a very sensible Uneasyness, when I found, that you had, wantonly and voluntarily, thrown away all these Advantages, and was the declared Enemy of your own Repose, Fortune, and Honour. I cannot be surprized after this, that you are my Enemy. Adieu, and for ever.

David Hume

 P.S.



I send you enclosed a Letter from Mr Boswel, which came to my hand about three Weeks ago. He complains to me very much of your Silence .
