Dear Sir

I received from Mr Couts one of the Duplicates of your Note of 600£ which I did not intend to be drawn in so unusual a Form, but only to be drawn, like two Bills of Exchange (the second bearing Payment, if the first be not pay'd). However, the Matter is not of any Consequence.

The ten Copies, large Paper, were thrown into Mr Kincaid's Warehouse, & I had given Baillie Hamilton Permission to send for them, which he had neglected. This is as lucky; since you desire to have them sent back again. I only allow'd, some time ago, Mr Kincaid to make use of one Copy; and I must retain another for myself, in order to bind up for a Present to Allan Ramsay, to whom I gave the first Volume. This you may state to my Account at the small Paper Price. The other eight shall be sent you; tho I cannot imagine you will have any Use for them. For there were no more than 75 of large Paper printed of the first Volume.

Please to draw out my Account, & send me a Copy of it. I shall deduct the Sum from your Note, when I negotiate it. I see an Answer to my Dissertations advertisd in the Papers. If it be of a small Size, please send it me under a Frank. I sent to Mr Strahan a Letter to Mr Oswald, desiring Franks from him: But if there be any Inconvenience on account of that Gentleman's Living out of Town; send Covers directed to me to Mr Elliot, or Sir Harry Erskine or Mr Mure, & they will frank them.

I have already begun and am a little advanc'd in a third Volume of History. I do not preclude myself from the View of going forward to the Period after the Revolution; but at present I begin with the Reign of Henry the 7th. It is properly at that Period modern History commences. America was discovered: Commerce extended: The Arts cultivated: Printing invented: Religion reform'd: And all the Governments of Europe almost chang'd. I wish therefore I had begun here at first. I shoud have obviated many Objections, that were made to the other Volumes. I shall be considerably advanced in this Volume before I be in London.

I come now to speak to you of an Affair, which gives me Uneasyness, & which I mention with Reluctance. I am told, that one Dr Brown has publishd a Book in London, where there is a Note containing personal Reflections on me, for which he quotes a Letter I wrote to you. What Sort of Behaviour this is to make use of a private Letter, without the Permission of the Person to whom it was addressd, is easily conceivd; but how he came to see any of my Letters I cannot imagine; nor what I wrote that coud give him any handle for his Calumny. All I can recollect of the Matter is this, that above two Years ago, when Baillie Hamilton was in London, he wrote me, that the Stop in the Sale of my History proceeded from some Strokes of Irreligion, which had raisd the Cry of the Clergy against me. This gave me Occasion to remark to you, that the Baillie's Complaint must have proceeded from his own Misconduct, that the Cause he assignd coud never have producd that Effect, that it was rather likely to encrease the Sale, according to all past Experience; that you had offerd (as I heard) a large Sum for Bolingbroke's Works, trusting to this Consequence; and that the Strokes complaind of were so few & of such small Importance, that, if any ill Effects coud have been apprehended from them, they might easily have been retrenchd. As far as I can recollect, this was the Purport of my Letter; but I must beg you, that you woud cause it to be transcribd & send me a Copy of it. For I find by John Hume, that you have it still by you. I doubt not but I coud easily refute Dr Brown; but as I had taken a Resolution never to have the least Altercation with these Fellows, I shall not readily be brought to pay any Attention to him: And I cannot but be displeas'd, that your Inadvertance or Indiscretion (for I cannot give it a better Name) shoud have brought me to this Dilemma. I fancy Brown will find it a difficult Matter to perswade the Public that I do not speak my Sentiments in every Subject I handle, & that I have any View to any Interest whatsoever. I leave that to him and his Gang: For he is a Flatterer, as I am told, of that low Fellow, Warburton. And any thing so low as Warburton, or his Flatterers, I shoud certainly be ashamd to engage with.

 I am Dr Sir Yours & c

David Hume

Edinburgh. 20 May 1757

P.S.

Since you are acquainted wt Dr Brown, I must beg of you to read this Letter to him: For it is probably or indeed certainly, all the Answer I shall ever deign to give him.
