Sir

Tho' I have been very unlucky, yet will not I despair. It is too much my Interest, that you execute your Intentions, to allow me to yield to Difficulties. I have wrote to a Friend in London, desiring him to find a way to send the Packets to Hanover, whence they cou'd easily be conveyd to Dresden; and I hope this Copy will at last come to your hands. But as it is still possible, that some Accident may make it miscarry, I must beg of you to give Orders, that one of the Copies, which I sent to Paris, may be convey'd to you. The close Alliance betwixt the Courts of Paris and Dresden must occasion the Passage of Couriers, one of which will be able to carry you a Copy. I doubt not too but Waggons or Carriers, either directly or obliquely by the way of Holland, cou'd convey a small Parcel from one Place to another.

In a Letter, which I did myself the Honor to write to you, I enclos'd another Letter, which, I thought, it might be proper for you to get inserted in the literary Journals, in order to prevent any other Translator from attempting the same Work. Your Journey to Dresden will throw you still farther behind. I have therefore enclos'd another Copy of that Letter, of which you may make whatever Use you think fit.

I have not yet receiv'd your Translation of my political Discourses, tho' I daily expect it with great Impatience. There was a Translation publish'd at the same time in Holland, which I have not seen. I doubt not but the Comparison will show me how much I have been beholden to you. The Alterations, which I sent you, referd to the Edition, from which you made your Translation, viz, the first or second: But as you have parted with your Copy, that Paper can no longer be of Use to you. As soon as your Translation comes to hand, I shall mark the Page & Line where the Alterations are to be inserted; & you will be able, without farther Trouble, to inform the Bookseller of Paris. The Alterations are so considerable, that I cou'd wish the second Edition not to be publish'd without comprehending them.

I hope your Jaunt to Dresden will prove an Entertainment to you. These Interruptions form an agreeable Diversity in the Life of a man of Letters; and the kind Reception, which your Character will procure you, cannot fail of rendering every Place acceptable. The Fate of poor Voltaire will terrify all men of Genius from trusting themselves with his Prussian Majesty, who, tho' one of the most illustrious Characters of the Age, is too much a Rival to be a very constant Patron. We have strange Stories with regard to Voltaire. It is pretended, that that sprightly, agreeable, libertine Wit has at last thrown himself into a Convent, has recanted all his Heresies, and is doing voluntary Pennance for his past Transgressions. But this I have a great Difficulty to believe. It is probably the Invention of the Bigots, in order to throw a Ridicule on him & other Freethinkers. I shou'd be sorry, if this last Accident shoud so crush his Spirits as to disqualify him from any farther Productions, or even damp the Boldness & Freedom of his Reasonings, or more properly speaking, of his Decisions. He has the Art of couching his Determinations in such lively Terms, that they often carry Conviction, as much as if they were supported by the strongest Arguments.

I shou'd esteem myself extremely oblig'd to you, if you inform me of any good Writings, which have lately been produc'd in Paris. We are sometimes late of seeing them in this Part of the World. Our English Literature has not, for some years past, been very fertile. Lord Bolingbroke's posthumous Productions have at last convinc'd the whole World, that he ow'd his Character chiefly to his being a man of Quality, & to the Prevalence of Faction. Never were seen so many Volumes, containing so little Variety & Instruction: so much Arrogance & Declamation. The Clergy are all enrag'd against him; but they have no Reason. Were they never attack'd by more forcible Weapons than his, they might for ever keep Possession of their Authority.

Mr Harris, about two Years ago, publish'd a Book, which he calls Hermes or Universal Grammar. Notwithstanding his Affectation of Greek, & his Mimickry of Aristotle, he is a good Writer; & this Performance, in my Opinion, equals or surpasses that of Abbé Girard, which has Merit.

We have in this Town a singular Phaenomenon, one Blacklocke, a very elegant Poet, born blind. His Writings are particularly remarkable for the Justness & Propriety of their Imagery; tho' he owns that he has no Idea of Light or Colors. An ingenious Gentleman in England is writing a Book, in order to solve the Phaenomenon, which is certainly very singular. The Poet tells me, that he has a singular Pleasure in reading the rural Poets, Theocritus & Virgil: For he understands the learned Languages. Nay Thomson's Seasons is a favourite Book with him: But he tells me, that to the Terms, expressive of Light & Color, he annexes, by a false Association, certain intellectual Ideas. Thus he conceives the Illumination of the Sun to be like the Presence of a Friend; the cheerful Color of Green to be like social Sympathy. This Account is scarce intelligible to us, who possess our Sight.

Sir George Lyttleton, who is an Author of Taste, has wrote the Reign of Henry the Second; & it will be publishd the Winter after the next. The Period is not interesting, nor is Sir George's Genius very strong, tho' it be polish'd. Notwithstanding the Expectations of the Public, this may prove but a middling Production. But he is a man of Rank & Figure, which encreases his Vogue. His Poetry is better than his Prose.

I have not seen Guthrie's Book against you: But I have seen his other Works, which makes me conclude, as you do, that it will make more against himself.

I am Sir

 Your most obedient & most humble Servant

David Hume.

Edinburgh Oct. 24 1754.
