Dear Dr

I write to you somewhat in a hurry and chiefly to convey at present to convey the enclosed Journal. Insert the Passage with regard to Sir James in a new's Paper without asking his Consent. I fancy you want one Journal with regard to you, which I mist by being at Compiegne. I shall send it you afterwards. All the Literati of my Friends, who understand English, think your Dissertation one of the finest Performances in our Language. A Gentleman of my Acquaintance has translated it for his own Satisfaction. He coud not publish it without publishing Ossian at the same time. My Scepticism extends no farther, nor ever did, than with regard to the extreme Antiquity of those Poems; and it is no more than Scepticism.

You may perhaps have heard of the rapid Whirl of my Fortune, backwards and forwards, of late. I had scarce received my Commission as Secretary to the Embassy, when I knew, that that Situation, the most agreeable in which I coud have been placed, was not to last. Lord Hertford must go to Ireland; and resolvd to carry me over as Secretary to that Kingdom, in conjunct Commission with his Son. On his Arrival at London, he found the Cry so loud against this Promotion of a Scotsman, that he was obligd to give it up, which he did the more easily as he knew my great Reluctance to that Office & Scene of Life. He has now got a Pension of 400 a Year settled on me; and as he has prepard an Apartment for me in the Castle of Dublin, I shall hurry thither, as soon as I leave France; and shall be afterwards free for the rest of my Life. I have not determin'd where I shall pass my latter days: This Place shoud be the most agreeable to me; but a man, who came late thither, and who is not supported by Family Connexions, may perhaps find himself misplac'd even in this Center of Letters and good Society. I have a Reluctance to think of living among the factious Barbarians of London, who will hate me because I am a Scotsman & am not a Whig, and despise me because I am a man of Letters. My Attachment to Edinburgh revives, as I turn my Face towards it. I have to day let your House to Nairne, but on two Conditions; that you do not keep it, and that I do not reserve it for myself. I receivd yours by Masson —As I am the only English Minister here at present, I live in a great Hurry of Business — We hear that our Friend, John, stands for poor Sir Harry's Burroughs, which seems to me a little wild and extravagant — I am told, that Lord Hertford's Intentions in my Favour made a great Fray in London. The Princess Amelia said, that she thought the Matter might be easily accommodated. Why cannot Lord Hertford says she make him a Bishop? The Lord Lieutenant has many good Bishoprics to dispose of.

Paris 23d of Augt 
1765



You may be assurd that nothing was ever more esteemd & respected than the Chevalier Macdonald is here. Is it possible, that he will be overlooked in London? Yes It is very possible.
