Dear Sir Gilbert

There is one Archibald Campbell, son of Principal Campbell of St Andrews: This man has very good Parts and a great deal of Learning; but has been unfortunate in his Life, and perhaps a little unhappy in his Conduct. He was some Years a Purser of a Man of War, where he savd a little Money; but it is wasting daily, by his living in London, however frugally; and he has nothing before him but the Prospect of old Age and extreme Poverty. He gave to the Public not long ago two small Pieces, which are Imitations of Lucian, and which are not without Merit, Lexiphanes and the Sale of Authors. He had formd two plans for the Improvement of the Revenue, which seemd to me plausible and well drawn; and I carry'd him to Lord North, who expressd his Approbation of them. Lately, he wrote to me, that he wishd to be appointed Purser of the Æolus, and desird me to give him a Letter of Recommendation to Lord North: But I thought, that I coud not use that Freedom with his Lordship; especially as this Office lay not immediately in his Department. I have not mentiond to him a word of you; so that you may chuse whether or not you will send to him or take any Notice of him: A Note directed to him at the Hungerford Coffeehouse in the Strand woud find him; but I woud not give him a Title to teize you, tho' I am told, that it is one of the Pleasures of Power, as well as of Beauty, to be so teizd. This I am sure of, that you will think it one of its greatest Pleasures to be serviceable to Merit in Distress; and it will be difficult to find a Man of so good Talents so little favourd by Fortune as Mr Campbell.

I am sorry to inform you, that all we Statesmen in this Town condemn loudly the Conduct of you Statesmen in London; especially in allowing those insolent Rascals, the Mayor and Sherriffs, to escape with Impunity. We were much disappointed not to find them impeach'd, and a Bill of Pains and Penalties pass upon them. The Tumults which might have ensu'd in London, we thought rather an Advantage, as it woud give Government an Opportunity of chastizing that abominable Rabble. But you have thought otherwise; and it is pretended that these lenient Maxims are succeeding; that Faction abates, the Tide turns, and the Heroes of Opposition are in Despair. I am heartily glad of it: But this is a new Experiment to reconcile such extreme Licence with Government: And if in a case, where popular Complaints had not the smallest Shadow of Pretence, the King and Parliament have prevaild after a long Struggle and with much Difficulty, what must it be, where there is some plausible Appearance, and perhaps some real Ground of Complaint, such as it is natural to expect in all Governments? However, I repeat it, I am glad of the present Appearance of Tranquillity; and, indeed, distant Dangers are not to be too anxiously provided against.

I ask your pardon again for the Freedom of mentioning Campbell to you; but as you belong to the Admiralty, I thought it might be easy for you in your present Situation, to slip him into some Office, such as his humble Pretensions may make him be contented with. And if you look into his Performances, you will, I believe, allow, that such a Man ought not to perish for Want, in a Country where there is so much Opulence, and so little literary Merit. I am Dear Sir

Your most obedient humble Servant 
David Hume.



Edinburgh 
5 of April 1770
