Compiegne 28th of July 1765

Sir

In obedience to your Excellency's Commands of the 14th Instant, which I receiv'd not till the 25th, I went to the Duke of Praslin, and declar'd to him, conformable to your Excellency's Instructions, that His Majesty, tho' he had chang'd his Administration at home, persever'd still in the same Disposition with regard to the several Powers in Alliance with him abroad, and that His Intention and Inclination were to maintain and preserve inviolable the Peace lately concluded, and to cultivate and improve the Harmony thereby happily establish'd. The Duke of Praslin made me the same Declaration on the Part of his most Christian Majesty.

Yesterday, I receiv'd a Visit from the Count de Bernis, Nephew to the Cardinal, who apply'd to me in his own Name and in that of his Uncle. The Object of their Application was this: Lately, the King of France had sent against the Sallee Rovers a small Squadron, consisting of a few Frigates, which were so happy as to execute the Object of their Expedition. By means of Boats, which they sent up the River, they burnt, at Harache , some Privateers of that Nation; but in this Action, it unfortunately happen'd, that the Chevalier de Narbonne, a young Man of Quality, Nephew to the Cardinal and Brother in law to the Count, was wounded and taken Prisoner by the Moors. His Relations in France are much at a Loss how to convey to him any Assistance and to make a Bargain for his Ransom; and they think, that the readiest Means is to have Recourse to the Friendship and Generosity of the English Nation. They are inform'd, that His Majesty has a Consul at Sallee (a Point that I neither could contradict nor confirm) and they are willing to hope, that your Excellency, if acquainted with the Case, wou'd convey Orders to him, to give all manner of Protection and perform every kind of good Office to the young Gentleman, who must at present stand so much in need of Assistance. They also wish, that he wou'd conclude some Bargain with the Moors, for the Ransom of the Chevalier; and as soon as they are informd of the Terms, they will take care to remit the Money to the Consul, in any Method which he will direct, together with such Money as he might otherwise have expended in assisting the Prisoner. They think, that, in this Transaction, it were better, the Moors did not know any thing farther of the Quality of the Person, except that he was Ensign of the Terpsichore; for such is the Name of the Frigate to which he belongs. If His Majesty has no Consul at Sallee, they flatter themselves, that any other English Consul on that Coast or the Governor of Gibraltar, may, from your Excellency's Instructions, be willing to perform this good Office. I have us'd the Freedom of giving you a Detail of this Affair; being sensible, that your Excellency wou'd gladly lay hold of an Occasion, both of performing an Act of Humanity and of obliging so many Persons of Distinction in this Country.

I take this Opportunity, Sir, of congratulating you on the late Mark which you have receiv'd of His Majesty's Favour, and of recommending myself to your Excellency's Protection. I have the Honour to be, with the greatest Esteem and Regard Sir

Your Excellency's 
Most obedient & most humble Servant



David Hume.
