Paris, 22 Sept. 1765.

My Lord,

Yesterday the Count de Lauregay came to me, and desired me to give him a list of all the Englishmen in Paris who were of a rank that entitled them to be received at the English Anbassador's. I asked him, to what purpose? He replied that as soon as the Duke of Richmond arrived, he intended to send about to all of them, to inform them, in his own name, that the Ambassador was in Paris, and lodged with him; and that he would make them very welcome to pay their respects to him in his house, that is the Count de Lauregay's.

To this extravagance he added another; which was: he asked it as a favour of me that I would keep my apartment, even after the Duke of Richmond's arrival. He said that it was sufficient if he made the Duke welcome to stay in his house for a little time, till he could provide himself of another, without dislodging his good friend; and that he would write on the door which led to my apartment, l'hôtel de Hume, that there might be no mistake in the limits between his Grace and me. After thanking him for this obliging offer, I told him that it was impossible for me to accept of it; for that I was to remove to-morrow, in order to lodge with a friend, not in an hotel garni; and that I could not disoblige a person for whom I had a great regard, by complying with this new proposal.

I immediately took care to inform Mr Walpole of this transaction, who thought it so important as to deserve the attention of my Lord Duke. M. de Guerchy, who came in upon the conversation, was of the same opinion; and Mr Walpole thought that as the Count de Lauregay had opened himself to me, I was a more proper person than he to convey intelligence of it to his Grace.

The Count de Lauregay has a head so differently turned from that of all other mortals, that it is not easy to divine the reasons of his conduct. Lady Hertford conjectures that he intends only to screw a higher rent from the Ambassador. It is commonly reported that he has already let his house to the Duc de la Valiere; and perhaps he wishes as soon as possible to put his new tenant in possession, and wants to disgust the Duke of Richmond, and hinder him from coming to his house. However this may be, Mr Walpole thought that by all means I ought to convey to you this intelligence.

There is another circumstance of which I can now assure you, that the King's journey to Fontainebleau, which used to take place on Oct. 2, is put off till an uncertain day; and it is thought at Court that it is very doubtful, by reason of the ill state of the Dauphin's health, whether that journey will at all have place or not this season. As this incident may have some effect on his Grace's journey, I also thought proper to inform you of it.
