Septr 10 [1743]

I made a Pen, dipt it in Ink, & set myself down in a Posture of writing, before I had thought of any Subject, or made Provision of one single Thought, by which I might entertain you. I trusted to my better Genius, that he wou'd supply me in a Case of such urgent Necessity: But having thrice scratcht my Head, & thrice bit my Nails, Nothing presented itself, & I threw away my Pen in great Indignation. O! thou Instrument of Dulness, says I, doest thou desert me in my greatest Necessity; & being thyself so false a Friend, hast thou a secret Repugnance at expressing my Friendship to the faithful Mure, who knows thee too well ever to trust to thy Caprices, & who never takes thee in his Hand without Reluctance. While I, miserable Wretch that I am, have put my chief Confidence in thee; & relinquishing the Sword, the Gown, the Cassock, & the Toilette, have trusted to thee alone for my Fortune & my Fame. Begone! avaunt! Return to the Goose, from whence thou camest. With her, thou wast of some Use, while thou conveyedst her thro the etherial Regions. And why, alas! when pluckt from her Wing, & put into my Hand, doest thou not recognize some Similitude betwixt it & thy native Soil, & render me the same Service, in aiding the Flights of my heavy Imagination.

Thus accus'd, the Pen erected itself upon its Point, plac'd itself betwixt my Fingers, & my Thumb, & mov'd itself to & fro upon this Paper, to inform you of the Story, complain to you of my Injustice, & desire your good Offices to the reconciling such antient Friends. But not to speak Nonsence any longer (by which, however, I am glad I have already fill'd a Page of Paper) I arriv'd here about three weeks ago: Am in good Health; & very deeply immerst in Books & Study. Tell your Sister Miss Betty (after having made her my Compliments) that I am as grave as she imagines a Philosopher shou'd be: Laugh only once a fortnight: Sigh tenderly once a Week: But look sullen every Moment. In short, none of Ovid's Metamorphosis ever show'd so absolute a Change from a human Creature into a Beast; I mean from a Gallant into a Philosopher.

I doubt not but you see my Lord Glasgow very often; & therefore I shall suppose when I write to one, I pay my Respects to both. At least, I hope he will so far indulge my Laziness. Hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicisim.

Did you receive my Letter from Glasgow? I hope it did not displease you. What are your Resolutions with regard to that Affair?

Remember me to your Sister Miss Nancy, to Miss Dunlop, & to Mr Leechman. Tell your Mother, or Sisters, or whoever is most concern'd about the Matter, that their Cousin John Steuart is in England, & as tis believ'd, will return with a great Fortune.

I say not a Word of Mr Hutcheson for fear you shou'd think I intend to run the whole Circle of my West countrey Acquaintaince, & to make you a Bearer of a great many formal Compliments. But I remember you all very kindly, & desire to be remember'd by you, & to be spoke of sometimes — & to be wrote to.
