My dear Baron

I am very much hurry'd and a little out of humour; so you need expect nothing but Business from me. I shall take another more serene day, when I have more leizure, to write you of Vanities and Gallantries, which I see you have your heart set upon. I immediately sent Lord Mareschal's Letter to Monsr Meuron, and desird to have a Conversation with him. He came and he appeard to me a genteel young Man in his Person, and modest and sensible in his Behaviour. I found, that he livd at present in the House of a Swiss Banker with whom I am acquainted. I went to the Banker, who spoke well of his Conduct and Morals. I had a second Conversation with the young Man, and was confirmd in my former Opinion of him. I find, that he is much inclind to come to you; but he desird time to see and consult his Father, without whose Consent and Approbation, he is resolvd to take no Resolution. I fancy you will have him and that he will serve the purposes intended. He seems to speak French with a good Accent. I told him, that I did not believe you was in any hurry about his coming to a Resolution, and this I conjectured from the great Youth of your Son, who coud not stand much in need of a Tutor for some time.

Your Cousin, Hutchy Mure's Son, came here a few days ago. I introduc'd him to Lord Hertford, who told him the same thing, that I did, that Paris is the worst Place in the World for a young Man to learn the Language or get into good Company. Their own young Men, of the best Families, are not at Mr Mure's Age admitted into Company. If a Lady keeps a Correspondence with any one, that is not approaching to thirty, she conceals it carefully, and woud be ashamd to produce as her Gallant a Boy of one or two and twenty, who is not yet supposd to be formd for rational Conversation. We old Gallants, you may believe, all support this Topic; and cry out Shame upon any Lady that favours a young, giddy Debauchee. Indeed, I never almost meet with any such in Company.

If all places were not almost alike for Happiness and Enjoyment, I shoud say that I pass my time better here than I have done any where else. My chief Grievance is, that I allowd myself at first to be hurry'd into too great a Variety of Company, and find a Difficulty to withdraw and confine myself to one Society, without which there is no real Enjoyment. My Connexions with the Ambassador led me to be connected also with Ministers of State and foreign Ministers: I naturally sought and obtaind Connexions with the learned: And I was violently carry'd, both by their Civilities and my own Inclination to form Connexions with the Fair, without whose Society I never coud in any place pass my time agreeably and who are the Life and Spring of every thing at Paris. I have cut off however all Visits with the Young and Brilliant, and require at least that a Lady be past thirty, before I enter into Correspondence with her. Society is certainly on a very agreeable Footing in this part of the World; and there are particularly more Women of Sense and Taste and Knowledge than any where else. You woud take them all for Vestals by the Decency of their Behaviour in Company. Scarce a double Entendre ever to be heard; scarce a free Joke: What lies below this Veil is not commonly supposd to be so pure. But behold! I have exceeded my Resolution, and have fallen into a Discourse of Gallantry before I was aware. I will answer none of your Letters for the future, unless Mrs Mure has a Share in them, to show you how much I am improvd. My Direction is under Cover to Lord Hertford at Northumberland House. I am Dear Baron

 Ever yours

David Hume .

Paris 28 March 1764.
