Paris 17 Novr. 1764

Dear Sir

Besides a Letter giving an Account of my Arrangement with L'Abbé Choquart for your Boys, there was put into the Post the same day another Letter of mine to you, which was intended to have gone by Lord March, which he mislay'd for eight days, and which was afterwards put into the Post, tho' wrote only with a View to its going by a private & secure hand. I wish it may not be lost: I am a little anxious on that head. You must know that March & Selwyn were once settled in their Post Chaise, to return for England; but chang'd their Mind in that critical Moment.

I can now tell you the Outlines of my Arrangement with Abbé Choquart in case my Letter shou'd not be found. You are to pay about 12 or 13.00 Livres a Year for each of your Boys; 500 for the Tutor: You are not oblig'd to keep them above a Quarter: The first Quarter begun on the first of October. I was oblig'd to agree to this Article, because the Master told me, that other People were solliciting for the vacant Places; and as I expected my Letter might reach you in London, I thought the Difference of a few days not worth minding. The Ambiguity between 12 or 1300 Livres a Year depends upon the Masters you choose for your Boys. You see then that this Pension is scarce more expensive than that at Anson's; tho' there is no manner of Comparison of the Places. But Mr Liston tells me that he has been oblig'd to hire some Furniture, which is some Addition, but not a considerable one, to the Expence.

As soon as I came from Fontainebleau, I went to the Pension militaire, so it is calld, where I had first a Conversation with the Abbé. I found him exceedingly pleasd with your Boys. He told me that whenever his two young Pupils arriv'd, he calld together all the French Gentlemen, who are to the Number of thirty or thirty two, and he made them an Harangue: He there said to them, that they were all Men of Quality, to be educated to the honourable Profession of Arms; that all their Wars woud probably be with England, that France & that Kingdom were Rome & Carthage, whose Rivality, more properly than Animosity, never allow'd long Intervals of Peace; that the Chance of Arms might make them Prisoners of Arms to Messrs Elliots, in which Case it woud be a Happiness to them to meet a private Friend in a public Enemy; that he knew many Instances of People whose Lives were sav'd by such fortunate Events, and it therefore became them, from Views of Prudence, and from the Generosity for which the French Nation was so renown'd, to give the best Treatment to the young Strangers, whose Friendship might probably endure and be serviceable to them thro' Life: He added, that the Effect of this Harangue was such, that, as soon as he presented your Boys to their Companions, they all flew to them and embrac'd them, and have ever since continu'd to pay them all Courtship & Regard, and to show them every Mark of Preference: Every one is ambitious to acquire the Friendship of the two young Englishmen, who have already formd Connexions more intimate than ever he observ'd among his other Pupils. Ce que j'admire, added he, dans vos jeunes amis est qu'ils ont non seulement de l'esprit, mais de l'ame: Ils sont veritablement attendris des temoignages d'amitié qu'on leur rende. Ils meritent d'etre aimés, parce qu'ils sçavent aimer.

When I came next to converse with your Boys, I found all this Representation exactly just. I believe they never pass'd fourteen days in their Life so happily as they did the last: What I find strikes them much is the high Titles of their Companions: There is not one, says Hugh, that is not a Marquess, or Count, or Chevalier at least. They are indeed all of them of the best Families in France; a Nephew of M. de Choiseul, two Nephews of M. de Beringhen, &c &c. They are frequently drawn out, and disciplin'd after the Prussian manner. I saw them go thro' their Exercises with the greatest Exactness and best Air. The Abbé remarkd to me, that the marching about, and wheeling, and moving under Arms, is better than all the dancing Schools in the World to give a noble Carriage to Youth. Gilbert is such a Proficient, that the Master is thinking already of advancing him to the first Rank, if not of making him a Corporal. All this is excellent for Hugh, and if Gilbert's Head be a little fill'd with military Ideas, this Inconvenience will easily be corrected, as far as it ought to be corrected.

The Abbé tells me, that in the short time they have been with him, their Accent is sensibly corrected; and he is perswaded that, in three Months time, it will not be possible to distinguish them from Frenchmen. They are never to hear Mass, but to attend at the Ambassador's Chapel every Sunday. Such is the general Account I have to give you: Their Preceptor will be more particular, and I shall visit them from time to time.

I am very much pleasd with Mrs Murray's favourable Remembrance of me. Please tell her that I was always incapable of any other Views, than of being serviceable to her Family. Tho' it is somewhat probable that I shall never in my Life have the pleasure of seeing her, I shall be always glad to preserve or recover her good Opinion.
