London 25 May 1767

I have used the Freedom, My Dear Sir, to send you the enclosed under a flying Seal, that you may read it before you deliver it. You will see, that part of it is addressed to you as well as to M. Turgot. I am certain, that your Humanity will engage you to enter into the same Views.

M. Turgot had expressed his Surprize, that I shoud have consented to enter into Public affairs, while he wishes to retire from them, and to give himself up entirely to the Cultivation of Letters; It is the purpose of the first Part of my Letter to make my Apology.

You judge right, My Dear Friend: It will never be in my purpose, and I believe, still less in my Power, to enter into the Prejudices entertained by the vulgar Part of my Country-men, and to feel an Antipathy against the French Nation: I know them too well to be capable of such a Sentiment. Happily, both Nations are at present seriously disposed to cultivate Peace with each other. May they long continue so: But it is a melancholy Reflection what trivial Matters will often set them a quarrelling, and by that means, spread the Flame from one End of the Globe to the other. The last War, for Instance, proceeded from the most frivolous Causes: It arose not surely from any Spirit of Ambition in you, tho' we imagined so on our side of the Water: It proceeded as little from ambitious Views in us, tho' our success in the War has made that the established Opinion in Europe. It was fomented by some obscure designing Men, contrary to the Intentions of the two Kings, the two Ministries, even the Generality of the two Nations. The Explication of a few Points might have prevented that horrible, destructive, ruinous War; more pernicious to the Victors than to the Vanquished. Perhaps the Endeavours of a Person even in my Station might have had some Effect, and might have prevented so great a Mischief.

It wou'd be an extreme Pleasure for me to find myself so useful; or even to flatter myself, that I had contributed something to so good an End. Mean-while, my Occupations do not hurry me extremely: I have Leizure for Society and even for Reading: The frequent Revolutions in this Country make me expect a sudden Dismission from my Employment: I shall comfort myself very easily; more especially as I then intend to take a Journey into France, in order to re-visit my Friends. Till that time, I beg you to preserve me a Share in their Memory, particularly with Mde de Montigni, M. de Trudaine, and Mde Dupré. I am with great Sincerity My Dear Sir

Your most obedient and most humble 
Servant 
David Hume
