Sir

After I had the Pleasure of seeing you, I took a Resolution of printing the Papers you was so good as to peruse, along with some others, under the general Title of Political Discourses. They are twelve in Number, & the Subjects are Of Commerce, of Luxury, of Money, of Interest, of the Ballance of Trade, of the Ballance of Power, of Taxes, of public Credit, of some remarkable Customs, of the Populousness of Antient Nations, of the Protestant Succession, an Idea of a perfect Commonwealth.

Before that on the Populousness of antient Nations I intend to prefix a Note to the following Purpose. 'An eminent Clergyman in Edinburgh having wrote, some Years ago, a Discourse on the same Question with this of the Populousness of antient Nations, was pleas'd lately to communicate it to the Author. It maintaind the opposite Side of the Argument to what is here insisted on, & contain'd much Erudition & good Reasoning. The Author acknowledges to have borrow'd, with some Variations, from that Discourse two Computations viz that with regard to the Number of Inhabitants in Epirus, and that with regard to those in Belgium. If this learned Gentleman be prevail'd on to publish his Dissertation, it will serve to give great Light into the present Question, the most curious & important of all Questions of Erudition.'

This Note, however unexceptionable it may seem to me, I woud not venture to print without your Consent; as not knowing how you might relish it. I hope it will give Offence to no Body, that you & I have a Correspondence together on literary Subjects.

There has been printed at London, but not yet publish'd an Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals of which I have order'd a Copy to be sent you; I hope you will not find my Ethics liable to much Exception, on the Side of Orthodoxy, whatever they may on the Side of Argument & Philosophy.

Please direct to me at this Place under Cover to Will. Mure Esqr. Member of Parliament. I am

 Sir 
Your most obedient humble Servant



David Hume

Glanderston near Glasgow Septr. 22 1751
