Dear Sir,

I have wrote apart a Letter, which you may send to Mr Millar: I shall here add a Word to Yourself; and ask a little of your Advice. Some time ago, I wrote to Mr Millar, that if he was inclin'd to purchase the full Property of these two Volumes of History, I wou'd part with it, if he wou'd make me a proper Offer. He desir'd me to name my Terms. I ask'd 800 Guineas; but have not yet receiv'd an answer from him. I own to you, that the Demand may appear large; but if Mr Millar and I reason upon the same Principles it will not appear unreasonable. I think History the most popular kind of writing of any, the Period I treat of the most interesting, and my Performance will I hope rise in Credit every day. We have so little, or rather nothing of this kind that has the least Appearance either of Impartiality or Eloquence, that I cannot doubt but in the long run it will have a considerable Success. Now I was offerd 800 Pounds for the first Edition alone by Baillie Hamilton; and he propos'd to have reasonable Profits after paying me that Sum: I cannot think but all the subsequent Editions must be at least equal in Value to the first alone. This is the View in which the Affair appeard to me: If it appears to you in the same Light, I doubt not but you will express your Mind to him. If you think my Demand unreasonable, I shall be oblig'd to you for telling me so, and for giving me your Reasons. For tho' it is not probable, that I shall fall much, if any thing, of that Demand: Yet if I see it impracticable for me to obtain it, I shall endeavor to contrive some other Method, by which I may adjust Matters with Mr Millar in case of a second Edition. It is chiefly in order to avoid the Trouble and Perplexity of such Schemes that I desire at once to part with all the Property.

 I am dear Sir Your most obedient humble Servant

David Hume.

 15 Feby. 1757.

P.S.

You will certainly like my Friend's Play. It was acted here with vast Success. And reads as well as it acts. Mr Millar woud tell you the Accident, which occasiond many copies of the Dissertations to be sold without the Dedication. It has given me some Vexation. However there is no Remedy.
