Dear Doctor

I am in debt to all my Friends in Letters, and shall ever be so; but what strikes me chiefly with Remorse are my great & enormous Debts to the Clergy. By this Neglect of my Protestant Pastors, you will begin to suspect that I am turning Papist. But to acquit myself at once, allow me to write you a common Letter, and to address a few Words to every one of you.

Dr Robertson.

Your History has been very well translated here, better than mine, as I am told. Its Success has given me Occasion to promise your Acquaintance to several Persons of Distinction, the Duc de Nivernois, the Marquis de Puysieulx, President Hainaut, Baron d'Holbac &c. I wish you coud speak French tolerably. You would find this Place agreeable. The Mareschal Broglio spoke of you to me with Esteem the other day.

Dr Jardine.

In order to refute all Calumnies, hear a short Story. Not long ago, as I came into a Company, I heard D'Alembert exclaim, Et verbum caro factum est. And the Word was made Flesh. This was thought a very good Jest on my past & present Life; and was much repeated. A Lady in telling the Story, said, Et verbum carum factum est. When told of her Mistake, she wou'd not allow it to be one.

Dr Carlyle.

I consulted with the Chevalier Macdonald (who by the bye is here in great Vogue, not for his Gallantries, like some others, who shall be nameless; but for his Parts & Knowledge) I say, I consulted with the Chevalier about writing a common Letter to Eglinton in favour of Wilson. He told me, it woud be quite useless. Eglintone would give that Kirk and every thing else to the tenth Cousin of the tenth Cousin of a Voter in the Shire of Air, rather than to the most intimate Friend he has in the World. Je baise les mains de Mde Carlisle avec tout l'empressement possible.

Dr Ferguson

Who by the bye, I believe is not a Doctor, tho' highly worthy from his Piety and Learning to be one: Then, Mr Ferguson. I think I have nothing in particular to say to you, except that I am glad of the Change of your Class, because you desir'd it, and because it fitted Russell. For otherwise I shou'd have lik'd better the other Science. The News of your great Success in teaching has reach'd me in Paris and has given me Pleasure; but I fear for your Health, from all these sudden & violent Applications — — — Ah! that you cou'd learn something, Dear Ferguson, of the courteous, and caressing and open manners of this Country. I shou'd not then have been to learn for the first time (as I did lately from General Clerk) that you have not been altogether ungrateful to me, and that you bear me some good will, and that you sometimes regreat my Absence. Why shou'd your Method of living with me have borne so little the Appearance of those Sentiments?

Dr Blair

Many People who read English have got your Dissertation on Fingal, which they admire extremely. A very good Critic told me lately, that it was incomparably the best Piece of Criticism in the English Language; a self-evident Truth, to me. I met also with many Admirers of Fingal; but many also doubt of its Authenticity. The Chevalier Macdonald is of use to me, in supporting the Argument, from his personal Knowlege of Facts. I cannot however but allow that the whole is strange, passing strange.

You seem to wish, that I shou'd give you some general Accounts of this Country. Shall I begin with the Points, in which it most differs from England, viz, the general Regard pay'd to Genius and Learning; the universal and professed, tho' decent, Gallantry of the Fair Sex; or the almost universal Contempt of all Religion, among both Sexes, and among all Ranks of Men? Or shall I mention the Points in which the French begin to concur with the English, their Love of Liberty for Instance? Or shall I give you some remarkable Anecdotes of the great Men, who, at present adorn French Literature? Perhaps you woud wish me to run over all these Topics successively: Alas there is not one, that wou'd not fill several Sheets of Paper with curious Circumstances, and I am the most lazy Writer of Letters in the World. However, I must say something on those heads: And first of the first.

There is a very remarkable Difference between London and Paris, of which I gave warning to Helvetius when he went over lately to England, and of which, he told me, on his Return he was fully sensible. If a man have the Misfortune, in the former place, to attach himself to Letters, even if he succeeds, I know not with whom he is to live, nor how he is to pass his time in a suitable Society. The little Company, there, that is worth conversing with, are cold & unsociable or are warmd only by Faction and Cabal; so that a Man, who plays no part in public Affairs, becomes altogether insignificant and if he is not rich, he becomes even contemptible: Hence that Nation are relapsing fast into the deepest Stupidity, Christianity & Ignorance. But in Paris, a man that distinguishes himself in Letters, meets immediatly with Regard & Attention. I found immediatly on my landing here, the Effects of this Disposition. Lord Beauchamp told me, that I must go instantly with him to the Dutchess de la Valiere's: When I excus'd myself on account of Dress; he told me, that he had her Orders, tho' I were in Boots. I accordingly went with him in a travelling Frock, where I saw a very fine Lady reclining on a Sopha, who made me Speeches & Compliments without Bounds. The Style of Panegyric was then taken up by a fat Gentleman, whom I cast my Eyes upon, and observd him to wear a Star of the richest Diamonds: It was the Duke of Orleans. The Dutchess told me, she was engag'd to sup in President Hainaut's; but that she woud not part with me: I must go along with her. The good President receivd me with open Arms; and told me among other fine things that a few days before the Dauphin said to him &c &c &c. Such Instances of Attention I found very frequent and even daily. You ask me, if they were not very agreeable? I answer, No: Neither in Expectation, Possession, nor Recollection. I left that Fireside (where you probably sit at present) with the greatest Reluctance: After I came to London, my Uneasyness, as I heard more of the Prepossessions of the French Nation in my Favour, encreas'd; and nothing cou'd have given me greater Joy than any Accident that wou'd have broke off my Engagements: When I came to Paris, I repented heartily of having enter'd, at my Years, in such a Scene; and as I found, that Lord Hertford had entertain'd a good opinion & good Will for Andrew Stuart, I spoke to Wedderburn, in order to contrive Expedients for substituting him in my Place. Lord Hertford thought for some time, that I woud lose all Patience and woud run away from him. But the Facility of speaking French returnd gradually to me: I formd many Acquaintaince & some Friendships. All the learned seemd to conspire in showing me Instances of Regard: The great Ladies were not wanting to a Man so highly in Fashion: And having now contracted the Circle of my Acquaintance, I live tolerably at my Ease. I have even thoughts of settling at Paris for the rest of my Life; but I am sometimes frighten'd with the Idea, that it is not a Scene suited to the Languor of old Age and I then think of retiring to a provincial Town or returning to Edinburgh, or — but it is not worth while to form Projects about the Matter. D'Alembert and I talk very seriously of taking a Journey to Italy together; and if Lord Hertford leave France soon, this Journey may probably have place.

I begun this Letter about two months ago; but so monstrously indolent am I, that I have not had time to finish it: I believe I had better send it off as it is. Tell Robertson, that la Chappelle, his Translator, is very much out of Humour & with Reason, for never hearing from him. I suppose some Letter has miscarry'd. I am Dr. Doctor

 Yours sincerely

David Hume

Paris 6 of April 1765

 To the Reverend Dr Hugh Blair at Edinburgh Free Hertford.
