[London, summer 1767.]

Dear Baron

I have seen your young Folks twice at Norlands since I wrote to you and Mrs Mure, and I see Graffigni from time to time. They are as well in their Health as can be imagind, are happy and contented, and are us'd well. But still the School does not encrease, and it is impossible it can continue long on its present Footing. The poor Devil must be a considerable Loser, with such a House and Family on his hands, and with so slender an Income. I am afraid Lord Hertford's Children will not go to him. My Lord was inclind to pass over that disagreeable Circumstance of Graffigni's giving himself Airs of Acquaintance with Men to whom he was an utter Stranger; but asking me if I really thought his Method of teaching Latin was the most proper for advancing young People, I coud not say it; upon which he seems determind to send his Boys elsewhere. This is a severe Blow to Graffigni's School. He is indeed a conceited Man, full of Whims and Affectations; reasoning always in the Clouds about the most obvious things, and hunting after Novelties and Singularities of which his Genius is incapable. What, for Instance, can be more whimsical than his Method of teaching Latin? He gives his Boys a long List of Words, which they are to get by heart like the Muster-Roll of a Regiment, and a great Heap of Grammar Rules, which are to them unintelligible. After he has laid this Foundation of a Language, as he imagines, he begins them with the most difficult of all the Latin Poets: And for this plan of Education he will give you a Galimatias of Reasons, cloathd in the smoothest Language, and deliverd with the softest Accent. But his Latin Master really seems to me a sensible young Fellow, and very fit for his Business, were he allowd to go on his own way, tho' I have never been able to get a private and confidential Conversation with him. But as Graffigni professes a Resolution to follow my Advice, and to alter every thing that displeases me (tho' probably this is only an empty Compliment), yet, if you have any Intention to continue your Sons there, I shall desire to have a private Conference with the Latin Master, and shall know his real Sentiments of the Matter, and insist upon such Alterations as may be thought proper. I think, besides the Difficulty of changing Masters, to you especially, who are at a Distance, the Boys are so well in other respects, that it may be worth while to try what can be done before you determine to seek another Place. Pray, is Andrew Steuart likely to succeed in his Elections? Compliments to your Wife, Sisters, Uncle, &c. Yours

David Hume.
