[Geneva] Sep: 12 1766

Yours of the 29th of Aug: I rcd. on the 8 inst. When I first heard of your quarrel, & that you intended to publish something, I was very silent, as I wished that nothing might be said about it till the work appeared, knowing your humane disposition & that perhaps your ever good nature might make you relent, but several letters from Paris made it publickly known here in about a fortnight after. I repeat what I have said before, that I think you have gone too far to retreat with credit. His friends triumph, & the few who are impartial seem inclining to his side, but the enclosed will convince you I am in the right. I hear he has wrote more letters much to the same purpose, but this is the only one I have seen, & is I think sufficient. I hope, by what you know of him, that you are now convinced that my friends are as honest & as much to be relied on as Yours. I could say a word or two of another of Yours, but I leave it to time & a Good Providence to open Your Eyes to the Truth in all Things. All I shall say, is, be less hasty in the choice of your friends. This advice to you as a man of Letters, may at this time be of use, if you follow it, for you are in many things too apt to think others as honest as yourself. I am nearer the fountain head, & know what you do not, so what I say is serious. I have lately fought your battles stoutly, I don't tell you I always do it. You may be sure my abhorrence to him adds a little to my zeal for you, but without any partiality, I can'not blame you for any thing in this affair, but for yours too great credulity (a failing one can't always accuse you of) & for your ill judged good nature. I seldom felt more pleasure than I did when I heard you had found him out so soon, for I was sure that sooner or later you would do it. Your uncommon marks of friendp hastened the discovery. Had you procured a pension of a thousand pounds, he had assassinated you, but as it was but a Hnd he only abuses you, & you have reason to be thankfull you have come off so well. I am convinced by all I have heard of him, that it is his maxim to use those people worse to whom he has the greatest obligations, he has given many proofs of it, & it is the only thing in which he has not changed his mind. I think it now depends on you to unmask Him . . . .
