Sep: 12 1766



Yours of the 29th of Aug: I rcd. on the 8 inst. When I first heard of your quarrel, & that you intended to publish something, I was very silent, as I wished that nothing might be said about it till the work appeared, knowing your humane disposition & that perhaps your ever good nature might make you relent, but several letters from Paris made it publickly known here in about a fortnight after. I repeat what I have said before, that I think you have gone too far to retreat with credit. His friends triumph, & the few who are impartial seem inclining to his side, but the enclosed will convince you I am in the right. I hear he has wrote more letters much to the same purpose, but this is the only one I have seen, & is I think sufficient. I hope, by what you know of him, that you are now convinced that my friends are  as honest & as much to be relied on as Yours. I could say a word or two of another of Yours, but I leave it to time & a Good Providence to open Your Eyes to the Truth in all Things. All I shall say, is, be less hasty in the choice of your friends. This advice to you as a man of Letters, may at this time be of use, if you follow it, for you are in many things too apt to think others as honest as yourself. I am nearer the fountain head, & know what you do not, so what I say is serious.



I have lately fought your battles Stoutly, I don't tell you I always do it. You may be sure my abhorrence to him adds a little to my zeal for you, but without any partiality, I can'not blame you for any thing in this affair, but for your too great credulity (a failing one can't alway's accuse you of) & for your ill judged good nature. I seldom felt more pleasure than I did when I heard you had found him out so soon, for I was sure that sooner or later you would do it. Your uncommon marks of friend[shi]p hastened the discovery. Had you procured a pension of a thousand pounds, he had assassinated you, but as it was but a H[u]n[dre]d he only abuses you, & you have reason to be thankfull you have come off so well. I am convinced by all I have heard of him, that it is his maxim to use those people worse to whom he has the greatest obligations, he has given many proofs of it, & it is the only thing in which he has not changed his mind. I think it now depends on you to unmask Him.



 You may be sure I shall not give a copy of your letter; I have not nor shall not let it out of my sight, & have shown it to a very few, & in doing that, was not guided by private friend[shi]p. I shall make no bad use of it depend upon it, so you may be Easy about your having trusted me, for I trust very few I assure you at any time, especially where party is concerned.



I wish not to appear in this affair, as these are things in which I ought not to meddle; but one must be a stock or a stone, to hear of such abominable doings, unmoved. An honest heart is shocked with Scenes of Villany falsehood Malice & Lies, of which I have seen & daily see the fatal effects off, I wish the good innocent Soul, as you once called him, was the guilty one, but there are more of the same stamp, some with parts almost equal to his, some without common sense, but great Art to supply the place of it, for tho' A fool is seldom good for any thing, in such matters they are often of use, if hot headed, & violent, with a little Hypocrisy, & have studied the Science of flattery.



If there is any thing in which I can be of further Service you may rely on me. Adieu
