Nov. 21. 1766

Sr

I rec'd yours of the 4th instant, by the last post, you say you have not seen the book, & as you perhaps may be the last to see it, I send you a copy of a few lines from the 'Avertissement des Editeurs. Mr H. en Livrant au public les pieces de son procès, nous a autorisés à déclarer qu'il ne reprendra jamais la plume sur ce sujet'. — Affairs here are now come to a Crisis & I am almost certain no one can attend at present to any thing, every one's thoughts being employed about what will be their fate, a few day's will probably determine it. God alone know's how it will end. I find all approve of your resolution not to publish more about this Worthless Man — all these reasons made me think it best not to obey you. But as I durst not Act upon my own judgment, I sounded the person whom you mention in your Letter. I said, I wondered whether you could resist publishing more about R., that now you had begun you would grow warmer, & perhaps he would provoke you to it. He replied, there is no reason to think it. Mr H: is a very peaceable man, besides what good could it do! R: ['s] own letter without more, shows what he is, but he certainly won't for he says so. Upon this I was in no further doubt about what was fit for me to do, I quietly locked up your letter without saying a word of it to any mortal, and think it shall till further orders from You.

By all that I can learn, even his friends say nothing for him, nor nothing against you: & his Enemies, & the impartial approve of your conduct, & all give due praise to your humanity & good Heart. What more can you desire! There is one paragraph in the Letter you sent me that if you will print it, I imagine it will come in much more àpropos in the preface to your Ecclesiastical History. You should have learnt this last Maxim in your Embassy. 'You are sure of your Friends so don't mind them, but secure your Enemies'. The latter part I would have you practise, leave the other for R. I am very glad he made you his Father Confessor, you know him so well that you Certainly can't beleive a word he say's. By your action's I should sooner suspect you. Strike a bold stroke, own you have been in the wrong, & prove it both by word & deed; I beleive you would give your ears to do it but you have not Courage. I suppose you have seen the letter from your other Worthy Correspondent. All think it makes a poor figure by yours & R: I was much diverted with these words 'Mais ou, Grand Dieu! ce bon homme emprunte-t'il les yeux dont il fixe ses Amis', I thought I saw you in one of your brown studies at the fireside. What he says of my much valued friend the Jongleur will do him no harm, he is as indifferent about all he can say as you can be; indeed all honest men are so, nay I think it is to any one's credit to say he has quarreled with them, a sure sign that he has obligations to them. If there is a Hell, that man will fry; bad as you are, I think you' ll not go to the same place. You'll say I am very free spoken, It is a failing from which you yourself are not entirely Exempt so you ought the readier to pardon it. Adieu. Famous as you are, both your names are but Common,  where you now are which makes me direct this as I do, as the safest way of sending it, I should not wish it to fall into other hands.
