Arlington Street Nov. 6th 1766.

Dear Sr



You have, I own, surprized me by suffering your quarrel with Rousseau to be printed, contrary to your determination when you left London, & against the advice of all your best friends here. I may add, contrary to your own nature, which has always inclined you to despise litterary squabbles, the jest & scorn of all men of sense. Indeed I am sorry you have let yourself be overpersuaded, & so are all that I have seen who wish you well: I ought rather to use your own word extorted: you say, your Parisian friends extorted your consent to this publication. I believe so. Your good sense could not approve what your good heart could not refuse. You add, that they told you Rousseau had sent letters of defiance against you all over Europe: Good God! my dear Sr, coud you pay any regard to such fustian? All Europe laughs at being dragged every day into these idle quarrels, with which Europe only wipes it's backside. Your friends talk as loftily as of a challenge between Charles 5th and Francis the first. What are become of all the controversies since the days of Scaliger & Scioppius, of Billingsgate memory? Why, they sleep in oblivion, till some Bayle drags them out of their dust, & takes mighty pains to ascertain the dates of each Author's death, which is of no more consequence to the World than the days of their birth. Many a country Squire quarrels with his neighbour about game & manours. Yet they never print their wrangles, though as much abuse passes between them, as if they coud quote all the Philippics of the learned.



You have acted, as I shoud have expected if you woud print with sense, temper decency & what is still more uncommon, with your usual modesty.  I cannot say so much for your Editors — but Editors & Commentators are seldom modest. Even to this day that race ape the dictatorial tone of the Commentators at the restoration of learning, when the Mob thought that Greek & Latin could give men the sense which they wanted in their native languages. But Europe is now grown a little wiser, & holds these magnificent pretensions in proper contempt.



What I have said is to explain why I am sorry my letter makes a part of this Controversy. When I sent it to you, it was for your justification; and had it been necessary I coud have added as much more, having been witness to your anxious & boundless friendship for Rousseau. I told you, you might make what use of it you pleased. Indeed at that time I did not, coud not think of its being printed, you seeming so averse to any publication on that head. However I by no means take it ill, nor regret my part, if it tends to vindicate your honour.



I must confess that I am more concerned that you have suffered my letter to be curtailed; nor should I have consented to That, if you had asked me. I guessed that your friends consulted your interest less than their own inclination to expose Rousseau; and I think their omission of what I said on that subject proves I was not mistaken in my guess. My Letter hinted too my contempt of Learned men & their miserable conduct. Since I was to appear in print, I should not have been sorry that that opinion should have appeared at the same time. In truth there is nothing I hold so cheap as the generality of learned men; & I have often thought that young men ought to be made Scholars, lest they should grow to reverence Learned Blockheads, & think there is any merit in having read more foolish books than other folks, which as there are a thousand nonsensical books for one good one, must be the case of any man who has read much more than other people.



Your friend Dalembert, who I suppose has read a vast deal, is it seems offended with my letter to Rousseau. He is certainly as much at liberty to blame it, as I was to write it. Unfortunately he does not convince me; nor can I think but that if Rousseau may attack all governments & all religions, I might attack him: especially on his affectation & affected misfortunes, which you and your editors have proved are affected. Dalembert might be offended at Rousseau's ascribing my letter to him; & he is in the right. I am a very indifferent Author, & there is nothing so vexatious to an indifferent author as to be confounded with another of the same class. I shoud be sorry to have his Eloges and translations of scraps of Tacitus laid to me. However I can forgive him anything, provided he never translates me.



Adieu! my dear Sr; I am apt to laugh, you know, & therefore you will excuse me, tho I do not treat your friends up to the pomp of their claims. They may treat me as freely; I shall not laugh the less; & I promise you will never enter into a controversy with them.

Yrs most sincerely 
Hor. Walpole
