Arlington street Nov. 11th 1766.



Indeed, dear Sr, it was not necessary to make me any apology. Dalembert is certainly at liberty to say what he pleases of my letter; and undoubtedly you cannot think that it signifies a straw to me what he says. But how can you be surprized at his printing a thing that he sent to you so long ago? All my surprize consists in your suffering him to curtail my letter to you, when you might be sure he would print his own at length. I am glad however that he has mangled mine: it not only shows his Equity; but is the strongest presumption that he was conscious I guessed right, when I supposed he urged you to publish, from his own private pique to Rousseau.



What you surmize of his censuring my letter, because I am a friend of Madame du Deffand, is astonishing indeed, & not to be credited unless you had suggested it. Having never thought him anything like a superior genius, as you term him, I concluded his vanity was hurt by Rousseau's ascribing my letter to him — but to carry resentment to a Woman, to an old & blind Woman, so far as to hate a Friend of hers, qui ne lui avoit point fait de mal, is strangely weak & lamentable! I thought he was a Philosopher, & that Philosophers were virtuous, upright Men, who loved Wisdom, & were above the little passions and foibles of humanity. I thought they assumed that proud title as an earnest to the World that they intended to be something more than mortal; that they engaged themselves to be patterns of Excellence, & would utter no opinion, woud pronounce no decision, but what they believed the quintessence of Truth; that they always acted without prejudice & respect of persons. Indeed we know that the ancient Philosophers were a ridiculous composition of arrogance, disputation, & contradictions; that Some of them acted against all ideas of decency; that others affected to doubt of their own senses: that Some, for venting unintelligible nonsense, pretended to think themselves superior to Kings: that they gave themselves airs of accounting for all that we do & do not see; & yet that no Two of them agreed in a single Hypothesis; . . . .

But, when in this enlightened age, as it is called, I saw the term Philosophers revived, I concluded the jargon would be omitted, & that we should be blessed with only the cream of Sapience: and one had more reason still to expect this from any Superior Genius. But, alas! my dear Sr, what a tumble is here! Your Dalembert is a mere mortal Oracle. Who but woud have laughed, if when the buffoon Aristophanes ridiculed Socrates, Plato had condemned the former, not for making sport with a great man in distress, but because Plato hated some blind old Woman with whom Aristophanes was acquainted?



Dalembert's conduct is the more unjust, as I never heard Madame du Deffand talk of him above three times in the seven months that I passed at Paris; & never, though She does not love him, with any reflection to his prejudice. I remember the first time I ever heard her mention his name, I said I have been told he was a good mimic, but coud not think him a good Author (Mr Crawford recollects this, & it is a proof that I always thought of Dalembert as I do now). She took it up with warmth, defended his parts, & said he was extremely amusing. For her quarrel with him, I never troubled my head about it one way or other; which you will not wonder at. You know in England We read their works, but seldom or never take any notice of Authors. We think them sufficiently paid if their works sell, & of course leave them to their Colleges & obscurity, by which means we are not troubled with their vanity & impertinence. I, who am an author, must own this conduct very sensible, for in truth we are a most useless tribe.  In France, they spoil us; but that was no business of mine.



That Dalembert should have omitted passages, in which you was so good as to mention me with approbation, agrees with his peevishness, not with his Philosophy. However, for God's sake do not reinstate the passages. I do not love compliments, & will never give my consent to receive any. I have no doubt of your kind intentions to me, but beg they may rest there. I am much more diverted with the Philosopher Dalembert's underhand dealings, than I shoud have been pleased with panegyric, even from you.



Allow me to make one more remark, & I have done with this trifling business for ever. Your Moral friend pronounces me ill-natured for laughing at an unhappy Man who had never offended me. Rousseau certainly never did offend me. I believed from many symptoms in his writings, & from what I had heard of Him, that his love of Singularity made him chuse to invite misfortunes, & that he hung out many more than he felt. I who affect no Philosophy, nor pretend to more virtue than my neighbours, thought this ridiculous in a man who is really a Superior Genius, & joked upon it in a few lines  certainly never intended to appear in print. The Sage Dalembert reprehends this — and where? in a book published to expose Rousseau, & which confirms by serious proofs, what I had hinted at in jest. What! does a Philosopher condemn me, & in the very same breath, only with ten times more illnature, act exactly as I had done? Oh! but you will say; Rousseau had offended Dalembert by ascribing the King of Prussia's letter to him — worse and worse! if Rousseau is unhappy, a Philosopher should have pardoned. Revenge is so unbecoming the Regem Regum, the man who is praecipuè Sanus — nisi cum pituita molesta est. If Rousseau's misfortunes are affected, what becomes of my Illnature? In short, my dear Sr, to conclude as Dalembert concludes his book, I do believe in the virtue of Mr. Hume, but not much in that of Philosophers. Adieu!

Yours ever,

Hor. Walpole



P.S. It occurs to me that you may be apprehensive of my being indiscreet enough to let Dalembert learn your suspicions of him on Mad. du Deffand's account; but you may be perfectly easy on that head. Tho I like such an advantage over him, & should be glad he saw this letter, & knew how little formidable I think him, I shall certainly not make an ill use of a private letter, & had much rather waive any triumph, than give a friend a moment's pain. I love to laugh at an impertinent Sçavant; I respect Learning, when joined to such goodness as yours, and never confound ostentation and modesty. . . .
