My Dear Sir

Your Letter Astonished me beyond measure. How or about what should Rousseau have had the Occasion to show Malignity towards you, his Guide and his Benefactor?  I have bewilder'd my Self in Conjectures. It could surely be nothing about opinions; it could not I think be any thing relating to Mony; I can Conjecture nothing, unless he has told some lies concerning your political Conduct in France. Whatever the Matter be, it must have been something extremely gross on his part, I am sure, that could overcome not only your natural Philanthropy, but your Strong prepossessions in his favour. He must be a very sad fellow; and it gives me great pain that he should turn out so. But for Gods sake do not be in a haste in publishing any thing about him. Nothing but Necessity should oblige you to this. You know the ill natured pleasure the world enjoys in a Paper war between two persons of Such fame and eminence as you & him. Both parties often Suffer in such personal Contests; & how clear soever the right may be on your Side, yet Envy to you will raise Partizans for him. You will see many reasons for deliberating very Cooly concerning this Step; and perhaps too you may in part have been imposed upon by reports which may have aggravated Some thing in his Conduct.

 As to your Letters to me I cannot think these need give you the least Uneasiness. Though they were all published, they would only Serve to show your Attachment, & regard to him & would justify you the more to the World, if he has acted Unworthily to you. They were only shown to the Circle of your Acquaintances here; & except your letter from Paris which Mrs Cockburn got into her hands for a day or two, they were never out of my possession. I do not believe Mrs Cockburn took any Copy; she is in the Country at present; but when she comes to Town I shall make Enquiry, & if she has any Copy I can certainly recover it. I beseech you in the mean time give me some hints of what the matter is betwixt this Apostate Philosopher & you; & in what Subject it is that he has injured you; as I have an extreme anxiety to hear, and am very much distressed about it. You are still Silent as to the time of our Seeing you in this Country. [. . .]

I ever am with the most perfect regard

My Dear Sir 
Your Faithful & affectionate 
HUGH BLAIR





Edinb. 10 July 1766
