Geneva 26 March

My Dear Secretary

I have delay'd for some Time answering your Letter in Expectation of being able to tell you what is to become of me, whether I am to return Home or to remain abroad some years longer; tho I believe the latter will happen I cannot speak of it with Certainty, as I left it to Lord B[ute] to determine for me and he has not as yet given me any Answer. I write to you at present to consult you about an Acquaintance of yours Mr Vivian who is here with Lord Abingdon and who thinks of returning to England May next. You'll be so good as to determine for him what Character he is to assume on his Arrival, whether that of a Clergyman or a Layman. I suppose you know he is in Orders, but he is very very low Church, to speak plain Language, I believe him to be [a] Sort of Disciple of your own and tho he does not carry Matters quite so far as you yet you have given him Notions not very consistent with his Priestly Character, so that you see you are somewhat bound to give him your best Advice. Vivian is a very good naturd sensible honest Fellow without any ffortune. My young man [Lord Mountstuart] has a great Liking for him and has all the Inclination in the World to serve him, but he neither knows what to ask for him, and is not sure if his ffather would ask any Thing at present. We are as much in the Dark as to what passes in England as if we liv'd in Siberia. As you know probably something of the Matter, without entering into Politicks you may give us some Hints to direct us in what Manner to act, and whether we may not be of more Use to our Friend in acting as Auxiliaries than Principals. Youll determine whether a Man of Probity can accept of a Living a Bishoprick that does not believe all the 39 Articles; for you only can fix him, he has been hitherto irresolute. If [I am not] mistaken he seems rather inclind not to be a Clergyman but you know better than I do how difficult it is to get any tolerable civil Employment. I mean any patent Place. Write as soon as you can conveniently and if you should determine for his being a Clergyman throw in something consolatory on his being oblig'd to renounce white Stockings the rest of his Life. I wait with Impatience to hear of your being made Secretary to the Embassy. Shall a Descendant of Gospatrick Earl of Northumberland remain in the Character of Under Secretary I hope not, tho I am afraid our cursed Politicks at Home will occasion some Delay . . . .
