a Paris 2 9bre 1766

. . . Vous avés desiré que je fusse votre traducteur et je n'avois pas besoin de tous les sentimens qui m'attachenet a vous pour me charger de ce travail avec plaisir. Votre cause me paroissoit celle des honnêtes gens et surtout celle des amis de la philosophie; Il y a longtems que je regardois Rousseau comme un profond et dangereux Charlatan, qui avoit passé sa vie a recevoir des bienfaits de tout le monde et a faire tout le mal qu'il avoit pu a ceux qui lui avoient fait le plus de bien. Je crois qu'il est tres bon qu'il soit demasqué et il l'est. J'ai toujours insisté sur la necessité d'imprimer; parce que vos plaintes etant connues et ayant fait de l'eclat, le grand scandale etoit fait et il etoit juste que la peine en retombat sur l'auteur de l'iniquité. Notre brochure a fait tout l'effet qu'elle devoit faire sur tous les esprits raisonnables et non prevenues; Il y a bien dans un certain monde de ces gens, d'une sensibilité excessive sur tout ce qui blesse le moins du monde leur amour propre, et d'une moderation Stoïque sur tout ce qui interesse celui des autres, qui couperoient la gorge a leur ami pour une parole imprudente, et feroit un procés sur un manque d'etiquette, mais qui voudroit qu'un homme de lettres se laissat outrager dans ce qu'il a de plus sensible, sans se servir des armes qu'il a pour se defendre; ces gens la pretendent qu'il eut mieux valu laisser tomber cette affaire; quelques autres entousiastes de Rousseau ou ennemis entousiastes des Philosophes cherchent a excuser son procédé, mais ces gens la forment le très petit nombre, et ce n'est pas a eux qu'il faut parler raison. Aux yeux de tout le reste David hume sera toujours un homme genereux, sensible et bienfaisant, Jean Jaques Rousseau n'est qu'un visionnaire ingrat, menteur et mechant. Il n'y point d'homme honnête qui ne voulut avoir fait au même prix ce que vous avés fait pour cet ingrat . . . .

[This Appendix may be fittingly rounded off with the best of the squibs that appeared in the newspapers on the subject of the Hume-Rousseau quarrel. The following appeared as No. 3 of a series of periodical essays entitled The Miscellany, purporting to be written by Nathaniel Freebody, in the St. James's Chronicle for 13–15 Jan. 1767. Burton printed it in a footnote to Life, ii. 340 f., and said: 'It has the appearance of having been written by a Scottish lawyer.']

HEADS OF AN INDICTMENT LAID BY J. J. ROUSSEAU, PHILOSOPHER, AGAINST D. HUME, ESQ.

1. That the said David Hume, to the great scandal of philosophy, and not having the fitness of things before his eyes, did concert a plan with Mess. Tronchin, Voltaire, and D'Alembert, to ruin the said J. J. Rousseau for ever, by bringing him over to England, and there settling him to his heart's content.

2. That the said David Hume did, with a malicious and traitorous intent, procure, or cause to be procured, by himself, or somebody else, one pension of the yearly value of £100 or thereabouts, to be paid to the said J. J. Rousseau, on account of his being a philosopher, either privately or publicly, as to him the said J. J. Rousseau should seem meet.

3. That the said David Hume did, one night after he left Paris, put the said J. J. Rousseau in bodily fear, by talking in his sleep; although the said J. J. Rousseau doth not know whether the said David Hume was really asleep, or whether he shammed Abraham, or what he meant.

4. That, at another time, as the said David Hume and the said J. J. Rousseau were sitting opposite each other by the fireside in London, he, the said David Hume, did look at him, the said J. J. Rousseau, in a manner of which it is difficult to give any idea: That he, the said J. J. Rousseau, to get rid of the embarassment he was under, endeavoured to look full at him, the said David Hume, in return, to try if he could not stare him out of countenance; but in fixing his eyes against his, the said David Hume's, he felt the most inexpressible terror, and was obliged to turn them away, insomuch that the said J. J. Rousseau doth in his heart think and believe, as much as he believes anything, that he, the said David Hume, is a certain composition of a white-witch and a rattlesnake.

5. That the said David Hume on the same evening, after politely returning the embraces of him, the said J. J. Rousseau, and gently tapping him on the back, did repeat several times, in a good-natured easy tone, the words, 'Why, what, my dear Sir! Nay, my dear Sir! Oh, my dear Sir!' From whence the said J. J. Rousseau doth conclude, as he thinks upon solid and sufficient grounds, that he, the said David Hume, is a traitor; albeit he, the said J. J. Rousseau, doth acknowledge, that the physiognomy of the good David is that of an honest man, all but those terrible eyes of his, which he must have borrowed; but he, the said J. J. Rousseau, vows to God he cannot conceive from whom or what.

6. That the said David Hume hath more inquisitiveness about him than becometh a philosopher, and did never let slip an opportunity of being alone with the governante of him, the said J. J. Rousseau.

7. That the said David Hume did most atrociously and flagitiously put him, the said J. J. Rousseau, philosopher, into a passion; as knowing that then he would be guilty of a number of absurdities.

8. That the said David Hume must have published Mr Walpole's letter in the newspapers, because, at that time, there was neither man, woman, nor child, in the island of Great Britain, but the said David Hume, the said J. J. Rousseau, and the printers of the several newspapers aforesaid.

9. That somebody in a certain magazine, and somebody else in a certain newspaper, said something against him, the said John James Rousseau, which he, the said J. J. Rousseau, is persuaded, for the reason above-mentioned, could be nobody but the said David Hume.

10. That the said J. J. Rousseau knows, that he, the said David Hume, did open and peruse the letters of him, the said J. J. Rousseau, because he one day saw the said David Hume go out of the room, after his own servant, who had, at that time, a letter of the said J. J. Rousseau's in his hands; which must have been in order to take it from the servant, open it, and read the contents.

11. That the said David Hume did, at the instigation of the devil, in a most wicked and unnatural manner, send, or cause to be sent, to the lodgings of him, the said J. J. Rousseau, one dish of beefsteaks, thereby meaning to insinuate, that he, the said J. J. Rousseau, was a beggar, and came over to England to ask alms: whereas be it known to all men by these presents, that he, the said John James Rousseau, brought with him the means of subsistence, and did not come with an empty purse; as he doubts not but he can live upon his labours — with the assistance of his friends; and in short can do better without the said David Hume than with him.

 12. That besides all these facts put together, the said J. J. Rousseau did not like a certain appearance of things on the whole.a
