Gibraltar March 30th 1767.

Dear Sir,

[. . .] I am very sensible of your goodness to me, in sending me the copy of your correspondence with M. Rousseau; I take it most kindly and as a mark of your rememberance as well as of the justice you do me, in believing I take a great and most sincere part in every thing that concerns your person or reputation. The first accounts I had of any rupture between you & Rousseau were very dark and unintelligible, owing to that confounded idea every man in London has (Viz) that somebody else writes to you besides himself which is the most provoking and tantalizing thing in the world. One man says 'I take it for granted you have heard what has happened between Mr Hume and Rousseau'. When I knew nothing that had happened, except that you went to England together. Another writes to me 'I believe Mr Hume will publish something in answer to Mr Rousseau' when I did not know Rousseau had wrote anything that required an Answer. These dark hints, which were by no means enlightened by the newspaper accounts left me in a strange perplexity, and I was resolved to beg somebody would be kind enough to explain to me what all this meant: I did not care to write to you on the subject fearing it might be disagreable to you, Ignorant as I was of particulars. I was persuaded you had been ill used and I would have laid fifty to one Rousseau was in the wrong from my knowledge of you, even though I had never read a line of his works or heard a word of his character, but considering upon both I was confirmed in my opinion. In the midst of these reflections, a friend of mine, who knew the state of my sentiments with regard to you, sent me the English copy of your correspondence with Rousseau. I need not tell you that I read it with infinite pleasure, nor how greatly that pleasure was increased when I found upon lending the book to everybody, there was not a dissenting voice, but all agreed in pittying and commending you, and in laughing at and condemning Rousseau: For my own part I will own fairly to you, I am one of those who are by no means sorry that Mr Rousseau has proved himself publickly to be very insane, and so I shall say no more of Mr Rousseau.

[. . .] I am with the greatest sincerity and regard

My dear Sir, 
Your most obedient 
and most humble Servant 
J. Irwine.
