My Dear Sir

I wrote to you about a fourthnight ago by the Post. The present goes by a Servant I had brought with me from England who chuses to return because his health does not well bear the fatigue of posting.

I send you herewith Mr Montigny de Trudaine's Translation of your N.H. of R. He's a very fine Young fellow, a rising man here and a great admirer of yours.

Besides the books I formerly begged of you to get I must trouble you for some more to be sent with the same address.

For Mr Turgot

The Peerage of England Do of Scotland Do of Ireland

Robinson's [Robertson's] history of Scotland

Baskerville's Milton 2 Volumes

second volume of Hume's History of England

Essays & Treatises on various subjects by David Hume one Volume in quarto

Four Dissertations by Ditto in Duodecimo

For President de Brosses

Baskerville's Milton and Ditto for Mr de Trudaine le fils

I'm not sure whether Mr Turgot does not mean by the second Volume of your History what we commonly call the first because he reckons that of the House of Tudor to be really the first.

This is a deal of trouble I give you but 'tis to serve men who would go to the Indies to serve you, for I'm in great earnest when I tell you that you're the man of the world they hold in the highest esteem.

Pray remember to write either to Monsr or Made du Pre de St Maur about the different things I recommended in my last & you should also write a short line to Mr Montigny de Trudaine after you have read his translation. A letter from you will at all times give great Satisfaction here. The few you have wrote have been much talked of. I once more repeat to you that your Correspondent Made du Pre de St Maur is without exception the most accomplished woman I ever saw and I also think the most rational & sensible.

I have sent you inclosed Proposals for publishing that fine Map of France you have heard so much of. Tis under the direction of the Academy and there are 31 Sheets already struck off. These I have seen and they are inimitably well done. Pray communicate these proposals to the curious for they are vastly surprized here in having as yet had only 25 subscriptions from Great Britain. Adieu.

J. S.
