Paris 1st March 1759

My Dear David

My Father has probably communicated to you a part of two letters I have wrote him from this place. If he has not, tell him I beg he may, as he knows I hate writing much, and it will save me some pages. The principal motive I have for troubling you with an epistle is to express my gratitude for the obligations I owe to your friendship, for under the title of your friend I have been more caressed here than ever stranger was by people of distinguished merit and a high rank in life. I hinted at your intention of one day paying them a visit and I assure you it gave a most general & unfeigned satisfaction to a great number of People you would like to live with and who, as far as my penetration goes, would be very happy to have you amongst them. If you have any thoughts of making a trip this Summer or Autumn, you need only say the word, and your Passport will be sent you by the return of the Post.

Madame Dupres your friend is a woman of fortune, fashion, and great good sense remarkably well behaved & generally esteemed. At her house you will see a great deal of the Politest & genteellest Company. Monsr de Trudaine who is equally desirous to see you & to have you at his Country house is a man so well known that I need not tell you the advantages of being acquainted with him. His son is one of the most amiable Characters in Paris. He has made a translation of your natural History of Religion which is too bulky to send you by the Post but I shall convey it to you by a private hand. To each of these you must send a Copy of your last Volume of the History as also to Monsr Turgot a man of very good sense great knowledge and one of your Admirers. You may add one too for the Chevalier de Chatlus [Chastellux] whom you'll wish to know when you come here. He learned the English language on purpose to read your works in the Original. All these may be directed to Mr de Trudaine, who being a Minister has every thing brought to him from the different parts of the kingdom very carefully & free of Charges. Pray don't forget our old friend Helvetius too who says he'll come to England to see you if you dont come to Paris. He lives in friendship with the above set because they love his aimiable Character at the same time that they have no very high idea of his Philosophy. He certainly is one of the best men ever was formed.

I am charged to make many Compliments to you from Mr Crebillon, Mr du Hamel, the Abbé du Renel [Raynal] & many many more who look for your coming amongst them with the same anxiety & impatience that — look for — Pray indulge them & me and come next winter. I'll meet you here soon after the Vintage is over & if you don't like the Place we'll return together.

The following books must be purchased & sent at the same time & an Acct of the charge transmitted to me.

Two copies of Robinson's [Robertson's] History

Johnson's Dictionary in Octavo

Johnson's Dictionary in Folio

Shakespears Works

Popes Illiad

Tom Jones

Memoires of a woman of pleasure 2 Volumes printed for G. Fenton in the Strand 17[?]

Miscellaneous Tracts by Middleton

Human Nature in 3 volumes by Dav: Hume

An Introduction to Languages Literary & Philosophical by H. Bailey 2 vols 8vo

Gerard Malines on Money

The whole may be sent to the care of Mr. Crawford at Rotterdam with orders to forward them to Mr de Trudaines Intendant General des finances & du commerce.

If an Cartel ship is going from Dover to Calais it will save Charges. My father will know by writing a line to Messrs Minet at Dover or sending to the Sick & Wounded Office on Tower Hill.

Messrs Minet will consign the Parcell to their friend at Calais.

Adieu my Dear Sir I won't tire you any longer. Believe me always most sincerely & respectfully

 Yours

John Stewart

Please add to the list of books to be purchased & sent here.

The Bible in the Erse & in the Welsh languages

The best Grammar (if there ever was one) in these two languages.

The best Grammar as to the Dictionarys in these two languages

No matter whether the Grammars are wrote in Latin or English but the Dictionarys must be double viz Erse & English or Latin and English or Latin & Erse. The same as to the Welsh Dictionary. This commissn is for Mr Turgot who's a great Etymologist.

Madame du Pres husband is an Antiquarian & wishes to know from Bob Wood the dimensions of the three Pyramids in Egypt in case he measured them.

Mr Dupres also wishes to know if there is any book published giving an Acct of the Ancient English moneys & particularly their weights which he says Ld Pembroke has carelessly omitted & which he's very angry at.

The Principal of the Scots Colledge here is also very angry at your friend Robinson [Robertson] for publishing his book before he came or sent somebody to examine 18 Volumes in folio of Manuscripts & records in the reign of Mary Queen of Scots which they have in this Colledge here.
