Memoire

Mr H. has receivd Orders from his Court to lay before the Court of France the Proposals of the English Merchants concern'd concern'd in the Paper Money of Canada & c.

These Proposals are made by the English Merchants, in order to conform themselves, as much as possible to the Arret, issu'd by the Court of France. They still insist, however, that as that Arret was fram'd without consulting the Court of England, it is liable to great Objections, and exposes them and their to great Injustice. They insist that all the Paper Money of Canada ought to have been pay'd in full, both because the Faith of the French Government is doubly plighted to that purpose both by their original Engagements in Canada, and by the strong Declaration annexd to the late Treaty.

They insist, that, even if a Reduction was to have place, the Liquidation of 50 payment of 50 per cent for the Bills of Exchange preceding 17 Octr 1759 was too low, as well as that of 25 per cent for the Cards & Billets of Ordonnance; because there was so considerable a Difference made between Paper and Money in Canada.

Allowing, that such a Difference had been made in Canada; /during the years 1759 & 1760/ yet as the Arret of the French /Court/ was not issud till July 1764, the Proprietors of the Paper Money had been great Losers, by so late a Payment.

This Hardship is greatly aggravated by the Terms of Payment: The very 25 per cent granted them cannot be disposd of but at 35 or 36 per cent Discount, which is a palpable a Circumstance, which the Court of France itself, reasoning upon its own Principles, must allow to be a great Hardship & Injustice.

For all these Reasons, the English Merchants insist that /besides over and above the Payments requird as above/ the Sum of 120.000 Pounds Sterling shall be pay'd them in four quarterly Payments as a Reparation of their Losses. | This Sum is proposed to be distributed among the Proprietors of the Cards & Billets d Ordonnance. The Court of England, sensible of the Justice of this Demand, support it with | the utmost Force, and demand, as soon as possible, a precise and categorical Answer from the Court of France. The former If the Demand is comply'd with, as [erasure illegible] the former /from the good Intentions of H.M. Christ Majesty/ Court has reason to expect, she also offers to acquit the latter of all Claims, which the Canadians may have, for the unequal Taxations of /of Provisions made by/ the French Intendant and which the /last/ Arret of the promis'd to redress. These Claims /and many others of a like Nature/ are very considerable; and this Consideration is an additional Reason for yielding to the present Demand.

Paris 25 of Septr 1765

Hume
