July 30

[. . .] Perhaps Sir, I confess it with ingenuity, had I been doom'd to be never personally acquaint'd with you, I should not have generosity enough, to correct your judgment of me. But in this particular occasion, as in all other, according my humble opinion, Right and good are closely united. What a Shame indeed for me, and disapointement for you: in place of the object, your imagination has adornd with such shining qualifications, to find a person, to whom nature has granted but indifferent ones. A great part of my youth is over. Some delicacy in features, mildness and decency in countenance, are the only exterior advantages, I can boast of. And as for interior, common sense, improved a little, by early good reading, are all I possess. My knowledge of the English language also, is confined as you can easily perceive. I have indeed acquir'd whithout assistance, that which I know of it; but if I am intitled to some elegancy I owe it to the repeated readings of your admirable works.

After this true picture of myself, in which I have struggled to exert the noble impartiality and candour which shine in all your writings, my first care is Sir, to acknowledge the infinite obligations you have conferr'd upon me by your kind letter. I have translat'd the P. S. to send it to my friend [Rousseau]. The esteem of such a man, must be the best balm, for his wound'd heart. But I am afraid he will not accept the glorious support, you are so good as to offer him. I fear, that the weight of his calamities has impair'd his health, and he cannot sustain, the fatigues of a long journey. In his last letter to me, he expresses a resolution, never to see England, upon that account. Nevertheless I am inform'd since, that new persecutions, may possibly determine him to alter his mind. An irregular trial has depriv'd him of the natural rights in his own country [. . .] .

Is it possible Sir, that this late unhappy event [the prosecution of Rousseau], could deprive of the honour of your presence, a country filled with your fervent admirers, and where every one, will endeavour, to outdo each other, in expressing the veneration and regard you so justly deserve? I hope you will not keep this severe resolution. If we want a liberty you think an advantage, t'is a reason to pity, and not to punish us. Besides your case and that of Mr Rousseau, tho' both foreigners in france, are quite different [. . .] .

 Since I have gone so far, permit me Sir, to ask your opinion upon the last Book of Mr. Rousseau [. . .] .
