Old-Windsor the 23d July 1766

After the letter you showed me, Sr, and the account you gave me, when you was here, of that madman Rousseau nothing can Surprise me from that quarter: but it does worse for it allarms me, his Frenzy is grown to such a height that I really think him dangerous, and that for his own sake and that of others 'tis full time he shou'd be locked up. Detestation for his malevolence, and compassion for his madness, make a sort of odd mixture in one's Sensations for him, and both prevent one's laughing at the ridiculous as well as absurd idea he has got about the conspiracy of the Triumvirate he supposes united to hurt him. You have really done by this Country, in importing him, what the late Lord Hillsborough did by Ireland, in carrying them the noxious animals and insects which were not the produce of that Country, and if Jean Jaques encreases and multiplys here you will have a great deal to answer for. I wrote Madame Geoffrin an account of all I learnt about him when I saw you last, for I think the world shou'd be informd of what he is capable, that no other human, kind-hearted, generous Hume (if there is another in the world) shou'd be liable to be so treated and so reviled by such an ungrateful malevolent Madman as he is. I am not surprised that strokes of great genius shou'd appear thro' all his madness, they are not in the least inconsistent. You know Dryden has long ago observed that Great wits are allyed to Madness, but what is much more Surprising and mortifying also is that great Parts and great wickedness often meet in the Same Subject, which almost every one's own experience will testifie.

[. . .]  Mr Bateman [. . .] feels that horror which an honnest mind always must at the bare mention of the ingratitude of Rousseau: who I hope will never come nearer London than he is at present and you I hope will never approach nearer to him, I seriously think his Frenzy dangerous. Believe me Sr with great truth and perfect esteem your most Sincere and faithful humble Servant

M. Hervey
