Dear Sir,

I Received the favour of Yours by last post, same morning sent you word of my having had a letter from Rousseau. Not knowing how to direct I had addres'd mine to Mr Rougemont, green Lattice Lane, who I knew was a correspondent of his. As soon as that Gentleman had heard where he was, forwarded my letter, & by Rousseau's to me, know he must have receiv'd it. In mine I gave him instructions what to do in relation to his receiving his Majesties Bounty, so I suppose he has given orders to Mr Rougemont for that purpose.

The good woman, who is called my housekeeper, was my Nurse, near Ninety & more then 3 parts blind, Mademoiselle & she never could agree. I have heard something of the story of the kettle & cinders, but am inclinable to believe, my Philosopher's resolutions were determin'd before that fray happened. His Governante has an absolute power over him & without doubt more or less influences all his actions. You certainly guess right about the unaccountable quarrel with you to whom he has so many & great obligations, nay I am almost sure he very heartily repents & inwardly wants to be reconciled. He has desir'd to hear from me often, & promises to let me know how he goes on as soon as ever he is the least fix'd. What he was writing, is the same he mention'd to you, will be a large work, containing at least 12 Vols. I am positively certain that when I left him he had not intirely finished one. There's nothing in it which in any shape relates to State affairs, or to Ministers of State.

You shall see his letter the first opportunity, but God help him I cant for pitty give a Coppy, & tis so much mix'd with his own poor little private concerns that it would not be right in me to do it.

You may depend upon it, that I shall with great pleasure give any information in my power to any Gentleman who wants the help of the levelling plough & my workmen shall be ready to instruct whoever they send in the use of it.

 I am Dear Sir Your most Obedient & most Humble Servant

Rich. Davenport

Davenport 6th of July 1767.
