Dear Sir

'Tis with the Greatest Satisfaction I hear this poor unfortunate man will enjoy the Pension. I am sure he lies under a thousand obligations, to you, & am extremely glad he has wrote to General Conway. I hope he made use of at least some expressions of Gratitude & respect to that Gentleman, whose Goodness of heart obtained this Favour from his Majesty.

I am sure You'll do Your Endeavour to save him from the Bastile or (which I more fear) the Arch Bishop of Paris prison.

He wrote me a letter from Spalding dated 11th in which he says I have great reason to be offended at his manner of Leaving Wootton — he says —

'Je préférois la liberté au Séjour de votre maison; ce sentiment est bien excusable. Mais je préfère infiniment le séjour de votre maison à toute autre captivité, et je préférerois toute autre captivité à celle où je suis, qui est horrible, et qui, quoiqu'il arrive, ne sauroit durer. Si vous voulez bien, Monsieur, me recevoir derechef chez vous, je suis prêt à m'y rendre au cas qu'on m'en laisse la liberté; et quand j'y serois après l'expérience que j'ai faite, difficilement serois-je tenté d'en resortir pour chercher de nouveaux malheurs. Si ma proposition vous agrée, tâchez, Monsieur, de me le faire savoir par quelque voye sûre, et de faciliter mon retour d'ici chez vous.' He repeats the same request of sending to him 2 or 3 times. This he sent on the 11. I received on the 17th. On the 18 I dispatched a servant to Spalding. Instead of staying for my answer, behold on the 14 he set out for Dover & on that morning wrote again by the Post to me, in which he says that if he had any assurance that His letter of the 11 would come to me & that I would agree to his proposal & again receive him, he should certainly stay for an answer. But as he despaird of my receiving his so he was determind to pass the Channel & I should hear from him when he reached Calais & quite sure of his liberty. That he would write from thence, & make me a very singular proposition. He professes the greatest regard for me & c.

The next is dated Dover, 18 May, where He says that he chose to write to me from that place, that seeing the Sea and finding he was in reallity a free man & might either go or Stay — then says he, I stoppd & intended to return to You but by Chance seeing in a publick paper how how  my departure from Wootton was treated — caus'd him immediately to renounce that Idea. He finishes with many Compliments, but without telling me where to write to him, & I long to know how to address my letters.

Before he left Wootton, he disposd of several long gowns amongst the poor people, went off in an old French dress, & got a blue Coat made for him at Spalding. Pray Can you inform me who he has authorizd to Receive his Majestys bounty, because I think I may pay into their hands the money I have of his in mine. I should be pleas'd if you could be so kind to inform me what date his letter bore which he wrote to the Lord Chancellor.

 I am Dear Sir Your Most Obedient Humble Servant

Rich. Davenport

Davenport May 25th 1767.

I'll take Care you shall see all his letters —
