Dear Sir,

I went over to Wootton on Tuesday, had a long Conference with Mr Rousseau on the Subject of your last letters, gave into his hands yours addressed to him (which he had not read before), shew'd him those I received from you, & in the most earnest manner insisted upon his giving you an open answer, to all your questions, which I told him you had certainly a right to ask, & he could not have any pretence what ever to refuse. His spirits seemed vastly flutterd. However he told me a long History of the whole affair. I Said, that as my knowledge of the French Language was very imperfect, I might easily misrepresent things, so begg'd him to write down the whole matter.

Before he began his discourse, I could not help speaking a deal to him on the Subject of the Pension, & Express'd my astonishment, at his even ever having had the least thought of refusing the favours of the Greatest King in the World. To my infinite Surprize he directly return'd this Answer, that he never had refus'd, nor any thing like it, spoke with the greatest respect & veneration of his Majesty, & with all sort of Acknowledgements of Gratitude to Generall Conway &c. You may well imagine my Surprize encreas'd. He then began his Story — but that I intirely leave to his pen, as he has faithfully promised to perform. I am Really Sorry for him, he's uneasy, frets perpetually & looks terribly — Tis almost impossible to conceive the odness of his extreme Sensibility, so that I conclude when he's Guilty of an error, his nerves are more in fault, than his heart. Things vex him, to the utmost extent of vexation, which would not even move such a dull Soul as mine is. In Short I perceive his disorder is Jealousy, he thinks you are fond of some Savant Hommes, who he unfortunately thinks his Enemys.

It will give me the Greatest Satisfaction to hear, that you have received a Satisfactory answer, & that every thing is set right again.

 I am Dear Sir Your Most Obedient Humble Servant,

Rich. Davenport

Davenport. 6th of July 1766.
