London July 2d. 1765.

Dear Sir

I received on Saturday last the letter you have favoured me with of the 24th Past which I observe to have been wrote with the knowledge of a Prince for whom I have the utmost respect and veneration, & upon a subject of the utmost delicacy & consequence to the future ease of that great personage and of another for whom you know I have the most devoted attachment. I must premise in the first place that I shall observe the most inviolable Secresy even to the person concerned unless she brings with her a suspicion of my having been wrote to & should tax me with it in which case I cannot deceive her.

I confess I think it unlikely that she will open herself at all to me upon so nice a point, I have no right to expect such unbounded confidence from her, & I am sure you will agree with me that it would be highly improper for me to touch upon so tender a subject unless she herself begins it, such a step could only create the suspicion you and the Prince wish to avoid, render all I could say of no effect, diminish her good opinion of me, without forwarding what you both wish. but if she should deign to consult me, the use I could be of to her would be to help her to think aloud, to arrange those thoughts with coolness, and method; & to draw the true conclusions after a candid examination of the different situations that occur for consideration namely

1st. continuing when a widow her former connexions.

2dly breaking those connexions and continue a widow.

3dly to marry the person with whom she has been connected.

The two first points depending upon herself must first be scrutinized and the examination of them will lead to consider how far it may be adviseable for her to push the last, and to fix her resolution in case she fails in the attempt.

It is impossible for me to determine my own opinion till I hear her reasons, my wish leads me to facilitate what the Prince desires, as far as may be consistent with the duty of a friend consulted upon a most nice and difficult conjuncture. all I can now promise is that if she does speak to me upon the affair you shall soon hear from me again upon the subject [. . .] .
