So, my Dear Sir, you have at last with no small reluctance, & after many struggles prevaild with yourself to acquaint some of your friends, that Lord Hertford means to desire that Government would be graciously pleas'd to bestow the character & emoluments of the Secretaryship upon the person who actually performs the functions of it. At your time of life, with so much independency about you, & so unlike your former conduct — indeed I am not at all surpris'd that it cost you near two pages of apology & explanation before you woud even intrust me with the secret. Were you less deep in the study of Human nature, & somewhat more an adept in the ways of men, I am apt to think, you woud rather have fill'd your letter with excuses for not having sooner made this application. However, to take up this gravely & in your own way, I am very sincerely of opinion that Lord Hertford in making a point of this request is doing the properest thing in the world, both with regard to his friendship for you, his own character, & the particular Station he fills. You say your hope of success is but moderate, & this to be sure is a very proper disposition of mind, & yet I can hardly agree with you, for I am really of opinion that Lord Hertford must prevail, & that some other arrangement must be found for Mr Bunbury. As to what collateral assistance your friends here can give, or how necessary their efforts may be I cant pretend to judge. It is enough for me that Lord Hertford wishes that your friends shoud assist as far as they can. Upon this principle I lost no time, in stating & inforcing the propriety of your demand, in all the ways and thro all the channels to which my little interest had any access. But tho I lost no time I had however the satisfaction to find Lord Hertford had been before hand with me, even where I lest expected to find him. As to the success I shall pretend to say nothing of it, as you must learn it more authentically, by the regular dispatches, but it is really my opinion that you will succeed, & I found this opinion both upon the reasonableness of the thing, & upon the manner I found it was receivd.

As to Ingrata patria ne ossa quidem habebis. Dont be at all uneasie, here I can speak more peremtorily, & notwithstanding all your errors mistakes & Heresys, in Religion Morals, & Government, I undertake, you shall have at least Christian Burial, & perhaps we may find for you a niche in Westminster Abey, besides. Your Lokes, Newtons & Bacons, had no great matter to boast of during their lives, & yet they were the most orthodox of men, they required no Godfather to answer for them, while on the other hand did not Lord Hertford spread his sevenfold shield, over all your transgressions, pray what pretentions have you either in Church or State, for you well know you have offended both. But I know what is the matter with you, the French Ladys as much as the French Philosophers have contributed to render you vain, & when successful with the fair & flattered by the learned, I know what sport you will make of all our grave admonitions. I long thought you woud have been content with a reversionary estate on fame not to take full effect till after your death, but since you are corrupted by bad company we must even assist you to grow rich & lazy like other men. To my Dear Sir

I am ever Yours very truly

Gilb: Elliot.

London 25th Apl 1764
