TO THE RIGHT HONBLE the LORD-CHIEF-JUSTICE REASON, and the HONBLE the JUDGES, DISCRETION, PRUDENCE, RESERVE, and DELIBERATION, THE PETITION of THE PATIENTS of WESTMINSTER against JAMES FRASER, apothecary

Most humbly showeth,

THAT your Petitioners had put themselves and Families under the Direction & Care of the said James Fraser, & had so continu'd for several Years, to their great mutual Benefit & Emolument.

THAT many of your Petitioners had, under his Management, recover'd from the most desperate & deplorable Maladies, such as Megrims, Toothakes, Cramps, Stitches, Vapours, Crosses in Love, &c. which wonderful Success, after the Blessing of God, they can ascribe to nothing but his consummate Skill & Capacity; since many of their Neighbours, labouring under the same Distresses, dy'd every day, by the Mistakes of less learned Apothecaries.

THAT there are many disconsolate Widows among your Petitioners, who believ'd themselves, & were believ'd by all their Neighbours, to be dying of Grief; but as soon as the said James Fraser apply'd Lenitives, & proper topical Medicines, they were observ'd to recover wonderfully.

That in all hypocondriacal Cases he was Sovereign, insomuch that his very Presence dispell'd the Malady, cheering the Sight, exciting a gentle Agitation of the Muscles of the Lungs & Thorax, & thereby promoting Expectoration, Exhileration, Circulation, and Digestion.

That your Petitioners verily believe, that not many more have dy'd from amongst them, under the Administration of the said James Fraser, than actually dye, by the Course of Nature, in Places where Physic is not at all known or practic'd: Which will scarcely be credited in this sceptical & unbelieving Age.

That all this Harmony & good Agreement betwixt your Petitioners & the said James Fraser had lately been distub'd, to the great Detriment of your Petitioners, & their once numerous Families.

That the said James Fraser associating himself with — Carey Surgeon, & William Guthrey Esqr & other evil intention'd Persons, not having the Fear of God before their Eyes, had given himself entirely up to the Care of Dame PUBLIC, and had utterly neglected your Petitioners.

That the Lady abovementiond was of a most admirable CONSTITUTION, envy'd by all who had ever seen her or heard of her; & was only afflicted sometimes with Vapours, & sometimes with a Looseness or Flux, which, not being of the bloody kind, those about her were rather pleas'd with it.

That, notwithstanding this, the said James Fraser uses all Diligence & Art to perswade the said Lady, that she is in the most desperate Case imaginable, & that nothing will recover her but a Medicine he has prepard, being a Composition of Pulvis pyrius, along with a Decoction of northern Steel, and an Infusion of southern Aqua sacra or holy Water.

That this Medicine or rather Poyson was at first wrapt up under a Wafer, markt Patriotism; but had since been attempted to be administrated without any Cover or Disguise.

That a Doze of it had secretly been pour'd down the Throat of the said Dame Public, while she was asleep, & had been attended with the most dismal Symptoms, visibly heightening her Vapours, & encreasing her Flux, & even producing some Symptoms of the bloody kind. And had she not thrown it up with great Violence, it had certainly prov'd fatal to her.

That the said James Fraser & his Associates now finding that this Catholicon does not agree with the Constitution of the said Dame, prescribe to her large Dozes of Phillipiacum, Cottontium, & Vandeputiana, in order to alter her Constitution & prepare her Body for the Reception of the said Catholicon.

That he had even been pleas'd to see Lovitium apply'd to her, tho known to be a virulent Caustic, and really no better than Lapis infernalis.

That while the Medicines, Goveriacum and Trentuntium, were very violent, resembling sublimate or high-flown Mercury, he also much approv'd of them; but since they were mollify'd by late Operations, and made as innocent as Mercurius Dulcis, they were become his utter Aversion.

That the said James Fraser, thro' his whole Practice on the said Dame Public, entirely rejected all Lenitives, Soporifics, Palliatives, &c, tho approv'd of by the regular & graduate Physicians, as Dr Pelham, Dr Fox, Dr Pitt; and that he prescrib'd nothing but Chymical Salts & stimulating Medicines, in which Regimen, none but Quacks & Empirics, who had never taken their Degrees, will agree with him.

That your Petitioners remember the Story of an Irish Servant to a Physician, which seem fitted to the present Purpose. The Doctor bid Teague carry a Potion to a Patient, & tell him it was the most innocent in the World, & if it did him no good, coud do him no harm. The Footman obeys, but unluckily transposing a Word, said that if it did him no Harm, it cou'd do him no Good: And your Petitioners are much afraid, that the Catholicon abovemention'd is much of the same Nature;

May it therefore please your Worships to discharge the said James Fraser from any farther Attendance on the said Dame Public, & to order him to return to the Care & Inspection of your Petitioners & their Families.
