King's College, 18 March 1763

Sir

On Monday last Mr John Farquhar brought me your letter of Feb 25th inclosed in one from Dr Blair. I thought my self very happy in having the means of obtaining at second hand, through the friendship of Dr Blair, your Opinion of my performance; and you have been pleased to communicate it directly, in so polite & friendly a manner as merits great acknowledgments on my part.

Your keeping a watchfull Eye over my Style with a view to be of use to me, is an Instance of Candor and Generosity to an Antagonist, which would affect me very sensibly although I had no personal concern in it. And I shall always be proud to follow so amiable an Example. Your Judgment of the Style indeed gives me great consolation, as I was very diffident of my self in regard to English, & have been indebted to Drs Campbel & Gerard for many corrections of that kind.

In attempting to throw some new light upon these abstruse Subjects, I wish to preserve the due mean betwixt Confidence and Despair. But whether I have any Success in this Attempt or not, I shall always avow my self your Disciple in Metaphysicks. I have learned more from your writings in this kind than from all others put together. Your System appears to me not onely coherent in all its parts, but likeways justly deduced from principles commonly received among Philosophers: Principles, which I never thought of calling in Question, untill the conclusions you draw from them in the treatise of humane Nature made me suspect them. If these principles are Solid your System must stand; And whether they are or not, can better be judged after you have brought to Light the whole System that grows out of them, than when the greater part of it was wrapped up in clouds and darkness. I agree with you therefore that if this System shall ever be demolished, you have a just claim to a great share of the Praise, both because you have made it a distinct and determinate mark to be aimed at, and have furnished proper artillery for the purpose

When you have seen the whole of my performance I shall take it as a very great favour to have your opinion upon it, from which I make no doubt of receiving light, whether I receive conviction or not.

Your Friendly Adversaries Drs Campbel & Gerard as well as Dr Gregory return their Compliments to you respectfully. A little Philosophical Society here of which all the three are members, is much indebted to you for its Entertainment. Your Company would, although we are all good Christians, be more acceptable than that of Saint Athanasius. And since we cannot have you upon the bench, you are brought oftner than any other man, to the bar, accused and defended with great Zeal but without bitterness. If you write no more in morals politicks or metaphysicks, I am affraid we shall be at a loss for Subjects. I am respectfully Sir

Your most obliged 
humble Servant 
Thomas Reid
