London Nov 11 1766

Sir



The week before last I recd from my friend Mr Suard of Paris a Letter acquainting me he had sent me for publication here some Copies of the Exposé Succinct which I have since recd & advertised.



A Gentleman furnished me with a Copy before I recd those Mr Suard sent me & I immediately advertised a translation & gave it to the gentleman who translated Rousseau's other pieces for me — he directly set about it, & last Saturday  sennight  I gave Mr Strahan Copy to begin Printing — He then showd me your Letter just recd in in which ye very obligingly mentioned my Name. As I had got the Original & advertised a translation he thought me every way intitled to it. (for it is a rule in the trade, whoever advertises  a translation first has the exclusive right) but he thought it best to show Mr Millar, who was then in town, your Letter — & who I find, then, gave up the point.



 I accordingly pushd the translation, & gave the translator your Papers, which I was glad of as it enabled us to print your originals rather than give a translation — for it often happens that the sense is perverted by it — I was vastly glad of this for your sake. Particular care is taken with respect to the translation — and the translator has given Notes here & there that is necessary — especially one relating to the Charge of R's about your suppressing the publication of the Letters of Mons. Perou which we have entirely overthrown & the world will see you are innocent of his false charge — This Note I particularly desire & I am sure ye will be pleased with it. In whatever view Mr R may see this, I care not, for I will ascertain facts where I can. Mr Suard told me he made no doubt but ye would send me a Copy for publication, being he thought the properest midwife in this Case.



As ye had desired Mr Strahan to send a Copy to Ld Hartford Mr Conway — Mr Walpole and Lady Hervey — he thought I had better send them from mine, which I did, & also 5 to you at Edin[burgh] by the Waggon, W₶ went Monday sen'night. As soon as the translation is finished, I will send ye a Copy by post — I intend to send Mr Balfour some Copies of each.

I am Sir

Your Most Obedt

Hble Servt

T Becket



What a pity it is that Mr Millar should at this time of day give himself a moments uneasiness, or reflect on Mr Strahan about this affair — which I find he has done, & most unfriendly — for to my Knowledge Mr S. has acted in ye most open manner Possible — having communicated the Contents of your Letter to him on the receipt of it.



 Mr S. thought as ye did, it was not an object to him — & as I said before, gave it up, & told Mr S. he had no objection to my having it, on representing to him my having the original & advertising the translation.



I have not recd your 10 Copies from Miss Eliot yet — Mr Strahan begs his Compliments to ye — & will write ye soon — he is this moment come from the H[ouse] of Com[mons].
