What new Change is this. Mrs Mure says you should have been a Girl, for you are never two minutes of one mind; and I say you are as credulous as any Girl, and believe every Report you hear. I wish you had but half the Faith for what you ought, and are bound, to believe.

We saw Lady Betty and Lord Stanley, at Hamilton on Thursday last, they expect no more Company from England. The Bishop Lord North's Brother with his Wife, were to have come but were stoped, and have laid aside their Intention, upon Account of Lord Gilford's being taken ill. I hope hell recover. Lady Betty heard from the Duchess, that there were no Body there but Miss Sempill. You dont call that Company sure. Ld and Lady Eglingtown are since gone there, but will be gone before we arrive. We told Lady Betty, we, that is you as well as ourselves, were to be there soon, whenever we had Notice from you. She said she would play at Whist with you from Morning to Night, was become of late so fond of it, that she had played with Andrew Stuart lately from one at Noon till one in the Morning, without ever rising, but for a few Minutes, to answer the Calls of Hunger. How can I give your strange Reason to the Duke and Duchess, in an empty House, that because it was full, you would not keep your Promise. In short we propose to go some Time next Week, what Time of it is indifferent, and we shall be determind by you, but you must decide and say when youll go along with us, for the Sake of your own Character, as well as of your Friends who wish your Company. Fix a day when youll be at Rouats, and well meet you there, he has been here we have promised to be with him, and answered for you too. You cant get off now, so dont think of making Excuses. Yours while

W. M.

Caldwell Monday 4th Sept [1775]

On telling Kattie what I had wrote, she offers an Amendment, which I much approve; that you should come here the End of the Week, or the very Beginning of the next, or as soon as you like, and that we should set out from hence for Inveraray together, whenever we find ourselves inclined. As travelling is your Business now, this should suit you better, than coming directly to Rouat's.
