
            Mr. ADDISON'S DISSERTATION Upon the most Celebrated Roman POETS, ALSO AN ESSAY UPON THE Roman Elegiac POETS.
            By Major PACK.
            The THIRD EDITION.
            To which is Added, 
                  •
               n ESSAY upon Mr. ADDISON's Writings. By R. YOUNG, Esq
            
            
               LONDON: 
               
                  ••
               inted for E. CURLL, over against Catherine Street in the Strand, 1721. Price 1s. 6d.
            
         
         
            
a Work of this Nature, no other Parts of Poetry could be displayed, except an Elegance of Style and Description: In both these Ways VIRGIL has this, pe-culiar to himself, that he captivates the Soul with his wonderful Sweetness, and his Descriptions are as Lively, as if we had the Object placed before our Eyes.
               In the Purity of his Style next fol-lows LUCRETIUS, whose Diction, allowing for his Obsoleteness, and Numbers almost Prosaick, may chal-lenge a Share of Praise, in those who have any Taste of the Roman Elo-quence: For Descriptions however, the second Post of Honour is due to CLAU-DIAN, who has throughout, in a most beautiful Style, interwoven his agree-able Images; faulty in this alone, that 
Versus diversis exponat Lo-quendi Modis. In hac Arte sese maxi-mè profecisse satis noverat CLAUDIA-NUS; de quacunque enim re satagit, assiduè semper quaerit quae describenda sunt, imo plurima sumpsit Argumenta, quae tota in Descriptionibus occupantur, ut videre est in Praefationibus, in Idylliis, in Libris de raptu PROSERPINAE, de PHOENICE, HISTRICE, TORPE-DINE, &amp; plerisque Epigramatum.
               OVIDIUS (ut erat Aulici Ingenii Homo) terso quidem &amp; polito Carmi-ne res exhibuit amatorias, in caeteris ta-men Operibus istiusmodi occurrit Sermo, quali in Triviis uti solent: Ille enim In-genio 
he expatiates upon his Subjects beyond all Decency, and frequently gives us the same Thoughts, diversified only in Expression. CLAUDIAN well knew what a Master he was in this Art, for on whatsoever Topick he is engaged, he diligently searches out Matter for De-scription, nay most of the Subjects he has wrote upon, are wholly such, as may be seen in his Prefaces, his E-clogues, his Books of the Rape of PRO-SERPINE, his Phoenix, his Porcupine, his Cramp-fish, and most of his EPI-GRAMS.
               OVID (like a true Courtier as he was) describes the Affairs of Love in neat and polite Verse. In the rest of his Works we meet with the more vulgar Way of Expression; for trust-ing 
suo confisus de operosiori Dicti-one elaborandâ parum erat satis solici-tus: In Libro tamen Metamorphose
                     •
                  s varias optime depinxit Animalium Mu-tationes, dum prior paulatim exuitur Forma &amp; nova superinducitur.
               Utrumque hoc, quod jam tractamus, Poetis Officium non rarò optimè prae-stitit PAPINIUS; LUCANUS neutrum, cujus Dictio, quanquam multùm sonat inflata, nullâ tamen Phraseorum aut Epithetorum Venustate animatur, sed Orationi magis solutae convenit, quam Poeticae; imo certe tali plerumque utitur Verborum delectû, qualem vel Liber dedignetur Sermo. Et quanquam in Descriptionibus saepissimè versatur, &amp; in hujusmodi diverticula nunquam non 
to a good Genius, he was little so-li
                     •
                  itous about forming a more elaborate Stile: but yet, in his Metamorphoses, he has Painted, in the greatest Perfection, the various Changes of all Creatures, and the Transformations proceed in a most easy and gradual manner.
               STATIUS has frequently discharged both these Requisites of a Poet, we just now observed; LUCAN neither, whose Diction, altho' very bombast, is not enlivened either by beautiful Phrases or Epithets, but comes nearer Prose than Poetry; nay, there is in him common-ly such a mean Choice of Words, as is sometimes even beneath Profe itself: And although he abounds in Descripti-ons, and is always making Excursions of that Kind, yet he seldom finishes his 
excurrit, raro tamen, ut debet, Opus absolvit. Jam vero, quod ad STATIUM attinet, plurima certe composuit sum-mis Poetarum invidenda, sed, inter magnas Virtutes, maxima occurrunt Vi-tia. In Dictione enim Verba nimis ad-mittit sesquipedalia, nullâque de Argu-mento habitâ ratione, vana numeris mi-scet Tonitrua; Nec minus in Descrip-tionibus peccat; nimio enim calori in-dulgens, dum totis viribus excellere co-natur, ultra Finem tendit opus, &amp; in tumorem excrescit. In utrumque hu-jusmodi vitium aliquando incidit CLAU-DIANUS. Jam vero, quoniam de VIR-GILII Aeneidis Argumento varii mul-ta scripserunt &amp; praeclara, pauca solum-modo de STATII &amp; LUCANI Car-minibus sunt advertenda; utpote, quae Latinorum omnium sola Epica haberi 
Work as he ought, or brings his Thoughts to any Justness of Conclusion.
               But now, as to STATIUS, he has given us Compositions worthy of the Envy of the best Poets. But with all his Beauties, he has greater Faults; for, in his Expression, he makes too much use of Gigantick Words; and, not con-sidering his Subject, mingles useless Thunder in his Numbers; Nor is he less faulty in his Descriptions; for, en-couraging too great a Heat, while he attempts to excel, he shoots beyond his Mark, and swells unnaturally. Of both which Extreams CLAUDIAN is too often guilty.
               And now, since there have been ma-ny Pieces written, and those of Note, 
debent. De LuCANO id saepe in Disputationem venit, an Historia, quâ constat Pharsalicum Poema, idoneum sit Heroici Carminis Argumentum.
               Vora ideo Heroicae Poese
                     •
                  s Natura inquirenda est, quam, apud Librum, de Dignitate &amp; Augmentis Scientiarum, his Verbis, optime exhibuit VERULA-MIUS Nostras.
               
                  "De Poesi Narrativâ, sive eam Heroicam appellare placet (modo hoc intelligas de Materiâ, non de Ver-su) ea a Fundame nto prorsus nobili excitata videtur, quod ad dignitatem humanae Naturae imprimis spectat. Cum enim Mundus sensibilis sit, Ani-mâ rationali, dignitate, inferior, vide-tur 
on the Subject of VIRGIL's Aeneis, (and less notice is taken of the Poetry of STATIUS and LUCAN) to whose Productions only the Latins allow the Title of Epick Poetry. As to LUCAN, it has been often disputed, whether Hi-story, of which the Pharsalia consists, be a proper Subject for an Heroick Po-em. For the Decision of this Point, we must enquire into the true Nature of Heroick Poetry, which our Country-man, the Lord BACON, has admira-bly described in his Treatise of The Ad-vancement of Learning. 
                  "—[As for Narrative Poesie, or, if you please, Heroical, (so you understand it of the Matter, not of the Verse) it seems to be raised altogether from a noble Foundation, which makes much for the Dignity of Man's Na-ture. 
Poesis haec humanae Naturae lar-giri, quae Historia denegat; atque Animo, umbris rerum, utcunque satis-facere, cum solida haberi non possint. Si quis enim Rem acutius introspiciat, firmum ex Poesi sumitur argumen-tum, Magnitudinem Rerum magis illustrem, Ordinem magis perfectum, &amp; Varietatem magis pulchram, Ani-mae humanae complacere, quam, in Naturâ ipsâ, post Lapsum, reperire ullo modo possit. Quapropter, cum Res geftae, &amp; Eventus, qui verae Historiae subjiciuntur, non sint ejus Amplitu-dinis, in quâ Anima humana sibi sa-tisfaciat, praesto est Poesis, quae Facta magis Heroica confingat: Cum Hi-storia vera, successus rerum, minime pro meritis Virtutum &amp; Scelerum, narret; corrigit eam Poesis, &amp; exi-tus, 

            Nomina AUTHORUM.
            
               I. VIRGILIUS.
               II. Lucretius.
               III. Ovidius.
               IV. Statius.
               V. Lucanus.
               VI. Claudianus.
               VII. Horatius.
               VIII. Juvenalis.
               IX. Plautus.
               X. Terentius.
               XI. Seneca.
               XII. Martialis.
               XIII. Catullus.
               XIV. Tibullus.
               XV. Propertius.
            
         
      
      
         
            
For, seeing this sensible World is, in Dignity, inferior to the Soul of Man, Poesie seems to endow human Nature with that which History de-nies; and to give Satisfaction to the Mind, with, at least, the Shadow of Things, where the Substance cannot be had. For, if the Matter be thorough-ly considered, a strong Argument may be drawn from Poesie, that a more stately greatness of Things, a more perfect Order, and a more beautiful Variety delights the Soul of Man, than any Way can be found in Nature since the Fall. Wherefore, seeing the Acts and Events, which are the Subject of true History, are not of that Amplitude, as to content the Mind of Man, Poesie is ready at Hand to feign Acts more Heroical: 
                     
&amp; fortunas, secundum merita, &amp; ex lege Nemeseos, exhibet: Cum Histo-ria vera, obviâ rerum satietate &amp; simi-litudine, animae humanae fastidio sit; reficit eam Poesis inexpectata &amp; va-ria, &amp; vicissitudinum plena canens. Adeo ut Poesis ista, non solum ad de-lectationem, sed etiam ad Animi magnitudinem, &amp; ad Mores conferat. Quare &amp; meritò etiam Divinitatis cu-juspiam particeps videri possit; quia animum erigit, &amp; in sublime rapit: rerum simulachra ad animi desideria accommodando, non animum rebus (quod ratio facit &amp; Historia) submit-tendo." Ex quo satis patet, veram Historiam cum Epico Poemate male convenire; &amp; proinde, LUCANUM, quoad Argumentum, maxime desecisse. Quinque, in
                     •
                  illius Poemate, maxime emi-cant 
Because True History reports the Suc-cesses of Business not proportionable to the Merit of Virtues and Vices, Poesie corrects it, and presents Events and Fortunes according to Desert, and according to the Law of Provi-dence: Because True History, thro' the frequent Satiety and Simili-tude of Things, works a Distaste and Misprision in the Mind of Man; Po-esie cheereth and refresheth the Soul, chaunting Things rare, and various, and full of Vicissitudes. So as Poesie serveth and conferreth to Delectation, Magnanimity, and Morality; and therefore it may seem deservedly to have some Participation of Divine-ness, because it accommodates its Images and Descriptions to the ut-most Desire and Wish of the Soul, 
Heroes, CAESAR, POMPEIUS, BRUTUS, CATO, &amp; CICERO. Omnes sane tam Vitâ insignes, quam Morte luctuosi; quorum Virtutes (quan-tum licuit per humanam Naturam) Perfectioni isti Heroicae, quam reliqui Poetae Ducibus suis falsò tribuerunt, proxime accesserant. LUCANUS CAE-SARI undique oblatrat, POMPEII Partes ambitiosè fovet, sed BRUTI &amp; CATONIS Encomia, ob Stoicum (credo) illud Ingenium, quod cum his habuit commune, maxime celebrat: Et plurima certe, quae LUCANO ob-jicias, Philosophiae hujuscemodi sunt re-ferenda. Inde immodicus iste Ingenii tumor, &amp; ambitiosa Sententiarum osten-tatio, quam, cum illâ Hominum turbâ semper habet in Deliciis; inde quae magna sunt, quam quae bona sunt, ma-luit 
not subjecting the Mind to Things or Facts, as Reason and History do."] From whence it is sufficiently manifest, that History and Epick Poetry are by no means proper Companions; and there-fore, that LUCAN has very much failed in his principal Subject: The five Heroes, who make the greatest Figure in his Poem, are CAESAR, POMPEY, BRUTUS, CATO, and CICERO; each of them indeed as distinguishable in their Lives, as to be lamented in their Deaths; Men, whose Virtues, allowing for the Frailties of Human Nature, came nearest to that Pitch of Heroick Perfection, which other Poets have falsely attributed to their Heroes. LUCAN every where snarls at CAE-SAR, and passionately espouses POM-PEY's Interest; but most of all, cele-brates 
praeferre. Hinc etiam, in eximiâ illâ Poese
                     •
                  s Virtute, Passionibus excitan-dis, ipse (qui omnes Philosophiae Affe-ctus tanquam illicitos existimavit) malè successerat, cujus Vitii unicum tantum (ut taceam caetera) Argu-mentum proferam. Postquam in Pug-nâ Pharsalicâ CAESAR de POMPEIO Victoriam reportaverit, LUCANUS maximè debuit, si aliquid ab ipsâ Hi-storiâ alienum protulisset, lugubri quo-dam Carmine immeritam doluisse POMPEII sortem, quippe quem, in toto Opere, summo habuit honore; vel sal-tem ipsum POMPEIUM (ut ingens patuit Doloris Argumentum) aut de amissâ Romae Libertate, aut de A-micorum Mortibus, aut de propriis querentem Infortunns, introduxisse o-portuit. Poeta tamen ab omni hujus-modi 
the Characters of BRUTUS and CATO, for that Spirit of Stoicism, which he had equally imbibed with them: And, indeed, most of the Faults objected to LUCAN, are rather to be imputed to this Kind of Philosophy. From whence sprung that boundless Vein of Wit, and that peculiar Affecta-tion of a lofty Style; which, like that Sect of Men, he always delighted in, and therefore gives the Preference ra-ther to Great, than Good Actions. And upon this Account, in raising the Passi-ons, (that most excellent Part of Poe-try) he succeeded but ill; because, up-on the Principles of his Philosophy, the Passions themselves were accounted as absolutely unlawful. To confirm this, (passing by many others) I will pro-duce but one Instance: After CAESAR 
Dolore tam longè a best, ut POMPEIUM obnixè hortaretur, post-quam victus a Bello decesserat, ut CAE-SARIS Victoris sui commiserescat, quia nempè CAESAR non sine Scelere Victoriâ potitus est;
                     
had obtained the Victory over POM-FEY, in the Battle of Pharsalia, LU-CAN certainly, (if he had enlarged on any Circumstance foreign to History it self) should, upon so remarkable an Occasion, have lamented the undeserved Fate of POMPEY, in the most mournful Strain; especially since he pays so high a Deference to him throughout his whole Work; or, at least, (as there was an open Field for Grief) he should have introduced POMPEY, either complaining of Rome's lost Liberty, the Death of his Friends, or his own Mis-fortunes. But LUCAN is so far from raising the Passions to this just Heighth, that he warmly advises POMPEY (when vanquished, he retires from the Field of Action) to commiserate the Condition of his Conqueror CAESAR, 

                     Nonne juvat pulsum bellis cessisse, nec istud
                     Prospexisse (nefas!) spumantes caede catervas?
                     Respice turbatos in cursu sanguinis amnes,
                     Et Soceri miserere tui; Quo pectore Romam
                     Intrabit factus campis felicior istis?
                  
               
               
                  

            
               DISSERTATIO DE INSIGNIORIBUS ROMANORUM POETIS.
               
                  OMNIUM, in re Poeticâ, maxime inclaruerunt Ro-mani, &amp; Romanorum VIRGILIUS: Optimae quaeque Regulae, huic Arti inservientes, non tam Criticorum Praeceptis, quam MARONIS exem-plo, sunt depromendae. Ut ideo de re-liquis 
because he had not won the Day, but by unjustifiable Methods.
                     Don't you rejoice that your superiour Foes
                     Have snatch'd you from a Scene of future Woes?
                     That blest in Exile you escape the Sight
                     Of Armies bleeding in domestick Fight?
                     Behold each River drags her tardy Flood,
                     Choak'd up with Carnage and distain'd with Blood;
                     Your Victor-Sire with pitying Eyes survey,
                     Nor envy him the Fortune of the Day.
                     How shall he enter Rome devoid of Shame,
                     Who on the publick Ruins builds his Name?
                  
               
               
                  
Quis tulerit Poetam tam ridiculè phi-losophantem? quasi vero POMPEIUS Senex, Exul, Miser, Triumphatus, ob Victorem suum quamvis scelestum Commiserationem quandam conciperet: Illum quidem maximè Stoicè sapuisse oportuerat, qui omnibus hisce Fortunae Donis spoliatus, tantum in nudâ Virtu-te poneret Felicitatem. Sed nullus Po-etarum, nisi VIRGILIUS, hujusmo-di afficiat Dolore: Alii plerunque, dum moerorem aliquem Lectoribus induce-rent, in illo peccant, quod nimiâ Pro-lixitate sese in questus effundant, nec un-quam satis Lachrymarum exhaustum esse sentiant, vel Ingenium, quod max-imè possint, Versibus infundendo, faci-unt, ut magis Carmina miremur, quam materiam lugeamus. De utro-que cavit VIRGILIUS, qui merâ 
Who can bear to hear the Poet Phi-losophizing in this ridiculous Manner? As if POMPEY, a Man in Years, an Exile, Miserable, and Vanquished, should have any Concern upon him for the Crimes of his Conqueror: He ought to have been very much stoicized indeed, who, despoiled of all the Goods of Fortune, could place the Sum of his Felicity in meer naked Virtue. But none of the Poets have touched this Passion of Grief like VIRGIL. The Generality of other Writers, when they attempt to move their Readers, offend in this Point, that they are too prolix in spinning out their Complaints, and think their Flood of Tears inex-haustible; or else, while they labour to express the Greatness of their Geni-us, in the Profuseness of their Verse, ra-ther 
semper Simplicitate luctuosa, ut in se sunt, exhibuit; &amp; levitèr quicquid dolet perstrinxerat: "Lamentationes enim, inquit CICERO, debent esse breves &amp; concisae, quia Lachryma subito exarescit, &amp; difficile est, Au-ditorem aut Lectorem, in summo illo animi animi affectu, tenere." Ut vero ad STATIUM redeamus, illi qui-dem Spiritus non rarò feliciter assurgit, cui dum temperare nequit, nescio quas projicit Ampullas, &amp; vana Carminibus addit Numerorum Terricula menta. THEBAIDIS quidem Argumentum Ingenii sui Truculentiae, sed non Hero-ico Poemati satis aptum videatur: ETEOCLES enim, POLYNICES, &amp; TYDEUS, quorum gesta hoc Car-mine celebrantur, nihil habent eorum, si unicam Fortitudinem demas, quae 
raise our Admiration at the Flow-ing of their Numbers, than excite our Pity in the Catastrophe of their Story. VIRGIL has carefully avoided both these Extreams, and dresses his Images of Sorrow in their Native Simplicity; and where-ever he touches upon the Pathetick, he does it with a masterly quickness: For, according to CI-CERO, Our expressions of Grief ought to be short and concise, because our Tears quickly dry up, and it is unnatural to detain either an Auditor or Reader in too long a Suspension of Grief.
               
               But to return to STATIUS, his Spirit is indeed lofty and aspiring, to which while he gives too great a Loose, he runs into Bombast, and to his Poetry often adds useless sounding Words. The Subject of his Thebais 
                  
conveniunt Heroibus: Imo, in toto Poemate, nulla nisi Scelerum, qualia sunt Parricidii, Perfidiae, Immanitatis, Odiorum, proferuntur Exemplaria; dum in omnibus ferè, quos suo Car-mine induxit VIRGILIUS, praecla-ra
                     •
                   quaedam illucescunt, &amp; in ipso AE-NEA summam Pietatem erga Deos, Natum, Conjugem, Amicos, &amp; Paren-tem, Oculis semper habemus subjectam. Epitheta plerunque STATIANA multum sonant metaphoricè, dum in-animatis illa tribuuntur, quae Anima-libus conveniunt. In Verbis tamen, nec rarò sinè maximâ Elegantiâ, Meta-phoras consectatur CLAUDIANUS; VIRGILIUS in utrisque parcissimus; STATIUS plurimas rerum similitudi-nes composuit, multum saepè de VIR-GILII Ingenio referentes, in quâ arte 
seems indeed suited to the Barbarity of his Genius, but is beneath the Dignity of an Heroick Poem. For neither E-TEOCLES, POLYNICES, nor TYDEUS, whose Actions are record-ed in this Poem, have any thing in them, except their Fortitude, agreeable to Heroes: Nay, throughout the whole Piece, there are no Examples produc'd, unless of Persons infamous for the most flagitious Enormities, such as Parricide, Treachery, Cruelty, and Revenge; while, on the contrary, every Thing Praise-worthy shines bright in VIR-GIL's Heroes; and in the Person of AENEAS we have plac'd before our Eyes an Instance of consummate Piety towards the GOD's, his Son, his Wife, his Friends, and his Father. The Epi-thets of STATIUS are generally 
meliùs successerat LUCANUS, si aliquid unquam mediocre admiserat; sed dum VIRGILIUS ad Apes, ad Formicas, &amp; istiusmodi Naturae ludicra descendit, nihil unquam nisi Quercum fulminatam, Terrae Exitium, aut Mundi Confla-grationem ebuccinat LUCANUS. Et hisce tandem, quorum alii non operae Pretium duxerunt meminisse, de He-roicis Scriptoribus brevitèr perstrictis. De Satyricis restat dicendum; quorum omnium JUVENALIS &amp; HORA-TIUS Palmam dubiam quidem fecerunt: Inter Literatos enim multum discrepat, utrum mordax illa Ingenii acerbitas, quâ suam armavit paginam JUVE-NALIS, an potius HORATII festi-vae Irrisiones, magis Satyrae conveni-ant: Ut vero de utroque rectiùs, sta-tuatur, pauca prius sunt advertenda. 
forced and very metaphorical, while such Properties are ascribed to Inani-mates, as really only belong to Animals. In the Choice of his Words, and fre-quently in his Metaphors, he is fol-lowed by CLAUDIAN with the utmost Elegance. VIRGIL is sparing in both these Particulars; STATIUS abounds much with Similitudes, in which he seems to imitate VIRGIL; but in this Instance LUCAN had had better Suc-cess, if he had hit upon the proper Me-dium: But while VIRGIL stoops down to the humble Subjects of Bees, Ants, and other such like delightful Themes of Nature; on the other Hand, LUCAN bellows out nothing but Stories of Oaks split by Lightening, Earthquakes, and the World's Confla-gration. Let this, in short, suffice, 
Ob infamem vitae suae lasciviam, etiam nunc temporis, malè audit HORA-TIUS; Virtutem tamen semper rigide coluit JUVENALIS: Ille in absolutissi-mâ AUGUSTI Aulâ versatus est, hic in pessima DOMITIANI Tempora incidisset: Proinde, ut ad sua &amp; Saeculi utriusque Ingenia Opera accommoda-rent Poetae, HORATIUS totus in ludi-cro exercetur Argumento, nec Morum Licentiam, sed indecoras quasdam Au-licorum Ineptias plerunque insectatur; non ideò abfuisset quin irrideretur, si, aliquâ Styli severitate, ad leviuscula hujusmodi castiganda, se accinxisset: Gravissima tamen in Temporibus suis reprehendit JUVENALIS, &amp; de Vitiis ubique queritur, quae vel pudeat reci-tare, &amp; isti sanè Materiae, summa 

               A DISSERTATION Upon the most Celebrated Roman POETS.
               
               
                  OF all the Nations in the World, the Romans have most excelled in the Art of Poetry, and even, a-mong the Romans, VIR-GIL has been the most deservedly cele-brated; from whom the justest Rules of this Art are rather to be taken, than from the dry Precepts of the Criticks. To the End, therefore, that we may the more truly ascertain the Beauties, and Faults, which occur among the rest of the Writers of Heroic Poetry, let us 
observable, concerning the Writers of Heroic Poetry, in itself New, and never before taken Notice of.
               Something now remains to be said of the Satyrists, among whom whe-ther JUVENAL or HORACE have most Right to the Bays, it is dfficult to determine; for it has been long a Dispute among the Learned, whether that Keenness and Bitterness of Expres-sion with which JUVENAL has armed his Satires, or HORACE's more jocose Lampoons are most agreeable to the End of SATIRE. Now that we may give a clearer Decision on this Head, a few Things must be premised. HO-RACE bears, to this Day, an ill Cha-racter for the Looseness of his Con-duct in Life. JUVENAL was a rigid 
Mentis Indignatio, Orationis Ardor, &amp; Ingenii Acrimonia, rectissime aptari videantur. Quamvis ubi ad Jocularia Animum demittit, non rarò Satyris Festivitatem fundit HORATIANAM. Uterque ideo (modo diversum consu-las Argumentum) suo quidem Genere perfectissimus emicuit; in illo Ridicu-lum Acri melius, in hoc Acre Ridiculo.
               
                  
Practiser of Virtue. The one was con-versant in the most perfectly polite Court of AUGUSTUS; the other lived in the Dregs of DOMITIAN's Time; and therefore both these Poets accom-modated their Writings to the Manners of the different Ages they lived in: For HORACE is intirely upon the ludicrous, and persues not so much the Licentious-ness of the Times, as the ridiculous Fopperies of some particular Cour-tiers; for had he attempted to correct these Trifles with Severity, he had not missed of being laughed at: But JU-VENAL lashes the grossest Crimes prevalent in his Time, and complains of Enormities which one would be ashamed to mention; and nothing less than the highest Resentmemt of Soul, Ardency of Expression, and Sharpness 
Reliqua certe HORATII Opera, Ad-miratione potius sunt digna quam En-comiis, nec majora solum Vituperatione, sed etiam Laude.
               Jam vero, quod ad Dramaticos atti-net, PLAUTI &amp; TERENTII Argu-menta, Sales, Elegantiae ubique adeò vulgantur, ut nihil de novo possit adjici.
               
                  
of Speech, could be an equal Match to Crimes so notorious; though whenever he descends to be jocose, we frequently meet with the Pleasantry of HO-RACE. Both of them, allowing for the different Manner of their Writing, are perfect Masters in their several Ways; in the one, the Ridicule appears better than the Severe, in the other, the Severe better than the Ridicule.
               
               The rest of HORACE's Pieces are so admirable, that they exceed our high-est Encomiums, and are not only beyond our Dislike, but above our Praise.
               As to what concerns the Dramatic Poets, PLAUTUS and TERENCE bear away the Bell, whose Plots, Turns, and Elegancy of Style, are so well known, that nothing New can be said upon them.
               
                  
De SENECA vero tam diverse sen-tiunt, ut alii inter summos Tragicorum, alii infra Infimum annumerent: Illi quidem Ingenium valde magnum, Ora-tio elegans &amp; concisa, abundat Senten-tiis plerunque acutis, Stoicam semper Philosophiam, quam amplexus est, re-dolentibus. Unde omnibus fere, qui Artem Dramaticam parum sapiunt, semper est in Deliciis; si tamen ad hanc respicias, Tragoediae ubique plurimum laborant, &amp; istud vitii (ut reliqua prae-termittam) SENECAE peculiare vide-atur, ut quoscunque inducat Interlocu-tores, nullâ, ad Personas quas sustinet, habitâ ratione, eundem semper unicui-que tribuat loquendi modum: Omnes severiora spirant Philosophiae Dogmata, &amp; quae Stoae magis conveniant, quam 
As ro SENECA, Mankind have had different Opinions of him; some have ranked him with the best Tragoe-dians, others have sunk him below the worst. He certainly had a great Ge-nius, an elegant and concise Way of Expression; he abounds with smart Turns, which always savour much of that Stoicism of which he was a Fol-lower, upon which Account he has al-ways been esteemed by those who have had little or no Taste of Dramatic Poetry; but then if we consider him as such, his Tragedies are throughout too elaborate; and this, to pass by his other Faults, seems peculiarly SENECA's, that he makes all his Actors (without any Regard to the Characters they bear) talk in the same Strain; all of 
Theatro. Eâdem semper Styli Magni-ficentiâ superbiunt Rex, &amp; Nuncius: Imo ipsam Nutricem (plurima enim tam acute profert) Stoicorum Praeceptis non mediocritèr imbutam sentias.
               Inter Epigrammatistas potissimùm emicuerunt MARTIALIS &amp; CLAUDI-ANUS; Ille semper, in extremo Poemate, Ingenii subjecit acumen, &amp; saepe similia insequitur Verborum Tintinnabula; Hic, per totum Epigramma, suum di-spergit Salem; &amp; venustissimâ ubique utitur Latinitatis Elegantiâ.
               
                  
them inculcate rigid philosophical Dog-mata, and such Morality as is rather fit for the Schools of the Stoicks, than the Roman Theatre: For with him the King and the Slave strut in the same Buskin; nay, you may perceive the Nurse herself deeply tinged with the Principles of Stoicism.
               Among the Epigrammatists, MAR-TIAL and CLAUDIAN have bore the greatest Reputaion; the first, for the severe Point in the Close of his Epi-grams, and the peculiar Jingle of his Words. The other, for dispersing the Poignancy of his Wit throughout his Epigrams, and that in the most beauti-ful Latin Phrase.
               
                  
Caeterum tamen Poetarum Vulgus, de istiusmodi mediocribus sunt, quos nec Dii nec Homines concesserunt; &amp; quam-vis una aut altera apud affectatas CA-TULLI Cantatiunculas, TIBULLI aut PROPERTII inhonestam pagi-nam, &amp; Carmina incuriosa, illucescat Virtus, non tamen est Operae Pretium Gemmas inter Stercora eruere.
            
            
               
Heroici Carminis Scriptoribus, recte statuamus Virtutes &amp; Vitia, quae apud singulos occurrunt, lectioni confe-ramus Virgilianae; qui, si ullibi defe-cerit Bucolicis, nonnunquam puriorem immiscuit Styli elegantiam, quam quae Pastoribus conveniat; &amp; saepe grandior sonat Carminum Majestas, quam quae tenui avenae consona videatur. Apud quemlibet Georgicorum librum, inimita-bili quâdam Sermonis Elegantiâ, Res rusticae explicantur; sed ultimus, de Apum Naturâ, valdè, praeter caeteros, ani-mum delectat; ubi, dum in tenui Ar-gumento procedit Poema, solennem quandam Sententiarum &amp; Verborum Pompam studiosè affectat Poeta. Apum ideo Opera Cyclopum assimulat Labori-bus, nec majori Carminum tumultu AENEAE &amp; TURNI recitat Certamina, 
The rest of the lower Class of the Latin Poets creep so low in their Numbers, that they are beneath the Notice either of GODS or Men: And tho' we may now and then discover in the affected Songs and Sonnets of CATULLUS, and the obscene POETRY of TIBULLUS and PROPERTIUS, some not disagree-able Pieces, yet it is not worth our while to rake the Dunghills for the sake of the JEWELS.
            
         
         
            

            
               TENTAMEN De POETIS Romanis ELEGIACIS.
               
                  SAepe Mecum ipse mira-ri soleo, Ex tot tantis-que viris in Antiquâ clas-sicorum Poetarum pagi-nâ Transferendâ, vel ope-rosè, vel commodè Jucundèque Versa-tis, tam paucos Extitisse, Qui Elegia-rum Scriptores, vel dignos operâ sua Ju-dicaverint, 

               AN ESSAY UPON THE Roman ELEGIAC POETS.
               
                  I Have often wondered, that, among so Many, who have Busied or Diverted Themselves in Transla-ting the Ancient Classick POETS, so Few have thought the Wri-ters of ELEGY Worthy their Pains, or Amusement. I cannot but Believe that, 
vel quidem suo otio dignos. Haud Ego quidem possum credere, quin Hi in propriâ scribendi Normâ perinde feliciter Successerint, atque alii; ac proinde cum non minori Emolumen-to, quam cum voluptate Legantur. Ad me quod Attinet, Affirmare possum, E-am fuisse semper animi temperationem mei, ut Eandem vel casui protervè for-tuito vel Difficultati rerum procaciter obliquae Stomachantem, Longe facilius Lenire me, atque mulcere potuisse Sen-serim, Dulcem optando Comitem Tibul-lum, quam vel Philosophorum Lectiones vel praecepta Theologorum Consulendo. Quicquid enim est solenne valde, id omne, aliquam, nescio quam, prohibito-riam Coactionis faciem, prae se ferre at-que ostentare videtur. Adeoque est paene semper inauspicata aut Discentis 
                  

                  These have succeeded as happily in their Way, as the Others, and that They may be Read with no less Advantage than Pleasure. For my own Part, I can affirm, that when at any time my Mind hath been ruffled by some peevish Accident or Disappointment, I have always found my temper sooner Com-posed by taking a Turn with TIBUL-LUS in my Hand, than by having re-course to the Lessons of PHILOSO-PHY, or the Precepts of DIVINES. Whatever is very solemn, carrieth with it, I don't know how, somewhat of Constraint: And it frequently happens by an unlucky Disposition either in the Pupil, or the Preacher, that Those se-verer Kinds of Discipline (I speak not This with the least Irreverence) serve rather to Punish, than Reform Us. It 
cujuslibet aut Docentis Indoles, Ut, Ex quovis severioris disciplinae Genere, no-strae potius poena voluntatis, quam men-tis Emendatio Nascatur. Verbis Enim ita strenue contendere, ut, munus esse rectae rationis, hoc vel illud agere, mens hominum convicta fateatur, non est res duri forsitan plena Negotii: At vero, ad illud idem munus obeundum, aliquem fortiter &amp; Suaviter Impellere, Hic est plane operosus flexanimae Orationis La-bor, Hoc summum Artis Misterium. Digna quidem Haec Horatii Sententia, quae altâ mente reposta maneat.
                     Virtus est Vitium fugere, &amp; sapientia prima
                     Stultitiâ Caruisse.
                   Annon Eodem prorsus Jure dicere pos-simus, E voluntariâ quadam Erum-narum 
is perhaps no Difficult Matter to Con-vince One of the Reasonableness of This or That Action, but the Secret lies in Engaging One in the Practice. It is a Memorable Sentence of a Celebra-ted MORALIST This,
                  
                     Virtus est vitium fugere, &amp; Sapientia prima
                     Stultitiâ caruisse.—Horat.
                     
                   
                  "It is the Beginning of VIRTUE to Depart from VICE; and the First Step towards WISDOM is to Forsake our FOLLY." May it not as justly be said, The First Step towards HAP-PINESS is to Forget our MISERY? The best Method to bring That about is not, I presume, by Alarming the THINK-ING FACULTY, but by Soothing and Lulling to Rest our too Active and Un-quiet REFLECTIONS.
               
                  
nostrarum Oblivione primum Surgere ad felicitatem gradum. Quem quidem Si assequi Optume Volumus, non debere nos cogitabundam nimis, sollicitamque illam, quae nobis est In-sita, particulam Exuscitare; tumultu-antes autem rerum ideas Mulcere, &amp; motos animi fluctus Componere, multo-magis opportere Confido.
               Donec Nostra hujusmodi Corpuscu-la, Misera illa quidem &amp; vacillantia na-vigiola, incertum hujus vitae cursum te-nent, &amp; in prope medium usque oceanum immani &amp; feroci ventorum vi pelluntur, Longe ab aspectu Littoris hospitibus Mansueti; Certo Certius est, Navi-gantes in illis animas Nostras, Gaudia permagna Intùs Oborientia Sentire, Quando ab Ingruenti extrinsecùs procellâ 
WHILST Our poor tottering BARK continues in This Uncertain Voyage of Life, and is so often kept out at Sea in rough and stormy Weather, far from the sight of any Hospitable Shoar, the SOUL, its PASSENGER, cannot sure but feel a mighty Satisfaction arising within, when she finds Herself afterwads Steal-ing, as it were, away under smoother Courses, and born gently down the Tide of TENDERNESS in soft and easie Gales of PASSION.
               THERE is a Charm in VERSE that never fails agreeably to Affect a Heart that is rightly plac'd: And there is, in my Opinion, something peculiarly mo-ving in the VERSES of That Good-natu-red Class of POETS CATULLUS, TI-BULLUS, PROPERTIUS, and OVID. 
                  
ipsae sese quasi furtim Retrahentes, &amp; Laevatius affectantes iter, Leniter natant voluptatis aquas, placidâque fruuntur passionis aurâ Secundo (ut ita dicam) teneritatis flumini Conjunctâ.
               Occulta quaedam Inest Carminibus Incantatio, quae nunquam non solet be-nè formatum pectus gratâ dulcedine af-ficere; atque Ego quidem Opinor, in Pro-bae illius atque Ingenuae Classis Poeta-rum, Catulli nempe, Tibulli, Proper-tii, &amp; Ovidii versibus, aliquid, nescio quid, singulare atque valde patheticum Existere. Certum Est, inter illa Ele-giaci ordinis carmina, Catulli perpauca esse aptè Judicatòque numeranda. At, quandocunque teneriora humanitatis argumenta tractat, Minervae suavem afflant odorem sententiae omnes, pro-prietatem 
compare them with the Style of VIR-GIL; who, if he be in any Thing de-ficient, it is, when he has sometimes in his Eclogues mingled such a Purity of Style, as is not entirely agreeable with the Dialect of Shepherds; and frequently the Dignity of his Verse seems no way consonant to the Rural Pipe. In every Book of his Georgicks, he treats of Coun-try Affairs with an inimitable Elegancy of Style; but, above all, we are most de-lighted with his last Book, Of the Nature of BEES; where, in a Poem on so incon-siderable a Subject, our Author purpose-ly affects a peculiarly solemn and pomp-ous Style. In this Piece he compares the Labours of the BEES to those of the Cyclops; and in the same lofty Numbers recounts the Skirmishes of these little Insects among themselves, as he does the 
There are but Few Pieces of CATUL-LUS, it is true, that can strictly be ranked among Those of the ELEGIAC ORDER: But whenever HE doth Touch upon the softer Subjects of HU-MANITY, his Sentiments have the ut-most Propriety and Delicacy; and therefore I could not but mention HIM among His Companions. They were, All Four, Men of Family and Conditi-on in their Country. Their Inclina-tions led Them naturally to PLEASURE, and Their Good Sense to a Discovery of the Knavery of BUSINESS, and the Va-nity of AMBITION. The Three Former may be said to have Been as Extraordi-nary a TRIUMVIRATE, as, perhaps, any Age hath Produced, I mean in an Idle Way of Life: Polite in their MAN-NERS; Easie in Their FORTUNES; Suc-cessful 
                  
prietatem vel accuratissimam sapiunt, Summamque redolent Elegantiae amae-nitatem. Ac proinde nihil aliud agere potui, quam ut Insigne ipsius nomen in sociorum eâdem studiorum ratione va-lentium numerum referrem. Eminebant Hi Quatuor, in Patriâ suâ, clari Natali-bus, &amp;, ut tum erant tempora, re plus-quam mediocri Fruebantur. Ad vo-luptatem traxit sua quemque Indoles; singuli vero, rectâ usi ratione, eò sapientiae processerunt, ut, &amp; publici pravitatem negotii, &amp; caducam prorsus Elati fastus incertique honoris Exploraverint in-anitatem. Tres Priores Jure merito dicantur Triumviratum perinde Illus-trem constituisse, atque ulla unquam protulit Aeta
                     •
                  ; Siquidem vivendi mo-dum splendidè otiosum spectemus. Per-politis ornati moribus, Rerum copia 
in Their AMOURS; Happy in each Other's ACQUAINTANCE; Belov-ed, in general, while they LIVED; and Universally Lamented, when They DIED. As for OVID, He was certain-ly Master of all the fine Qualities and Accomplishments that could be desired in a GENTLEMAN. But having Of-fended AUGUSTUS, either by Hap-pening to be an Unexpected Witness of that EMPEROR's Love-Intrigues, or else by too lasciviously Describing His Own (which was the Crime Preten-ded) He was Banished from ITALY in his Fiftieth Year; and Languished out the Remainder of His Days at TA-MOS (the Modern TEMESWAER as some think) There are I believe but two Instances in Story of a Punishment like This for What, at the worst, could 
affluentes, bene succedentes in amori-bus, summâ cum familiaritate sibi In-vicem beatè conjuncti, Quamdiu vixe-runt, tamdiu usque viguere humani Ge-neris deliciae; &amp; tandem cum a vivo-rum regionibus discesserunt, eas utique omnes discessum Lugentes Relique-re. Quantum ad Ovidium attinet, erat ille quidem omnibus illis Apprimè or-natus &amp; morum &amp; ingenii dotibus, quae ad absolutè fingendum hominem planè generosum conducere posse vi-deantur. Quippe Iratus illi August-us, vel quod Insperatò istius imperato-ris occultae Lasciviae testis aderat fortui-tus, vel quod proprios a mores (utilli spe-ciosè vertebatur Crimini) impudicè ni-mis describebat, Eundem Annum haben-tem Quinquagesimum Ex Italia in Exi-lium mittebat. Exul reliquum miseriae 
be called only an Indiscretion: One in the Person of OVID, The Other in That of RABUTIN. Their Masters were equally Absolute, equally Wise, and equally Jealous.
               
               
                  
vitae tempus Languidè valdè consumens inter sauromatas in Civitate (cui nomen recens Temeswaer, uti putant Nonnulli) Extremum obiit Diem. Hujusmodi Suppliciorum Exempla non nisi Bina in omnibus Historiarum Monumentis Es-se credo reperienda, ubi, quod est puni-tum (si malum quam durissimè ap-pellemus) illud inconsideratè solum-modo atque temerè factum vocare pos-sumus; Alterum Ovidii Personae sorte Contigit, Rabutini alterum. Horum quidem Principes, pari certè, illoque su-premo dominandi Jure Gaudebant, Sa-pientiâ fruebantur Pari, paribus Suspi-cionibus angebantur.
               Haec Geniorum, quibus Hi Erant praediti, perexigua sanè delineatio, Nos abundè doceat rectè Judicare, quantum 
FROM this Little Draught of Their Characters, One may judge how Edi-fying any of Their Compositions must needs be to an Elegant Understand-ing. 
                  
Scientiae lumen, quamque dulce &amp; E-legans Emolumentum, Compositissima quaeque Horum Poetarum themata, men-tibus afferant benè atque nitidè prepa-ratis. Ac Revera, Quam in amicitia fidem inviolatam, Quos teneros in amo-re Impulsus, Quam in propinquos Be-nevolentiam assiduam, Quae tandem omnium virtutum Moralium Monu-menta intuemur? Quae videmus Exem-plaria? Quae, quaeso Utique, non vi-demus? Ut mille Ingenii ornamenta Omittam, ut praeteream miram illam Dulcedinem &amp; felices musicae numeros poeticae tenerè Cadentes, Ut taceam denique Genuinas illas &amp; quasi Iam-modo Spirantes vitae Imagines, quae quidem Efficiunt, ut vix, primâ facie, opinemur, Scenam Earandem in saeculo perinde remoto fuisse repraesentatam, at-que 
And, indeed, What Sincerity in FRIENDSHIP, What Fondness in LOVE, What Kindness to RELATIONS, What Instances of all the Social VIRTUES do We not meet with in Their Writings? Not to mention a thousand Ornaments of Wit, a wonderful Sweetness, and easy Cadence in their Numbers, and so True a Picture of Life, that one can scarce Fancy the Scene to lye at the Distance it is placed.
               
                  
nobiscum magis ipsi cogitantes re-vera sentimus.
               Una Porro objectio non est silentio praetereunda: Quippe Crimini in univer-so paenè orbe Christiano Ducitur Hisce Poetis, nimiam in inhonestis rerum ideis Excogitandis Licentiam, nimiam-que in eisdem exprimendis obscenita-tem Affectasse.
               Sed tamen est certum quid re-spondeam. Siquando, parva Blan-ditiarum suarum quasi stratagemata Explicantes, tali verborum usi sint de-lectu, qualem Religiosa dedignaretur morum simplicitas, ortam indé ta-men vitiosam oblectationem omnem, non singulari cuidam turpitudini ab his unicè affectatae, sed Communi potissi-mum 
quam hasce Insectorum Turmas inter sese depraeliantes. Ubique exiguae Rei-publicae Duces, Populi, Studia, Mores, &amp; tenue illud Imperium, quod intra Al-vearii Angustias exercetur, venustâ, ne-scio quâ, Carminis Magnificentiâ expri-muntur: Quin hoc certe in toto Opere praecipue occurrit admirandum, quo-modo, dum Plantationis, Pastionis, &amp; Agriculturae curas exequitur Poeta, omissis usitatioribus loquendi formulis, materiae tam incultae locutionem Poeti-cam accommodaret; quomodo ignobi-liori depressus Argumento nunquam ad Stylum Plebeium Orationem demiserat: Sed tanta undique apparet Locutionum vis, ut multi (quamvis temerè) Geor-gicos etiam Aeneidi praetulisse non dubi-tarint; sed in hoc Opere, per Argumen-tum, non licuit alias Poese
                     •
                  s Partes 
THERE is One Objection, which I must not pass over, and that is general-ly charged upon These POETS: Imean, Their too great License, and Obsceni-ty in Their Ideas and Language,
               
               To This I would Reply, That if upon some Occasions, They seem not to have been very Scrupulous about the Terms They made use of in Communicating their Amorous Adventers, it ought not to be imputed to a Scandalous Sin-gularity in THEM, but to the Common 
                  
atque Effrenatae illius, in quâ viguere, aetatis Licentiae attribuere nos debere contendo. Siquidem ejusdem reum criminis Agimus Horatium; Ha-bere certe debemus confitentem re-um. Porro autem ipse Virgilius, cu-jus ad Coelos usque tollitur Modestia, Multa in Bucolicis scripsit, quae, apud nos, Lasciva atque ab honestate remota ponuntur. Ne plura, totum argumen-tum Haec Unica Consideratio Determi-nat. Qui animum bonis &amp; Intaminatis vitae Institutis retinet Imbutum, ille cum hisce Authoribus versari facillimè potest, Omnis Expers periculi contagi-onis. Atque Quantum ad eos spectat, Quorum Improbitas superat Ingenium (Execrabilius autem accidere fatuo nihil potest) illi Proprii &amp; insensati quidem vitii tempestate abrepti, aras 

                  Indulgence of the AGE in which They Flourished. HORACE must Plead Guilty to the same Indictment. Nay, VIRGIL Himself, as Applauded as HE is for Modesty, hath left many Ex-pressions in his ECLOGUES that might be Argued of Wantonness. Af-ter All, the whole Matter will turn upon this Single Point. A Person whose Principles are Uncorrupted may freely Converse with These AUTHORS without Danger of Infection: And for Such who have more Wickedness than Wit (the greatest Curse that can befal a FOOL) their sensless Vice will tempt Them to Pervert even the most Sacred Things to the vilest Purposes. How-ever, though All their POEMS may be Read in the Originals with Safety, I do not pretend to say They can All 
                  
focosque &amp; res omnes quam maxumè sacras, Nequissimi cujusque facinoris perpetrandi gratâi, prosternent. At, Quandoquidem Omnia horum poeta-rum Carmina, uti erant primitùs &amp; Latinè scripta, tute &amp; sine labe Legi queant; singula tamen, salvâ morum pietate, anglicè reddi posse, Minimè Contendo. Sed, quum multa possint; Dolendum videtur, Linguam Anglica-nam non perfrui pluribus, quippe quae Ditiorem redderent Sermonem nostrum, atque pleniorem Dulcium varietate Imaginum, quae aequè sunt innocuae, atque sunt suaves.
               Qui vero hujusce operis provinciam in se Susceperint, illi profecto desuda-bunt, Cum novos passim invenient Labores Ex crebris clausulis ad ritua-lem 
be Translated with Decency. But since Many of Them may, it is Pity, I think, We have not More of Them in ENGLISH, to Enrich our Language with a Variety of Pleasing Images that are as Innocent, as they are De-lightful.
               
               THERE is One Difficulty that will still lye upon the Hands of Any who shall Undertake this Work, and This ariseth from their frequent Allusions to the Ceremonies ând Notions of Their RELIGION. Instances of This abound even in Those Copies of their Verses that are writ the most in the Spirit of LEWDNESS: (As SUEPRSTITION hath ever been an Especial Bawd to LUST) But for All such as are Proper to be Translated, they may be Rendered by 
Religionis cultum &amp; superstitiosa quaelibet Dogmata altè respicientibus Oriundos. Hisce Exemplis abundant Ea Carmina, in quibus Reperitur maxi-ma vis Libidinis: Nempe Lasciviae Len-ocinari Superstitio Jugitèr solet. Quan-tum autem ad illa attinet, quae non inde-cora Tralatione digna sunt, Eaquidem Omnia, paucis illustrata Commentariis, non solum Erunt Intellectu facilia, ve-rum Etiam Lectoribus merè Anglica-nis magnam afferent Voluptatem.
            
            
               
a few Explanatory Notes not only In-telligible, but very Entertaining, to a mere ENGLISH Reader.
               
            
         
         FINIS.
      
   

Rencounters of AENEAS and TURNUS. All along, the Generals of this small Republick, the Populace, the Factions, the Customs and Forms of Government exercised within the narrow Limits of the Bee-hive, are described with an in-expressible Beauty and Magnificence. Throughout the whole Work, what mostly raises our Admiration, is, that in the Persuit of his Discourse on Plant-ing, Grazing, and Agriculture, (wa-ving the common Forms of Speech) he suits his Poetick Diction to so unpolite a Theme; how, seemingly depressed with the Meanness of his Subject, he never sinks into a Plebeian Style; but the Force and Energy of his Expression are so conspicuous, that many, too rashly indeed, have not scrupled to pre-fer the Georgicks to the Aeneid: But in 
praeftitisse, quam Styli &amp; Descriptionum Elegantiam. Quod ad utrumque atti-net, illud sibi proprium semper vendi-cat MARONIS Pagina, ut, quicquid exprimat, mirâ quâdam Dulcedine ani-mum ingrediatur, &amp; quod describat, melius quam si Oculis subjiciatur, tan-quam praesens intueamur.
               In Styli puritate proxime accedit LUCRETIUS, cujus Dictio, si obso-letae aliquando Verborum Antiquitati, &amp; Numeris pene solutis agnoscas, illo-rum Palato, qui Romanè sapiunt, persua-vis videatur. In Descriptionibus tamen CLAUDIANO secundus debetur Ho-nos, qui amoenas Rerum Imagines ubi-que venustissimâ contexuit Oratione, in hoc solummodo vitiosus, quod fusius, quam par eft, semper expatietur, eos-demque 
