Law is a bottomles-pit: Exemplified in the case of the Lord strutt, John Bull, Nicholas Frog, and Lewis Baboon. Who spent all they had in a law-suit. Printed from a manuscript found in the cabinet of the famous sir Humphry Polesworth.


LAW Is A Bottomles-Pit. Exemplified in the CAsE of The Lord strutt, John Bull, Nicholas Frog, and Lewis Baboon. Who spent all they had in a Law-suit. rinted from a Manuscript found in the Cabinet of the famous sir Humphry Polesworth.

LONDON: Printed for John Morphew, near stationer's-Hall. 1712. (Price 2d.)
The Contents.


    CHAP. I. THE Occasion of the Law-suit.
    Chap. II. How Bull and Frog grew jealous that the Lord struit intended to give all his C  stom to his Grandfather Lewis Baboon.
    Chap. III. A Copy of Bull and Frog's Lette  Lord struit.
    Chap. IV. How Bull and Frog went to Law  Lord strutt  Premises, and were joyn  by the rest of  Trade en.
    Chap. V. The true Characters of John Bull, Nic  Frog, a d Hocus.
    Chap VI. Of the  succes of the Law-suit
    Chap. VII. How John Bull was so mightily pleas'd with his succes , that he was going to leave off his Trade, and turn Lawyer.
    Chap. VIII. How John disc ver'd that Hocus had an Intrigue with his Wife, and what follow'd thereupon.
    Chap. IX. How seign er Cavallo, an Italian Qua  undert k to Cure Mrs. Bull of her Ʋlcer.
    Chap. X. Of John Bull's second Wife, and the go Advice that she gave him.
    Chap. XI. H w John look'd over his Attorney's B.
    Chap. XII. How John grew Angry, and resolv'd  a Composition; and what Methods w  practi d by the Lawyers for keeping him from
    Chap. XIII. How the Lawyers agreed to send D Diego Dis allo, the Conjurer, to John Bull, dis ade him from making an end of his La  su t; and what pased between them.

LAW is a Bottomles-Pit.
1. CHAP. I. The Occasion of the Law-suit.

I Need not tell you of the great Quarrels that have happen'd in our Neighbourhood, since the Death of the late Lord strutt; how the Parson and a cunning Attorney got him to settle his Estate upon his Cousin Philip Baboon, to the great disappointment of his Cousin Esquire south. some stick not to say, that the Parson and the Attorney forg'd a Will, for which they were well Paid by the Family of the Baboons: Let that be as it will, it is matter of Fact, that the Honour and Estate have continued ever since in the Person of Philip Baboon.

You know that the Lord strutts have for many Years been poses'd of a very great Landed Estate, well condition d, wooded, water d, with Coal, salt, Tin, Copper, Iron, &c. all within themselves; that it has been the Misfortune of that Family, to be the Property of their stewards, Tradesmen, and inferior servants, which has brought great Incumbrances upon them; at the same time not abating of their expensive way of Living, has forc'd them to Mortgage their best Manors: It is credibly reported, that the Butchers and Bakers Bills of a Lord strutt that lived Two hundred Years ago▪ are not yet paid.

When Philip Baboon came first to the Posesion of the Lord strutt's Estate, his Tradesmen as is usual upon such Occasions, waited upon him to wish him Joy, and bespeak his Custom: The two chief were John Bull the Clothier, and Nic. Frog the Linnen-draper; they told him, that the Bulls and Frogs had serv'd the Lord strutts with Drapery Ware for many Years; that they were honest and fair Dealers; that their Bills had never been question'd; that the Lord strutts lived generously, and never us'd to dirty their Fingers with Pen, Ink, and Counters; that his Lordship might depend upon their Honesty, that they would use him as kindly as they had  ne his Predecesors. The young Lord seem d to  all in good Part, and dismis'd them with a deal of  Content, asuring them he did not intend to  any of the honourable Maxims of his Predecesors.
2. CHAP. II. How Bull and Frog grew jealous that the Lord strutt tended to give all his Customs to his Grandfather  Baboon.

IT happen'd unfortunately for the Peace of our Ne  bourhood, that this Young Lord had an old cunni  Rogue (or as the scots call it) a false Loon of a Gra  father, that one might justly call a Jack of all Tra  sometimes you would see him behind his Counter sell  Broad Cloth, sometimes measuring Linnen, next Day  would be dealing in Mercery Ware; high heads, R  bons, Gloves, Fans and Lace he understood to a nice  Charles Mather could not bubble a young Beau bet  with a Toy; nay, he would descend even to the sell  of Tape, Garters, and shooe-buckles: When shop  shut up, he would go about the Neighbourhood and ea  Half a Crown by teaching the young Men and Maids  Dance. By these Methods he had acquir'd imme  Riches. which he us'd to squander away at Back-swor  Quarter-staff, and Cudgel play, in which he took gre  Pleasure, and challeng'd all the Country. You will  it is no wonder if Bull and Frog should be jealous of th  F llow. ‘It is not imposible (says Frog to Bull) but th  old Rogue will take the Management of the ou  Lord's Busines into his Hands; besides, the Rasc  has good Ware, and will serve him as cheap as a  body in that Case: I leave you to judge what mu  become of us and our Families, we must starve or tu  Journeymen to Lewis Baboon; therefore Neighbou  I hold it adviseable, that we write to young Lor  strutt, to know the Bottom of this Matter.’
3. CHAP. III. A Copy of Bull and Frog's Letter to the Lord strutt.

    My LORD

I suppose your Lordship knows that the Bulls and the Frog have served the Lord strutts with all sorts of Draper Ware, Time out of Mind; and whereas we are jealous  not without Reason, that your Lordship intends henceforth to buy of your Grandsire old Lewis Baboon; This is to inform your Lordship, that this Procceediug does not suit with the Circumstances of our Families, who have lived and made a good Figure in the World by the Generosity of the Lord strutts: Therefore we think fit to acquaint your Lordship, that you must find sufficient security to us, our Heirs and Asigns, that you will not employ Lewis Baboon, or else we take our Remedy at Law clap an Action upon you of 20000 l. for old Debts, seize and distrain your Goods and Chattels, which, considering your Lordship's Circumstances, will plunge you into Difficulties, from which it will not be easie to extricate your self; therefore we hope, when your Lordship has better consider'd on it, you will comply with the Desire of

    Your loving Friends, John Bull, Nic. Frog.

some of Bull's Friends advised him to take gentler Methods with the young Lord; but John naturally lov'd rough play. It is imposible to expres the surprize of the Lord strutt upon the Receipt of his Letter, he was not flush in Ready, either to go to Law or clear old Debts, neither could he find good Bail: He offer'd to bring Matters to a friendly Accommodation; and promis'd upon his Word of Honour, that he would not change his Drapers; but all to no purpose, for Bull and Frog saw clearly, that old Lewis would have the Cheating of him.
4. CHAP. IV. How Bull and Frog went to Law with Lord strutt about the Premises, and were joyn'd by the rest of the Tradesmen.

ALL Endeavours of Accommodation between Lord strutt and his Drapers prov'd vain, Jealousies encreas d and indeed it was rumour'd abroad that Lord strutt had bespoke his new Liveries of old Lewis Baboon. This coming to Mrs. Bull's Ears, when John Bull came Home he found all his Family in an uproar. Mrs. Bull, you must know, was very apt to be Cholerick. You sot, says she you loyter about Alehouses and Taverns, spend your Time t Billiards, Nine-pins or Puppetshows, or flaunt about the stre ts in your new gilt Chariot, never minding me nor your numerous Family; don't you hear  how Lord strutt has bespoke his Liveries at Lewis Baboon's shop? don't you see how that old Fox steals away your Customers, and turns you out of your Busines every Day, and you sit like an idle Drone with your Hands in your Pockets? Fie , up Man, rouze thy self; I ll sell to my shift before ll be so used by that Knave. You must think Mrs. Bull had been pretty well tun'd up by Frog, who chim'd in with her learn d Harangue. No further delay now, but to Counsel learn'd in the Law they go, who unanimously asur'd 'em both of the Justice and infallible succes of their Law-suit.

I told you before, that old Lewis Baboon was a sort of a Jack of all Trades, which made the rest of the Tradesmen jealous, as well as Bull and Frog; they hearing of the Quarrel, were glad of an opportunity of joyning against old Lewis Baboon, provided that Bull and Frog would bear the Charges of the suit; even Lying Ned the Chimney-sweeper and Tom the Dust-man put in their Claims, and the Cause was put into the Hands of Humphrey Hocus the Attorney.

A Declaration was drawn up to shew, ‘That Bull and Frog had undoubted Right by Prescription to be Drapers to the Lord strutts; that there were several old Contracts to that purpose; that Lewis Baboon had taken up the Trade of Clothier and Draper, without serving his Time, or purchasing his Freedom; that he sold Goods that were not Marketable, without the stamp; that he himself was more fit for a Bully than a Tradesman, and went about through all the Country Fairs, challenging People to fight Prizes, Wrestling and Cudgel-play: And abundance more to this purpose.’
5. CHAP. V. The true Characters of John Bull, Nic. Frog, and Hocus.

FOR the better understanding the following History, the Reader ought to know, That Bull, in the main, was an honest plain-dealing Fellow, Cholerick, Bold, and of a very unconstant Temper; he dreaded not Old Lewis either at Back-sword, single Fauchion, or Cudgel-play; but then he was very apt to quarrel with his best Friends, especially if they pretended to govern him: If you f atter'd him▪ you might lead him like a Child. John's Temper depended very much upon  the Air; his spirits rose and fell with the Weather-glas. John was quick, and understood his Busines very well, but no Man alive was more careles, in looking into his Accounts, or more cheated by Partners, Apprentices, and servants: This was occasioned by his being a Boon-Companion, loving his Bottle and his Diversion; for to say Truth, no Man kept a better House than John, nor spent his Money more generously. By plain and fair dealing, John had acquir'd some Plumbs, and might have kept them, had it not been for his unhappy Law-suit.

Nic. Frog was a cunning fly Whore on, quite the reverse of John in many Particulars; Covetous, Frugal; minded domestick Affairs; would pine his Belly to save his Pocket, never lost a Farthing by careles servants, or bad Debtors: He did not care much for any sort of Diversions, except Tricks of High-German Artists, and Leger de main; no Man exceeded Nic. in these, yet it must be own'd, That Nic. was a fair Dealer, and in that way had acquir'd immense Riches.

Hocus was an old cunning Attorney, what he wanted of ski l in Law, was made up by a Clerk which he kept, that was the prettiest Fel ow in the World; he lov'd Money, was smooth Tongu'd, gave good Words, and seldom lost his Temper: He was not worse than an Infidel; for he provided plentifu ly for his Family, but he lov'd himself better than them all: He had a termagant Wise, and, as the Neighbours said, was plaguy Hen-peck'd; he was seldom ob erv'd, as some At ornies will practice to give his own personal Evidence in Causes; he rather chose to do it per test. conduct. in a word, the Man was very well for an Attorney.
6. CHAP. VI. Of the various succes of the Law-suit.

LAW is a Bottomles Pit, it is a Cormorant, a Harpy that devours every thing; John Bull was flatter'd by his Lawyers that his suit would not last above a Year or two at most; that before that time he would be in quiet Posesion of his Busines; yet ten long Years did Hocus steer his Cause through all the Meanders of the Law, and all the Courts; no skill, no Addres, was wanting; and to say Truth, John did not starve the Cause: there wanted not Tellow Boys to see Counsel, hire Witneses, and bribe Juries. Lord strutt was generally Cast,  never had one Verdict in his favour; and John was promis'd. That the next would be the final Determination; but alas! that final Determination, and happy Conclusion was like an inchanted Island, the nearer John came to it, the further it went from him: New Tryals upon new Points still arose; new Doubts, new Matters to be cleared in short. Lawyers seldom part with so good a Cause ti  they have got the Oyster, and their Clients the shell, John Money, Book Debts, Bonds, Mortgages, all went into the Lawyers Pockets; then John began to borrow Money up in Bank-stock, East-India Bonds, and now and then  Farm went to Pot: At last it was thought a good Expedient to set up Esquire south's Title to prove the Wi  Forg'd, and disposes Philip Lord strutt at once; here a gain was a new Field for the Lawyers, and the Caul grew more intricate than ever. John grew madder and madder: Wherever he met any of Lord strutt's servants he tore off their Cloaths: Now and then you would see them come home naked, without shoes stockings and Linnen. As for Old Lewis Baboon, he was reduc'd to his last shift, tho' he had as many as any other: His Children were reduced from rich silks to Doi  stuff , his servants in Rags and bare-Footed, instead or good Victuals, they now lived upon Neck-Bees, and Bullocks-Liver; in short, no Body got much by the Matter but the Men of Law.
7. CHAP, VII. How John Bull was so mightily pleas'd with his succes, tha  he was going to leav  off his Trade, and turn Lawyer.

IT is wisely observed by a great Philosopher, That Ha  bit is a second Nature: This was verify'd in the Case o  John Bull, who from an honest and plain Tradesman, had got such a haunt about the Courts of Justice and such a Jargon of Law-words, that he concluded himself as able a Lawyer, as any that pleaded at the Bar, or sat on the Bench: He was overheard one day, talking to himself after this manner, ‘How capriciously does Fate or Chance dispose of Mankind? How seldom is that Busines allotted to a Man for which he is fitted by Nature? It is plain, I was intended for a Man of Law: How did my Guardians mistake my Genius. in placing me, like a mean slave, behind a Counter?  Bles me! What immense Estates these Fellows raise by the Law? Besides, it is the Profesion of a Gentleman: What a Pleasure it is to be victorious in a Cause? To swagger at the Bar? What a Fool am I to drudge any more in this Woollen Trade? for a Lawyer I was born, and a Lawyer I will be; one is never too Old to learn▪ ’ All this while John had con'd over such a Catalogue of hard words, as were enough to conjure up the Devil; these he used to bubble indifferently in all Companies, especially at Coffee-houses; so that his Neighbour Tradesmen began to shun his Company as a Man that was crack d. Instead of the Affairs of Blackwell-Hall, and Price of Broad-cloath, Wooll, and Bayses, he talk'd of nothing but Actions upon the Case, Returns, Capias, alias capias, Demurrers, Venire facias, Replevins, supersedea's, Certiorari's, Writs of Error, Actions of Trovre and Conversion, Trespases, Precipes & Dedimus: This was matter of Jest to the learned in Law; however Hocus and the rest of the Tribe, encourag'd John in his Fancy, asuring him, That he had a great Genius for Law: That they question'd not but in time, he might raise Money enough by it to reimburse him of all his Charges; That if he study'd, he would undoubtedly arrive to the Dignity of a Lord Chief Justice: as for the Advice of honest Friends and Neighbours, John despis'd it; he look'd upon them as Fellows of a low Genius, poor grovelling Mechanicks; John reckon'd it more Honour to have got one favourable Verdict than to have sold a Bale of Broad-cloath. As for Nic. Frog, to say the Truth, he was more prudent, for tho' he follow'd his Law-suit closely, he neglected not his Ordinary Busines. but was both in Court and in his shop at the proper Hours.
8. CHAP. VIII. How John discover'd that Hocus had an Intrigue with his Wife, and what follow'd thereupon.

JOhn had not run on a madding so long had it not been for an extravagant Bitch of a Wife, whom Hocus perceiving John to be fond of, resolv'd to win over to his side. It is a true saying, That the last Man of the Parish that knows of his Cuckoldom, is himself. It 'twas observed by all the Neighbourhood, that Hocus had Dealings with John's Wife, that were not so much for  his Honour; but this was perceiv'd by John a little too late: she was a luxurious Jade, lov'd splendid Equipages, Plays, Treats, and Ba ls, differing very much from the sober Manners of her Ancestors, and by no means fit for a Tradesman's Wife. Hocus fed er Extravagancy (what was still more shameful) with John's own Money. Every body said that Hocus had a Months mind to her Body; be that as it will, it is matter of Fact, that upon all occasions she run out extravagantly on the Praise of Hocus. When John us'd to be finding fault with his Bills, she us'd to reproach him as ungrateful to his greatest Benefactor; One that had taken so much pains in his Law-suit, and retriev'd his Family from the Oppresion of old Lewis Baboon. A good swinging sum of John's readiest Cash, went towards building of Hocus's Country House. This Affair between Hocus and Mrs. Bull was now so open, that all the World were scandaliz'd at it; John was not so Clod-pated, but at last he took the Hint. The Parson of the Parish Preaching one Day a little sharply against Adultery, Mrs. Bull told her Husband▪ That he was a very uncivil Fellow to use such course Language before People o  Condition, That Hocus was of the same mind, and that they would joyn to have him turn'd out of his Living for using personal Reflections. How do you mean, says John, by personal Reflections? I hope in God, Wi e, he did not reflect upon you. No, thank God, my Reputation is too well established in the World to receive any hurt from such a oul Mouth'd scoundre l as he; his Doctrine tends only to make Husbands Tyrants, and Wive slaves; must we be shut up, and Husbands left to their Liberty? Very pretty indeed; a Wi e must never go abroad with a Platonick to see a Play or a Ball, she must never stir without her Husband; nor walk in spring Garden with a Cousin. I do say, Husband, and I will stand by it, That without the innocent Freedoms of Life, Matrimony would be a most intollerable state; And that a Wi e's Virtue, ought to be the result of her own reason, and not of her Husband s Government; for my part, I would scorn a Husband that would be Jealous, if he saw a Fellow in Bed with me. All this while John's Blood boyl'd o his Veins, he was now confirm'd  in all his suspicions; Jade, Bitch and Whore were the best Words that John gave her. Things went from better to worse, 'till Mrs. Bull aim'd a Knife at John, tho' John threw a Bottle at her Head very brutally indeed: After this there was nothing but Confusion; Bottles, Glases, spoons, Plates, Knives, Forks, and Dishes flew about like Dust, res lt of which was, That Mrs. Bull receiv'd a bruise in her Right side, of which she dy'd half a Year after: The Bruise imposthumated, and afterwards turn'd to a stinking Ulcer, which made every body shie to come near her she melt so; yet she wanted not the help of many able Physicians, who attended very diligently, and did what Men of skill could do, but all to no purpose, for her Condition was now quite desperate, all regular Physicians and her nearest Relations having giv'n her over.
9. CHAP. IX. How signior Cavallo, an Italian Quack, undertook to Cure Mrs. Bull of her Ulcer.
THere is nothing so imposible in Nature, but Montebanks will undertake; nothing so incredible, but they will affirm: Mrs. Bull's Condition was look'd upon as desperate by all the Men of Art; then signior Cavallo judged it was high time for him to interpose, he bragged that he had an infallible Ointment and Plaister, which being applied to the sore would Cure it in a few Days; at the same time he would give her a Pill that would purge off all her bad Humours, sweeten her Blood, and rectifie her disturb'd Imagination: In spite of all signior Cavallo's Applications the Patient grew worse every Day, she stank so no body durst come within a stone's throw of her, except signior Cavallo and his Wife▪ whom he sent every Day to Dres her, she having a very gentle soft Hand. All this while signior apprehended no Danger. If one ask'd him how Mrs. Bull did, better and better, says signior Cavallo; the Parts heal, and her Constitution mends, if she submits to my Government▪ she will be abroad in a little time. Nay, it is reported, that he wrote to her Friends in the Country, that she should Dance a Jig next October in Westmister-Hall; that her Illnes had been chiefly owing to bad Physicians. At last signior one Day was sent  for in great haste, his Patient growing worse and worse; when he came he affirmed, that it was a gros Mistake, that she never was in a fairer Way: Bring hither the salve, says he; and give her a plentiful Draught of my Cordial. As he was applying his Ointments, and administring the Cordial▪ the Patient gave up the Ghost, to the great Confusion of signior Cavalio, and the great Joy of Bull and his Friends. signior slung away out of the House in great disorder, and swore there was foul Play, for he was sure his Medicines were infallible. Mrs. Bull having dy'd without any signs of Repentance or Devotion, the Clergy would hardly allow her Christian Burial. The Relations had once resolved to sue John for the Murder, but considering better of it, and that such a Trial would rip up old sores, and discover things not so much to the Reputation of the Deceased, they dropt their Design. she left no Will, only there was found in her strong Box the following Words wrote on a scrip of Paper, My Curse on John Bull and all my Posterity, if ever they come to any Composition with my Lord strutt. There were many Epitaphs writ upon her, one was as follows;

    Here lies John't Wife 
    Plague of his Life;
    she spent his Wealth,
    she wrong'd his Health,
    And left him Daughters three,
    As bad as she.

The Daughters Names were Polemia, Discordia and Ʋsuria.
10. CHAP. X. Of John Bull's second Wise, and the good Advice that she gave him.

JOHN quickly got the better of his Grief, and seeing that neither his Constitution, nor the Affairs of his Family could permit him to live in an unmarried state he resolved to get him another Wife; a Cousin of his last Wife's was propos'd, but John would have no more of the Breed: In short, he wedded a sober Country Gentlewoman, of a good Family and a p entiful Fortune; the reverse of the other in her Temper, not but that she lov'd Money, for she was of a saving Temper, and apply'd her Fortune to pay John's clamarous Debts, that the unfrugal Methods of his last Wife, and this ruinous Law suit had brought him into. One day as she  her Husband in good Humour, she talk'd to him  after the following manner. My Dear, since I have been our Wife, I have Observ d great Abuses and Disorders in ur Family; your servants are mutinous and quarrelsom, d cheat you most abominably; your Cook-Maid is in Com ination with your Butcher, Poulterer, and Wishmonger; ur Butler purloin your Liquor and your Brew r sells your ogwash; your Baker cheats both in Weight and in Tale; en your Milkwoman and your Nursary Maid have a Fellow eling; your Taylor, instead of shreads, Cabages whole ards of Cloth; besides leaving such long scores, and not ing to Market with ready Money, forces us to take bad Ware  the Tradesmen at their own Price. You have not posted  Books these Ten Years; how is it posible for a Man of usines to keep his Affairs even in the World at this Rate? ay God this Hocus be Honest; would to God you would  over his Bills, and see how Matters stand between Frog d you; prodigious sums are spent in this Law suit, and more st be borrow'd of scriveners and Usurers at heavy Interest; sides, my Dear, let me beg of you to lay aside that wild ject of leaving your Busines to turn Lawyer, for which,  me tell you, Nature never design'd you. Believe me, these gues do but flatter, that they may pick your Pocket. John ard her all this while with patience, till she prcik'd  Maggot, and touch'd his tender point; then he broke  in a violent Pasion. What, I not fit for a Lawyer!  me tell you, my Clodpated Relations spoil'd the greatest ius in the World when they bred me a Mechanick. Lord tt and his Old Rogue of a Gransire have found to their , that I can magine a Law suit as well as another. I  deny what you say, says Mrs. Bull, nor do I call in que  your Parts, but I say it does not suit with your Circum ces; you and your Predecesors have Liv'd in good Repu on among your Neighbours by this same Cloathing Trade,  it were madnes to leave it off. Besides, there are few  know all the Tricks and Cheats of these Lawyers; does  our own Experience teach you how they have drawn you om one Term to another, and how you have danc'd the  of all the Courts, still flattering you with a final Isue,  for ought I can see, your Cause is not a bit clearer than it  seven Years ago. I will be Damn'd says John if I  of any Composition from strutt or his Grandfather; I'll  wheel about the streets an Engine to grind Knives and  scisars; however I'll take your Advice; and look over my Accounts.
11. CHAP. XI. How John look'd over his Attorney's Bill.

WHen John first brought out the Bills, the surprize of all the Family was unexpresible, at the prodigious Dimensions of them; in short, they would have measur'd with the best Bale of Cloath in John's shop. Fees to Judges, puny Judges, Clerks, Prothonotories, Philizers, C irographers, Underclerks, Proclamators, Council, Witneses, Jury-Men, Marshals, Tipstaffs, Cryers, Porters; for Enrollings, Exemplifications, Bails, Vouchers Returns, Cavea s, Examinations, Fil ngs of Words, Entries, Declarations, Replications, Recordats, Nolle Pros q i's, Certiorari's, Mittimus, Demurrers, special Verdicts, Informations, scire Facius, supersiedeas abeas Corpus, Coach-hire, Treating of Witneses, &c. Verily; says John, there are a prodigious Number of learned Words in this Law, what a pretty science it is! Ay, but Husband, you have paid for every sylable and Letter of these fine Words; bles me, what immense sums are at the bottom of the Accompt! John spent several Weeks in looking over his Bills, and by comparing and stating his Accompts, he discover d that, besides the Extravagance of every Article, he had been egregiously cheated; that he had paid for Councel that were never fee'd, for Writs that were never drawn, for Dinners that were never dres'd, and Journeys that were never made: In short, that Hocus and Frog had agreed to throw the Burden of the Law-suit upon his shoulders.
12. CHAP. XII. How John grew Angry, resolved to accept a Composition; and what Methods were practis'd by the Lawyers for keeping him from it.

WELL might the Learn'd Daniel Burges say, That a Law-suit is a suit for Life. He that sows his Grain upon Marble, will have many a hungry Belly before Harvest. This John felt by woful Experience. John  s Cause was a good milch Cow, and many a Man subsisted his Family out of it. However John began to think it high time to look about him; he had a Cousin in the Country, one sir Roger Bold, whose Predecesors had been bred up to the Law, and knew as much of it as any Body; but having left off the Profesion  for some time, they took great pleasure in Compounding Law-suits amongst their Neighbours, for which they were the Aversion of the Gentlemen of the Long Robe, and at perpetual War with all the Country Attorneys. John put his Cause in sir Roger's Hands, desiring him to make the best of it; the News had no sooner reach'd the Ears of the Lawyers, but they were all in an Uproar. They brought all the rest of the Tradesmen upon John: 'squire south swore he was betray d, that he would starve before he compounded; Frog said he was highly wrong'd, ev'n lying Ned the Chimney-sweeper, and Tom the Dust-man complain'd that their Interest was sacrific'd: As for Hocus  s Wife, she took a Hackney-Chair and came to John's House immediately and fell a scolding at his Wife like the Mother of Belzebub, ‘You silly, aukward, ill-bred, Country sow you, have you no more Manners than to rail at my Husband, that has sav'd that Clod-pated, Num-skull'd Ninny hammer of yours from Ruin and all his Family? it is well known how he has rose early and sate up late to make him easy, when he was sotting at every Ale-house in Town. I knew his last Wife, she was a Woman of breeding, good humour, and complaisance, knew how to live in the World; as for you, you look like a Puppet mov'd by Clock-work; your Cloaths hang upon you, as they were upon Tenter-hooks, and you come into a Room as you were going to steal away a Pis pot; get you gone into the Country to look af- your Mothers Poultry, to milk the Cows, churn the Butter, and dres up Nosegays for a Holy-Day, and meddle not with Matters that you know no more of, than the sign-post before your Door: It is well known that my Husband has an establish'd Reputation, he never swore an Oath, nor told a Lie in all his Life: He is grateful to his Benefactors, faithful to his Friends liberal to his Dependants, and dutiful to his superiors; he values not your Money more than the Dust under his Feet, but he hates to be abus'd: Once for all, Mrs. Mynx, leave off talking of my Husband, or I will pull out these saucer Eyes of yours, and make that redstreak Country-Face look as raw as an Ox Cheek upon a Butcher's stall; remember, I say, that there are  Pillories and Ducking-stools.’ With this, away she flung, leaving Mrs. Bull no time to reply: No stone was left unturn d to fright John from this Composition. sometimes they spread Reports at Coffee-houses, that John and his Wife were ran mad; t t they intended to give up House, and make over all the Estate to Old Lewis Baboon that John had been often talking to himself, and seen in the streets without shoes or stockings; That he did nothing from Morning to Night but beat his servants, after having been the best Master alive; as for his Wife she was a meer Natural. sometimes John's House was beset with a whole Regiment of Attorneys Clerks, Bailiffs Followers, and other small retainers of the Law, who threw stones at his Windows, and Dirt at himself, as he went along, the street. When John complain'd of want of ready Money to carry on his suit, they advis'd him to pawn his Plate and Jewels, and that Mrs. Bull should sell her Linnnen and Wearing Cloaths.
13. CHAP. XIII. How the Lawyers agreed to send Don Diego Dismallo, the Conjurer, to John Bull▪ to diswade him from making an end of his Law suit; and what pas'd between them.
Bull. HOw does my good Friend Don Diego?
Don. Never worse Who can be easie when their Friends are playing the Fool?
Bull. But then you may be easie, for I am resolv'd to play the Fool no longer: I wish I had hearken'd to your Advice, and compounded this Law suit sooner.
Don. It is true; I was then against the ruinous ways of this Law suit, but looking over my scheme since, I find there is an Error in my Calculation. sol and Jupiter were in a wrong House, but I have now discover'd their true Places: I tell you I find that the stars are unanimously of Opinion, that you will be succesful in this Cause; That Lewis will come to an untimely , and strutt will be turn'd out of Doors by his Wife and Children. Then he went on with a Torrent of Eclypticks, Cycles Epicycles, Ascendants, Trines, Quadrants, Conjunctions Bulls, Bears, Goats, and Rams, and abundance of hard Words, which being, put together, signify'd nothing. John all this while stood gaping and staring, like a Man in a Trance.
FINIs. 

JOHN BULL In His SENSES: BEING THE SECOND PART OF Law is a Bottomless-Pit.

Printed from a Manuscript found in the Cabinet of the famous Sir Humphry Polesworth.

LONDON: Printed for John Morphew, near Stationer's-Hall, 1712. Price 3d.

THE CONTENTS.

    CHAP. I. MRS. BULL's Vindication of the indispensable Duty of Cuckoldom, incumbent upon Wives, in case of the Tyranny, Infideli  or Insufficiency of Husbands: Being a full Answer to the Doctor's Sermon against Adultery. Pag. 5
    CHAP. II. The two great Parties of Wives, the Devoto's and the Hits. 8
    CHAP. III. An Account of the Conference between Mrs. Bull and Don Diego Dismallo. 9
        The Articles of Agreement between John Bull and Nicholas Frog. 12
         Nicholas Frog's Letter to Lewis Baboon, Master of the Noble Science of Defence. 14
    CHAP. IV. How the Guardians of the Deceas'd Mrs. Bull's three Daughters came to John Bull, and what Advice they gave him; wherein is briefly treated the Characters of the three Daughters: Also John Bull's Answer to the three Guardians. 15
    CHAP. V. Esquire South's Message and Letter to Mrs. Bull. 22

 John Bull in his Senses.
CHAP. I. Mrs. Bull's Vindication of the indispensable Duty of Cuckoldom, incumbent upon Wives, in case of the Tyranny, Infidelity, or Insufficiency of Husbands: Being a full Answer to the Doctor's Sermon against Adultery.

JOHN found daily fresh Proofs of the Infidelity and bad Designs of his deceas'd Wife; amongst other Things, one Day looking over his Cabinet, he found the following Paper.

IT is evident that Matrimony is founded upon an original Contract, whereby the Wife makes over the Right she has by the Law of Nature to the Concubitus vagus, in favour of the Husband, by which he acquires the Property of all her Posterity; but then the Obligation is mutual: And where the Contract is broken on one side, it ceases to bind on the other; where there is a Right, there must be a Power to maintain it, and to punish the offending Party. This Power I affirm to be that Original Right, or rather that indispensable Duty of Cuckoldom, lodg'd in all Wives, in the Cases above-mention'd. No Wife is bound by any Law to which she her self has not consented: All Oeconomical Government is lodg'd originally in the Husband and Wife, the executive part being in the Husband, both have their Privileges secur'd to them by Law and Reason; but will any Man infer from the Husband's being invested with the executive Power, that the Wife is depriv'd  of her Share, and that which is the principal Branch of it, the original Right of Cuckoldom? and that she has no remedy left but Preces & Lacrymae, or an Appeal to a supreme Court of Judicature? No less frivolous are the Arguments that are drawn, from the general Appellations and Terms of Husband and Wife; a Husband denotes several different sorts of Magistracy, according to the Usages and Customs of different Climates and Countries; in some Eastern Nations it signifies a Tyrant, with the absolute Power of Life and Death. In Turkey it denotes an Arbitrary Governor, with power of perpetual Imprisonment; in Italy it gives the Husband the power of Poison and Padlocks; in the Countries of England, France and Holland, it has quite a different Meaning, implying a free and equal Government, securing to the Wife, in certain Cases, the liberty of Cuckoldom, and the property of Pin-money and separate Maintenance; so that the Arguments drawn from the terms of Husband and Wife are fallacious, and by no means fit to support a tyrannical Doctrine, as that of absolute unlimited Chastity, and conjugal Fidelity.

The general Exhortations to Chastity in Wives, are meant only for Rules in ordinary Cases, but they naturally suppose the three Conditions of Ability, Justice and Fidelity, in the Husband; such an unlimited, uncondition'd Fidelity in the Wife could never be supposed by reasonable Men; it seems a reflexion upon the Chch, to charge her with Doctrines that countenance Oppression.

This Doctrine of the original Right of Cuckoldom is congruous to the Law of Nature, which is superior to all human Laws, and for that I dare appeal to all Wives: It is much to the Honour of our English Wives, that they have never given up that fundamental Point; and that tho' in former Ages they were muffled up in Darkness and Superstition, yet that Notion seem'd engraven on their Minds, and the Impression so strong, that nothing could impair it.

 To assert the Illegality of Cuckoldom, upon any Pretence whatsoever, were to cast odious Colours upon the married State, to blacken the necessary Means of perpetuating Families: Such Laws can never be suppos'd to have been design'd to defeat the very end of Matrimony, the Propagation of Mankind. I call them necessary Means, for in many Cases what other Means are left? Such a Doctrine wounds the Honour of Families, unsettles the Titles to Kingdoms, Honours and Estates; for if the Actions from which such Settlements spring were illegal, all that is built upon them must be so too; but the last is absurd, therefore the first must be so likewise. What is the Cause that Europe groans, at present, under the heavy Load of a cruel and expensive War, but the tyrannical Custom of a certain Nation, and the scrupulous Nicety of a silly Quean, in not exercising this indispensable Duty of Cuckoldom, whereby the Kingdom might have had an Heir, and a controverted Succession might have been avoided? These are the Effects of the narrow Maxims of your Clergy, That one must not do Evil, that Good may come of it.

The Assertors of this indefeasible Right, and Jus Divinum of Matrimony, do all in their Hearts favour Gallants, and the Pretenders to married Women; for if the true legal Foundation of the married State be once sap'd, and instead thereof tyrannical Maxims introduc'd, what must follow but Elopements. instead of secret and peaceable Cuckoldom?

From all that has been said, one may clearly perceive the Absurdity of the Doctrine of this seditious discontented, hot-headed, ungifted, unedifying Preacher, asserting, That the grand Security of the matrimonial State, and the Pillar upon which it stands,  founded upon the Wife's belief of an absolute uncondition  Fidelity to the Husband's Bed: By which bold Asse  tion he strikes at the Root, digs the Foundation, a  removes the Basis upon which the Happiness of   married State is built. As for his personal Reflexions, I would gladly know who are those Wanton Wives he speaks of? who are those Ladies of high Stations, that he so boldly traduces in his Sermon? It is pretty plain who these Aspersions are aim'd at, for which he deserves the Pillory, or something worse.

In confirmation of this Doctrine of the indispensable Duty of Cuckoldom, I could deduce the Example of the wisest Wives in all Ages, who by these means have preserv'd their Husband's Families from Ruin and Oblivion, by want of Posterity; but what has been said, is a sufficient Ground for punishing this pragmatical Parson.
CHAP. II. The two great Parties of Wives, the Devoto's and the Hitts.

THE Doctrine of unlimited Chastity and Fidelity in Wives, was universally espous'd by all Husbands, who went about the Country, and made the Wives sign Papers, signifying their utter Detestation and Abhorrence of Mrs. Bull's wicked Doctrine of the indispensable Duty of Cuckoldom. Some yielded, others refused to part with their native Liberty; which gave rise to two great Parties amongst the Wives, the Devoto's and the Hitts. Tho' it must e own'd, the distinction was more nominal than eal; for the Devoto's would abuse Freedoms some imes; and those who were distinguish'd by the Name  Hitts, were often very honest. At the same me there was an ingenious Treatise came out, with e Title of Good Advice to Husbands; in which they  counsell'd not to trust too much to their Wives ning the Doctrine of unlimited conjugal Fidelity, d so to neglect Family Duty, and a due watchfulness  over the Manners of their Wives; that the greatest Security to Husbands was a vigorous Constitution, good Usage of their Wives, and keeping them from Temptation; many Husbands having been Sufferers by their trusting too much to general Professions, as was exemplified in the Case of a foolish and negligent Husband, who trusting to the Efficacy of this Principle, was undone by his Wife's Elopement from him.
CHAP. II. An Account of the Conference between Mrs. Bull and Don Diego Dismallo.
Don Diego.

IS it possible, Cousin Bull, that you can forget the honourable Maxims of the Family you are come of, and break your word with three of the honestest best meaning Persons in the World, Esquire South, Frog and Hocus, that have sacrific'd their Interest to yours? It is base to take Advantage of their Simplicity and Credulity, and leave them in the lurch at last.
Mrs. Bull.

I am sure they have left my Family in a bad Condition, we have hardly Money to go to Market, and no Body will take our Words for Six Pence. A very fine Spark this Esquire South! My Husband took him in, a dirty, snotty-nos'd Boy, it was the Business of half the Servants to attend him, the Rogue did bawl and make such a noise: Sometimes he fell in the Fire and burnt his Face, sometimes broke his Shins clambering over the Benches, often piss'd a-Bed, and always came in so dirty, as if he had been dragg'd thro' the Kennel at a Boarding-School. He lost his Money at Chuck-Farthing, Shuffle-Cap, and All-Fours; sold his Books, pawn'd his Linnen, which we were always forc'd to redeem. Then the whole Generation of him are so in love with Bagpipes and  Poppet Shows; I wish you knew what my Husband has paid at the Pastry Cooks and Confectioners, for Naples Biscuit, Tarts, Custards, and Sweet-Meats. All this while my Husband consider'd him as a Gentleman of a good Family that had fallen into Decay, gave him good Education, and has settled him in a good Credible way of Living, having procur'd him, by his Interest, one of the best Places of the Country; and what return, think you, does this fine Gentleman make us? he will hardly give me or my Husband a good Word, or a civil Expression: Instead of plain Sir and Madam (which, tho' I say it, is our doe) he calls us Goody and Gaffer such a one, that he did us a great deal Honour to Board with us; huffs and dings at such a rate, because we will not spend the little we have left to get him the Title and Estate of Lord Strutt; and then, forsooth, we shall have the Honour to be his Woollen-drapers.
D. Diego.

And would you lose the Honour of so noble and generous an Undertaking? would you rather accept the scandalous Composition, and trust that old Rogue, Lewis Baboon?
Mrs. Bull.

Look you, Friend Diego, if we Law it on till Lewis turns honest, I am afraid our Credit will run low at Blackwell-Hall; I wish every Man had his own; but I still say, that Lord Strutt's Money shines as bright, and chinks as well as Esquire South's. I don't know any other Hold that we Tradesmen have of these great Folks, but their Interest; buy dear, and sell cheap, and I'll warrant ye you will keep your Customer. The worst is, that Lord Strutt's Servants have got such a haunt about that old Rogue's Shop, that it will cost us many a Firkin of strong Beer to bring them back again, and the longer they are in a bad Road, the harder it will be to get them out of it.
D. Diego.

But poor Frog, what has he done! On my Conscience, if there be an honest, sincere Man in the World, it is that Frog.
Mrs Bull.


I think I need not tell you how much Frog has been oblig'd to our Family from his Childhood; he carries his Head high now, but he had never been the Man he is, without our Help. Ever since the Commencement of this Law-Suit it has been the Business of Hocus, in sharing our Expences, to plead for Frog. Poor Frog, (says he) is in hard Circumstances, he has a numerous Family, and lives from Hand to Mouth; his Children don't eat a bit of good Victuals from one Year's end to the other, but live upon Salt Herring, sowr Crud, and Bore-cole; he does his utmost, poor Fellow, to keep things even in the World, and has exerted himself beyond his Ability in this Law-Suit, but he really has not where-withal to go on. What signifies this Hundred Pounds, place it upon your side of the Account; it is a great deal to poor Frog, and a Trifle to you. This has been Hocus's constant Language, and I am sure he has had Obligations enough to us to have acted another Part.
D. Diego.

No doubt Hocus meant all this for the best, but he is a tender-hearted charitable Men; Frog is indeed in hard Circumstances.
Mrs. Bull.

Hard Circumstances! I swear this is provoking to the last degree. All the time of the Law-Suit, as fast as I have Mortgaged, Frog has purchas'd: From a plain Tradesman, with a Shop, Warehouse, and a Country-Hutt, with a dirty Fish-Pond at the end of it, he is now grown a very rich Country Gentleman, with a noble-landed Estate, noble Palaces, Manors, Parks, Gardens and Farms, finer than any we were ever Master of. Is it not strange, when my Husband disburs'd great Sums every Term, Frog should be purchasing some new Farm or Manor? So that if this Law-Suit lasts, he will be far the richest Man in his Country. What is worse than all this, he steals away my Customers every Day; I have Twelve of the richest, and the best, that have left my Shop by his Perswasion, and  whom, to my certain Knowledge, he has under Bonds never to return again: Judge you if this be neighbourly Dealing.
D. Diego.

Frog is indeed pretty close in his Dealings, but very honest: You are so touchy, and take things so hotly, I am sure there must be some Mistake in this.
Mrs. Bull.

A plaguy one indeed! You know, and have often told me of it, how Hocus and those Rogues kept my Husband, John Bull, drunk for five Years together, with Punch and Strong Waters; I am sure he never went one Night sober to Bed, till they got him to sign the strangest Deed that ever you saw in your Life. The Methods they took to manage him I'll tell you another time, at present I'll only read the Writing.
Articles of Agreement betwixt John Bull, Clothier, and Nicholas Frog, Linnen-draper.

I. That for maintaining the ancient good Correspondence and Friendship between the said Parties, I Nicholas Frog do solemnly engage and promise to keep Peace in John Bull's Family; that neither his Wife, Children nor Servants give him any Trouble, Disturbance or Molestation whatsoever, but to oblige them all to do their Duty quietly in their respective Stations: And whereas the said John Bull, from the assured Confidence that he has in my Friendship, has appointed me Executor of his Last Will and Testament, and Guardian to his Children, I do undertake for me, my Heirs and Assigns, to see the same duly execused and performed, and that it shall be unalterable in all its Parts by John Bull or any Body else: For that purpose it shall be lawful and allowable for me to enter his House at any Hour of the Day or Night, to break open Bars, Bolts and Doors, Chests of Drawers and strong Boxes, in order to secure the Peace of my Friend John Bull's Family, and to see his Will duly executed.

II. In Consideration of which kind neighbourly Office of  Nicholas Frog, in that he has been pleas'd to accept of the foresaid Trust, I John Bull, having duly consider'd that my Friend Nicholas Frog at this time lives in a marshy Soil and unwholesome Air, infested with Fogs and Damps, destructive of the Health of himself, Wife and Children, do bind and oblige me, my Heirs and Assigns, to Purchase for the said Nicholas Frog, with the best and readiest of my Cash, Bonds, Mortgages, Goods and Chattels, a landed Estate, with Parks, Gardens, Palaces, Rivers, Fields and Outlets, consisting of as large Extent as the said Nicholas Frog shall think fit: And whereas the said Nicholas Frog is at present hem'd in too close by the Grounds of Lewis Baboon, Master of the Science of Defence, I the said John Bull do oblige my self, with the readiest of my Cash, to Purchase and Enclose the said Grounds, for as many Fields and Acres as the said Nicholas shall think fit; to the intent that the said Nicholas may have free Egress and Regress, without Lett or Molestation, suitable to the Demands of himself and Family.

III. Furthermore, the said John Bull obliges himself to make the Country-Neighbours of Nicholas Frog, allot a certain part of Yearly Rents, to pay for the Repairs of the said landed Estate, to the intent that his good Friend Nicholas Frog may be eased of all Charges.

IV. And whereas the said Nicholas Frog did Contract with the deceased Lord Strutt about certain Liberties, Privileges and Immunities, formerly in the Possession of the said John Bull; I the said John Bull do freely, by these Presents, renounce, quit and make over to the said Nicholas the Liberties, Privileges and Immunities contracted for, in as full manner as if they never had belong'd to me.

V. The said John Bull obliges himself, his Heirs and Assigns, not to sell one Rag of Broad or Course Cloath to any Gentleman, within the Neighbourhood of the said Nicholas, except in such Quantities and such Rates, as the said Nicholas shall think fit.
Sign'd and Seal'd,

    John Bull,
    Nic. Frog.

The reading of this Paper put Mrs. Bull in such a Passion, that she fell downright into a Fit, and they were forc'd to give her a good quantity of the Spirit of Hartshorn before she recover'd.
D. Diego.

Why in such a Passion, Cousin? Considering your Circumstances at that time, I don't think this such an unreasonable Contract. You see Frog, for all this, is religiously true to his Bargain, he scorns to hearken to any Competition without your Privacy.
Mrs. Bull.

You know the contrary, read that Letter.
Reads the Superscription.

For Lewis Baboon, Master of the Noble Science of Defence.
SIR,

I Understand that you are at this time Treating with my Friend John Bull, about restoring the Lord Strutt's Custom, and besides allowing him certain Privileges of Parks and Fish-Ponds: I wonder how you, that are a Man that knows the World, can talk with that simple Fellow. He has been my Bubble these Twenty Years, and, to my certain knowledge, understands no more of his own Affairs, than a Child in Swadling-Cloaths. I know he has got a sort of a pragmatical silly Jade of a Wife, that pretends to take him out of my Hands, but you and she both will find your selves mistaken, I'll find those that shall manage her; and for him, he dares as well be hang'd as make one step in his Affairs, without my consent. If you will give me what you promised him, I will make all things easie, and stop the Deeds of Ejectment against Lord Strutt; if you will not, take what follows; I shall have a good Action against you, for pretending to rob me of my Bubble. Take this warning from
Your loving Friend, Nic. Frog.

I am told, Cousin Diego, you are one of those that have undertaken to manage me, and that you have  said you will carry a Green Eag your self, rather than we shall make an end of our Law-Suit: I'll teach them and you too to manage.
D. Diego.

For God's sake, Madam, why so Cholerick? I say, this Letter is some Forgery, it never enter'd into the Head of that honest Man, Nic. Frog, to do any such think.
Mrs. Bull.

I can't abide you, you have been railing these Twenty Years at Esquire South, Frog and Hocus, calling them Rogues and Pick-Pockets, and now they are turn'd the honestest Fellows in the World; what is the meaning of all this?
D. Diego.

Pray tell me how you came to employ this Sir Roger in your Affairs, and not think of your old Friend Diego?
Mrs. Bull.

So, so, there it pinches. To tell you truth, I have employ'd Sir Roger in several weighty Affairs, and have found him trusty and honest, and the poor Man always scorn'd to take a Farthing of me. I have abundance that profess great Zeal, but they are damnable greedy of the Pence. My Husband and I are now in such Circumstances, that we must be serv'd upon cheaper Terms than we have been.
D. Diego.

Well, Cousin, I find I can do no good with you, I am sorry that you will ruin your self by trusting this Sir Roger.
CHAP. IV. How the Guardians of the deceas'd Mrs. Bull's three Daughters came to John, and what Advice they gave him; wherein is briefly treated the Characters of the three Daughters: Also John Bull's Answer to the three Guardians.

I Told you in my first Part, that Mrs. Bull, before she departed this Life, had bless'd John with three Daughters; I need not here repeat their Names, neither  would I willingly use any scandalous Reflections upon young Ladies, whose Reputations ought to be very tenderly handled; but the Characters of these were so well known in the Neighbourhood, that it is doing them no Injury to make a short Description of them.

The Eldest was a termagant, imperious, prodigal. lewd, profligate Wench, as ever breath'd; she used to Rantipole about the House, pinch the Children, kick the Servants, and torture the Cats and the Dogs; she would rob her Father's strong Box, for Money to give the young Fellows that she was fond of: She had a noble Air, and something great in her Mein, but such a noisome infectious Breath, as threw all the Servants that dress'd her into Consumptions; if she smelt to the freshest Nosegay, it would shrivel and wither as it had been blighted: She us'd to come home in her Cups, and break the China, and the Looking-glasses, and was of such an irregular Temper, and so entirely given up to her Passion, that you might argue as well with the Northwind, as with her Ladyship; so Expensive, that the Income of three Dukedoms was not enough to supply her Extravagance. Hocus lov'd her best, believing her to be his own, got upon the Body of Mrs. Bull.

The second Daughter, born a Year after her Sister, was a peevish, froward, ill-condition'd Creature as ever was born, ugly as the Devil, lean, haggard, pale, with saucer Eyes, a sharp Nose and hunch-back'd, but active, sprightly and diligent about her Affairs. Her Ill-Complexion was occasion'd by her bad Diet, which was Coffee, Morning, Noon and Night. She never rested quietly a Bed, but used to disturb the whole Family with shrieking out in her Dreams, and plague them next Day with interpreting them, for she took them all for Gospel. She would cry out Murder, and disturb the whole Neighbourhood; and when John came running down Stairs to enquire  what the Matter was, nothing forsooth, only her Maid had stuck a Pin wrong in her Gown. She turn'd away one Servant for putting too much Oil in her Sallad, and another for putting too little Salt in her Water-Cruel. But such as by Flattery had procur'd her Esteem, she would indulge in the greatest Crimes. Her Father had two Coachmen, when one was in the Coach-box, if the Coach swung but the least to one side, she used to shriek so loud, that all the Street concluded she was overturn'd; but tho' the other was eternally Drunk, and had overturn'd the whole Family, she was very angry with her Father for turning him away. Then she used to carry Tales and Stories from one to another, till she had set the whole Neighbourhood together by the Ears; and this was the only Diversion she took pleasure in. She never went abroad, but she brought home such a bundle of monstrous Lyes as would have amaz'd any Mortal, but such as knew her: Of a Whale that had swallow'd a Fleet of Ships; of the Lyons being let out of the Tower, to destroy the Protestant Religion; of the Pope's being seen in a Brandy Shop at Wapping, and a prodigious strong Man that was going to shove down the Cupola of Paul's; of Three millions of Five Pound Pieces that Esquire South had found under an old Wall; of Blazing-Stars, Flying Dragons, and abundance of such Stuff. All the Servants in the Family made high Court to her, for she Domineer'd there, and turn'd out and in whom she pleas'd; only there was an old Grudge between her and Sir Roger, whom she mortally hated, and used to hire Fellows to squirt Kennel Water upon him as he pass'd along the Streets, so that he was forc'd constantly to wear a Surtout of oil'd Cloath, by which means he came home pretty clean, except where the Surtout was a little scanty.

As for the Third, she was a Thief, and a common mercenary Prostitute, and that without any  Solicitation from Nature, for she own'd she had no Enjoyment. She had no Respect of Persons, a Prince or a Porter was all one, according as they paid; yea she would leave the finest Gentleman in the World to go to an ugly pocky Fellow, for Six Pence more. In the practice of her Profession she had amass'd vast Magazines of all sorts of Things; she had above Five hundred Suits of fine Clothes, and yet went abroad like a Cynder-Wench: She robb'd and starv'd all the Servants, so that no Body could live near her.

So much for John's three Daughters, which you will say were Rarities to be fond of. Yet Nature will show it self; no Body could blame their Relations for taking care of them, and therefore it was that Hocus, with two other of the Guardians, thought it their Duty to take care of the Interest of the three Girls, and give John their best Advice, before he Compounded the Law-Suit.
Hocus.

What makes you so shy of late, my good Friend? There's no Body loves you better than I, nor has taken more pains in your Affairs: As I hop'd to be sav'd I would do any thing to serve you, I would crawl upon all Four to serve you; I have spent my Health, and paternal Estate in your Service; I have, indeed, a small Pittance left, with which I might retire, and with as good a Conscience as any Man. But the thoughts of this disgraceful Composition so touches me to the Quick, that I cannot sleep: After I had brought the Cause to the last Stroke, that one Verdict more had quite ruin'd old Lewis and Lord Strutt, and put you in the quiet Possession of every thing; then to Compound, I cannot bear it. This Cause was my Favourite, I had set my Heart upon it; it is like an only Child, I cannot endure it should miscarry: For God sake consider only to what a dismal Condition old Lewis  is brought: He is at an end of all his Cash, his Attorneys have hardly one Trick left, they are at an end of all their Chicane; besides, he has both his Law and his daily Bread now upon Trust: Hold out only one Term longer, and, I'll warrant you, before the next, we shall have him in the Fleet. I'll bring him to the Pillory, his Ears shall pay for his Perjuries; for the Love of God don't Compound, let me be Damn'd if you have a Friend in the World that loves you better than I; there is no Body can say I am Covetous, or that I have any Interest to pursue but yours.
2d Guardian.

There is nothing so plain, than that this Lewis has a design to Ruin all his neighbouring Tradesmen, and at this time he has such a prodigious Income, by his Trade of all kinds, that if there is not some stop put to his Exorbitant Riches, he will Monopolize every thing, and no Body will be able to sell a Yard of Drapery or Mercery Ware but himself. I therefore hold it advisable, that you continue the Law-Suit, and burst him at once. My Concern for the three poor Motherless Children obliges me to give you this Advice, for their Estates, poor Girls, depend upon the Success of this Cause.
3d Guardian.

I own this Writ of Ejectment has cost dear, but then consider it is a Jewel well worth the Purchasing, at the Price of all you have. None but Mr. Bull's declar'd Enemies can say he has any other Security for his Cloathing Trade, but the Ejectment of Lord Strutt. The only Question then that remains to be decided, is, Who shall stand the: Expences of the Suit? To which the Answer is as plain, Who but he that is to have the Advantage of the Sentence? When Esquire South has got Possession of his Title and Honour, is not John Bull to be his Clothier? Who then but John ought to put him in Possession? Ask but any indifferent Gentleman  who ought to bear his Charges at Law? and he will readily answer, his Tradesmen. I do therefore affirm, and I will go to Death with it, that, being his Clothier, you ought to put him in quiet Possession of his Estate, and with the same generous Spirit you have begun it, compleat the good Work. If you persist in the bad Measures you are now in, what must become of the three poor Orphans? My Heart bleeds for the poor Girls.
John Bull.

You are all very eloquent Persons, but give me leave to tell you, that you express a great deal of more Concern for the three Girls than for me; I think my Interest ought to be consider'd in the first place. As for you, Hocus, I can't but say you have managed my Law-Suit with great Address, and much to my Honour; and, tho' I say it, you have been well paid for it; never was Attornies Bill more Extravagant, and, give me leave to say, there are many Articles which the most griping of your Profession never demanded. I have trusted you with the disbursing great Sums of Money, and you have constantly sunk some into your own Pocket. I tell you I don't like that Sinking. Why must the Burthen be taken off Frog's Back, and laid upon my Shoulders? He can drive about his own Parks and Fields in his gilt Chariot, when I have been forc'd to Mortgage my Estate! his Note will go farther than my Bond! Is it not Matter of Fact, that from the richest Tradesman in all the Country, I am reduced to beg and borrow from Scriveners and Usurers, that suck the Heart, Blood and Guts out of me, and what was all this for? Did you like Frog's Countenance better than mine? Was not I your old Friend and Relation? Have I not Presented you nobly? Have I not clad your whole Family? Have you not had an Hundred Yards at a time, of the finest Cloath in my Shop? Why must the rest  of the Tradesmen be not only indemnified from Charges, but forbid to go on with their own Business; and what is more their Concern than mine? As to holding out this Term, I Appeal to your own Conscience, has not that been your constant Discourse these Six Years, one Term more, and old Lewis goes to Pot; if thou art so fond of my Cause, be generous for once, and lend me a brace of Thousands. Ah Hocus! Hocus! I know thee, not a Sous to save me from Goal, I trow. Look ye, Gentlemen, I have liv'd with Credit in the World, and it grieves my Heart, never to stir out of my Doors, but to be pull'd by the Sleeve by some Rascally Dun, or another: Sir, Remember my Bill: There's a small Concern of a Thousand Pounds, I hope you think on't, Sir. And to have these Usurers transact my Debts at Coffee-Houses and Ale-Houses, as if I were going to break-up Shop. Lord! That ever the Rich, the Generous John Bull, Clothier, the Envy of all his Neighbours, should be brought to Compound his Debts for Five Shillings in the Pound; and to have his Name in an Advertisement, for a Statute of Bankrupt. The Thoughts of it makes me Mad. I have read some-where in the Apocrypha, That one should not consult with a Woman touching her, of whom she is Jealous; nor with a Merchant, concerning Exchange, nor with a Buyer, of Selling; nor with an unmerciful Man of Kindness, &c. I could have added one thing more; Nor with an Attorney, about Compounding a Law-Suit. This Ejectment of Lord Strutt will never do. The Evidence is Crimp; the Witnesses swear backwards and forwards, and Contradict themselves, and his Tenants stick by him. If it were practicable, is it reasonable, that when Esquire South is losing his Money to Sharpers and Pick-Pockets, going about the Country with Fidlers and Buffoons, and squandring his Income with Hawks and Dogs,  I should lay out the Fruits of my honest Industry in a Law-Suit for him, only upon the hopes of being his Clothier? and when the Cause is over, I shall not have the Benefit of my Project, for want of Money to go to Market. Look ye, Gentlemen, John Bull is but a plain Man; but John Bull knows when he is ill used. I know the Infirmity of our Family; we are apt to play the Boon-Companion, and throw away our Money in our Cups: But it was an unfair thing in you, Gentlemen, to take Advantage of my Weakness, to keep a parcel of roaring Bulleys about me, Day and Night, with Huzza's, and Hunting-Horns, and Ringing the Changes on Butchers Cleavers; never to let me cool, and make me set my Hands to Papers, when I could hardly hold my Pen. There will come a Day of Reckoning for all that Proceeding. In the mean time, Gentlemen, I beg you will let me into my Affairs a little, and that you would not grudge me very small Remainder of a very great Estate.
CHAP. V. Esquire South's Message and Letter to Mrs. Bull.

THE Arguments us'd by Hocus, and the rest of the Guardians, had hitherto prov'd insufficient. John and his Wife could not be perswaded to bear the Expence of Esquire South's Law-Suit. They thought it reasonable, that since he was to have the Honour and Advantage, he would bear the greatest Share of the Charges; and retrench what he lost to Sharpers, and spent upon Country-Dances, and Puppet-Plays, to apply it to that use. This was not very grateful to the Esquire: Therefore, as the last Experiment, he was resolved to send Signior  Benenato, Master of his Fox-Hounds, to Mrs. Bull, to try what good he could do with her. This Signior Benenato had all the Qualities of a fine Gentleman, that were fit to Charm a Lady's Heart; and if any Person in the World could have perswaded her, it was he: But such was her unshaken Fidelity to her Husband, and the constant Purpose of her Mind to pursue his Interest, that the most refined Arts of Gallantry, that were practis'd, could not seduce her Loyal Heart. The Necklaces, Diamond Crosses, and rich Bracelets that were offer'd, she rejected with the utmost Scorn and Disdain. The Musick and Serenades that were given her, sounded more ungratefully in her Ears, than the Noise of a Screech Owl; however she receiv'd Esquire South's Letter, by the Hands of Signior Benenato, with that Respect which became his Quality. The Copy of the Letter is as follows; in which you will observe he Changes, a little, his usual Stile.
MADAM,

THE Writ of Ejectment against Philip Baboon, pretended Lord Strutt, is just ready to pass; there wants but a few necessary Forms, and a Verdict or two more, to put me in the quiet Possession of my Honour and Estate: I question not, but that, according to your wonted Generosity and Goodness, you will give it the finishing Stroke; an Honour that I would grudge any Body, but your self. In order to ease you of some part of the Charges, I promise to furnish Pen, Ink and Paper, provided you pay for the Stamps. Besides, I have order'd my Steward to pay, out of the readiest and best of my Rents, Five Pounds ten Shillings a Year, 'till my Suit is finished. I wish you Health and Happiness, being, with due Respect,
MADAM,
Your assured Friend, SOUTH.

 What Answer Mrs. Bull return'd to this Letter, you shall know in my Third Part, only they were at a pretty good distance in their Proposals; for as Esquire South only offer'd to be at the Charges of Pen, Ink and Paper, Mrs Bull refus'd any more than to lend her Barge, to carry his Counsel to Westminster-Hall.
FINIS.
Books Sold by J. Morphew, near Stationers-Hall.

LAW is a Bottomless-Pit: Exemplified in the Case of the Lord Strut, John Ball, Nicholas Frog, and Lewis Baboon; who spent all they had in a Law-Suit. Printed from a Manuscript found in the Cabinet of the famous Sir Humphry Polesworth. The Second Edition. Price 3 d.

Some Remarks on the Barrier Treaty between Her Majesty and the States-General. By the Author of the Conduct of the Allies. To which are added, the said Barrier-Treaty, with the two Separate Articles; Paart of the Counter-Project; The Sentiments of Prince Eugene and Count Sinzendorf upon the said Treaty; And a Representation of the English Merchants at Bruges. Price 6 d.

The Sixth Edition Corrected, of the Conduct of the Allies, and of the Late Ministry, in beginning and carrying on the present War. Price 6 d.

Just Publish'd, in a small Pocket Volume, on a fair Elzevir Letter,

The Examiners for the Year 1711. To which is prefix'd, A Letter to the Examiner. Sold by John Morphew, and A. Dodd, at the Peacock without Temple-Bar.

JOHN BULL Still In His SENSES: BEING THE THIRD PART OF Law is a Bottomless-Pit.

Printed from a Manuscript found in the Cabinet of the famous Sir Humphry Polesworth: And Publish'd (as well as the two former Parts) by the Author of the New Atalantis.

LONDON: Printed for John Morphew, near Stationer's-Hall, 1712. (Price 4d.)

THE CONTENTS.

    THE Publisher's Preface
    CHAP. I. The Character of John Bull's Mother.
    CHAP. II. The Character of John Bull's Sister Peg; with the Quarrels that happen'd between Master and Miss in their Childhood.
    CHAP. III Jack's Charms, or the Method by which he gain'd Peg's Heart.
    CHAP. IV. How the Relations Reconcil'd John and his Sister Peg, and what Return Peg made John's Message.
    CHAP. V. Of some Quarrels that happen'd after Peg was taken into the Family.
    CHAP. VI. The Conversation between John Bull and his Wife.
    CHAP. VII. Of the hard Shifts Mrs. Bull was put to, to preserve the Mannor of Bullocks-Hatch, with Sir Roger's Method of keeping off importunate Duns.
    CHAP. VIII. A Continuation of the Conversation between John Bull and his Wife.
    CHAP. IX. A Copy of Nic. Frog's Letter to John Bull.
    CHAP. X. Of some extraordinary Things that pass'd at the Salutation Tavern, in the Conference between Bull, Frog, Esquire South and Lewis Baboon.


The Publisher's PREFACE.

THE World is much indebted to the famous Sir Humphry Polesworth, for his ingenious and impartial Account of John Bull's Law-Suit; yet there is just Cause of Complaint against him, in that he retails it only by Parcels, and won't give us the whole Work; This forces me, who am only the Publisher, to bespeak the Assistance of his Friends and Acquaintance, to engage him to lay aside that stingy Humour, and gratify the Curiosity of the Publick, at once. He pleads in excuse, that they are only private Memoirs, wrote for his own Use, in a loose Style, to serve as a help to his ordinary Conversation. I represented to him the good Reception the two first Parts had met, that tho' they had been calculated by him, only for the Meridian of Grubstreet, yet they were taken Notice of by the better sort; that the World was now sufficiently acquainted with John Bull, and interested it self in his little Concerns. He Answer'd with a Smile, that he had indeed some trifling Things to impart that concerned John Bull's Relations and Domestick Affairs; if these would satisfy me, he gave me free leave to make use of them, because they would serve to make the History of the Law-Suit more intelligible. When I had look'd over the Manuscript, I found likewise some further Account of the Composition, which perhaps may not be unacceptable to such as have read the two former Parts.
CHAP. I. The Character of John Bull's Mother.

JOHN had a Mother, whom he Lov'd and Honour'd extremely, a Discreet, Grave, Sober Good Condition'd, Cleanly Old Gentlewoman, as ever liv'd; she was none of your Cross-grain'd termagant  scolding Jades, that one had as good be hang'd as live in the House with, such as are always censuring the Conduct, and telling scandalous Stories of their Neighbours, extolling their own good Qualities, and undervaluing those of others. On the contrary, she was of a Meek Spirit, and as she was strictly Virtuous her self, so she always put the best Construction upon the Words and Actions of her Neighbours, except where they were irreconcileable to the Rules of Honesty and Decency. She was neither one of your precise Prudes, nor one of your phantastical old Belles, that Dress themselves like Girls of Fifteen; as she neither wore a Ruff, Fore-head Cloth, nor High-crown'd Hat, so she had laid aside Feathers, Flowers, and crimpt Ribons in her Head-dress, Furbulow Scarfs and Hoop'd Petticoats. She scorn'd to Patch and Paint, yet she lov'd to keep her Hands and her Face Clean. Tho' she wore no flaunting lac'd Ruffles, she would not keep her self in a constant Sweat with greasy Flannel: Tho' her Hair was not stuck with Jewels, she was not asham'd of a Diamond Cross; she was not like some Ladies, hung about with Toys and Trinkets, Twiser Cases, Pocket-Glasses and Essence Bottles; she us'd only a Gold Watch and an Almanack, to mark the Hours and the Holy-Days. Her Furniture was neat and genteel, well fancy'd with a bon Goust. As she affected not the Grandeur of a State with a Canopy, she thought there was no Offence in an Elbow Chair; she had laid aside your Carving, Gilding and Japan Work, as being too apt to gather Dirt, but she never could be prevail'd upon to part with plain Wainscot and clean Hangings. There are some Ladies that affect to smell a stink in every Thing; they are always highly perfum'd, and continually burning Frankincense in their Rooms; she was above such Affectation, yet she never would lay aside the Use of Brooms and scrubbing Brushes, and scrupl'd not to lay her Linnen in fresh Lavender: She was no less genteel in her Behaviour, well-bred without Affectation, in the due mean between one of your affected Cursying  pieces of Formality, and your Romps that have no regard to the common Rules of Civility. There are some Ladies that affect a Mighty regard for their Relations; We must not Eat to Day, for my Uncle Tom, or my Cousin Betty dy'd this time ten Years; Let's have a Ball to Night, it is my Neighbour such a ones Birth-day; she look'd upon all this as Grimace; yet she constantly observ'd her Husband's Birth-day, her Wedding-day, and some few more. Tho' she was a truly good Woman, and had a sincere Motherly Love for her Son John, yet there wanted not those who endeavour'd to create a Misunderstanding between them, and they had so far prevail'd with him once, that he turn'd her out of Doors to his geeat Sorrow, as he found afterwards, for his Affairs went all at sixes and sevens. She was no less Judicious in the turn of her Conversation and Choice of her Studies, in which she far exceeded all her Sex; your Rakes that hate the Company of all sober, grave Gentlewomen, would bear hers, and she would by her handsome manner of proceeding sooner reclaim than some that were more sower and reserv'd; she was a zealous Preacher up of Chastity, and Conjugal Fidelity in Wives, and by no means a Friend to the new-fangl'd Doctrine of the Indispensible Duty of Cuckoldom: Tho she advanc'd her Opinions with a becoming Assurance, yet she never usher'd them in, as some positive Creatures will do, with dogmatical Assertions, This is infallible; I cannot be mistaken; none but a Rogue can deny it. It has been observ'd that such People are oftner in the Wrong than any Body; tho' she had a thousand good Qualities, she was not without her Faults, amongst which one might perhaps reckon too great Lenity to her Servants, to whom she always gave good Counsel, but often too gentle Correction. I thought I could not say less of John Bull's Mother, because she bears a part in the following Transactions.

CHAP. II. The Character of John Bull's Sister Peg, with the Quarrels that happen'd between Master and Miss, in their Childhood.

JOHN had a Sister a poor Girl that had been starv'd at Nurse; any Body would have guess'd Miss to have been bred up under the Influence of a cruel Step-Dame, and John to be the Fondling of a tender Mother. John look'd ruddy and plump, with a pair of Cheeks like a Trumpeter; Miss look'd pale and wan, as if she had the Green-Sickness; and no wonder for John was the Darling, he had all the good Bits, was cramm'd with good Pullet, Chicken, Pig, Goose and Capon; while Miss had only a little Oatmeal and Water, or a dry Crust without Butter. John had his golden Pippens, Peaches and Nectarnes; poor Miss a Crap Apple, Sloe or Blackberry. Master lay in the best Apartment, with his Bed Chamber toward the South Sun. Miss lodg'd in a Garret, expos'd to the North Wind, which shrevel'd her Countenance; however, this Usage tho it stunted the poor Girl in her Growth, gave her a hardy Constitution; she had Life and Spirit in abundance, and knew when she was ill used; Now and then she would seize upon John's Commons, snatch a Leg of a Pullet, or a bit of good Beef, for which they were sure to go to Fisticuffs. Master was indeed too strong for her, but Miss would not yield in the least Point, but ev'n when Master had got her down, she would scratch and bite like a Tyger; when he gave her a Cuff on the Ear, she would prick him with her Knitting-Needle. John brought a great Chain one Day to tye her to the Bed Post, for which Affront Miss aim'd a Pen-knife at his Heart: In short, these Quarrels grew up to rooted Aversions, they gave one another Nicknames, she call'd him Gundyguts, and he call'd her Lousy Peg: Tho' the Girl was a right clever Wench as any was, and thro' her pale Looks, you might discern Spirit and Vivacity, which made her not indeed a perfect Beauty, but something that was agreeable. It was barbarous  in Parents not to take Notice of these early Quarrels, and make them live better together, such Domestick Fewds proving afterwards the occasion of Misfortunes to them both. Peg had indeed some odd Humours and comical Antipathy, for which John would jeer her. What think you of my Sister Peg (says he) that faints at the Sound of an Organ, and yet will dance and frisk at the Noise of a Bagpipe? What's that to you, Gundy-guts, (quoth Peg) every Body's to chuse their own Musick.' Then Peg had taken a Fancy not to say her Pater-noster, which made People imagine strange things of her. Of the three Brothers that have made such a Clutter in the World, Lord Peter, Martin and Jack; Jack had of late been her Inclinations; Lord Peter she detested; nor did Martin stand much better in her good Graces, but Jack had found the way to her Heart. I have often admir'd what Charms she discover'd in that aukward Booby, till I talk'd with a Person that was acquainted with the Intrigue, who gave me the following Account of it.
CHAP. III. Jack's Charms, or the Method by which he gain'd Peg's Heart.

IN the first place, Jack was a very young Fellow, by much the youngest of the three Brothers, and People indeed wonder'd how such a young upstart Jackanapes shou'd grow so pert and saucy, and take so much upon him. (2.) Jack brag'd of greater Abilities than other Men; he was well gifted, as he pretended; I need not tell you what secret Influence that has upon the Ladies. (3.) Jack had a most scandalous Tongue, and persuaded Peg that all Mankind besides himself were pox'd by that scarletfac'd Whore Signiora Bubonia. As for his Brother Lord Peter, the Tokens were evident in him Blotches, Scabs, and the Corona: His Brother Martin though he was not quite so bad, had some nocturnal Pains, which his Friends pretended were only Scorbutical; but, he was sure, proceeded from a worse Cause. By such malicious Insinuations, he had possess'd the Lady, that he was  the only Man in the World, of a sound, pure, and untainted Constitution: Tho' there were some that stuck not to say, that Signiora Bubonia and Jack rail'd at one another, only the better to hide an Intrigue; and, that Jack had been found with Signiora under his Cloak, carrying her home in a dark stormy Night. (4.) Jack was a prodigious Ogler; he would Ogle you the outside of his Eye inward, and the White upward. (5.) Jack gave himself out for a Man of great Estate in the Fortunate Islands, of which the sole Property was vested in his Person; by this Trick he cheated abundance of poor People of small Sums, pretending to make over Plantations in the said Islands; but, when the poor Wretches came there with Jack's Grant, they were beat, mock'd, and turn'd out of Doors. (6.) I told you that Peg was whimsical, and lov'd any thing that was particular: In that way Jack was her Man; for he neither thought, spoke, dress'd, nor acted like other Mortals: He was for your bold Strokes; he rail'd at Fops, tho' himself the most affected in the World; instead of the common Fashion, he would visit his Mistress in a Mourning Cloak, Band, short Cuffs, and a peaked Beard. He invented a way of coming into a Room backwards, which he said shew'd more Humility, and less Affectation: where other People stood, he sat; where they sat, he stood; when he went to Court, he us'd to kick away the State, and sit down by his Prince Cheek by Choul, Confound these States (says he) they are a modern Invention; when he spoke to his Prince he always turn'd his Br [...]ch upon him; if he was advis'd to fast for his Health he would eat Roast beef; if he was allow'd a more plentiful Diet, then he would be sure that Day to live upon Watergruel; he would cry at a Wedding, laugh and make Jests at a Funeral. He was no less singular in his Opinions; you would have burst your sides to hear him talk Politicks: All Governments (says he) is founded upon the right Distribution of Punishments; decent Executions keep the World in awe; for that Reason the Majority of Mankind  ought to be hang'd every Year; for Example, I suppose, the Magistrate ought to pass an irreversible Sentence upon all blue-ey'd Children from the Cradle; but that there may be some shew of Justice in his proceeding, these Children ought to be Train'd up, by Masters appointed for that purpose, to all sorts of Villany, that they may deserve their Fate, and the Execution of them may serve as an Object of Terror to the rest of Mankind. As to the giving of Pardons he had this singular Method, That when these Wretches had the Ropes about their Necks, it should be enquired, who believ'd they should be hanged, and who not? The first were to be Pardon'd, the last hang'd out-right: Such as were once pardon'd, were never to be hang'd afterwards, for any Crime whatsoever. He had such Skill in Physiognomy, that he would pronounce peremptorily upon a Mans Face, That Fellow (says he) do what he will, canâ–ªt avoid Hanging; he has a hanging Look. By the same Art, he would prognosticate a Principality to a Scoundrel. He was no less particular in the Choice of his Studies; they were generally bent towards exploded Chimera's, the perpetum Mobile, the circular Shot, Philosopher's Stone, and silent Gunpowder, making Chains for Flea's, Nets for Flies, and Instruments to unrevel Cobwebs, and split Hairs. Thus, I think, I have given you a distinct Account of the Methods he practis'd upon Peg. Her Brother would now and then ask her. What a Devil dost thou see in that pragmatical Coxcomb, to make thee so in Love with him? He is a fit Match for a Tailor or a Shoemaker's Daughter, but not for you that are a Gentlewoman. Fancy is free (quoth Peg) I'll take my awn way, do you take yours; I do no care for your flaunting Beaus, that gang with their Breasts open, and their Sarks over their Waistcoats, that accost me with set Speeches out of Sidney's Arcadia, or, The Academy of Compliments. Jack is a sober grave Youngman; tho' he has none of your study'd Harangues, his Meaning is sincere: He has a great Regard  to his Father's Will; and he that shews himself a good Son, will make a good Husband; besides, I know he has the Original Deed of Conveyance to the Fortunate Islands; the others are Counterfeits. There is nothing so obstinate as young Ladies in their Amours; the more you Cross them, the Worse they are.
CHAP. IV. How the Relations reconcil'd John and his Sister Peg, and what return Peg made to John's Message.

JOHN BULL, otherwise a good natur'd Man, was very hard-hearted to his Sister Peg, chiefly from an Aversion he had conceived in his Infancy. While he flourish'd, kept a warm House, and drove a plentiful Trade, poor Peg was forc'd to go hawking and pedling about the Streets, selling Knives, Scissars and Shoe-buckles; now and then carry'd a Basket of Fish to the Market; sow'd, spun and knit for a poor Livelihood, till her Fingers-end were sore; and when she could not get Bread for her Family, she was forc'd to hire 'em out at Journey-work to her Neighbours; Yet in these her poor Circumstances, she still preserv'd the Air and Mien of a Gentlewoman; a certain decent Pride, that extorted Respect from the haughtiest of her Neighbours; when she came into any full Assembly, she would not yield the pas to the best of them. If one ask'd her, Are not you related to John Bull? Yes (says she) he has the Honour to be my Brother. So Peg's Affairs went, till all the Relations cry'd out shame upon John, for his barbarous Usage of his own Flesh and Blood; that it was an easie matter for him to put her in a credible way of living, not only without Hurt, but with Advantage to himself, being she was an industrious Person, and might be serviceable to him in his way of Business. Hang her, Jade, (quoth John) I can't endure her, as long as she keeps that Rascal Jack's Company. They told him, the way to reclaim her was to take her into his House; that by Conversation, the childish Humours of their younger days might be worn out. These Arguments were enforc'd  by a certain Incident. It happen'd that John was at that time about making his Will, and entailing his Estate, the very same in which Nic. Frog is namâ–ªd Executor. Now his Sister Peg's Name being in the Entail, he could not make a thorough Settlement without her Consent. There was indeed a malicious Story went about as if John's last Wife had fall'n in love with Jack, as he was eating Custard a Horseback; that she perswaded John to take his Sister Peg into the House the better to drive on her Intrigue with Jack, concluding he would follow his Mistress Peg. All I can infer from this Story is, that when one has got a bad Character in the World, People will report and believe any thing of them, true or false. But to return to my Story; when Peg receiv'd John's Message, she huff'd and storm'd like the Devil: My Brother John (quoth she) is grown wondrous kind hearted all of a suddain, but I meikle doubt, whether it be not mair for his awn Conveniency than my good; he draws up his Weits and his Deeds forsooth, and I mun set my Hand to them, unsight unseen. I like the young Man he has settled upon well enough, but I think I ought to have a valuable Consideration for my Consent: He wants my poor little Farm, because it makes a Nook in his Park Wall; ye may e'en tell him, he has mair than he makes good use of; he gangs up and down drinking, roaring and quarrelling through all the Countrey Merkats making foolish Bargins in his Cups, which he repents when he is sober; like a thriftless Wretch, spending the Goods and Gear that his Fore-Fathers won with the Sweat of their Brows; light come, light goâ–ª he cares not a Farthing: But why should I stand Surety for his silly contracts? the little I have is free, and I can call it my own; Hame's hame be it never so hamely; I ken him well enough, he could never abide me, and when he has his ends he'll e'en use me as he did before; I'm sure I shall be treated like a poor Drudge; I shall be set to tend the Bairns, darn the Hose, and mend the Linnen. Then there's no  living with that auld Carline his Mother, she rails at Jack and Jack's an honester man than any of her Kin: I shall be plagu'd with her Spells and her Paternosters and silly auld warld Ceremonies: I mun never pair my Nails on a Friday, nor begin a Journy on Childermas day, and I mun stand becking and binging as I gang out and into the Hall: Tell him he may e'en gan his get, I'll have nothing to do with him, I'll stay like the poor Country Mouse, in my own Habitation. So Peg talkt; but for all that, by the Interposition of good Friends, and by many a bonny thing that were sent and many more that were promis'd Peg, the matter was concluded, and Peg taken into the House upon certain Articles; one of which was, That she might have the Freedom of Jack's Conversation, and might take him for Better and for Worse, if she pleas'd; provided always, he did not come into the House at unseasonable Hours, and disturb the Rest of the Old Woman, John's Mother.
CHAP. V. Of some Quarrels that happen'd after Peg was taken into the Family.

IT is an old Observation, that the Qnarrels of Relations are harder to reconcile than any other; Injuries from Friends fret and gall more and the Memory of them is not so easily obliterated: This is cunningly represented by one of your old Sages, called Aesop, in the Story of the Bird, that was griev'd extremely, for being wounded with an Arrow feather'd with his own Wing; as also of the Oak that let many a heavy Groan, when he was cleft with a Wedge of his own Timber. There was no Man in the World less subject to Rancour than John Bull, considering how often his good Nature had been Abus'd; yet I don't know, but he was too apt to hearken to tatling People, that carried Tales between him and his Sister Peg, on purpose to sow Jealousies, and set them together by the [...]ars: They say that there were some Hardships put upon [...], that had been better let alone; but it was the Business of good People to restrain the Injuries on  one side, and moderate the Resentments on the other; a good Friend acts both parts, the one without the other will not do. The Purchase-Money of Peg's Farm was ill paid; then Peg lov'd a little good Liquor, and the Servants shut up the Wine-Cellar, but for that Peg found a Trick, for she made a false Key; Peg's Servants complain'd that they were debar'd from all manner of Business, and never suffer'd to touch the least thing within the House; if they offered to come into the Warehouse, then strait went the Yard slap over their Noddle; if they ventur'd into the Counting-Room, a Fellow would throw an Ink bottle at their Head; if they came into the best Apartment, to set any thing there in order, they were saluted with a Broom; if they meddl'd with any thing in the Kitchen, it was odds but the Cook laid them over the Pate with a Ladle; one that would have got into the Stables, was met by two Rascals, who fell to work with him with a Brush and a Curry-comb; some climbing up into the Coach box, were told, that one of their Companions had been there before that could not drive, then slap went the long Whip about their Ears: On the other Hand it was complain'd, that Peg's Servants were always asking for Drink-Money, that they had more than their share of the Christmas-box; to say the Truth, Peg's Lads bustl'd pretty hard for that, for when they were endeavouring to Lock it up, they got in their great Fists, and pull'd out Handfuls of Half-Crowns, some Shillings and Six-pences, others in the Scramble pick'd up Guineas and Broad-pieces. But there happen'd a worse thing than all this, it was complain'd that Peg's Servants had great Stomachs, and brought too many of their Friends and Acquaintance to the Table; that John's Family was like to be Eat out of House and Home. Instead of regulating this Matter as it ought to be, Peg's young Men were thrust away from the Table; then there was the Devil and all to do, Spoons, Plates and Dishes, flew about the Room like mad, and Sir Roger, who was now Major Domo, had enough to do to quiet them. Peg said this  was contrary to Agreement, whereby she was in all things to be treated like a Child of the Family; then she call'd upon those that had made her such fair Promises, and undertook for her Brother John's good Behaviour; but alas! to her Cost, she found that they were the first and readiest to do her the Injury. John at last agreed to this Regulation, that Peg's Footme [...] might sit with his Book-keeper, Journey-men and Apprentices; and Peg â–ªs better sort of Servants might sit with his Footmen, if they pleas'd.

Then they began to order-Plumb Porridge and Minc'd Pies for Peg's Dinner: Peg told them she had an Aversion to that sort of Food; that upon forcing down a Mess of it some Years ago, it threw her into a Fit, 'till she brought it up again: Some alledg'd it was nothing but Humour, that the same Mess should be servâ–ªd up again for Supper, and Breakfast next Morning; others would have made use of a Horn, but the Wiser sort bid let her alone, and she might take to it of her own Accord.
CHAP. VI. The Conversation between John Bull and his Wife.
Mrs. Bull.

THO' our Affairs, Honey are in a bad Condition. I have a better Opinion of them since you seem to be convinc'd of the Ill Course you have been in, and are resolv'd to submit to proper Remedies. But when I consider your immense Debtsâ–ª your foolish Bargains and the general Disorder of your Business, I have a Curiosity to know what Fate or Chance has brought you into this Condition.
J. Bull.

I wish you would talk of some other Subject, the Thoughts of it make me mad, our Family must have their run.
Mrs. Bull.

But such a strange thing as this, never happen'd to any of your Family before; they have had Law Suits, but tho' they spent the Income, they never Mortgag'd the Stock: Sure you must have some of the [...] or the Norfolk Blood in you; prithee give me some Account of thse Matters.
J. Bull.


Who could help it? There lives not such a Fellow by Bread, as that Old Lewis Baboon, it is the cheatingest, contentious Rogue, upon the Face of the Earth. You must know, one Day as Nic. Frog and I were over a Bottle making up an old Quarrel, the old Knave would needs have us drink a Bottle of his Champaigne, and so one after another, till my Friend Nic. and I, not being used to such heady Stuff got bloody Drunk. Lewis all the while, either by the Strength of his Brain, or Flinching his Glass, kept himself sober as a Judge. My worthy Friends (quoth Lewis) henceforth let us live Neighbourly, I am as peaceable and quiet as a Lamb, of my own Temper, but it has been my Misfortune to live among quarrelsom Neighbours. There is but one thing can make us fall out, and that is the Inheritance of Lord Strutt â–ªs Estate; I am content, for Peace sake to wave my Right, and submit to any Expedient to prevent a Law-Suit; I think an equal Division will be the fairest way. Well mov'd Old Lewis (quoth Frog) and I hope my Friend John here will not be Refractory. At the same time he clap'd me on the Back, and slabberâ–ªd me all over from Cheek to Cheek, with his great Tongue. Do as you please, Gentlemen (quoth I) 'tis all one to John Bull. We agreed to part that Night, and next Morning to meet at the Corner of Lord Strutt's Park Wall, with our surveying Instruments, which accordingly we did. Old Lewis carried a Chain and a Semicircle, Nic Paper, Rulers and a Lead Pencil, and I follow'd at some distance with a long Pole. We began first with surveying the Meadow-Grounds, afterwards we measur'd the Corn Fields Close by Close, then we proceeded to the Wood-Lands, the Copper and Tin Mines. All this while Nic. laid down every thing exactly upon Paper, calculated the Acres and Roods to a great Nicety. When we had finish'd the Land, we were going to break into the House and Gardens, to take an Inventory of his Plate, Pictures, and other Furniture.
Mrs. Bull.

What said Lord Strutt to all this?
J. Bull.


As we had almost finish'd our Concern, we were accosted by some of Lord Strutt's Servants: Hey day, what's here? What a Devils the meaning of all these Trangams and Gimcracks, Gentlemen? What, in the name of Wonder, are you go [...]ng about, jumping over my Master's Hedges, and running your Lines cross his Grounds? If you are at any Field-Pastime, you might have ask'd leave, my Master is a civil well-bred Person as any is.
Mrs. Bull.

What could you Answer to this?
J. Bull.

Why truly my Neighbour Frog and I were still hot-headed; we told him his Master was an Old doating Puppy that minded nothing of his own Business; that we were Surveying his Estate, and settling it for him, since he would not do it himself. Upon this there happen'd a Qurrrel but we being stronger than they, sent them away with a Flea in their Ear. They went home, and told their Master, My Lord (say they) there are three odd sort of Fellows going about your Grounds with the strangest Machines that ever we beheld in our Life; I suppose they are going to Rob your Orchard, fell your Trees, or drive away your Cattle; they told us strange things of settling your Estate: One is a lusty old Fellow, in a black Wig, with a black Beard, without Teeth; there's another thick squat Fellow in Trunk-Hose; the third is a little long Nos'd, thin Man. (I was then Lean, being just come out of a fit of Sickness.) I suppose it is fit to send after them, lest they carry something away.
Mrs. Bull.

I fancy this put the Old Fellow in a rare Tweag.
John Bull.

Weak as he was, he call'd for his long Toledo swore and bounc'd about the Room, Sdeath! what am I come to, to be Affronted so by my Tradesmen? I know the Rascals! my Barber, Clothier and Linnen-Draper, dispose of my Estate! bring hither my Blunderbuss I'll warrant ye you shall see Daylight through them. Scoundrels! Dogs! the Scum of the Earth! Frog, that was my Fathers Kitchenboy, he pretend to meddle with my Estate! with my Will! Ah poor Strutt, what art thou come to at last, thou hast liv'd too long in the World, to see thy Age  and Infirmity so despis'd? How will the Ghosts of my noble Ancestors receive these Tidings? They cannot, must not sleep quietly in their Graves. In short, the Old Gentleman was carried off in a Fainting Fit, and after bleeding in both Arms hardly recoverâ–ªd.
Mrs. Bull.

Really this was a very extraordinary way of Proceeding: I long to hear the rest of it.
J. Bull.

After we had come back to the Tavern, and taken t'other Bottle of Champaigne, we quarrell'd a little about the Division of the Estate; Lewis hall'd and pull'd the Map on one side, and Frog and I on t'other, till we had like to have tore the Parchment to pieces. At last Lewis pull'd out a pair of great Taylor's Shears and clip'd off a Corner for himself, which he said was a Mannor that lay convenient for him, and left Frog and me the rest to dispose of, as we pleas'd. We were over-joy'd, to think Lewis was contented with so little, not smelling what was at the bottom of the Plot. There happen'd, indeed, an Incident, that gave us some Disturbance; A Cunning Fellow, one of my Servants, two Days after, peeping through the Key-hole, observ'd that Old Lewis had stole away our part of the Map, and saw him fiddling and turning the Map from one Corner to the other, trying to join the two pieces together again: He was muttering something to himself, which he did not well hear, only these Words, 'Tis great Pity, 'tis great Pity! My Servant added, that he believ'd this had some ill-meaning; I told him he was a Coxcomb, always pretending to be Wiser than his Companions; Lewis and I are good Friends, he's an honest Fellow, and, I dare say, will stand to his Bargain. The Sequel of the Story prov'd this Fellow's Suspicion to be too well-grounded; for Lewis revealâ–ªd our whole Secret to the Deceas'd Lord Strutt, who, in Reward to his Treachery, and Revenge to Frog and me, settled his whole Estate upon the present Philip Baboon: Then we understood what he meant by piecing the Map together.
Mrs. Bull.

And was you surpris'd at this? Had not Lord Strutt reason to be Angry? Would you have been contented to have been so us'd your self?
J. Bull.


Why, truly Wife, it was not easily reconciled to the common Methods, but then it was the Fashion to do such things: I have read of your Golden Age, your Silver Age, &c. one might justly call this the Age of the Lawyers. There was hardly a Man of Substance in all the Country, but had [...] Counterfeit that pretended to his Estate: As the Philosophers say, that there is a Duplicate of every Terrestrial Animal at Sea, so it was in this Age of the Lawyers, there was at least two of every thing; nay, o' my Conscience, I think there were three Esquire Hackums at one time. Lewis Baboon entertainâ–ªd a Fellow that call'd himself John Bull's Heir; I knew him no more than the Child unborn, yet he brought me into some Trouble and Expence. There was another that pretended to be Esq. South; and two Lord Strutts, you know. In short, it was usual for a parcel of Fellows to meet, and dispose of the whole Estates in the Country: This lies convenient for me Tom; Thou would do more good with that Dick, than the Old Fellow that has it â–ª So to Law they went with the true Owners; the Lawyers got well by it, every Body else was undone. It was a common thing for an honest Man, when he came Home at Night, to find another Fellow domineering in his Family, hectoring his Servants, calling for Supper, and pretending to go to Bed to his Wife. In every House you might observe two Sofia's quarrelling who was Master: For my own part, I am still afraid of the same Treatment, that I should find some Body behind my Counter selling my Broad Cloath.
Mrs Bull.

There are a sort of Fellows that they call Banterers, and Bambouzlers, that play such Tricks; but, it seems, these Fellows were in earnest.
J. Bull.

I begin to think that Justice is a better Rule than Conveniency, for all some People make so slight on't.
CHAP. VII. Of the hard Shifts Mrs. Bull was put to, to preserve the Mannor of Bullock's Hatch; with Sir Roger's Method to keep off importunate Duns.

AS John Bull and his Wife were talking together, they were surprizâ–ªd with a sudden knocking at  the Door, those wicked Scriveners and Lawyers no doubt (quoth John) and so it was; some asking for the Money he ow'd, and others warning to prepare for the approaching Term: What a cursed Life do I lead â–ªquoth John)? Debt is like deadly Sin; for God-sake, Sir Roger, get me rid of these Fellows. I'll warrant you (quoth Sir Roger) leave them to me. And in eed it was pleasant enough to observe Sir Roger's Method with these importunate Duns; his sincere Friendship for John Bull, made him submit to many things, for his Service, which he would have scornâ–ªd to have done for himself. Sometimes he would stand at the Door with his long Poll to keep off the Duns, 'till John got out at the Back-Door. When the Lawyers and Tradesmen brought extravagant Bills, Sir Roger us'd to bargain before hand, for leave to cut off a quarter of a Yard in any part of the Bill he pleased; he wore a pair of Scissars in his Pocket for this purpose, and would snip it off so nicely, as you cannot imagine; like a [...] Goldsmith he kept all your Holydays; there was not one wanting in his Calendar; when ready Money was scarce, he would set them a telling a tho [...] Pounds and Six-pences, Groats, and Three pe [...] Pieces: It would have done your Heart good to have seen him charge thro' an Army of Lawyers, Attorney's, Clerks and Tradesmen; sometimes with Sword in Hand, at other times nuzling like an Eel in the Mud: When a Fellow stuck like a Bur, that there was no shaking him off, he [...] to be a mighty inquisitive about the Health of his Uncles and Aunts in the Country; he could call them all by their Names, for he knew every Body, and could talk to them in their own way. The extremely Impertinent he would send away to see some strange Sight, as the Dragon at Hockley the Hole; or bid him call the 30th of next February. Now and then you would see him in the Kitchen, weighing the Beef and Butter, paying ready Money, that the Maids might not run a-tick at the Market; and the Butchers, by bribing of them, sell Damagâ–ªd and Light Meat. Another time he would slip into the Cellar, and gage the Casks: In his leisure Minutes he  was posting his Books, and gathering in his Debts; uch frugal Methods were necessary where Money was so scarce, and Duns so numerous. All this while John kept his Credit, could show his Head both at Change and Westminister-Hall; no Man protested his Bill, nor refus'd his Bond, only the Sharpers and the Scriveners; the Lawyers and other Clerks pelted Sir Roger as he went along. The Squirters were at it with their Kennel-Water, for they were mad for the loss of their Bubble, and that they could not get him to Mortgage the Mannor of Bullocks Hatch. Sir Roger shook his Ears and nuzled along, well-satisfied within himself that he was doing a charitable Work, in rescuing an honest Man from the Claws of Harpies and Blood-suckers. Mrs. Bull did all that an affectionate Wife, and a good Housewife, could do; yet the Boundaries of Virtues are indivisible Lines, it is impossible to march up close to the Frontiers of Frugality, without entering the Territories of Parsimony. Your good Housewifes, are apt to look into the minutest Things: Therefore some blam'd Mrs. Bull for new heel-piecing her Shoes, grudging a quarter of a Pound of Soap and Sand to scowre the Rooms, but especially, that she would not allow her Maids and Apprentices the Benefit of John Bunyan, the London-Apprentice, or the Seven-Champions, in the Black Letter.
CHAP. VIII. A Continuation of the Conversation betwixt John Bull and his Wife.
Mrs. Bull,

IT is a most sad Life we lead, my Dear to be so teaz'd paying Interest for Old Debts, and still contracting new Ones. However I don't blame you for vindicating your Honour and chastizing old Lewis; to curb the Insolent, protect the Opprest, recover ones own, and defend what one has, are good Effects of the Law: The only thing I want to know is how you came to make an End of your Money before you finish'd your Law Suit.
John Bull.

I was told by the Learned in the Law, that my Suit stood upon three firm Pillars: More Mony for more Law, more Law for more Mony, and no  Composition. More Money for more Law was plain Demonstration, for who can go to Law without Mony? and it was as plain, that any Man that has Mony, may have Law for it. The third was as Evident as the other two; for what Composition could be made with a Rogue that never kept a Word he said?
Mrs. Bull.

I think you are most likely to get out of this Labyrinth by the second Door, by want of ready Money to purchase this precious Commodity: But you seem not only to have bought too much of it, but have paid too dear for what you have bought; else how was it possible to run so much in Debt, when, at this very time the yearly Income of what is Mortgag'd to those Usurers would discharge Hocus's Bills, and give you your Belly full of Law, or all your Life, without running one Six Pence in Debt? You have been bred up to Business; I suppose you can Cypher, I wonder you never us'd your Pen and Ink.
J. Bull.

Now you urge me too far; prithee, dear Wife, hold thy Tongue. Suppose a young Heir, heedless, raw, and unexperienced, full of Spirit and Vigour, with a favourite Passion, in the Hands of [...] Scriveners: Such Fellows are like your Wire [...] Mills, if they get hold of a Man's Finger, [...] pull in his whole Body at last, till they squeeze [...] Blood and Guts out of him. When I wanted Mon [...], half a dozen of these Fellows were always waiting in my Antichamber, with their Securities ready drawn. I was tempted with the Ready, some Farm or other went to Pot. I receiv'd with one Hand, and paid it away with the other, to Lawyers; that, like so many Hell hounds, were ready to devour me. Then the Rogues would plead Poverty, and Scarcity of Money, that always ended in receiving Ninety for the Hundred After they had got Possession of my best Rents, they were able to supply me with my own Mony. But what was worse, when I look'd into the Securities, there was no Clause of Redemption.
Mrs. Bull.

No Clause of Redemption, say you; that's hard!
John Bull.


No great matter, for I cannot pay them. They had got a worse Trick than that; the same Man bought and Sold to himself, paid the Mony, and gave the Acquittance: The same Man was Butcher and Grasier, Brewer and Butler, Cook and Poulterer. There is something still worse than all this; there came twenty Bills upon me at once, which I had given Mony to discharge; I was like to be pull'd to Pieces, by Brewer, Butcher, and Baker, even my Herb-Woman dun'd me as I went along the Streets (thanks to my Friend Sir R [...]ger, else I must have gone to Goal). When I askd the meaning of this, I was told, the Mony went to the Lawyers; Counsel won't tick, Sir; Hocus was urging; my Book-keeper sat Sotting all Day, playing at Purt, and All-fours: In short, by griping Usurers, devouring Lawyers, and negligent Servants, I am brought to this pass.
Mrs. Bull.

This was hard usage! but methinks, the least reflection might have retriev'd you.
J. Bull.

'Tis true, yet consider my Circumstances, my Honour was engag'd, and I did not know how to get out; besides, I was for Five Years often Drunk, always muddled, they carried me from Tavern to Tavern, to Alehouses and Brandy-shops, brought me acquainted with such strange Dogs: There goes the prittiest Fellow in the World (says one) for managing a Jury, make him yours. There's another can pick you up Witnesses. Serjeant such a one has a Silver Tongue at the Bar. I believe, in time I should have retain'd every single Person within the Inns of Court. The Night after a Trial, I treated the Lawyers, their Wives and Daughters, with Fiddles, Hautboys, Drums and Trumpets. I was always hot-headed; then they placâ–ªd me in the middle, the Attorneys and their Clerks dancing about me, hooping and hallowing, Long live John Bull, the Glory and Support of the Law!
Mrs. Bull.

Really, Husband, you went through a very notable Course.
John Bull.

One of the things that first alarm'd me was, that they shew'd a Spite against my poor Old Mother; Lord (quoth I) what makes you so Jealous  of a poor, old, innocent Gentlewoman, that minds only her Prayers, and her Practice of Piety, she never meddles in any of your Concerns? Foh (say they) to see a handsomeâ–ª brisk, genteelâ–ª young Fellow, so much govern'd by a doating old Woman; why don't yo and suck the Bubby? Do you consider she keeps you of a good Jointure? she has the best of your Estate settled upon her for Rent-Charge: Hang her, old Thief, turn her out of Doors, seize her Lands, and let her go to Law if she dares. Soft and fair, Gentlemen (quoth I) my Mother's my Mother, our Family are not of an unnatural Temper. Tho I don't take all her Advice, I won't seize her Jointure; long may she enjoy it, good Woman, I don't grudge it her: She allows me now and then a Brace of Hundreds for my Law-Suit; that's pretty fair. About this time the old Gentlewoman fell ill of an odd sort of a Distemper; it began with a Coldness and Numbness in her Limbs, which by degrees affected the Nerves (I think the Physicians call them) seiz'd the Brain, and at last ended in a Lethargy. It betray'd it self at first in a sort of Indifference and Carelesness in all her Actions, Coldness to her best Friends, and an Aversion to stir or go about the common Offices of Life. She that was the cleanliest Creature in the World, never shrunk now if you set a Close-stool under her Nose. She that would sometimes rattle off her Servants pretty sharply, now if she saw them drink, or heard them talk profanely, never took any notice of it. Instead of her usual Charities to deserving Persons, she threw away her Money upon roaring swearing Bullies, and randy Beggars, that went about the Streets. What is the matter with the old Gentlewoman (said every Body) she nev [...] us'd to do in this manner? At last the Distemper grew more violent, and threw her downright into ravi [...] Fits; in which she shriek'd out so loud, that she d [...] sturb'd the whole Neighbourhood. In her Fits [...] call'd out upon one Sir William. Oh! Sir William, [...] hast betray'd me! kill'd me! stabb'd me! sold me [...] Cuckold of Dover! See, see, Clum with his bloody Kni [...] seize him, seize him, stop him! Behold the the Fury, [...]  her hissing Snakes! Where's my Son John! is he well! is he well! poor Man, I pity him! And abundance of such strange Stuff, that no Body could make any thing of. I knew little of the Matter, for when I enquir'd about her Health, the Answer was, that she was in a good moderate way. Physicians were sent for in haste; Sir Roger with great difficulty, brought R [...]ff; G [...]th came upon the first Message. There were several others call'd in; but, as usual upon such Occasions, they differ'd strangely at the Consultation. At last they divided into two Parties, one sided with G [...]th, and the other with R [...]ff. Dr. G [...]th. This Case seems to me to be plainly Hysterical; the Old Woman is Whimsical; it is a common thing for your Old Women to be so: I'll pawn my Life, Blisters with the Steel Diet, will recover her. Others suggested strong Purging and Letting of Blood because she was Plethorick. Some went so far as to say the Old Woman was mad, and nothing would do better than a little Corporal Correction. R [...]ff. Gentlemen, you are mistaken in this Case, it is plainly an accute Distemper, and she cannot hold out three Days, without she is supported with strong Cordials. I came into the Room with a good deal of Concern, and ask'd them what they thought of my Mother? In no manner of Danger, I vow to God (quoth G [...]th) the Old Woman is Hysterical, Fanciful, Sir, I vow to God. I tell you, Sir (says R [...]ff) she can't live three Days to an end, unless there is some very effectual Course taken with her, she has a Malignant Fever. Then Fool, Puppy, and Blockhead, was the best Words they gave. I could hardly restrain them from throwing the Ink-Bottles at one another's Heads. I forgot to tell you, that one Party of the Physicians desir'd I would take my Sister Peg into the House to Nurse her, but the Old Gentlewoman would not hear of that. At last one Physician ask'd if the Lady had ever been us'd to take Laudanum; her Maid answer'd, not that she knew; that indeed there was a High German Livery-Man of hers, one Van Ptschirnsooker, that gave her a sort of a Quack Powder. The Physician desir'd to see it; Nay, says he, there is Opium in this, I am sure.
Mrs. Bull.


I hope you examin'd a little into this Matter.
John Bull.

I did indeed, and discover'd a great Mystery of Iniquity. The Witnesses made Oath, That they had heard some of the Livery-men frequently railing at their Mistress. They said, She was a troublesome fiddle faddle old Woman, and so ceremonious that there was no bearing of her. They were so plagu'd with bowing and cringing as they went in and out of the Room, that their Backs ach'd; she us'd to scold at one for his dirty Shoes, at another for his greasie Hair, and not combing his Head: Then she was so passionate and fiery in her Temper, that there was no living with her; she wanted something to sweeten her Blood; that they never had a quiet Night's rest, for getting up in the Morning to early Sacraments; that they wish'd they could find some way or another to keep the old Woman quiet in her Bed. Such Discourses were often overheard among the Livery-men, that the said Van Ptschirnsooker had undertook this Matter. A Maid made Affidavit, That she had seen the said Van Ptschirnsooker one of the Livery-Men, frequently making up of Medicines and administring them to all the Neighbours; that she saw him one Morning make up the Powder which her Mistress took; that she had the Curiosity to ask him whence he had the Ingredients? They come (says he) from several Parts of de World; dis I have from Geneva, dat from Rome, this White Powder from Amsterdam, and the Red from Edinburgh; but the chief Ingredient of all comes from Turkey. It was likewise proved, that the said Van Ptschirnsooker had been frequently seen at the Rose with Jack, who was known to bea [...] an inveterate Spite to his Mistress; That he brought [...] certain Powder to his Mistress, which the Examina [...] believes to be the same, and spoke the following Word [...] â–ª Madam, here is grand Secret van de Warld; my sweetni [...] Powder, it does temperate de Humour, despel de Wind [...] and cure de Vapour; it lulleth and quieteth de Animal Sp [...] rits, procuring Rest, and pleasant Dreams: It is the infall [...] ble Receipt for de Scurvy, all Heass in de Bloodt, and Br [...] ing  out upon de Skin; It is de true Blood Stancher, stopping all Fluxes of de bloodt. If you do take dis, you will never ail any ding; it will Cure you of all Diseases: And abundance more to this purpose, which the Examinant does not remember.

John Bull was interrupted in his Story by a Porter, that brought him a Letter from Nicholas Frog, which is as follows.
CHAP. IX. A Copy of Nic. Frog's Letter to John Bull. [John Bull Reads]
Friend John.

WHat [...]lum is it that makes thee jealous of thy old Friend Nicholas? Hast thou forgot how some Years ago he took thee out of the Spunging House? ['Tis true, my Friend Nic. did so, and I thank him; but he made me pay a swinging Reck'ning.] Thou begins now to repent the Bargain that thou wast so fond of; and, if thou durst, would forswear thy own Hand and Seal. Thou sayst, that thou hast purchas'd me too great an Estate already; when at the same time thou knowest I have only a Mortgage: 'Tis true, I have Possession, and the Tenants own me for Master; but, has not Esquire South the Equity of Redemption? [No doubt, and will redeem it very speedily; poor Nic. has only Possession, eleven Points of the Law] As for the Turnpikes I have set up they are for other People not for my Friand John: I have order'd my Servant constantly to attend to [...]et thy Carriages through without paying any thing: only I hope thou wilt not come too heavy laden to spoil my Ways. Certainly I have just Cause of Offence against thee my Friend, for supposing it possible that thou and I should ever quarrel: What Hounsfoot is it that puts these Whims in thy Head? Ten Thousand Last of Devils haul me if I don't love thee as I love my Life. [No question, as the Devil loves Holy-Water!] Does not thy own Hand and Seal oblige [...] to purchase for me, till I say it is enough? Are not [...] Words plain. I say it is not enough. Dost thou think thy Fri [...]nd Nicholas Frog made a Child's Bargain? Mark the Words of thy Contract, tota pecunia, with all thy Money. [Very well! I have purchas'd with my own Money, my Childrens, and my Grand childrens Money, is not that enough? Well  tota pecunia let it be, for at present I have none at all; He would not have me purchase with other Peoples Money sure, since tota pecunia is the Bargain; I think it is plain, no more Money, no more Purchase.] And whatever the World may say, Nicholas Frog is but a poor Man in comparison of the rich, the opulent John Bull great Clothier of the Warld. I have had many Losses, six of my best Sheep were drown'd, and the Water has come into my Cellar, and spoil'd a Pipe of my best Brandy: It would be a more friendly Act in thee to carry a Brief about the Country to repair the Losses of thy poor Friend. Is it not evident to all the World, that I am still hem'd in by Lewis Baboon? is he not just upon my Borders? [And so he will be if I Purchase a thousand Acres more, unless he gets some Body betwixt them.] I tell thee Friend John thou hast Flatterers, that persuade thee that thou art a Man of Business; do not believe them: If thou would'st still leave thy Affairs in my Hands thou should'st see how handsomly I would deal by thee. That ever thou should'st be dazzled with the inchanted Islands, and Mountains of Gold, that old Lewis promises thee! 'Dswounds! Why dost thou not lay out thy Money to Purchase a Place at Court, of honest Israel? I tell thee, thou must not so much as think of a Composition. [Not think of a Composition, that's hard indeed; I can't help thinking of it, if I would.] Thou complainst of want of Money, let thy Wife and Daughter burn the God Lace upon their Petticoats, sell thy fat Cattle; retrench but a Sirloin of Beef, and a Peck-Loaf in a Week from thy gormandizing Guts [Retrench my Beef, a Dog! Retrench my Beef! then it is plain the Rascal has an ill Design upon me, he would starve me.] Mortgage thy Manor of Bullocks Hatch, or Pawn thy Crop for Ten Year. [A Rogue! Part with my Country Seat, my Patrimony, all that I have left in the World, Iâ–ªll see him hang'd first.] Why hast thou chang'd thy Attorney? Can any Man manage thy Cause better for thee? [Very pleasant! because a Man has a good Attorney, he must never make an End of his Law-Suit.] Ah John, John, I wish thou knevvest thy ovvn Mind: Thou art as fickle as the Wind. I  tell thee thou hadst better let this Composition alone, or leave it to thy Loving Friend,
Nic. Frog.
CHAP. X. Of some extraordinary Things that pass'd at the Salutation Tavern, in the Conference between Bull, Frog, Esq South, and Lewis Baboon.

Frog had given his Word, that he would meet the above mention'd Company at the Salutation, to talk of this Agreement; tho' he durst not directly break his Appointment, he made many a shuffling Excuse; one time he pretended to be seized with the Gout in his right Knee; then he got a great Cold that had struck him deaf of one Ear; afterwards two of his Coach-Horses fell sick, and he durst not go by Water, for fear of catching an Ague. John would take no Excuse but hurry'd him away: Come Nic. (says he) let's go and hear at least what this old Fellow has to propose; I hope there's no hurt in that. Be it so (quoth Nic.) but if I catch any harm, woe be to you; my Wife and Children will curse you as long as they live. When they were come to the Salutation, John concluded all was sure then, and that he shou'd be troubled no more with Law affairs; he thought every Body as plain and sincere as he was. Well Neighbours (quoth he) let's now make an end of all Matters, and live peaceably together for the time to come; if every body is as well inclin'd as I, we shall quickly come to the upshot of our Affair: And so pointing to Frog to say something, to the great surprize of all the Company, Frog was seizd with a dead Palsy in the Tongue. John began to ask him some plain Questions, and hoop'd and hollow'd in his Ear. John Bull, Let's come to the Point, Nic' Who would'st thou have to be the Lord Strutt? Would'st thou have Philip Baboon? Nic, shook his head and said nothing. John Bull Wilt thou then have Esquire South to be Lord Strutt? Nic. shook his Head a second time. John Bull. Then who the Devil wilt thou have? say something or another. Nic. openâ–ªd his Mouth, and pointed to his Tongue, and cry'd A, a a, a! which was as much as to say, he could not speak. John Bull. Shall I serve Philip Baboon with  Broad cloth, and accept of the Composition that he offers, with the Liberty of his Parks and Fishponds? Then Nic. roar'd like a Bull, O, o, o, o! If thou wilt not let me have them, wilt thou take them thy self? Then Nic. grin'd, cackled and laugh'd, till he was like to kill himself, and seem'd to be so pleas'd, that he fell a frisking and dancing about the [...]oom. John Bull. Shall I leave all this Matter to thy [...]anagement, Nic. and go about my Business? Then Nic. got up a Glass, and drank to John, shaking him by the Hand till he had like to have shook his shoulder out of Joint. John Bull. I understand thee, Nic. but I shall make thee speak before I go. Then Nic. put his Finger in his Cheek, and made him cry Buck, which was as much as to say, I care not a Farthing for thee. John Bull. I have done Nic. If thou wilt not speak, I'll make my own Terms with old Lewis here. Then Nic lollâ–ªd out his Tongue, and turn'd up his Bumm to him; which was as much as to say, Kiss [...]. John perceiving that Frog would not speak, turns to old Lewis: Since we cannot make this obstinate Fellow speak, Lewis pray condescend a little to his Humour, and set down thy meaning upon Paper, [...] may answer it in another Scrap. I am infinitely [...] (quoth Lewis) that it happens so unfortunately; for playing a little at Cudgels t'other Day, a Fellow has given me such a Rap over the Right Arm, that I am quite Lame: [...] have lost the Use of my Forefinger and Thumb, so that I [...] hold my Pen. John Bull, That's all one, let me [...] for you. Lewis. But I have a Misfortune, that I [...]nnot read any bodies hand but my own. John Bull. Try what you can do with your Left Hand. Lewis. That's impossible; it will make such a Scrawl, that it will not be legible. As they were talking of this Matter, in came Esquire South all drest up in Feathers and Ribbons, stark staring mad, brandishing his Sword, as if he [...]ld have cut off their Heads; crying, Room, room, [...] for the grand Esquire of the World! the Flower of [...]quires! What, cover'd in my Presence; I'll crush your [...]ouls, and crack you like Lice! With that he had like to [...]ave struck John Bull's Hat into the Fire; but John, [...] was pretty strong fisted, gave him such a Squeeze,  as made his Eyes Water. He went on still in his mad Pranks; When I am Lord of the Universe, the sun shall [...] and adore me! Thou, Frog, shalt be my Bailiff; Lewis my Taylor, and thou, John Bull, shalt be my Fool! All this [...] Frog laughâ–ªd in his Sleeve, gave the Esquire [...] Noggan of Brandy, and clapâ–ªd him on the Back which made him ten times madder. Poor John stood in amaze, talking thus to himself: Well John thou art got into rare Company! One has a dumb Devilâ–ª t'other a mad Devil, and the third a Spirit of Infirmity. An honest Man has a fine time onâ–ªt amongst such Rogues. What art thou asking of them after all? Some mighty Boon one would think! Only to sit quietly at thy own Fireside. 'Sdeath, what have I to do with such Fellows! John Bull after all [...] Losses and Cr [...]sses can live better without them, than they can without him. Would to God I liv'd a thousand Leagues off them: But the Devil's in't: John Bull is in, and John Bull must get out as well as be can. As he was talking to himself, he observâ–ªd Frog and Old Lewis edgng towards one another to Whisper; so that John was forced to sit with his Arms a-kimbo, to keep them asunder. Some People advis'd John to Blood Frog under the Ton [...]ue, or take away his Bread and Butter, which would certainly make him speak; to give Esquire South Hellebore; as for Lewis, some were for emollient Poltass, others for opening his Arm with an Incision knife.

I could not obtain from Sir Humphry, at this time, a Copy of John â–ªs Letter, which he sent to his Nephew by the young Necromancer; wherein he advises him not to eat Butter, Ham, and drink Old Hock in a Morning, with the Esquire and Frog, for fear of giving him a sour Breath.
FINIS.

LEWIS BABOON Turned Honest, AND JOHN BULL POLITICIAN. Being The FOURTH PART OF Law is a Bottomless-Pit.

Printed from a Manuscript found in the Cabinet of the famous Sir Humphry Polesworth: And Publish'd, (as well as the Three former Parts and Appendix) by the Author of the NEW ATALANTIS.

LONDON: Printed for John Morphew, near, Stationers-Hall. 1712. Price 6d.

THE PREFACE.

WHEN I was first call'd to the Office of Historiographer to John Bull, he express'd himself to this purpose: Sir Humphry, I know you are a plain Dealer; it is for that Reason I have chosen you for this important Trust; speak the Truth, and spare not. That I might fulfil those his honourable Intentions, I obtain'd Leave to repair to, and attend him in his most secret Retirements; and I put the Journals of all Transactions into a strong Box, to be open'd at a fitting Occasion, after the manner of the Historiographers of some Eastern Monarchs: This I thought was the safest way; tho' I declare I was never afraid to be chop'd by my Master for telling of Truth. It is from those Journals that my Memoirs are compil'd: Therefore let not Posterity, a thousand Years hence, look for Truth in the voluminous Annals of Pedants, who are entirely ignorant of the secret Springs of great Actions; if they do, let me tell them, they will be Nebus'd. With incredible Pains have I endeavour'd to copy the several Beauties of the ancient  and modern Historians; the impartial Temper of Herodotus, the Gravity, Austerity, and strict Morals of Thucidides, the extensive Knowledge of Xenophon, the Sublimity and Grandeur of Titus Livius, and to avoid the careless Stile of Polybius: I have borrow'd considerable Ornaments from Dionysius Halicarnasseus and Diodorus Siculus: The specious Gilding of Tacitus I endeavour'd to shun. Mariana, Davila, and Fra. Paulo, are those amongst the Moderns whom I thought most worthy of Imitation; but I cannot be so disingenuous, as not to own the infinite Obligations I have to the Pilgrim's Progress of John Bunyan, and the Tenter Belly of the Reverend Joseph Hall. From such Encouragement and Helps, it is easy to guess to what a degree of Perfection I might have brought this great Work, had it not been nip'd in the Bud by some illiterate People in both Houses of Parliament, who envying the great Figure I was to make in future Ages, under Pretence of raising Money for the War, have padlock'd all those very Pens that were to celebrato the Actions of their Heroes, by silencing at once the whole Æ²niversity of Grubstreet. I am perswaded, that nothing but the Prospect of an approaching Peace could have encourag'd them to make so bold a step. But suffer me, in the Name of the rest of the Matriculates of that famous Æ²niversity, to ask them some plain Questions: Do they think that Peace will bring along with it the Golden Age? Will there be never a Dying-Speech of a Traitor? Are Cethegus  and Cataline turn'd so tame, that there will be no opportunity to cry about the Streets, [...] Dangerous Plot? Will Peace bring such Plenty, that no Gentleman will have occasion to go upon the Highway, or break into a House? I am sorry that the World should be so much impos'd upon by the Dreams of a False Prophet, as to imagine the Millennium is at hand. O Grubstreet! thou fruitful Nursery of tow'ring Genius's! how do I lament thy Downfall? Thy Ruin could never be meditated by any who means well to English Liberty: No modern Lycaeum will ever equal thy Glory, whether in soft Pasiorals, thou sung the Flames of pamper'd Apprentices and coy Cook-Maids, or mournful Ditties of departing Lovers; or if to Maeonian Sirains thou rais'd thy Voice, to record the Stratageies, the arduous Exploits, and the nocturnal Scalade of needy Heroes, the Terror of your peaceful Citizen, describing the powerful Betty, or the artful Picklock, or the secret Caverns and Grotto's of Vulcan sweating at his Forge, and slamping the Queens Image on viler Metals, which he retails for Beef, and Pots of Ale; or if thou wert content in simple Narrative to relate the cruel Acts of implacable Revenge, or the Complaints of ravish'd Virgins, blushing to tell their Adventure before the listening Crowd of City Damsels, whilst in thy faithful History thou intermingles the gravest Counsels and the purest Morals: Nor less acute and piercing wert thou in thy Search and pompous Description of the Works of Nature, whether in proper  and emphatick Terms thou didst paint the blazing Comets fiery Tale, the stupendous Force of dreadful Thunder and Earthquakes, and the unrelenting Inundations. Sometimes, with Machiavelian Sagacity, thou unravellest the Intrigues of State, and the traiterous Conspiracies of Rebels giving wise Counsel to Monarchs. How didst thou move our Terror and our Pity with thy passionate Scenes, between Jack-catch and the Heroes of the Old-Baily! How didst thou describe their intrepid March up Holborn-Hill! Nor didst thou shine less in thy theological Capacity, when thou gavest ghostly Counsel to dying Felons, and recorded the guilty Pangs of Sabbath-breakers! How will the noble Arts of John Overton's Painting and Sculpture now languish! where rich Invention, proper Expression, correct Design, divine Altitudes, and artful Contrast, heighten'd with the Beauties of Clar-Obscur, embellish'd thy celebrated Pieces to the Delight and Astonishment of the judicious Multitude! Adieu persuasive Eloquence! the quaint Metaphor, the poinant Irony, the proper Epithet, and the lively Simile, are fled to Burleigh on the Hill: Instead of these, we shall have I know not what  Vid. Bp. of St. Asap [...] Preface.The Illiterate will tell the rest with Pleasure! I hope the Reader will excuse the Digression, due by way of Condolance to my worthy Brethren of Grubstreet, for the approaching Barbarity that is likely to overspread all its Regions, by this oppressive and exorbitant Tax, It has been my good Fortune  to receive my Education there; and so long as I preserv'd some Figure and Rank amongst the Learned of that Society, I scorn'd to take my Degree either at Utrecht or Leyden, though I was offer'd it gratis by the Professors there.

THE CONTENTS.

    Chap. I. THE Sequel of the History of the Meeting at the Salutation, Pag. 1
    Chap. II. How John Bull and Nic Frog settled their Accounts, p. 7
    Chap. III. How John Bull found all his Family in an Æ²proar at home, p. 13
    Chap. IV. How Lewis Baboon came to Visit John Bull, and what passed between them, p. 14
    Chap. V. Nic. Frog's Letter to John Bull; wherein he endeavours to vindicate all his Conduct with relation to John Bull and the Law-Suit, p. 23
    Chap. VI. The Discourse that passed between Nic. Frog and Esquire South, which John Bull overheard, p. 26
    Chap. VII. The rest of Nic.'s Fetches, to keep John out of Ecclesdoun Castle, p. 31
    Chap. VIII. Of the great Joy that John expressed when he got Possession of Ecclesdoun, p. 35

 LEWIS BABOON Turned Honest, AND JOHN BULL POLITICIAN.
CHAP. I.

The Sequel of the History of the Meeting at the Salutation.

WHere, I think, I left John Bull, sitting between Nic. Frog and Lewis Baboon, with his Arms a-kimbo, in great Concern to keep Lewis and Nic. asunder. As watchful as he was, Nic. found the Means, now and then, to stear a Whisper, and, by a cleanly Conveyance under the Table, to slip a short Note into Lewis's hand,  which Lewis as slyly put into John's Pocket, with a Pinch or a Jog, to warn him what he was about. John had the Curiosity to retire into a Corner, to peruse these Billet deux of Nic's; wherein he found, that Nic, had used great Freedoms, both with his Interest and Reputation. One contained these words, Dear Lewis, Thou seest clearly that this Blockhead can never bring his Matters to bear: Let thee and me talk to night by our selves at the Rose, and I'll give thee Satisfaction. Another was thus express'd; Friend Lewis, Has thy Sense quite forsaken thee, to make Bull such Offers? Hold fast, part with nothing, and I will give thee a better Bargain, I'll warrant thee.

In some of his Billets, he told Lewis "that John Bull was under his Guardianship; that the best part of his Servants were at his Command; that he could have John gagg'd and bound whenever he pleased, by the People of his own Family." In all these Epistles, Blockhead, Dunce, Ass, Coxcomb, were the best Epithets he gave poor John: In others he threatned, "that He, Esquire South, and the rest of the Tradesmen, would lay Lewis down upon his Back, beat out his Teeth, if he did not retire immediately, and break up the Meeting.

I fancy I need not tell my Reader, that John often chang'd Colour as he read, and that his Fingers itch'd to give Nic. a good Slap on the Chops, but he wisely moderated  his cholerick Temper: "I sav'd this Fellow (quoth he) from the Gallows when he ran away from his last Master, because I thought he was harshly treated; but the Rogue was no fooner safe under my Protection, than he began to lie, pilfer, and steal, like the Devil: When I first set him up in a warm House, he had hardly put up his Sign, when he began to debauch my best Customers from me: Then it was his constant Practice to rob my Fish-ponds, not only to feed his Family, but to trade with the Fishmongers: I conniv'd at the Fellow till he began to tell me, that they were his as much as mine: In my Manour of Eastcheap, because it lay at some distance from my constant Inspection, he broke down my Fences, robb'd my Orchards, and beat my Servants. When I us'd to reprimand him for his Tricks, he would talk saucily, lye, and brazen it out, as if he had done nothing amiss. Will nothing cure thee of thy Pranks Nic. (quoth I?) I shall be forced, some time or another, to chastise thee: The Rogue got up his Cane and threatned me, and was well thwack'd for his Pains: But I think his Behaviour at this time worst of all; after I have almost drowned my self, to keep his Head above Water, he would leave me sticking in the Mud, trusting to his Goodness to help me out. After I have beggar'd my  self with his troublesome Law-Suit, with a Pox to him, he takes it in mighty Dudgeon because I have brought him here to end Matters amicably, and because I won't let him make me over, by Deed and Indenture, as his lawful Cully; which, to my certain Knowledge, he has attempted several times. But, after all, canst thou gather Grapes from Thorns? Nic. does not pretend to be a Gentleman, he is a Tradesman, a self-seeking Wretch, but how camest thou to bear all this, John? The Reason is plain; Thou conferrest the Benefits, and he receives them; the first produces Love, and the last Ingratitude: Ah! Nic. Nic. thou art a damn'd Dog, that's certain; thou knowest too well, that I will take care of thee, else thou would'st not use me thus: I won't give thee up, it is true; but as true as it is, thou shalt not sell me, according to thy laudable Custom.While John was deep in this Soliloquy, Nic. broke out into the following Protestation.
Gentlemen,

I believe every body here present will allow me to be a very just and disinterested Person. My Friend John Bull here is very angry with me, forsooth, because I won't agree to his foolish Bargains. Now I declare to all Mankind, I should be ready  to sacrifice my own Concerns to his Quiet; but the care of his Interest, and that of the honest Tradesmen that are embark'd with us, keeps me from entring into this Composition. What shall become of those poor Creatures? The Thoughts of their impending Ruin disturbs my Night's Rest, therefore I desire they may speak for themselves. If they are willing to give up this Affair, I shan't make two words of it.

John Bull begg'd him to lay aside that immoderate Concern for him; and withal, put him in mind, that the Interest of those Tradesmen had not sat quite so heavy upon him some Years ago, on a like Occasion. Nic. answer'd little to that, but immediately pull'd out a Boatswain's Whistle; upon the first Whiff, the Tradesmen came jumping into the Room, and began to surround Lewis like so many yelping Curs about a great Boar, or, to use a modester Simile, like Duns at a great Lord's Leve the Morning he goes into the Country; one pull'd him by the Sleeve, another by the Skirt, a third hallow'd in his Ear; they began to ask him for all that had been taken from their Forefathers by Stealth, Fraud, Force, or lawful Purchase; some ask'd for Manours, others for Acres, that lay convenient for them; that he would pull down his Fences, level his Ditches; all agreed in one common Demand, that he should be  purg'd, sweated, vomited, and starv'd, till be came to a sizeable Bulk, like that of his Neighbours; one modestly ask'd him Leave to call him Brother; Nic. Frog demanded two Things, to be his Porter and his Fishmonger, to keep the Keys of his Gates, and furnish his Kitchen; John's Sister Peg only desir'd that he would let his Servants sing Psalms a Sundays; some descended even to the asking of old Cloaths, Shoes, and Boots, broken Bottles, Tobacco-pipes, and Ends of Candles.

Monsieur Bull (quoth Lewis) you seem to be a Man of some Breeding; for God's sake use your Interest with these Messicurs, that they wou'd speak but one at once; for if one had a hundred pair of Hands, and as many Tongues, he cannot satisfy them all at this rate. John begg'd they might proceed with some Method; then they stop'd all of a sudden, and would not say a word. If this be your Play (quoth John) that we may not be like a Quaker's dumb Meeting, let us begin some Diversion; what d'ye think of Rouly-Pouly, or a Country-Dance? What if we should have a Match at Football! I am sure we shall never end Matters at this rate.

CHAP. II.

How John Bull and Nic. Frog settled their Accompts.
J. Bull.

DÆ²ring this general Cessation of Talk, what if You and I Nic. should enquire how Money-matters stand between us?
Nic. Frog.

With all my Heart, I love exact Dealing; and let Hocus Audit; he knows how the Money was disburs'd.
J. Bull.

I am not much for that at present; we'll settle it between Ourselves: Fair and Square Nic. keeps Friends together. There have been laid out in this Law-Suit, at one time 36000 Pounds and 40000 Crowns: In some Cases I, in others you, bear the greatest proportion.
Nic.

Right: I pay three Fifths of the greatest Number, and you pay two Thirds of the lesser Number: I think this is Fair and Square as you call it.
John.

Well, go on.
Nic.

Two Thirds of 36000 Pounds are 24000 Pounds for your Share, and there remains 12000 for mine. Again, Of the 40000 Crowns I pay 24000, which is three Fifths, and you pay only 16000, which is two Fifths; 24000 Crowns make 6000 Pounds, and 16000 Crowns make 4000 Pounds: 12000 and 6000 make 18000: 24000 and 4000 makes 28000. So there are 18000 Pounds to my Share of the Expences, and 28000 to yours.

 After Nic. had bambouzled John a while about the 18000 and the 28000, John call'd for Counters; but what with Slight of Hand, and taking from his own Score and, adding to John's, Nic. brought the Balance always on his own side.
J. Bull.

Nay, good Friend Nic. though I am not quite so nimble in the Fingers, I understand Cyphering as well as you: I will produce you my Accompts one by one, fairly writ out of my own Books: And here I begin with the first. You must excuse me if I don't pronounce the Law Terms right.
[John Reads.]
Â   l.  s.  d.
Fees to the Lord Ch. Justice and other Judges, by way of Dividend 200 10  06
Fees to puny Judges 50  00  00
To Esquire South for post Terminums   100 10  06
To ditto for Non est Factums    200 00  00
To ditto for Discontinuance, Noli prosequi, and Retraxit    80  10  06
To ditto for a Non Omittas, and Filing a post Diem  50  00  00
To Hocus for a Dedimus potestatem.    300 00  00
To ditto for Casas and Fifas after a Devastait    500 00  00
Carry over  1481    11  06
Brought over    1481    11  06
To ditto for a Capias ad computandum  100 10  06
To Frog's new Tenants per Account to Hocus, for Audita querelas.    200 00  00
On the said Account for Writs of Ejectment and Destringas.  300 00  00
To Esquire South's Quota for a Return of a Non est invent. and nulla habet bona 150 10  00
To  for a Pardon in forma pauperis   200 00  00
To Jack for a Melius inquirendum upon a Felo de se    100 00  00
To Don Diego for a Defecit  50  00  00
To Coach-hire   500 00  00
For Treats to Juries and Witnesses  300 00  00
Sum 3382    12  00
Due by Nic. Frog    1691    06  00
Of which paid by Nic. Frog  1036    11  00
Remains due by Nic. Frog    654 15  00

Then Nic. Frog pull'd his Bill out of his Pocket, and began to read.

Nicholas Frog's Account. Remains to be deducted out of the former Account,Â     l.  s.  d.
To Hocus for Entries of a Rege inconsulto   200 00  00
To John Bull's Nephew for a Venire facias, the Money not yet all laid out 300 00  00
The Coach-hire for my Wife and Family, and the Carriage of my Goods during the time of this Law-Suit    200 10  06
For the extraordinary Expences of feeding my Family during this Law-Suit  500 00  00
To Major Ab.    300 00  00
To Major Will.  200 00  00
Sum 1700    10  06
From which deduct   1691    06  00
There remains due to Nic. Frog  09  04  06

Besides, recollecting, I believe I paid for Diego's Defecit.
John Bull.

As for your Venire facias, I have paid you for one already; in the other, I believe you will be Nonsuited: I'll take care of my Nephew my self. Your Coach-hire and Family Charges are most unreasonable Deductions;  at that rate, I can bring in any Man in the World my Debtor. But who the Devil are those two Majors that consume all my Money? I find they always run away with the Ballance in all Accompts.
Nic. Frog.

Two very honest Gentlemen, I assure you, that have done me some Service.

To tell you plainly Major Ab. denotes thy greater Ability, and Major Will thy greater Willingness to carry on this Law-suit. It was but reasonable thou shouldst pay both for thy Power and thy Positiveness.
J. Bull.

I believe I shall have those two honest Majors discount on my side in a little time.
Nic. Frog.

Why all this Higgling with thy Friend about such a paltry Sum? Does this become the Generosity of the Noble and Rich John Bull? I wonder thou art not asham'd. Oh Hocus! Hocus! where art thou, it used to go another-guess manner in thy time, when a poor Man has almost undone himself for thy sake, thou art for fleecing him and fleecing him; is that thy Conscience John?
J. Bull.

Very pleasant indeed; it is well known thou retains thy Lawyers by the Year, so a fresh Law-suit adds but little to thy Expence, they are thy Customers, I hardly ever sell them a Farthings worth of any thing; nay, thou hast set up an Eating-house, where the whole Tribe of them spend all they can rap or run; if it were well reckon'd, I believe  thou gets more of my Money than thou spends of thy own. However, if thou wilt needs plead Poverty, own at least that thy Accompts are false.
Nic. Frog.

No marry won't I, I refer my self to these honest Gentlemen, let them judge between us; let Esquire South speak his Mind, whither my Accounts are not right, and whither we ought not to go on with our Law-suit.
J. Bull.

Consult the Butchers about keeping of Lent. I tell you once for all, John Bull knows where his Shoe pinches, none of your Esquires shall give him the Law, as long as he wears this trusty Weapon by his side, or has an inch of broad Cloath in his Shop.
Nic. Frog.

Why there it is, you will be both Judge and Party; I am sorry thou discoverest so much of thy head-strong Humour before these strange Gentlemen, I have often told you that it would prove thy Ruin some time or another.

John saw clearly he should have nothing but wrangling, and that he should have as little Success in settling his Accounts as ending the Composition: Since they will needs overload my Shoulders (quoth John) I shall throw down the Burden with a squash amongst them, take it up who dares; a Man has a fine time of it, amongst a combination of Sharpers, that Vouch for one anothers Honesty. John look to thy self, Old Lewis makes reasonable  Offers, when thou hast spent the small Pittance that is left, thou wilt make a glorious Figure when thou art brought to live upon Nic. Frog and Esquire South's Generosity and Gratitude, if they use thee thus, when they want thee, what will they do when thou wants them? I say again, John look to thy self?

John wisely stiffled his Resentments, and told the Company that in a little time he should give them Law, or something better.
All.

Law! Law! Sir, by all means, what is Twenty Two poor Years towards the finishing a Law-suit? For the Love of God more Law, Sir!
J. Bull.

Prepare your Demands, how mamany Years more of Law you want, that I may order my Affairs accordingly. In the mean while farewel.
CHAP. III.

How John Bull found all his Family in an Æ²proar at Home.

NIc. Frog. who thought of nothing but carrying John to the Market, and there disposing of him as his own proper Goods, was mad to find that John thought himself now of Age to look afer his own Affairs: He resolv'd to traverse this  new Project, and to make him uneasie in his own Family. He had corrupted or desuded most of his Servants into the extravagantest Conceits in the World, that their Master was run mad, and wore a Dagger in one Pocket, and Poison in the other; that he had told his Wife and Children to Lewis, disinherited his Heir, and was going to settle his Estate upon a Parish Boy; that if they did not look after their Master, he would do some very mischievous Thing. When John came home he found a more surprising Scene than any he had yet met with, and that you will say was somewhat extraordinary.

He call'd his Cook-maid Betty to bespeak his Dinner, Betty told him, That she beg'd his Pardon; she could not dress Dinner till she knew what he intended to do with his Will. Why Betty, Forsooth (quoth John) thou art not run mad art thou? My Will at present is to have Dinner: That may be (quoth Betty) but my Conscience won't allow me to dress it, till I know whither you intend to do righteous Things by your Heir? I am sorry for that Betty (quoth John) I must find some body else then. Then he call'd John the Barber. Before I begin (quoth John) I hope your Honour won't be offended, if I ask you whither you intend to after your Will? If you won't give me a positive Answer, your Beard may grow down to your Middle, for me. I gad and so it shall (quoth Bull) for I will never trust my Throat  in such a mad Fellows Hands. Where's Dick the Butler? Look ye (quoth Dick) I am very willing to serve you in my Calling, d'ye see, but there are strange Reports, and plain-dealing is best, d'ye see. I must be satisfied if you intend to leave all to your Nephew, and if Nic. Frog is still your Executor, d'ye see; if you will not satisfie me as to these Points, d'ye see, you may drink with the Ducks: And so I will (quoth John) rather than keep a Butler that loves my Heir better than my self. Hob the Shoemaker, and Pricket the Taylor told him, they would most willingly serve him in their several Stations, if he would promise them never to talk with Lewis Baboon, and let Nicolas Frog, Linnen-draper, manage his Concerns; that they could neither make Shoes nor Cloaths to any that were not in good Correspondence with their worthy Friend Nicolas.
J. Bull.

Call Andrew my Journey-Man: How goes Affairs, Andrew? I hope the Devil has not taken Possession of thy Body too.
Andrew.

No, Sir, I only desire to know what you would do if you were dead?
J. Bull.

Just as other dead Folks do, Andrew. This is Amazing
[Aside.
Andrew.

I mean if your Nephew shall inherit your Estate?
J. Bull.

That depends upon himself. I shall do nothing to hinder him.
Andrew.

But will you make it sure?
J. Bull.


Thou mean'st, that I should put him in Possession, for I can make it no surer without that, he has all the Law can give him.
Andrew.

Indeed Possession, as you say, would make it much surer; they say, it is eleven points of the Law.

John began now to think that they were all enchanted; he enquires about the Age of the Moon, if Nic had not given them some intoxicating Potion, or if old Mother Jenisa was not still alive. No, o'my faith (quoth Harry) I believe there is no Potion in the Case, but a little Aurum Potabile. You will have more of this by and by. He had scarce spoke the Word, when of a sudden Don Diego, follow'd by a great Multitude of his Tenants and Work-men, came rushing into the Room.
D. Diego.

Since those worthy Persons, who are as much concern'd for your Safety as I am, have employ'd me as their Orator, I desire to know whither you will have it by way of Syllogism, Enthymem, Dilemma or Sorites.

John now began to be diverted with their Extravagance.
J. Bull.

Let's have a Sorites by all means, tho' they are all new to me.
D. Diego.

It is evident to all that are versed in History, that there were two Sisters that play'd the Whore, two thousand Years ago: Therefore it plainly follows, that it is not lawful for John Bull to have any manner  of Entercourse with Lewis Baboon. If it is not lawful for John Bull to have any manner of Entercourse (Correspondence, if you will, that is much the same thing) then a Fortiori, it is much more unlawful for the said John to make over his Wife and Children to the said Lewis; if his Wife and Children are not to be made over, he is not to wear a Dagger and Ratsbane in his Pockets; if he wears a Dagger and Ratsbane, it must be to do Mischief to himself or some body else; if he intends to do Mischief, he ought to be under Guardians, and there is none so fit as my self and some other worthy Persons, who have a Commission for that purpose from Nic. Frog, the Executor of his Will and Testament.
J. Bull.

And this is your Sorites, you say; with that he snatch'd a good tough Oaken Cudgel, and began to brandish it; then happy was the Man that was first at the Door; crouding to get out, they tumbled down Stairs, and it is credibly reported some of them drop'd very valuable Things in the hurry, which were pick'd up by others of the Family.

That any of these Rogues (quoth John) should imagine I am not as much concern'd as they about having my Affairs in a settled Condition, or that I would wrong my Heir for I know not what. Well Nic. I really cannot but applaud thy Diligence, I must own  this is really a pretty sort of a Trick, but it shan't do thy Business for all that.
CHAP. IV.

How Lewis Baboon came to visit John Bull, and what pass'd between them.

I Think it is but ingenuous to acquaint the Reader, that this Chapter was not wrote by Sir Humphry himself, but by another very able Pen of the University of Grubstreet.

John had (by some good Instructions that was given him by Sir Roger) got the better of his Cholerick Temper, and wrought himself up to a great steadiness of Mind, to pursue his own Interest through all Impediments that were thrown in the way; he began to leave off some of his old Aquaintance, his roaring and bullying about the Streets; he put on a serious Air, knit his Brows, and for the time had made a very considerable progress in Politicks, considering that he had been kept a stranger to his own Affairs. However, he could not help discovering some remains of his Nature, when he happen'd to meet with a Foot-Ball, or a Match at Cricket; for which Sir Roger was sure to take him to task. John was walking about his Room with folded Arms, and a most thoughtful Countenance, his Servant brought him Word that one Lewis  Baboon below wanted to speak with him. John had got an Impression that Lewis was so deadly a cunning Man, that he was afraid to venture himself alone with him: At last he took heart of Grace. Let him come up (quoth he) it is but sticking to my Point, and he can never over-reach me.
Lewis Baboon.

Monsieur Bull I will frankly acknowledge, that my Behaviour to my Neighbours has been somewhat uncivil, and I believe you will readily grant me, that I have met with Usage accordingly. I was fond of Back-sword and Cudgel play from my Youth, and I now bear in my Body many a black and blue Gash and Scars, God knows. I had as good a Ware-house, and as fair Possessions as any of my Neighbours, tho' I say it; but a contentious Temper, flattering Servants, and unfortunate Stars, have brought me into Circumstances that are not unknown to you. These my Misfortunes are heighten'd by domestick Calamities, that I need not relate. I am a poor old batter'd Fellow, and I would willingly end my Days in Peace: But alas, I see but small hopes of that, for every new Circumstance affords an Argument to my Enemies to pursue their Revenge; formerly I was to be bang'd because I was too Strong, and now because I am too Weak to resist, I am to be brought down when too Rich, and oppressed when too Poor. Nic. Frog has used me like a Scoundrel; You are a  Gentleman, and I freely put my self in your Hands, to dispose of me as you think fit.
J. Bull.

Look you, Master Baboon, as to your Usage of your Neighbours, you had best not dwell too much upon that Chapter; let it suffice at present that you have been met with, you have been rolling a great Stone uphill all your Life, and at last it has come tumbling down till it is like to crush you to pieces: Plain-dealing is best. If you have any particular Mark, Mr. Baboon, whereby one may know when you Fib, and when you speak Truth, you had best tell it me, that one may proceed accordingly; but since at present I know of none such, it is better that you should trust me, than that I should trust you.
L. Baboon.

I know of no particular Mark of Veracity, amongst us Tradesmen, but Interest; and it is manifestly mine not to deceive you at this time; you may safely trust me, I can assure you.
J. Bull.

The Trust I give is in short this, I must have something in hand before I make the Bargain, and the rest before it is concluded.
L. Baboon.

To shew you I deal fairly, name your Something.
J. Bull.

I need not tell thee, old Boy; thou canst guess.
L. Baboon.

Ecclesdown Castle, I'll warrant you, because it has been formerly in your  Family! Say no more, you shall have it.
J. Bull.

I shall have it to m'own self?
L. Baboon.

To thy n'own self.
J. Bull.

Every Wall, Gate, Room, and Inch of Ecclesdown Castle, you say?
L. Baboon.

Just so.
J. Bull.

Every single Stone of Ecclesdown Castle, to m'own self, speedily!
L. Baboon.

When you please, what needs more Words?
J. Bull.

But tell me, old Boy, hast thou laid aside all thy Equivocals and Mentals in this case?
L. Baboon.

There is nothing like Matter of Fact; Seeing is Believing.
J. Bull.

Now thou talk'st to the purpose; let us shake Hands, old Boy. Let me ask thee one Question more, What hast thou to do to meddle with the Affairs of my Family? To dispose of my Estate, old Boy?
L. Baboon.

Just as much as you have to do with the Affairs of Lord Strut.
J. Bull.

Ay, but my Trade, my very Being, was concern'd in that.
L. Baboon.

And my Interest was concern'd in the other: but let us drop both our Pretences; for I believe it is a moot point, whether I am more likely to make a Master Bull, or you a Lord Strut.
J. Bull.

Agreed, old Boy; but then I must have Security that I shall carry my Broadcloth to Market, old Boy.
L. Baboon.


That you shall: Ecclesdown Castle! Ecclesdown! Remember that: Why would'st thou not take it when it was offer'd thee some Years ago?
J. Bull.

I would not take it, because they told me thou would'st not give it me.
L. Baboon.

How could Monsieur Bull be so grosly abused by downright Nonsense? They that advised you to refuse, must have believed I intended to give, else why would they not make the Experiment? But I can tell you more of that Matter than perhaps you know at present.
J. Bull.

But what say'st thou as to the Esquire, Nic. Frog, and the rest of the Tradesmen? I must take care of them.
L. Baboon.

Thou hast but small Obligations to Nic, to my certain Knowledge: He has not us'd me like a Gentleman.
J. Bull.

Nic, indeed, is not very nice in your Punctilio's of Ceremony; he is Clownish, as a Man may say; Belching and Calling of Names have been allow'd him time out of mind, by Prescription: but however, we are engag'd in one Common Cause, and I must look after him.
L. Baboon.

All Matters that relate to him, and the rest of the Plantiffs in this Law-Suit, I will refer to your Justice.

CHAP. V.

Nic. Frog's Letter to John Bull; wherein he endeavours to vindicate all his Conduct, with relation to John Bull and the Law-Suit.

NIC. perceiv'd now that his Cully had elop'd, that John intended henceforth to deal without a Broker; but he was resolv'd to leave no Stone unturn'd to recover his Bubble: Amongst other Artifices, he wrote a most obliging Letter, which he sent him Printed in a fair Character.
Dear Friend,

When I consider the late ill Usage I have met with from you, I was reflecting what it was that could provoke you to it; but upon a narrow Inspection into my Conduct, I can find nothing to reproach my self with, but too partial a Concern for your Interest. You no sooner set this Composition a-foot, but I was ready to comply, and prevented your very Wishes; and the Affair might have been ended before now, had it not been for the greater Concerns of Esq South, and the other poor Creatures, embark'd in the same Common Cause, whose Safety touches me to the Quick. You seem'd a little jealous that I bad dealt unfairly with you in Money-matters,  till it appear'd by your own Accounts, that there was something due to me upon the Ballance. Having nothing to answer to so plain a Demonstration, you began to complain as if I had been familiar with your Reputation; when it is well known, not only I, but the meanest Servant in my Family, talk of you with the utmost Respect. I have always, as far as in me lies, exhorted your Servants and Tenants to be dutiful; not that I any ways meddle in your domestick Affairs, which were very unbecoming for me to do. If some of your Servants express their great Concern for you in a manner that is not so very polite, you ought to impute it to their extraordinary Zeal, which deserves a Reward rather than a Reproof. You cannot reproach me for want of Success at the Salutation, since I am not Master of the Passions and Interests of other Folks. I have beggar'd my self with this Law-Suit, undertaken merely in Complaisance to you; and if you would have had but a little Patience, I had still greater things in Reserve that I intended to have done for you. I hope what I have said will prevail with you to lay aside your unreasonable Jealousies, and that we may have no more Meetings at the Salutation, spending our Time and Money to no Purpose. My Concern for your Welfare and Prosperity, almost makes  me mad. You may be assur'd I will continue to be
Your affectionate Friend and Servant, NIC. FROG.

John receiv'd this with a good deal of Sang froid; Transeat (quoth John) cum caeteris erroribus: He was now at his Ease; he saw he could now make a very good Bargain for himself, and a very safe one for other Folks. My Shirt (quoth he) is near me, but my Skin is nearer: Whilst I take care of the Welfare of other Folks, no body can blame me, to apply a little Balsam to my own Sores. It's a pretty thing, after all, for a Man to do his own Business: a Man has such a tender Concern for himself, there's nothing like it. This is somewhat better, I trow, than for John Bull to be standing in the Market, like a great Dray-horse, with Frog's Paws upon his Head, What will ye give me for this Beast? Serviteur Nic. Frog, you may kiss my Backside if you please. Though John Bull has not read your Aristotles, Plato's, and Machiavels, he can see us far into a Milstone as another: With that John began to chuckle and laugh, till he was like to burst his Sides.

CHAP. VI.

The Discourse that pass'd between Nic. Frog and Esquire South, which John Bull overheard.

JOhn thought every Minute a Year till he got into Ecclesdown Castle; he repairs to the Salutation, with a Design to break the Matter gently to his Partners: Before he enter'd, he overheard Nic. and the Esquire in a very pleasant Conference.
Esq South.

Oh the Ingratitude and Injustice of Mankind! That John Bull, whom I have honour'd with my Friendship and Protection so long, should flinch at last, and pretend that he can disburse no more Money for me; that the Family of the Souths, by his sneaking Temper, should be kept out of their own.
Nic. Frog.

An't like your Worship, I am in amaze at it; I think the Rogue should be compell'd to do his Duty.
Esq South.

That he should prefer his scandalous Pelf, the Dust and Dregs of the Earth, to the Prosperity and Grandeur of my Family!
Nic. Frog.

Nay, he is mistaken there too; for, he would quickly lick himself whole again by his Vails. It's strange he should prefer Philip Baboon's Custom to Esq South's.
Esq South.


As you say, that my Clothier, that is to get so much by the Purchase, should refuse to put me in Possession; did you ever know any Man's Tradesman serve him so before?
Nic. Frog.

No, indeed, an't please your Worship, it is a very unusual Proceeding; and I would not have been guilty of it for the World. If your Honour had not a great Stock of Moderation and Patience, you would not bear it so well as you do.
Esq South.

It is most intolerable, that's certain Nic. and I will be reveng'd.
Nic Frog.

Methinks it is strange, that Philip Baboon's Tenants do not all take your Honour's part, considering how good and gentle a Master you are.
Esq South.

True, Nic. but few are sensible of Merit in this World: It is a great Comfort, to have so faithful a Friend as thy self in so critical a Juncture.
Nic. Frog.

If all the World should forsake you, be assur'd Nic. Frog never will; let us stick to our Point, and we'll manage Bull, I'll warrant ye.
Esq South.

Let me kiss thee, dear Nic. I have found one honest Man amongst a thousand at last.
Nic. Frog.

If it were possible, your Honour has it in your Power to wed me still closer to your Interest.
Esq South.

Tell me quickly, dear Nic.
Nic. Frog.


You know I am your Tenant; the Difference between my Lease and an Inheritance is such a Trifle, as I am sure you will not grudge your poor Friend, that will be an Encouragement to go on; besides, it will make Bull as mad as the Devil: You and I shall be able to manage him then to some purpose.
Esq South.

Say no more, it shall be done Nic. to thy Heart's Content.

John, all this while, was listening to this comical Dialogue, and laugh'd heartily in his Sleeve, at the Pride and Simplicity of the Esquire, and the sly Roguery of his Friend Nic. Then of a sudden bolting into the Room, he began to tell them, that he believ'd he had brought Lewis to reasonable Terms, if they would please to hear them.

Then they all bawl'd out aloud, No Composition, Long live Esquire South and the Law! As John was going to proceed, some roar'd, some stamp'd with their Feet, others stop'd their Ears with their Fingers.

Nay, Gentlemen (quoth John) if you will but stop proceeding for a while, you shall judge your selves whether Lewis's Proposals are reasonable.
All.

Very fine indeed, stop proceeding, and so lose a Term.
J. Bull.

Not so neither, we have something by way of Advance, he will put us in Possession of his Mannor and Castle of Ecclesdoun.
Nic. Frog.


What dost talk of us, thou mean'st thy self?
J. Bull.

When Frog took Possession of any thing, it was always said to be for Æ²s, and why may not John Bull be Æ²s, as well as Nic. Frog was Æ²s? I hope John Bull is no more confin'd to Singularity than Nic. Frog; or take it so, the constant Doctrine that thou hast preach'd up for many Years, was that Thou and I are One; and why must we be supposed Two in this Case, that were always One before? It's impossible that Thou and I can fall out Nic. we must trust one another: I have trusted thee with a great many things, prithee trust me with this one Trifle.
Nic. Frog.

That Principle is true in the main; but there is some Speciality in this Case, that makes it highly inconvenient for us both.
J. Bull.

Those are your Jealousies, that the common Enemies sow between us; how often hast thou warn'd me of those Rogues, Nic. that would make us mistrustful of one another?
Nic. Frog.

This Ecclesdoun-Castle is only a Bone of Contention.
J. Bull.

It depends upon you to make it so, for my part I am as peaceable as a Lamb.
Nic. Frog.

But do you consider the unwholesomness of the Air and Soil, the Expences of Reparations and Servants, I would scorn to accept of such a Quag-mire.
J. Bull.


You are a great Man, Nic. but in my Circumstances, I must be e'en content to take it as it is.
Nic. Frog.

And you are really so silly, as to believe the old cheating Rogue will give it you.
J. Bull.

I believe nothing-but Matter of Fact, I stand and fall by that, I am resolv'd to put him to it.
Nic. Frog.

And so relinquish the hopefulest Cause in the World, a Claim that will certainly in the End, make thy Fortune for ever.
J. Bull.

Wilt thou purchase it Nic? thou shalt have a lumping Pennyworth; nay, rather than we should differ, I'll give thee fomething to take it off my Hands.
Nic. Frog.

If thou would'st but moderate that hasty impatient Temper of thine, thou should'st quickly see a better thing than all that: What should'st thou think to find old Lewis turn'd out of his paternal Estates and Mansion-house of Clay-Pool? Would not that do thy Heart good to see thy old Friend Nic. Frog Lord of Clay Pool? Then thou and thy Wife and Children shall walk in my Gardens, buy Toys, drink Lemonade, and now and then we should have a Country-dance.
J. Bull.

I love to be plain, I'd as lieve see my self in Ecclesdoun-Castle, as thee in Clay-Pool. I tell you again, Lewis gives this as a  Pledge of his Sincerity, if you won't stop proceeding to hear him, I will.
CHAP. VII.

The rest of Nic's Fetches to keep John out of Ecclesdoun-Castle.

WHEN Nic. could not diswade John by Argument, he try'd to move his Pity, he pretended to be sick and like to dye, that he should leave his Wife and Children in a starving Condition, if John did abandon him; that he was hardly able to craul about the Room, far less capable to look after such a troublesome Business as this Law-suit, and therefore begg'd that his good Friend would not leave him. When he saw that John was still inexorable, he pull'd out a Case-Knife, with which he used to Sneaker-snee, and threaten'd to cut his own Throat. "Thrice he aim'd the Knife to his Wind pipe with a most determin'd threatning Air. What signifies Lise (quoth he) in this languishing Condition, it will be some Pleasure that my Friends will revenge my Death upon this barbarous Man, that has been the Cause of it? All this while John look'd Sedate and Calm, neither offering in the least to snatch the Knife, nor stop his Blow, trusting to the Tenderness Nic. had for his own Person:  When he perceiv'd that John was immoveable in his Purpose, he apply'd himself to Lewis.

Art thou (quoth he) turn'd Bubble in thy Old Age, from being a Sharper in thy Youth? what occasion hast thou to give up Ecclesdoun-Castle to John Bull? his Friendship is not worth a Rush, give it me and I'll make it worth the while. If thou dislikest that Proposition, keep it thy self, I'd rather thou shouldest have it than he. If thou hearkens not to my Advice, take what follows; Esquire South and I will go on with our Law-suit in spite of John Bull's Teeth.
L. Baboon.

Monsieur Bull has used me like a Gentleman, and I am resolv'd to make good my Promise, and trust him for the Confequences.
Nic. Frog.

Then I tell thee thou art an old doating Fool. With that Nic bounc'd up with a Spring equal to that of one of your nimblest Tumblers or Rope dancers, falls foul upon John Bull to snatch the Cudgel he had in his Hand, that he might Thwack Lewis with it. John held it fast, so that there was no wrenching it from him. At last Esquire South buckl'd to, to assist his Friend Nic. John hall'd on one side, and they two on the other; sometimes they were like to pull John over; then it went, all of a sudden again, on John's side, so they went see-sawing up and down, from one End of the Room to the  other: Down tumbl'd the Tables, Bottles, GlasseÌ„s, and Tobacco Pipes: The Wine and the Tobacco were all spilt about the Room, and the little Fellows were almost trod under Foot, 'till more of the Tradesmen joyning with Nic. and the Esquire, John was hardly able to pull against them all, yet he never quit hold of his trusty Cudgel; which by the contranitent Force of two so great Powers, broke short in his Hands. Nic. seiz'd the longer end, and with it began to Bastinado Old Lewis, who had slunk into a Corner, waiting the Event of this Squabble. Nic came up to him with an insolent menacing Air, so that the old Fellow was forc'd to skuttle out of the Room, and retire behind a Dung-cart: He call'd to Nic, thou insolent Jackanapes, time was when thou durst not have used me so, thou now takest me unprovided, but old and infirm as I am, I shall find a Weapon by and by to chastise thy Impudence.

When John Bull had recover'd his Breath, he began to parly with Nic. Friend Nic, I am glad to find thee so strong after thy great Complaints; really thy Motions Nic. are pretty Vigorous for a consumptive Man. As for thy worldly Affairs Nic, if it can do thee any Service, I freely make over to thee this profitable Law-suit; and I desire all these Gentlemen to bear witness to this my Act and Deed, yours be all the Gain, as mine has been the  Charges, I have brought it to bear finely: However, all I have laid out upon it goes for nothing, thou shalt have it with all its Appurtenances, I ask nothing but leave to go home.
Nic. Frog.

The Counsel are fee'd, and all Things prepared for a Tryal, thou shalt be forced to stand the Issue: It shall be pleaded in thy Name as well as mine: Go home if thou can'st, the Gates are shut, the Turnpikes locked, and the Roads barracado'd.
J. Bull.

Even these very ways Nic that thou toldest me, were as open to me as thy self? If I can't pass with my own Equipage, what can I expect for my Goods and Waggons? I am deny'd Passage through those very Grounds that I have purchased with my own Money; however, I am glad I have made the Experiment, it may serve me in some stead.

John Bull was so over-joy'd that he was going to take Possession of Ecclesdoun, that nothing could vex him. Nic (quoth he) I am just a going to leave thee, cast a kind look upon me at parting.

Nic look'd sower and grum, and would not open his Mouth.
J. Bull.

I wish thee all the Success that thy Heart can desire, and that these honest Gentlemen of the long Robe may have their Belly full of Law.

 Nic could stand it no longer, but flung out of the Room with disdain, and beckon'd the Lawyers to follow him.
J. Bull.

Buy, buy Nic, not one poor Smile at parting, won't you shake your day-day, Nic? Buy Nic: With that John march'd out of the common Road cross the Country, to take Possession of Ecclesdoun.
CHAP. VIII.

Of the great Joy that John express'd when he got Possession of Ecclesdoun.

WHEN John had got into his Castle, he seem'd like Æ²lysses upon his Plank after he had been well sous'd in Salt-water; who (as Homer says) was as glad as a Judge going to sit down to Dinner, after hearing a long Cause upon the Bench. I dare say John Bull's Joy was equal to that of either of the two; he skip'd from Room to Room; ran up Stairs and down Stairs, from the Kitchen to the Garrets, and from the Garrets to the Kitchen; he peep'd into every Crany; sometimes he admired the Beauty of the Architecture, and the vast Solidity of the Masons Work; at other times he commended the Symetry and Proportion of the Rooms. He walk'd  about the Gardens; he Bath'd himself in the Canal, swimming, diving, and beating the liquid Element, like a milk-white Swan. The Hall resounded with the sprightly Violin and the martial Hautboy. The Family trip'd it about and Caper'd like Hail-stones bounding from a Marble Floor: Wine, Ale and October flew about as plentifully as Kennel-Water; then a Frolick took John in the Head to call up some of Nic Frog's Pensioners that had been so mutinous in his Family.
J. Bull.

Are you glad to see your Master in Ecclesdoun-Castle?
All.

Yes indeed, Sir.
J. Bull.

Extremely glad?
All.

Extremely glad, Sir.
J. Bull.

Swear to me that you are so.

Then they began to damn and sink their Souls to the lowest Pit of Hell, if any Person in the World rejoyc'd more than they did.
J. Bull.

Now hang me if I don't believe you are a parcel of perjur'd Raseals; however take this Bumper of October to your Master's Health.

Then John got upon the Battlements, and looking over he call'd to Nic Frog.

How d'ye do Nic? D'ye see where I am Nic? I hope the Cause goes on swimmingly Nic; when dost thou intend to go to Clay-Pool, Nic? Wilt thou buy there some High-Heads of the newest Cut for my Daughters? How comest thou to go with thy Arm ty'd  up? Has old Lewis given thee a rap over the Finger-ends? Thy Weapon was a good one when I weilded it, but the Butt-end remains in my Hands. I am so busy in packing up my Goods, that I have no time to talk with thee any longer: It would do thy Heart good to see what Waggon Loads I am preparing for Market; if thou wantest any good Office of mine, for all that has happen'd, I will use thee well Nic; buy Nic.

John Bull's Thanks to Sir Roger, and Nic Frog's Malediction upon all Shrews, the Original Cause of his Misfortunes, are reserv'd for the next Volume.
FINIS.

An appendix to John Bull still in his senses: or, Law is a bottomless-pit. Printed from a manuscript found in the cabinet of the famous Sir Humphry Polesworth: and publish'd, (as well as the three former parts) by the author of the New Atalantis.


AN APPENDIX TO JOHN BULL Still In His SENSES: OR, Law is a Bottomleſs-Pit.

Printed from a Manuſcript found in the Cabinet of the famous Sir Humphry Poleſworth: And Publiſh'd, (as well as the three former Parts) by the Author of the NEW ATALANTIS.

LONDON, Printed for John Morphew, ne [...]r Stationer's-Hall, 1712. Price 3d.
AN APPENDIX TO John Bull Still in his Senſes, &c.
1. CHAP. I.
The Apprehending, Examination, and Impriſonment of Jack, for Suſpicion of Poiſoning.

THE attentive Reader cannot have forgot, that in my laſt Part, the Story of Yan Ptſchirnſooker's Powder was interrupted by a Meſſage from Frog. I have a natural Compaſſion for Curioſity, being much troubled with the Diſtemper my ſelf; therefore to gratify that uneaſy itching Senſation in my Reader, I have procur'd the following Account of that Matter.

Yan Ptſchirnſooker came off (as Rogues uſually do upon ſuch Occaſions) by Peaching  his Partner, and being extremely forward to bring him to the Gallows; Jack was accus'd▪ as the Contriver of all the Roguery. And indeed it happen'd unfortunately for the poor Fellow, that he was known to bear a moſt inveterate Spight againſt the old Gentlewoman, and conſequently, that never any ill Accident happen'd to her, but he was ſuſpected to be at the bottom of it. If ſhe prick'd her Finger, Jack, to be ſure, laid the Pin in the way: If ſome Noiſe in the Street diſturb'd her Reſt, who could it be but Jack in ſome of his nocturnal Rambles? If a Servant run away, Jack had debauch'd him: every idle Tittle-tattle that went about, Jack was always ſuſpected for the Author of it: However, all was nothing to this laſt Affair of the temperating, moderating Powder. The Hue and Cry went after Jack, to Apprehend him, dead or alive, wherever he could be found. The Conſtables look'd out for him in all his uſual Haunts; but, to no purpoſe. Where d'ye think did they find him at laſt? Ev'n ſmoaking his Pipe very quietly, at his Brother Martin's; from whence he was carry'd, with a vaſt Mob at his Heels, before the Worſhipful Mr. Juſtice Overdo. Several of his Neighbours made Oath, That of late, the Priſoner had been obſerv'd to lead a very diſſolute Life, renouncing ev'n his uſual Hypocriſy, and Pretences to Sobriety: That he frequented Taverns and Eating-Houſes,  and had been often guilty of Drunkenneſs and Gluttony at My Lord-Mayor's Table: That he had been ſeen in the Company of Lewd Women: That he had transferr'd his uſual religious Care of the engroſs'd Copy of his Father's Will, to Bank Bills, Orders for Tallies, and Debentures: [Note: Tale of the Tub.] Theſe he now affirm'd, with more literal Truth, to be Meat, Drink, and Cloth, the Philoſophers Stone, and the Ʋniverſal Medicine: That he was ſo far from ſhewing his cuſtomary Reverence to the Will, that he kept company with thoſe that call'd his Father a cheating Rogue, and his Will a Forgery. That he not only ſat quietly and heard his Father rail'd at, but often chim'd in with the Diſcourſe, and hugg'd the Authors as his Boſom Friends: [Note: Tale of the Tub.] That inſtead of asking for Blows, at the Corners of the Streets, he now beſtow'd them as plentifully as he begg'd them before: In ſhort, That he was grown a meer Rake; and, had nothing left in him of old Jack, except his Spight to John Bull's Mother.

Another Witneſs made Oath, That Jack had been overheard bragging of a Trick he had found out to manage the old formal Jade, as he us'd to call her. ‘Damn this numb'd-Skull of mine (quoth he) that I could not light on it ſooner. As long as I go in this ragged tatter'd Coat, I am ſo well known,  that I am hunted away from the old Woman's Door by every barking Curr about the Houſe, they bid me Defiance; there's no doing Miſchief as an open Enemy, I muſt find ſome way or another of getting within Doors, and then I ſhall have better Opportunities of playing my Pranks, beſides the Benefit of good keeping.’

Two Witneſſes Swore, that ſeveral Years ago, there came to their Miſtriſs's Door, a young Fellow in a tatter'd Coat, that went by the Name of Timothy Trim, whom they did in their Conſcience believe to be the very Priſoner, reſembling him in Shape, Stature, and the Features of his Countenance; that the ſaid Timothy Trim being taken into the Family, clap'd their Miſtriſs's Livery over his own tatter'd Coat; that the ſaid Timothy was extremely officious about their Miſtriſs's Perſon, endeavouring by Flattery and Tale-bearing, to ſet her againſt the reſt of the Servants; no Body was ſo ready to fetch any thing that was wanted, or reach what was drop'd; that he us'd to ſhove and elbow his Fellow-Servants to get near his Miſtreſs, eſpecially when Mony was a paying or receiving, then he was never out of the way; that he was extremely diligent about every Bodies Buſineſs but his own; that the ſaid Timothy, while he was in the Family, us'd to be playing Roguiſh Tricks; when his Miſtreſs's back was turn'd he would  loll out his Tongue, make Mouths, and laugh at her, walking behind her like a Harlequin, ridiculing her Motions and Geſtures; if his Miſtreſs look'd about, he put on a grave, demure Countenance, as he had been in a fit of Devotion; that he us'd often to trip up Stairs ſo ſmoothly that you could not hear him tread, and put all things out of Order; that he would pinch the Children and Servants, when he met them in the dark, ſo hard, that he left the Print of his Fore-fingers and his Thumb in black and blue, and then ſlink into a corner, as if no Body had done it: Out of the ſame malicious Deſign, he us'd to lay Chairs and Joint-ſtools in their way, that they might break their Noſes by falling over them. The more young and unexperienc'd, he us'd to teach to talk Saucily, and call Names: During his ſtay in the Family there was much Plate miſſing; that being catch'd with a couple of Silver Spoons in his Pocket, with their Handles wrench'd off, he ſaid, he was only going to carry them to the Goldſmiths to be mended; that the ſaid Timothy was hated by all the honeſt Servants, for his ill-condition'd, ſplenetick Tricks, but eſpecially for his ſlanderous Tongue; traducing them to their Miſtreſs, as Drunkards, Thieves and Whore-maſters; that the ſaid Timothy, by lying Stories, us'd to ſet all the Family together by the Ears, taking delight to make them Fight and Quarrel; particularly one Day  ſitting at Table, he ſpoke Words to this Effect: ‘I am of Opinion (quoth he) That little ſhort Fellows, ſuch as we are, have better Hearts. and could beat the tall Fellows; I wiſh it came to a fair Trial, I believe, theſe long Fellows, as ſightly as they are, ſhould find their Jackets well thwack'd.’ A parcel of tall Fellows, who thought themſelves affronted by this Diſcourſe, took up the Quarel, and to't they went, the tall Men and the low Men, which continues ſtill a Faction in the Family, to the great Diſorder of our Miſtreſs's Affairs: That the ſaid Timothy carried this Frolick ſo far, that he propos'd to his Miſtreſs, that ſhe ſhould entertain no Servant that was above four Foot ſeven Inches high, and for that Purpoſe had prepar'd a Gage, by which they were to be meaſur'd: That the good old Gentlewoman was not ſo ſimple as to go into his Projects, ſhe began to ſmell a Rat. ‘This Trim (quoth ſhe) is an odd ſort of a Fellow, methinks he makes a ſtrange Figure with that ragged, tatter'd Coar, appearing under his Livery, can't he go ſpruce and clean, like the reſt of the Servants? The Fellow has a Roguiſh Leer with him, which I don't like by any means: beſides, he has ſuch a twang in his Diſcourſe, and an ungraceful way of ſpeaking through the Noſe, that one can hardly underſtand him; I wiſh the Fellow be not Tainted with ſome bad Diſeaſe.’ The Witneſſes  farther made Oath, That the ſaid Timothy lay out a Nights, and went abroad often at unſeaſonable Hours; that it was credibly reported, he did Buſineſs in another Family; that he pretended to have a ſqueamiſh Stomach, and could not eat at Table with the reſt of the Servants, tho' this was but a pretence to provide ſome nice Bit for himſelf; that he refus'd to Dine upon Salt-fiſh, only to have an opportunity to eat a Calve's Head (his Favourite Diſh) in private; that for all his tender Stomach, when he was got by himſelf, he would devour Capons, Turkeys and Sirloins of Beef, like a Cormorant.

Two other Witneſſes gave the following Evidence, That in his officious Attendance upon his Miſtreſs, he had try'd to ſlip in a Powder into her Drink, and that once he was catch'd endeavouring to ſtifle her with a Pillow as ſhe was a ſleep; that he and Ptſchirnſooker were often in cloſe Conference, and that they us'd to drink together at the Roſe, where it ſeems he was well enough known by the true Name of Jack.

The Priſoner had little to ſay in his Defence; he endeavour'd to prove himſelf Alibi; ſo that the Trial turn'd upon this ſingle Queſtion, whether the ſaid Timothy Trim and Jack, were the ſame Perſon? which was prov'd by ſuch plain Tokens, and particularly by a Mole under the left Pap, that  there was no withſtanding the Evidence; therefore the Worſhipful Mr. Juſtice committed him, in order to his Tryal.
2. CHAP. II.
How Jack's Friends came to viſit him in Priſon, and what Advice they gave him.

JACK hitherto had paſs'd in the World for a poor, ſimple, well-meaning, half-witted, crack'd-brain'd Fellow, People were ſtrangely ſurpriz'd to find him in ſuch a Roguery; that he ſhould diſguiſe himſelf under a falſe Name, hire himſelf out for a Servant to an old Gentlewoman, only for an opportunity to Poiſon her. They ſaid, That it was more Generous to profeſs open Enmity, than, under a profound Diſſimulation, to be guilty of ſuch a ſcandalous Breach of Truſt, and of the ſacred Rights of Hoſpitality. In ſhort, the Action was univerſally Condemn'd by his beſt Friends; they told him in plain terms, That this was come as a Judgment upon him, for his looſe Life, his Gluttony, Drunkenneſs and Avarice, laying aſide his Father's Will in an old mouldy Trunk, and turning Stock-jobber, News-monger, and Buſie-body, meddling with other Peoples Affairs, ſhaking off his old ſerious Friends, and keeping Company with Buffoons and  Pick-pockets, his Father's ſworn Enemies; That he had beſt throw himſelf upon the Mercy of the Court, Repent, and change his Manners. To ſay truth, Jack heard theſe Diſcourſes with ſome Compunction; however he reſolv'd to try what his new Acquaintance would do for him: They ſent Habakkuk Slyboots, who deliver'd him the following Meſſage, as the peremptory Commands of his truſty Companions.
Habakkuk. Dear Jack, I am ſorry for thy Misfortune; Matters have not been carried on with due Secrecy; however, we muſt make the beſt of a bad Bargain: Thou art in the utmoſt Jeopardy, that's certain; Hang, Draw and Quarter, are the gentleſt things they talk of. However, thy faithful Friends, ever watchful for thy Security, bid me tell thee, That they have one infallible Expedient left to ſave thy Life: Thou muſt know, we have got into ſome Underſtanding with the Enemy, by the means of Don Diego Diſmallo; he aſſures us there is no Mercy for thee, and that there is only one way left to Eſcape; it is indeed ſomewhat out of the common Road, however, be aſſur'd, it is the reſult of moſt mature Deliberation.
Jack. Prithee tell me quickly, for my Heart is ſunk down into the very bottom of my Belly.
Hab. It is the unanimous Opinion of your Friends, that you make as if you hang'd your  ſelf; that they will give it out that you are quite dead, and convey your Body out of Priſon in a Beir; and that John Bull, being buſied with his Law-Suit, will not enquire further into the matter.
Jack. How d'ye mean, make as if I had hang'd my ſelf?
Hab. Nay, you muſt really hang your ſelf up in a true genuine Rope, that there may appear no Trick in it, and leave the reſt to your Friends.
Jack. Truly this is a matter of ſome Concern; and my Friends, I hope, won't take it ill, if I enquire a little into the means by which they intend to deliver me: A Rope, and a Nooſe, are no jeſting Matters!
Hab. Why ſo miſtruſtful? haſt▪ thou ever found us falſe to thee? I tell thee, there is one ready to cut thee down.
Jack. May I preſume to ask who it is that is entruſted with that important Office?
Hab. Is there no end of thy How's and thy Why's? that's a Secret.
Jack. A Secret, perhaps, that I may be ſafely truſted with, for I am not like to tell it again. I tell you plainly, it is no ſtrange thing for a Man, before he hangs himſelf up, to enquire who is to cut him down.
Hab. Thou ſuſpicious Creature! if thou muſt needs know it, I tell thee it is Sir Roger; he has been in Tears ever ſince thy Misfortune. Don Diego and we have laid it ſo, that  he is to be in the next Room, and before the Rope is well about thy Neck, reſt ſatiſfied, he will break in, and cut thee down: Fear not, old Boy; we'll do't, I'll warrant thee.
Jack. So I muſt hang my ſelf up, upon hopes that Sir Roger will cut me down, and all this upon the Credit of Don Diego: A fine Stratagem indeed to ſave my Life, that depends upon Hanging, Don Diego, and Sir Roger!
Hab. I tell thee there is a Myſtery in all this, my Friend, a piece of profound Policy; if thou knew what good this will do to the Common Cauſe, thy Heart would leap for Joy: I'm ſure thou would not delay the Experiment one moment.
Jack. This is to the Tune of All for the better. What's your Cauſe to me, when I am hang'd?
Hab. Refractory Mortal! If thou wilt not truſt thy Friends, take what follows; know aſſuredly, before next full Moon, that thou wilt be hung up in Chains, or thy Quarters perching upon the moſt conſpicuous Places of the Kingdom. Nay, I don't believe they will be contented with Hanging, they talk of Empaling, or breaking on the Wheel; and thou chuſeſt that, before a gentle ſuſpending of thy ſelf, for one Minute. Hanging is not ſo painful a thing as thou imagines. I have ſpoke with ſeveral that have undergone it,  they all agree it is no manner of uneaſineſs; be ſure thou take good notice of the Symptoms, the Relation will be curious; it is but a kick or two with thy Heels, and a wry Mouth or ſo: Sir Roger will be with thee in the twinkling of an Eye.
Jack. But what if Sir Roger ſhould not come? will my Friends be there to Succour me?
Hab. Doubt it not; I will provide every thing againſt to Morrow Morning, do thou keep thy own Secret, ſay nothing: I tell thee, it is abſolutely neceſſary for the Common Good, that thou ſhouldſt go through this Operation.
3. CHAP. III.
How Jack hang'd himſelf up by the Perſwaſion of his Friends, who broke their Word, and left his Neck in the Nooſe.

JACK was a profeſs'd Enemy to Implicit Faith, and yet I dare ſay, it was never more ſtrongly exerted, nor more baſely abuſed, than upon this occaſion. He was now, with his old Friends, in the ſtate of a poor disbanded Officer after a Peace; or rather a wounded Soldier after a Battle; like an old Favourite of a cunning Miniſter after the Jobb is over; or a decay'd Beauty to a cloy'd Lover in  queſt of new Game; or like an hundred ſuch things that one ſees every Day. There were new Intrigues, new Views, new Projects on foot; Jack's Life was the Purchaſe of Diego's Friendſhip, much good may it do them. The Intereſt of Hocus and Sir Williams Crawly, which was now more at Heart, made this Operation upon poor Jack abſolutely neceſſary. You may eaſily gueſs that his Reſt that Night was but ſmall, and much diſturb'd; however the remaining part of his Time he did not employ (as his Cuſtom was formerly) in Prayer, Meditation, or ſinging a double Verſe of a Pſalm, but amuſed himſelf with diſpoſing of his Bank-Stock; many a Doubt, many a Qualm, overſpread his clouded Imagination. ‘Muſt I then (quoth he) hang up my own perſonal, natural, individual Self, with theſe two Hands! Durus Sermo! What if I ſhould be cut down, as my Friends tell me? There is ſomething Infamous in the very Attempt; the World will conclude I had a guilty Conſcience. Is it poſſible that good Man, Sir Roger, can have ſo much pity upon an unfortunate Scoundrel, that has perſecuted him ſo many Years? No, it cannot be: I don't love Favours that paſs through Don Diego's Hands. On the other ſide, my Blood chills about my Heart, at the thought of theſe Rogues, with their bloody Hands grabbling in my Guts, and pulling out my very Entrails:  Hang it, for once I'll truſt my Friends.’ So Jack reſolv'd, but he had done more wiſely, to have put himſelf upon the Tryal of his Country, made his Defence in Form; many things happen between the Cup and the Lip, Witneſſes might have been brib'd, Juries manag'd, or Proſecution ſtop'd. But ſo it was, Jack for this time had a ſufficient Stock of Implicit Faith, which led him to his Ruin, as the Sequel of the Story ſhews: And now the fatal Day was come, in which he was to try this hanging Experiment. His Friends did not fail him at the appointed Hour, to ſee it put in practice. Habakkuk brought him a ſmooth, ſtrong, tough Rope, made of many a ply of wholeſome Scandinavian Hemp, compactly twiſted together, with a Nooſe that ſlip'd as glib as a Bird-catcher's Gin. Jack ſhrunk and grew pale at firſt ſight of it, he handled it, meaſur'd it, ſtretch'd it, fix'd it againſt the Iron-bar of the Window to try its ſtrength, but no Familiarity could reconcile him to it. He found fault with the length, the thickneſs, and the twiſt, nay, the very colour did not pleaſe him. ‘Will nothing leſs th [...]n Hanging ſerve (quoth Jack)? Won't my Enemies take Bail for my good Behaviour? Will they accept of a Fine, or be ſatisfied with the Pillory and Impriſonment, a good round Whipping, or Burning in the Cheek?’
 Habakkuk. Nothing but your Blood will appeaſe their Rage; make haſte, elſe we ſhall be diſcover'd: There's nothing like ſurpriſing the Rogues. How they will be diſappointed, when they hear that thou haſt haſt prevented their Revenge, and hang'd thine own ſelf?
Jack. That's true; but what if I ſhould do it in Effigies? Is there never an old Pope, or Pretender, to hang up in my ſtead? we are not ſo unlike, but it may paſs.
Hab. That can never be put upon Sir Roger.
Jack. Are you ſure he is in the next Room? Have you provided a very ſharp Knife, in caſe of the worſt?
Hab. Doſt take me for a common Lyar? Be ſatisfy'd, no Damage can happen to your Perſon, your Friends will take care of that.
Jack. Mayn't I quilt my Rope, it galls my Neck ſtrangely? beſides, I don't like this running Knot, it holds too tight, I may be ſtifled all of a ſudden.
Hab. Thou haſt ſo many If's and And's; prithee diſpatch; it might have been over before this time.
Jack. But, now I think on't, I would fain ſettle ſome Affairs, for fear of the worſt: Have a little Patience.
Hab. There's no having Patience, thou art ſuch a faintling, ſilly Creature.

Jack. O thou moſt deteſtable, abominable, Paſſive Obedience! did I ever imagine I ſhould become thy Votary, in ſo pregnant an Inſtance; how will my Brother Martin laugh at this Story, to ſee himſelf out done in his own Calling? He has taken the Doctrine, and left me the Practice. No ſooner had he utter'd theſe Words, but like a Man of true Courage, he ty'd the fatal Cord to the Beam, fitted the Nooſe, and mounted upon the bottom of a Tub, the inſide of which he had often Grac'd in his proſperous Days. This Footſtool Habakkuk kick'd away, and left poor Jack ſwinging, like the Pendulum of Paul's Clock. The fatal Nooſe perform'd its Office, and with moſt ſtrict Ligature, ſqueez'd the Blood into his Face, 'till it aſſum'd a purple dye: While the poor Man, heav'd from the very bottom of his Belly for Breath, Habakuk walk'd with great Deliberation into both the upper and lower Room, to acquaint his Friends, who receiv'd the News with great Temper, and with Geers and Scoffs inſtead of Pity, Jack has Hang'd himſelf (quoth they!) let us go and ſee how the poor Rogue ſwings. Then they call'd Sir Roger. Sir Roger (quoth Habakkuk) Jack has hang'd himſelf, make haſte and cut him down. Sir Roger turn'd firſt one Ear and then t'other, not underſtanding what he ſaid.
Hab. I tell you Jack has hang'd himſelf up.
Sir Roger. Who's hang'd?
 Hab. Jack.
Sir Roger. I thought this had not been hanging Day.
Hab. But the poor Fellow has hang'd himſelf.
Sir Roger. Then let him hang. I don't wonder at it, the Fellow has been mad theſe twenty Years. With this he ſlunk away.

Then Jack's Friends began to hunch and puſh one another, Why don't you go and cut the poor Fellow down? Why don't you? and why don't you? Not I (quoth one,) not I (quoth another,) not I (quoth a third,) he may hang 'till Doomſday before I relieve him. Nay it is credibly reported, that they were ſo far from ſuccouring their poor Friend, in this his diſmal Circumſtance, that Ptſchirnſooker, and ſeveral of his Companions, went in and pull'd him by the Legs, and thump'd him on the Breaſt. Then they began to rail at him for the very thing which they had both advis'd and juſtify'd before, viz. his getting into the old Gentlewoman's Family, and putting on her Livery. The Keeper, who perform'd the laſt Office, coming up, found Jack ſwinging, with no Life in him; he took down the Body gently and laid it on a Bulk, and brought out the Rope to the Company. This, Gentlemen, is the Rope that hang'd Jack; What must be done with it? Upon which they order'd it to be laid among the Curioſities of Greſham College, and it is call'd  Jack's Rope to this very Day. However Jack after all, had ſome ſmall Tokens of Life in him, but lies at this time paſt hopes of a total Recovery, with his Head hanging on one Shoulder, without Speech or Motion. The Coroners Inqueſt ſuppoſing him Dead, brought him in Non Compos.
4. CHAP. IV.
The Conference between Don Diego Diſmallo, and John Bull.

DUring the time of the foregoing Tranſaction, Don Diego was entertaining John Bull.
D. Diego. I hope, Sir, this Day's Proceeding will convince you of the Sincerity of your old Friend Diego, and the Treachery of Sir Roger.
J. Bull. What's the matter now?
D. Diego. You have been endeavouring, for ſeveral Years, to have Juſtice done upon that Rogue Jack; but what through the Remiſſneſs of Conſtables, Juſtices and pack'd Juries, he has always found the Means to eſcape.
J. Bull. What then?
D. Diego. Conſider then, who is your beſt Friend, he that would have brought him to  condign Puniſhment, or he that has ſav'd him. By my Perſwaſion, Jack had hang'd himſelf, if Sir Roger had not cut him down.
J. Bull. Who told you that Sir Roger has done ſo?
D. Diego. You ſeem to receive me coldly; methinks my Services deſerve a better Return.
J. Bull. Since you value your ſelf upon Hanging this poor Scoundrel, I tell you, when I have any more Hanging-work, I'll ſend for thee; I have ſome better Employment for Sir Roger: In the mean time, I deſire the poor Fellow may be look'd after. When he firſt came out of the North-Country into my Family, under the pretended Name of Timothy Trim, the Fellow ſeem'd to mind his Loom and his Spinning-wheel, till ſome body turn'd his Head; then he grew ſo pragmatical, that he took upon him the Government of my whole Family: I could never order any thing, within or without doors, but he muſt be always giving his Counſel, ſorſooth: Nevertheleſs, tell him, I will forgive what is paſt; and if he would mind his Buſineſs for the future, and not meddle out of his own Sphere, he will find that John Bull is not of a cruel Diſpoſition,
D. Diego. Yet all your skilful Phyſicians ſay, that nothing can recover your Mother, but a piece of Jack's Liver boil'd in her Soup.

J. Bull. Thoſe are Quacks: My Mother abhors ſuch Canibal's Food; ſhe is in perfect He [...]lth at preſent: I would have given many a good Pound to have had her ſo well ſome time ago. There are, indeed, two or three troubleſome old Nurſes, that becauſe they believe I am tender-hearted, will never let me have a quiet Nights Reſt, with knocking me up: Oh, Sir, your Mother is taken extremely ill! ſhe is fall'n into a fainting Fit! ſhe has a great Emptineſs, and wants Suſtenance! This is only to recommend themſelves, for their great Care. John Bull, as ſimple as he is, underſtands a little of a Pulſe.
FINIS. 