
when the many Tracts wrote by the Dissen-ters
in their own just Vindication have been
Answer'd.
            But this Gentleman has the Misfortune so
to be blinded by his Passion, as to cry Victoria
before the Battle is ended; and not to trouble
you, Sir, with many Negatives, I wish you
would let us see one Time whenever by any
thing but Railery you worsted the Dissen-ters.
            We
confess, Sir, that at ill Language you
have the better of us; whether you have any
Professors of the Scolding Talent among your
Students we know not, for you will not
suffer us to be Taught in your Universities;
but we assure you, that in those Schools where
we are fain to bring up our Youth, we Teach
no such Science.
            But as if all you had laid down on that
Head were true, and you were very cer-tain
that you had worsted the Dissenters in
Argument, you give them a home Charge.
            3. That 'tis their Method not to mind Answers,
but to Repeat and Repeat their own Objections In
Infinitum.
            Now, Sir, This may or may not be true,
according as you can or cannot give a Ge-nuine
Answer to the following Account of
Answers given, and Books written; by Dis-senters
in their own Vindication, which you,

nor any of your Church, have ever yet
thought fit to venture an Answer to, and
when you can you may defend your Church
from unfair Treatment of the Dissenters in
point of Argument on this Head.
            And not to go too far beyond the Memory
of those we are talking to, I think there
stands Two Books of the Learned Mr. Clarkson
yet unanswered, the one Entituled, No Scrip-ture
Evidence for Diocesian Bishops; and the other,
A Discourse of Liturgies. 'Tis true, there is a
long and learned Discourse of Dr. Comber's
then Precentor of York, wherein with some of
our Author's Spirit, Treating the Memory of
Mr. Clarkson neither like a Gentleman nor a
Scholar, tho' all Men know he was as much
of both as ever the Nation bred; and tho' a
Dissenter, had the Honour to be Tutor to
the Learned and most Excellent Dr. Tillotson,
late Archbishop of Canterbury.
            
            After this Author has pleased himself with
sufficiently reproaching his Deceased Antago-nist,
he goes on to rummage Antiquity to
prove that Liturgies were in use in the Primi-tive
Church. This was no part of the Dis-pute;
and had not the Doctor overlook'd it in
his haste, Mr. Clarkson had Anticipated his
whole Discourse in p. 
               
                  •
               . 'Whether Liturgies,
or Forms of Worship and Administration,

were in use in the Primitive Church or not,
is no part of the present Dispute.'
            
            
               'But whether these Liturgies were pre-scrib'd
and Impos'd as Terms of Communion
this is the Question.' 
            
            Now to this Question the Dr. is not pleas'd
to say one Word, as I can observe, in his whole
Book, but goes on to prove that to be true
which Mr. Clarkson granted, and lets that a-lone
which he deny'd.
            Nay, so Ridiculous was this Answerer in
the Management of himself, both in the
Search of Antiquity, and in rendring those
Authors he Quotes, that a Learned Minister
of the Church of England, meerly with a re-spect
to Justice and Learning, Reply'd to
him, and made it appear that the Doctor did
not so much as understand the Language of
the Quotations. This was Mr. Samuel Bold,
Rector of Steeples in Dorsetshire.
            
            This, I suppose, is some Peoples Way of
Answering the Dissenters; and if this may
pass for Answering, they are Answer'd in-deed:
But I must take the Freedom to say, It
has yet remain'd unprov'd, that ever a strict
Literal Compliance to any Prescrib'd Form
of Worship and Administration of Sacraments
was Impos'd as the Term or Condition of
Communion in any Branch of the Christian
Church, for above 400 Years after our Sa-viour's

time; nay, 'twould be hard to prove
it ever done in any Church in the World but
ours to this Day; and they are still welcome to
make it out if they can; and till they do, the
World may judge whether the Dissenters are
worsted in Argument, or no.
            That there were Bishops in the Primitive
Church has also been defended with a great
deal of Skill; but as to their Diocesan Royal-ty
and Juridiction, they have always, in Pru-dence,
thought fit to let the Dispute of it a-lone;
and I would advise them to do so still,
for they must find some other Book to defend
it from than the Scripture, and some other
Ages of the World to search for the Practice in
than that of the Primitive Church
            But I must confess the Dissenters were
worsted another Way, in the Case of Dr.
Calamy and Mr. Delaun; of which remarkable
Story this is the short Abstract.
            
               Dr. Calamy preaching a Sermon at Alderman-bury
Church, Entituled, A Discourse about Scru-pulous
Consciences, makes the Dissenters this fair
Challenge, as by his printed Sermon, P.  
                  •
               .
appears in these Words: Could we but prevail
with the People diligently to examine the Merits of
the Cause our Church would every Day gain Ground
amongst all wise Men; for we care not how much
Knowledge and Ʋnderstanding our People have, so they
be but Humble and Modest with it: Nor do we desire

Men to become our Proselites any farther than we
give them Scripture for it. And in another Place
he goes on; All we desire of the Dissenters is, that
they would equally hear both Sides; that they would
weigh and consider the Arguments that may be propound-ed
to them; and being indifferent to either Part of the
Question, would think it no Shame to change their Mind
when they see good Reason for it.
            Mr. Delaun, a Man whose Learning and
Temper were Conspicuous to all the Learn-ed
World, and particularly in the Book he
wrote, accepts this Challenge, and writes
down his Reasons for Nonconformity; and
as the Doctor had printed his Sermon, and
thereby appeal'd to the World, all Peoples
Mouths were fill'd with the Fairness of the
Proposal, and every Body cry'd out, the Dis-senters
were worsted, Mr. Delaun therefore
thought himself oblig'd to print his Reply.
            But as the Victory consisted, as it does still,
in Boasts and Rhodomontades, so they were
as loth to be overcome, as sensible that they
should be so, and took immediate Care to
suppress the Book, by seizing the Copy at the
Printer's; and this was follow'd, by seizing
the Author for writing a Seditious Libel, put
him in Prison, fin'd him 
                  Ʋltra Tenementum, and
were hardly prevail'd upon to vouchsafe him
the Favour to excuse him the Pillory, which

they at last told him in Court was only re-mitted
in respect to his Learning.
            Here was a true Church-Conquest; and this
Gentleman was persecuted with so much true
Church Zeal, that he lay in Newgate for his
Fine, till he, his Wife and Children, died there,
to the Eternal Scandal both of the Church-man
and the Dissenters; the one, that he should
first challenge a Dispute, and then so basely
Treat the Man that accepted it; and the o-ther,
that they should not contribute 75 l. to
save a Life sacrific'd for their Defence; and
such a Life, as, for real Merit, deserv'd infi-nitely
more Regard in a Nation of Humanity
and Religion, as we fancy our selves to be.
            The Book for which this Gentleman was
thus handl'd remains to this Day unanswer'd
by these People, that boast so much of worst-ing
the Dissenters, and they would do well
to look back upon that Book, and make some
rational Reply to it before they tell us we can
shew no Reasons for our Dissenting.
            In like manner they proceed still with the
Dissenters upon other Points of arguing, as
particularly by Repealing and Repeating In Infini-tum
the Charge of Rebellion and Faction,
whereas they have been over and over Chal-leng'd
make out their own Loyalty of
Principles or Practice to exceed the Loyalty
of the Dissenters.
            
               

And De Foe's Test of the Church of England's
Loyalty has receiv'd yet no other Answer than
his Shortest Way, by a Fine 
                  Ʋltra Tenement
                     •
                  m,
and the reproachful Answer of the Pillory. If
this be your Way of answering Arguments,
Gentlemen, 'tis no wonder you can worst the
Dissenters.
            To proceed in their usual Method, a worthy
Member of the House of Commons has pub-lish'd
a Book to vindicate the Occasional Bill;
and, like those who take Things upon Trust,
has affirm'd, that all wise Nations in the World
have thought it necessary to entrust the Ad-ministration
of Publick Affairs in the Hands
of such Persons only as are of one and the
same Persuasion in Matters of Religion.
            A very handsome Way of calling all the
Christian World Fools: For I defie him to
shew me one of those wise Nations, and to
prove it by one Instance, unless where there
has not been any Toleration of other Persua-sions,
the Turks only Excepted.
            Thus, Gentlemen, we are worsted by For-geries
and Falsities, not by Arguments; we
are challeng'd to Dispute, and then ruin'd for
Disputing; ask'd Questions, and then fetch'd
up for Answering them. But since this Gen-tleman
has found an Adversary capable to deal
with him, Power and P—ts excepted, I leave

him to say the Dissenters are worsted, when
he proves it by a sufficient Reply.
            We are now challeng'd to prove that we
dissent from the Church in Points so far from
being essential, as that the Chnrch cannot be
justified in Refusing to abate them; and
we are desir'd to give in the Objections to the
Convocation.
            What Authority their Author has from the
Convocation to make this Offer, I know not,
and do not see how I shall know it; or whe-ther
the Convocation will receive such a List
of the indifferent things, or no; but since
this bold Challenger would be answered, and
will not be satisfied with a General Reply,
but this must be spoken to by it self, I crave
leave to accept his Challenge as far as the fol-lowing
Particulars reach.
            First, I do affirm this has been done alrea-dy
by the whole Body of the Dissenting Mi-nisters
in such a Manner, and with such mo-dest
Reasons, as several of the Episcopal Cler-gy
were so satisfied with, and did so repre-sent
to King Charles the Second, that their
Concessions were a sufficient Ground of a U-nion:
VVhat, and who, hindred a Union
when the Dissenters made such Concessions,
I leave to this Gentleman to tell us, if he
cares to expose his Friends so much.
            
               

Secondly, I do affirm, that if the Church of
England would think fit so far to stoop to
their Dissenting Brethren, as to abate such
things only, and all such, as are acknowledg'd by
themselves to be Indifferent; if it would not
reduce us all to such a perfect Union as to
Comprehend all Parties, it would yet Em-brace
so many in the Arms of the Church:
'Twould cause so many to return to the
Church among the Dissenters, as would
render the Remainder less considerable.
            I am to suppose the Challenger in this
Matter does not expect I should give in such
a List of Alterations as would Reconcile the
Quakers, or perhaps not all other Societies;
or to tell him what Sorts would Conform,
and what would not: But I answer him in
Reason, if I say for my self, that upon such
Concessions I would Conform with all my
Heart, and Thousands more, I believe, would
do the like.
            Since then he has made such an Offer, let
us Examine what it is we desire of the
Church, what are the Indifferent Things
we differ about, and I join Issue with him if the
Convocation thinks fit to make these Abate-ments
and Amendments, and we refuse to
Conform, then I am content we shall pass

for a People who are willing to keep open
the Breach to serve other Designs.
            Before I descend to the Particulars, 'tis
necessary to make some Enquiry into what
I call Indifferent.
            1. I call those Things Indifferent which
are not Essential Points of Doctrine, with-out
the Belief or Practice whereof a Man
cannot obtain Salvation.
            2. All things introduc'd into the Church
of England, either in Worship or in Disci-pline,
by Humane Institution, which are
not to be found either by Command or by
President in the Holy Scriptures, which are
the Rule of our Faith.
            
            On this Head of Indifferent Things there-fore
I join Issue with our Author; and if he
thinks fit to present our Humble Address to
the Convocation, that they will be pleas'd
to make such Abatement in the Indifferent
Things following, I am persuaded such
Multitudes of Dissenters will come into the
Church as may very well deserve the Name
of a Union, tho' not of an Universal Con-formity,
and the Number of Remaining Dis-centers
would be much the smaller.
            
               

            THE
DISSENTERS
ANSWER
TO THE
High-Church Challenge.
            
               London, Printed in the Year 1704.
         
      
      
         
            

First of all as to Liturgies, we desire,
since it is all Originally Humane, and made
by Men Fallible, and of like Passions with our
selves, they may suffer such Amendment as
are Reasonable and Justifiable from Scrip-ture,
and the Practice of the Primitive
Church.
            Secondly, We desire that after such Amend-ment,
the Minister may not in all Cases be
Ti'd up and Prescrib'd by the Letter of the
Book, but may have Liberty to Express
himself at large in Prayer, as the present Exi-gence
of the Case may require, and his own
Abilities may supply.
            Thirdly, We desire the Ordination of Mi-nisters
by Presbyters may be allow'd, being
Justifiable by Scripture; and that our Mini-sters
may be admitted into Holy Orders with-out
the Re-ordination, and Imposing of Unrea-sonable
Oaths.
            Fourthly, We desire the Kneeling at the
Sacrament, Bowing at the Name of Jesus, the
Cross in Baptism, the Use of the Surplice,
and all those Things own'd by the Greatest
Masters of the Dispute to be Indifferent, may
either be wholly left out, or so left at the
Discretion of the People, as that they may
not be impos'd upon them without their
Consent.
            
               

Fifthly, We desire the Episcopal Hierarchy
to be Reduc'd to such a Pitch of Authority as
may be justified by the Scripture, and to no
other; and we are ready to enter into an Ex-amination
with them, what that Particu-lar
of Power amounts to, and how far it ex-tends.
            I
do not say these are all the Heads which
I suppose the Dissenters require, but I say
these are some of them, and the most Consi-derable;
and if the Church would give such
Concessions as were Reasonable on these
Heads, the Controversie would soon be de-cided,
Whether the Dissenters Separated from
the Established Church on frivolous Grounds,
or no.
            First, As to Alterations in the Liturgy,
'tis the Avow'd Opinion of the Church of
England, that no Church in the World is in-fallible;
and above all, our Church does not
pretend to the Title. If then we are not In-fallible,
but subject to Err and Mistake, why
should she refuse to Enter into the Cause,
whether it is convenient to make any farther
or more perfect Reformation or no; but tho'
the Consideration were not on a farther Refor-mation,
yet if it were only giving up some

smaller Matter for the sake of Christian Peace,
it were not Commendable only, but a Due
Requisite Temper in a Christian Church.
            As to them that blame the Dissenters for
Separating, let us enquire of them if they are
uncapable of greater Light, and consequently
of knowing better what they ought to do,
than they did before? If then they will sup-press
this Light, and refuse to Amend
Things, tho' the Light of their own Consci-ence
directs them to it, where lyes the
Charge of Schism? Surely not at their Door,
who would only pursue a perfect Reformati-on,
and think it their Duty to serve God in the
VVay most agreeable to his Revealed VVill
in the Scriptures; but at theirs, who would
oblige them to worship him according to the
Inventions of Men, by Forms and Methods,
for which they have neither Warrant, Com-mand,
of Example, either in the Scripture, or
the Primitive Practice of the Church; I Appeal
to all the World, that as well now as before it is
not our Faults that they bring the Liturgy
upon the Stage of Dispute, but the bold
Challengers of Men that can never make
good their Arguments: And they ought first
to have Answered what has been said already,
before they had Challeng'd us to show New
Reasons.
            
               

Wherefore in the Sense first of the
Irresistable Force of what has been said alrea-dy,
and secondly of my Incapacity of saying
more to the Purpose, at least in so short a
time, I make the Proposers this fair Offer,
and they are at Liberty to carry it to the
Convocation, for 'tis their Business, not ours.
            1. When they will please to Answer Mr.
De Laun's Plea for the Non-conformists, and the
Substantial, yet Unanswerable, Reasons there
given for our Dissenting.
            2. When they will please to Reply to the
Concessions of the Dissenters in the Confe-rence
at the Savoy, and prove they were not
sufficient Grounds of an Union.
            3. When they will Confute the Scriptural
Authority of Bishop 
                  Ʋsher's Model of Church-Government,
which was much the same with
the Scheme the Dissenters presented to King
Charles the Second, and give the Reasons why
the Bishops refused it, Baxt. Life, cap. 8.
            4. If they please to Reply (a little more to
the Purpose than Mr. Osfley and Mr. Hoadly has
done) to the Grounds and Reasons of Non-con-formity
in the 10th Chapter of Baxter's Life,
Abridg'd by Mr. Calamy, and to some yet Un-answered
Things in Mr. Calamy's Reply to
Mr. Hoadly.
            
            
               

5. If they please to give a Rational An-swer
to the first, Second and Third, Vol. of
the Conformists Plea for the Non-conformists, wrote
by a Member of their own Church, and to
Gillespy's View of English Popish Ceremonies.
            
            Whenever these things are Soberly and Ju-diciously
Answered, and as Dr. Calamy pro-posed
good Scripture and Reason brought for
it, assure your self, Sir, when these Things
are Answered, there shall be no manner of
need to bring an Occasional Bill to prevent
the Alternate Conformity of Dissenters; 'tis
most certain, that the far greater Number of
them will come in, and become your Chri-stian
United Brethren; and till you do these
Things, Gentlemen, we Appeal to all the
World, who are the Causers of the Schism
you speak of, those that all along offered to
come in upon Reasonable Conditions, or those
that have persecuted us for not complying
with Humane Institutions, which are no
where to be found in Scripture, which is the
only Rule of Faith.
            
            And thus now the World may see with
what Truth these Gentlemen blacken the Dis-senters
with their Repeating Objections, but taking
no notice of Answers, which I here fairly return
upon them, and assure them, that whenever

they will Answer the Objections in Mr. De
Laun's Book against the Liturgy and Canon
of the Church of England, and prove the same
to be necessary from Scripture and Reason,
I will certainly Conform, for I believe and
own it my Duty to Conform to them if I can,
and I can never resist Conforming to any thing
which is prov'd to be my Duty from Reason
and Scripture.
            I think 'tis needless to say much of my
own, after such Men as these have appear'd
and gone off the Stage with no Reply; nei-ther
can I satisfie my self to attempt any
thing by way of Addition to Men of such
exalted Learning, till I can see something
New offered upon these Heads, and unless
these Gentlemen have something to say more
than has been said before them by Men su-perior
in Learning to themselves: What they
now advance savours of an Arrogance pecu-liar
to themselves, and which I like so ill,
that I care not to imitate.
            I shall therefore think it more than suf-ficient
thus to tell them what has been said
already; and if they have any thing to say by
way of Reply, that demands an Answer,
they may not want what is needful to justifie
the Practice and Principles of the Dissenters,
to be such as neither the Charge of Faction or
Rebellion can be laid at their Doors, and it

seems by this Challenge he would let the
World believe that the Church of England
would not stand with the Dissenters for small
Matters; and I cannot but wonder with what
Face he can Publish to the World these fol-lowing
Words, which I am persuaded he has
no Authority for from his Superiors.
            We should have little Quarrel with the Dissenters
about all the Objections they make as to Habits, Ce-remonies,
Liturgy, and even the Grand Point of Or-dination
by Presbyters in Cases of Necessity; if it
were not for that Fulsome Word Schism, if they did
not gather Separate Congregations, and set them up
in Opposition to the Church, and so form a Schism, they
would be no Dissenters, notwithstanding their diffe-rent
Sentiments as to the Points before mentioned.
All these are his own Words, P. 3.
            
               Thou Hypocrite, out of thine own Mouth shalt thou
be condemned; If you had not Quarrell'd
with us about Habits, Ceremonies, Liturgy,
and Ordination, there had been no Schism;
no Separate Congregations gathered, no
breaking off from the Church, no such thing
as Dissenters, at least but few among us; and
to impose this upon the World after such
plain Evidence as has been given to the con-trary,
deserves a courser Title than I care to
foul my Paper with, and evidently shows the
Method of the Party who run down the Dis-senters
by Falsities and Forgeries.
            
               

And that I may do what these People sel-dom
concern themselves about; I lay it down
as a Truth, that when King Charles the Se-cond
was Restor'd to the Crown, the pre-sent
Dissenters being then desir'd to Conform
to the Church of England, and their Ministers
having very good Inducement so to do, viz.
the Possession of their Livings and Benefices,
they were Commanded by the King to give in
their Proposals upon which they would Con-form.
            And
'tis needful to give a short Abstract of
the Proceedings in that Case, in Order to let
the World see what occasion'd the Schism
these People cry so much out of, and to place
the Guilt of it where it really lyes; for as the
Morality, so the Immorality, of every Action
consists in the Principle from whence it pro-ceeds,
and the End to which it is design'd.
            At the Restoration of King Charles II. to
put the Dissenters in Hopes that a Reconcilia-tion
was intended, Ten or Twelve of the
Principal of them were made His Majesties
Chaplains; and these designing to improve
that Opportunity, waited upon him, intro-duc'd
by the Earl of Manchester, and humbly
recommended to His Majesty the Happiness,
and the Opportunity of a Union among his
Protestant Subjects in Matters of Religion,

and begging of him that ONLY NECESSARY
THINGS might be the Terms of Ʋnion.
            
            The King declar'd himself very favourably
on this Head, profess'd that the Proposal was
exceeding agreeable to him, and promis'd
them to do his utmost to bring it to pass.
Telling them withal, That this Agreement cou'd
not be expected but by abating something on both Sides,
and meeting one another in the Mid-way; and that
if they were willing to do their Parts, if it was not
effected, it should be their own Faults, and not his.
            
            Here it may very well be observ'd that
the Schism lyes directly at the Door of the
Church, if the King's Words are true. For the
Dissenters did make Offers of meeting half
Way, and more than half Way, as shall pre-sently
be made out; and if our Brethren of
the Church can make out one Step offer'd by
them in the most indifferent Circumstance,
then ours is the Schism, and not theirs. If
not, Vae vobis Hypocritae. Job 15. 6. Thine own
Mouth condemneth thee, and not I; yea, thine own
Lips testifie against thee.
            
            The King after this directed, That they should
bring in Proposals of the utmost they could yield to;
and they in return besought His Majesty,
That at the same time that they offer'd their Concessi-on
to His Majesty, the Brethren on the other side might
also bring in theirs, containing the utmost they would
abate and yield to in order to Concord; and the King

promis'd them it should be so. Cal. Ab. Bax-ter's
Life, p. 144
            According to this Direction of the King
they met and agreed upon a Paper, with a
most Humble Address to His Majesty, they
make Four Preliminary Requests to the King,
and then offer'd their Proposals, an Abstract of
which you have in Mr. Calamy's Abridgment a-foresaid,
p. 145. and for the Faithfulness of
the Quotation the Reader is referr'd to the
Original, which is to be seen in Print.
            First, They request, That serious Godliness might
be countenanced; a Learned and Pious Minister in each
Parish encouraged; that a Personal, Publick, owning
the Baptismal Covenant might precede an Admission
to the Lord's Table; and that the Lord's Day might
be strictly sanctified. They offer to allow of the
true, ancient, Primitive Precedency in the
Church, with a due Mixture of Presbyters,
in order to the avoiding the Corruptions,
Partiality, Tyranny, and other Evils, which
are incident to the Administration of a single
Person; the Things which they principally
blamed in the English Frame were the great Ex-tent
of the Bishops Diocess: Their deputing Commissa-ries,
Chancellors, and Officials, to act in their Stead:
Their assuming their sole Power of Ordination and Ju-risdiction,
and acting so arbitrarily in Visitation Ar-ticles;
bringing in new Ceremonies, and su-spending
Ministers at Pleasure: And for re-forming

            THE
Dissenters Answer
TO THE
High-Church Challenge.
            AS it is the Character of the Devil to
bring a Railing Accusation, so no
Man of Sence or Manners cares to
imitate him; all Men of Learning,
that ever I met with, will allow that People
may Differ, Debate and Dispute, without Bil-lingsgate
Language; that Invidious Names,
and Indecent Reproaches, serve to gratifie the
Spleen, and flow from a Redundancy of Gall
in the Author, but add no manner of Force
to his Argument; good Words are as strenu-ous
as bad; and the Satyr lyes in the Truth,
not the ill Language, of the Book.
            From this Principle, the Author of a late
Pamphlet, with a Title as long as a Book,
and call'd, The Wolf Stript, must not expect a
Return of Dirt for Dirt; and while he calls
every Man by his Name, and yet is asham'd of

these Evils, they proposed, that Bi-shop
Usher's Reduction of Episcopacy unto the Form
of Synodical Government received in the ancient Church
should be the Ground-work of an Accommo-dation;
and that Suffragans should be chosen
by the respective Synods: The Associations
be of a moderate Extent; the Ministers to be
under no Oaths, or Promises of Obedience to
the Bishops, as being responsible for any
Transgression of the Law; and that the Bi-shops
govern not by Will and Pleasure, but
according to Rules, Canons and Constitutions,
that should be ratified and establish'd by Act
of Parliament. As to the Liturgy, they own-ed
the Lawfulness of a prescribed Form of
Publick Worship, but desired that some Learn-ed,
and Pious, and Moderate Divines of both
sorts might be employed either to compile a
new Liturgy, or to reform the old, adding some
other varying Forms in Scripture Phrase, to
be used at the Minister's Choice. As to the
Ceremonies they humbly represented, that the
Worship of God was perfect without them;
that God hath declared himself in Matters of
Worship a jealous God; that the Reformed
Churches abroad, most of them rejected the
Ceremonies that were reclaimed here; that
here in England they had ever since the Re-formation
been Matters of Contention and
Dispute; that they had occasioned the silen-cing

of many Pious and Useful Ministers,
and given Rise to many Separations from the
Church: That they were at best but indif-ferent,
and in there own Nature mutable;
and therefore they begg'd that kneeling at the
Sacrament might not be imposed, and that the
Surplice and the Cross in Baptism, and the
bowing at the Name of Jesus, rather than
Christ, or Emanuel, might be abolished, and
that Care might be taken to prevent future
Innovations, contrary to Law; that so the
Publick Worship might be free, not only
from Blame, but Suspicion.
            Does this look like a Proposal from Men
that did not dissent, but upon Factious and
Politick Principles? 'Tis hard there shou'd
be any Occasion to revive the Discourse of
these Things at a Time when we wish for that
Peace and Ʋnion which Her Majesty has so ear-nestly
invited us to. But these Men of Storms
and Heat, who are wilfully ignorant them-selves,
are willing other Men should be blind-ly
so; and therefore 'tis necessary a little to
refresh their Memory, and to shew to the
World that this Schism and Separation of the
Dissenters was wholly occasion'd by the
Church refusing to give up indifferent Things,
and imposing those indifferent Things as
Terms of Communion upon the Consciences
of all the People.
            
               

               The King upon the Ministers delivering in
the Proposals and Address Treated them very re-spectfully,
says the same Author, renew'd his Pro-fessions
of his earnest Desires of an Accommodation of
the Differences; told them he was well pleas'd that
they agreed to a Liturgy, and yielded to the Essence
of Episcopacy.
            Here is an Acknowledgment from the
Head of the Church, that the Dissenters were
for an Accommodation, agreed to a Liturgy,
and to the Essence of Episcopacy, and yet our
Modern Men of Peace will throw all the
Breach upon the Dissenters.
            Now, Gentlemen, let us examine your
Christian High-Church Temper these yield-ing,
complying, Dissenters met with, that
we may see whether they were out, or were
driven out from the Church.
            The Dissenters that were to be for Yet they
were not so expected, according to their Request,
and His Majesty's Promise, to be met with by
the Divines on the other Side, and to see their
Proposals, but none appear'd; and after long
expecting their Condescentions and Compli-ances,
at last they receiv'd a Satyrical Answer
by way of Reflection to their Proposals, but
not one Word of Condescention and Compli-ance.
            
               

               'As to Church-Covernment, they declare for the
former Hierarchy without any Alteration;
and inviduously insinuate, that their Refle-ctions
on the Consequences of a single Per-son's
Administration in the Church, was as
applicable to the Civil State. The Extent of
Diocesses they declare suitable enough to the
Bishops Office; and the Administration of Ecclesi-astical
Jurisdiction by Chancellors, &amp;c. Regular in
the Main. Bishop 
                     Ʋsher's Reduction they reject as
inconsistent with Two other of his Discour-ses,
as being at best but a heap of Private Con-ceptions
The Liturgy they applaud as unex-ceptionable,
and think it can't be said to be
too Rigorously imposed, when Ministers are
not denied the Exercise of their Gifts, in
Praying before and after Sermon; which Sort
of Praying, they declare however, is but the
continuance of a Custom of no great Autho-rity,
and grown into Common use by Suffe-rance
only, without any other Foundation
in the Laws and Canons. The Revising the
Liturgy nevertheless they yield to, if his Ma-jesty
thinks fit. As for the Ceremonies, they
could not part with one; not being able to
think that the Satisfaction of some Private
Persons was to be laid in Ballance against the
Publick Peace, and Uniformity of the
Church. Nay, were any Abatements made,
they are satisfied unquiet Spirits would be

thereby encouraged to make further De-mands.'
            
            
               Ecce
signum, here's the Foundation of the
Dissenters Schism in Three Heads.
            Episcopal Hierarchy without Alteration.
            Liturgy Ʋnexceptionable, and impossible to be too
Rigorously Impos'd.
            Ceremonies, not one to be parted with.
            Pray, Gentlemen, how long have ye alter'd
your Minds, that you can now say you won't
quarrel with us for Habits, Ceremonies, or Ordina-tion;
and when we offer'd to agree with you
in every thing else, you would have your Ordi-nation
without Alteration, you would not part
with one of the Ceremonies; and thought your Litur-gy
Ʋnexceptionable, and that it cou'd not be too Rigo-rously
Imposed? How long is it since these Gen-tlemen
have been of a better Opinion? And
when all is done, how shall we be sure their
Proposal is Genuine, while we have expe-rienc'd
so much Falsity and ill-grounded Pas-sion,
as before?
            Here now is the Picture of a High-Church
Challenge, to which we may very well An-swer,
we are the same that we were when we
made the Proposals to King Charles the Se-cond,
and we have a great deal of Reason to
believe you are the same too. Ill Nature seldom
turns Changling. 'Tis true, you did promise us

fine things, you promised to come to a Tem-per
with the Dissenters, and declar'd 'twas
your Principle to give an Ease to Consciences
truly Scrupulous; and upon this Foot you
obtain'd upon us to join with you in the Re-volution:
Now you talk of Honesty, pray,
Gentlemen, do us the Favour to let us know
in what you ever perform'd that Promise, and
when we are to expect it?
            Now you shall be put to Trial of your Ho-nesty
and Justice, what Commission you had
from the Convocation to tell us you would
not Differ about Habits, Ceremonies, Liturgy and
Ordination, I know not, and believe you will
be puzzled to produce it: But I venture to say
to you from abundance of the Dissenters, that
then you shall differ with us for nothing; Remit
us these and we will Conform to you, and
be all One Church and One People.
            'Tis about these Things Chiefly you Differ
with us; you have no Pretences but these
upon us: The Articles of Rebellion Forty
One; the Rye-House Plot, Castares's Evidences,
and more: We can allow you all these, and
many more than is true, and yet prove that
your Principles are as Disloyal, and your
Practices have been as full of Rebellion, as
ours; you have made as many Insurrections
against the Establish'd Governors of the Na-tion
as we; you have made as many Factions

against the Princes and the Laws, took up
Arms as often, kill'd as many Kings, or en-deavour'd
it, as we; and how often have you
been Challeng'd to come to a Test of your
Loyalty with us? But you are Proof against
Argument; and without taking notice of
these things, or of any thing else that stands
against you, you Repeat and Repeat your
Railings, and suffer your Tongues to Launch
out in a sensless and insignificant manner,
In Insinitum.
            
            And to help load the Dissenters with In-famy,
you Charge them with all that has been
done in Scotland, where the Arbitrary Tyran-ny
of State Ministers oftentimes made the
People Desperate: No wonder if from such
Principles you can Charge them with Burn-ing
the City of London. One would think
these Gentlemens Passions should not make
them forget their Reason so much as to expose
their Proceedings to their own Friends.
            Did not the Committee of Parliament fix
the Firing of the City upon the Roman Catho-licks,
by the irresistable Testimony of the
Persons concern'd; and why must the Dissen-ters
do it? Had you brought them by Perse-cution
to such desperate Fortunes, to such De-spair,
as to set Fire to their own Houses?
Were there not almost as many of them Burnt
out as of the Church?
            
               

The ridiculous Fury of these Men is an
Answer to themselves; and upon the whole, I
offer to make out, That the Dissenters have, on
all Occasions, behav'd themselves with as much
Zeal for the Government, as much Sincerity
to the Soveraign, and as much Loyalty, as the
Church has done, let them begin the Debate
when they please.
            On the other Hand, I'll prove, That the High
Church Party has tyranniz'd over them by all
the Illegal, Unchristian, Methods possible, en-deavouring
to drive them to the Extremities
of Despair and Rebellion.
            I'll prove by the Preachings, Printings, and
declar'd Judgment, of several of the most zea-lous,
High, Party, that however the Practice
was disown'd by the Party, upon the unseason-able
exposing it, by the Book, call'd, The Shortest
Way; yet that it has all along been their De-sire,
and very often in their Design; and I ap-peal
for the Truth of it, among many Instan-ces,
to a Letter of a known Church-man,
whose Original I have by me, being wrote
to a Person who sent him the Book for a Pre-sent.
            SIR,
            I
Received yours, and enclosed the Book, call'd, The
Shortest Way with the Dissenters, for
which I thank you; and, next to the Holy Bible, and

Sacred Comments, I place it as the most Valuable Thing
I can have. I look upon it as the only Method, and
I pray God to put it into the Heart of our most Graci-ous
Queen to put what is there propos'd in Execution.
            Here is the Character of a High-Church-man
drawn to the Life; but when in a Post
or Two this Gentleman understood it was
wrote by a Dissenter, in his next he sends up
an Invidious Character of a Whig, and what
in his Opinion such a one deserv'd.
            And now, Gentlemen, would Reason and
Arguments serve for a Reply to you, I should
go on with your voluminous Rapsody of Scan-dal;
but really it is so full of Rudeness, and
Want of Manners, as well as Want of Truth,
that I chuse to let it go, and return to your
Challenge about our Conformity; and this
you direct us to lay before the Convocation,
which I cannot but make some just Excepti-ons
to.
            1. I see no Reason to believe the Convo-cation
has given you any Authority to make
the Proposal; I cannot but believe that the
Convocation knows too well what, and how
often, the Dissenters have offer'd the very
Thing these Gentlemen propose; the Con-vocation
cannot be ignorant that all Proposals
of Amendment and Abatement are Ungrate-ful
and Disagreeable to the Temper of these

High-Churchmen; and the Convocation could
not be guilty of so much Imprudence to offer
that to us now, which we have so often offer-ed
them to no Purpose.
            2. I see no Reason to believe the Convoca-tion
will perform the Conditions these Gen-tlemen
propose, viz. to abate the Habits, Ce-remonies,
Liturgies, and Ordination; and
therefore, Gentlemen, you are desired to take
back your own Words with this fair Proposal.
            Whenever the Church of England ceases to
quarrel with us about Habits, Ceremonies, Li-turgies,
and Ordination, we are content that
those Dissenters which shall after that refuse
to Conform, may be taxed with being unwil-ling
to have the Breach healed, with being
obstinate Dissenters, or what you please.
            'Tis an unaccountable Assurance in any Au-thor
to advance such a Notion to the World;
in which, had they Power but of Reflection
on themselves, they must of Necessity see
they were in the Wrong.
            Pray, Gentlemen, what do you think we
differ with you for? We hope you are Prote-stants;
we have own'd you a true Church, and
that we differ from you in nothing Doctrinal,
or absolutely Necessary for Salvation? Will
ye keep your Words with us? Then here is
your Challenge answer'd.
            
               

his own, calls most Men out of their Names,
and fills his Book with the Exuberance of his
Hypochondriack Vapours, he ought to be look'd
upon as an Author not worth while to med-dle
with; if a Gentleman should fight with
a Chimney-sweeper, he may beat the Man,
but he will daub himself so much, will stink
of the Soot, and foul his Cloaths, that the
Victory is not worth the Disorder 'twill put
him into.
            In like manner, he that will deal with this
Author in his own Way, must foul his Mouth
with so much Bear-Garden Language, such
rude, unmannerly, and unscholar-like, Beha-viour,
that he must be tainted with the un-grateful
Savour of his Enemy's Malignancy,
and look like the Man he meddles with as not
worth any Man's while.
            Upon this Account I shall not meddle with
his Voluminous Tract it self; but as he has
made a fair Challenge in the Eighth Page of his
Book to all the Dissenters, I am willing to en-ter
a little in the Case; not so much expect-ing
to silence a Tongue pointed with Raillery,
but to let the World know that the Dissenters
are not unprovided with strong Arguments to
defend a just Cause.
            The Challenge that this Gentleman has
made to the World, and of which he seems so
very confident, is as follows.
            
               

Get the Convocation to pass it into an Act,
that the Church will not quarrel with us a-bout
Habits, Ceremonies, Liturgies and Ordination,
the Schism be upon us if we do not Conform.
            If you can't do this, then make us no more
Challenges, never write to us to tell you upon
what Terms we will Conform; we are ready
to Conform upon your own Terms; we take
you at your own Words; do but perform what
you have voluntarily propos'd, we are your
own.
            Not but that we have great Reason to say,
we know very well that this Offer is neither
in your Power, nor in your Nature; not in
your Power, as private Men; not in the Na-ture
of your High Church, as a Party.
            Nor is it any Breach of Charity to say so,
because we have had so much Experience of
your Temper on all Occasions in this Matter;
and in particular, in the Conferences at the
Savoy, where the Dissenters made all the Con-cessions
of Charity and Obedience that they
were able to do with any Safety to their Con-sciences;
they went through the Common-Prayer-Book,
and propos'd only such Amend-ment
as they found absolutely necessary to
make it tolerable to them and their Hearers;
they offer'd to dispute upon the Amendments
they had made, and to justifie all their Obje-ctions
by the Scriptures.
            
               

In a Word, they offer'd to Conform so far
as they were able to answer it to God, their
Consciences, and the World; and he that re-quires
Men to offer more, or else rejects them,
and shuts them out of their Communion,
wou'd do well to tell us who are the Authors
of the Schism.
            But after all, these Gentlemen, by what I
can perceive, are as ignorant in the thing they
call Schism, as they seem to be in other Things;
and we have the Testimony of the House of
Lords, in which there concurr'd most of the
Bishops of the Church of England, that the Dis-senters
are not Schismaticks. See the Reasons of
the Lords against the Bill to prevent Occasional
Conformity.
            
            And had these Gentlemen bethought them-selves
when they charge us with this Schism,
for separating from the Church, they would
have reflected a little on Mr. Hales, of Eaton,
a Sober and Judicious Divine of the Church of
England, who in his Treatise of Schism lets
them know, that separating in Communion
from any Particular Church is not a Schism,
if the Persons are not separated from the whole
Body of Christians; but he that holds the
Head, holds fast the Faith, and does not di-vide
in Faith and Doctrine, cannot be said to
be guilty of Schism for his refusing to join in
Communion with this or that Particular

Church. The Church of Christ is that whole
Body of Christians, however dispers'd all o-ver
the World, who are united to him by
Faith, and are the Members composing and
join'd to his Mystical Body, professing the
same Doctrine and Faith, tho' divided into
never so many several Communities, Socie-ties,
and other Parts.
            If this be to be Schismaticks, 'tis plain the
Dissenters are not no Schismaticks; and thus we
have the Testimony of the Church Ministers,
we have the Vote of the Church of England
Bishops, and a Majority of the House of Peers,
that the Dissenters are no Schismaticks.
            
               What shall we say now? If the Dissenters are
allow'd by the Church not to be Schismaticks;
and if the House of Lords concur in the Vote;
and if you will not will not quarrel with us for Habit,
Ceremonies, Liturgy or Ordination; Pray let
these Authors tell us what is the Difference among us?
The People may soon be united, for here is lit-tle
left to dispute of.
            What then is it we are treated for in such
a Scandalous Manner? For what is it we are
call'd by Sir H. M. a People unsafe to be trust-ed
with any Part of the Administration? In
what are we dangerous to the Government?
In what is it unsafe to trust us? Why, Ye are
Enemies to Monarchy, and always plotting

against the Government, says these Learned
and Passionate Authors.
            Say you so, Sirs? We will come to an Ac-count
of Plots against Monarchy and Govern-ment
when you will; and whenever we do,
you will be found guilty of more than we.
            But you have given us a long List of Dissen-ters
Plots, as you call them, and of People exe-cuted
for them. First of all, I believe 'twould
be hard to prove the Dissenters were in a Plot
every time some of them were hang'd for it:
And we have seen some Church of England
Parliaments 
                  Ʋnhang them again, as far as they
could, to do Justice to their Posterity: But I
shall not ravel into the List of Dissenters Plots
at this time; only I cannot avoid telling this
Author that he has not given a fair Account
of them; the Dissenters, Sir, have been guilty
of more Plots against the Government than
you charge them with, and more have been
executed for it than you tell us of; for I as-sure
you the Author of this wears a Mourning
Ring on his Finger, given at the Funeral of
Mr. Christopher Love, a Presbyterian Minister,
Beheaded Anno 1653. for the horrid Phanatick
Plot, contriv'd for the bringing in, as they then
call'd him, Charles Stuart, and the restoring of
Monarchy.
            And now we come to examine a little this
Author's preposterous Motion, that we should

give in our Grievances to the Convocation.
Why truly, Gentlemen, we have Grievances
which the Convocation might redress, but
we don't expect they will; and some of them
are as follow.
            I. 'Tis our Grievance to be falsly accus'd,
as Mismanagers of the late Reign, when we
had little or nothing to do in it; as unsafe to
the Government, when we have all along en-deavoured
to uphold it; as Enemies to Peace,
when we challenge all our Enemies to testifie
who has the greatest Zeal for the Publick
Concord, the Dissenters, or the Church.
            2. 'Tis our Grievance to be challeng'd to
show on what Terms we can Conform, and
large Concessions offer'd us in the Name of
the Convocation by Men who are so far
from having any Authority from the Con-vocation,
that the Gentlemen of that Assem-bly
do not think it worth while to own what
they say, or perform what they promise, in
their Names, as it certainly is in this Case.
            3. It is a Grievance to us, and to the whole
Nation, that we should at first, to gratifie a
Party, and to fortifie the State Policy of Trick-ing
and Designing Men, be driven out, and cast
off, from the Church-Communion, and the So-ciety
of Fellow-Christians, for Trifles, and
Things Indifferent.
            
               

Perhaps I am not of so free an Opinion
as to the Indifferency of all the Things in
which we Differ as the Church themselves;
but they are allow'd by the Church them-selves
to be Indifferent, and they are particu-larly
Indifferent in the Sense of Indifferency
explain'd as before; and therefore, ad hominem,
they are really Indifferent: Even the whole
of Church Discipline is so far Indifferent,
that whether this or that Model be settled,
either Party are allow'd to be capable of Sal-vation
without prejudice to their Belief in
that Head; or to speak plain, a Man may
go to heaven in the Practice of either of
them, but yet as Conscience directs, ought
to have Liberty to Chuse for himself.
            But to be cast out of Christian Communion
for Trifles, for such are all the Indifferent Things
compar'd to the more Essential Points of Religion,
this is a Grievance; and this is indeed the
Original Grievance, and the first Cause of
all their Speparation, which our Author calls
Schism, to impose what they own the Scrip-ture
does not impose.
            'Tis my Opinion, generally speaking, that
no Church can justifie keeping out any Per-son
from their Communion for any thing
that will not in its own Nature and Circum-stances
keep him out of Heaven: To keep
us out of the Communion of the Church for

things which you own we may be saved with-out,
will find but slender Authority in the
Scripture to Justifie.
            But after all, suppose our Grievances
were laid before the Convocation, will this
Author assure us of Relief this Way? Will
he undertake to tell us any thing the Con-vocation
has done that Way for any Body?
Nay, will he be pleased to tell us, whether
that Body, who have now Set above Fifteen
Years Annually, have done one Act or Thing
for the Benefit of the Church they Represent?
Will he please to give the World a History of
their Actions, and engage to make out they
have done any thing but Wrangle among
themselves for so long time? These Men of
Uniformity, have they had any Uniform
Proceedings? Have they, in short, done any
thing worthy of themselves, or the Church
they Represent? If they have, we would be
glad to hear it; if they have not, to what
Purpose should we apply to them for the Heal-ing
our Breaches.
            Besides this, let us ask him another Que-stion,
Do the Convocation agree among them-selves?
Have not some Gentlemen fill'd the
World with Volumes and learned Tracts on
little Matters, relating to Adjournings and Re-cesses
of that Assembly; and that one Difficul-ty
seems not yet Master'd, and how can we

expect that Spirit of Candor, that Temper
and Peaceable Mind, which is absolutely ne-cessary
to bring to pass so great a Blessing as
this of a Protestant Union? How can we
look for it from an Assembly that cannot
Decide their own Controversies, nor Heal
their own Breaches.
            Upon the whole, it seems to me this Man
of Gall has overshot himself, has gone be-yond
his Commission, and has made a Propo-sal
he had no Authority for, and promised for
People that will not perform for him.
            Wherefore upon the whole Matter, as we
have small Reason to hope for a Reconcilia-tion
of Principles, I think the present Busi-ness
of the Nation is to arrive at a Reconcilia-tion
of Parties, a Conjunction of Interests,
a General Union of Affection, where there
cannot be a Union of Opinions; that the
Strife of Parties and Factions may cease, and
that Clamour and Contention may be at an
end.
            Could this be brought to pass, it would
really be the greatest Step towards Conjun-ction
in Religious Matters.
            First, This would make our Charity ex-tensive,
and we should not make it our con-stant
business to Accuse, but Excuse, One
Another; Reproachful Terms and Marks of
Distinction would die of course; Protestant

would be the Common Name of all Opinions.
            God be prais'd, we are all of One Religion
in England, tho' we Differ about Methods:
We pretend to be all Travelling to Heaven,
tho' we fall out by the Way; and we fall
out about the Way too: But if every man
disturb'd himself less about the Course his
Neighbour Steers, and concern'd himself more
about his own, there would more find the
right Way thither, as far as Humane Conduct
is concern'd in the Voyage to Heaven.
            
            As to the Dissenters in England, they are
Misrepresented to the Nation, that they are for
Tumults and Rebellions, Insurrections, and
pulling down Monarchy, and Governments;
enough has been said here and elsewhere to
Invite the Accusers to a fair Debate; but the
present Case chiefly respects their Interest.
They are not a Small, nor a Poor Sort in the
Nation: The old Proverb of, Intrest won't
lye, is on their side; Men of Estates are never for
pulling down Houses, Burning Towns, and Ruining
Nations; 'tis Natural for Trading Men to be
Wise for themselves; 'tis Men of Desperate
Fortunes are for Embroiling Kingdoms, and
setting States and Governments into a Flame.
            The Dissenters in England, generally speak-ing,
are the Men of Trade and Industry; and
what Estates they have, lye principally in
Stock of Goods, Houses, and Credit. No

Publick Disaster can befal the Nation, but
what affects their Estates more than other
Mens; Banks Stocks, Trade Foreign and Do-mestick,
These are the first Things that suffer
on any Publick Disorder; and none of those
People who are thus Embark'd in Trade, can
be properly thought to desire Disasters and
Revolutions, because they are generally the
first that feel it.
            There may indeed be some Men among
them that want Principles, and may Act ill,
but these are few, and not Remarkable; the ge-nerality
of the Dissenters must be blind to
their own Interests, as well as Enemies to the
Government and their Neighbours, when
they promote Factions and Divisions in the
State.
            It may not be amiss to observe in this Case
what I Appeal to any Man's Judgment in, be-sides
my own, in the particular Article of
Stocks in the City, when the People are un-easie
at any Publick Matters, and the Pro-spect
of Affairs looks with an ill Aspect,
the Stocks fall; again, on the contrary, when
they are easie, the Stocks rise, and the Stock-Jobbers
frequently Manage such Occasions;
and on this Head 'tis observ'd, That in the Case
of a certain Bill depending in the House,
when the People thought it would be pass'd,
Stocks fell; again, when the talk of it began

The Dissenters make a Heavy Noise, That the
Church will not Purchase a Reconciliation, with
the giving up only of a few Indifferent Things,
which Offend their Tender Consciences.
            
            And the Low-Church lay the Blame upon the
High-Church, (with very severe Reflections)
That they are Obstructers of this Blessed Union.
            
            Now let none of these be Judges in their own Cause.
Therefore let the Dissenters give in to the Present
Convocation a List of such Indifferent Things,
which, if Granted, they will Promise to Conform,
and Heal the Schism. The Scruples are Theirs.
Therefore they must make the Proposal. None others
can tell what will Satisfie them.
            If they will not do this, Let them stop their Cla-mours,
and Never more say, That nothing will be
Granted them! And that the Church of England
has no mind to Heal the Schism!
            
            But if they will do this, then it will appear, Whe-ther
the High or the Low-Church will go Farthest
to Purchase this Desir'd Reconciliation; and which
of them do, in good Earnest, Wish it, and not rather
to keep open the Breach, to serve other Designs!
            
            Next, let those of the Convocation, who were for-merly
Imploy'd in this Grand Project of Reconcilia-tion,
(of which they have made such Boasts) lay
before the House the Grounds and the Terms of it;
that it may appear they were none but Indifferent
Things, which were to be Given up to the Dissenters!
Otherwise, let Them too Cease their Railing at the

to be laid aside, as it really was for some time,
all Stocks rose in Price; and when it came
to a Period, they still advanc'd again.
            Not that I Argue from hence that the
Dissenters are the Chief Parties Interessed in
the Stocks, for 'tis plain they are not; but from
hence may be seen by any Man who does
not put out his own Eyes, the great Benefit
of Peace and Union, the Effect it has on
Trade, Credit, and the Value of Estates.
            Besides, the Author of this Book discovers
a Spirit of too much Rancor and Malice, to
make it fit to talk with him. I am told he
is not an English-man; and indeed he seems
not to be an English-man, by his furious way
of Treating the English Nation at a time when
they are all inclin'd to peace with one ano-ther;
the least thing can be said of him in
this Case is, that he discovers Impotent Rage
at a People, who, God be prais'd, are out of
his Reach; and the Remnant of his Railing
Talent may lye either against the Lords who
have rejected the Occasional Bill, on whom, with-out
doubt, he will plentifully bestow the
usual Titles of a Faction, a Party, Low-Church
Men, and the like.
            Or else he may give himself a Loose at the
Queen, who several of his Habit, for we
understand he is a Brother of the Gown, have
left off to pray for, except at Church, where

they cannot help it; and as Mr.—of
High-Wickham has entirely left Her Majesty
out of his Grace after Meat, ever since Her
Speech to the Houses of Parliament for Peace
and Union; so these Gentlemen may be
expected with him to give Her Majesty a Cast
of their Foul Language as soon as they dare
do it.
            But one Word with this Gentleman, and
then I conclude, and that is about Plotting,
for the Dissenters have been his Plotters and
his Rebels all along, and have on all Occa-sions
been very roughly handled by him, as to
Associations, Treasons, Rebellions, and the
like.
            Now I would fain desire this Gentleman to
tell us a little News about a Plot in Scotland;
Her Majesty has given Her Parliament an Ac-count
that She has Unquestion'd Informa-tion
of a Plot in Scotland; for our parts we ex-pected
it from the Malignancy of the Party
there; but now a Declaration of its Unque-stion'd
reality from the Throne, has put the
Matter of Fact out of Question.
            Now as this Gentleman keeps a very good
Correspondence there, which appears by his
own Writing, I could most earnestly recom-mend
to him to inform the World how many
Dissenters, or Presbyterians, there are con-cerned
in it.
            
               

Without doubt he can make it appear there
are no High-Churchmen in it; for they, Good Men,
are of such untainted Principles, as to Loyal-ty,
they are so true to the Doctrine of Pas-sive
Obedience, and Non-Resistance, that 'tis
impossible they can ever be concern'd in any
such thing; no, no, it must all go upon the
poor Papists; those Roman Catholicks are sad
Fellows; they are always plotting, and these
Whigs and Dissenters they must have a Hand
in it; just as this Author says they had
in the Fire of London; the Dissenters were in-deed
very eager to set the Nation in a Flame,
when they set Fire to their own Houses to
begin it.
            But alas for us! What shall we say now, if
it may be prov'd that here are a great many
High-flying Churchmen in this Plot? Then
the Wolf will be stript indeed. What if here should
be Depos'd Bishops, Non-Jurant Parsons, and High-Church
Episcoparian Scots-men, in this Plot against
the Queen and Her Goverment? What
shall we say then? Why, I'll tell you what
they will say; they'll say that Presbyterian
Tyranny has drove them to such Extremities,
that Flesh and Blood could bear no longer.
To which I shall answer, Not at all, granting
the Truth of Fact, that just as much had the
Rebels at—and Bothwell-Bridge, to
say, That Episcopal, Prelatick, Tyranny drove

them to such Extremities, that Flesh and
Blood could bear no longer.
            From whence I draw this short Inference,
That whether they are Churchmen or Dis-senters,
one Religion or another; when Men
think themselves oppress'd, let their Princi-ples
and Pretence be what they will, they
will always forget those Pretences; Nature
will prevail; they will attempt their Free-dom,
and seek by Force to resist Force.
            Church of England, Church of Rome, Church
of Scotland, Church of France, any Church in
the World,
Whene'er they are Oppress'd, they will Rebel.
            
            But one thing, we must tell these Gentle-men,
they differ from their Brother Rebels in;
that they have plotted and rebell'd with half
the Oppressions and Tyranny as others have
done before them.
            And if ever these Gentlemen please to com-pare
the Sad and Doleful Sufferings of the Episco-pal
Dissenters in Scotland, of which they have
made so much Noise, with the Miseries, Mur-thers,
Plunders, and Barbarous Usage of the
Dissenters in Scotland for 30 Years before, it
will be easily seen which had the most
Cause to cry out of, Flesh and Blood being able to
bear no longer; and whenever they please to en-ter

into the Detail of these Things, we are rea-dy
to join Issue with them on this Head.
            The Author or Authors of this Wolfish
Book would have done well to have taken
Advice from a Gentleman of their own Par-ty,
and who writes on the same Subject, who
has said much more to the Purpose, and in
Language much more suitable to common
Civility, and good Manners; I mean the Au-thor
of a Book, Entituled, 
                  Ʋnion to the Church of
England Freely Offer'd, and Earnestly Recommend-ed,
to the Dissenters from it, of all Perswasions; but
particularly to the Occasional Conformists.
            
            Now tho' I am of the Opinion that the
Arguments that Gentleman makes use of may
be answer'd, yet I must acknowledge to his
Honour, that while on the one Hand he dis-covers
himself to be of High-Church Prin-ciples,
yet he shew himself a Man of Tem-per,
a Scholar, and a Gentleman; and if ever
he is replied to, ought to be treated according-ly;
the Candor with which he treats the Par-ty
he writes against, at least deserves this
Acknowledgment, that he is the first of that
Side that has used them civilly, and is thereby
just so much the harder to be confuted, for
railing is much larger answer'd than Argu-ment.
            I leave Dr. Davenant and to answer
those Parts of the Scurrilous Invectives rela-ting

to them, which 'tis not so much a Que-stion
whether they can, as whether 'tis worth
while for them, or any Body else, to reply to
so much Railery.
            Nor indeed had this been wrote, but to re-peat
to the World how willing the Dissenters
are at all times to enter into the Merits of the
Cause, to let the World see the Reasons of
their Dissent, and how willing they are up-on
such Concessions as Reason and Consci-ence
calls for to come to a general Union
with their Protestant Brethren, notwith-standing
all the Misrepresentation of High-Church
Malice to the contrary.
            FINIS.
         
      
   


               High-Church, as Men of Violent Spirits, &amp;c.
for Obstructing their Designs! Or, for Suspect-ing
what-they were!
            The High-Church Desire, That they, and the
Low-Church, and the Dissenters too, may be
Try'd by their Actions, and not by the Clamours
on either Side. And that they may be Heard Pub-lickly,
in the Face of the World, by the Method
Propos'd.
            And Whoever Refuse this, and cannot Propose a
more Rational and Convincing Way, for the
Clearing of Themselves, let Them be Guilty.
            
            Had this been a new Challenge, this Author
might have had some Reason to have expected
it should have been accepted and replied to.
            But since I find his Reading as short as his
Censure is hasty, I think the properest Me-thod
is to revise what of this Kind has been
already done, and to put him in Mind that all
he has said only ends in this Absurdity of
arguing, viz. The Dissenters have alrea-dy
been challeng'd to this, have accepted the
Challenge, undertaken the Defence of
their Doctrine, and of their Dissenting, have
effectually vindicated themselves from the
Charge of Schism, given Reasons for
their Scruples, and made Proposals for Con-formity;
they have challeng'd the Church to
Union and Peace, they have defended them-selves

from the Charge of Disloyalty and Re-bellion,
and offered the Church to bring their
Loyalty to the Test with them; and none of
these things have ever been Answer'd, or some
of them not so much as Reply'd to.
            Now as this Gentleman supplies Matter
of Fact with Indecency and Railery, I shall
not need to follow him there; he begins the
very first Page of his Book with Three positive
Falsities, neither of which he can in the least
tollerable manner make out.
            First, That they have a Society of
Writers.
            Secondly, That the Dissenters find them-selves
worsted in Argument.
            In the same Page he tells us, Tis the Method
of the Dissenters not to mind any Answer, but to
repeat and repeat their own Objections IN INFI-NITUM.
            'Tis
far from my Design to Reply to a Book
as full of Absurdities and Contradictions as
it is Verbose and Malignant, and therefore I
shall content my self with these Three Instan-ces.
            1.
As to the Dissenters having a Society of
Writers, I am so well satisfied of its being a
Forgery of his own, that I Challenge him to

make appear that there is so much as a Cor-respondence
among them of any Two toge-ther
that have ever Wrote in the Behalf of
the Dissenters; and as he is mighty forward
to print Names, and to abuse them by Name
too, he is welcome to set down their Names
if he can: In which, if he pursue his usual
Method of presuming things are so, and then
affirming it as positively as if he cou'd prove
it, he will certainly Ensnare and Expose him-self
as much in the Particulars as he has
done now in the General.
            Had the Dissenters so much Unanimity
among themselves, as he pretends they have,
they would have too great a share in the Pub-lick
Regard, to let such a hard-mouth'd
Author Treat them in so Scurrilous a Manner
as he does; the Government would suppress
the Spirit of Railery in the Mouths of these
Enflamers, that they should not have
such a full Liberty of Traducing and Abu-sing
their Bretheren, in order to keep open
the Breach, which 'tis every True English Pro-testant's
Desire and Interest to see heal'd.
            No, Sir, the Dissenters have no such So-cieties;
the Spirit of Union, the more Ʋn-happy
for them, is not so much among them;
they are all forward enough to have any Bo-dy
serve them, but it must be at their own
Hazard, and at their own Expence, which a

late unhappy Author of theirs very lately
had Experience of enough to warn any Man
from venturing to serve them again.
            But therefore, Sir, is it plain that this Book
is far from being Wrote as a Design of the Par-ty,
but with the Sence of Truth, which eve-ry
Honest Man has a Right to Vindicate.
            At the same time, Sir, I affirm your Party
has, and ever had, a Society of Writers; and
whenever you desire it, I am ready to gratifie
you with some of their Names; tho' I am not
forward of printing Names, as a piece of Rude-ness
unbecoming an Author: But a certain
Weekly Paper now in Course is Publickly
own'd to be so wrote; and I know Personal-ly,
that the wretched Performance has occa-sion'd
some Considerations among People of
greater Capacities, to provide a Set of Men
to do it better, and to gratifie them for the
Service.
            But, Sir, I shall not enter upon the tedi-ous
Work of Recrimination, as a thing in
which there is so much room for launching
out, that the compass of this small Tract
would be too straight for it.
            2. You tell us, The Faction, which is your
Civil Term for the Dissenters, find themselves
worsted in Argument.
            
            It had been time enough to have boasted thus
when you had put your Armour off, and
