
            THE
ADVANTAGES
OF THE
East-India Trade
TO
ENGLAND,
CONSIDER'D.
            (Price 1s. 6d.)
         
         
            

Power has increas'd with their Trade,
and by the Assistance of that only; as on
the other hand, the Decay of the Spanish
Power (which in the Time of Philip II.
was a Terror to the whole World, and was
rais'd on the meer Increase of their Trade)
has apparently been occasion'd by the De-cay
of their Trade, out of which they were
every where driven by the Dutch.
            
            The whole World, as well Pagan as
Christian, is full of Examples of this kind:
But to give one for all the rest; a Com-parison
between the Eastern Provinces of
Asia (such as we call the East-Indies and
China) and the whole Country of Africa,
will confirm this Observation beyond all
Contradiction.
            We see the whole Quarter of the World
call'd Africa, large to an Extreme, suited by
its Climate and Situation for all manner of
Improvements, as well by Cultivation as
Commerce; populous (at least on the Sea
Coasts) equally almost to any other Part,
and in some Places more populous than most
other Parts of the World.
            Their Ports, Harbours, Rivers and Bays,
were they frequented, and the safe Roads
fully described, are more in number than in
most other Countries; and their prodigious
Length of Coast cannot but render this Part
of the World admirably situated for the Ad-vantages
of Commerce: For the whole

Country call'd Africa is an Island, except
the small Isthmus or Neck of Land from
Suez on the Red Sea to Alexandria, which
is not above 60 Miles. Nay, so well fitted
for Trade is Africa, that a late Author tells,
us, there are more and greater Rivers in it,
and more adapted to Commerce, and to In-land
Navigation, than in all the Country of
America; those of Virginia and Carolina
only excepted.
            But in the midst of all these Advantages,
thro' the Indolence and Ignorance of the
Natives on one hand, and the barbarous
Tyranny of the Moors and Turks on the
other, (the European Nations having planted
but few Colonies on her Continent) we see
this whole Country in a manner left deso-late,
no Improvement, no settled Govern-ment;
but vast Extents of Land neglected,
whole Provinces left wild, and like a Terra
deserta, remaining in a meer State of Na-ture:
And all for want of Trade.
            The Soil is in many Places very rich,
and the Product of Nature exceeds all the
rest of the known World. The North Coast,
for almost 2000 Miles, commonly call'd the
Coast of Barbary, produces the finest Cop-per,
and in great Quantities: All the Fruits
that the South Coast of Spain is so famous
for, are produced here in the greatest Plenty
and perfection; such as Raisins, Pomegra-nates,
Lemons, Oranges, Almonds; and to
sum up all, such a prodigious Quantity of the

best WheatVide Capt, Braithwaite's late History of the Revolutions in Morocco., that were it not inhabited by
the worst of Diones, and govern'd by the
worst of Tyrants, the Turks and Moors, it
would be the Granary of Europe: Where-as
now it is poor, naked, and much of it
barren, and almost starves its indolent, un-improving
Inhabitants.
            The West Coast produces Honey, Wax,
Guinea Grains, Furrs, Civet, Drugs and
Gums, of very rich kinds; and besides all
these, Gold and Elephants Teeth in abun-dance.
The East Coast produces Gold and
Teeth also, and Black Cattle without Num-ber;
and going North from the Coast of
Zanguebar up to the Red Sea, it furnishes
Arabia with the finest and best Breed of
Horses. And besides all this, were not the
West Shore of the Red Sea possess'd by the
Turks, who will suffer no free Trade with
Aethiopia, it is not to be express'd what a
Scene of Wealth and Commerce would open
it self there.
            And Africa is not only thus rich in its
actual Produce, but the Soil is of such a
Nature as to be capable of vast Improve-ments,
were it duly cultivated and manag'd.
The Author of the Atlas assures us, that
the Sugars of Barbadoes and Jamaica, as
also Cotton, Ginger, Indico and Cocoa, have
all been try'd there, and thrive to a Wonder:
And other Authors, as well English as Dutch,
               

concur with him, and tell us that Experi-ments
have been made of the Coffee of
Mocha, the Tea of China and Japan, &amp;c.
and we are told there are Plants of both
now in the Africa Company's Garden at
Cape-Coast Castle: And indeed why should
those valuable Productions fail in Africa,
when planted in the very same Climate in
which they grow to such Perfection in
Arabia and China? But for a farther Ac-count,
and indeed a very particular one, of
the probable 'Improvements that might be
made in this Part of the World, I must re-fer
to the Book before mention'd; it not
being possible to treat particularly of these
things in the Compass of so short a Piece as
this is.
            What we have now to observe, and which
is to our present Purpose, is; That with
all this Wealth in Nature, and all the Im-provements
which might be added by the
help of Industry and Art, there is no Com-merce
worth naming in Africa. The Nor-thern
People despising Trade, live by Ra-pine,
being almost all Corsairs and Pirates;
such as the Algerines, Tuniseens and Tri-polins,
together with the Moors of Sallee
and Alfarache on the North-west Shore.
The other Western Coasts have so little Em-ployment
for the many Millions that inha-bit
it, (I mean from the Rio Grande or Ni-ger,
North, to the Congo, South) that for

want of Produce they sell one another, and
the People are carried away by Thousands,
Men, Women and Children, to the Number,
as some think, of 300000 in a Year, to la-bour
and work for the more diligent Euro-peans
in America. Here is a flagrant Ex-ample
of the Weakness and Deficiency of a
Country for want of Trade, in spite of all
the Bounty of Nature, and of the most e-vident
Capacity for the best Trade in the
World.
            I might enlarge here upon the Situation
of Africa for Improvement and Commerce,
as, its lying between all the Trading Quar-ters
of the World, and its Nearness to Eu-rope,
which is the Market for all its Pro-ductions;
also how it might be encourag'd to
build, and employ Ships, and might raise a
sufficient Fund of Goods for the Employ-ment
of Shipping, as well as Gold to pay
them. But all this is fully done in the At-las,
which gives a distinct Account of the
Commerce, both as it now is, and as it is
capable of being increas'd; and shews how
much superior Africa would be to America,
or even to India it self, if it was encourag'd
by settled Colonies, as the former, or inha-bited
by a trading manufacturing People, as
the latter. I cannot therefore leave this
Particular, without recommending it to the
Age to study the enlarging of Commerce,
the encouraging of Industry, the planting

of desolate Countries, and the employing
those indolent Nations, who tho they may
be said to be idle, yet 'tis not so much for
want of Will to work, as for want of some
to employ them, and instruct them what to
do.
            I have now done with one Branch of
the Comparison, viz. the State of Africa,
with respect to Trade: Let us next look in-to
an Extreme the other Way, I mean in
the Indies, that is to say, the Countries of
Malabar, India Proper, Ceylon, Coromandel,
Bengal, Siam, Pegu, Cochin-China, with Chi-na
it self, and Japan.
            
            It cannot be said but that the Natives of
some if not most of these Countries, are
(or were originally) as ignorant and stupid
as the Negroes of Africa; excepting al-ways
the People of China, and even in
Africa the People of Aethiopia.
            
            But the Indians are enur'd to Trade, and
have a natural Genius to Industry and Ap-plication;
and so they fall upon Labour,
whilst the Africans are indolent; and spread
their Manufactures, the Work of their Peo-ple,
over the whole World, whereas the o-ther
sell not the Work of the People but
the People themselves.
            And what is the Consequence of all this,
but that these Nations of India are rich,
populous and powerful? Nay, the Mogul,
               

who is call'd the most powerful Emperor
of India, and the Grand Tartar, who is
the like in China, are made so rich and
strong, meerly by the immense Wealth arising
from their Trade.
            The Chinese have not any Sea Coast, ex-cept
along the Eastern Shore of their Coun-try;
and yet they spread the Sea with their
Ships, and have such an infinite Number, that
one who describes that Country, said he be-lieved
they had Ships enough to make a
Bridge from thence into France. It is sup-posed
he would not be taken literally; but
we may venture to conclude from thence,
that he found there an infinite Number of
Vessels of all kinds.
            The Power and Riches of China are well
worth a large Description; as also the Mul-titude
of Cities, of which some are so great
as to contain, by Report, 5 or 6,000000
of People; and the Provinces, which how-ever
remote from the Sea, or from the ca-pital
City, are full of considerable Towns,
large Villages, scattered Hamlets and Dwel-lings,
and all surprizingly full of People.
            If we inquire into the Reason of this, we
shall find it all owing to Trade, and the
mighty Commerce they carry on as well by
Land as by Sea. We see the Produce of
their Land is coveted by all the Europeans,
and by us in particular; witness, especially,
their Tea, their China Ware, and several of

their Drugs and other Growth of their Soil:
And as for their Manufactures, they were not
only brought hither in vast Quantities, but
they became, as it were, the Terror of Europe
in Trade, and of Great Britain in particu-lar;
so that we were oblig'd to make Laws to
keep them out, and to prohibit the Use and
Wearing of them; otherwise they would ru-in
and destroy our own Manufacture.
            How these populous Countries pursue their
Commerce, and especially their Manufac-tures,
with an indefatigable Application, ap-pears
from the immense Quantity of Goods
they would import upon us, if they were
not prohibited; and the Author of the At-las
has prov'd, that the People of India and
China are able to clothe the whole World
with their Manufactures; and that they
trade with Europe infinitely to its Loss,
and to their own Gain, for that in effect
all the ready Money of the other three
Parts of the World, all the Gold and Silver of
Africa and America, would be hardly able to
serve for Returns: all which he makes out
very clearly, even to the meanest Capacity.
            Hence we see the Justice of the Prohi-bitions
in England, and also in France;
I mean the prohibiting the Use and Wear-ing
of these foreign Manufactures: For if
Commerce be the Life and Soul of a Na-tion's
Prosperity, if we are more or less
rich and powerful as our Trade is more or

less flourishing; it must be understood of
such Trade only as we gain by, not of
pernicious Trading, and which we cannot
carry on but to our Loss. And this may
occasion some unusual Speculations concern-ing
the great Strife we find among the Eu-ropean
Powers, about who shall or shall not
carry on this Trade to India: For if it be
true, that Europe in general loses by it,
and that it exhausts the Treasure of all our
Trading Countries, returning nothing but its
own Produce and its own Manufactures,
and receiving little from us but our Bulli-on
and Coin, which is the Essence of our
Produce (I mean by Ʋs here the Europe-ans;)
I say, if this be true, it would be
the undoubted Interest of all Europe to prohi-bit
that Commerce, except what is abso-lutely
necessary for the supply of Europe's
Wants, that is to say, things that we can-not
be without; such as Salt-petre, Pep-per,
Spices, needful Drugs and Dye-stuffs,
and the like; all which are the natural
Product or Growth of the Country; and
not to meddle with any of their Manufac-tures,
which indeed are the things that in-jure
the Commerce of Europe, and impo-verish
the People.
            As to the Coffee and Tea, which are the
two great Articles so much in Demand,
'tis sufficient to observe, that we might
transplant those Vegetables, and many more,

from Arabia, India and China, into Africa;
and with a very little Application might
raise them all, and in sufficient Quantities,
in our own Factories on the Coast of
Guinea. This the Dutch have begun with
success in relation to the Coffee, which
they have raised already in so great a
Quantity at Ba
                     •
                  avia, that they setch very
little now from Mocha: And we are told
also, that they have made another Attempt
for planting Coffee at Surinam on the
Coast of Nova Audalusia in America, where
it also thrives very well. But this is a
Digression from the present Purpose; and
for a farther Inquiry into these things, I
refer the Reader to the foremention'd Atlas,
where he will see them explain'd and treated
on at large.
            However, I cannot quit this Discourse of
the India Trade, without hinting as I go,
that I think, while this Part of Europe is
so busily engag'd, even almost to a War,
for preventing Encroachments upon this
Trade, it is very strange they should entire-ly
neglect a Back-Door by which all the
most hurtful Part of the East-India Trade
is like (and very quickly too) to break in
upon them like a Flood, and that with a
Force which they will not find it easy to
resist; I mean by the Way of Russia, and
that as well by Caravans over Land from
China, as by Water, that is to say, by a

            THE
ADVANTAGES
OF
PEACE
AND
COMMERCE;
WITH
Some REMARKS on the
East-India Trade.
            
               LONDON:
Printed for J. BROTHERTON and THO. COX
in Cornhill, and sold by A. DODD without Tem-ple-Bar.
1729.
         
      
      
         
            

River Navigation from the Great Mogul's
Dominions, which is more properly and
particularly call'd East-India: Which I shall
have occasion to mention again by and by.
            Let me now speak a little of the Bene-fit
and Advantage of Peace, in relation
to Trade; as I join'd them together at
first.
            Peace is certainly the Right Hand of
Trade; it is its Support and Defence: It
is by Peace alone that the flourishing and
prosperous State of Trade is preserv'd, if
not procur'd. The History of our Trade
in England would abundantly confirm this.
The first Introduction of our Woollen Ma-nufacture
was under the peaceable Reign
of Henry VII. During those twenty Years,
it took its first and deepest Root. The
next Reign was not so quiet: The Sup-pression
of Monasteries at home, the Per-plexities
about the Queens, and the Wars
in France and Flanders, embarass'd the
Court and the Clergy; but the common
People were generally kept out of the
Quarrel, and their Trade still took root at
home.
            Persecution indeed in the latter End of
King Henvy VIII's Reign, and thro' the
whole Reign of his Daughter Queen Mary;
nay even during the Reformation in Ed-ward
VI's Reign, take them all together,

harass'd the People, and extremely interrup-ted
Commerce. In one Reign one sort of
People were uneasy, in the next another,
in the third another: Alternately, one Side
and the other fled from their Dwellings,
secur'd their Effects, and hid themselves for
their Lives. In one Reign one Side rebell'd,
and in another Reign another: In king
Edward VI's Reign the Norfolk and the
Devonshire People rebelled for the Mass;
in Queen Mary's Time Sir Thomas Wyatt
and the Kentish Men rebelled for the Re-formation:
And by all these things Trade
was interrupted.
            When Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown,
Trade flourish'd in such a manner as surpriz'd
the World; because the Glory of her Arms
gave her an Advantage to spread it abroad,
as we may say, to all Nations; and the
Root it had taken in the Times of Peace,
under the two Henrys, had given the Mer-chants
a Strength of Stock to extend it into
the remotest Parts of the World.
            The Queen, whatever Part she bore in
the Wars abroad, always kept her Subjects
in Peace at home; the Intervals occasion'd
by the Insurrection of the Earl of Westmor-land
and others, were not worth naming.
This Peace at home, and the Support and
Assistance the Queen gave to her Merchants
abroad, laid the Foundation of the most
flourishing Branches of our Trade, viz. our

               Turkey, Hamborough, and Muscovy Compa-nies;
and especially the planting Colonies
abroad, particularly in America.
            
            Whoever consults the above-mention'd
Author, will find, that the Discovery and
peopling of all our most considerable Co-lonies
in America, were perform'd in her
Reign; and will see from what small Begin-nings
those flourishing Plantations have been
raised to their present Greatness, the peace-able
Possession being preserv'd by the powerful
Influence of England.
            
            If War at any time interrupted them, as
the Wars they had with the Natives often
did, their Trade was greatly lessen'd, the
Plantations spoil'd, and the whole very
much endanger'd; as has been the Case of
Virginia and New England more than
once.
            In the same Queen's Reign the first Voy-ages
were made to the Gold Coast of A-frica,
which we now call Guinea; and all
was supported by the Purses of her Mer-chants
and trading People, grown rich by
the success of Trade in the peaceable Reigns
of her Predecessors: So that in her Reign
it might be said to arrive to its first Glory,
and even to its Meridian Height, counting
one Hundred Years from its Beginning.
            It may be true, that the great Success of
Queen Elizabeth in her Maritime Affairs,
and the Terror of her Name, gave a vast

Addition to the Glory of her Reign: But
it was her prodigious Extending and En-couraging
the Commerce of her Subjects,
that gave Stability of Greatness and Power
to the whole Kingdom; and it was upon
the foot of the Greatness of her Trade, that
the Nation became formidable over the whole
World.
            Witness for this, the Regard shewn to
her Embassies (which, by the way, consisted
of Merchants) chiefly at the Courts of Con-stantinople,
Ispahan in Persia, and Moscow;
in all which her Merchants were admitted,
and her Letters in their behalf receiv'd with
the greatest Respect, tho no English Minister
of State or Envoy had ever been seen, or
perhaps heard of, in any of those Courts
before.
            From hence to this very Day, the Com-merce
of Great Britain has been the Glory
of our Country, as it is the Fund of our
Power. Kings and Princes may declare War,
and lead Armies, and Victory sometimes at-tend
the fortunate Inferior: But generally
speaking, the longest Purse, not the longest
Sword, gets the Day in the End; and as
nothing can furnish Money like Commerce,
so the Trading Countries have manifestly the
Advantage in a War.
            This indeed is a good Reason why Eng-land,
of all other Nations, should be the
least afraid of a War: And yet at the

same time let me hint to our Countrymen
who are so forward for Fighting, That we
are likely always to suffer the greatest Dis-advantages
in case of a War; and the Rea-son
is plain, because of our infinite Num-ber
of Ships, and Merchants, and Mer-chants
Effects, which are abroad in every
Corner of the World: No Nation has so
much to lose, and no Nation can suffer so
great Loss in case of a War.
            Therefore I cannot but pay a great De-ference
to the Endeavours of those Mini-sters,
who, notwithstanding the Murmurs of
the People, apply themselves to the preser-ving
the Peace of Europe, and preventing a
War. War to a Trading Nation is a De-gree
of Death; it is a strong Paralytick, it
stagnates the Blood; and, in a word, is
fatal, if not to the Trade it self in general,
yet to the Prosperity and Health of it.
And tho our Trade, being the greatest with-out
Dispute in the World, is therefore best
able to support us in a War; yet our Trade
too would suffer most by a War, even
for this very Reason, because it is the
greatest.
            But to look a little abroad again: Other
Nations are visibly increas'd in Power by
the Help of their Commerce, as well as
England; and the Dutch are the next Ex-ample.
            
               

The Author of the Atlas gives a distinct
View of the prodigious Trade they carry
on. He touches upon their small Begin-nings,
and shews how they were elevated,
meerly by their Commerce, from the Poor
and Distressed States, the Style in which
they addressed Queen Elizabeth for Aid
against the Spaniards, to that of the High
and Mighty Lords the States General, the
Style in which they now treat both with their
Allies and Enemies.
            He describes their foreign Trade, their
Fisheries, and their Greenland Trade in an
especial manner, of which there is indeed
a surprizing Account: He gives the History
of their first Adventures to the East-Indies,
and their Progress and Conquest there over
the Portuguese Settlements: He shews the
Glory and Grandeur of their City of Bata-via;
and indeed that very Place is a con-vincing
Proof of what I have advanced, the
formidable Power of that City, and of all the
Dutch Settlements in the Indies, being en-tirely
raised by Commerce, without the least
Assistance from the Government or the publick
Stock in Holland.
            
            He gives an Account likewise of all their
Inland Trade, the greatest perhaps of its kind
in the World; a Trade wholly carry'd on by
River Navigation, by the Help of Boats,
Hoys, Bylanders, and such Vessels, upon
the great Rivers of the Scheld, the Maes,
               

the Rhine, the Ems and the Weser; and
from those Rivers again by the Lys, the
Scarp and Sambre, the Moselle, the Saar,
the Maine, the Neckar, and abundance of
other navigable Streams, into the very Heart
of Germany, France, and the Austrian Ne-therlands,
and quite up into Switzerland.
            
            'Tis to be observ'd here likewise, that
nothing but Peace could raise such a Com-merce
to a People distress'd, as they were
before, by all the Extremities of War, to
such a Degree, that we have been told,
they were once upon the Point of resolving
to ship themselves all off, Poor and Rich,
to quit their Country to the Spaniards,
and go away to the East-Indies. But the
War ending, first in a Truce of twelve Years,
and after that in a perpetual Peace, how
soon did the Case alter with them! Peace
raised Trade, their Trade raised their Wealth,
and their Wealth raised their Power; in which
their Fleets are so formidable that, England
only excepted, they are able to fight all the
other Maritime Powers of Europe, I had
almost said if they were join'd together.
Here is indeed an undoubted Testimony to
my first Assertion, viz. That the Trading
Nations are the most powerful Nations.
            I might run thro' the particular Cases of all
the Nations in Europe, but I shall only add
the Muscovites or Russians.
            
            
               

How feeble this vastly extended Empire
was about thirty Years ago, I need not say.
They had not one Port in all the Trading
Seas of the World, by which they could
correspond with any Part of Europe, Arch-angel
on the frozen Northern Coast only ex-cepted.
            For
want of this, of what Consideration
were they in the Account of Europe's
Strength? How little did they weigh in
the Balance of Power? And they were re-garded
in the several Courts of Europe ac-cordingly;
so that the Turks told them up-on
some Occasion, that they neither under-stood
how to make War or Peace. Thus
contemptible were they, tho at the same
time the Czar had a Country under his
Dominion as big as all the rest of Europe.
And the Reason of all this low Figure they
made, was evidently this, and nothing
else, viz. That they had no Trade, no
Commerce or Correspondence with the rest
of the World.
            Observe now the Difference: When the
late Czar Peter came to the Government,
and by his Prudence and Politicks ally'd
himself with the Trading Countries of Eu-rope,
beginning to teach his People the
Arts of Navigation and Commerce; as soon
as he did this, he got Money, rais'd Troops,
shew'd the World that his Men might be
taught to fight as well as other Nations,

and soon brought them to do so. As soon
as the Prosperity of Trade made them feel
something of the Advantages accruing by
it, we find him pushing himself upon the
Swedes, gaining from them the Maritime
Provinces they possess'd in the Baltick;
and as he open'd the Seas for his People
to trade, they soon enabled him to spread
those Seas with his Men of War, so that
he became an Over-match either for the
Dane or the Swede; and had he lived a
few Years longer, he would have begun to
appear formidable in the Ocean as well as he
had done in the Baltick Sea.
            We have seen the Successors of this Prince,
however unactive in other Matters, extreme-ly
diligent in this of Trade. The present
Czar is now establishing the Commerce of
his Subjects to all Parts of the World, and
his Eastern Commerce in particular in a sur-prizing
manner, as well with China as In-dia,
Persia, and Turkey. This he does
partly by a Communication of Rivers, and
partly by the Caspian Sea, and also by Land.
And this brings me back to what I mention'd
before, viz. That the Trade with the East-Indies
was likely to break in upon Europe
this Way, in a Manner too powerful to be
resisted, and in a Way more fatal than ei-ther
the Emperor's late Company erected at
Ostend, or any other Rivals whatsoever.
            
               

It is but a few Days ago, that Letters
from Petersburg brought an Account of
the Return of Mons. Winderowitz, the
Russian Embassador to the Emperor of China,
and of the Success of his Embassy at that
Court: How he had settled the Limits of
the two Empires, which had in vain been
attempted for above sixty Years before; and
withal had made a particular Treaty of Com-merce,
by which a free Trade is establish'd
between the two Empires, and all the Hin-drances,
Scruples, and troublesom Ceremo-nies,
which obstructed it, and in particular
the Tolls, Presents, and other Demands made
by the Chinese Officers at the passing the
great Wall of China, are taken off; and all
other Tolls and Payments, Presents or Fees
taken at the Entrance into any City or Pro-vince,
which were before uncertain and ar-bitrary,
are all remov'd, and turn'd into one
general Duty or Custom of Import and Ex-port,
as in other Countries; and this Duty
or Custom to be unalterable, except on due
Notice given on both Sides.
            Besides this, they have settled the placing
of Guards in proper Places, and the building
of Caravanseras or fortify'd Inns upon the
Road, for the Reception of Merchants and
their Goods; and the Governours of every
Province are to be made answerable for any
Robberies committed by the Tartars or any
other Rovers within their Bounds; due Notice

            THE
ADVANTAGES
OF
Peace and Commerce.
            
            PEACE and Trade have so far got
the Start of War and the Sword,
that the Trading Nations of the
World are now become infinitely
superior in Wealth and Power, to those who
might properly be call'd the Fighting Nations,
and whose Grandure depended upon the Ex-tent
of their Dominions, and Number of con-quer'd
Countries.
            Nor is this Superiority obtain'd by the Po-licy
of their Government, the Prudence of
their Counsels, or the Valour of their Troops,
so much as by the Increase of their Com-merce:
This has enlarg'd their Wealth and
Power, attracted Multitudes to dwell in the
most narrow and prescribed Bounds, and found

being always given of the Approach of such
Merchants or their Caravans.
            By this means they assure us, that the
Trade between China and Russia will be as
safe and easy as it is or can be in Europe
between one Province and another; and
that the Caravans shall go and come with
such Freedom, that there shall arrive in
Russia at least one great Caravan, consisting
of four, five, or six Hundred Camels, a
Month; and sometimes three or four such in
a Month.
            It would be worth while to describe here
the Manner of the March of these Caravans,
how they are furnish'd with Provisions in
such great Desarts as they are oblig'd to pass
over; what Hazards they run from the
Robbers and Tartars upon the way, and the
like: As also to describe the Way it self,
and what vast Circuits they take for the Con-venience
of coming to inhabited Countries
and navigable Rivers, especially the great Ri-vers
Janizea and Oby, the River Irtisk, and at
last the Dwina; by which they are brought
up to Wo
                     •…
                  gda, from whence they have
but a short Passage to the Lakes Onega and
Ladoga, by which they come to Petersburg.
But as this would be too tedious for the nar-row
Compass of this Work, so it is not so
directly to my present Purpose.
            To return therefore to the Point which
is more immediately before me: We are told,

that these Measures being enter'd into by the
Government of Russia, the Trade is to be
carry'd on by a Company to be incorpo-rated,
and to be furnish'd with all needful
royal Privileges, and Assurances of Protecti-on,
and of a constant Care of their Interests at
the Emperor of China's Court by the Russian
Emperor: And we are also told, that the
Merchants of Lubec are, or are to be, very
far interested in the said Company.
            The Goods to be imported this Way from
China, are (to be sure) all the finest and most
portable; such as wrought and raw Silks,
the former in the known Variety in which
we usually imported them from thence; al-so
Gold in Specie, Drugs of various kinds,
and Tea. Whether any of the Goods usually
brought from the Bay of Bengal, and other
Parts of India, may find their Way by this
Rout, we cannot determine. But if this
Trade should now be open'd as above, and
all these Goods be brought upon such easy
Terms of Carriage as they assure us shall be
done, and we should see them publickly put
up in open sale at Petersburg, and perhaps
at Lubec; it naturally leads me to ask, to
what Purpose is all this Stress laid upon the
erecting an Ostend Company? Certainly the
opening a Trade to India in general is the
main thing to be consider'd; not whether
it shall be done by one Nation or another,
one Prince or another: For a Sale of East-India
               

and China Goods at Lubec or at
Ostend, at Petersburg in the Gulph of Fin-land,
or at Trieste in the Gulph of Venice,
is much the same thing to the Commerce of
Europe. Unless therefore some Check can
be put to the erecting such a Company as this,
(and that I do not see is any way practi-cable)
the suppressing that at Ostend does
not, in my Opinion, seem to promise much
to the Commerce. But to go on with the
Muscovite Company:
            Besides this Back-Door Trade (for so it
may be justly call'd) to China, the late Czar
had laid a Scheme for another; and I must
acknowledge it seems very practicable, ac-cording
to the Situation of the Country,
and the Sources and Courses of the Rivers
Indus, Ganges, and Oxus; as they are laid
down in the said Atlas Maritimus.
            
            This Trade, according to the Czar's Design,
was thus, viz. That by a short Passage over
Land from the Ganges and the Indus, the one
running into the Bay of Bengal by the Fac-tories
of Hugeley and Calcuta, and the o-ther
running into the Indian Ocean not far
from Suratte, and between that and the
Gulph of Persia: I say, the Czar's Design
was, that Caravans should be appointed from
both those great Rivers to the River Oxus,
(the Distance from either of them being not
above 120 to 140 Miles) and all the rich
Goods of either Coast of India, viz. of the

Coast of India and Malabar, by the Indus,
and of the Coast of Coromandel and Gol-conda,
by the Ganges, should be brought
into the Caspian Sea; from thence by Ship
to Astracan on the Wolga; and from As-tracan,
by the Wolga, and by the new Ca-nal
which the Czar begun, into the Lake
Ladoga, and then by the Neva to Peters-burg.
So that all this Trade would be
carry'd on by Water from the remotest Parts
of India, except about 120 to 140 Miles,
as above.
            I need not enumerate all the several sorts
of Goods which would come into Europe
by this Passage; it is enough to say, that
they would leave us under no Necessity to
bring any thing about by long Sea, except
the heavy and bulky Goods. As for Spices,
we see them even already sold at Moscow
cheaper than we can buy them here; and
the like of the raw Silk of Georgia and
Guylan, which has been brought, if I am
not misinform'd, to Petersburg, and thence
to Lubec and to Hamburgh, cheaper than by
the Turkey Trade to London.
            
            If the Carriage by these Rivers and Ca-ravans
does not add too much to the Va-lue
of these Goods, as we are told it does
not, (the Labour of the People or Cattle
amounting to but very little in those Coun-tries)
I do not see that the immoderate Length
of the Passage bears any Weight in the Ac-count.

Besides, here is one Advantage which
the Passage by Sea wants, viz. here is no
hazard of Loss, no Premium to be given
for Insurance, no Fear of Enemies or Pi-rates,
or of long and chargeable Embargoes,
no Averages to allow upon damag'd Goods,
or Abatement for Goods touch'd with salt
Water.
            The Navigation of the Rivers is without
Risk, the Passage over the Caspian Sea is
a Trifle; if the Vessels are well built, they
very rarely miscarry: Whereas we find the
Ships, which go on with our Trade, often
subjected to Loss and Miscarriage, sometimes
foundring at Sea, blown up by Accident with
Powder, taken by Pirates and Corsairs, as
one of the Ostend Ships was lately by the
Turks of Barbary: And it is but a few
Years since no less than fourteen Sail of
the best Ships, English as well as Dutch,
very richly laden, were cast away at the
Cape of Good Hope, as they rode there
at Anchor; and all the Goods and People
lost. If these Losses are discounted out of
the Profits of the Company they belong to,
I am of Opinion they would more than
balance the Difference of Freight in seven
Years Commerce. But let the Freight or
Carriage be what it will, if they sell their
Goods as cheap at Market as our Com-panies
do or can do, I think the Question
is answer'd; and it appears that these Back-Doors

will in a very little time rob Eu-rope
of as much Money in their East-India
Commerce, as not the Ostend Company on-ly,
but as all the other Companies put to-gether.
            Nor
is it possible, at least I do not see it
possible, for all the Powers of Europe to
prevent it. As for us, and the other Ma-ritime
Powers, our Naval Strength does not
signify one Farthing to it; for not a Ship,
if we had twenty times as many, can come
near to act in any Capacity in the whole
Trade from India to Petersburg: Fleets
and Navies are all out of the Question;
the Carriage is all by Rivers, except one
great Pond (for the Mare Caspium is no
more;) and these Rivers, take the Czar and
the Great Mogul together, are all within their
own Territories, and out of every Body's
Reach.
            All I see possible to be done, is to pro-hibit
Trade with Petersburg and the other
Russian Ports; or, if you will go a shorter
Way, to commence a War, and beat the
Muscovites out of Livonia and Ingria, and
so give them no Ingress to the Baltick
Sea; tho this is not so easy to be done as
some may imagine: And yet if it were done,
they would still find some Vent or other
for their Trade; and if they had the Goods,
we should find some Way or other to come
at them: For the Prospect of Gain is al-ways

such a Spur to the Merchant, that no-thing
can restrain him:
—Extremos currit mercator ad Indos.
            
            That this Way of Trade from India to
Muscovy is not impracticable, may appear
from hence, That it was always one of
the Gates by which the Indian Goods found
a Passage into Europe, before the Passage
by Sea about the Cape of Good Hope was
found out. For those Goods were brought
from the Ganges and the Indus to the Oxus;
thence, touching at the great City Perse-polis
destroy'd by Alexander the Great,
down the same River into the Caspian Sea,
and so into Muscovy by the Wolga. This
Channel of Trade the Muscovites always
kept open; only they did not then find a
Way to carry on the Traffick into the rest
of Europe, they having little or no Corre-spondence
with the Princes or Nations of any
part of the World.
            It were greatly to be wish'd indeed, that
the Trade to China and India were in it
self a profitable Trade to the rest of Eu-rope;
then the opening these Back-Doors or
By-Channels might be of some Use to us:
but as it is, I must confess it seems to be
nothing but opening a new Passage to let
in more Thieves upon us, to carry away
our ready Money; and that neither this

any more than the Ostend Company should
be allow'd, if it could be help'd, nor our
own be allow'd to bring any Goods but
such as are absolutely necessary for our Use;
and that as to wrought Silks, Callicoes
printed or plain, they should be all entirely
expell'd, as things utterly inconsistent with
the Prosperity of the Linen, Woollen, and
Silk Manufactures, not of England only, but
of all the Nations of Christendom. But to
return.
            By all these great Improvements in Trade
we see now the Opulence and Growth of
Power in the Empire of Russia: 'Twas in-deed
the Czar's Conquests upon the unfor-tunate
King of Sweden which gave him the
Opportunity of launching thus out into
Trade; and being a Prince of a penetrating
Genius, he began himself, that he might
shew his People the Advantages of Com-merce:
Thus he took Tar, and some of
his richest Furrs, and several other Goods, all
into his own Hands, and traded with them
infinitely to his own Advantage.
            Then he erected a Silk Manufacture, and
having the Silk imported by his own Mer-chants
from Guilan, caused Manufactures,
and Men skill'd in working and weaving
Broad Silks, to be brought from France: By
which he presently found Means to set up the
Silk Manufacture, and bred his own Subjects
to that and other mechanical Employments.
            
               

Above all he apply'd himself to the Study
of the Mathematicks, and more particularly
of Navigation, building and fitting out Ships
of War, till we saw him his own Admi-ral
at the Head of a Royal Navy; whereas
he had not one Ship, no not a Yacht to
set his Foot in, when he first came into
England; nor a Port for them to enter, if
he had had any, Archangel in the White Sea
excepted.
            Now we see his Subjects trading into Spain,
as well as into other Countries, with Ships
of good Burden; and carrying Naval Stores,
the Product of their own Country, into
France, Spain, Portugal, and Italy, as well
as to Lubec, and Hamburg, and other Ports
nearer home.
            Since the Conclusion of the Treaty with
Sweden, call'd the Peace of Abo, how infi-nitely
are the Russians increas'd in Know-ledge,
in Shipping, and indeed in Wealth as
well as Power! and all by Trade, and that
Trade made flourishing by Peace: And if
their young Emperor pursues the wise Mea-sures
of his Grandfather, and encourages the
two inseparable Friends, PEACE and
TRADE, he may in time bring the Mus-covites
to be the most powerful Nation in all
the Northern World.
            I might here enlarge upon what I hinted
before. viz. That several Nations having lost
their Trade, by which they were made so

formidable and considerable, they have also in
proportion sunk in their Strength, and lost
the Weight they bore in the Scale of Power
in Europe.
            
            The Portuguese are an eminent Example
of this, and the Genoese, both of them in
former times very powerful and rich, but
now much sunk thro' want or neglect of
Trade. As the Genoese lost their Trade first,
and their Possessions in the Euxine Sea af-terwards,
by the Aggression of the Turks;
so likewise they abated in Power; and
whereas before they could bring a strong
Fleet into the Levant Sea, and disputed e-ven
with the Venetians themselves; now
they have not above five or six Gallies and
not one Man of War in their keeping: so
naturally did their Power decline with their
Commerce.
            The same thing may in proportion be
observ'd of the Flemings in general, and
the City of Antwerp in particular; and as
I said above, of the Hans Towns, who were
once so powerful that they beat and burnt
the Danish Fleet in plain Fight at Sea;
and when any War happen'd in that Part
of the World, whoever had the Hans Fleet
on their side, were sure to conquer: But as
their Trade supported and indeed form'd all
that Power, so their Trade declining, they
are no more a Body, their Power is gone,
and the little Name of a Hans or Union of

Subsistence for them, where the Country it
self could not maintain the tenth Part of
them: By this they have raised a Naval
Strength, which has made them terrible at
Sea, as well as formidable on Shore: By
this they have been able, on all Occasions,
to carry the War home to their Enemies
Coasts, however distant, and even in the
remotest Parts of the Globe: By this they
look into every Port, knock at every Door,
command Peace or War; and, in a word,
awe the World.
            All the formidable Fleets of England,
Holland, France, Spain, and the Baltick,
what would they signify, if the respective
Countries to which they belong, could not
find able Seamen to man and manage them?
'Tis as they are or not able to do this, that
even those Maritime Powers are more or
less potent at Sea; and this is all in pro-portion
to their Trade. Their Seamen are
the Strength of their Fleet; and those Sea-men
are nourish'd, increas'd, and in Time
of Peace employ'd, and thereby kept up to
their Number, only by Trade; nothing else
can do it.
            Abundance of useful Inferences might be
drawn from these Observations; but I wave
them for the present, to bring all down to
the Point I have now more immediately in
view, which is this: That whoever would
learn to know the World, and would go

Merchants, which once they had and made
such a Figure with, is sunk into scarce a
Memorial of it in the City of Lubec.
            
            The Inference from all this might be very
profitably turn'd upon our selves in the pre-sent
Conjuncture; namely, That if we would
still enjoy our Wealth and Power, our Fame
and Glory, we must preserve our Trade, and
to that End, as far as we can, should preserve
the publick Peace also; seeing Peace and Trade
are Handmaids to one another.
            FINIS.
         
      
   


the best and readiest Way to obtain a just
Idea of its present State, as well as of the Si-tuation
of the several Countries in it, has
nothing to do but to study Trade.
            Learn to understand the Commerce of
the World, and of course you are led in-to
its Geography, or the Description of its
Situation: By this means you will be in-sensibly
drawn into a Knowledge of the
Distances of one Country from another, of
their Position on the Globe, and how they
stand with respect to one another: By in-quiring
which way their Commerce is car-ried
on, you necessarily come to know,
whether they are inland Countries, or bor-dering
on the Sea; whether Islands, or con-tiguous
to one another and to the Conti-nent;
whether to be travell'd to and traded
with by Land or by Water, or perhaps by
both.
            Nor is the Situation of Nations only
known by the Study of Trade; but by this
Means also their several Interests are judg'd
of, as also their Ability to support one an-other
and themselves, which way their
Strength lies, and how it exerts it self,
whether by Land or Sea: And all their na-vigable
Rivers and trading Ports are known
by the Navigation which is employ'd between
them, and the Trade which is carried on in
them.
            
               

The Number of the People, the Wealth,
and consequently the Strength of Nations,
are all learnt by the same Study. By this
you see the Richness of their Product, the
Bulk of their Exportations, and Number of
Ships employ'd in their Trade. Even the
Diligence and Application of their People
is judg'd of by the Quantity and Goodness
of their Manufactures, and the Produce of
their Country appearing in Trade.
            To know Trade then is to know the
World: And I may farther observe, That
if any one Nation could govern Trade, that
Nation would govern the World; could it
give Laws to the Commerce, it would give
Laws to the People, and the whole World
would be its Dependents and Subjects.
            Not so much the Histories of past Times,
as the many Examples of the present, con-firm
this. The Trading Nations are certain-ly
the most formidable at this time; and that
they are so in consequence of their Supe-riority
in Trade, may appear, in that all
those Nations, which were formerly great
in Trade, but since declin'd, are in pro-portion
declin'd in their Strength as their
Trade has fallen off. The City of Antwerp
is a noted Instance of this, as are almost
all the Hans Towns in Germany; also No-vogr
                     •
                  d
in Russia, and several others, whose
History we may find, as it respects their
former Greatness, and particularly their pre-sent

Decay, with the Causes of it, in the
Atlas Maritimus, lately publish'd, which in
almost every Part of it confirms this Maxim
by Examples in the most considerable Cities
and States in the World.
            The late French King, Lewis XIV. (more
justly on that account call'd Great, than for
the Glory of his Arms) saw plainly that
the Way to make the French Nation the
Terror of the World, was not so much by
the Success of his Arms, and his Conquests
upon his Neighbours, as by encouraging
the Commerce of his own Country, and
employing the vast Numbers of People,
which his Dominions were every where full
of, and which he found out of Business and
starving, in the several Branches of Trade,
as Arts, Manufactures, Navigation, Fishing, &amp;c.
by which means the Poor were every where
set to work, if not made to work, and of
Consequence fed and cloth'd; almost every
Province being put in a Capacity to feed and
employ their own Hands: and the Effects of
this are, to this Day, very visible and plain
in the following Instances.
                  1. His Tallie (which is a Tax upon all
the Families of the Plebeii, or meaner
trading People only) is visibly increas'd,
and raises now some Millions more than it
usually did.
                  
                     

2. His Subjects, especially in the ma-nufacturing
and trading Towns, grew rich;
and had he not been oblig'd by the Di-stress
of the War to oppress them after-wards
with heavy and almost insupport-able
Taxes, by which the publick Credit
sunk, and grew precarious, and the Bank
of Lyons in particular was ruin'd and fail'd,
and the Coin debas'd almost to nothing, so
that their Crown was not worth the an-tient
Livre in exchange: I say, had not
these things follow'd by the Distresses of
the War, the common trading People of
France had been rich; and 'tis evident
that they grow rich apace since the War,
by the meer Increase of their Manufactures
at home.
                  3. In a farther Pursuit of the same Max-ims,
the King turn'd his Eye to the Sea,
and took proper Measures for the Increase
of Shipping, the Encouragement of Sea-men,
the setting up Companies, Fisheries,
and the like, that his Subjects might be
employ'd as well by Water as by Land,
and that he might be able to man and fit
out his Ships of War with able Seamen of
his own; which the French have since
done, but were never able to do before.
               
            
            The Encouragement this gave to his Peo-ple,
and their Opulence by Sea, evidently
appear'd, even to the Terror of Europe, in

the mighty Fleets which he fitted out in a few
Years after he began those Regulations; Fleets
superior even to the united Naval Powers
of England and Holland: Nor had this Naval
Power of France been broken, had it not
been for the meer Arrogance of the King
himself, who in a mistaken Confidence of his
own Power, positively order'd Mons. Tour-ville,
his Admiral, to fight the Confederate
Fleet, (not thinking they were join'd, and)
whether they were join'd or no; by which
means he was overthrown, and some of the
finest Ships in the World set on fire in their
own Ports, and some even by their own
Hands; a Loss they never recover'd: But
this by the way. The fitting out such a
Fleet as the French had in the Action at
Beachy, in the Year 1690, is fully to the
Point in Hand, where they had 90 Men of
War of the Line, from 55 Guns and up-wards,
among which were no less than 17
three-Deck Ships, and as I have been told,
above 50000 Men, whereof 32000 were a-ble
Seamen of their own. All these Advan-ces
in the French King's Dominions, by
means of Trade, are at large describ'd in
the foremention'd Book, to which I refer
the Curious.
            These are the Effects of Trade, where the
Increase and Cultivation of it are made the
Care of the Publick. The States of Holland
are another Instance hereof, whose formida-ble
