
            A FURTHER ACCOUNT Of the most Deplorable Condition OF Mr. EDMUND CURLL, BOOKSELLER.
            Price Three Pence.
         
         
            

At the Laundresses, at the Hole in the Wall in Cursitors Alley, up three Pair of Stairs, the Author of my Church History—if his Flux be over—you may also speak to the Gentleman who lyes by him in the Flock Bed, my Index-maker.
                  
                  The Cook's Wife in Buckingham Court; bid her bring along with her the Similes that were lent her for her next new Play.
                  Call at Budge Row for the Gen-tleman you use to go to in the Cock-loft; I have taken away the Lad-der, but his Landlady has it in keeping.
                  I don't much care if you ask at the Mint for the old Beetle-brow'd Critick, and the purblind Poet at the Alley over against St. Andrews Holbourn. But this as you have time.
               
            
            
               

All these Gentlemen appear'd at the Hour appointed, in Mr. Curll's Dining Room, two excepted; one of whom was the Gentleman in the Cock-loft, his Landlady being out of the way, and the Gradus ad Par-nassum taken down; the other hap-pened to be too closely watch'd by the Bailiffs.
            They no sooner enter'd the Room, but all of them show'd in their Be-haviour some Suspicion of each o-ther; some turning away their Heads with an Air of Contempt; others squinting with a Leer that show'd at once Fear and Indignation, each with a haggard abstracted Mien, the lively Picture of Scorn, Solitude, and short Commons. So when a Keeper feeds his hungry Charge, of Vul-tures, Panthers, and of Lybian Leo-pards, each eyes his Fellow with a fiery Glare: High hung, the bloody Liver tempts their Maw. Or as a Housewife stands before her Pales, surrounded by her Geese; they fight,

they hiss, they gaggle, beat their Wings, and Down is scatter'd as the Winter's Snow, for a poor Grain of Oat, or Tare, or Barley. Such Looks shot thro' the Room transverse, oblique, direct; such was the stir and din, till Curll thus spoke, (but with-out rising from his Close-stool.) 
                  'Whores and Authors must be paid beforehand to put them in good Humour; therefore here is half a Crown a piece for you to drink your own Healths, and Confusion to Mr. Addison, and all other success-ful Writers.'
                  'Ah Gentlemen! What have I not done, what have I not suffer'd, rather than the World should be depriv'd of your Lucubrations? I have taken involuntary Purges, I have been vomited, three Times have I been can'd, once was I hun-ted, twice was my Head broke by a Grenadier, twice was I toss'd in a Blanket; I have had Boxes on the Ear, Slaps on the Chops; I

have been frighted, pump'd, kick'd, slander'd and beshitten.—I hope, Gentlemen, you are all convinc'd that this Author of Mr. Lintott's could mean nothing else but starving you by poisoning me. It remains for us to consult the best and speediest Methods of Revenge.'
               
            
            He had scarce done speaking, but the Historian propos'd a History of his Life. The Exeter Exchange Gentle-man was for penning Articles of his Faith. Some pretty smart Pindarick, (says the Red-Stocking Gentleman,) would effectually do his Business. But the Index-maker said their was no-thing like an Index to his Homer.
            
            After several Debates they came to the following Resolutions.
                  
                     Resolv'd, That every Member of this Society, according to his se-veral Abilities, shall contribute some way or other to the Defama-tion of Mr. Pope.
                  
                  
                     

                     Resolv'd, That towards the Li-belling of the said Mr. Pope, there be a Summ employ'd not exceed-ing Six Pounds Sixteen Shillings and Nine Pence (not including Advertisements.)
                  
                     Resolv'd, That Mr. D
                           _…
                        
                      make an Affidevit before Mr. Justice Tully, that in Mr. Pope's Homer, there are several Passages contra-ry to the establish'd Rules of OUR Sublime.
                  
                     Resolved, That he has on Pur-pose in several Passages perverted the true ancient Heathen Sense of Homer, for the more effectual Pro-pagation of the Popish Religion.
                  
                     Resolv'd, That the Printing of Homer's Battles at this Juncture, has been the Occasion of all the Disturbances of this Kingdom.
                  
                     Ordered, That Mr. Barnivelt be invited to be a Member of this So-ciety,

in order to make further Discoveries.
                  
                     Resolv'd, That a number of ef-fective Errata's be raised out of Mr. Pope's Homer (not exceeding 1746.) and that every Gentleman, who shall send in one Error, for his Encouragement shall have the whole Works of this Society Gra-tis.
                  
                  
                     Resolv'd, That a Summ not ex-ceeding Ten Shillings and Six-pence be distributed among the Members of this Society for Coffee and To-bacco, in order to enable them the more effectually to defame him in Coffee-Houses.
                  
                  
                     Resolv'd, That towards the fur-ther lessening the Character of the said Mr. Pope, some Persons be de-puted to abuse him at Ladies Tea Tables, and that in Consideration our Authors are not well dress'd enough, Mr. C
                           _…
                        y be deputed for that Service.
                  
                     

                     Resolv'd, That a Ballad be made against Mr. Pope, and that Mr. Oldmixon, Mr. Gildon and Mrs. Centlivre do prepare and bring in the same.
                  
                     Resolv'd, That above all, some effectual Ways and Means be found to encrease the Joint Stock of the Reputation of this Society, which at present is exceedingly low, and to give their Works the greater Currency; whether by raising the Denomination of the said Works by counterfeit Title Pages, or mixing a greater Quantity of the fine Me-tal of other Authors, with the Al-loy of this Society.
                  
                     Resolv'd, That no Member of this Society for the future mix Stout in his Ale in a Morning, and that Mr. B. remove from the Her-cules and Still.
                  
                  
                     Resolv'd, That all our Members, (except the Cook's Wife) be provi-ded

with a sufficient Quantity of the vivifying Drops, Or Byfield's Sal Volatile.
                  
                  
                     Resolv'd, That Sir R. B. be ap-pointed to endue this Society with a large Quantity of regular and ex-alted Ferments, in order to enliven their cold Sentiments (being his true Receipt to make Wits)
               
            
            These Resolutions being taken, the Assembly was ready to break up, but they took so near a-part in Mr. Curll's Afflictions, that none of them could leave him without gi-ving some Advice to re-instate him in his Health.
            Mr. Gildon was of Opinion, That in order to drive a Pope out of his Belly, he should get the Mummy of some deceas'd Moderator of the General Assembly in Scotland, to be taken inwardly as an effectual Anti-dote against Antichrist; but Mr. Oldmixon did conceive, that the Li-ver of the Person who administred

the Poison, boil'd in Broth, would be a more certain Cure.
            While the Company were expe-cting the Thanks of Mr. Curll, for these Demonstrations of their Zeal, a whole Pile of Essays on a sudden fell on his Head; the Shock of which in an Instant brought back his Dili-rium. He immediately rose up, o-ver-turn'd the Close-stool, and beshit the Essays (which may probably oc-casion a second Edition) then without putting up his Breeches, in a most furious Tone, he thus broke out to his Books, which his distemper'd Imagination represented to him as alive, coming down from their Shelves, fluttering their Leaves, and flapping their Covers at him.
            Now G
                     _…
                  d damn all Folio's, Quar-to's, Octavo's and Duodecimo's! un-grateful Varlets that you are, who have so long taken up my House with-out paying for your Lodging?—Are you not the beggarly Brood of fum-bling Journey-men; born in Garrets,
               

among Lice and Cobwebs, nurs'd up-on Grey Peas, Bullocks Liver, and Porter's Ale?—Was not the first Light you saw, the Farthing Candle I paid for? Did you not come before your Time into dirty Sheets of brown Pa-per?—And have not I cloath'd you in double Royal, lodg'd you hand-somely on decent Shelves, lac'd your Backs with Gold, equipt you with splendid Titles, and sent you into the World with the Names of Per-sons of Quality? Must I be always plagu'd with you?—Why flutter ye your Leaves, and flap your Covers at me? Damn ye all, ye Wolves in Sheeps Cloathing; Rags ye were, and to Rags ye shall return. Why hold you forth your Texts to me, ye pal-try Sermons? Why cry ye—at every Word to me, ye bawdy Poems?—To my Shop at Tunbridge ye shall go, by G
                  _…
                and thence be drawn like the rest of your Predecessors, bit by bit, to the Passage-House: For in this present Emotion of my Bowels, how do I compassionate those who have

            A FURTHER ACCOUNT Of the most Deplorable Condition OF Mr. EDMUND CURLL, BOOKSELLER. Since his being POISON'D on the 28th of March.
            
            To be publish'd Weekly.
            
               LONDON Printed, and Sold by all the Pub-lishers, Mercuries, and Hawkers, within the Bills of Mortality. 1716.
         
      
      
         
            

great need, and nothing to wipe their Breech with?
            Having said this, and at the same Time recollecting that his own was yet unwiped, he abated of his Fury, and with great Gravity, apply'd to that Function the unfinish'd Sheets of the Conduct of the E
                  _…
                of N
                     _…
                  m.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   


            A FURTHER ACCOUNT Of the most Deplorable Condition Of Mr. EDMUND CURLL, Bookseller.
            THE Publick is already ac-quainted with the Man-ner of Mr. Curll's Impoi-sonment, by a faithful, tho' unpolite, Historian of Grub-street. I am but the Continu-er of his History; yet I hope a due Distinction will be made, be-tween an undignify'd Scribler of a Sheet and half, and the Author of

a Three-Penny stitcht Book, like my self.
            
               Wit (saith Sir Richard Blackmore) proceeds from a Concurrence of regular and exalted Ferments, and an Afflu-ence of Animal Spirits rectify'd and refin'd to a degree of Purity. On the contrary, when the igneous Parti-cle rise with the vital Liquor, they produce an Abstraction of the rati-onal Part of the Soul, which we commonly call Madness. The Ve-rity of this Hypothesis, is justify'd by the Symptoms with which the unfortunate Mr. Edmund Curll, Bookseller, hath been afflicted e-ver since his swallowing the Poison at the Swan Tavern in Fleetstreet. For tho' the Neck of his Retort, which carries up the Animal Spi-rits to the Head, is of an extraordi-nary Length, yet the said Animal Spirits rise muddy, being contami-nated with the inflammable Parti-cles of this uncommon Poison.
            
               

The Symptoms of his Departure from his usual Temper of Mind, were at first only speaking civilly to his Customers, taking a Fancy to say his Prayers, singeing a Pig with a new purchas'd Libel, and refusing Two and Nine Pence for Sir R
                  _…
                B
                  _…
               
               's Essays.
            
            As the poor Man's Frenzy in-creas'd, he began to void his Excre-ments in his Bed, read Rochester's bawdy Poems to his Wife, gave Oldmix-on a slap on the Chops, and wou'd have kiss'd Mr. Pemberton's A
                  _…
                
               by Violence.
            
            But at last he came to such a pass, that he wou'd dine upon nothing but Copper Plates, took a Clyster for a whipt Syllabub, and eat a Suppository for a Raddish with Bread and Butter.
            
            We leave it to every tender Wife to imagine how sorely all this afflict-ed poor Mrs. Curll: At first she pri-vately put a Bill into several Church-es, desiring the Prayers of the Con-gregation

for a wretched Stationer distemper'd in Mind. But when she was sadly convinc'd that his Misfortune was publick to all the World, writ the following Letter to her good Neighbour Mr. Lintott.
               
                  
                     A true Copy of Mrs. Curll's Letter to Mr. Lintott.
                     
                     
                        Worthy Mr. Lintott,
                        
                     
                     YOU, and all the Neighbours know too well, the Frenzy with which my poor Man is visi-ted. I never perceiv'd he was out of himself, till that melancholy Day that he thought he was poi-son'd in a Glass of Sack; upon this, he took a strange Fancy to run a Vomiting all over the House, and in the new wash'd Dining Room. Alas! this is the greatest Adversity that ever befel my poor Man since he lost one Testicle at School by the bite of a black Boar. Good Lord! if he should die, where should I dis-pose of the Stock? unless Mr. Pem-berton or you would help a distressed

Widow; for God knows he never publish'd any Books that lasted a-bove a Week, so that if we want-ed daily Books, we wanted daily Bread. I can write no more, for I hear the Rap of Mr. Curll's Ivory headed Cane upon the Coun-ter.—Pray recommend me to your Pastry Cook, who furnishes you yearly with Tarts in exchange for your Papers, for Mr. Curll has dis-oblig'd ours since his Fits came up-on him;—before that, we gene-rally liv'd upon bak'd Meats.—He is coming in, and I have but just time to put his Son out of the way for fear of Mischief: So wish-ing you a merry Easter, I remain your
                     
                        most humble Servant, C. Curll.
                     
                     
                        
                           P. S. As to the Report of my poor Husband's stealing a Calf, it is really groundless, for he always binds in Sheep.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               

But return we to Mr. Curll, who all Wednesday continued outragiously Mad. On Thursday he had a lucid In-terval, that enabled him to send a general Summons to all his Authors. There was but one Porter who cou'd perform this Office, to whom he gave the following Bill of Directions where to find 'em. This Bill, to-gether with Mrs. Curll's Original Letter, lye at Mr. Lintott's Shop to be perus'd by the Curious.
            
               
                  Instructions to a Porter how to find Mr. Curll's Authors.
                  AT a Tallow-chandlers in Pet-ty France, half way under the blind Arch: Ask for the Histo-rian.
                  
                  At the Bedsted and Bolster, a Musick House in Morefields, two Translators in a Bed together.
                  
                     

At the Hercules and Still in Vine-gar-yard, a School-Master with Carbuncles on his Nose.
                  At a Blacksmiths Shop in the Friars, a Pindarick Writer in red Stockings.
                  In the Calendar Mill Room at Exeter Change, a Composer of Meditations.
                  At the Three Tobacco Pipes in Dog and Bitch Yard, one that has been a Parson, he wears a blue Camblet Coat trim'd with black: my best Writer against reveal'd Religion.
                  
                  At Mr. Summers a Thief-catchers, in Lewkners Lane, the Man that wrote against the Impiety of Mr. Rowe's Plays.
                  At the Farthing Pye House in Tooting Fields, the young Man who is writing my new Pastorals.
                  
                  
                     
