		                            NUMB. IV.
                     Quando alea hos animos?
						Juv.
						 
AMONG all the Amusements, invented by the idle part of Mankind, to
pass away their Time, there is not one, which is attended with so
many Evil Consequences as that of Gaming, nor indeed any so much
below the Dignity of Human-Nature, it being an Employment so
Trifling in Appearance, that a Man with a Box and Dice, is hardly
distinguishable from a Child with it's Rattle, nor when he Diverts
himself with a few scraps of Painted Paste-board, does he make one
whit a better figure. 
		But setting Appearances of this kind aside, which can make even
the Wisest look Ridiculous, I shall chiefly Dwell upon the more
solid Evils, that attend all intemperate practitioners in this way,
and these I shall Sum up in the following Losses, viz. Loss of Time;
Loss of Reputation; Loss of Health; Loss of Fortune; Loss of Temper;
and what is often the Effect of it, the Loss of Life it self.
		First, That it is a Loss of Time, is plain, because our Time
may be employ'd to more advantage; for by Six Hours in the twenty
four, I can make my self Wiser, and better, and Richer; whereas on
the Contrary, by Cards or Dice, I do Infallibly grow more Stupid,
and Worse; and a Hundred to One against me I grow Poorer.
		Secondly, That it is a Loss of Reputation, and Esteem in the
World, is easily proved, because no Man of Reputation or Esteem was
ever called a Gamester; Eo. vice versa, No Gamester can be called a
Man of Reputation and Esteem. For in giving the best Characters to
Men or Women, we never use the Word Gaming as an Epithet. We say,
for Instance, A great and Glorious King; A wise and a good Governor;
A learned and a Pious Bishop; An unbiassed and just Chancellor; a
Virtuous and a Modest Lady, and so through the best Degrees of Men
and Women. But how odly would it sound, if we should take out the
latter Epithet from each of these, and put in their stead the Word
Gaming. And say, A Wise and a Gaming King; A Learned and a Gaming
Bishop; An unbiassed and Gaming Chancellor; A Virtuous and a Gaming
Lady, &c. From which it is plain, that Gaming must stand and agree
with the worst Characters; For it Sounds very well to say, A
Profligate Gaming Spendthrift; A Notorious Gaming Sharper; A
Swearing Gaming Bully. And the same Epithet will agree as well with
Pick-pockets, Rakes, Highway-men, and others of that distinguished
Race of Mankind.
		Thirdly, That it is a Loss of Health follows from the Sedentary
Life, to which those who follow Gaming are confined; whence, as I am
told by a knowing Physician, proceed Dropsies, Gouts, Gravel, and
Stone in the Men; and in the Women, Tympanies of both kinds,
Hystericks, Vapours, and a load of bad Humours, for want of those
Exercises, which produce Perspiration, and Evacuations necessary to
Invigorate, Strengthen, and preserve the Animal Oeconomy, free from
those Numerous Distempers, which Laziness and Sloth produce.
		Fourthly, That it is a Loss of Fortune is out of all Dispute,
from the Numberless Instances, I cou'd give of Lords, Ladies, and
Squires, some of whom have lost their whole Estates; others the most
part; others again have laid themselves under such difficulties,
that their Annual Income has fallen very short to supply them with
the Common Necessaries of Life; so that they have been obliged to
live upon the Credit of the ensuing Year.
		And as for Ladies whose Pride would not permit them to be so
obliged to their Creditors, they either pawn their Houshold
Moveables, or Sell (what next to Gaming, goes nearest to their
Heart), their very Parapharnalia; but this I must Remark, has
happend chiefly among those who have been seduced as Cullies to the
Fashionable Game of Quadrill. It will not be here Foreign to my
purpose, to Write down some few Inventories of Goods, lately hawked
about by trusty Chamber-maids.
		
		       Belonging to Lady FLAVIA near Stephen's-Green.
1 Diamond Necklace, 1 Pair of Diamond Ear-Rings, 3 Diamond-Rings,
and a Gold Watch with Trinckets.

                To Mrs. DORINDA of Dawson-Street.
2 Large Silver-Cups, 3 Salvers, 2 Pair of Candlesticks, 1 Silver
Sauce-Pan.

                To Madam CHLOE in Jervice-Street.
2 Birth-Day Suits, 1 Piece of French Damask, Broad Green Stripe,
with White Flowers, Pawned for Nine Pounds, 4 Damask Table-Cloaths,
and a Dozen of Napkins.
 
               To Madam LIBERIA of College-Green.
A fine wrought Coverlet of a Bed, A picture of her Husband's Father
and Mother set in Gold, A Gold Snuff-box, 1 Dozen of Silver-spoons,
A Child's Bells and Coral.

		I have had an Account of many more, but this is full enough to
answer my Design, for I intend only by this discovery that their
Husbands should add a little more to their Pin-money, and thereby
enable them to pay their Debts of Honour, in a less Scandalous way.
		Indeed it would not be amiss, if Husbands should make use of
their Authority, at least to regulate one Circumstance, that is, to
bring their Wives to be content with two Hours Play, instead of
twelve in the four and twenty; because some Inconveniences attend
it. The Servants having all that Time to themselves, to Intreigue;
to Juncket; to Filsh and Steal; to pawn the Inferior Moveables of
the Pantry, and Kitchen; and lastly to Corrupt the Children; by
teaching them Cursing, Swearing, Lying, and Lewdness, which in all
probability may bring both Ruin and Disgrace to their Family.
		It is very well known that among the great and fashionable
People of former ages, they very rarely had recourse to Gaming. We
read that Artaxerxes, Cato, and Augustus, did sometimes Divert
themselves this Way, but I cannot recollect that ever the Ladies
entered into it at all, their Amusements being rather the Needle and
the Loom; for which their Perfections are Celebrated by the Oldest
and best Poet of the World. The Men of any Consequence, passed their
Evenings in Learned and agreeable Conversation, such as tended to
make them wiser and better, for which I appeal to the Symposiacks of
Plato, the Feast of Xenophon, and those Accounts given by Macrobius.
And to bring the matter nearer our own Times, the People of the
greatest Consequence, in these British Isles, have chosen rather to
pass away their Evenings in Polite Discourses with one another; and
I should think that I failed in a due Veneration for their Memories,
if I should pass their Names over in Silence. The Celebrated Lord
Falkland, Earl Carnarvan, Endymion Porter, Mr. Waller, Sir John
Sucklin; and among the conversible Ladies, The Countesses of
Bedford, Carlisle, Devonshire, and several others. This way of
Improvement is elegantly described by Horace.
		
			      ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄErgo
			Sermo oritur, non de villis domibusve alienis:
			Nec male necne Lepos Saltet: sed quod magis ad nos
			Pertinet, et nescire malum est agitamus: utrumne
			Divitiis homines, an sint virtute beati:
			Quidve ad amicitias, Usus, rectumne trahat nos:
			Et qu‘ sit natura boni, summumq; quid ejus.
			
			Thus after plain Repast, each cheerful Guest,
			With useful Conversation, Crowns the Feast,
			Not Trifling Chat, on this, or tother Place,
			Or Lepos Dancing with a better Grace;
			But what is more Concern to Humane kind,
			To mend our Manners, and improve the mind.
			On Philosophick Questions wisely bent,
			As whether Wealth or Virtue gives content,
			What Cause directs us in the Choice of Friends,
			Our private Int'rest, or more Noble Ends.
			What Road to chuse, what End we should pursue,
			And how to keep the Good Supreme in View.
		
		For my own Part I could rather Wish, and I believe many
Husbands would agree with me, That the Ladies would rather employ
themselves, as Juvenal Describes those in his Time, in Fighting
Prizes upon a Publick Stage, whereby they would at least discover
their Activity, and their Courage, in a much more becoming manner,
than (according to the present Practice) pulling of Coifs upon a
wrangle at Quadrill.
		The Ancients did so far abhor any Excess in Gaming, That
Aristotle in his 4th Book of Ethicks, at the latter end of the 1st.
Chap. places Tyrants, Gamester's and Robbers in one Class, their
Dispositions being exactly the same: For who ever yet knew a right
Gamester, that was not apt to insult upon Success, or to pillage all
before him upon every Advantage. The Author I have now mentioned
Stiles them very justly aischrokerdeis (I wish the Ladies understood
Greek) We have no English Word expressive enough to explain it. The
nearest meaning I can think of is base-gainers. And what can be
baser, than to sit down deliberately with a Friend, either at his
House, or my own, with an Intention to pick his Pocket, by a lucky
Throw of a Dye, or a Cast of a Card. This has been frequently the
Practice. However I shall content my self with a Relation of one
Fact, because it is somewhat singular in it's kind.
		BRYANIA the Virago one Evening, invited the beautiful Morisda
to a game of Cards at her House, which the latter declined, as
having neither Skill, nor Inclination, nor Money for Play; yet by
much Importunity was prevailed on to sup with her. Soon after
BRYANIA calls for a Pack of Cards, and told the poor innocent Lady,
she would instruct her in a Game, which a Child of four Years old
might learn in four Minutes; to this the complying good-natured
Morisda willingly consented, upon her Friend's telling her she might
lose very little by low playing at this Game. Accordingly they fixt
upon three-pence a Counter. They had not played above three Hours,
when the poor Cully was told she had lost about a trifle of twenty
Guineas. Being not able to command twenty Shillings in the world,
she took her leave in great Confusion, and Grief, promising to
discharge the Debt in a litle Time. The unmerciful BRYANIA dunned
her the Day following, and so continued for a Week. This put the
poor indigent Lady upon trying all Friends. In the mean Time, the
following Letter was written to her, which I have Transcribed with
the strictest Justice to the Writer.
		
			MADDUM,
		I donat undarstand youar tretmint in giuin me they troble off
     Sendin so offen forr that trifil wich youe losst too me tuther
     nit If youe doo nott sende itt bye they berer I a shuar youe I
     wil rite too youar husbund forr itt, Maddum I amm &c.
		
		This terrible Letter put the poor Lady to her last Shifts (nor
is it a wonder it should, her Husband being the greatest Bear
living) which was to borrow the Money of a certain Collonel, and
this, uncharitable People did misinterpret for a Valuable
Consideration.
		The fifth Loss, I mentioned, was that of Temper. If any one
doubts the Truth of this Position, I refer him to the Groom Porters,
and Lucas's-Coffee-House, where the only Virtuosi of the Gaming
Science are Daily and Nightly to be seen. If Blaspheming, Cursing,
Swearing, Duelling, Runing of Heads against the Wall, Throwing Hats
and Wigs in the Fire, Distortions of the Countenance, Biting of
Nails, Burning of Cards, Breaking of Dice-Boxes, can be called a
Loss of Temper, they are found in the aforesaid places, in the
highest degree of Perfection. And to make out the last and greatest
Loss, which is, The Loss of Life.
		I have, according to the best of my Memory, heard of no less
than seven or eight worthy Gentlemen of the Trade, within a very few
Years, upon some hasty Words and Blows, given at some of these
Gaming-Tables, retire from their Company, and one of them bring in
the News of the other's Death in about Six Minutes.
		Upon the whole, I cannot but remark, That Gaming proceeds from
three Qualities of the basest kind, Avarice, Laziness and Ignorance;
For it must undoubtedly be a thirst for Gain, which is a motive to
high playing; and as for the Lazy and Ignorant (if they play low) I
am more willing to indulge them, because they have naturally better
Talents for sitting and trifling, than wholsome bodily Exercise, or
spending the Evenings in a way of Conversation, agreeable to
Rational Creatures.
		I shall end this Paper with a very useful Remark. Plato is my
Author, that the Demon THEUTH was the Inventor of Dice (The Ladies
know well enough, that the Devil and Demon are the same) and the
Vulgar have it by Tradition, that Cards are the Devil's own
Invention, for which reason, time out of mind, they are and have
been called the Devil's Books, therefore I cannot but say after this
Information given, if Gamesters will not desist, they are
undoubtedly at the Devil's Devotion.