		                            NUMB. II.
                                
         Occursare capro, cornu ferit ille, caveto. Vir.


MY design, in Writing this Paper, being chiefly to expose such
Barbarians, who think themselves exempt from those Laws of
Hospitality, which have, through all Ages and Countries, been
observed by the best and most distinguished part of Mankind; I hope
I shall, even in my own Country, find Persons enough, to joyn with
me in a hearty detestation of a certain Country-Squire, at the
Relation of the following Fact, which I shall tell without the least
Aggravation, or Partiality.
		Two Clergy-men, of some Distinction, Travelling to the Country
for their Health, happened to set up together in a small Village,
which was under the Dominion of a certain Animal, dignified with a
brace of Titles, that of a Militia-Collonel, and a Squire. One of
these Gentlemen standing in the Street, and observing a Coach-man
driving his Coach and four Horses furiously against him, turned into
the close Passage between his Inn and the Sign-post, but the Coach-
man, instead of driving through the middle of the Street, which was
the usual and most commodious way, turned short, and Drove full upon
the Gentleman, without any Notice, so that he was on a sudden
enclosed between the fore-horses, and if his Friend and another
Gentleman, who were in the middle of the Street, had not suddenly
cryed out to stop the Coach, he must have unavoidably been trodden
under the Horses Feet, and his Body bruised to Death by the Wheels
running over him. His Friend who saw with Terror what had like to
have befallen him, full of Indignation, repaired immediately to the
aforesaid Squire or Collonel (to whom he was told the Equipage
belonged) with a Complaint against his Coach-man. But the Squire
instead of expressing any Concern, or offering any Redress, sent the
Doctor away with the following Answer. Sir, I have a great Regard
for your Cloath, and have sent my Coach-man to ask your Friend's
Pardon; for one of your Servants this moment, told me what had
happened. But, Sir, said the Doctor, do you think that is
sufficient? I dare venture to affirm, if the like had befallen you,
within the Liberties of my Friend, and you were brought to the same
Danger by his Servant, he would not only have him Punished, but at
the same time, he would discharge him his Service. Sir, (said the
Collonel) I tell you again, that I have sent my Coach-man to ask his
Pardon, and I think that is enough, which he spoke with some
sturdiness; and well he might; for he had two Cannons at his Back.
Good God, said the Doctor to himself, (when he had got out of Gun-
shot) what a Hottentot have I been talking to! who so little values
the Life of a Gentleman, and as it happen'd that very Gentleman, to
whom the Nation hath in a particular manner been obliged. Back he
went full of Resentment, for the slighting Treatment his Friend met
with, and very Candidly reported all that passed; who being a Man of
a different Spirit from that wretched Collonel, ordered one of his
Servants to Write the following Letter.
		
		SIR,
MY Master commanded me to tell you, That if you do not punish and
turn off that Villain your Coach-man, he will think there was a
Design upon his Life, I put this in Writing for fear of mistakes,
		I am your humble Servant to command
		                                                          A. R.
		
		The Superscription was, FOR SQUIRE WETHER, or some such Name.
		This Letter was delivered, and away went the Travellers. They
had not Rode far, before they fell into the Company of a Gentleman,
a degree above the common Level, and who seemed to be a Man of
Candor and Integrity, which encouraged them to recount what had
happened. He said in Answer, that they had a narrow escape; and it
was a Wonder that the whole Town did not fall upon them at once, and
worry them; for the People there, had little or no Devotion, besides
what was engaged to the Squire, as an Effect of the Terrors, they
lay under from their Landlord, who Rode them all down, as poor as
his Fox-hunters. After this he took occasion with great Modesty, and
Decency, to draw his Character, which was to the following purpose.
That the Squire had about fifteen hundred Pounds a Year, and lived
in a long White-Barn; where no Man living was one Farthing the
better for him. That his Piety consisted in Six Psalms every Day
after Dinner, without one Drop of Wine. That he had once reduced a
certain Reverend Dean, plumper than any two of his Brethren, to be
as slender about the Waste as a Weazle by a Fortnight Scouring of
bad Ale, to which the Dean was not accustomed. That his hospitality
was within the enclosure of a Rampart, with a Draw-bridge. That if
any Gentleman was admitted by chance, his entertainment was lean
Salt-beef, sour Beer, and Muddy Ale. That his Charity was as much
upon the catch as a Pick-pocket; for his method was to bring others
to erect Charity-Schools, by promising his Assistance, and so
leaving them in the Lurch.
		That without the least Tincture of Learning, he was a great
pretender to Oratory and Poetry, and eminently bad at both, which (I
hope I shall be excused the Digression) brings to my Memory a
Character, given by Julius Capitolinus of the Emperor VERUS. Melior
quidem Orator fuisse dicitur, quam Poeta; imo (ut verius dicam)
pejor Poeta quam Rhetor, (viz.) He was a better Orator than Poet,
but, to speak the thing more properly, He was a viler Poet than an
Orator. But to give you a Specimen of his Genius, I shall repeat an
Epigram of his own Composition (and I am very sure it is every Line
his own, without any help) which is drawn by a Sign-Dawber on the
Cross-board of a Ferry-boat, in Characters that have hitherto stood
the Fury of all Weathers.
		
			All you that are
			To Andrew Heir,
			And you that him attend
			Shall Ferry'd be,
			Oe'r Carrick free,
			For Blank's the Boatman's Friend.
			
		The behaviour of this Squire being of the most Savage kind, I
think my self obliged out of the tender Regard, which I bear to all
Strangers, and Travellers, to animadvert upon him in as gentle a
manner as the occasion will allow. And therefore I shall first lay
down a few Postulatums. That every Travelling-Gentleman is presumed
to be under the Protection of the Governing-Mayor, Sovereign,
Portriff, or Squire of the Town or Village, which he happens to make
his Stage. That the Laws of Humanity, Hospitality and Civility,
oblige him, if there be no Accommodation in the Publick Houses, fit
for a Person of Distinction, to invite him to his own, or supply the
Deficiencies as well as he can. That if any Insult or Injury be
offered either to such a stranger, or his Servants, the Squire is
obliged to justify, vindicate, and espouse their Cause. This was the
method observed among the civilized People of the old Jewish, and
Heathen World; Where we find some of the Patriarchs themselves
condescending to wash the Feet of such Travellers, as they
entertained. And so sacred was the Regard for Strangers among the
Heathens, that they dignifyed their Supreme GOD with the Title of
Jupiter Hospitalis. Nothing was thought so monstrous as to offer any
Violence to Sojourners among them, which was so religiously
observed, that it became the glory of the most distinguished Heroes,
to destroy and extirpate such as were remarkable for their Cruelty
to Strangers. This it was, which added so much glory to the
character of Theseus, for the Punishments he inflicted on Sisiphus,
Procrustes, &c. It was owing likewise to a generous Indignation,
That Hercules threw Diomede (The Collonel and Squire of that Age) to
be devoured by those Horses, which he fed with the Flesh of poor
Travellers, and I find upon enquiry that they were Coach-Horses too.
I shall make no farther remark upon this, nor Application, but say
to the Squire, That it is very happy for him the present Age has not
one Hercules left, or a Week would not pass, before he should feel
the weight of that Heroe's Club, or be thrown by way of Reprizal
under his own Horses feet. And I may farther add, that in this whole
Kingdom, from one end of it to the other, another Squire could not
be found, who would behave himself in the same manner to the same
Person; but Hundreds, who on the Contrary, would have given all the
Satisfaction, that Gentlemen of Justice, Humanity, and common
Benevolence ought to do, upon the like accident, although they had
never seen him before. I confess this Paper contains nothing besides
a dry Fact, and a few occasional Observations upon it. But in the
former I told my READERS, that Facts would be the chief part of the
Entertainment, I meant to give them. If what I have said, may have
any Effect on the Person concerned, (to whom care shall be taken to
send this Account) or if it helps to revive the old spirit of
Hospitality among us, or at least begets a Detestation of the like
inhuman Usage in others; one part of my design is answered. However,
it cannot be unseasonable to expose Malice, Avarice, Brutality, and
Hypocrisie, wherever we find it.