                            NUMB. VI.
                                
                    O patria! o divum domus!

WHEN I Travel through any part of this unhappy Kingdom (and I have
now by several Excursions, made from Dublin, gone thro' most
Counties of it) it raises two Passions in my Breast of a different
kind; An Indignation against those vile betrayers and Insulters of
it, who Insinuate themselves into Favour, by saying, It is a Rich
Nation; and a sincere Compassion for the Natives, who are sunk to
the lowest Degree of Misery and Poverty, whose Houses are Dunghills,
whose Victuals are the Blood of their Cattle, or the Herbs in the
Field; and whose Cloathing to the Dishonour of God and Man is
Nakedness.  Yet Notwithstanding all these Dismal Appearances, it is
the Common Phrase of an upstart Race of People, who have suddenly
sprung up like the Dragons Teeth among us: That Ireland was never
known to be so Rich as it is now; by which as I apprehend, they can
only mean Themselves, for they have Skipt over the Channel from the
Vantage Ground of a Dunghill upon no other Merit, either Visible or
Divinable, than that of not having been born among us.
		This is the Modern way of Planting ColoniesÄÄEt ubi Solitudinem
faciunt, id imperium vocant.  When those who are so unfortunate to
be born here, are excluded from the meanest Preferments, and deem'd
incapable of being entertain'd, even as common Soldiers, whose poor
stipend is but Four pence a Day.  No Trade, no Emoluments, no
Encouragement for Learning among the Natives, who yet by a perverse
consequence are divided into Factions, with as much Violence, and
Rancour, as if they had the Wealth of the Indies to contend for.  It
puts me in mind of a Fable which I Read in a Monkish Author.  He
quotes for it one of the Greek Mythologists, That once upon a Time a
Colony of large Dogs (called the Molossi) Transplanted themselves
from Epirus to ’tolia where they seized those parts of the
Countries, most fertile in Flesh of all kinds, obliging the Native
Dogs to retire from their best Kennels, to live under Ditches and
Bushes.  But to preserve good Neighbourhood, and Peace, and finding
likewise, that the ’tolian Dogs might be of some use in the low
Offices of Life, they passed a Decree, That the Natives should be
entituled to the Short-Ribs, Tips of Tails, Knuckle-Bones, and Guts
of all the Game, which they were obliged by their Masters to Run
Down: This Condition was accepted, and what was a little Singular,
while the Molossian Dogs kept a good understanding among themselves,
living in Peace and Luxury, these ’tolian Curs were perpetually
snarling, growling, barking, and tearing out each others Throats. 
Nay, sometimes those of the best Quality among them, were seen to
Quarrel with as much Rancour for a Rotten Gut, as if it had been a
fat haunch of Venison.  But what need we wonder at this in Dogs,
when the same is every Day practised among Men.
		Last Year I Travelled from Dublin to Dundalk, thro' a Country
esteemed the most Fruitful part of this Kingdom, and so Nature
intended it.  But no Ornaments or Improvements of such a Scene were
visible.  No Habitations fit for Gentlemen.  No Farmers Houses.  Few
Fields of Corn, and almost a bare Face of nature, without new
Plantations of any kind, only a few miserable Cottages, at least
three or four Miles distance, and one Church in the Centre between
this City and Droghedah.  When I arriv'd at this last Town, the
first mortifying Sight, was the Ruins of several Churches, batter'd
down by that Usurper Cromwell, whose Fanatick Zeal made more
Desolation in a few Days, than the Piety of succeeding Prelates, or
the Wealth of the Town have, in more than sixty Years attempted to
repair.
		Perhaps the Inhabitants, through a high strain of Virtue, have
in Imitation of the Athenians made a Solemn Resolution, never to
rebuild those sacred Edifices, but rather leave them in ruins, as
Monuments, to perpetuate the detestable memory of that hellish
Instrument of Rebellion, Desolation and Murther.  For, the Athenians
when Mardonius had ravaged a great part of Greece took a formal Oath
at the Isthmus to lose their Lives rather than their Liberty.  To
stand by their Leaders to the last.  To spare the Cities of such
Barbarians as they conquered.  And, what crowned all, the Conclusion
of their Oath was, We will never repair any of the Temples, which
they have burned and destroyed, that they may appear to Posterity as
so many Monuments of these wicked Barbarians.  This was a glorious
Resolution.  And I am sorry to think, that the Poverty of my Country-
men will not let the world suppose, they have acted upon such a
generous Principle, yet upon this Occasion I cannot but observe that
there is a fatality in some Nations, to be fond of those, who have
treated them with the least humanity.  Thus I have often heard the
memory of Cromwell, who has depopulated and almost wholly destroyed
this miserable Country, celebrated like that of a Saint; and at the
same time the Sufferings of the Royal Martyr turned into Ridicule,
and his Murder justifyed even from the Pulpit, and all this done
with an intent to gain favour under a Monarchy, which is a new
strain of Politicks that I shall not pretend to account for.
		Examin all the Eastern Towns of Ireland, and you will trace
this horrid Instrument of Destruction, in the defacing of Churches,
and particularly in destroying whatever was Ornamental, either
within or without them.  We see in the several Towns a very few
Houses scattered among the Ruins of thousands, which he laid level
with their Streets.  Great Numbers of Castles! the Country Seats of
Gentlemen then in Being, still standing in ruin, habitations for
Bats, Daws, and Owls, without the least Repairs or Succession of
other buildings.  Nor have the Country Churches, as far as my Eye
could reach, met with any better Treatment from him, nine in ten of
them lying among their Graves, and God only knows when they are to
have a Resurrection.  When I passed from Dundalk where this cursed
Usurper's handy-work is yet visible, I cast mine Eyes around from
the Top of a Mountain, from whence I had a wide and a waste Prospect
of several venerable Ruins; It struck me with a Melancholy, not
unlike that expressed by Cicero in one of his Letters which being
much upon the like Prospect, and concluding with a very necessary
Reflection on the uncertainty of things in this World, I shall here
insert a translation of what he says.  In my Return from Asia, as I
Sailed from Agina, towards Megara, I began to take a prospect of the
several Countries round about me.  Behind me was Agina: Before me
Megara: On the right Hand the Pir‘us: and on the left was Corinth:
Which Towns were formerly in a most flourishing Condition; now they
lye prostrate and in Ruin.
		Thus I began to think with my self. Shall we who have but a
trifling Existence express any resentment, when one of us either
dies a natural Death, or is Slain, whose Lives are necessarily of a
short Duration, when at one view I behold the Carcases of so many
great Cities.  What if he had seen the Natives of those free
Republicks, reduced to all the miserable consequences of a conquered
People, living without the common defences against Hunger and Cold,
rather appearing like Specters than Men?  I am apt to think that
seeing his Fellow-Creatures in Ruin like this, it would have put him
past all patience for Philosophick Reflections.
		As for my own Part, I confess, that the Sights and Occurrences
which I had in this my last Journey, have so far transported me to a
mixture of Rage and Compassion, that I am not able to decide, which
has the greater Influence upon my Spirits; For this new Cant of a
rich and flourishing Nation, was still upper-most in my Thoughts;
Every Mile I travelled, giving me such ample Demonstrations to the
Contrary.  For this reason, I have been at the pains to render a
most exact and faithful Account of all the visible Signs of Riches,
which I met with in sixty Miles riding through the most publick
Roads, and the best part of the Kingdom.  First, As to Trade, I met
nine Carrs loaden with old musty shrivel'd Hydes, one Car-load of
Butter.  Four Jockeys driving eight Horses, all out of Case.  One
Cow and Calf, driven by a Man and his Wife.  Six tattered Families
flitting to be shipped off to the West-Indies.  A Colony of a
hundred and fifty Beggars, all repairing to people our Metropolis,
and by encreasing the number of Hands, to encrease it's Wealth, upon
the old Maxim, that People are the Riches of a Nation.  And
therefore ten thousand Mouths with hardly ten pair of Hands, or any
Work to employ them, will infallibly make us a rich, and flourishing
People.  2dly, Travellers enough, but seven in ten wanting Shirts
and Cravats; nine in ten going barefoot, and carrying their Brogues
and Stockens in their Hands.  One Woman in twenty having a Pillion,
the rest riding bare-backed.  Above two hundred Horsemen, with four
pair of Boots amongst them all.  Seventeen Saddles of Leather (the
rest being made of Straw) and most of their Garrons only shod
before.  I went into one of the principal Farmer's Houses, out of
Curiosity, and his whole Furniture consisted of two Blocks for
Stools, a Bench on each side the Fire-place made of Turf, six
Trenchers, one Bowl, a Pot, six Horn-Spoons, three Noggins, three
Blankets, one of which served the Man and Maid Servant; the others
the Master of the Family, his Wife and five Children.  A small
Churn, a wooden Candlestick, a broken Stick for a pair of Tongs.  In
the publick Towns, one third of the Inhabitants walking the Street
barefoot. Windows half built up with Stone, to save the expence of
Glass, the broken Panes up and down supplied by brown Paper, few
being able to afford white; in some places they were stopped with
Straw or Hay.  Another mark of our Riches, are the Signs at the
several Inns upon the Road, viz. In some a Staff stuck in the
Thatch, with a Turf at the End of it; a Staff in a Dunghill with a
white Rag wrapped about the Head; A Pole, where they can afford it,
with a Beesom at the Top.  An Oatmeal Cake on a Board in a Window;
And, at the principal Inns of the Road, I have observed the Signs
taken down and laid against the Wall near the Door, being taken from
their Post to prevent the shaking of the House down by the Wind.  In
short, I saw not one single House, in the best Town I travelled
through, which had not manifest Appearances of Beggary and Want.  I
could give many more Instances of our Wealth, but I hope these will
suffice for the End I propose.
		It may be objected, What use it is of to display the Poverty of
the Nation in the manner I have done.  In answer, I desire to know
for what Ends, and by what Persons, This new Opinion of our
flourishing State has of late been so Industriously advanced.  One
thing is certain, that the Advancers have either already found their
own Account, or have been heartily promised, or at least have been
entertained with hopes, by seeing such an Opinion pleasing to those
who have it in their power to reward.
		It is no doubt a very generous principle in any Person, to
rejoice in the felicities of a Nation, where themselves are
Strangers, or Sojourners.  But if it be found that the same Persons
on all other Occasions express a hatred and contempt of the Nation
and People in General, and hold it for a MaximÄÄThat the more such a
Country is humbled, the more their own will rise,  it need be no
longer a Secret, why such an Opinion and the Advancers of it are
encouraged.  And besides, if the Bayliff reports to his Master, that
the Ox is Fat and Strong, when in reality it can hardly carry it's
own Legs, is it not natural to think, that command will be given,
for a greater load to be put upon it.