                           NUMB. XIII.
          Sermo datur cunctis, animi sapientia paucis.
								Cato.

THERE is one kind of Conversation, which every one Aims at, and
every one almost fails in; It is that of Story-telling. I know not
any thing which engages our Attention with more Delight, when a
Person has a sufficient stock of Talents Necessary for it, such as
Good Sense, True Humour, a clear Head, a ready Command of Language,
and a Variety of proper Gesture, to give Life and Spirit to what he
says. If any of these be wanting, the Listners, instead of being
diverted, are made very uneasy; but if the Person be utterly Void of
them all, as it is very often the Case, he becomes a Nuissance to
the Company, and they are so long upon the Rack as he speaks. It has
sometimes fallen to my Lot, that a Man whom I never offended, has
laid me under the Persecution of a long Story, and Compelled me to
hear, what neither concerned himself, nor me, nor indeed any Body
else, and at the same time, he was as much in earnest, as if both
our Lives and Fortunes, and the Felicity of the whole Kingdom
depended upon what he said. A Humour very unaccountable! That a Man
shall be letting off Words for an hour or two, with a very innocent
Intention, and after he has done his best, only makes me uneasy, and
himself Contemptible.
		This natural Infirmity in Men, is not only confined to Story-
telling, but it appears likewise in every Essay whatsoever of their
Intellectuals. As for Instance; If one of these be a Preacher of
GOD's Word, by far fetched Criticisms, numerous Divisions, and Sub-
divisions, in-coherent Digressions, tedious Repetitions, useless
Remarks, Weak Answers to strong Objections, Inferences to no
Premises, tedious Exhortations, and many other Methods of
Protraction, he shall draw you out a Discourse for an hour and a
quarter, unequally dispensing Opium and Edification to his Flock,
there being seven Sleepers for one Hearer. If he be a Lawyer, he
shall, by an uncommon Way of Amusement, run away with a Subject,
which might be explained in two Minutes, and Dilate upon it two
hours, with such a Volubility of Tongue, such Affluence of
Expression, with something so like a good Style, and manner of
Thinking, that the Judges and Jury, attend with as much Gravity, as
if there were a continued Chain of true Reasoning, and solid
Argument. If he be a Member of the Upper or Lower House, he does not
proceed four Sentences, before the Rest know where to have him an
hour hence; in the mean time they Divert one another, in talking of
matters indifferent, till the Gentleman has done. I could give many
more Instances, but that I think these sufficient for my present
purpose; beside, least I should incur the like Reproach my self, I
must in a few Words, divide the Story-tellers, into the short, the
long, the marvellous, the Insipid, and the Delightful.
		The short Story-teller is he, who tells a great deal in few
Words, engages your Attention, pleases your Imagination, or quickly
excites your Laughter. Of this Rank were Xenophon, Plutarch,
Macrobius, among the Ancients. Ex. gr.
		When the Nephelai of Aristophanes, a Satyr upon Socrates was
Acting, his Friends desired him to retire, and hide behind them. No
said Socrates, I will stand up here, where I may be seen; for now I
think my self like a good Feast, and that every one has share of me.
vid. Feast of Xenophon.
		Brasidas the Famous Lacedemonian General caught a Mouse. It bit
him, and by that means made its escape. O Jupiter, said he, what
Creature so Contemptible, but may have it's Liberty if it will
Contend for it. vid. Plutarch. de profect. virtut.
		Diogenes having sailed to Chios, while it was under the
Dominion of the Persians, said in a full Assembly, the Inhabitants
were Fools for Erecting a Colledge, and Building Temples, since the
Persians would not allow them the privilege of making their own
Priests, but sent them over the most Illiterate of their Magi.
		Augustus while he was encamped with his Army, some where near
Mantua, was disturbed three Nights successively, by the hooting of
an Owl. Proclamation was made to the Soldiers, that whoever caught
the Offender, (so that he might be brought to Justice,) should have
an ample reward for his pains. Every one was Loyally engaged in the
pursuit of this Bird. At last, one more Vigilant than the rest,
found him in a Hollow-tree, so brought him in Triumph to the
Emperor, who saw him with the greatest Joy, but gave the Soldier a
sum of Money, so far below his Expectation, that he let the Owl fly
away that Instant, so true a Sense of Liberty, ran through the very
meanest of the Romans.  Macrob. Sat.
		The long Story-teller is one, who tells little or nothing in a
great number of Words; for this, many among the Moderns are famous,
particularly the French. And among our selves in this Kingdom we
have a vast Number of the better sort. As well as I can recollect
there are six Deans, four Judges, six and thirty Councellors at Law,
sixty five Attorneys, some few Fellows of the College, every
Alderman through the whole Nation, except one, all old Gentlemen,
and Ladies, without exception, five of the College of Physicians,
three or four Lords, two hundred Squires, and some few People of
distinction beside.
		I shall here insert a fragment of a long Story, by way of
example, containing 129 Words, which might have been said in these
ten following, viz. Nine Years ago I was to Preach for a Friend.
		I remember once, I think it was about seven Years agoÄÄNo I
lyeÄÄIt was about nine Years ago; for it was just when my Wife was
Lying in of Dicky, I remember particularly the Mid-wife would have
had me stay to keep her company, and it was the heaviest Day of
Storm and Rain, that I ever saw before, or since, but because I
engaged to Preach for a very Worthy Friend of mine, who lived about
twenty Miles off, and this being Saturday, I could not defer it to
the next Morning, though I had an excellent Nag, which could have
Rid it in three hours, I bought him of a Neighbour one Mr.
Masterson, yet because I would not put my Friend in a fright &c.
Thus far he went in one Minute. The Story lasted an Hour, so that
upon a fair computation he Spoke 7740 Words, instead of 600, by
which means he made use of 7140 more than he had occasion for. If a
right application were made of this hint, which I have given, it
would be of admirable Effect in the dispatch of publick business, as
well as private conversation, nay in the very Writing of Books, for
which I refer the reader to the Fable of the Bees, and the two
Elaborate Treatises, Written by the Learned Mr. HÄÄÄÄÄÄn.
		The marvellous, is he, who is fond of telling such things as no
Man alive, who has the least use of his reason, can believe. This
humour prevails very much in Travellers, and the Vain glorious, but
is very pardonable, because no Man's Faith is imposed upon, or if it
should be so, no ill consequence attends it. And beside, there is
some kind of Amusement in seeing a Person seriously extravagant,
expecting another should give Credit to what he knows impossible for
the greatest Dunce to Swallow.
		One of these, who had travelled to Damascus, told his Company,
that the Bees of that Country were as big as Turkies. Pray Sir, said
a Gentleman (begging pardon for the Question) How large were the
Hives? The same size with Ours, replied the Traveller. Very strange,
said the other. But how got they into their Hives? That is none of
my business, I Gad let them look to that.
		Another, who had Travelled as far as Persia, spoke to his Man
John, as he was returning home, telling him, how Necessary it was,
that a Traveller should draw things beyond the Life, or else, he
could not hope for that respect from his Country-Men, which
otherwise he might have. But at the same time, John, said he,
wheresoever I shall Dine, or Sup, keep you close to my Chair, and if
I do very much exceed the bounds of Truth, Punch me behind, that I
may correct my self. It happened on a Day, that he Dined with a
Certain Gentleman, who shall be Nameless, where he affirmed, that he
saw a Monkey in the Island Borneo, which had a Tail three-score
Yards long. John punched him. I am certain it is fifty at least.
John punched again. I believe to speak within compass, for I did not
measure it, it must have been forty. John gave him tother Touch. I
remember it lay over a Quick-set hedge, and therefore could not be
less than thirty. John at him again. I could take my Oath it was
twenty. This did not satisfy John. Upon which the Master turned
about in a Rage and said, Damn you for a Puppy, would you have the
Monkey without any Tail at all?
		Did not the famous Dr. Burnet, whose History is much of the
same stamp with his Travels, affirm that he saw an Elephant play at
Ball? And that grave Gentleman Ysbrant Ides, in his Travels through
Muscovy to China, assures us, that he saw Elephants, which were
taught to low like Cows, to yell like Tigers, and to mimick the
sounding of a Trumpet; but their highest Perfection, as he relates
it, was that of singing like Canary birds. However this is not so
marvellous (for Pliny relates Wonderful things of their Docility) as
what a Gentleman told a full Company in my hearing within this
fortnight. That he had seen a Show at Bristol, which was a Hare,
taught to stand upon her hind-legs and bow to all the Company, to
each Person in particular, with a very good Grace, and then proceed
to beat several Marches on the Drum. After this a Dog was set upon
the Table. His Master, the Show-man, made many grievous Complaints
against him, for High Crimes, and Misdemeanors. The Hare nits her
Brows, kindles her Eyes like a Lady, falls in a Passion, attacks the
Dog with all her Rage and Fury, as if she had been his Wife,
Scratches, bites, and cuffs him round the Table, till the Spectators
had enough for their Money.
		There is a certain Gentleman, now in Ireland, most remarkably
fond of the marvellous (but this through Vanity) who among an
infinite Number of the like Rarities, affirms, that he has a Carp,
in a Pond by it self, which has for twenty Years past, supplyed him
and his Friends, with a very good Dish of Fish, when they either
came to Dine, or Sup with him. And the manner of it is thus. The
Cook-maid goes with a large Kitchin-knife, which has a Whistle in
its handle; she no sooner blows it, but the Carp comes to the Sluice
and turns up its Belly, till she cuts out as much as she has
occasion for, and then away it scuds. The Chasm is filled in a Day
or two, and the Carp is as sound as a Roach, ready for the Knife
again. Now, if he and his Cook-maid took the most solemn Oath to the
truth of this, or the most sanctifyed Quaker should say YEA to it,
which is made equal to any Prelate's Oath, I would no more give
Credit to them, than I would to the Collonel, who said he was at the
Battle of Landen, where his Majesty King William, of Glorious
Memory, lost the Day. And this Collonel, being in the utmost
Confusion, fled among the rest. He Swore he had Galloped above two
miles, after his Horses Head was Shot off, by a Cannon-ball, which
he should not have missed, if the poor Creature had not stooped at a
River side to Drink.
		I should be glad to spend an Evening with half a dozen
Gentlemen of this uncommon Genius, for I am certain they would
improve upon one another, and thereby I might have an Oportunity of
observing how far the Marvellous could be carryed, or whether it has
any bounds at all.
		The insipid, who may not unfitly be called Soporifick, is one
who goes plodding on in a heavy dull Relation of unimportant Facts.
You Shall have an Account from such a Person of every Minute
Circumstance, which happened in the Company where he has been, what
he did, and what they did, what they said, and what he said, with a
Million of trite Phrases, with an and so beginning every Sentence.
And to make a long Story short. And as I was saying, with many more
expletives of equal Signification. It is a most dreadful thing, when
Men have neither the Talent of speaking, nor the Discretion of
holding their Tongues, and that, of all People, such as are least
qualifyed, are commonly the most earnest in this way of
Conversation.
		The Delightful Story-teller is one, who speaks not a Word too
much, or too little; who can, in a very careless manner, give a
great deal of pleasure to others, and desires rather to Divert, than
be Applauded; who shews good understanding, and a delicate turn of
Wit in every thing which comes from him; who can entertain his
Company better with the History of a Child and its Hobby-horse, than
one of the Soporificks can with an Account of Alexander, and
Bucephalus. Such a Person is not unlike a bad Reader who makes the
most ingenious Piece his own, that is, Dull and Detestable, by only
coming through his Mouth. But to return to the Delightful Story-
teller, I cannot describe him by any Words so well, as his own, and
therefore take the following Story to shew him in the most agreeable
light.
		A Mountebank in Leicester-Fields had drawn a huge Assembly
about him; among the rest a Fat unwieldy Fellow, half stifled in the
Press, would be every fit Crying out Lord! what a filthy Crowd is
here! pray good People give Way a litle! bless me! what a Devil has
raked this Rable together? Zounds what squeezing is this! Honest
Friend remove your Elbow. At last a Weaver, that stood next him,
could hold no longer. A Plague confound you, said he, for an Over
grown Sloven; and who, in the Devil's Name, helps to make up the
Crowd half so much as your self? Don't you consider (with a Pox)
that you take up more room with that Carcass than any five here? Is
not the Place as fit for us, as for you? bring your own Guts to a
reasonable Compass (and be Damnd) and then I'll engage we shall have
room enough for us all.
		This I have transcribed from a most Celebrated Author, with
great pleasure, and do earnestly recommend it to my Country-men, as
the true standard of Story-telling, both as to Style, and Manner,
and every thing requisite not only to please the Hearer, but to gain
his favour and Affection. And for the Time to come, be it Enacted,
that if any person, of what Rank soever, shall presume to exceed Six
Minutes in a Story, to hum or haw, use hyphens between his Words, or
Digressions, or offers to engage the Company to hear another Story
when he has done, or speaks one Word more than is Necessary, or is a
Stammerer in his Speech, that then it shall, and may be lawful for
any one of the said Company, or the whole Company together, to pull
out his, hers, or their Watches to make use of broad hints, or
inuendoes for him the said Story-teller, to break off, although
abruptly, otherwise he is to have a Glove, or Handkerchief, crammed
into his Mouth for the first default, and for the second, to be
kicked out of Company. 