                           NUMB. XIV.
                                
          Naturam expellas furcƒ licet usque recurret.
								Hor. 
								
THERE is an old Heathen Story, That Prometheus, who was a Potter in
Greece, took a frolick to turn all the Clay in his Shop into Men and
Women, separating the Fine from the Course, in order to distinguish
the Sexes. The Males were formed of a mixture Blue and Red, as being
of the toughest Consistence, fitter for Creatures destin'd to
Hardships, Labour, and difficult Enterprizes; the Females were
molded out of the most refined Stuff, much of the like substance
with China-ware, Transparent, and Brittle; designing them rather for
Show and Beauty, than to be of any real use in Life, farther than
that of Generation. By the Transparency he intended the Men might
see so plainly through them, that they should not be capable of
Hypocrisy, Falshood or Intrigue; and by their britleness, he taught
them, they were to be handled with a Tenderness suitable to their
delicacy of Constitution.
		It was pleasant enough, to see with what Contrivance and Order,
he disposed of his Journey-men in their several Appartments, and how
judiciously he assigned each of them his Work, according to his
Natural Capacity, and Talents, so that every Member, and part of the
Humane Frame, was finished with the utmost exactness and Beauty.
		In one Chamber you might see a Leg-shaper; in another a Skull-
roller; in a third an Arm-stretcher; in a fourth a Gut-winder; for
each Workman was distinguished by a proper Term of Art, such as
Knuckle-turner, Tooth-grinder, Rib-cooper, Muscle-maker, Tendon-
drawer, Paunch-blower, Vein-brancher, and such like; but Prometheus
himself made the Eyes, the Ears, and the Heart, which, because of
their Nice and Intricate Structure, were chiefly the business of a
Master-Workman. Beside this, he compleated the whole, by fitting and
joyning the several parts together, according to the best Symetry
and Proportion. The Statues are now upon their Legs. Life the chief
ingredient is wanting, Prometheus takes a Ferula in his Hand, (a
Reed of the Island Chios having an Oily Pith) steals up the Back-
stairs to Apollo's Lodgings, lights it Clandestinely at the Chariot
of the Sun, so down he creeps upon his Tip-toes to his Ware-house,
and in a very few Minutes, by an Application of the Flame to the
Nostrils of his Clay Images, sets them all a stalking and staring
through one another, but intirely insensible of what they were
doing. They looked so like the latter end of a Lord-Mayor's Feast,
he could not bear the sight of them. He then saw it was absolutely
Necessary to give them Passions, or Life would be an insipid thing,
and so from the Super-abundance of them in other Animals, he culls
out enough for his purpose, which he Blended and Tempered so well,
before Infusion, that his Men and Women became the most amiable
Creatures, that thought can conceive.
		Love was then like a pure Vestal-flame, not made up of sudden
Joy, Transports, and Extasies, but Constant, Friendly and
Benevolent.
		Anger did not appear horrid, and frightful by Turbulent
Emotions of the Breast, and Distortions of the Face, but preserved a
Dignity of Resentment in the Countenance, commanding a Reverential
awe in the Offender.
		Fear did not in the least encroach upon the Bounds of
Fortitude, by a slavish Dejection of Spirits, nor was it ever seen
upon any occasion, but as a Monitor, to prevent the doing of any
Action, which might be attended with Disgrace, or Repentance.
		In the same manner was every Passion and Appetite under the
best Regulation and Dominion of reason. The World would have been a
most delightful Scene had People continued in this Situation, but
alass! there can be no Happiness here without a mixture of misery.
		Prometheus is apprehended for his Theft, and Presumption, bound
fast in Chains to a Rock, with a Vulture to prey upon his Liver. His
Journey-men get Drunk for joy, they were now their own Masters,
during which interval, they fall to Man and Woman making with
excessive Precipitation and hurry. Now you might see a small Head
set upon a pair of broad Shoulders; a Nose too long, too short, too
thick, too small, or awry on the Face; A large heavy Carcass reard
upon a small pair of Spindle Shanks, by which means they became
bandy; a long Chin to a short Face; One Arm longer than the other;
Eyes too big for their Sockets; Mouths three times too wide, or too
narrow; every Part and Limb almost chosen and put together at
random. But to conclude the Farce, when they came to the Passion-
work, instead of blending, and tempering them in true Proportion,
they took them from the worst of Animals simply, and by guess. To
one was given the Rage and Fury of a Wolf. Hence came a most
Virulent, Persecuting, Malicious Villain; from whom has descended
those boistrous and outragious Pests of Society, who are every Day
disturbing our Peace; the only blessing we can enjoy upon Earth. To
another the Poison and Rancour of a Toad, from whom sprang the
revengeful, who upon the least touch of Offence, are ever upon the
watch, to ruin the inadvertent. To another the Subtilty and Cunning
of a Fox, from whom we trace the Politician, who turns all the
motions of his Soul to Seducing, Betraying, Surprizing, Fair-
Promises with foul Intentions, perpetual Stratagems to his own
advantage, under the Specious appearance of the publick Good.
		To another the Alertness of a Monkey. He begat a large family
of Jibers, Buffoons, and Mimicks; these are a numerous breed and
dispersed over the Face of the whole Earth. The chief business of
their Lives is to make People laugh at one another, and not to spare
even their nearest Friends; who while they are Copying the
imperfections of others, bring themselves to be Originals. You may
distinguish this happy Race by their Hawk-noses, One Eye less than
t'other, and a perpetual Sneer, which by repeated Habit, becomes
inseparable from their Faces. To another the Pride of a Peacock. He
turns Beau, stiches all the Tinsel about him, that he can; hangs a
Tayl to his Head, and so Walks through the World. To another the
Gluttony, Laziness and Luxury of a Hog. From him are descended your
pamper'd Citizens, and others, whose chief exercise consists in
Eating and Drinking: They are very easily distinguished by the
Plumpness and Rotundity of their Dewlap, the Torosity of their Necks
and Breasts, and the prominence of their Abdomen. Numberless are the
Instances might be given of the predominance of Brutes, thus
occasioned in Men, but that I hasten to give a Summary Account of
the Animals, chiefly chosen by these Journey-men, to give proper
accomplishments to the other Sex, viz. Cats, Ferets, Weazels,
Vipers, Magpies, Geese, Wagtails, Rats, Stoats, Ratle-Sneaks, Wasps,
Hornets, and some few others. It is needless to inform the Reader,
what Qualities were infused from these, when he can behold them so
plainly in one half or more of his Female Acquaintance. And I dare
venture to say, that you can hardly go into a Family, where you may
not distinguish some one Lady eminently remarkable for a lively
resemblance to one, or more of the aforesaid Animals. Upon the
whole, I shall make this Remark, that the Handy-work of Prometheus,
and their Progeny, are to be distinguished with the greatest ease,
from that of his Journey-men; his being all Humane, Benevolent,
Easy, Affable, Good-humoured, Charitable and Friendly; whereas those
of his Journey-men are Cruel, Malicious, Turbulent, Morose, Ill-
natured, Snarling, Quarrelsome, Pragmatical, Covetous, and Inhuman,
which we dayly experience among the great Vulgar and the Small, nor
can all the Power of Art, or Education, intirely Wash away the Dirt
of the Journey-man's Palm, or quite Abolish, or restrain that
Exuberance of wrong Passions which are owing to the cause already
assigned. And I will say farther, that I know nothing else in
Nature, but what may by Cultivation, or Chymistry change it's
Nature, such Persons only excepted, who have had a wrong Impression
at first, and Human Excrements; But this being of too foul a Nature,
to bear a Dissertation in prose, I shall Transcribe it, as it was
Cooked up in verse, for the Taste of the Polite, being a very fit
Emblem, to explain this Great, and useful Maxim, That there is no
method, as yet found out, to change Natural Inclination.
		
		
                      THE TALE OF THE TÄÄD.

A Pastry-Cook once molded up a TÄÄÄÄ
(You may beleive me when I give my Word)
With nice Ingredients of the fragrant kind,
And Sugar of the best, right Doubl' refin'd,
He blends them all; for he was fully bent                       
Quite to annihilate it's Taste, and Scent.
With Out-stretcht Arms, he twirls the Rolling-Pin,
And spreads the yielding Ordure smooth and Thin.
'Twas not to save his Flow'r, but shew his Art,
Of such foul Dough to make a sav'ry Tart.                      
He heats his Ov'n with care, and bak'd it well,
But still the Crust's offensive to the Smell;
The Cook was vext to see himself so foil'd,
So Works it to a Dumpling, which he boyl'd;
Now out it comes, and if it stunk before,                      
It stinks full twenty times as much, and more.
He breaks fresh Eggs, converts it into Batter,
Works them with Spoon about a Wooden-Platter,
To true consistence, such as Cook-maids make
At Shrovetide, when they toss the pliant Cake.                 
In vain he twirls the Pan, the more it fries,
The more the Nauseous, fetid Vapours rise.
Resolv'd to make it still a sav'ry bit,
He takes the Pan-Cake, rolls it round a Spit,
Winds up the Jack, and sets it to the fire,                    
But roasting rais'd it's pois'nous fumes the high'r.
Offended much (although it was his own,)
At length he throws it, where it shou'd be thrown,
And in a Passion, storming loud, he cry'd,
If neither bak'd, nor boyl'd, nor roast, nor fry'd,            
Can thy offensive Hellish Taint reclaim,
Go to the filthy Jakes from whence you came.
                                
                           THE MORAL.
                                
THIS Tale requires but one short Application,
It fits all Upstart Scoundrels in each Nation,
Minions of Fortune, Wise Men's jest in Pow'r,
Like Weeds on Dunghils Stinking, Rank, and Sour.