                            NUMB. XI.
                                
           ÄÄUt dehinc Speciosa miracula promat.  Hor.
                                
                                
		Mr. Intelligencer,
HAVING but lately met with the following Proposals in a Letter to
the Author of the London-Journal, bearing Date March 30th. 1728. 
And having the greatest Veneration and Esteem for the Writer of it,
as well as the best Opinion of his vast Abilities for the
Undertaking; I hope, I do not come too late, in giving a helping
Hand to spread it abroad for the Author's Advantage, and Benefit of
the Learned World, by giving it a Poetick Dress, which I think would
have been much better from his own Pen, had he been in a humour of
versifying; for he has the most extraordinary Talents that way of
any Man now living, except A. P.  There is a turn and beauty of
Language, as well as Thought, carry'd on with the greatest
Perspicuity thro' the whole, much in the manner of Voiture.  This I
own has been of singular Advantage to me; for the easiness and
politeness of his Prose, contributed much to the smoothness and
Musick of my Verses, purely owing to my Transferring as much of his
Expression, as I possibly could, into my Performance.  From this
elegant Specimen of his, the World will see what they are to expect
from him; at least a vast deal of Orthodox Divinity, Critical
Remarks, Solid Argument, wholesome Instruction, clear Information,
with an entertaining beauty of Style, peculiar to the Great and
Learned S---d---l---y.  And now I have named him, I need say no more
to recommend the Work but what follows.

				Your great Admirer and Well-wisher,
								A. B.
								
								
Ä

                             Church-street, Soho, March 30, 1728.
                                                                 
              To the Author of the LONDON JOURNAL.
                                
		SIR,
		
I have published the Specimen of a Book, entitled, An Universal View
of all the eminent Writers on the Holy Scriptures; being a
Collection of the Dissertations, Explications, and Opinions, of
learned Men in all Ages, concerning the difficult Passages and
obscure Texts of the Bible; and of whatsoever is to be met with in
Profane Authors, which may contribute towards the better
Understanding of Them.
		I beg the Favour of communicating to the World, by means of
your Paper, what I think at present necessary to say, towards the
unfolding my Design in this Work, and to answer the Objections which
I have heard made against it.
		Most of the Articles whereof I treat, are, at one time or
other, made the Subject of common Discourse; and too many Persons,
who debate in private on these Points, are unfurnish'd with proper
and rational Materials for such Conversation.
		These Observations occasion'd my forming a Design, to collect,
into one View, the chief Sentiments of the best Authors, in most
Languages, on those Subjects, for the Benefit only of common
Discourse and Instruction: But when I came to reflect more closely
on the Matter, I found, besides my obliging the Generality of
Readers, and my enlarging the Fund of Scriptural Knowledge amongst
the Unlearned, that I was in a fair way of doing Service to the
Learned and more Intelligent Part of my Countrymen likewise;
because, by means of this Work, they wou'd save abundance of Time,
which is now lost, in turning over from Book to Book, and from Page
to Page, the numberless Authors, which I shall quote.  And if any of
them are inclin'd to consult the Originals, I promise to refer them
faithfully to the Line and Page; and I began further to conceive,
that I should oblige many amongst the Learned, by saving them
abundance of Cost and Expence in purchasing several Books, which it
will be sufficient for them to see and hear of, in the Quotations of
my View.
		The Reader is desir'd to observe, that there is no
Bibliotheque, no Collection of this kind, so compleat, now extant,
in any Language, as I shall shew in my general Preface to the Whole;
and it must not be forgot, that the English want such a Collection,
more than most other Christian Nations.
		All the Objections, which I have heard, will be answer'd by
what follows; whereby those Persons, particularly, will find
themselves mistaken, who imagine, that the Immensity of the Work
ought both to terrifie them from encouraging, and me from
undertaking it.  For I shall not go thro' the whole Bible Verse by
Verse, as in the Specimen.  MOSES's first Chapter is an entire
Piece, on the Creation, and I could not omit one Line of it; but my
subsequent Articles will be taken from Books, Chapters and Verses,
very distant often from one another: Nay, I shall leave whole Books
of the Bible untouch'd, viz. such as are Moral or Poetical only, or
meerly Historical; and I shall take Notice of no Parts of those
Books, but such as are very Curious and Intricate, and have
occasion'd something extraordinary to be said on them.  Besides, it
must be considered that I shall omit numberless Authors, on every
Subject; and that, without any dread of displeasing, or hopes of
pleasing any Sects or Parties of People; and I shall only collect
from the most received Authors on every Article, and such as none
shall except against for Learning or Abilities, whatever they may do
for Opinion.
		The Sentiments of the Fathers and antient Commentators will be
sufficiently answer'd for out of POOLE's Synopsis; for it wou'd be
an endless, idle and dusty Work, to contract all their heavy and
voluminous Writings; but whatever may be still thought wanting of
these Antients, will be supplied even to Satiety, from PETAVIUS,
CALMET, and others. Further, nothing could be so disagreeable either
to me or to the Reader, as to give a full Detail of all the Stuff
that was published Abroad about the Time of, and a long while after
the Reformation; and it wou'd be more nauseous still to revive what
was writ at Home, from the Beginning of the last Century till
towards the End of it, and indeed for some part of the Century
before it.
		But, God be thanked, there wanted not great Genius's, who wrote
in several Places at the same Times; and if I raise the Work to Two
large Vols. in Folio, with what the learned and bright Part of
Mankind alone have left us, I may reasonably expect Forgiveness for
not swelling my Labours into Four or more Folio's, by interspersing
tedious Observations, and ridiculous, wild and low Expositions.
		I shall print the Two Vols. within a reasonable time after my
Subscriptions come in; for I have my Additions and Amendments, that
are to compleat the Specimen, ready and prepared: which Specimen
being to be reprinted for the Body of the Work, will, together with
what Collections I have by me for succeeding Articles, give me all
imaginable Advantage of the Printer, who cannot work at the Press so
fast as I can supply him with Copy; besides which I have procur'd
the Assistance of some learned Persons to collect for me, and have
got so diligent and expert an Amanuensis, to transcribe for the
Press, that it can never stand still.
		I beg leave to remark, that besides the Benefit which every
English Reader, of common Sense, will reap by this Undertaking, it
will be of more special Service to young Divines, who may hereby at
the same time procure variety of Learning, and indulge a studious
Curiosity, at a small Expence; and who, by means of this Collection,
will be sufficiently furnish'd with a Bibliotheca Sacra; to which,
if they add only POOLE's English Annotations on the Old, and
HAMMOND's Exposition of the New Testament, they will need few other
Books for some Years, unless it be a Concordance to understand
Scripture.
		As to those who object, that such a Variety of Opinions on one
Subject, as I shall always produce, will rather confound than
satisfy People, I beg leave to disagree with them: because every
intelligent Person can judge for himself; and because those of
meaner Capacities may consult others of better Understanding; every
thing being laid before them in plain English.
		And, in Truth, I cannot but esteem such a Work, to be, in
justice, due to the Inhabitants of our Islands.  Monsieur CALMET
gives the following reason for publishing Nine Volumes in Folio,
containing, not only, his own Comments, but Variety of Opinions,
concerning the difficult Parts of the Bible, viz. that his
Countrymen might, now, read in their own Language, what has hitherto
been conceal'd from them in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin.
		A noble Attempt in a Papist! and his Work is so well executed,
that I wish Encouragement were given to have it all translated into
English.
		However, tho' CALMET's Religion, and the Laws of his Country,
would not permit him to quote so freely as he ought; yet, thank God,
we have that Liberty here; and, I hope, the use I make of it won't
want Encouragement, since my Design is the same with CALMET's, viz.
publick Information.
		His Religion, indeed, has no way to subsist, but by the Benefit
of unknown Tongues; but the Truth of Holy Scripture, and of the
Protestant Religion, want no learned Veils, or Foreign Couvertures.
		English Popery is much more abominable, than the Romish!
		I wou'd now have it remembred, that I shall produce nothing but
what has been publish'd already in some Language or other; unless,
perhaps, some private Piece, very new and extremely curious, should
fall in my way.  And I would have those Persons who are too fearful
of my encouraging Scepticism by these Books, believe, that I shall
insert no Opinions which give Offence either to Natural, or Reveal'd
Religion; my intent being to establish Truth, which can only be done
by comparing different Sentiments on the same Subject.
		To let the Reader further into the Nature of my Design, I here
present him with the Titles of my Articles, from the Creation, to
the Deluge; by which he may form a Judgment of the rest.
		
			1.  Of the Creation.
			2.  Of the Sabbath.
			3.  Of the Paradisaical State.
			4.  Of the Fall.
			5.  Of Sacrifice.
			6.  Of Cain and Enoch.
			7.  Of the Depravity of Men, before the Flood.
			8.  Of the Deluge.
			
		I cannot make an End, without observing, that I shall neither
oppose, nor interfere with the Proposals of Dr. INNES.  The Doctor's
Work (as I am told) is wholly Moral; mine is wholly  Critical: He
designs to make Men Better; my Aim is to make them Wiser.
		The Doctor resolves, (as I hear) to pass by what ever has,
hitherto, been written in the Moral way, on the Bible, and to
moralize anew on it himself.  I am in a quite different Train: I
shall publish little or nothing of my own, nor shall I produce any
one Author in the Doctor's way of Proceeding.
					I am, SIR,
					Your humble Servant,
						JONATHAN SMEDLEY.
						
						
YOU that would read the Bible turn all
To April 6 the London Journal,
And by a Letter there you'll see
How much the Text will owe to me.
Five thousand Years and moreÄÄ'tis odd           5
None cou'd explain the Word of GOD!
Of all the Learned, in all Ages,
Thro' all their long, laborious Pages,
'Till I, the Top of IRISH DEANS,
Have made it out with Wond'rous pains.          10
I've Read the Dev'l and all of Books,
The World may Read 'em in my looks:
Above ten Waggon load at least,
Within my Skull in Order place't;
From thence to sally forth anew,                15
One Universal single View.
I've likewise ransack'd Books prophane,
Which I shall muster, to explain
Whate'er is hid obscure, perplext,
As plain as Pike-staff, ev'ry Text.             20
Most Articles, whereof I treat,
Have been the Subject of Debate,
Full often o'er a Pot of Ale,
When I was Rabby at Kinsale.
But then, for want of Antient Learning,         25
The Scripture Sense not well discerning,
Our Nights were past in great Confusion,
No mortal making one Conclusion.
To find a Remedy for this,
I hope it will not be amiss,                    30
To furnish my Associates quondam,
(That they no more dispute at randome)
With choice Collected Dissertations,
Answers, Rejoinders, Replications,
That each may have enough to say,               35
And hold the Scripture his own way.
Profecto legi plus quam satis,
More Languages than Mithridates.
All which I Learn'd (as will appear
Since I left Ireland) in one Year;              40
Where such, as knew my stock, can tell,
I scarcely cou'd Read English well.
In this one Book I've done much more,
Than all the World has done before;
No Bibliotheque, that is now extant,            45
Has half so well explain'd a Text on't;
With so much ease I can Command it,
The greatest Dunce may understand it.
If any thinks the Work too long
For one Man's Head, I'll shew he's wrong;       50
Because the way, which I intend
Will bring it quickly to an end.
In Chapters here and there I'll dip,
Whole Books not worth the Reading Skip,
Whate'er's Poetical, or Moral,                  55
To them I have a mortal Quarrel;
What meerly is Historical,
I shall not touch upon at all;
You'll see me such a Bible-trimmer,
That I'll reduce it to a Primmer.               60
As for the Fathers, they are all met,
In Pool, Petavius, and Calmet,
I've Read 'em Page by Page, and find
No gleaning Work for me behind.
And when I cut one Folio short,                 65
Will not the Reader thank me for't?
For I have so much Antient Lore
I could have swell'd 'em into four.
We wait Subscriptions coming in,
We're just beginning to begin;                  70
'Tis this the Printer's sole pretence is,
We've Paper, Types, Amanuensis;
And all, but what few Pence are owing,
To set the Press and me a going.
One thing I beg leave to remarkÄÄÄÄ             75
For Young Divines, who're in the dark;
And English Readers, who are straining
In every Chapter for a meaning;
For Men of Letters, and good Sense,
Here's Learning at a small expence;             80
They'll find my Books, when well examin'd,
Will do by Help of Pool and Hammond;
And if the Parsons can afford once
A Bible with a large Concordance,
I know not any thing they lack                  85
Except it be an Almanack.
In my Compilement they shall see
Opinions, great Variety!
That every Schismatick with ease,
May find a Gloss himself to please.             90
Now Monsieur Calmet (like an Olio)
Disht up nine Tracts of his in Folio.
To all his Country-Men reveal'd,
What Latin, Hebrew, Greek conceal'd,
So plain in French, hat every Peasant           95
Breaks out with Rapture in the praise on't.
O what a Glorious learned heap is't!
A wond'rous Author for a Papist!
I wish in English 'twere Translated,
And mine to wipe his Rev'rence fated.          100
To what Perfection had he brought
His Books, with Liberty of Thought!
But all along he's Crampt I find,
And therefore durst not speak his mind;
For had he said a Word 'gainst Popery,         105
The Laws wou'd turn his Neck with Rope a wry.
Thus Foreign Pop'ry is a Curse,
But English Popery is worse.
		Remember all, before you're told,
That what I Write for New, is Old;             110
If any Man of Reading looks
He'll find it all in other Books;
As I'm an Orthodox Divine,
I've stol'n my Comments ev'ry line.
There's all the wrangling Tracts I know        115
Collected here both con and pro,
So well dispos'd of, ev'ry Man
May find the Truth out, if he can.
From the Creation to the Flood
(To shew you that my Work is good)             120
I've drawn a Sketch, as I thought best,
To form a Judgment of the rest.
A word or two before I close all,
One Doctor Innis makes Proposal,
A poor Insipid Moral Tool,                     125
He'd have the World to walk by Rule.
He thinks I've nought to do, but nose him,
I'd see him hang'd e'er I oppose him.
He strives to make Men good, but I Sir
Resolve to make them worse, and Wiser.         130
It ever was my way to love
The Serpent, rather than the Dove.
The Doctor, by a vain Pretension,
Depends upon his own Invention;
But I, who always liv'd on loan,               135
Shan't Write a Sentence of my own.


		SIR,
I Have inserted your Poem, and think you have done your self great
Honour, by shewing so much Regard to a Person remarkably Eminent;
besides a most laudable Zeal in recommending a Work, which is likely
to prove of the Greatest Advantage to our Church in general, in this
degenerate Age of Prophaness and Infidelity.

				I am with due Respect Your's, &c.
				
					The Intelligencer.