"A Sermon Preached  in the Ersh Language to  His  Majesty  First Highland  Regiment of Foot,  Commanded by Lordfohn  Murray, At   their  Cantonment at Camberwell, on the 18th Day  of  December  1745. Being  appointed as  a Solemn Fast."
"God,  in dispensing   his  Judgments  and  mercies  to humankind,  no  doubt pays  regard  to  their  different  characters;  and  though  we  are  not  rashly to Judge  of men  merit  by their  misfortunes  in  particular  instances, yet sacred  history  gives sufficient  authority to presume that public  calamities are the effect  of public corruption,  and that there  is no way of thoroughly averting  the  punishment  but  by  a general  reformation  of  manners."
"It  is from  this  consideration  that  at  particular  times,  but  more  especially  in times of general distress, the national authority  is interposed  to admonish every congregation  and society of men  to humble  themselves before  God in a solemn  and open  manner,  that  he may avert  his deserved Judgments from  us and bless our resolutions towards a better conduct  for  the  future."
"As our country  is  at present torn with domestic disorder, we can do no less in duty to our God, to our fellow-countrymen,  and to our own souls, than heartily  to  comply with  the  public  appointment,  in  humbling  ourselves before  God,  in  praying  that  he  would  forgive  our  sins,  and  disappoint the  malice  of our  enemies. This  is our  duty  as men  and  Christians,  in common  with  all  the  members  of  the  society  to which  we  belong. As I have had occasion to illustrate this on a former  occasion, I shall at present turn  your  attention  to your  peculiar  duty  as men who  are  in  the  more particular  manner  set  apart  for  the  defense  of your  country;  to  whose hands  the  sword  is entrusted  and whose  business  it  is, not  only by your pious and  regular behavior to draw down the blessing of God  upon  your country and contribute  to its peace and  good order, but more  particularly to repel the assaults of its enemies by the blessing of God on your  fidelity and courage. It  was  with  a  view to this that  I  made choice to these words of Joab,   in which  he addressed  himself to the army  of  Israel  when  they were ready to engage with their enemies. And it is to be hoped  that the  motive he uses to whet their resolution  may have the like effect  upon you. If it be made  to  appear  that your  people  and  the  cities of your  God  are  attacked and endangered  in their most valuable concerns, I doubt not but you will think the occasion  calls upon you to play the men, and exert your  utmost vigor  in their  defense."
"In  the first place, shall endeavor  to  make  it appear that  it  is the  duty of  every  man  to  defend  his  country  when  in  danger.  Secondly,  that  the present  circumstances  of our  country  render  it the  indispensible  duty of every man, and yours  in particular, to be active in its defense."
"In  the first  place,  by  a man  country  is meant  that  society  or  united body of men of which he is a member, sharing all the advantages that arise from  such  a union. Not  merely  the  soil  or  spot  on which  he was  born, as  it  is  too  often  understood  by  many. On  this  supposition,  the  love  of one  country,  which  has  always  been  esteemed  the  most  manly  virtue, might be rejected  as a mere whim or prejudice. No: the name of country bears a meaning  more  sacred  and  interesting.  It was  not  for  the  place of their  nativity  úia  Joab   exhorts  the  Israelites   to play the  men;  it  is for  their people  and  for  the  cities of their  God. As if  he  had  said, God  has already with a mighty arm  relieved your fathers  from  oppression, he made  them free  and  established  them  into a well-ordered  society; he entrusted  them as  keepers  of  his  oracles,  the  blessed  effects  of  which  deliverance  and establishment  you  now  feel. Do not the  laws he  gave you  serve to direct the  conduct  of every  individual  and  to  defend  you  from  the  violence  of others? Are you not instructed in the knowledge of the True God and have you  not  his worship  established  in  the  cities?"
"Take  courage   then,   and play the  Men for  your  People  and for   the  Cities of your God."
"Suffer  not  that  people, whom  he has established  in peace and  liberty, to be scattered over the  face of the  earth,  his  laws to  be  canceled  or  his worship  corrupted.  It  is in a state of society alone that  man  can prosper  either  in  his civil or  religious interests.  We  do  not  subject  ourselves  to  government  merely  to  satisfy the  lusts of those who  are fond  of power.  It  is because  society, under  the regulation of  laws  and government,  is the  state for which  providence  has calculated  our  natures. No  sooner  do  we  make  our  entrance  here,  than we  stand  in  need  of assistance  of others; and were  it not continued,  and afterwards  reciprocally given and received through the whole of our lives, our  being  here  was  forlorn  and  comfortless  indeed.  Laws  are  necessary to secure our persons and properties, to protect the weak and restrain  the violent. Kings and judges become necessary to put those laws in execution and to apply their  sanctions when  necessary  for  the good  of  society."
"Our religious  interests  too  are  maintained  under  the  influence  of sound  and wholesome  laws; and  the very name  of  it must  soon  perish  and  dwindle away amongst  men  were  it not  for  the union  into  societies. As the assistance of others  is necessary to  supply  us with  the  outward  conveniences of  life,  so it is likewise to instruct our minds and communicate what God has been pleased to reveal concerning himself  Had not particular men  in nations and countries been appointed to preserve the Oracles of God, our fathers  [would have] received the gospel  in  vain and we never should have heard  the  glad tidings of  salvation  through Jesus  Christ.  In  short,  it  is to society and mutual intercourse  that we owe the advancement of sciences, arts,  improvements,  and  everything  that  is conducive  to the welfare  of  a reasonable  being."
"If society is a thing so indispensably necessary to human  nature, and if every individual member reaps such inestimable advantages from  their joint  confederacy,  we  can  no  longer  hesitate  in  drawing  our conclusion  that  each member  is bound, both  on  account  of  his  own  and the public welfare, to maintain that league from which he derives so many blessings. Or  shall we say  that  a  man  is  to lie idle and draw  his  nourishment from  that stock to which he contributes  nothing? Must he not contribute to the support  of that establishment  to which  alone he  owes the  security of his own person and property? The contrary conduct  is not only  unjust, but the height of folly and madness: For if he allows that roof which shelters him  to be destroyed, he himself must  suffer.  If any particular  person is  mean  and  dishonest  enough  to desert  the  public  interest  in  times  of danger,  his cunning ought  to  conceal  his sentiments  from  others  lest  his example  might  induce  them  likewise  to  throw  off  the  restraint  of  laws and  good  order  and  deprive  him  of that  security  and  those  privileges  he was unworthy to enjoy.  In  times of peace and  tranquility every man  may sufficiently  contribute  to the support  of the common  interest by keeping within  the sphere of  his  particular  profession;  but more  may be requisite when the public  is in danger. Thus you  are doubly bound  to defend  your country  as  men  who  share  the  influence  of  its  laws,  in  common  with others, and as men who are set apart and maintained  by the public for this very end. But I proceed to show, in the second place."
"That the present circumstances of your country render it the indispensible duty of every man, and yours in particular, to exert your utmost vigor in its defense."
"To  prove this, no more  will  be necessary than to show that every subject of Britain enjoys all the advantages that arise from  a  well-ordered  state and that this good order of government  is in danger of being subverted  unless we  exert  ourselves  in  its support.  If any  man  is insensible  of the  advantages that we enjoy  as subjects  of Britain  it must be owing to his want of experience  and  his being a stranger  to oppression. Were we, on  the  one hand, to behold the miserable confusion  that attends anarchy, or to groan under  the  insolence  and  pride  of  a  tyrant,  we  might  then  learn  to value our  present  happiness  at  a higher  rate. Were we  to  behold  violence  and rapine in the room ofjustice,  or  [to see] the unrestrained  lusts of a tyrant take the  place of  law  and  equity, we might thence  learn to consider  security  and  liberty  as a treasure  not  too  dearly bought  at the  expense of our blood. This our  fathers  felt,  and  they  have  left  us the  fruits  of their  toils in  our  present  happy  establishment.  Our  laws  secure  our  civil  liberties and  shelter  us  from  injury;  no man, however weak or  despicable,  can be injured without redress, nor can the most powerful  injure, without  being called  to  an account. Our  king, in whose wise  and  mild  government we have all cause to rejoice, can make no  law  without the advice of his people  given by their representatives  in parliament. And indeed the whole nation almost  shows  how well  they  are  satisfied  with  his  government,  by  that alacrity with which  they contribute  support  to the  king and  our  present constitution.  Nor  is  it  to  be  wondered  at:  For  where  are  the  instances of  his  oppression,  or  where  is  he  that  can  tax  him  with  any  encroachment on  his people  privileges? Are not our  laws duly executed  and  our persons and properties secured, the happy effects  of which administration we behold  in that peace and independence which prevails in every part of our  country?  Nor  are we  less  happy  in  our  religious  establishment.  We have Moses and the prophets, the gospel of Christ, and the writings of his apostles  put  into our  hands with  freedom  to peruse  them;  there  to  learn our duty and with our own  eyes perceive what God requireth of  us."
"Our worship  is not  clogged  superstitious  ceremonies  calculated  to strike the  simple with  awe or  raise the  power  of  a  designing men. We have no whimsical doctrines for which there  is no foundation  in scripture. We are not bound  to yield implicit faith  to the dictates of others. Every man  may openly  profess  his  sentiments,  unless  manifestly  subversive  of the  state, without  any  apprehensions  of  the  rack  or  gibbet;  means  of  instruction frequently  used  even  where  Christianity  is  pretended  to.  Care  is  taken that  we  be  instructed  in  religion  in  our  youth  and  the  duties  of  it  afterwards  inculcated  through  the whole  of our  lives. In  that  particular,  that part  of  the  country  from  which  we  come  is  peculiarly  indebted  to  the king and government.  Free schools  have been  erected  for  the  instruction of  the  poor  and  ministers  supported  at the  expense of the crown. Where churches were thinly scattered,  [the king and government  saw to it]  that the  knowledge  of  religion  and  the worship  of God  might  be wanting  in no part  of  the  kingdom. How well some of them  have repaid  this care, let their own consciences answer. Blessed be God, we are not accountable for  the conduct  of others, nor  need we blush while our  own  character as faithful  and honest  [men]  remains entire.
What has now been mentioned  is a short review of privileges you  enjoy under the present government; your persons  and liberty  is secured; your religion  is established  pure and  undefiled  according to the Word of God.
What  change  for  the  better  this  rebellion  would  bring  is not  easily conceived. Do the authors of it propose to give greater security  to  our persons, to better our  laws, or reform  our  religion? Neither  can be expected  from the rapacious tempers of some, nor the avowed principles of  others.
Would they only substitute another  in the room  of the best of kings? This would argue them mad and declared enemies to their country: For what purpose rebel  against  one  whose  clemency  and  equitable  government  they  have experienced,  in  favor  of another,  of whom  nothing farther  is known  but that  he  has  been  bred  in  the  schools  of  tyranny  and  superstition?  The madness  of  such  a procedure  is  open  and  palpable,  or  looks  rather  like the daring attempt of desperate men  to advance their own  fortunes  at the expense  of their  country.  Shall we suppose  that, contrary  to the  declared inclination of this kingdom, they subvert the present government  by  force; where  then  is our  security? Where are our  laws and  privileges? Force has already  taken  place; we  are  already  enslaved  into  compliance with  their demands. And on what grounds can we presume but that they will maintain, by the measures of tyranny and oppression, what they have gained by force? Can we suppose that those who  [have] contemned  laws and justice in  making their acquisition will peaceably yield to these rules when  their success  shall  give  them  more  license  to  transgress?  As we  have  all  the reason in the world to dread the consequences of their  success,  so  we have reason  to  bless God  that  he  has put  the  means  in  his  majesty  hands  to scourge their  insolence and protect this nation  from  the ruin  they intend it. It  is to be hoped  that  we,  upon  this occasion, will contribute our share towards  those  ends  as we  tender  the   Good of  our  People,   and  the Cities  of our Cod.
The  single  circumstance  of  its being hatched  and  supported  by the declared enemies of our country is sufficient  to obviate the most specious pretences  made  in  favor  of  this  rebellion.  Are  the  French,   against  whom we  have spent our  blood  and  treasure, whom  you  have encountered  like enemies in the  field,  now become our friends? Are they concerned  for our welfare?  Do they propose to rectify what  is amiss in our government  and render us happy at their own expense?  Let who will be ensnared  by such pretences, sure the very mention  of  it  is enough to rouse the  indignation of a reasonable man; and the more so, if it has misled any of those we may have  formerly  deemed  worthy  of our  friendship  and  acquaintance.'''  By what arguments  can they prove that the  French   have no design to extend their  dominion,  their  religion,  and  policy  to  this  island?  Does  any  part of  their  former  conduct  authorize  us  to  form  such judgment?  If  they have no such design,  if they are quite disinterested  in the present cause, there  must  be  some  uncommon  change  in  their  policy;  and  the  usage they now intend  [for]  the rebels  oîBritain,  very different  [from]  that they have shown towards others who relied on them. They too will  feel  in the consequences  that  they  are  only  made  tools  to  serve  the  purposes  very different  from  the ends they propose to themselves.
But  even  let us  suppose  the  French   only  meant  to  seat this  Pretender on  the throne   Britain  and  leave him  afterwards  the  free  management of the kingdom: What can we expect in our civil religious concerns  from a popish king but the subversion  of liberty and entire corruption  of our religion? May we not expect to have our bibles snatched from our hands, ourselves  dragged  to  the  stake  and  the  gibbet  for  perusing  the Word  of God? Ignorance and superstition again resume their tyranny in our lands and  we  and  our  posterity  bend  to  the  unnatural  dominion  of  priests and churchmen?  But to quiet  these our  apprehensions, we  are told  our future  mock  prince  has  no  regard  to  religion  at  all.  How  agreeable  a prospect it is to live under the dominion of an atheist, let those who have any  regard  to  religion  or virtue  Judge!
The  very name  of  religion  must be lost under such a government, or that form  established which is most conducive to the ends of  the  prince, not that which  is most  agreeable to the Word of God. And  is there any that bids fairer to enslave  humankind than  popery,  or  any  that  a  designing,  ambitious  prince  would  sooner pitch upon, for that end? But granting he had no personal attachment  to the Church  of  Rome,  yet  he  lies under  the  highest  obligations  to  those who  have; and  the establishment  of it here must  have been  a condition stipulated  in  order  to  engage  them  in  his  interest.  Has  he  not  received his  early  instructions  form  the  zealous  supporters  of  popery,  and  does not  he come  from  these  schools to claim the  sovereign direction  of our affairs  civil  and  religious?  Sure  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  Court of  Rome,  who  consider  us  as their  enemies  and  our  religious  constitution  as  directly  subversive  of  their  authority,  will  take  this  and  every opportunity  to  sap  the  foundation  of  our  religion  and  policy  in  order to  subject  us  again  to  their  dominion.  These  things  are  so  open  and palpable  that  it must  argue very little concern  about  religion to  hesitate in  the  matter. The  mere  mention  of  a  change  in our  government  from France  or  Rome  is enough to create suspicions and rouse the spirits of the most  secure. But  allowing there were  no  such weighty prejudice  in  the case,  yet the very presence that is made to support this Pretender claim is enough to fill every breast with indignation. We are told, here is a man, notwithstanding  we  are now under the best government, who has a right to command  us, our  persons, and  estates. It  is strange: Are we then,  by birth, the property of a man? May we be bought and  sold  like the beasts of the field? Were  any  man  to  sell  us  so we  should  be  surprised  at  his impudence, yet such  is  the pretence that  is  made to support this rebellion.
Though  the  government  we  are  under  is  the  most Just  and  equitable, though we are all averse to change, yet  we  belong to another  indefeasible  right  of succession  in consequence  of which  he now comes to claim  by force.  Such a claim  is certainly founded  on principles  the most  unheard and  extravagant.  We  must  suppose  that  government  is established  not for  the  good  of humankind  but to  satisfy  the  lusts of  a  Prince; and  that the whole  body of  a  people was made  for  his sake, seeing he  has a right to disturb  their  peace  and  happiness,  in  order  to  impose  his  dominion over them.  Since one  man  may thus become the proprietor  of millions, whose persons and  lives are only destined  to serve his pleasure; by what marks has providence distinguished  this wonderful  man  for whose sake millions of his own species were created? Were we not originally  formed after  the  Image of God,  as well as he? Are we not  reasonable beings and accountable  for  our  conduct?  We  are  accountable  for  the  changes  we make  in our  laws and  religion,  and  if we corrupt  that  religion  God  has given  us we must  answer  it  at the  great  Day. From what  right  then  has he a title to impose a change on us, for which we alone are accountable?
Blessed  be  God,  there  is nothing  either  in  Scripture  or  Nature  to  give countenance  to  such  a claim.  We  have voluntarily  submitted  ourselves to  a lawful  government;  we  have the Word  of God  known  amongst  us and  his  worship  established  according  to  it.  And  none  has  a  right  to withdraw our alliance from  our king or  force us to admit any corruption into our worship.
Thus  I hope  it  sufficiently  appears  that we  have  great  reason  now  to bestir  ourselves  in  defense  of  our  country.  Our  personal  security,  our religion,  laws,  and  everything  that  can  be  dear  to  a  reasonable  man  is called  into question. The  Disturbers  of  its  peace are now  advanced  into the very heart of the Kingdom and would direct their course towards the metropolis  which  you, with  others,  are  appointed  to  defend;  and  I  am persuaded  [that] when you  have occasion to act you will not be wanting to  your  religion,  your  kind,  your  country,  and  yourselves;  which  will effectually  wipe  away  any  reproach  that  may  be  thrown  upon  you  on their  account.
Remember,  you  are  men  sworn  to defend  your  country:
Take  courage, and play  the  Men for   your People  and for   the  Cities of your God.
If you  oppose your acquaintances it is to prevent their ruin: If you oppose your relations it is to save them and their posterity from  slavery  forever.
Let  us now humble  ourselves before  God; pray that  he would  forgive our  sins;  that  he  would  continue  the  Light  of  his  Gospel  amongst  us;
and strengthen our Hands in the Defence  of our holy religion and happy privileges."
