


I wrote last from Groninguen & told you of Mr Gordons Intention of passing the Winter at this place. The impressions he had got of Groninguen upon the Road woud have made him constantly Dissatisfied at that place, for people sometimes think meanly of themselves at an University of litle repute, as in a Coat that is out of Fashion, otherwise I am not well qualified to Judge of the Superiority of this University.

There are a great Variety of Professors, & all who have got the Degree of Mr of Arts here may advertise a College upon any Branch they please, they have scarcely any Vacations. The publick lectures are in German & Strangers are Obliged to have private lessons in Latin for themselves which make the fees very high. Mr Gordon attends three in Company with Mr Abercrombie. The Civil Law, The Law of Nature & Nations, & Modern History, which are rather too many at once, at least they woud be so to one who coud give application to books & pursue a Point steadily, but that habit is seldom acquired by People in Mr Gordons Way; he likes very well to hear about matters of Study but what is called Poring, is not much to his mind. I have no trouble in advising him against Irregularitys, & the whole remittances are very safely  entrusted to his own management so that you may call me a very happy Governour, provided you will always keep in mind how far the happiness of a Governour mounts. This is not a place of Conversation to me, there may be agreeable people but I have not yet been able to find them out or relish much through the Medium of bad Latin & bad French, I am already of opinion that Learning is very frequent here, but have not met with any Glimmering of Taste, or very elegant Reflexions: but you must consider me as a Stranger [xxx] who may know more hereafter.

A Gentleman passed some days ago in his way from Paris to Berlin, & told some Storys of Mr Fontenelle, one that he was in Company with a Lady who happend to drop her Fan, he put himself immediatly in motion to take it up, but she prevented him, for he is a hundred year old, upon which he said, Plut a Dieu que je n'avois que quatre Vingt Ans. Another Lady who it seems had removed lately to his neighbourhood made him a Visit & told him; she expected to see him often for that reason; he replyed that wont be my reason, that will be only my Pretence. I wish you may relish these Bons mots, that come so far as Germany, if not you may make reflections upon the length of time it may take to turn a Frenchman Sour. I saw lately some Smart letters in Manuscript that Passed between Voltaire, & a Church Man of Dignitee in France on account of his Infidelity, They say he is Constantly Complaining of his Health & threatning to Die.  

A Lady here tells me she saw him in his way from Berlin, & that he caressed one of her Children & said he woud be fond of him even if he had been begotten by Maupertuis. We Lodge here with a Frenchman, who is a litle Foolish, for the sake of learning his Language; he has taught French in this Place for Some years, he has translated some of Mr Hume's Works into French & has the the Title of Secretary to the King of Poland, all which is very fine in a Landlord. The King when he has a mind to Flatter a Man cannot give A Title of Nobility but makes many Secretarys & Members of the Privy Council. The Nobility waste away here to Nothing; for all the Sons share alike in the Estate & Title; all ranks almost have Voluminous Titles, if you was a Professor at Leipzig instead of Glasgow I shoud have directed my Letter. To His Excellency The most learned & Celebrated &c. I shoud be sorry to have written all this Idleness to a Man who is not well & I hope to hear you don't Complain this Winter.

Make my Complts to Mrs Smith Miss Douglas & Other Friends at Glasgow. If Mr Bagwell & Mr Reid be at Glasgow my Complts to Both. I woud write to them if I was quite Sure of their being there. Mr Gordon Joins me in Good Wishes. I am Dear Sr 

 






Two or three days before I got your letter I happened to be applyed to by Mr Alexander Merchant here, to recommend a young man if I knew any fit to be tutor to his Son. I immediately carried your letter to him and he is perfectly Satisfyed with the recommendation and I am well Satisfyed that as far as relates to Mr Alexander himself and his family your friend will have every reason to applaud his good fortune in meeting with him. He has very right Ideas with respect to his Children and very noble ones with respect to the person whom he trusts with the charge of them. He told me when he first mentioned this Subject that it would be a pleasure to him to meet with such a Young Man as he coud forward through life and that he would not scruple to risk of his fortune in doing it if his Subject was promising. The only difficulty with Mr Alexander with respect to your Friend is that his view to Physic may carry him away from him sooner than he woud wish. And it may be a difficulty with your friend that the two boys of whom the charge is proposed to him are so young the one being eight and the other six but they are equally advanced being to begin the Latin together. He proposes that they shall attend the Public School while they have the advantage of a Tutor at home. He leaves the terms to you or me and will be inclined to increase them as the boys advance especially if that will induce a person to his mind to continue with him the full time. Remember me affectionately to J. Black and all friends with you. Youll please let me know your friends resolution when he had determined himself. I am Dear Sir

 



I am told that Dr Beaty, or his party, give out that he has not only refuted but killed D. Hume. I should be very glad of the first, but sorry for the other; and I have the pleasure to inform you that he is in perfect good health; if he had been otherwise I should have certainly mentioned it in some of my letters. He had a cough, and lost flesh, soon after you went from home, which we did not know what to think of, but it turned out a mere cold, and it went off without leaving any ill effects; he has still some less flesh than usual, which nobody regrets, but in point of health and spirits I never saw him better. You seemed to doubt whether I should not write to Lord Stanhope. I had inclination enough, but was not so decided as to send my letter to himself without putting it in your power to withhold it if proper, and therefore I stayed for a frank; what is disagreeable is, laying him under the obligation to make a ceremonious answer, and, if he be gone, subjecting him to Continental postage, so you will judge. I have not seen J. Ferguson, but he must acquiesce. I am, dear Sir, most affectionately yours






It has given me great pleasure that you have avoided doing anything that might tend to urge Lord Stanhope farther than he has already gone in the proposal respecting Lord Chesterfield. If I had known the part he took in that business, I should certainly at first have either frankly accepted of the offer made me, or declined it in a way that could not imply an intention to raise the terms. This is certainly the only alternative that is now left me. I have recolved the subject all night and this morning, and the possibility of my becoming a burden on Lord Stanhope's family weighs much, but the odds on Lord Chesterfield's life is so great as very much to reduce that consideration. My place here, a few years ago, was worth about £300 a-year, but this and the preceding year it has fallen considerably short; and while the present alarm of the scarcity of money, and the expense of education at Edinburgh, continues, it may not rise again to its former value. To this I must add, that in case of debility or old age, I shall probably be reduced to my salary, which is no more than £100 a-year. For these reasons I think that I can fully justify myself to my family in accepting of £200 a year certain, with the privilege of choosing my place and my occupations; and if my Lord Chesterfield's guardians should be of opinion that he ought, when he comes of age, not only to relieve my Lord Stanhope of his engagement, but likewise, in case I shall have acquitted myself faithfully and properly, to make some such addition to my annuity as I mentioned, I shall then likewise think that I can justify my conduct to the world who rate men commonly as they do horses, by the price that is put upon them. But of this I would not have the least hint to my Lord Chesterfield at present. I have so far proceeded without consulting anybody, and have formed an opinion subject to correction. I mean to read your letters, and this I am writing to one or two of my friends. If they approve, it shall go to you; and if you agree with me, be so good as intimate my resolution to the guardians of my Lord Chesterfield; or, if you have any objections of moment, delay it till I shall have heard from you. My own present feeling is, that I should be to blame if I omitted putting myself and family under the protection of persons so worthy and so respectable, when I have an opportunity of doing it without any real hazard to my interest. But I shall not enter on this subject, my heart, indeed, being too full, especially with respect to Lord Stanhope. I am, &c.,





I don't know whether You may not allude to a letter that I have not received, but it is likely that none have miscarried. And I thought my last decisive as to my resolutions and intended Motions. I have laboured hard to finish at the College and have put an end to one Species of Philosophy today and shall to another tomorrow. I have fixed to set out for London with J. Ferguson on Tuesday the Fifteenth of this Month, but as my Companion is indulgent to himself and Lazy may not be in London before Sunday or Monday thereafter. I write this merely because you say you are uneasy at not hearing from me. Am perfectly Satisfied with the whole manner and State of the Transactions and defer particularly till we meet. I have been dining with D. Hume who says you have never yet made any attempt to cure him on his Pet altho it be a great and a growing distemper. I am


You see I have taken full benefit of the time you allowed me to form my opinion of this situation, and have the pleasure to inform you it is in most material circumstances very agreeable. I was received with great politeness, and continue to be treated with sufficient marks of regard. I have found not only vivacity and parts as I was made to expect, but likewise good dispositions and attachments, servants all of an old standing, and become friends without any improper influence or disorder that I have yet observed. I was made to expect great jealousy of control, and set out with a resolution to employ no other than what a sense of my great regard might give me. It is likely that a person of different character was expected, and the disappointment, I believe, has had a good effect. My journey hither furnished no adventures worth relating. My Lord Stanhope's being at Paris gave me access, for the few days I stayed, to some very respectable and agreeable company, in which I was questioned concerning you, particularly by the Duchess D'Enville, who complained of your French, as she did of mine, but said that before you left Paris she had the happiness to learn your language. I likewise met with your friend, Count Sarsfield, to whom I had great obligations, and if I write I beg that you will thank him &c &c






I have been for some time so busy reading you, and recommending and quoting you, to my students, that I have not had leisure to trouble you with letters. I suppose, however, that of all the opinions on which you have any curiosity, mine is among the least doubtful. You may believe, that on further acquaintance with your work my esteem is not a little increased. You are surely to reign alone on these subjects, to form the opinions, and I hope to govern at least the coming generations. I see no addition your work can receive except such little matters as may occur to yourself in subsequent editions. You are not to expect the run of a novel, nor even of a true history; but you may venture to assure your booksellers of a steady and continual sale, as long as people wish for information on these subjects. You have provoked, it is true, the church, the universities, and the merchants, against all of whom I am willing to take your part; but you have likewise provoked the militia, and there I must be against you. The gentlemen and peasants of this country do not need the authority of philosophers to make them supine and negligent of every resource they might have in themselves, in the case of certain extremities, of which the pressure, God knows, may be at no great distance. But of this more at Philippi. You have heard from Black of our worthy friend D. Hume. If anything in such a case could be agreeable, the easy and pleasant state of his mind and spirits would be really so. I believe he will be prevailed on at last to get in motion, and to try the effect of Bath, or anything else Sir Jno. Pringle may recommend. I have said more on this subject to Mr Gibbon, who, if you be found at London, will communicate to you. If not, I hope we shall soon meet here. And am, &c




My Dear Smith, I heard from Mr Chalmer of your being again intangled in my disagreeable Affairs And have Since received your own letter inclosing one from My Lord Stanhope to you. I have been greatly at a loss on this occasion for want of my usual Counsellor Mr Davidson. After mature consideration it appears to my friends here as well as to myself that a requisition to produce the original of Earl Stanhopes letter to me dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774 may be a matter of Course in Bussiness But that it may proceed likewise from some degree of Suspicion that my Copies of this Letter particularly that transcribed in my own hand writeing and sent to the Earl of Chesterfield in January last is not exact. That if the original letter were by any Accident lost the Suspicion might produce Insinuations of which I shoud in that case have no direct refutation. And that in this View of the matter I ought not to expose this letter to any Avoidable Accident whatever. If My Lord Chesterfield declare his Intention in case my Copy is verifyed by the original, to fullfill the condition which will Relieve My Lord Stanhope of his Obligation, I will if he give me leave without loss of time to go to London and wait upon his Lordship with the original Letter. In the meantime I send by this post Copys of this and two Other letters from My Lord Stanhope to me Collated and Attested by a Notary Public and by The Lord Provost of Edinburgh in hopes that this may be Sufficient. These Copys go in a Packet to Mr Chalmer who will communicate them to you and otherwise employ them for any purpose they can Serve. I return you with this Lord Stanhopes letter to yourself and send to His Lordship the Copy he desires in my own hand writeing very sorry any difficulty shoud hinder me from sending the Original.


I wrote last from Groninguen and told you of Mr. Gordons Intention of passing the Winter at this place. The impressions he had got of Groninguen upon the Road woud have made him constantly Dissatisfied at that place, for people sometimes think meanly of themselves at an University of little repute, as in a Coat that is out of Fashion; otherwise I am not well qualified to Judge of the Superiority of this University. There are a great Variety of Professors, and all who have got the Degree of Master of Arts here may advertise a College upon any Branch they please, they have scarcely any Vacations. The publick lectures are in German and Strangers are Obliged to have private lessons in Latin for themselves which make the fees very high. Mr. Gordon attends three in Company with Mr. Abercrombie. The Civil Law, The Law of Nature and Nations, and Modern History, which are rather too many at once, at least they would be so to one who could give application to books and pursue a Point steadily, but that habit is seldom acquired by People in Mr. Gordons Way; he likes very well to hear about matters of Study but what is called Poring, is not much to his mind. I have no trouble in advising him against Irregularitys, and the whole remittances are very safely entrusted to his own management so that you may call me a very happy Governour, provided you will always keep in mind how far the happiness of a Governour mounts. This is not a place of Conversation to me, there may be agreeable people but I have not yet been able to find them out or relish much through the Medium of bad Latin and bad French. I am already of opinion that Learning is very frequent here, but have not met with any Glimmering of Taste, or very elegant Reflexions: but you must consider me as a stranger who may know more hereafter.

A Gentleman passed some days ago in his way from Paris to Berlin, and told some Storys of Mr. Fontenelle: one that he was in Company with a Lady who happend to drop her Fan, he put himself immediatly in motion to take it up, but she prevented him, for he is a hundred years old, upon which he said; Plut a Dieu que Je n'avois que quatre Vingt Ans. Another Lady who it seems had removed lately to his neighbourhood made him a Visit and told him; she expected to see him often for that reason; he replyed that wont be my reason, that will only be my Pretence. I wish you may relish these Bons mots, that come so far as Germany, if not you may make reflections upon the length of time it may take to turn a Frenchman Sour. I saw lately some Smart letters in Manuscript that Passed between Voltaire, and a Church Man of Dignitee in France on account of his Infidelity. They say he is Constantly Complaining of his Health and threatning to Die. A Lady here tells me she saw him in his way from Berlin, and that he caressed one of her Children and said he woud be fond of him even if he had been begotten by Maupertuis. We Lodge here with a Frenchman, who is a little Foolish, for the sake of learning his Language; he has taught French in this Place for some years, he has translated some of Mr. Humes Works into French and has the Title of secretary to the King of Poland, all which is very fine in a Landlord. The King when he has a mind to Flatter a Man cannot give A Title of Nobility but makes many Secretarys and members of the Privy Council. The Nobility waste away here to Nothing; for all the Sons share alike in the Estate and Title; all ranks almost have Voluminous Titles, if you was a Professor at Leipzig instead of Glasgow I should have directed my Letter, To his Excellency The most learned & Celebrated &c. I should be sorry to have written all this Idleness to a Man who is not well and I hope to hear you don't Complain this Winter. Make my Compliments to Mrs. Smith Miss Douglass and other Friends at Glasgow. If Mr. Bagwell and Mr. Reid be at Glasgow my Compliments to Both. I woud write to them if I was quite sure of their being there. Mr. Gordon Joins me in Good Wishes. I am Dear Sir 

 


Two or three days before I got your letter I happened to be applyed to by Mr Alexander Merchant here, to recommend a young man if I knew any fit to be tutor to his Son. I immediately carryed your letter to him and he is perfectly Satisfyed with the recommendation and I am well Satisfyed that as far as relates to Mr Alexander himself and his family your friend will have every reason to applaud his good fortune in meeting with him. He has very right Ideas with respect to his Children and very noble ones with respect to the person whom he trusts with the charge of them. He told me when he first mentioned this Subject that it would be a pleasure to him to meet with such a Young Man as he coud forward through life and that he woud not scruple to risk of his fortune in doing it if his Subject was promising. The only difficulty with Mr Alexander with respect to your Friend is that his view to Physic may carry him away from him sooner than he woud wish. And it may be a difficulty with your friend that the two boys of whom the charge is proposed to him are so young the one being eight and the other six but they are equally advanced being to begin the Latin together. He proposes that they shall attend the Public School while they have the advantage of a Tutor at home. He leaves the terms to you or me and will be inclined to increase them as the boys advance especially if that will induce a person to his mind to continue with him the full time. Remember me affectionately to J. Black and all friends with you. Youll please let me know your friends resolution when he had determined himself. I am Dear Sir

 
 

I am told that Dr Beaty, or his party, give out that he has not only refuted but killed D. Hume. I should be very glad of the first, but sorry for the other; and I have the pleasure to inform you that he is in perfect good health; if he had been otherwise I should have certainly mentioned it in some of my letters. He had a cough, and lost flesh, soon after you went from home, which we did not know what to think of, but it turned out a mere cold, and it went off without leaving any ill effects; he has still some less flesh than usual, which nobody regrets, but in point of health and spirits I never saw him better. You seemed to doubt whether I should not write to Lord Stanhope. I had inclination enough, but was not so decided as to send my letter to himself without putting it in your power to withhold it if proper, and therefore I stayed for a frank; what is disagreeable is, laying him under the obligation to make a ceremonious answer, and, if he be gone, subjecting him to Continental postage, so you will judge. I have not seen J. Ferguson, but he must acquiesce.

It has given me great pleasure that you have avoided doing anything that might tend to urge Lord Stanhope farther than he has already gone in the proposal respecting Lord Chesterfield. If I had known the part he took in that business, I should certainly at first have either frankly accepted of the offer made me, or declined it in a way that could not imply an intention to raise the terms. This is certainly the only alternative that is now left me. I have revolved the subject all night and this morning, and the possibility of my becoming a burden on Lord Stanhope's family weighs much, but the odds on Lord Chesterfield's life is so great as very much to reduce that consideration. My place here, a few years ago, was worth about £300 a-year, but this and the preceding year it has fallen considerably short; and while the present alarm of the scarcity of money, and the expense of education at Edinburgh, continues, it may not rise again to its former value. To this I must add, that in case of debility or old age, I shall probably be reduced to my salary, which is no more than £100 a-year. For these reasons I think that I can fully justify myself to my family in accepting of £200 a-year certain, with the privilege of choosing my place and my occupations; and if my Lord Chesterfield's guardians should be of opinion that he ought, when he comes of age, not only to relieve my Lord Stanhope of his engagement, but likewise, in case I shall have acquitted myself faithfully and properly, to make some such addition to my annuity as I mentioned, I shall then likewise think that I can justify my conduct to the world, who rate men commonly as they do horses, by the price that is put upon them. But of this I would not have the least hint to my Lord Chesterfield at present. I have so far proceeded without consulting anybody, and have formed an opinion subject to correction. I mean to read your letters, and this I am writing to one or two of my friends. If they approve, it shall go to you; and if you agree with me, be so good as intimate my resolution to the guardians of my Lord Chesterfield; or, if you have any objections of moment, delay it till I shall have heard from you. My own present feeling is, that I should be to blame if I omitted putting myself and family under the protection of persons so worthy and so respectable, when I have an opportunity of doing it without any real hazard to my interest. But I shall not enter on this subject, my heart, indeed, being too full, especially with respect to Lord Stanhope. I am etc.






I don't know whether you may not allude to a letter that I have not received, but it is likely that none have miscarried. And I thought my last decisive as to my resolutions and intended Motions. I have laboured hard to finish at the College and have put an end to one Species of Philosophy today and shall to another tomorrow. I have fixed to set out for London with J. Ferguson on Tuesday the Fifteenth of this Month, but as my Companion is indulgent to himself and Lazy may not be in London before Sunday or Monday thereafter. I write this merely because you say you are uneasy at not hearing from me. Am perfectly Satisfied with the whole manner and State of the Transactions and defer particularly till we meet. I have been dining with D. Hume who says you have never yet made any attempt to cure him of his Pet altho it be a great and a growing distemper. I am




You see I have taken full benefit of the time you allowed me to form my opinion of this situation, and have the pleasure to inform you it is in most material circumstances very agreeable. I was received with great politeness, and continue to be treated with sufficient marks of regard. I have found not only vivacity and parts as I was made to expect, but likewise good dispositions and attachments, servants all of an old standing, and become friends without any improper influence or disorder that I have yet observed. I was made to expect great jealousy of control, and set out with a resolution to employ no other than what a sense of my great regard might give me. It is likely that a person of a different character was expected, and the disappointment, I believe, has had a good effect. My journey hither furnished no adventures worth relating. My Lord Stanhope's being at Paris gave me access, for the few days I stayed, to some very respectable and agreeable company, in which I was questioned concerning you, particularly by the Duchess D'Enville who complained of your French, as she did of mine, but said that before you left Paris she had the happiness to learn your language. I likewise met with your friend, Count Sarsfield, to whom I had great obligations, and if you write I beg that you will thank him, etc. etc.






I have been for some time so busy reading you, and recommending and quoting you, to my students, that I have not had leisure to trouble you with letters. I suppose, however, that of all the opinions on which you have any curiosity, mine is among the least doubtful. You may believe, that on further acquaintance with your work my esteem is not a little increased. You are surely to reign alone on these subjects, to form the opinions, and I hope to govern at least the coming generations. I see no addition your work can receive except such little matters as may occur to yourself in subsequent editions. You are not to expect the run of a novel, nor even of a true history; but you may venture to assure your booksellers of a steady and continual sale, as long as people wish for information on these subjects. You have provoked, it is true, the church, the universities, and the merchants, against all of whom I am willing to take your part; but you have likewise provoked the militia, and there I must be against you. The gentlemen and peasants of this country do not need the authority of philosophers to make them supine and negligent of every resource they might have in themselves, in the case of certain extremities, of which the pressure, God knows, may be at no great distance. But of this more at Philippi. You have heard from Black of our worthy friend D. Hume. If anything in such a case could be agreeable, the easy and pleasant state of his mind and spirits would be really so. I believe he will be prevailed on at least to get in motion, and to try the effect of Bath, or anything else Sir John Pringle may recommend. I have said more on this subject to Mr Gibbon who, if you be found at London, will communicate to you. If not, I hope we shall soon meet here. And am, etc.

. . . David, I am afraid, loses ground. He is cheerful, and in good spirits as usual; but I confess that my hopes from the effects of the turn of the season towards spring have very much abated . . . .




I heard from Mr Chalmer of your being again intangled in my disagreeable affairs and have since received your own letter inclosing one from My Lord Stanhope to you. I have been greatly at a loss on this occasion for want of my usual Counsellor Mr Davidson. After mature consideration it appears to my friends here as well as to myself that a requisition to produce the original of Earl Stanhopes letter to me dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774 may be a matter of Course in Business But that it may proceed likewise from some degree of suspicion that my Copie of this Letter particularly that transcribed in my own hand writeing and sent to the Earl of Chesterfield in January last is not exact. That if the original letter were by any Accident lost the suspicion might produce Insinuations of which I shoud in that case have no direct refutation. And that in this View of the matter I ought not to expose this letter to any Avoidable Accident whatever. If My Lord Chesterfield declare his Intention in case my Copy is verifyed by the original, to fullfill the condition which will Relieve My Lord Stanhope of his Obligation, I will if he give me leave without loss of time go to London and wait upon his Lordship with the original Letter. In the meantime I send by this post Copys of this and two other letters from My Lord Stanhope to me Collated and Attested by a Notary Public and By The Lord Provost of Edinburgh In hopes that this may be sufficient. These Copys go in a Packet to Mr Chalmer who will communicate them to you and otherwise employ them for any purpose they can Serve. I return you with this Lord Stanhopes letter to yourself and send to His Lordship the Copy he desires in my own hand writeing very sorry any difficulty shoud hinder me from sending the Originall.

your letter has been read to me, and I would have sooner attempted something in the way of answer, but for want of Strength, and even now, what I do will be of as little Satisfaction to you as to myself. In your case I do not see what the Prince himself could do, If you were convicted of a crime his Prerogative could Pardon, but in nomination for Employment in which his Ministers alone are accountable they cannot forgive interference, and if they do not forgive, are powerful to resent. Still further be it from me at Ninety two, to make my first approach to His Royal Highness's Notice, is an act of mere Presumption, and in this  trust however Bold you yourself may be in action, will indulge my caution.

I Prize your Victory in obtaining the kind affection of Walter Scot, and others I could name, more than some Battles however loudly talked of, but knowing how the Admiralty stand affected, my decided wish is that you wait the Chapter of accidents, and discontinue all further applications for the present. For Money it appears to me you have enough if carefully conducted.

Here too in open arms extended to receive you; and you may perform the part of Chief in my impending obsequies, an office which will there become you[r] and leave no stain behind to blot your future life.

Believe me to be with more concern than I can express 


I must insist on not seeing the inclosed any more & that may matters may proceed for this year in the ordinary way. I wish that I were a great Prince with a great Revenue & fewer outlets for money that I might deal more nearly in proportion to what I think of Peoples merits. In the mean time I am your most



P. S. I had attended Dr Ferguson's the first year he taught the Natural Philosophy Class, 1759— 60, gratis . . . . two years after, when in Watson's hospital, I offered him a fee, but he would not accept it. When his son Adam came to my class in the H[igh] S[chool] I requested he would allow me to return his favour; but next year when I sent back his first quarter, I received this letter.

I am very glad to find that you take up the Bussiness of procuring publick benefits in our part of the Countrey. It is now your turn & I hope that you will not drop it soon. My private interest in the Lime Road was much greater some years ago than it is now: but if you make a very good Road you may tempt me to use it a little still. At any Rate I am willing to Contribute & considering the comparative value of my Concern I am affraid I may be thought to have done so extravagantly. You will find my Subscription of three Guineas at the end of the paper you  are pleased to Address to me. I heartly wish you success in whatever you Undertake either for the Benefit of your own Estate or the Conveyance of the Publick, and Am


As Lord Carlisle and Mr Eden are preparing to return to Great Britain, His Majesty's Commissioners have directed me to desire that you will fortwith inform yourself from the Merchants, whether previous to their Excellencies Departure there are any farther measures respecting Trade which are wished to be taken into consideration and I shall be glad to know the result as soon as convenient. I am with ver sincere Respect, Sir, your most obedient and 


I am to request of You for the Information of His Majesty's Commissioners the best Account you can furnish of the Variation during the last twelve Months between the Prices of the Principal Articles of Stores and Provisions which are imported into this Place from distant Ports by Licenses and otherwise for necessary Consumption.

I have the honour to be, with Great respect, Sir your most obedient 


We arrived here yesterday morning without having met with any interruption or uneasiness on the Road, but we are likely to meet with some hinderance here, the Wind has been contrary all day yesterday & continues so to day, if it comes more favourable a Packet will sail this afternoon, but there is at present litle appearance of it, as the Wind seems to be set in, and blows hard. If we are detained here to another Post day, I will write your Lordship again from this place.

The expence to Harwich amounts to About Nineteen Guineas. I have not yet delivered your Lordships letter to Mr Fletcher, & I believe it will come more properly when the hurry and dissipation of his Journey is over.

I am with great respect 
your Lordships 
Most Obedient 
& most  

Groningen October 4th 1756


Mr Fletcher and I arrived safe here a few days ago, & have introduced him to some of my acquaintances [xxx], & engaged a lodging for him at which he slept last night, in the house of a Person who has passed some time in England, & is now setled here as a teacher of the English and French languages. This House was recommended by Mr. Swartz the Professor of Law, & I thought it lucky for Mr Fletcher at first to find a Landlord he coud speak to.

We have not yet fixed upon an Ordinary for him, but hope in a few days to setle that point likewise. I have been inquiring into the particulars of his expence here, & will be able to inform your Lordship fully in my next or on my return to Scotland. We have drawn upon Mr Crawfurd for five and Twenty Pounds, as Mr Fletchers Allowance for the first quarter. This money as far as I have hitherto been informed, may probably be sufficient for him at this place.

One of the Persons I have made him acquainted with here is Professor of Anatomy & has very good reputation as a Physician. If Mr Fletcher's health shoud require his Attendance, I have great confidence in his Skill & Attention. We have a Countreyman setled here, Mr Falkner a Brother of Lord  Hackertons. Mr Fletcher brought him a letter from Mr Crawfurd to procure him Credit & give his assistance in any thing thing else he might stand in need of. Mr Falkner has been very Civil & I hope, will be extremely usefull to Mr Fletcher while he stays here. Our expence in all to this place amounts to about three & thirty Guineas, we stayed for a Wind at Harwick some Days after I wrote your Lordship & had a very tedious passage, which detained us in all about ten days. I have delivered your Lordships letter to Mr Fletcher, he was much affected with it, & tells me he will send the Copy of it by me. As I hope He will be fully setled here in a litle time, I can scarcely expect to hear from your Lordship at this place. The way from here to Amsterdam is almost impassable when the Winter weather begins, which will make it necessary for me to set out the sooner.

We made no stay at any place in Holland & gave litle attention to the Publick news. The People I have talked with seem to think this Countrey in the Utmost danger from all Quarters. They are threatned by every formidable Power in Europe, & required to declare themselves, which they are so far from Venturing to do that they dare not make the least augmentation of their Troops for fear of giving Umbrage to their Neighbours. The People at Present seem to be stromgly affected to the King of Prussia, they consider the War in Germany as a Religious one, & think the Protestant Interest at Stake, so much for news which I remember your Lordship was pleased to desire .

I shall be able in my next to inform your Lordship of every thing relating to Mr Fletchers setlement at this place.


In my last I told your Lordship how far I had gone in setling Mr Fletcher here; & did not then think it necessary to wait for a return from your Lordship, Mr Fletcher was indeed then very melancholy but I was in hopes that might go off in a few days, it has however increased to such a degree that I cannot think of leaving him so soon as I proposed, without even a Servant who in case of further Changes, might at least procure him the offices of Humanity. I am very well aware what your Lordship must feel from these appearances for my own disstress is beyond expression. I cannot for[e]see what I may be obliged to do before I can hear from your Lordship, perhaps to return to Brittain, where a properer place might be found for Mr Fletcher till his melancholy goes off, than any here, he is at present disqualified by it for doing any thing. I am hurryed in writing this as the Post is just going away & I was not able to determine myself what to propose  to your Lordship sooner. I feel great uneasiness in a Situation Subject to blame without advice or Authority from those who shoud direct me. Your Lordship will please to direct for me (Au Parlament d'Angleterre a Groningue) or to the Care of Mr Crawfurd at Rotterdam.


Mr Fletcher has appeared so much better for some days past, that I am preparing to set out on my return, I am still not without uneasiness on his account but inclined to believe that this Situation is as favourable for him as any that coud be found. His Landlord has promised me a particular Attention to all his Affairs, & to call for the accounts regularly every week of such people as furnish him any thing here. He has hitherto since we set out given no signs of dissorder, & has been cautious with respect to drinking although I did not appear to restrain him in that Particular. The degree of Melancholy which possessed him perplexed me very much as I am hurried to leave this place both by the winter season coming on & my apprehensions of an Ague which used to trouble me in this Country.

As his Spirits seem to have taken a turn to the Better  I hope it may Please God to restore him fully to his former applications & Temper of Mind, he seems to be out of the way here of what formerly [xxx] might have missled & disstracted his mind. I thought it necessary however to take what precautions I could in case of the Worst. Mr Falconer whom I formerly mentioned to your Lordship, & to whom he is recommended by Mr Crawfurd, promised me to take particular care of him, & as I have informed him in confidence of the former state of his health he will be able to suit his care to that circumstance. I likewise explained his case to Dr Vandoeveren Professor of Anatomy, in whom I have much confidence as a Physician and as an Obliging Worthy Man, both agreed in thinking that his Present Landlord is a very proper person for him to lodge with, his name is Le Moine, & as I gave him your Lordships Adress, he will not fail to write if any thing remarkable occurs. If your Lordship has any commands for him Please direct (A Monsr Monsr Le Moine Maitre de Langues a Groninguen by Holland).

Mr Fletcher has given me a Copy of your Lordships last letter to him, and at his earnest desire I have  left the Latin Newtestament with him. I have computed his Stated expence for one half year.




Which in British money amounts to twenty four Pounds seven Shillings and eight pence. There are other Particulars besides Cloaths which I coud not compute such as Candles Tea Sugar &c. We have lately had a Storm in this Countrey which has cast many Wrecks on the Coast & greatly the Damaged the Shipping which plys in this Country. I intended to take the favourable weather which now offers to get over the Lakes and Marshes of Friesland.


I wrote your Lordship a litle before I set out from Groninguen, of the resolution I had taken & did not find any reason to Alter it. Mr Fletcher continued to recover his Spirits, & since I set out I have the Satisfaction of a letter from his Landlord; which came to hand at this place, telling me he was very well, & begun to talk & employ himself more than when I was at Groninguen.

I have come here in order to meet with some company or find out some convenient way of travelling to Scotland & don't intend to make any Stay. I sent your Lordship in my last some computation of Mr Fletchers Stated articles of expence where he now is. I am sorry that this Journey shoud have been so expensive to your Lordship, & earnestly wish  the Satisfaction may be answerable, which I hope it will. The whole according to the best account I have been able to keep of the Particulars amounts to £53:2:5. The delays in waiting for Passages has increased the expence a good deal. I hope to be in Scotland soon & defer further Particulars till then. I am My Lord


I Understand Mr Home has been proposing Schemes for my Advantage in Scotland, & he has informed me of the manner in which your Lordship was pleased to receive them. I am very much affected with such proofs of your Lordships remembrance & Friendship, & whatever be the consequence can never forget the Respect & Gratitude which my treatment has at all times inspired me with. I have written to Mr Home on the Subject of his proposals, I am sorry the Affair is of a Nature to give trouble to my friends, & know he is Sanguine about every thing where friendship is concerned. You will be able to Judge how far Mr Abercrombie can be brought to reasonable terms, & I Shall have a particular Satisfaction in following any determination your Lordship is pleased to take the trouble of making for me.

I have not heard of Mr Kinloch since he went to Bath, he was then looking well, but his Spirits a little depressed with the apprehension of his remaining complaint. I have some thoughts of getting in to the Stage Coach & going down for some days to see how he does. I wish your Lordship Joy of the Victory on the Rhine but need not trouble you with the Accounts talked of here as you will be better informed.

I am With the most Sincere Respect 
& Affection 
My Lord 
your Lordships 
most faithful & 
most  

London July 11th 1758


Mr Kinloch I believe informed your Lordship, by the last post, of my intention to attend him on his journey Abroad, & I was extremely willing to be of any use to him; & went in to his proposal with little hesitation, till upon recollection I saw the difficulties which might attend by my being out of the Way at this time. He bore with the thoughts of allowing me to return when Necessary: but when I thought of the difficultys which might Attend my Return in time of War, & the inconveniency to him of being left in a Strange Countrey I determined it was better to lay aside thoughts of it Altogether.

I think Myself extremely Obliged to your Lordship for the trouble I understand you are pleased to take in what concerns me. Mr Home writes in very Sanguine terms on the prospect of Success in Making an Agreement with Mr Abercrombie: but his friendship as it may have led him to give your Lordship  trouble on my Account may likewise have made him think Other Circumstances equally easy. The Purchase is greatly beyond my Stock; but I am made to believe that the income of the place, with diligence in the Profession might enable me in a few years to clear the debt it woud bring upon me. And if it takes place I am determined to quiet my own Mind against any loss to my friends, by Ensurance. This affair however filled me with a good deal of Anxiety & made me a very improper Companion for Mr Kinloch; who I am affraid has taken my hesitations amiss. I took the Liberty to Recommend his continuing Mr Congalton; but he is not determined & Stays here a few days longer, he was told today that the Sailing of the Packet is interrupted by two French Cruizers which ply in the Passage, & that none will sail till a Man of War which is ordered Round comes to protect them. It made me uneasy that he imputed part of his delay to me: but many things have occurred to me that make it impracticable for me to go along with him as I at first intended. Among others I have been informed that the Gentleman in whose hands the greater part of my little Stock is lodged, has a prospect of Going to America. It is necessary for me to settle my affairs with him before he goes & to have my little funds in readyness if there is any prospect of making a Bargain with Mr Abercrombie. I am sorry to give your Lordship the trouble of so long a letter but it is owing to my Concern, for the Offence which Mr Kinloch seems to have taken, & to explain the Reasons of my not being able to accompany him as he wrote I intended.

Whatever be the Event of projects formed for me in Scotland I shall rest Satisfied in the Proofs I have received of your Lordships Goodness &

am with the greatest Respect 
My Lord 
your Lordships 
Most obliged & 
most  

London July 12th 





I had notice from Mr Home by last Post that I was chosen Professor in the College of Edinburgh. Nothing coud happen more agreeable to me & it gives me great pleasure to think that I shall soon have an opportunity of thanking your Lordship in Person, to whose friendship alone I own that piece of good fortune. I shall be very happy if your Lordship continues to have satisfaction from that kind protection you have given me on this & former occasions.

I was to wait on Mr Fletcher this morning:but missed him, I shall go to receive his commands before I set out for Scotland which will be as soon as I can settle my little affairs here. The people here are not much alarmed with the French  Invasion even People who allow it practicable have no impression of its consequence. I am told that one Miss Grey who is lately returned from Holland says; The French Minister at the Hague advised her not to go to England in a time of such confusion, or if she must go, offered her letters of recommendation to The Officers of the French Army. This piece of news your Lordship may not have heard from any other hand, Altho you will certainly hear that a Battle is expected in Westphalia. Prince Ferdinand is unwilling to pass the Weser, & has given it as his opinion that Hanover woud suffer more from the two Armys before an Action than it will lose by Contributions in case his Army is defeat.

I am With The greatest respect 
My Lord 
your Lordships 
most obliged & most humble 
Servant 

Edinr May 17th 1760


I have written this line, in case I should miss your Lordship; I dont know whither it is proper to trouble you about Stamp Masters. But I have a sister who is married to a man of the name of Wilkie at Coupar in Angus who some years ago was appointed Joint Stamp Master with one   Menzies who being unable for the Bussiness on account of his Age only retained the Sellary and so much of the bussiness as was to be done in the Town itself, Whilst it was understood that my Brother in Law was to do the Rest & I think to succeed in the office: I have a letter from My sister telling me that they are very much alarmed by some steps which they hear have been taken to change the destination of the office in a favour of a person who it seems has married Menzies daughter. My Sisters Situation forces me, perhaps to tresspass on your Lordships Goodness. If it should  [xxx] come before the Trustees for the Linnen Manufacture your Lordships Protection here woud add most sensibly to the Obligations I ly under. & am

My Lord your Lordships most 
Humble & Affectionate Servant 




I have met with Interruptions which hindered My writing the inclosed till this day at one O Clock, & made it impossible for me to go to Brunstane to Dinner. As your Lordship said you was to be in Town tomorrow forenoon I will wait upon you sometime between twelve & two wherever I find you are. If I have mistaken your Lordships meaning, I can have your farther directions then. I hope you will excuse my keeping the French Treaty tomorrow as I have not yet had time to read it.

I am 
with the greatest 
Respect 
My Lord 
your Lordships 
most faithful & 
most  

19 Feb. 1762


Principal Goldie died this morning. I am going to attend My Class Otherwise would have carryed this Message Myself. I will call to Receive your Lordships Commands after twelve O Clock. I am with the greatest respect 

your Lordships 
most faithful & most 
 








Friday 10 O'Clock
Mr Ferguson Presents his Complts to Lord Milton, he has been confined to his bed since about the midle of the Day yesterday with a feverish Dissorder which is now abated but which does not yet permit him to Rise. He will however be sure to wait upon his Lordship the moment he is allowed to Stir abroad.

Thursday Morning
London Septr 13th 1762


The Inclosed letters were sent to me that I might carry them to your Lordship: but being obliged to delay my setting out for some days it is proper that I forward them by the Post. Captain Fletcher was advised by Dr Pringle to go to the South of France for his health & The Duke of Bedfords going furnishing him with so good an opportunity of going without a Passport that he had no time to consult your Lordship upon it before he set out. He is still the youngest Captain in the Regiment & has only Lieutennants Pay there being a Captain from that Regiment allowed to retire upon his full pay. But this probably will not long be the Case as the Regiment is now before the Havanna. I will refer farther Particulars  and all Political news from this place till I have the pleasure of Seeing your Lordship.

Mr Oswald in a cover under which he sent me the Inclosed desires that I woud Join my Testimony to his Recommendation of Mr Drysdale. Which I do most willingly as Mr Drysdale has been my Intimate Friend for many years and I know him to be a very deserving Man who upon farther knowledge or tryal woud give your Lordship great Satisfaction.

I expect to be at Edinburgh in about a fortnight when I long to entertain you with what I have been able to understand of the temper of this place and am with the Most Sincere Respect and Affection your Lordships

Most Obliged & 
mostle  

Castle Hill Febry 18th 1764


I have drawn out & enclosed the Scroll of such a Paragraph as your Lordship perhaps will think proper to insert in your letter to the Ld P:S: relating to Coll. Fletchers Affair. It may proceed or follow what relations are to be sent of the Perthshire election.

I have likewise inclosed inclosed a short memorandum of the Proposal I mentioned relating to the College & am with the greatest Respect.

My Lord 
your Lordships 
most Obedient & most 
 




I have enclosed the letters your Lordship gave me and a Short proposal which may serve as a Supplement to Dr Wisharts report. I have been much hurried but hope these papers do not come too late. I am with the greatest Respect

My Lord 
your Lordships 
most Obliged & most 
 

Hallyards near Peebles 28th June 1798



I received your most acceptable present by Dr Blacks conveyance & tho very little of a Genealogist or Antiquary have been highly gratifyed. Mere names of Father & Son with dates & Successions always vanish from my recollection And I need some adventure or trait of Character to give them Substance and to make an impression. You have supplied these requisites, And I am now convinced that your Family is the most Illustrious of any in Europe descending from remote Antiquity thro nobles Crowned Heads Great Warriours & Heroes noted abroad as well as at home and if the Popedome were not extinguished in a fair way to have the Keys of St. Peter & the triple Crown.

Their generations serve to Arrange and to illustrate the History & Antiquities of their own Country & in some measure of forreign Nations also. In reading Guicciardini formerly I was unable to guess who that Obiné Scotzese could be. And I am ashamed to say  that hitherto the History of Scotland has interested me less than almost any Other that is Commonly read. [xxx] This I should be sorry to account for [xxx] without owning the defect to be in myself.

I have many times attended Buchanan: but notwithstanding his Latin never could get through. I am well pleased with the knock you have given him. His fine genius and wonderful possession of a dead Language never can attone for malice or indifference to truth. His retention in a family who honoured him with an important trust might have excused some bias to hide defects or to heighten their lustre: but the Contrary disposition was at least extremely perverse. Your discoveries in the Vatican have met the progeny of Robert the Second beyond the possibility of misrepresentation or doubt. I have now only one difficulty left how you come at this moment not to take the Title of Sr A. Stuart of Castlemilk. As to the execution of your work: If you make a Gil Blas of me I can give every Sort of encouragement about the Homilies. There is the same compleat information the same fair Statement & fullness if not redundancy of Evidence as in former productions & perfection or Sublimity of Stile; because it is precisely what it ought to be. And I rejoice to think that checks  to Animal life do not always touch the Intellectual faculties. Along with the Genealogy I had your letter to Dr Black sent to me & have since received your letter to myself. I am not discouraged by the slowness of progress in recovering your strength. My own was so slow that except in the effects of Bath & my excursion to Italy I never could fix the time of any Sensible advance, Altho I am now certainly as well as could be expected at my time of life, & better probably than I should have been if the check I received about the age of 60 had not put me upon a safer course of life than formerly.

It is an old saying that at a certain Age every man is either a fool or a Physician of the two no doubt one had best be a Physician. Altho I suspect that the Skill of such Physycians is mostly limited to their own Case, Yet the causes of health are so much the same to every body that except in the case of opposite disseases what is good for one will be so likewise for Another. We are too apt to suppose that our peculiar Constitutions require what we have brought upon ourselves by habit &c. There may be for ought I know a very material difference betwixt your constitution and mine. One inclined to repletion or fullness of Blood, the other not so much. I know not what upon this account the Doctors may have recommended  to you: but to me the meagre diet and Water has been in a high degree Salutary & pleasant. Your own experience of what is attended with least inequality of sensation whether of want or repletion is certainly the best guide. I have seen a name in the bath list which I suppose to be yours. And hope that you may still reap some benefit from the Queens Bath. Your catching cold formerly makes me suspect that you used the private or covered baths. The difference is probably greater than people commonly imagine. Observe the appearance of boiling immediately over the hot Spring in the Kings Bath, it proceeds from a discharge of a Air together with the Water, And that Air is what Dr Black who first observed it in other instances, called fixed Air & Other Chymist[s] have since called Acid gas or Carbonic gas, the same with that which fills the bottom of the Grotto del Cane near Naples and which upon immersion extinguishes flame or kills an Animal as effectually & immediately as Water or drowning itself. This Air respired in too great a propor[tion] may give that check to animal life which we call a Cold. And if so it is certainly material when you approach a Spring of such Air that the Space should be uncovered for the free access of better respiration.

Your coming to this country will be a great  Pleasure to many. Mrs Stuart has a Sister within a few miles of us here & I hope to be early informed of your Arrival. And tho very much attached to my own Apparatus for sleeping &c will either go without them or transport them wherever I can have the Satisfaction of passing any time with you. Here is a pleasant enough Shealing with plenty of Chickens & Garden Stuff if you allow a Philosopher to think of his belly. I direct this Letter to London & trust it will find you wherever you Are. I am  with

the most Sincere respect and Affection 

most  

[1772]

Dear Sr

The inclosed are Answers to some Queries I put to a Relation of My Wife now at Aberdeen who lived long at Batavia in quality of English Consul. The Dutch have reputation for good Government & I wished to have some notion of their Establishment in India. These queries were put carelessly in a Postscript & with little recollection. The Answers however are disstinct and Satisfactory. I have them here for your perusal that if any thing occur to you I may question him farther. I shall write him sometime next week after I have again considered this Paper & got your Animadversions. Please consider whether this Dutch Book may

 be worth ordering. 
I am 
Dear Sr 
yours most 
affectionately 












Mr Stuart
St Andrews 11 July 1811



you will accept of my thanks for your Ingenious and valuable Performance on the Subject of Taste.

My defect of sight which renders me dependent on others for what I hear read, has so long deferred my acknowledgements.

I have indeed suspected that the distinction of Beauty & Deformity any more than those of Merit and Demerit Happiness & Misery, were not applicable to any mere Corporeal Essence or Form.

In this you have confirmed me by your ample and satisfactory Induction of Facts throughout the departments  of Matter in which we commonly fancy distinctions so expressed.

I was personally acquainted with the Late Capability Brown and if I could have put your work in his hands should have endeavoured to divert him and his Employers from the search of Capability and Beauty in subjects were it is merely Fanciful to those in which it is real. But this I may be told is Moralizing and adverse to the Taste of the Age. Be this as it may. I am happy to leave the Culture of Taste in such hands as yours.

I am  with most Sincere Esteem your obliged & most 




Dear Sr

I am sorry to be Obliged to give you trouble a second time about my Affairs in the College: In treating about the Instruments which belonged to the Late Doctor Stuart I have been referred to Doctor Cuming who has engaged to bring that Affair to some conclusion by tomorrow. As there are likewise some Instruments which belong to the public, I am obliged to give you the trouble of making an application to My Lord Provost & Town Council, to have those instruments delivered to me by their Authority, together with Such an Inventory as may Ascertain the particulars committed to my care, & for which I or my heirs are hereafter to be accountable to the public.

I am Sr 
With great Respect 


Hallyards 31st March 




Dear Sir

I have had notice from my Son of the Copper plates being come & have desired him to put them into your hands with my request to have some proof impressions as soon as convenient. That we may consider what is necessary or may be done for their improvement & this I am perswaded you will think right. We are proceeding as you probably know at the press. And I am much allarmed at the probable size or [xxx] of our Volumes if condensed into four. A lumpy Octavo is of all forms the most inconvenient to me & I break down some of my books into separate vol's. I should earnestly wish if it can be done without great inconvenience that our book could be divided into six Vol. s. The [xxx] Stitched should be nearly the same & if more when bound I shoud hope the  buyer would be reconciled on account of the more convenient & portable form. I make these remarks to have them considered before the first separation of a Vol. And you will determine what should be done. I am

Dear Sir 

most  

Hallyards near Peebles 13 Septr 1798

Gentlemen

I am glad to see the plates so little dammaged as they appear to be. The first execution had little elegance or merit of any sort; And nothing material at present occurs to me for their improvement: but when reduced I shall be glad to have a proof of each separately when perhaps some little addition of names &c may occur.

I should think that the two plates Nºs 3 & 5 would not need to be reduced as they may somehow be folded into the Octavo Vol. but of this you can judge better. If you should imagine it of any consequence to have a representation of the author there is in this family a Miniature well done which may be copyed for the title page in form of a medallion but such things if not well executed are best omitted. I expect to be in Edinburgh soon when I shall call upon you And Am,




Chapel Street friday 17th May 1799

Dear Sir

I am about my departure for the Country. I wish to make some presents here but now recollect only Sir Ralph Abercrombie Lord Dalkeith Lord Ancram & Mr Kerr of the Post Office to whom we are so much Obliged. When the Vols are Stitched be so good as send Copies to these three Four Persons, Directed to each from the Author. You will learn at what Shop Lord Dalkeiths & Lord Ancrams parcels are taken in & they have Messengers every day in Town. I imagine I shall not trouble you for many more here but if any should occur to yourself or me I may trouble you hereafter. I am Dear Sir


 






William Strahan Esqr



1817–66–6———2.2 

18

18

17–6

17–6

6–6

6–6

———

———

2.2 

2.2
Hallyards near Peebles 22 April 1805

Gentlemen

I have received the two Quarto Vols you sent accompanyed with a Letter from Cadel and Davis concluding with their opinion on the subject of an Octavo Edition. The same they told me a year or two ago; but is not an Answer to the Question I wished you to put. This was to sound them on the Subject of transferring the Property, which as the Sale is so dull I should think they may not be unwilling to do. If so I should wish to know upon what terms that I might determine what is proper for me to do either now or by such improvements as occur to me left to my Heirs. In all this I wish you to proceed as from yourselves without any mention of me.

N.B. you will please to Observe that if Cadel & Davis were to print a new Edition there would be two hundred pounds due to me. I am Gentlemen


 

Hallyards near Peebles 20 August 1807

Gentlemen

I want for a particular purpose a Sett of my little works. That is to say. The Essay on the History of Civil Society, one vol. 8vo. The History of the progress and Termination of Roman Republick 5 Vols 8vo the last Edition. The Principles of Moral & Political Science 2 Vols 4to. Let them be decently bound: The Edges stained of a deep Red or Claret Colour with thick Boards Letter & numbered on the back. I wish to have them soon & when ready please to have them well packed up & sent to me here by the Peebles Carrier.

I am 







Messs Bell & Bradfute
St Andrews 21st July 1810



I have received your letter acquainting me that Trustees whom you do not name are now deliberating on the publication of my worthy Friends and your late Uncle's Manuscripts. Of this you must be sensible that I cannot give any opinion. The small part I saw or with my impaired sight could decipher did not appear to me intended for publication: but rather the amusement of leisure in the exercise of a talent in which our friend excelled, the easy satisfactory detail of familiar occurrences affording a pleasure which his correspondents experienced in every letter he wrote to them. I was so pleased in reading the part you showed me or I could attempt to read but  it related to things and persons, most of us so obscure as not to be entitled to publick notice, that I should not be willing to exceed what I believed to be the Authors original intention by publication. And I thought myself the more at liberty to give this opinion, that I found my own name repeated with that partial favour which I always experienced from my friend. It was our lot thro' great part of our time to be neighbours so near as to be frequently together and the opportunities I believe were never willingly omitted by either. We were Socii Criminis in the countenance we gave to the first representation of our friend J. Home's Tragedy of Douglas, a charge for which I was never called to Account But Dr Carlyle was more known & had more enemies who by prosecuting him for this offence declared him innocent of any thing more likely to serve their spite. We were also accessory to the formation of a Poker Club, & survived most of its members, & thus had occasion of regret which are but ill refrained in the solitary comforts of sequestered Old Age. You cannot doubt my desire to promote  the respect which is due to the memory of Dr Carlysle's memory; But how I know not beyond the testimony if it were called for that I never knew a more steady friend or more agreable companion, and in this I should have so many concurring witnesses as to make my words of little Account. I shall be anxious to know how you proceed, and I beg I may hear from you.

I am with best respects to Mrs Bell

yours most affectionately





I have the honour of your Lordships letter with the Copys inclosed & am extremely sorry for the occasion to which they relate. I am even surprised to find that Lord Chesterfield should suppose my Claim to the Annuity in question precluded by expressions in a letter which was neither addressed nor communicated to me or shoud Suppose me fettered now by a condition which was never proposed to me. It is true that in deliberating on the terms that were offered me by The Earl of Chesterfields Guardians I considered both the risk I ran of  loseing my Professorship & the chance I had of being able to retain it but never once imagined that my Annuity, the sole lucrative consideration on which I agreed to the proposal, was to depend on either Event.

Your Lordship I observe had mentioned to Lord Chesterfield that I did lose my Professorship & that I enjoy it now through the favour of those who reelected me before I parted with his Lordship . If there were any doubt of the hazard I ran of loseing my Professorship that fact must certainly remove it. The Town Council of Edinburgh who are the Patrons of this University did by one act deprive me of my office: but on hearing my Plea against some irregularitys in their proceeding & my application for favour, they by a subsequent Resolution erased the former from their Records. And were even willing to indulge me with leave of Absence for another term, which woud have enabled me to remain with Lord Chesterfield untill he attained the Age of twenty one years: But the Act of His  Lordships last Guardians, made it unnecessary for me to avail myself of their Indulgence. This fact however has not been stated by me as any part in the foundation of my Claim to an Annuity from His Lordship nor has it before now been ever mentioned by me in the course of this bussiness: so that His Lordships expressions in chargeing me with meanness on that account are at least unguarded if not unjurious. It is sufficiently dissagreeable to have any disspute whatever with His Lordship without the addition of ungracious terms: And if I were writeing to His Lordship I shoud endeavour to make him sensible of this truth by some such conjunction of Epithets as he has made to me. That it is mean, for instance, in The Earl of Chesterfield to impute to me a part which I never acted, or to excuse himself from the performance of a bargain by alledgeing a condition which never was Stipulated.

Lord Chesterfield I perceive intends me no more than Justice, & it is indeed all I ever proposed to ask of His Lordship. I am only sorry that he makes it necessary to apply any where else for a determination of what that Justice is, but must Suppose that he has as little inclination as power to withhold it from me.

I have a very disstinct remembrance of the passage in Mr Lovel Stanhopes Conversation to which your Lordship alludes. Having mentioned with other things my Claim to this Annuity Mr Stanhope was pleased to say that although he believed it woud fall on Lord Chesterfield at last: yet he coud do nothing relating to it at present. And this I mentioned in the letters I then wrote to My Lord Stanhope to Sr George Savile & to Mr Hewett.

The Idea of a Lawsuit with persons to whom I owed every Duty & with whom I expected to Remain on terms of confidence and friendship, is extremely painful to me: but from the Papers which I have the honour to receive from your Lordship now appears unavoidable. My Suit I imagine must stand against The Earls of Chesterfield & Stanhope jointly: but I shall wait for My Lord Stanhopes commands, which may be sent to Mr Chalmer my Agent in St. Albans Street or to myself here before my Counsel or Solicitor proceeds. Mr Smith Arrived here yesterday & joins me in Respects. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

My Lord 
your Lordships most 
obliged & most  








Lord Viscount Mahon



I have the honour of Your Lordships letter with the Copys inclosed and am extremely sorry for the occasion to which they relate. I am even surprised to find that Lord Chesterfield should suppose my Claim to the Annuity in question precluded by expressions in a letter which was neither addressed nor communicated to me or should Suppose me fettered now by a condition which was never proposed to me. It is true that in deliberating on the terms that were offered me by The Earl of Chesterfields Guardians I considered both the risk I ran of of loseing my Professorship and the chance I had of being able to retain it but never once imagined that my Annuity, the sole lucrative consideration on which I agreed to the proposal, was to depend on either Event.

Your Lordship I observe had mentioned to Lord Chesterfield that I did lose my Professorship and that I enjoy it now through the favour of those who reelected me before I parted with his Lordship. If there were any doubt of the hazard I ran of loseing my Professorship that fact must certainly remove it. The Town Council of Edinburgh who are the Patrons of this University did by one act deprive me of my office: but on hearing my Plea against some irregularitys in their proceeding and my application for favour, they by a subsequent Resolution erased the former from their Records. And were even willing to indulge me with leave of Absence for another term, which would have enabled me to remain with Lord Chesterfield untill he attained the Age of twenty one Years: But the Act of His Lordships last Guardians, made it unnecessary for me to avail myself of their Indulgence. This fact however has not been stated by me as any part in the foundation of my Claim to an Annuity from His Lordship nor has it before now been ever mentioned by me in the course of this bussiness: so that His Lordships expressions in chargeing me with meanness on that account are at least unguard[e]d if not injurious. It is sufficiently dissagreeable to have any disspute whatever with His Lordship without the addition of ungracious terms: And if I were writeing to His Lordship I shoud endeavour to make him sensible of this truth by some such conjunction of Epithets as he has made to me. That it is mean, for instance, in The Earl of Chesterfield to impute to me a part which I never acted, or to excuse himself from the performance of a bargain by alledgeing a condition which never was stipulated.

Lord Chesterfield I perceive intends me no more than Justice, and it is indeed all I ever proposed to ask of His Lordship. I am only sorry that he makes it necessary to apply any where else for a determination of what that Justice is, but must suppose that he has as little inclination as power to with-hold it from me.

I have a very distinct remembrance of the passage in Mr Lovel Stanhopes Conversation to which Your Lordship alludes. Having mentioned with other things my Claim to this Annuity Mr Stanhope was pleased to say that although he believed it woud fall on Lord Chesterfield at last: yet he coud do nothing relating to it at present. And this I mentioned in the letters I then wrote to My Lord Stanhope to Sir George Savile and to Mr Hewett.

The Idea of a Lawsuit with persons to whom I owed every Duty and with whom I expected to Remain on terms of confidence and friendship, is extremely painful to me: but from the Papers which I have the honour to receive from your Lordship now appears unavoidable. My Suit I imagine must stand against The Earls of Chesterfield and Stanhope jointly: but I shall wait for My Lord Stanhopes commands, which may be sent to Mr Chalmer my Agent in St Albans Sreet or to myself here before my Counsel or Solicitor proceeds. Mr Smith Arrived here yesterday and joins me in Respects. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect My Lord

Your Lordships most 
obliged and most  



Revd Sir

you have done me a great deal of honour, in making me the conveyance of a proposal from the Committee of Association in the County of York,for a reformation of Parliament, & for the extension and better regulation of the right of Election to Parliament throughout the Kingdom. I took the first opportunity my Health would allow to communicate the contents of your Packet to Mr Ilay Campbell a Gentleman of the first Character in this Country, who, I understood was employed in preparing the Draft of a Bill relating to the right of Election in Scotland. And am desired to return his thanks to you and the Other Gentlemen of the Yorkshire Committee. This matter is under consideration here, chiefly with a view to reform a Supposed abuse  which has recently crept into the manner of constituting qualifications to vote at County Elections. Persons having extensive Superiorities in this part of the Kingdom, parcel them out to their retainers & Friends in such manner as to multiply Votes without increasing the number of Voters. The person who confers these qualifications being understood to dispose of the Votes as he pleases. Of those concerned in this reform, many no doubt are willing to reduce the qualifications of voters so as to increase their number: but this like many other reformations, I am told, must be the work of time & some caution. My own earnest wish has long been, that we had the same Law of Parliament with you as far as relates to County Elections: but I confess that I do not hope ever to obtain it.

I am very happy that my writings make me be considered as a Sincere friend  of the Constitution: being so little able to serve it in practice the least I can do is to pay it all due respect in my Speculations. One of its beauties is that it can withstand many evils without being overthrown. I know nothing so likely to be fatal to it as the weakness & Cowardice of those on whom its preservation depends. And I sincerely believe that to preserve the rights of the people the Vigour of the Crown is not less necessary than their own. To make us as happy, as our Constitution woud admit of, requires indeed many other conditions, which I hope we shall long improve or retain.

I have the honour to be with 
great Respect 
Revd Sir 

 



‘He wrote a letter to the Town Council, begging leave of absence for one season, and proposing Mr Bruce to be allowed by the Council to teach in his place. This letter, indeed, was not delivered; because the member of the Council to whom it was addressed, upon its being mentioned to him, advised, as more for Mr Ferguson's interest, that it should not be presented’.


Sr

I have not yet had access to the Rooms in the College, which are alloted to the use of the Natural Philosophy Class; because some Effects belonging to the executors of the Late Professor are still lodged there, & the Person to whose care they are committed is absent from Town. But being informed that those Rooms need reparation, I am Obliged to beg the favour you will apply to My Lord Provost &  The Town Council in order to have them visited, & the necessary repairs considered, in such time as that they may be compleated if possible before the meeting of College. Mr Cumming with whom I am to treat of what relates to the late incumbent & myself, is expected in Town this week, and that no time may be lost after his Arrival, I beg that you will be pleased to lay this request before the first meeting of Council & am Sir


& most  



Dear David

I was just about writing to you when I had the pleasure of your letter. I knew you woud not forgive me if I did not tell you what Josey was doing. He went to Mathisons School immediatly on coming to Town, but has not begun the Greek. We have not been able to find a teacher who has any number of Scholars with whom to class him, it not being the fashion here to begin Greek in this manner & I begin to doubt whether we should gain any considerable advantage by attempting it.

Hunter at the College has two Class's, at the first of which he begins the very Rudiments of the greek grammar at the other he continues to read Greek Authors. Josey will be young enough to mix with his Scholars even at the first class two years hence & it is a question whether we coud prepare him sufficiently for the second. To send him to the first with a smattering learned elsewhere is only enabling him to be idle while the Other Boys are bussy, & perhaps giving him a habit of neglecting the Thing altogether, which literally happened to myself in a like Situation.

Meantime Mathison after some weeks tryal with many  commendations of Josey tells me that he is defective in some of the Principles of the Latin Tongue, particularly in Prosody, & has not a facility in writing sufficient for his School exercises. Part of this complaint may arise from a mere difference in the particulars chiefly attended to in this School & from the manner of teaching. I think Josey reads Virgil very well for his Age but I perhaps woud not be a good Scholar at Mathisons Class. At any rate it will be an advantage to him to be on a footing with his companions in the Mechanical parts & to have fair play to his Emulation. I have for this reason desired Mathison to find me a Person who by Attending him an hour at home in the Evening may bring him forward in the Particulars he wants & to give his Man directions necessary for that purpose & to choose one who is fit to proceed to the Greek with him in case you continue to desire it. He will however read the Latin Grammar with him &c till we hear from you or till he has the same facility of quoting Rules of Prosody that the Other boys at Mathisons Class have acquired by being used to his Way. At Present his Journal as he tells me begins with getting up at eight taking his breakfast & going to School where he remains to Eleven. Then to the High School yard to play at English Man & Scots Man or the Hare  and the dogs, of which I take the merit as I saved him from the writing School at that hour. He returns to School at twelve & continues till two, goes to writing between three & four & spends his Evening as he tells me in getting his School tasks or in reading amusing books such as his Uncles History. In short he is a very amiable boy with quick parts in my opinion as well as yours, and there is no doubt but he will do well. Write your opinion about the Greek: meantime a month will not be misspent in the way I proposed. After that he may go on to the Greek or the French or some thing else as you shall think proper.

I am very glad of every thing that gives you pleasure even of some things that give you pain. From all accounts both before & since you went to Paris it might have be foreseen that your reception even from Sincere as well as affected admirers woud amount to a degree of teasing. But all for the best as my fellow Philosopher Pangloss says. I dont care if you are chassé de France à Coups de Complimens & accablé en Angleterre a coups de richesse so as not to find any rest to the Soles of your feet out of Scotland. I woud fain consider every accession to your Fortune as so many dishes added to the future dinners in James's Court & your Eclat in France as  the forerunner of much Variety of chosen & excellent Wines from every quarter of that great Kingdom. Mean time tho I like to lounge at firesides in practice I have not in speculation that opinion you mention. I know nothing that is necessary to happiness but Cordiallity & the talent of finding diversion in all places. I remember somewhere a Mans being told that he was too Nice because he coud not dine on a Ragout and must have cold mutton. But I shoud not perhaps contradict you so flatly nor rub so hard considering how tender your Sensibility will be grown after so many lenient applications.

I have seen Lord Marischall sometimes since he has been here, he is indeed very engaging & I shall certainly follow your directions relating to him. Ahmet Ulla now a Christian has followed him to this place. It is a pity she changed before she came here she woud have been the first Lady who ever entertained at Edinburgh the hopes of Rogering to all Eternity. I need not tell you to put Gen'l Clerk in mind of me. I only wait to hear of his coming to London or some place of Residence in order to write to Him.

I am just now interrupted by one Lister chosen by Mathison who is to attend Josey as above at the rate of two Guineas or if that is too much a Guinea & half a Quarter.

All your friends here are well. Believe me to 
be Dear David 
Most Affectionately yours 
&c Adam Ferguson





Dear Sir

I promised to make all my applications to the Ministry by your means & I hope that before all the affairs of this church & State are settled you will think me a man of my word. I beg that if you are not disgraced and on your way to Scotland before this comes to hand, which I hope you will be very soon, that you will favour the Prayer of the inclosed Petition from My Colleagues. I am not concerned but their Petition is reasonable it is gone I believe to The treasury by some Proper conveyance & I woud fain hope it may receive some Support from you likewise as being of the Northern Department.

I am glad to hear from Jno Home that the last representation we made in his affair may be Satisfactory. God grant your continuance in Power till this affair is dispatched. I am  much obliged to you for the Review and to the Author of it for his favour & partiality to me. I have just now sent me by Lord Kames who is at Blair Drummond a Letter of Mrs Montagu to His Lordship. If I knew the ground on which she trod in this countrey I woud kiss it for the Notice she is pleased to take of me. I am very sorry for the complaints of her health & for her thinking that mankind in any state shoud be as perfect as her conceptions, in order to give Satisfaction. I dont believe that there is in the whole list of created beings one that acts his part or fulfills his destiny better than man, & I am perfectly satisfied with him & with no circumstance better than I am with his fancying a perfection superiour to his own Nature which is the foundation of many of his complaints. I write all this in hopes that when you see Mrs Montagu you will mix some of my Philosophy with your own. I am nevertheless somewhat Angry  with her for conjuring up the Spartan black broth against me . I thought to have laid this Devil under the Genteeler appellation of Pottage which you know is here a dish in great request. I know that you are an admirer of the Athenians as well as Mrs Montagu & if I were to plead the cause of Sparta against her I must appeal somewhere else. Meantime I believe in my conscience that very few even of the Spartans coud receive her commendations without Vanity, and I am in this Article but a mere Scots Man.

John Home sets out for London next week. I expect to dine at the Poker with Edgar, to day he goes there for the first time. All is well here & what your malice wanted to represent as mischief done by me has turned out no mischief at all.

I am Dr Sr 
 
 

Geneva June 6th 1774



I wrote you a short line from London as Other people do when they draw Money. Matters here were then & still continue in some dissorder but I hope that from this time forward I shall be able to draw my appointments pretty Regularly & shall in a little time endeavour to replace what you so kindly favoured me with. My Journey to this place has furnished no adventures worthy of being told. It has been extremely pleasant & tho we have lately spent a month in making the Tour of Swisserland I am not yet tired of Wandering. That Country is Curious by Nature by Art & by Politics. In the Aristocratical Cantons all Councils are Secret & the people are well Governed nobody knows how. As for the Democratical I could be mad enough to put on great breeches and let my Beard grow if the people would admit me to be one of them. In the meantime I think myself very happy in the Prospect of returning to Scotland after I have passed a year or  two in this way of Life I hope not unprofitably.

I think I am very fortunate in the Character of My young Friend as well as in the whole of the Connections I have formed. He has Vivacity Parts & good Disspositions, a little spoilt perhaps by certain Circumstances but if every thing were already Perfect there would be nothing further to be done.

I am now writing on the Very Spot where Calvin reformed the reformed Churches this being the place of his house & Garden where we Live & I feel the warmth of my Zeal sufficiently against all reprobates altho I shall not indulge it in this letter. I am likewise in sight of Voltairs Castle another worthy tho of a different description. I have seen him but it is probable can tell you nothing new of him. He is worn to a shadow but has all his Vivacity & his Genius Intire. The last proof he has given of it is a Satire in Dialogue between Pegasus & himself which I think is perfectly equal to what he used to write. He writes frolicking Cards to Lord Chesterfield & calls him, mon droit honor  honorable Seigneur & Signs himself Le Pauvre Diable de Ferney. A Geneva Lady had a dispute with him lately about the Trinity, When she had finished a Speech he Answered

Jusqu'a ce jour Iris la Trinité 
Dans mon Esprit n'a pas fait fortune 
mais unissant les trois graces en une 
Vous confonde[z] mon Incredulité







He entertained us with a Philippic against France and its Bigottry. Lord Chesterfield said he should go to england, Ah si je n'avez que Soixante & dix Ans Said.

So much for Voltair. I hope you favour me with a line & that I shall Peggy is not fallen off in her Cookery in your Eating, when I have finished Education, I hope to be better Judge of matters. Please to direct for me at the Ed . . . .

 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .




I received about eight days ago, after I had been reading your History, the copy which you have been So good as to send me, and for which I now trouble you with my thanks. But even if I had not been thus called upon to offer you my respects; I coud not have refrained from congratulating you on the merit, & undoubted success of this valuable performance. The Persons of this place, whose Judgement you will value most, agree in opinion, that you have made a great addition to the Classical Literature of england, and  given us, what Thucydides purposed leaving with his own Countreymen, A Possession in Perpetuity. Men of a certain Modesty and Merit always exceed the expectation of their Friends; and it is with very great pleasure I tell you: that altho you must have observed in me every mark of Consideration and regard; that this is nevertheless the case I receive your Instructions, and Study your model, with great deference, and join with every one else in applauding the extent of your Plan in hands so well able to execute it. Some of your readers I find were impatient to get at the fifteenth Chapter, and began at that place. I have not heard much of their Criticism but am told that many doubt of your Orthodoxy. I wish to be always of the Charitable side while I own you have proved that the Clearest stream may become foul when it comes to run over the muddy bottom of human Nature. I have not stayed to make any  particular remarks: If any should occur on a Second reading I shall not fail to lay in my claim to a more needed & more useful admonition from you in case I ever produce any thing that merits your Attention.

And am with the greatest respect 




Dear Sir

I shoud make some apology for not writeing you sooner in Answer to your Obligeing letter: but if you shoud honour me frequently with such requests you will find, that with very good intentions I am a very dilatory, irregular correspondent. I am sorry to tell you that our Respectable Friend is still declining in his health, he is greatly emaciated & loses strength. He talks familiarly of his near prospect of dying. His Mother it seems died under the same symptoms. And it appears so little necessary or proper  to flatter him that no one attempts it. I never Observed his Understanding more clear or his humour more pleasant & Lively. He has a great Aversion to leave the tranquillity of his own house to go in search of health among Inns and Hostlers. And his Friends here gave way to him for some time: but now think it necessary that he shoud make an Effort to try what change of Place & Air or any thing else Sir John Pringle may advise can do for him. I left him this morning in the mind to comply in this Article & I hope that he will be prevailed on to Set out in a few days. He is just now Sixty-five.

I am very glad that the Pleasure you give us recoils a little on yourself through our Feeble Testimony. I have as you suppose been employed at any intervals of Leisure or rest I have had for some years, in taking  notes or collecting Materials for a History of the Disstractions that broke down the Roman Republic & ended in the Establishments of Augustus & his immediate Successors. The Compliment you are pleased to pay I cannot accept of even to my Subject. Your Subject now appears with advantages which it was not supposed to have had. And I suspect that the Magnificence of the Mouldering Ruin will appear more Striking, than the same building when the view is perplexed with Scaffolding Workmen & dissorderly lodgers And the Ear is Stunned with the noise of destruction & repairs & the Alarms of Fire. The Night which you begin to describe is Solemn & there are Gleams of Light Superior to what is to be found in any Other time. I comfort myself that as my trade is the Study of human Nature I coud not fix on a more interesting Corner of it than  the end of the Roman Republic. Whether my Compilations shoud ever deserve the attention of any one besides myself must remain to be determined after they are farther Advanced. I take the Liberty to trouble you with the inclosed for Mr Smith, whose uncertain stay at London makes me at a loss how to direct for him. You have both such reason to be pleased with the World just now that I hope you are pleased with each other.

I am, with the greatest Respect, Dear Sir, Your most Obedient, and most 


Sciennes 4th March 1790

Dear Madam

I can without hesitation or reserve answer the Question which you put to me having read Mr Alisons Book soon after it was published. This volume is given but for a part of the intended Work. It is written in my opinion with perspicuity ease and Elegance. His Arguments on the different points he undertakes to Prove, full & to me convincing. So that I think it must do him great credit with the Publick & satisfy his friends that they may venture to recommend him with great Confidence.

I have the honour to be Dr Madam




London, March 10th 1779

My Lord,

I should have been to wait on your Lordship with the inclosed Papers if I were not confined by the Remains of a Smart Fit of a Feaver I had in the End of last week. The Person to whom they relate & who means to present them to Your Lordship has I believe stated the Facts very fairly & will probably obtain your Lordships Pardon for this Trouble. He flattered himself that His Memorial was  to have been presented to Lord North by Mr Mc Donald to whom he has long been known but is dissappointed by Mr McDonalds being gone as he informs me to the Countrey for Some weeks.

He tells me he had the Honour of being presented to Your Lordship in America & has pressed me very earnestly to Sollicit your Protection in his application for some relief to his present difficulties. Your Name in any way Accompanying these Papers to the Minister may procure him some Attention & he will probably leave them for your Consideration. The Patronage of Disstressed Americans is not at present a Station of Pleasure: but times may change.

The few Letters I have received from  New York by the last Packet confirm the former favourable Accounts & are summd up by saying that The Congress are Allarmd and dissunited.

I have the Honour to be with the greatest Respect My Lord your Lordships most Obliged & most obedient 



To The Earl of Carlisle
Hallyards near Peebles, N.B. 11th January 1798

Dear Sir

you do me great pleasure by calling upon me for any thing that can be of use to you. My late worthy Brothers Esteem and Obligations have made you more than a Relation.

I certainly could interpret some of the names in the list you have sent me: but think I do better in referring you by the inclosed to My Friend Mr Bisset Minister of the Parish who by this daily use of the language and view of the places can much better connect the name and description together. I know it is a received Notion with Antiquaries here that most names of places in the Country are of gallic original and actually descriptive of the Situation. Much of this no doubt is true  & not a little imaginary as you will easily admit when you consider by what accident names are affixed to places without any meaning.

The district of Scotland in which the gallic etimologist is most Successful in this Way is the Counties of Air & Galway, where no Gallic has been Spoken time out of mind. And yet the inference is fair that it must have been the vulgar tongue formerly. As to the fact I have just heard it asserted & no more that a very Old man in the memory of People in the last Age used to say he remembered when the Common people spoke Gallic about him. And yet the total change of one Language for another totally & radically different is Scarcely to be accounted for without the Absolute extirpation of one Race & Substitution of Another. We perceive how the Latin has been changed into Italian Spanish & even French by time & a mixture of Races. But I  dont believe that the Saxon has come to be Substituted for Welsh or Gallic and a total change made without the removeal of those who Spoke the one to make way for those who Spoke the Other. And our imperfect account of these removeals & Supplantations has made me very Sceptical respecting the Authority of our History in many parts.

But this is perhaps little to your purpose. Altho' one impression your Dictionary will make on the mind of your readers is: That the Scoto Saxon[s] as well as Anglo Saxons are now in possession of a Country originally Gallic. I return the list of names as it may save you the trouble of recurring again to the Map and together with my letter to Mr Bisset send you one also to Mr McLaggan Minister at Blair in Athol who is highly reputed as a Gaelic Scholar and Antiquary. If he have proper Maps within his  reach I trust he will extend his Observations & interpretation of names beyond his own Parish or immediate Neighbourhood.

I am dear Sir with the most Sincere regard your most Obed.t 
& most humble Servt 






George Chalmers Esqr



Being informed of an Intention to appoint me Professor of Moral Philosophy in the place of Mr Balfour who has resigned in order to make way for Mr Russell to succeed me in the Professorship of Natural Philosophy: I hereby give my full consent to the part of this Arrangement which depends on me, & intend this letter to your Lordship as a resignation of my present office of Professor of Natural Philosophy in the College of Edinburgh in order that the other parts of this Arrangement may be put in execution. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect to your Lord Lordship & the Town Council

My Lord 
your Lordships most Obliged 
& most  








To George Drummond Esqr 
Lord Provost of Edinburgh


To His Grace The Duke of Montagu from Dr Ferguson at Edinburgh

A Gentleman in whose ingenuity, the writer of this memorandum has much Confidence, says, that he knows of a method of attack against which Gibraltar is not provided, & by which of course it might be taken by the Enemy. The Defence, if known might defer the event or oblige the besiegers to repeat their attack with disadvantage; but could not in the end prevent the effect of it.

He farther professes to know of means that may be employed to keep vessels afloat, when in danger of sinking at Sea, And which would be effectual to raise the Royal George now sunk at Spithead.


New York Octr 15th 1778


I beg leave to present to your Lordship my most Respectful acknowledgements for the terms in [which] you are pleased to make known to the King's Commissioners His Majesty's most gracious approbation of their choice in nominating me to act as Secretary to the Commission & for having laid before His Majesty an Instrument for His Royal Signature confirming me in that office. I hope I shall ever retain a proper sense of My Duty  to His Majesty and of my Obligation on this occasion to your Lordship.

I have the Honour to be with the greatest Respect

My Lord 
your Lordships 
most Obedient 
& most  

London 29 May 1779


Being to Deliver to your Lordship the Letter of His Majestys Commissioners containing their Thanks for His Majestys gracious Acceptance of their Services, I meant at the same time to have begged Leave to present my own to your Lordship for the Obliging Protection I have experienced both in My Nomination as Secretary & in the Discharge of My humble Duties. It will ever be a happiness to me to have any opportunity of exerting my Affection & Loyalty to His Majesty & of Evincing the Sense I retain of My Obligation to your Lordship.

I have the Honour to be with 
the greatest Respect 
My Lord 
your Lordships 
most Obedient & 
most  














Lord George Germain






Having received a Call to attend a young Nobleman abroad & in circumstances that require my Speedy compliance, I take this way of making my request to your Lordship & the Town Council that I may be allowed to Substitute proper persons in what remains of my bussiness in the College for this winter. Ever since I have had the honour of being a Professor I have endeavoured faithfully to discharge my duty to the Public, & if I may judge from the countenance occasionally given to me by the Patrons of the University, not without their approbation. This encourages me to hope that in a matter which is of so much importance to my family I may have  every reasonable Indulgence. And I now beg that your Lordship woud communicate my earnest Intreaty to the Council that they woud either be pleased to point out to me Persons Proper for this Substitution, Or allow me to Apply to Dr Lind to teach what remains to be taught this Session of the Natural Philosophy And to the Rev. d Mr Grieve at Dalkeith to teach what remains to be taught of the Moral Philosophy. My knowledge of the Learning & Abilitys of these Gentlemen is such; that if they undertake the several tasks I have mentioned for them; I am confident that they will perform them to the advantage of the Students & the Satisfaction of the Public. I have the Honour to be with the greatest Respect

My Lord your Lordships 
most Obliged & most  






P.S. Edinburgh 15th Febry 1774: The Lord Provost from the Committee to whom the foregoing Letter was remitted Reports that after Considering the Same and reasoning thereupon. It is the Opinion of the Committee, the Councill not grant the request in the said Letter, but that Professor Ferguson ought to be directed to teach what Remains to be taught this Session himself. Gilb. Laurie P.
Hallyards near Peebles 9th March 1798



I have notice of your kindness in the nomination of my relation Robert Stuart to an Indian Cadetship. As I believe you would not suppose me insensible I hesitated whether to give you the trouble of opening a letter on the Subject: But as this is done: I have no more but to Pray that God may bless and Prosper you for the preservation of us all. I am with great Respect your most Obliged

and most Obedient 


Hallyards near Peebles 18th January 1802



I have not lost sight of the subject on which you permitted me to write. And have been kept back more by want of Strength than of good will to the work. You may consider what follows as a last effort of impending Fourscore & treat it accordingly.

You know that I glory in the Volunteer Corps of Great Britain and Ireland not as adepts in the mysteries of War & Military Tactics but as a Specimen of what the Country may expect in time of need And an Evidence that no varieties of Condition or occupation can Silence the great Behest of Nature to defend what they possess. With this in my head  I attacked you on the subject of those Corps That the Peace might not be allowed to extinguish that Fire of which the War had struck out such Sparks.

The Publick is well apprised of your merit in Arming so great a Body of the People in defence of their Country, And will look up to you for Support in case any question arise relating to that measure. It was no doubt Idle in me to think of prompting you in a matter so well understood; And this Specimen might have warned you of what was to be expected: but you are now in some measure pledged to bear with what may Come. It is a gratification to me; And if real Respect and the utmost deference to your Judgement of what may or may not be entertained or Attempted can attone for seeming presumption I may hope to be forgiven.

Before the preliminaries of Peace were known to be Signed I had my doubts whether The present government of France was ripe for such a conclusion: but when this  appeared to be the Case & there is so much bussiness to be done for themselves at home, Unless the Republican faction force a War, we may look for a peace of some Continuance & take our measures accordingly.

It is nevertheless wise to consider the longest Peace but as a long Truce and a time of preparation for War. Such are human Affairs And no single Party can mend them, without, what never can be obtained, A consent of the whole.

It requires no foresight to Arm when an Ennemy is at the Door; any more than to Cloak when it rains: But the Proverb enjoins to Cloack when it is fair, leaving the Traveller to do what he pleases when it is foul. You may not need this lesson: but you will not prevail on your People to Arm in time of Peace with the same Alacrity as in time of War. Then the Threats of an Ennemy to give us Law on the Thames: The Insolent attempts that were made to seduce our People from their Allegiance Suggested the Idea of Volunteer Corps; And the pressure of generous Nature into what appeared a post of danger & of honour soon filled the Ranks. But now it is peace and the danger has  vanished; let us not think the occasion is over for such Institutions; nor neglect any measure we can take to preserve them.

It is here if ever that speculation itself may be of use and Stumble upon things that do not occur in practice. My Fancy however I doubt is barren, And terminates in little more than one general prescription To make that appear honourable to which you wish the Honourable and the Worthy to repair. In this I need not say that the gracious Regard of the King & the Example of those about him will have a Powerfull Charm. His Majesty is not a Soldier by Profession I see no reason why he may not be a volunteer: This language may be too free: but it is only to you.

In well ordered Communities the Military Function however highly respected is Still Subordinate to the Civil. Or in other words the sword tho powerful should be directed by Justice. For this I know not any security so effectual as that of placing the Sword, When Education, the Sense of high Rank, And a mighty Station  in the preservation of order, have already placed the virtues of Candour Magna[ni]mity and Justice.

This, in general so wise a measure of Policy, is happily favourable to what we have So earnestly to wish, on the Present occasion. These Islands have their Barrier fortifyed by Nature but to be Safe must have a guarison formed in the bosom of their People And the very organs of Civil & Political order turned into Sinews of Strength.

Nations for the most part would have it in their Power to force the Service they require: And would command rather than accept of Voluntary exertions. This indeed it is fit they should have in Their Power. But the less that the Iron hand of necessity is felt, the Better. If it be Supposed that persons retained to serve the publick as Soldiers can do nothing else; The Power of Defence must be restricted within very narrow limits, unless the People at large & otherwise employed be allowed in consistence with their employments to choose the portion of time they will employ in preparing themselves  for those pressing occasions on which defence may become an Act of necessity equally devolved upon all.

In this the expedience of a Voluntary Militia is sufficiently manifest: but I ought to beg your pardon for couching that point. The means of cultivating the happy disposition of our People to join the use of Arms even during Peace to their other occupations is what I meant to consider.

Here it is Evident that in admitting Recruits we are rather to Select than to solicit; For besides that it is no recommendation to any Institution, that it is open to every one; here is a Trust that must not be prostituted. The Magistrate is to be Supported in the discharge of his Duty & his Supporters must be taken from among those who are likely to respect his Person & the Laws he is Appointed to execute. Those who had volunteered during the War may not be questioned: but for Entrants in future, a Patrimonial or pecuniary qualifications may be required, And a Character without reproach Certainly: For this Purpose a proper form of Attestation may be entrusted with a Magistrate, The Parish Minister &c bearing that the Subject is without reproach, And in his  Condition of Life Orderly Independent and frugal. If our Institution should become fashionable as I hope it may, may we not hope that these Qualifications may become fashionable also.

As Fashions however for the most part descend from the High to the Low; it is surely not too much presumption to hope that there are many well informed liberal & high minded in the upper Ranks who will be pleased to set an Example of so much advantage to their Country.

If I had my wish; every member in either house of Parliament under fifty years of Age, should enroll his name in some Volunteer Corps and give due attention to its forms. There is no question of Precedence on this Parade, a place in the Ranks is as honourable as the first Station of Command. The Object of this Wish is perhaps already more than fulfilled: but it is no more than a Wish and must rest with those concerned. If I durst talk of Enactment: looking forward to a future period, Suppose twenty one years after the present date; might it not be enacted, That after the year 1823 no one should be qualified for a seat in either House of Parliament untill after sixteen years of Age his name had stood enrolled five years in a Volunteer Corps and his Attendance on its duties been  regular.

This it is true would not bring a great Force into the Field; not even if all the members of both Houses should Serve for life. It is not their numbers we trust to; but their Estimation and example. Nor is our Strength to be calculated by numbering the Arms at any one time in hand over the Country: The Object is to exhibit the practice of Arms in such a form of distinction & honour as will excite the Ambition of every ingenuous youth & become a necessary Article in the course of every Liberal Education.

The young and the Active may be allured in this matter, by many little circumstances of Celebrity & publick Notice attending the Military array joined with Other County Solemnities. The Ball The Race the Hunt &c &c And honorary prizes for competition in Facts of Agility & Strength.

We are perhaps too apt to slight such facts as unworthy at least of Gentlemen: but in this we differ from the wisest nations of Antiquity, who sought for vigour of mind And the Emulation  of Glory in the excercises and display of a Vigorous body. If what is called Learning were the sole or principal Objects of education for all ranks and Conditions of men: few nations could boast of advantages in that respect superiour to ours. Many Foundations for publick Instruction were laid before it was known in what men ought to be instructed; but successive Ages have arrived at last at real Science and Elegant Literature which in one degree or Another are supposed the general Objects of Education for all.

There is an Account from Mecklenburg no less pleasant than new. Of no less than an Institution of a School for Schoolmasters. It is wonderfull that this never occurred before; And that we who who have Boards for Agriculture & Trade &c &c should never have a Board for Education to Observe and Supply the wants of succeeding Ages in this Important Article. I would willingly emulate the wisdom of Mecklenburgh: but begin with the Establishment of a Board the Highest and most Dignifyed the State can Compose with the  King himself at their Head And next to His Majesty all who serve or served any of the higher Offices of State Primates Chancellors Secretaries of State &c &c &c. From such a Board all the Instruction might Issue relating to what might be taught & how. It is not likely that they would find any thing to Suppress in our present Universities:b ut the recent institution of a Military College & Practical Institute for The Application of Theory to Art show that somethings may be added. And why not annex Military & Practical schools to every University That beneficial Endowments may not be separated That letters might accompany Practice & the Literary student be kept in mind of his Manhood & the common cause of His King and his Country which may at some interesting time require his exertions. While every Individual is opening a Separate Career for himself it is surely a supreme Object of State, that none should be lost to the Community  in any of its essential Departments whether of Order Resource or defence.

I need not trouble you with my reasons for so much Anxiety about our internal Strength. Please take for an Emblem The great Gyant Briareus. He had 100 Arms & hands, 50 heads & breathed fire at 100 Nostrils. With all this he had but one little Heart on which the whole depended. While the Heart was safe, Briareus could deal his blows and make himself respected at any distance: but if this failed him he was a mere carrion for Vulturs and beasts of Prey.

I once thought before I had done to be upon you with an Idea, which has long pressed on my mind, no less than a Project of giving the Privates whether of the Army or Navy a Scale of Estimation & small advance of Day on which every entrant might hope to better himself by good behaviour: What Happy effect if it could render the Application or even the fear of Punishment less necessary. Besides the Policy of this measure it might appear a proper expression of Gratitude for the honours they have procured  to the national Character.

One word more and I have done. Away with the absurd Fable, Sovereign at the Sea, which we sometimes so idly repeat. We and every Party on Earth to the extent of our force, have a right to impede Search & detain everything from going to an Ennemy, by which he might be enabled to annoy us. But the Sea is not a Subject of Properly Idle Prentensions to homage on: that Element will sett the world against us, more than real usurpations at Land might do: for the first is galling to Thousands: the other only to a few Statesmen.

The weather has reduced me to be mostly in bed where I have repeatedly taken up and laid down this paper & now endeavour to make out my treatise. The labour has not been painful. You have been ever present to my mind. Farewell. My Blessing forever attend you.


Hallyards near Peebles 28 Janry 1802



your bearing with these impertinence without taking any offence is what I expected: And I fear to tresspass on your good Nature: but cannot refrain my Assent my Assent to the Idea of Universal Training for publick Defence. I agree with The Persians of old who are said to have taught all their Children to shoot the Bow as well as to Speak Truth. In these indeed there was no matter for Separate Professions, any more than, in our Case, there is reason to withhold the Powers of Defence from any one who has a Country to defend. The only question is How the powers of Defence may be most effectually extended to all who have a Share in the Stake.

One way is by Compulsory Statute as  in other instances of publick Arrangement. In this way no doubt every Subject may be forced to handle a Firelock: but this is soon Obtained and is of little value if the Heart does not go along with it. There is danger that whatever is forced may leave an impression of Servitude and consequently some degree of repugnance to the Bussiness. It was not the use of Arms but the National Spirit that has of late decided the Fortune of Europe. Another Way is one on which we are already entered. That of fostering Volunteer Corps with attainable marks of Disstinction and Honour. On this Point, what I said, I am affraid a little too flippantly. That The King himself might be a Volunteer, could mean little more, than that His Majesty on certain occasions might wear The Volunteer Uniform as he bears the Collar of an Order, that of the Garter or Thistle on its Day.

In the Volunteers there can be no repugnance; for they consist of the Willing, and as such are likely to be a Selection of the most Worthy. The honours they bear will be alluring  to Numbers, & take like a fashion; infect the mass of the People & to make free with a familiar Allusion: like jest propagate a kind of Military Ferment or Verve through the Whole.

At Rome for Some Ages the Lower Class of the People were not received into the Legions. Every Roman nevertheless was a Soldier in his Heart: both he who was enrolled, and he who Aspired to be so.

You will infer from this that I am partial to the Volunteer Corps; & the more so that we have them Actually in Use. There is a French Proverb, with Cautions, when we have already what is good in our hands, against Aspiring to what is better, but may not be attainable: Le plus grand Ennemi du bien c'est le mieux.

I have the honour to be with Respect and affection 
 

and most obedt 
 

Hallyards near Peebles August 2d 1802



As you gave me leave to write what I thought of your Volunteer Corps, I trust you will take in good part also what occurs to me on the Subject of Buonapartes Legion of honour. I am the more inclined to trouble you with my impressions, upon seeing that Institution slightly treated in some news-paper Articles on both sides [of] the water. This I can believe the Government of France is not averse to, because this Legion is certainly not meant to allarm us: but to strengthen their own hands without being noticed. Such Institutions operate as Alternatives are said to do in Medicine without any instantaneous effect, but requiring time are not to be counteracted by any similar contrivance once the Consequence begins to Appear.

The French Soldiers Enthousiasm for equal claim to preferment is likely [to] abate when the object is secured or no longer contested,  and the State may be obliged to rely on a discipline in which it was is not to have any Advantage over its neighbours. For this reason it might be hoped that France should be less formidable in the nineteenth Century than it had been at the close of the Eighteenth. But the Genius of a Statesman & Warrior who in a few years & by a general consent [xxx] [of] competitors of great renown & Ability has mounted step by step from a very Obscure to the highest Situation is it seems not to suffer the streams of Revolution to spread on the Plain and lose their force. This Policy is likely to be as formidable in Peace as in War. He has actually said or rather enacted, That every French man is to consider himself as the Defender of his Country. That Armies are to be formed by conscription 1st of the young & unmarried, next of an Age more advanced & so on untill the Force that may be employed is that of the whole.

While The Law holds this Language to every Frenchman Such allurements are presented as may engage sufficient numbers to covet the distinction of a soldier, & fill the ranks with Men not pressed but with adventurers who press to be foremost in the Career of Honour. To this purpose we may refer the frequent Military shows, in which  new standards are erected under oaths of Devotion to the Military Duty, with the Ostentatious distribution of honours by which Military Service is signalized and Rewarded. But more especially the Institution of a Legion of which every Rank from the highest to the lowest is to be a place of honour to which those of every Rank may Aspire.

It is surely not necessary to devise any higher Reward than that with which meritorious Commanders of Armies & Fleets are vested in this Country: but the immediat[e] Effect of such rewards, except in mere votes of Thanks and Praise does not descend below the Commander in chief, So far it is good, but partial, while a place in the Legion of Honour is a Spur to Emulation in every Rank. May we not hope that after witnessing the Effects of National Spirit in our Forces abroad & our Volunteers at home, while mere discipline every where else gave way to the fury of a revolutionary madness, that much may be done to show our sense of this Spirit & contribute to foster & Preserve it. I am not partial to former times, or disposed to ascribe the Virtues of men to Ignorance & Poverty: but rather believe that Ranks well employed are favourable to Virtue and Elevation of mind. No Nation Surely ever exhibited  a better Spirit than Britain has done in the height of its affluence: but there is no reason why that Spirit should be neglected or [xxx] because they are a great Resource [xxx] adopted as the only standard of Estimation & ho nour. The Manufacturer I trust will not be less qualifyed to ply his Loom because he is conscious that no Enemy will dare to invade his family or his Property. I am far from being disposed to undervalue the Virtue that has been taken of Military merit: but I wish if Possible to have something devised in the way of that Institution I have mentioned to Penetrate the Souls of men with Sentiments of Elevation & Honour. That Institution never can be slighted because The Sovereign honour is of it And never can lose the Regard payed to it in every rank unless we suppose its appointments prostituted to Subjects unworthy which cannot be frequent in a Country where the Sense of the Army is every thing.

I may not be able to see you in this tour to the Country but be Assured of the most sincere respect And affection as well as confidence in your Ability & Love to your Country. I have the Honour to be with the highest consideration

 

and most  

Hallyards near Peebles 9th June 1804

My Dear Lord

I am aware of the Impropriety of intruding on your Lordship in these times: but my Tenure in the course of Nature cannot be long, And Anxious concern for a Son of mine, who has been now for years an unemployed Writer to The Signet at Edinburgh, has become irresistible. I flatter myself that he is not to blame; And I could account for his want of Success, from the train into which the Bussiness of that Profession has got, of which I was not apprised untill it was too late. But a long letter would not be excuseable.

I have not at present any particular  Request to make; if I had I should probably only interfere with some previous Arrangement. My wish is merely to place the Circumstance of my Son in your Lordship[s] View; And leave it to the Operation of that kind intention towards My Family of which I have So Sensibly felt the effects. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

My Lord your Lordships most Obliged and 
most Obedt humble 
Servant 

St Andrews 7 October 1810

My Dear Lord

The Within is a List of Publications now in my possession. Dr Hill had left this place on his Way to Duneira but I trust this may come to hand before he comes away. I am particularly fond of Troop Ships or floating Barracks While the Continent is as one Party against us & we are surrounded by the sea our Army should be afloat.

I am glad to think I may live to see or Grant the Bust if not the Statue and have the Honour to be with the greatest Respect

your Lordships most Obliged 
& most Obedient  

St Andrews 28 December 1810

My Dear Lord

The Inclosed has come to me without a Name. On being read to me I think it worth your Lordships notice. The measure to which it relates seems to call for all that kind of Benevolence & Wisdom which have distinguished so many of your Lordships acts, that I shall hold myself Excused for this Intrusion.

Your protege is now at Sea more penetrated with your favour than with any other thing that has [xxx xxx].

I have the honour who with the greatest respect Your Lordships most blind but most affectionate 


Letter to the President and Other Members of Congress, His Excellency Henry Laurens the President, and other Members of Congress.

Gentlemen

With an earnest desire to stop the further Effusion of Blood and the Calamities of War, We communicate to you with the least possible delay after our Arrival in this City, a copy of the Commission with which His Majesty is pleased to honor Us, as also the Acts of Parliament on which it is founded, and, at the same time that We assure you of our most earnest desire to reestablish on the Basis of equal freedom and mutual safety the Tranquillity of this once happy Empire; you will observe that we are vested with Powers equal to the Purpose and such as are even unprecedented in the Annals of our History.

In the present State of our Affairs, though fraught with subject of mutual Regret, all parties may draw some degree of Consolation and even Auspicious Hope from the recollection that cordial Reconciliation and Affection have in our own and other Empires succeeded to Contentious and Temporary Divisions not less violent than those We now experience.

We wish not to recall Subjects which are now no longer in Controversy, and will reserve to a proper time of discussion, both the hopes of mutual Benefit and the Consideration of Evils that may naturally contribute to determine your Resolutions as well as our own on this important occasion.

The Acts of Parliament which we transmit to you having passed with singular Unanimity, will sufficiently evince, the disposition of Great Britain, and shew that the Terms of Agreement in Contemplation with His Majesty and with Parliament are such as come up to every wish that North-America either in the hour of temperate Deliberation or of the utmost Apprehension of danger to Liberty has ever expressed.

More effectually to demonstrate Our good Intentions we think proper to declare even in this Our first Communication that We are disposed to Concur in every satisfactory and just arrangement towards the following among other Purposes.

To consent to a Cessation of Hostilities both by Sea and Land.

To Restore free Intercourse, to revive mutual affection, and renew the common Benefits of Naturalization through several parts of this Empire.

To extend every Freedom to Trade that our Respective Interests can require.

To agree that no military Forces shall be kept up in the different States of North America without the consent of the General Congress or particular Assemblys.

To concur in measures calculated to discharge the Debts of America, and to raise the Credit and Value of the Paper Circulation.

To perpetuate Our Union by a Reciprocal Deputation of an Agent or Agents from the different States who shall have the Priviledge of a Seat and Voice in the Parliament of Great Britain or if sent from Britain in that case to have a Seat and Voice in the Assembly's of the different States to which they may be deputed in order to Attend in the several interests of those by whom they are deputed.

In short to establish the Power of the Respective Legislatures in each particular State, to settle its Revenue, its Civil and Military Establishments, and to Exercise a perfect freedom of Legislation and Internal Government, so that the British States throughout North-America acting with us in Peace and War under one Common Sovereign may have the irrevocable enjoyment of every Priviledge that is short of a total Separation of Interests, or consistent with that Union of Force on which the Safety of our common Religion and Liberty depends.

In our Anxiety for preserving those Sacred and essential Interests, We cannot help taking notice of the Insidious Interposition of a Power, which has from the first Settlement of the Colonies been actuated with Enmity to us both. And notwithstanding the pretended date or present form of the French Offers to North-America yet it is notorious that these were made in Consequence of the Plans of Accommodation previously concerted in Great Britain, and with a View to prevent our Reconciliation and to prolong this Destructive War.

But we trust that the Inhabitants of North-America connected with us by the nearest Ties of Consanguinity, speaking the same language, interested in the preservation of similar Institutions, remembering the former happy Intercourse of good Offices and forgetting recent animosities will shrink from the thought of becoming an Accession of force to our late mutual Enemies; and will prefer a firm & free and perpetual Coalition with the Parent State to an insincere and unnatural Foreign Alliance.

This Dispatch will be delivered to you by Doctor Ferguson the Secretary to His Majesty's Commission and for fuller explanation and discussion of every Subject of difference, We desire to meet with you either Collectively or by Deputation, at New York, Philadelphia, York Town or such other place as you may propose. We think it right however to Apprise you, that His Majesty's Instructions as well as our own desire to remove from the immediate Seat of War in the Active Operations of which we cannot take any part, may induce us speedily to remove to New York; but the Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Land Forces (who is joined with Us in the Commission) will if it should become necessary either Concur with us in a Suspension of Hostilities or will furnish all necessary Passports and safe Conduct to Facilitate our meeting and we shall of course expect the same of you: If after the time that may be necessary to consider this Communication and transmit your answer the Horrors and Devastations of War should continue we call God and the World to Witness that the Evils which must follow are not to be imputed to Great Britain. And we cannot without the most real Sorrow anticipate the Prospect of Calamities which we feel the most Ardent desire to prevent. We are with perfect respect

Gentlemen your most Obedient and most s

Philadelphia June 10th 1778
Gentlemen,

With an Earnes[t desire] to stop further Eff[usion] of blood, we seize the [first] moment after our A[rrival to] communicate to you . . . . of the Commission . . . . His Majesty is pleased . . . . us, together with the [will of] Parliament on whic[h it is] founded. And we ha[ve] . . . . as we are vested with [full] Powers you will be . . . . Sincerity of our disp[osition to] employ them in to restore upon the ba[sis of] equal freedom and . . . . Safety the peace of [this] happy Empire.

On this occasion tho fraught with Subjects of Mutual regret we recollect with some degree of Consolation that many of the happiest Establishments of our Constitution which is justly considered as a Model of Civil Liberty, have taken their rise from temporary divisions & Civil  dissensions not less . . . . than those we have rece[ntly] . . . . experienced. But we . . . . mentioning Subjects wh[ich] now no longer in Cont[est] . . . . And reserve to a more . . . . [proper] time of discussion both . . . . hopes of benefit & the c[essa]tion of Evils which are . . . . to determine you as we . . . . ourselves on the impo[rtant] questions that may . . . . the present occasion. . . . 

The Acts which . . . . [com]municate to you having . . . . with a Singular Unan[imity] are sufficient to express [the most ami]cable dissposition of [Great] Britain & to show th[e] . . . . terms of agreement in . . . . [contem]plation with His Maj[esty] . . . . with Parliament, are . . . . come up to every . . . . America either in the hon[ourable] Moderation or of the utm[ost] Jealousy of Liberty . . . . And the sense in which . . . . [un]derstand them carrys . . . . cession that is short of a separation of Interests; . . . . is consistent with that of Force on which the c[ontinuation] of our common Religion [and] liberty may depend.

We Confess that we ar[e] . . . . on the Present occasion by . . . . Insidious interposition of Power which we can have no . . . . mot[ivation] . . . .
New York August 7th, 1778


I have the Honour to transmit to you, by order of Their Excellencies His Majestys Commissioners, The inclosed Paper containing a Remonstrance on the Subject of the Detention of The Troops lately Serving Under Lieutenant General Burgoyne, with a Requisition for their immediate Release: To which I make no doubt that you will pay the attention due to matters of such high Concern.

And have The Honour to be With The Greatest Respect Sir your most obedient & most 



To His Excellency 
Henry Laurens Esqr 
President of The Congress
Copy

New York, 26th October, 1778


It being reported that the Hotham Tender Lieutenant Hale, sent from hence with a Flag of Truce to carry Packets directed, according to the inclosed List and containing the Original and Copies of a Manifesto and Proclamation lately issued by His Majesty's Commissioners, has been wrecked and the Papers lost. I have the Commands of their Excellencies to transmit the inclosed Copies that the Congress may be informed of the Contents, and in Case the Reports respecting the Wreck of the Vessel above mentioned should prove true, communicate them to the Assemblies of Pennsylvania and the Delaware Counties, to whom as well as to the Congress, the Instruments executed in due Form shall be sent as soon as any Desire is by them signified to that effect.


I have, within these few days, been honoured with a circular letter from the Committee of the Highland Society, with Queries relating to the poems of Ossian.

In answer to the first query, the committee will please to know, that about the year 1740, I heard John Fleming, a taylor, who in the manner of the country, worked with his journeymen at my father's house, repeat, in a kind of chiming measure, heroic strains relating to an arrival or landing of an host and a subsequent battle, with a single combat of two chiefs. This I took down in writing, and kept for some time; but was not in possession of when Mr MacPherson's publication appeared. I had no doubt, however, in recognizing the same passage in the arrival of Swaran, and the single combat with Cuchullin, in MacPherson's translation of Fingal.

The few words I can recall, are, 1st, in relation to the hosts engaged:



And in relation to the chiefs who grappled, and in whose struggle



The Committee will be so good as excuse my spelling, and guess at the words as they best can. As John Fleming was then an oldish man, he is probably long since dead.

As to the second query-the Committee will please to know that I have, at different times, heard other scraps or fragments repeated; but the principal use I made of them was, to tell my friend and companion at College, Mr John Home, that there were such relicks of ancient poetry in the Highlands, and which led him to the inquiries which produced Mr MacPherson's communications.

The fragments I afterwards saw in Mr MacPherson's hands, by no means appeared of recent writing: the paper was much stained with smoke, and daubed with Scots snuff.

To the third and fourth queries, I can say nothing, as I am not now in the neighbourhood to which they refer.

To the fifth, please to know that I have, very early in my life, and of course very long, heard of Fingal and his race of heroes, and of poetry on their subject, to be found some where in the Highlands. But as to my qualification to give evidence in this matter, the Committee will please to know, that the place of my nativity in Athole, is barely within the limits at which Gaelic begins to be vulgar tongue, and where the mythology and tradition of the highland were likely to be more faint than in the interior parts. I am sensible that mere opinion must go for little in the midst of such evidence as the Committee are in search of. I cannot, however, entire ly suppress my own, in addressing the committee of a society of which I have the honour to be a member, though prevented by my infirmities from taking any active part in the meritorious pursuits in which they are engaged. In the communications which Mr MacPherson at any time made to me, I was far from apprehending any imposture; but when the poems of Fingal and Temora appeared, I was inclined to think some pains must have been bestowed, and even liberties taken, in piecing together what was found in separate or broken fragments, with defects attending all such traditionary strains. What the collector had to do, or actually did, of this sort, it is impossible to know, if he himself has kept silence on the matter. May we not, without attempting to compare the subjects together, recollect a similar tradition relating to the scattered rhapsodies of Homer himself? and as the collector left no intimation of the pains or liberties he took, we embrace Homer, as we may now do Ossian, as the sole author of strains which bear his name. When I consider the late fashion of the times, respecting the contents of a language which is now thought so interesting, I am not surprised that the gleanings of Mr MacPherson has left so little vestige behind. It was a language spoken in the cottage, but not in the parlour, or at the table of any gentleman. Its greatest elegancies were to be learned from herdsmen or deer-stealers. It was connected with disaffection, and proscribed by government. Schools were erected to supplant it, by teaching a different language. There were no books in it, but the manuals of religion, and these in so awkward and clumsy a spelling that few could read them. The fashionable world in the neighbourhood, as usual, derided the tone and accent of Highlanders, believing their own to be models of elegance and harmony. It was more genteel to be ignorant than knowing of what such a language contained; and it required all the genius, learning, and courage of James MacPherson, to perceive and affirm that the ancient strains of Gaelic poetry might compare with those of other nations more celebrated. If it should still remain a question with many, whether he collected or composed these strains, I shall not be surprised; for I believe, that what he got in writing was unknown to those who gave it, and the merit of what was repeated scarcely felt. And, in short, that he himself at times was not averse to be thought the author of what became so much celebrated and admired throughout Europe.

In writing so much, and so little to the purpose of the Committee's letter, I trust to your usual favour and good nature in helping me to the proper excuses; and am, with the most sincere and perfect regard,


I am sorry to feel that I can do but little to supply the defects of your materials, in framing the intended Memoir relating to the life of my very particular friend John Home. My intimacy with him began at College, about the year 1743, or 44. I left Scotland in the summer 1745, did not return till the year 1751, and had no fixed residence in Scotland till near 1760, and my recollection of transactions, or rather of dates, within this whole period, is very imperfect, and even perplexed.

As to Mr. Homes early visits to London, I heard of one in company with some of Mr. Adam's family, and believe it was then he met with his repulse from Garrick, and made his address to Shakespeare's monument. I know not whether he was then presented to Lord Bute, but have heard of his interviews with Mr. Pitt, afterwards Earl of Chatham. His openness, ardour, and warmth of  heart, recommended him equally to Mr. Pitt and Lord Bute; but the political difference which arose and increased betwixt these personages, lost him the one in the same degree as he acquired the other.

It was, I think, in his first visit to London, he fell in with Collins the poet, perhaps introduced by Mr. Barrow, who, as you suppose, was his fellow adventurer in the castle of Doune, and continued through life his warm and affectionate friend, as I too experienced by Home's recommendation. Home's access to Lord Bute procured Barrow the office of paymaster to the army, during the American war, where scores of millions passed through his hands, and left him returning to England, I believe, nearly as poor as he went.

I lived, as you suppose, with Mr. Home, at Braid, a farmhouse two miles south of Edinburgh; but as to the date, I can say nothing, but suppose it may have been after the first representation of Douglas at Edinburgh, and after he was far gone in the favour of Lord Bute.

I remember he was then much engaged in versifying, but cannot say what. I think, but may be mistaken, it was in some changes or amendments wished by Lord Bute, in the tragedy of Agis; and even in concert with Garrick, who was beginning to regard the influence of Lord Bute more than he had formerly regarded the applications of Home. I  am by no means qualifyed to mention what different subjects, or works, Mr. Home attempted or executed, as I myself, during the busiest time of his life, was much engaged abroad, sometimes in the Low Countries, in Germany, Switzerland, and even in America. As to any attempt of his in comedy, I never heard of any such thing; and, if the public are not much interested to know the failures as well as successes of literary men, I should be willing to have the attempt in comedy you mention entirely suppressed, as one of the mistakes we commit in moments of dulness or error.

As to what you call the party at Moffat, I cannot pretend to recollect the date to which it may be referred. I believe it was not any concerted party. John Home was there by himself — lived at the Ordinary — and met with James M'Pherson at the Bowling Green. M'Pherson was there with his pupil, young Graham of Balgoun (now Lord Lynedoch), living with his mother, Lady Christian Graham, at her Brother, Lord Hopetoun's house, in that village. What passed between John Home and James M'Pherson, I soon after heard of; and had no doubt it was a continuation of what had passed frequently betwixt Home and myself, on the subject of reported traditionary poetry in the Highlands. There was another highlander there, who, as well as Mr. Home, I understood, obtruded on M'Pherson  with inquiries on that subject. M'Pherson confirmed the report; and being asked whether he could exhibit any specimens, said he was possessed of several; and on Home's wishing to have some translation, M'Pherson agreed, and furnished him with some of those fragments which were afterwards printed in a pamphlet, and drew that public attention which gave rise to the further proceeding on the subject.

David Hume was not at Moffat when these interviews with M'Pherson took place; he was, you know, a professed sceptic, and cannot properly be said to have ever formally affirmed or denied the authenticity or imposture of the poetry in question. He began, and continued to call for evidence-perhaps for more evidence than the circumstances of the case could admit; but this, you know, is the essence of scepticism; —to most men, day- light is sufficient evidence that the sun is rising or risen; but the sceptic would always have more, even if the rays are vertical.

As to the project and subscription which afterwards took place, to dispatch M'Pherson to collect more poetry in the Highlands, I was not then in Scotland, nor heard of it till some time afterwards.

Mr. Home certainly never entertained any doubt that the original of Mr. M'Pherson's translations was traditionary in the Highlands.

As to the society he mostly frequented at London, you seem to be sufficiently informed. Lord Bute generally treated him with an uncommon degree of affection; their minds were much at unison in all the sentiments of admiration or contempt. The sphere of attentions paid to Mr. Home at London, no doubt extended after the representation of Douglas; but I have ever since been too little in London to be apprised of particulars for your information; and as to the defects of what you might expect from me on the subject of this letter in general, I trust you will forgive it, being now for many years declining, while you and many other younger men are advancing in knowledge and power.

I am visited sometimes by Dempster, who is possibly too old for your acquaintance, but I call him a younker, being myself about to enter on my ninetieth year.


Give me leave to introduce to your acquaintance and good offices my Friends Mr Johnstone and Mr Gardener and at the same time to renew my respects to you. It is extreamly agreeable to recall the memory of my having been at Geneva though attended with a very sincere regret for the shortness of my stay. Many changes must have happened since the year 1774: but I shall forbear alluding to particulars untill I am better informed. One thing I am happy to Know that you are in the train of pursuing your former studies, and excursions to the mountains, and have at last accomplished the Herculean labour of getting to the top of Mont Blanc, a difficulty, indeed, which I thought must have remained for ever unsurmounted. Your toils are not lost to the observers even of this country.

The former vols. you published are in their hands and Mr Hutton in particular is highly pleased and instructed. He has long worshipped the same Divinitys with you and embraced every specimen of stone or earth with a most pious attention. His Ideas are magnificent and what is more precious and more difficult in science formed with a scrupulous regard to reality. You have some account of them in the paper he has furnished me, to be sent by these gentlemen to you. He had directed a copy for you to the secretary of the Academy of Agriculture at Paris of which he is a member: but as the copy I now send may arrive before the other he is willing to indulge my request of having this duplicate for the purpose. He has likewise joined a copy of his theory of Rain. It would be a great pleasure to him and to me to pay our respects at Geneva and visit your mountains. There is a company here in which it has often been mentioned, but we should draw different ways some to contemplate the Earth, others the Country ancient and Modern and I am particular to follow the Tract of my Friends the Romans: but a scheme that has already given so much amusement in Nords is not likely to be executed. I trust I shall have from Mr Gardener from time to time some account of my Friends of Geneva. In the meantime I beg to be remembered most respectfully to Madame De Saussure and conclude with again recommending these gentlemen to your good offices. 


I have just seen in the hands of Dr Black the letter which you have received from Dr Percy, and am exceedingly vexed to have a difference on a matter of fact with a person whose character I so much respect; I did not imagine that Dr Percy, any more than you, could have been affected by the late declaration relating to a passage in a pamphlet, on the authenticity of Ossian's Poems, farther than the repetition of your names, which were already made free with. If I had thought Dr Percy any way committed, I should certainly have troubled him with a copy of my declaration, and waited his commands before it was published. But it did not occur to me that he, any more than you, could be cited in support of any allegation which it concerned me to deny.

The most respectful thing I can now do to Dr Percy is to remind him, as far as my memory serves me, of the fact in the only conversation which I had the honour to have with him. Among other subjects that of Earse poetry was mentioned, and I remember to have shewn him, in my own hand-writing, some scraps which I had received from Mr James Macpherson, or from Mr Maclaggan, Chaplain of the 42d regiment. I remember a line, or expression, in which the Poet, describing the time and the scene, said, the sun of day was scorching the mountain, and that Dr Percy was pleased to say it was a Pleonasm, but a beautiful one. I remember to have left the paper with Dr Percy, and have since lost every other copy of it.

The difference between Dr Percy and me is perhaps not very material; no more, as he states it, than that he remembers what I have forgot. If, nevertheless, what he pleased to publish shall seem to corroborate the charge which I have already thought myself called upon to deny, I must recur to the intire sense and consciousness of my innocence, and renew my declaration, that I was not present at the repetition of verses to Dr Percy by a young Student from the Highlands; and I give my denial in these positive terms, because I not only do not remember the repetition of verses in Earse, by a Student from the Highlands, by a Student upon that occasion, but because I do not remember the repetition of verses in Earse on any other occasion; and because, though intimate with some students from the Highlands, I do not remember that any of them ever repeated verses in my presence beyond a song or a catch; and this circumstance remains with me with respect to some of them, as a circumstance I noted; so that I am entirely persuaded Dr Percy, in recollecting the passages of his few days stay at Edinburgh, must have jumbled together circumstances that, in point of time, were actually separate; the repetition of verses by a young Student, with the communication of verses in writing by me. If this supposition does not compose the difference, I must despair of being able to remove it, and must leave the matter to the candour of those who are pleased to bestow any thought on me or my affairs.

If I should be under the necessity of publishing any more on this subject, I shall, with your leave, send a copy of this letter to the press. In the mean time, as I have not the honour of a personal correspondence with Dr Percy, must beg the favour that you will transmit it to him.


To the contents of this letter, I must now add, that although the facts stated by Dr Percy might be admitted on less authority than his, yet as they are entirely contrary to any feeling or recollection I have of the matter, and have been employed to convey a very injurious imputation against me, he must excuse me, if I do not admit them. And if he still persist, that over and above the specimen of Earse poetry, which I gave him in my own hand-writing, I likewise procured a Student to recite other specimens to him, he will farther excuse me, if I insist, that every passage, of which the interpretation was vouched by me, was in truth what it was given for. As he allows, that I may not have been conscious of any deception in what passed between the Student and him, I must, in return, allow that he may not be conscious of any misrepresentation of the fact. But I cannot allow that he has made the best use of his understanding, in thinking it credible, that any person, possessed of a decent character, could be concerned in such a cheat, as he supposes to have been practised upon him.


I return Dr Percy's letter of the 10th inst., on this disagreeable subject, of the recital of Erse poetry. I am sorry he has had so much trouble; but cannot blame myself, as I am satisfied the trouble did not originate with me. I have in what is past, and shall continue in what may follow, to confine myself strictly to what is necessary in my own defence. I found it alledged in print, that Dr Percy had a cheat put upon him when at Edinburgh, to which I was accessory. In such cases it is often argued that until such or such assertions be contradicted they must be supposed true; and I did not choose that my character should rest upon that footing. I was free to deny any concurrence in the cheat, and even free to deny my having ever been present at any such scene as that in which the cheat was said to be practised. With respect to the last point, indeed, it may be thought that I could speak only negatively, and deny my having any memory of the transaction; and so it is no doubt of all past transactions. But there are circumstances which entitle a person to be more or less positive. In this case the cheat that is said to have been put upon Dr Percy could not be practised in my presence without my concurrence; and this every feeling of my mind warrants me in denying in the most positive terms. As I never questioned the fidelity of Mr James M'Pherson in his publications, I was none of those who busied themselves in finding evidence of it. It has happened to me, indeed, to mention a very few particulars of Erse poetry that were known to myself; and from my knowledge of which I had taken a very early impression of what mere genius, without the aid of literature or foreign models, may do where the human mind is free and the passions have scope in recital as well as in action. I imagined that evidence of its power might have been found in every country if collected before language and manners had so far changed as to obliterate or efface its productions. There being any remnants of it in the Highlands of Scotland, I imputed to the manners and language having changed less than they have done elsewhere in equal periods of time. Whether or no this be honourable for the people I will not at present try to determine. It appeared to me matter of some curiosity in the history of mankind, but very little as matter of vanity to one corner of this island, much less of jealousy to any other corner of it. The scraps I showed to Dr Percy had a reference to this idea, not the fidelity of Mr M'Pherson's publications. And I was surprised to find myself, contrary to the general tenor of my feelings, stated as a fabricator of evidence on that subject. I thought myself free to deny in very positive terms my having ever been present at the repetition of verses to Dr Percy by a student from the Highlands; because I never knew a student who pretended to repeat any part or specimen of Ossian's heroic poetry. And the mention of Mr John M'Pherson's name does not at all alter the state of my recollection, for my memory of him is, among other particulars in which he is well known to me, that he never appeared to be in possession of any part of Ossian's poetry. I well remember that he was in some degree a singer, though I do not recollect any particular song but one, which, with a very few words of any meaning, consisted chiefly of a chorus or burden, not more significant than lullabolaro or derry down. If he repeated this or any other song that Dr Percy might hear the sound of the language, it is no wonder that I should forget that circumstance, especially as I have totally forgot Dr Percy's visit with you at my house. But I hope that Dr Percy, now he has seen his minutes, will be sensible that a person may mistake what he thinks he remembers, as well as another may forget what has really passed. What he wrote from his memory in a former letter was, that I had sent for a student to your house. What he writes now is, that he came to the student at my house. Some other very easy mistake in the circumstances, if recollected, might acquit me entirely of any share in the imposition that was put upon Dr Percy. I confess that I was astonished at the ease with which this charge was stated against me in the pamphlet which has given rise to this correspondence. If I had the honour of being sufficiently known to Dr Percy, I should certainly request that he would compare probabilities, and consider which is most likely, that I should be accessory to a cheat, or that he should mistake some material circumstance of a story sixteen years old. Although I may not be entitled to employ this plea with Dr Percy, I certainly must be allowed to submit it, in case I am under a necessity of more publications, to persons to whom I am better known. There is certainly hitherto no reason to apprehend from me, as Dr Percy mentions, any improper desire of committing my name in print. I appeared, from necessity, to prevent inferences which might be drawn from my silence against me. I do not pretend to set up my affirmation against that of any other person; but as often as occasion is given to the same inference, I must appear again to the same purpose. Dr Percy is pleased to say in the letter which I return to you, that if I persist in denying publicly the existence of a recital, &c., he must then be compelled, much against his will, to produce at large necessary proofs in support of his own affirmation. Dr Percy will be pleased to observe, that I do not pretend to know what recitals he may have had made to him. I only deny that I ever was present at any imposition put upon Dr Percy by any pretended recital of Erse, and that I ever was present at any such recital. I am persuaded that there are no proofs to the contrary, of which Dr Percy will not perceive the weakness the more he considers them. At any rate, he must be sensible that if any such proofs are supposed, I cannot possibly consent to have them secreted. When they appear, I hope that I too shall proceed with temper and decency, although I have a little more at stake than Dr Percy, and have my integrity to defend against a most unexpected attack, which it seems is to be carried on against me in support of his accuracy in conversation.

I have been in the country all day, have barely time to write what I wish you to know by this post, in answer to a letter with which you have made me so happy. I will think no more of doubts or difficulties of any kind. Kate is mine. You have a numerous family of children. I hope that she is among those that will need your assistance the least. I am averse to all solemnity, I would not even have you think of going to the expense of new cloths for her on this occasion. I make no change in my house till she comes, and then she may change it as she pleases. I spoke something about Interest in my last; my meaning was that you should consider of a paper in which I may secure all I die possessed of to Kate and her children in case she survives me. I am in too great a hurry to explain this at present, but will send you a memorandum of it by next post, and you may have the writing ready to be signed when I get to Aberdeen. Doctor Black is ready to attend me whenever I call for him. My situation requires the decency of some forms, such as being called in church, and married by a minister of the Established Church. If Doctor Campbell is at hand to perform this office, it will be very agreeable. I hope that the ceremony of proclamation can be got over at Aberdeen in less than three Sundays. I can at a day's warning get a certificate of my being proclaimed here, and I hope you can get through that affair so as to satisfy Dr Campbell in much the same manner. If this can be done, I think you may get this letter and write an answer naming a particular day, so as that Dr Black and I may be at Aberdeen by the end of the first week in October. My time will only allow me to get to Aberdeen the day before and leave it the day after our ceremony. Your own family is company enough for me on the occasion. If Mr A. Gordon from Hallhead could without inconvenience be there, it would be pleasant, or anybody else that Kate chooses. This letter is the longer for being written in a hurry; but I hope it is to be understood and that it will procure from you, by the first post, the nomination of a day in the first week of October, or at furthest in the second. Dr Black and I will be there the day before. I am, your most obliged and affectionate servant

In looking over Lord Chesterfields deed of settlement I find that £100 for the last half year was due on the 29th of September last. If you have not made application for Payment of it, I beg that you will without Delay. Running more into Arrears may be inconvenient to his Lordship as well as to me & make him feel the inconvenience of this Bussiness more as it may expose me to the loss of the Whole. I waited some time to pick up a Frank but it is not material as all these Expences must necessarily fall upon me. I am Dear Sir


At my return from Bath on Saturday evening I found it necessary that I should stay a week or two about London before I go to Scotland & chuse to pass as much of that time at this place for the sake benefit of the Air, as I can. As this is about the time that Lord Chesterfields people of Bussiness may be expected to make their half yearly Payment you will please to let me know what passes. Direct for me at Mrs Atkinss near the Hare & Billet on Blackheath. The penny post I am told is the best conveyance hither.

you may possibly think that I am forgetting you like your Other Correspondents of the Royal Society of Edinburgh; but Michaelmas must remind me. I knew exactly the State of your bussiness on receiving your Letter: but our Society very unlike a trading Company that has Stopt Payment has never yet begun to pay & when they do I hope will never Stop.

They have had only one meeting for the first Forms & they have established a Fund for their expence but how productive it has yet become I know not.

The Person for you to correspond with  I believe is Mr Keith younger of Ravelstone at Edr who has accepted the Office of Treasurer. The Society is to meet for Bussiness on the first Monday of Novr. It will be proper that your Account be then presented & you will either transmit it to Mr Keith in time for that purpose, or if you have formerly sent it to any person here cause them produce it, tho I think it should bear interest & therefore a fresh Copy will be best.

Be so good as make the usual Call on Lord Chesterfield's Agents.

I am Dr Sir 

most  






Dear Sir

As there was little chance of my being in London & I forsaw the necessity of a transaction relating to my Book; I sent you the Copies annexed to my last although I did not clearly see what part you should take in the matter immediately. Even in Answer to your Letter I must proceed on Suppositions, which at this distance I cannot verify, & of which even on the Spot I should probably not be a Competent judge. If my Book has had its utmost sale, it would be very improper for me to grasp at a profit to the hurt of my Booksellers: But if the most profitable part of the Sale is yet to come either from the lasting demand for it or from their exertion when it becomes their absolute property, I ought not, in justice to my family, to forgo any part of the advantage, that is justly due to me. Messrs Strahan & Cadell have the reputation of fair &  liberal dealers, & I must continue to think they deserve it untill I have reason to think otherwise. Please to let them know that I wish to come to a definitive Bargain, & try on what terms they are willing to conclude the transaction. I am willing to accommodate them in deferring the term of payment hereafter as may be fit and reasonable. In other respects our Agreement of Febry 28. 1782 I think ought to be the basis.

As to the Evidence of their having performed the conditions of that egreement I must for the present suppose so, altho if the agreement were to be strictly fulfilled they would probably offer such Evidence as the case would admit of; what that evidence is I know not & must Submit to you & to them. I cannot entertain any doubt of their having taken the proper Steps to secure the copy right to whomsoever it shall be assigned: but as this is probably matter of record, you can  easily know it.

I ought probably to have mentioned in my last, that I mean my letters on this Subject to be confidential & Secret.

I am Dear Sir 

& most humble Serv't 



Dear Sir

I write merely to remind you that I am alive & wish you to apply as usual for the half years Annuity due to me at this term, from Lord Chesterfields Trustees. I wish also that in making any remittance to me you will take Credit for the Charges of our late vexatious transaction &c. I am Dear Sir your most Obedt &





Jas Chalmer Esqr
Bankhead 19th Octr 1786

Dear Sir

I write to remind you of our Michaelmas application to Lord Chesterfields Trustees for the Last half years Annuity. And beg at the same time you will inquire for His Lordship & where he now is, As by the news paper accounts he has been some time in England.







P. S.Please direct 
for me as formerly 
at Edinburgh where 
I Expect be soon


Dear Sir

I wrote to you yesterday, that I am required by a Circular Letter from the Auditors Office & signed by Sir John Dick & Others to exhibit my Account of money received and Disbursed in my office of Secretary to his Majesties Commissioners &c &c in America. The Account is to be attested on Oath before a Baron of his Majesties Court of Exchequer & exhibited at the Auditors office on or before Wednesday the 13th Decr at two OClock. Finding from this experience that such requisitions may be repeated I am very unwilling to risk any material Paper, which I cannot restore in case it should be lost, by any uncertain Conveyance. And therefore hope that the Inclosed Copy of My Account and of the Commissioners Certificate attested on Oath before a Baron of Exchequer here may for the present at least be Sufficient. If not. Please refer to the Attested Copy taken at the War office when it was there presented by you. For the same reason that I am unwilling to risk by any uncertain Conveyance the original Account and Docket signed by the Commissioners I am unwilling also to risk the vouchers of Particular Articles exhibited to the Commissioners when they passed my Account at New York. All these Papers however if necessary shall be sent to you when required. Most of the disbursements  were made upon mere verbal instructions from the Commissioners and as some of them were naturally to be made without any exaction of Receit or Voucher whatever: — it was the more necessary for me to present the Account to the Commissioners for their Approbation while the occasions were recent in their memory. Thus having given this Approbation I hope will be thought to exhonerate me so far as I was bound to Obey their commands. In case however Particular Articles should be questioned I must trouble you with the following comment.

Article 1st The Commander in Chiefs 
 warrant endorsed to Governor Johnstone 
 The Governors Name on the Warrant 
 is my Voucher. — Mr Holland — found a person to convey 
 Papers to New England & the two Separate 
 Articles of 20 Guineas each refer to that 
 Service. Mr Cooper was Clerk to Governour Johnstone 
 & being employed by the Commissioners rece[ived] 
 a Gratuity of £50 at his departure for England 
 Mr Upham & Allen Loyalists in Disstress. 
 The Several Articles paid to the Clerk Mr 
 Derbage. & to the Printers Gaine Robertson 
 & Rivington Vouched by their Receipts. 
 Mr Paterson Do.



























If such explanations should be called for please to make use of them Otherwise the names of persons in Question need not be mentioned. As to the Receipts and Vouchers in my hands I will take the first safe opportunity of sending them to you if they should be necessary.

I have deferred concluding my Letter untill  I should have taken the Oath required to the truth of the within Acct & Docket. But I have now little to add: further than that I wish very much the Auditors would Satisfy themselves now of the Truth & give me Such a Clearance as may save me from farther trouble. I shall be glad to hear from you as soon as convenient what passes on your Exhibiting the Inclosed or what farther may be required from & me. The time limited for my Appearance is on or before Wednesday the 13th of this December which I make no Doubt you will attend. I am

Dear Sir 







James Chalmer Esqr
Edr 1st Octr 1787

Dear Sir

I had notice some time ago from the Messrs Drummond at Charing Cross that the following Sums were lodged with them by the Messrs Thomas Payne & Son, to my Acc't £32 in Cash.

£13/100 John Stockdales note due 23 Septr you will remember enough of the transaction relating to the Roman History to recollect that whatever came from Messrs Payne on that Acc't should be lodged with Mr Pulteneys Banker & to his Acc't untill his advance was discharged, My desire therefore is that you will take the trouble  to inquire whether Stockdales note be paid and if so, to have the £100 transferred to MR Pulteneys Credit as above. If any formal order be necessary from me to that effect be so good as let me know what it should be & on what Stamp &c. I must at the same time remind you to make at a proper time the usual application for the half years Annuity due from Lord Chesterfields Trustees at Michaelmas. I am Dear Sir


& most  

Dear Sir

Above you have a Certificate which I hope will entitle you to receive my half years appointment from Lord Chesterfields Banker. You will recollect the Bussiness on which I have lately been at London. It was so far advanced at my Departure that I left my Son Joseph Ferguson possessed of an Appointment of Cadet in the Corps of Artillery on the Bengale Establishment and  of an Order to Captain Dempster of the [xxx] to give him his Passage to India. I left him in the hands of Captain Dempster & of some Friends in the City for this purpose paying all Costs for Passage & Necessarys on the Voyage or on his arrival. But in case any trifle should remain from oversights, delay or Other Accident I left with him a letter to you requesting that you would be so good as Supply him to  my Account, & I now renew the same request. I am Dear Sir






Munich 5 October 1793

Dear Sir

Finding myself here at Munich past the Michaelmas Term a[nd] known to Mr Walpole the King's Minister, I have thought it a good opportunity to Obtain the within Attestation which I hope will entitle you to receive my last half years Annuity from Lord Chesterfield's Banker. If so you will please give notice to My Son Adam Ferguson Writer in South Castle Street New Town Edinburgh, who has a Factory a[nd] full powers of Attorney from me so that his draft will be to you a discharge or receit equal to mine. I have found travelling in this country sometimes tedious and with ill acommodation but so healthy as to be fit to restore invalids. The Elector mentioned yesterday at his Levee that the King of Prussia has declared his intention to Winter at Berlin. And there is a Report that the Emperor is about to set out from Vienna to Brussels. What all this portends you will guess. I am

Dear Sir your most obedient 



James Chalmers Esqu.
Dear Sir

My last at Michaelmas was from Munich in Bavaria, being now at Florence on my return from the Southern parts of Italy. I have Obtained on the Other leaf of this paper Mr Wyndhams Attestation to entitle you to draw the half years Annuity now due from Lord Chesterfield Banker. When you receive it be so good as pay it to My Account to Messrs Couts in the Strand to help out a little my Credit with them. I am now on my way North & expect to be clear of Italy soon. I am


Servant 






Florence 29 March 

Hallyards near Peebles 12th July 1800

Dear Sir

I am now to write in the mournful Predicament of Heir to one of my own Children.

The young man who two or three years ago executed a bond to me in your hands is now no more. The Climat of India has been fatal to his Constitution. A Friend & Relation is remitting his Effects. A Companies Bill no 37 for £562. 10 p. has been received on my Account by Coll. Joseph Burnett & not been payable, as I am told, till October has been placed in the hands of Mrs Couts. Coll. Burnet is now at Edinburgh. I have not seen him, & do not know whether he has endorsed the Bill for payment when due but he has furnished me with the inclosed copie and Acknowledgement of my Property in the Contents. You will please present it to Mr. Couts & inquire whether any thing more will be necessary to warrant the Contents of the Bill when payed being placed to my credit in the Books of that House.  There is another Bill for £537. 10  on the way or rather come by Coll. Mc Kenzie of the same Regiment already arrived at London, & daily expected at Edinburgh. When this Bill comes to hand, I shall probably place with Messrs Mansfield & Co and believe that when both are paid I shall find it expedient to place the amount of some Other of my little Effects have gone through the Hands of Mr Couts & Mr Ramsay into some of the publick Funds.

The Accounts of the Regiment will probably have been made up & sent home also by Coll McKenzie & I must desire that you will inquire at the Agents N. Donaldson Esqr White Hall, for the State of my Late Son Captn Josephs Ferguson of the 78 Regiment Account; Obtain an Abstract of it, & let me know how it stands & in case of any ballance Instruckt me in the needful to have it Settled. I am Dr Sir


and most  

Hallyards near Peebles 5 Octr 1801

Dear Sir

The Documents on the Other leaf of this Paper will speak for themselves. Being apprised some time ago of a payment made by Mr Donaldson Agent to the 78 Regt in part Price of a Company Sold in that Regiment. And my son expressing your desire & his own to know how it should be disposed of: As I trust every thing in my Name will like this be the joint & equal Property of all my Children, my notion was that it should be vested in my Name, And I mentioned the 5 [xxx] 1797, when I understand it is so vested, with exception of My Son Adams own Share who having an Active Cash Account at Edr thinks it more for his advantage to [have] it placed to his Credit there, Upon the whole of Bussiness I am desirous to have the Stock Receipt in my Possession that I may enter a declaration on the back of it whose Property it is. In this according you will do the needful And Oblige your

Most Obedient 
& most  






James Chalmer Esqr
13 Dec. 1801



The last favour I had of yours was of the 17th Octr last with draft of Mr Thomson for £31:18;10 which was duly honoured.

The purpose of My Now troubling you, is to beg of you with Conveniency, to apply to Mr Donaldson of Whitehall relative to the balance of £950 which remains to Come from the 78th regt part of the proceeds of My late brother Josephs Commission in the Same.

Here have been of late a good many Arrivals from Bengal, and Mr Donaldson I trust has had Some Communication on the above business from Capt Jas Fraser and the Pay Master of the Regt who by a Memorandum Subjoined to Mr Donaldsons Acct with my late brother (& transmitted by you to me on the 17 July last) fall to remit the former £550 and the latter £400 as the prices of Company & insigncy in my brothers Succession in the regt.

My Father feels Considerable uneasiness at the delay which takes place in the final Settlement of this transaction, & trusts you will have the goodness to represent the Matter in the proper terms to Mr Donaldson. I am Dear Sir


Adam Ferguson.



Jas Chalmer Esqr Abingdon St West
Hallyards 4th Octr 1803

Dear Sir

you have as formerly on the Other Leaf of this paper my Affidavit together with the Minister of Manors Certificate of my Residence in his Parish. The Last I should presume is not necessary & you will please to tell me whether it be so or no As the Minister may be from home at the Term as he has now been for some Days.

I find myself indebted to My Brother in Law Mr Samuel Burnett £ 32:10:11 and you will please to reserve a round Sum to Answer it when he sends his discharge to you as he will be told to do. I am Dr Sir





James Chalmer Esqr

Nevertheless you will please 
direct for me at Hallyards 
near Peebles ______







Dear Sir

I wrote to you about six or eight days ago from Hallyards And my son soon after from this place relating to a change of Designations or Names which we wish to have made on the stock Books relating to the Long Annuity Part of My Brother Roberts Estate of which the Life Rent is bequeathed in Trust to me: But the Reversion to another & hope that matter is in proper train. Meantime pressing circumstances have occurred here that make it necessary for me to sell out the £120 four pr Cts which was soon after Michaels last vested in my name. I therefore earnestly request you to dispose of that little Stock & to let me know when I may draw on you for the Produce & wish it may be as soon as Convenient. I am Dear Sir your most

obedt Servant


Hallyards near Peebles Janry 29, 1808

Dear Sir

I have heard from Mr Samu[e]l Burnett of Lloyds Coffee House that the Deed in favour of my Daughters of which the Form was sent to America at the desire of Robert Ferguson is now executed & returned by him. Mr Burnett desires to have my directions about the Paper & I have desired him to lodge it with you in hopes that you may find a Safe conveyance for it hither. Perhaps you may know of some Friend coming to this Country or if you think it safe enough  by the Post I will not grudge the Postage or if it be safe in a Frank.

My Friend Fordyce who is not limited as Members of Parliament are to a certain weight will frank it for me.

But for this there is no haste. Whatever charge has been already incurred in the matter be so good as discharge to my account.

I am now anxious to have my Account with Robert Ferguson as residuary Legatee of His Father & my Brother now made up while I am in the way to look after it and have the Sum I am to Surrender neatly.

Ascertained It came to my hands from different Quarters in Separate payments & in the Interval of some years. My son was joint Executor with me  and I relyed upon him for the particulars. He is not now in this Country And my own Notes do not Satisfy me as to the whole amount. I am now therefore recurring to all the Quarters from which any money was received by me on account of my Brothers Will to correct or corroborate my own Notes.

Part was received from a Mr Mitchel either Banker or Agent. This I believe passed through your Hands. And if any such House or Person as Mitchel now remains be so Good as desire to turn up their Books & say what Sum I received from them on Acct. of my Brothers will. This Compared with your own Books will be Satisfactory to me on that particular Item. I am Dear Sir


& most  

St Andrews October 2d 1809



you will learn on the Other leaf of this Paper that I have changed Quarters Since my Last. Grown too feeble for Country affairs I supposed a Town would fit me better And having out Lived all my Friends at Edinburgh I endeavour to mix here with a Society that is very much to my mind And shall be glad to hear of you on every Occasion.

Dear Sir your most Obedient & most 



James Chalmer Esqr
[St Andrews] October 4, 1813

Dear Sir

you have the usual attestations on the other leaf of this paper.

I endeavoured to hasten the Miss Burnetts in denomination of their Agent supposeing their Annuity to be payable at this Term but have learned that it is not payable till Christmas so that they may proceed at leisure. I sent them a Copy of your last Letter and we must wait their pleasure.




[23 Sept. 1795]

 Nydpath Castle to Pendreech health peace & Salubrity. Retired from the Children of men to live among the lambs of Sheep & their Shepherds, I am anxious to know what is passing among the Dogs & the Wolves. And if the Wolves come across the flock, rejoice that they are dogfully opposed. There is malice in your old friend. The Don's cession of St Domingo to the French, with whom both he & we were at War; but with how little hearty Cooperation! The Don will never forgive Gibraltar & who can blame him. I have sometimes asked Jn Bull how he would like to have Spain lay hold of the Lands End, and pretend to give law in the British & Irish Channels. But Jn thinks that Other Nations should give way to him. He is insulated and at one time thinks he should care for nobody, at another time that every body should be governed by him & never at all knows how to behave himself to Other Nations. But according to the Italian Proverb: Bisogna ben coprirsi il viso innanzi di  stuzzicar il vespaio .

I am glad the Armament is great and may the Blessed Maker of Seas & Winds and Climate favour its unwieldy Bulk. It is not long since I thought R. Abercrombie the first of the young men in point of of Good Sense Gentleness and Candour. How proc[e]ed to See him with the Thunder on his Arm. So the Lord of Thunder & of Storms preserve and Prosper him. That is right by all means bring home the Cavalry they will enable Such politicians as I am to Sleep the Sounder. I knew the Strain would be tedious: for I had such a one myself: but time will restore the Muscle & may it be really, as well as nominally, that of Achilles, till peace is restored which is the never ceasing Object of My Prayers &c &c &c




your Express was Received    . In Consequence of it, I have been with the Duke of Atholl. Told him I was to do what Coll. C: was to have done himself in case he could have got back from Ireland by his Time. & that I had in charge to make this Intimation if my Friend was detained in that Countrey beyond the time at which he meant to make it himself. That he was expected every Hour in this Countrey & would then certainly pay his Respects with such Recommendations as might encourage him to hope for Countenance & Support. That he had some time last Spring Consulted  his Friends in Government on a different Object & had this Recommended to him that his Friends in that Quarter therefore would probably think themselves the more Indispensibly called upon to support him that this attempt was their own Suggestion ——— The Answer was that He had not fully considered what Part he should take in the Elections of that District, or if any Part. That his Family however had an Interest there & he must Attend to the means of Supporting it. That he must deferr Coming to any final Resolution till the Arrival of Col M. who was Expected from London in a few Days.

I told him that no Other or more Decisive Answer could be immediatly Expected. The Day & the Evening passed in much Hospitality & Politeness on the Part of his G: I  set out Early next morning for this Place.

Pray send us the Remainder of our Letters to Ld Kinoul &c Lord Gray . And now I think one may with propriety be written to the Duke of Athol.

The Others are Delivered. I met Ld Privy Seal at Perth, he on his Way to Bute, & I to Dunkeld, he is over & above his Respect to the Recommendation friendly to Ld Miltons Family.

General Skene I have seen he is a Man of Influence in one Burrough & puts his hand to the work Cordially & Willingly. The Circumstance we Anxiously wish for is the Arrival of the Principal. For in such Matters the great & needful operations can be performed only by the Principal. You may believe that all your Letters have been understood Tua  not excepted.

Yours most 
Sincerely & Affectionately &c 
Jas Mc Pherson Esqr


,

Our Friend Cl having made part of his Tour will inform you by this Express of the Particulars. I wrote you by successive Posts last week what occurred here. You will judge how far the matter can be carryed with any Credit of Adn or Advantage to the private Party.

At C. General Skenes Friends have acquitted themselves in a Manner that Deserves the Protection of G.. At St. A. no encouragement.

At D —  the Whole decided against us And in this the adherents of D: & of the D of A are probably Agreed.

At P: — Leading men by our accounts not Engaged: but Letters to Neighbouring Gentlemen  will not be Sufficient, & you will consider in what manner & through what Channel the Patronage of G. & the Respect that is due to it can be employed.

As to the L — A— who is supposed to speak the language of Administration is Silent this Bussiness becomes Proportionally Difficult. Is there any considerable thing in Dependence that can be given through the Proper Channel.

If P —  with C —  could be Secured then CC could afford to Strugle hard for a 3d & do as much as he ever meant to do for the whole Object. But without this the affair seems Desperate and a handsome Retreat is all that can be Effected, for the Credit of A —  as well as his own.

D —  is exceedingly Popular. Every man of us disposed to wish him  personnally well. It is painful to be against him upon any Other Idea than that his Seat must be disposed ofa to some body else if not to us.

Pray Answer by express and with as little loss of Time as circumstances will Allow.
Edr 1st September 1780



The Express to CC arrived & has been delivered to him this Morning. You should have heard from me very full a Post or two ago if I had not supposed you Sufficiently informed by Letters which I knew were written by Our Friends CC & J: M: relating to the Declaration of P: against us; a very important Emergence in the Progress of our Affairs.

We had then almost lost Heart:but the Partizans employed elsewhere made favourable Reports particularly from St. A. which Revived our Hopes & Induced CC to hasten a second time to F — . His Antagonist being there, & certain Persons  being engaged in his Company, prevented any Decisive Conversation, at That Time, tho Overtures were made, Supposed Sufficient, to prevent any Actual Engagements against us, untill the Bussiness could be farther Adjusted. Letters however from thence, received this Morning, represent the Vote of that Town as engaged against us.

A Declaration of the Council Signed by the Provost & the two Bailies to that Purpose is actually given in Writing: But as it has been said of this Place that the People there are open to Conviction to the Last: a Tryal will be made, more, to Satisfy, that the utmost has been done; than from any real hopes of Success. It appears now that the Encouragement conveyed to you as from the principal B — s was altogether without Foundation. The Report of it may have Piqued them to declare themselves  Otherwise. St. A:: has been gained not by the Influence of Coll. Nairne who has till very lately avoided CC & his Friends but by a very Active Friend and some Expence which had produced the Effect before the Letter to Nairne Arrived. That to Ld Kinnoul was Instantly sent as was that likewise to Mr Fothuringham of Purie but, as I now believe, all too late, as well those which are received & forwarded this Morning. Whatever farther CC may do here for the Credit of Ad-n or his own The time is come when his Hopes of being Elected must come intirely from your Quarter of the World. And I most Earnestly Exhort you to fix without Delay the Alternative on which he proceeded as necessary to justify his Expence; save his Credit upon a dissappointment here, & enable him to Patronize the Friends of Govt. & his own in these B — s. I am well perswaded that Governt will find in him a very Respectable Friend & able Support. Yours most Affectionately

&c


,

I am glad you are decided on the form in which Ossian is to be recorded. You may expect to hear different opinions on the subject; but if any one thinks he can do better in a more portable form, or in Roman character, this he can easily accomplish from your standard copy; and I shall cease to reason on the subject. Being but a bastard Gaelic man, my ear is a very uncertain rule for pronunciation or orthography. I will, however, mention what occurs under correction of your better judgment. Will it not be proper to prefix an alphabet, with notice of the power of each letter? If so, I think the two sigmas should be distinguished, the one s the other sh. I think the alpha is sufficiently full and broad in the sound without any additional vowel, as (u), for instance; and I think the upsilon should have the power of the English (v), uniformly given to it. The modern Greeks always pronounce it so. The (ɣ), falsely numbered with the diphthongs, should always stand for the Italian (u), or English double (oo), as in moon or boon, &c. To illustrate these remarks, I have ventured to mark the changes they would make in the specimen. Aɣous I see, you spell with a kappa, to my ear it is rather a (γ), gamma; however you know much better. Query, also whether the nasal sound, when the article precedes a word beginning with gamma or kappa, may not be marked with the double gamma, as in the tale of Pharaoh's daughter (αγγ ϰοϕαν); so much for remarks which you will not make any use of, as you see cause. I have conformed to your former injunction exactly in consulting no more persons. There are few persons of any education in the Highlands, whether clergy or laity, that do not know the Greek alphabet; and perhaps will have easier access to your Ossian in that alphabet than they would in the barbarous orthography which few, and I among the rest, never learned to read. I know that this would make many a learned man stare. For there is no persuading people south of Tay, that all the works of the bards are not to be found in booksellers' shops in Lochaber or Morven the capital of the country at least. I tryed your experiment on J. Home, and he made it much more intelligible from the Greek orthography than from the Roman. I showed him in confidence your flagellation of the Edinburgh critics, and he is much diverted. I admire the fair hand and current writing of Greek in your amanuensis. — And am, 


Galway May 25th 





I had no opportunity of seeing any Charter Schools untill the Regiment came to this Town, which is the reason your Lordship has not heard from me sooner. There is one at Loch-Rea about Sixteen Miles from this Place, which I went to see, & inclose a State of the Masters acc'ts with the Society according to the information I had. As your Lordship was desirous to know their manner of Building for this purpose: I have attempted to make a Plan, at which I am not expert, but it will perhaps be more satisfying than a Description. I had only room on the Paper for the Ground floor. Above Stairs the Body of the house is divided in the midle by a Partition which forms apartments for the Master and Mistress, & the wings of each Side are in intire Rooms where the Beds are for the Children. They have Garrets over head for Store & Lumber.

This School is build upon an Acre of Ground which was given to the Society by My Lord Clanrickard, And they have a Lease of forty Acres at Six pounds per An[num]. 

The Complement is twenty Boys and twenty Girls of which only two are now wanting. They complain much of the difficulty of finding Children, because the Papists are averse to the Design. In looking over the Register, I found all the Children at this School to a very few are Natives of Dublin, & I believe they pick them up more easily there than in the Country.

They teach them to read English & repeat the Catechism with some Arguments against Popery: but most of their time is employed in Work. The Oldest of the Boys are employed in what they can do without Doors; the younger Boys knit Stockings & the Girls Spin. When their time is out they are put apprentice to Protestant Tradesmen or to Service Under Indentures.

I hear pretty Good accounts of their success in General. Many Gentlemen get Servants from these schools; & I was told in Particular of one Paterson in the Country of Antrim who carrys on the Linnen Manufacture to a great extent, & employs about a hundred from these Schools.

Our Review is over this Day. Major Grant sets out for Scotland in a few days, & I hope to see your Lordship soon after this letter. I am

My Lord your Lordships most  




PS. I had almost forgot to tell your Lordship that I begin to Despair of finding a Wolf Dog, for the Breed is become very Scarce in the Country.
Blackheath Aprile 21st 





I have heard with much Surprise and concern of a Resolution  of the Town Council to Vacate my office in the College at the end of a session, in which my place had been, with their own permission & with the approbation of the Publick, Supplyed by one of my Colleagues. After having Served fifteen years, & I flattered myself without any discredit to the University I trusted that I had no reason to apprehend the Patrons of it woud attempt to deprive me of my Professorship uncalled & unheard. The Interest which I have at stake made me wish to be indulged with leave of Absence for one  Session longer. Such an Indulgence had been granted to one of my predecessors & is now granted by the first University in Britain to one of its members. If it had been refused to me I might have felt the Severity of being commanded to forego an Emolument which a few months longer woud have Secured to my Family: but certainly shoud have acquiesced in the most respectfull manner. I shoud not however have troubled your Lordship at present on this Subject; if I had not heard that I am accused of having neglected to give the Town Council proper Intimation of the circumstances that were likely to detain me Abroad. I left Edinburgh without knowing precisely how long I might be Absent. When my Prospects became less uncertain I was at a great Disstance, foresaw a change of Magistracy & was therefore desirous to commit the Official Communication of my Affairs to a friend who was present & who coud judge of the  properest method of Conducting them. Nor had I any Surmise till within these two days that any circumstance in this matter had exposed me to blame or censure.

I am still Ignorant of Particulars, & whatever misstakes may have been committed by my friends or Myself I hope that your Lordship and every Gentleman in the Magistracy will upon recollection think me incapable of any intended neglect, And that you will believe me to be with the greatest Respect

My Lord 
your Lordships 
most Obedient & 
most  

Vilvorden Camp Septr 11 1745

Dr Jack

Were you now in your old place and I at my old Corner of the table, I coud tell you a great many Storys and adventures, as how I dined with Yappie Findornard at the Briel, and how I slept at Rotterdam, no matter whether true or false so I might be allow'd to assume the airs of a traveler and a great fellow, in which Character whether you allow of it or not, I intend to write this Letter. I promised to write you from London but we are often under Obligations to do what is not so easily performed. I was so bewildered and lost in that great place, and my Brain so jumbled that I could not think of doing any thing orderly. During the short time I was there I got into great variety of mixed Company, which afforded a deal of entertainment to which before I had been pretty much a Stranger; every fellow reads the publick papers and talks his mind concerning them with all the vehemence immaginable. What does the King do abroad quoth one. Bring home the Army quoth another if they woud make Lord George Graham Admiral of the Fleet we are a match for all Europe Still. You see, these vast oddities of Character, as might naturally be expected, in a place where a great many of the Inhabitants come from different corners of the World, and bring their own peculiaritys along with them, and where the Characters of others are Shaped amidst a Multitude, as Chance or their different applications will have it.

But how come I, say you who was but two short Weeks in London to see all this. You or I may go to an Eating House a Beer or any house, set at what Board join what company you will, and talk familiarly with people who neither know you nor one another, and whom perhaps you never will have another sight of. As for the Whores Villains and Robbers that throng the Streets at Night John Blair can give you a very good account of them. I saw John Spencer Esq.r who is like a footman in his Dress and a Yorkshire Jockie in his Air and manner. The Famous Lord Chesterfield is as short as my friend Drysdale and has as great a head as my Brother Robertson, I saw him lookie, with great patience reading a beggars paper in the entry to the Cockpit as he was going in to settle the affairs of Brittain and Europe. And not to forget you Sir, I have seen St Paul's which in my shallow judgements is a grand Building. I heard a preaching there concerning Modesty and Bashfulness, which was  somewhat Speculative like the Sermons of Davie Dickson according to Andrew Grey. But not to forget myself concerning whom you are no doubt anxious to know somewhat, I went to our Agent, who told me that my £60 at Least was mounted to upwards of 90, and I am since made to understand that the Duke of Cumberland has orderd that pay to all in my way whilst the Army is Abroad. The Agent gave me thirty Guineas and so I bade him farewell and marched away in the Stage Coach to Harwich. In a few hours after I came there, the packet sailed, and with the Assistance of a little bit of a hurricane we were dashed from England to Holland in about fourteen hours. I can tell you little about the Dutch but that they are grave odd like fellows, and speak a language I don't understand. They are the greediest for Money of any people I ever saw; profit is their life and joy nor will they allow you one doit of advantage though your life were at stake. There appeared amongst many one remarkable Instance of this at Rotterdam, there were other two Gentlemen in Company, after we had taken three places in a kind of Posting Coach that goes from Rotterdam to Antwerp and had all payd our pistoles each, one of the Company went aside to the Petit Maison, ad exonerandum alveum, the people immagining some body had not payd, went first to one, then to another, at length they came to the Gentleman in his retirement from which place he was dragged by a Man and a Woman in all the Dishabile common on such occasions without being able to Satisfy them till he came to an interpreter, so little delicacy have they in money matters and so impatient are they till their demands are Satisfied. We set out from Rotterdam in the Morning and drove it away to Antwerp that Night. The appearance of the Country was very strange to me who was mostly conversant with the highlands of Scotland, such dead extended plains, such a Cold invary'd prospect, where a paltry Bush will terminate the view to as good purpose as a Mountain were wonder enough to a Highlander. And indeed in so far as I could observe it the Temper of the People seemed to be pretty much what the objects they were conversant with woud inspire. Tho Sunday there especially in the afternoon be a mere play day, I cannot say, but the people keep it with as much Gravity as they do in Scotland, no Gamboling no Quips or Quidities, every fellow sets on a form before his Door with perhaps Six Pair of Breeches on, and a tobaco pipe,  smoaking with as much Gravity and wisdom as the Minister of Gladsmuir himself, you'll perhaps too see a houshold thing or two with shining Morning face and Green Purse on Side creeping like Snail about her own affairs.

In the Country the People are mostly Bours, that is each holds as his own Property a piece of Ground equall to a good farm with you, for which he pays some tax to the Republick only. To this it is owing that in all the way through Hollandd I coud not see a house beyond that of a Ministers manse at Gladsmuir. No Gentilhomes or Highland Dune wassels. Mr Allen McLean of Brolas in the Isle of Mull a Gentleman of as good Blood as any in all that country, observed that the D—l ha him if he believed there was any thing of a tolerably good Gentleman in all Holland, which Observation I leave John Hume to make his remarks on, as he can trace their blood from the Siege of Leyden even until this day, and prove that they have had their five senses in as good condition as if they had been descended of the best family in Scotland. When you come near Antwerp and in that City itself the face and apearance of things are pretty different. The City is large but thinly peopled, the Low people are very poor and ragged and The great extravagantly fantastick in their dress and equipage. It is their dayly custom to ride round the whole Streets every afternoon, bowing and saluting one another as they pass, and I am told many of them can alight from a most princely Coach and come home to dine on a little Sallad and Greens because they cannot afford a better dinner, the Coach horses and Laqueys eating up all their Revenues.

There is in that place I am told about 100 Churches and 6000 priests. I myself was in more Churches than I coud well number and in many of them Saw very admirable Pictures, but the Grandest piece they have is one of Rubens in Notre Dame Church, it is our Saviour taking down from the Cross, I never coud conceive such perfection in that Art before, the whole and each figure being so masterly designed and finished. You may possibly have heard of the Grand spire of Antwerp, I wish I could give you a Draught  of it, I never saw such a piece of Gothick Architecture in my life. It shoots to a vast heght and is just a pyramid of minute ornaments crusted and baked together to the very top, on the top of it your view is boundless it being higher than any ground within a hundred Miles of it. Nor must you be surprisd Ladies that I write about Steeples, for by that means I Instruct your Brother let you know that I was at Antwerp whether you will or not. After I had spent upwards of ten days in this place I went forward to the Camp, where I became acquainted with my officers all at once, we here form a body whose interests are all Connected together, and it is the easiest matter to fall into acquaintance. I'm extremely happy in my Colonel nor would I change him or his Regiment for any in the Service, I preached to them yesterday over a Couple of Drums, and tho it was my first I had no more fear or concern than if it had been my hundredth and nineteenth time. A few days after I came we had a General Review of all the Troops, they were all drawn out in their lines, and his Highness rode from on[e] end of the Line to tother, and myself be sure in his Retinue, you cannot immagine how much I was roused by the Spirit Stirring Drum and the ear piercing fife with all the Pomp & Circumstance of glorious War. In the evening we had a fire of Joy on account of the Election, which was the Grandest noise I ever heard. The Dutch began upon the Left and from thence the fire came roaring and flashing along thro the whole line, for near ten or twelve Miles, that being the length of our present Camp.

I am mightily pleased with every thing in this way of life, as for the Grand Monarque he fled to Versailles, whenever he heard of my coming, which you may remember I told you would be the Case. Our Army is far from being in the desperate condition you immagined when I left Scotland. What our numbers are I cannot positively tell, but I believe we are little less than 40000, we expect the Hessians to join us in a few days. For some days after I came here the French advanced guard mounted every day in Sight of ours, and every night we were giving and receiving Alarms, but now the French have moved their Camp to Allost & we live quite peaceably how long it may be so I know not, but the Enemy seem not to chuse to hazard much fighting with us at present. And now ye Dear Beings all after amusing you with a deal of Skimble Skamble stuff, I must tell you that I long exceedingly to hear from you: I own that it is my own fault that I did not extort a Letter from you sooner by writing sooner; but that I hope you will forgive and I am sure if you are sensible of the Pleasure it will give me to hear from you you will not delay it Long. I coud send you Services from all my heart but I hope it is needless. 
Dr Jack, yours with



Sincere Affection 

Siennes Saturday 2d Octr 1790

Ferguson informs John Adam of having been mistaken about the day, and of having enquired at Bayle's. Sends best respects to Mrs Adam & Mrs Loch.


I am much Obliged to you for Answering the Inclosed & am Ashamed you shoud have so much trouble. The Candleshers  looks very Learned but like most branchs of learning become familiar when known. I am sorry you had not the patience to take your lesson of so much consequence to your Eyes.

I am Dr Sr 
Most Affectionately 
yours Adam Ferguson


Dear Sir

We have at last made our Way to this Place through many halts & much slow travelling. The Route we took by Birmingham Manchester &c considered as a Specimen of all England would give a very high Idea of your Industry & Skill in the use of Labour & consequently of your Numbers & Wealth, fully equal to the Arduous Contest in which you are engaged. By the Way You did not seem to know when I was in the South how much you owe to Lord Cornwallis. He has gained the Victories & made the Marches we see in the Gazette without consuming any Provisions from Europe. A Gentleman who is here & left him at Wilmington after having made the March  with him tells me so. He paid Friends for what was taken from them And gave Ennemies Notorious or doubtful, receipts of which they may avail themselves hereafter in case of any mistake now made to their prejudice. The heavy and almost insufferable burden of this War comes from the Necessity of feeding an Army in America from Europe why it is not published that we have done without it in this case & may in other Cases I do not conceive. But in this Zeal for National Affairs I must not forget what touches myself. In the first Place. The Pamphlet you showed to me at Windsor is but just now come to hand. Upon considering the Passage relating to me it appears that the author would fairly insinuate that Dr Piercy had a cheat put upon him at Edr in which I was a principal Actor. This puts me upon my Defence & I can do no more than plead not guilty. I trouble you with a Copy of My Declaration, if you chuse to permit me, I wish very much it should be addressed to yourself & be to so published in the most Current of the News Papers. If that  should not be proper, let the address be changed to the Publisher & if you will be so good as forward it with my signature I will be Obliged to you. Dr Piercy I believe passed some Days with Dr Blair & I do not know what may have passed between them: but I never saw him but once.

Although I do not remember the Authenticity of Ossian Poems was then Questioned, the Conversation certainly turned upon Antient Poetry: for I remember very distinctly having Shown to Dr Piercy and even left with him Some Scrap or Scraps of Poetry in the Earse Language as I myself had written them without any regard to the Supposed Orthography which I never acquired nor Attended to. If Dr Piercy is a keeper of Scraps he may have this still. Having long neglect and lost what I had picked up in this way myself I had got some such things both from Mr McPherson & from Mr Mc Lagan Chaplain to the 42d Reg't & cannot from memory distinguish which it was I gave to Dr Piercy. These Gentlemen I see are never to be convinced. If conjectural Evidence is brought they call out for direct Testimony: If Testimony they call out  for the Ipsa Corpora. If the Ipsa Corpora, then Mr Mc Pherson or some one Else has made a Translation into Earse from the Original English of Mr McPhersons Forgery. And I despair of seeing the matter cleared up to their Satisfaction as neither Original nor Scotch much less highland Testimony is to be admitted. If there be no merit in those produc[tions] they ought to have been forgotten So long ago. If there is I wish we had the Supposed Originals. The Specimens I have seen apart from The Curiosity of them are very Interesting as Efforts of the Imagination & the Heart Equal to any Poetry I know, & whether genuine or Spurious. I shall never be Ashamed of having mistaken them for Originals.

I am about to have the Roman History transcribed fair & am only Sorry I have not the means of Submitting it to your Inspection. I should be unwilling to make Booksellers risk their money without some better grounds than their belief of my Industry & Talents. Mrs Ferguson joins in best respects to Mrs Douglass. Yours most Sincerely


Hallyards near Peebles N.B. March 4th 1807


I have to remind Your lordship in this letter of two different Persons. The writer of it will sett his name at the end, and has no other Claim to Credit; but for mer[e] instances of Your Lordships Goodness. The Other Person for whom he ventures to address your Lordship is Mr William Gardiner, who was some years ago admitted to Holy Orders, with a view to his becoming Chaplin to the English residing at Dantzick, where he has accordingly been with great satisfaction to himself & those with whom he was connected; Untill the Calamitous Defeat of the Prussians & the Advance of a Victorious Enemy whose threats of Destruction to every thing English on his Way, will account for Mr Gardiners Allarm & Escape to his own Country, where he has come with a Wife, and six Children. He now proposes to offer himself  at home, and hopes for a kind reception in the Bosom of that Church to which he belongs.

I was one of the persons who formerly bore Testimony to his merits and am far from having any reason to repeat the concern which I have repeatedly taken in his Wellfare. I trust you will forgive my endeavour to facilitate his Approach to your Lordships Notice. Your countenance must be of Signal benefit to him; And if I could in any degree contribute to procure it for him, should think I performed a meritorious office for a deserving Man. I am too old to be sure that my interposition may not be improper: but trust to your Lordships Indulgence. I continue to write I hope intelligibly: but my sight has so failed that it is with difficulty I read what I have written & must plead your excuse of inaccuracy.

I still conceive you as what you was and cannot apprehend any decrepitude or weekness whatever.

I have the honour to be with great Respect 
My Lord 
your Lordships 
most obedt & 
most  

Brunstain Aug.t 15. 1757



I am sorry to find from your Letter to my Lord Milton that the dislike you formerly expressd to stay at Groninguen continues to give you so much Uneasiness. My Lord desires me to assure you that when he considered of a place proper for your Studies the only Reasons he had to prefer Groninguen arose from Circumstances advantageous to you. He thought that Retirement would be more proper and even more agreeable to yourself, than being exposed to Company who might divert you from your business & hinder the design which both he & you had in going abroad: For this reason he preferrd Groninguen to Leyden which is more frequented by our Countrymen & where they frequently interrupt & seduce one another. The Truth is that Foreigners generally attach themselves to one Another abroad which is a great disadvantage because they can reap little advantage benefit from One another & are made to neglect the business for which they went. There was another reason which made my Lord's choice of Groninguen appear extremely desireable to me, that I knew some worthy people there to whom I could recommend the Care of your health & in whose Friendship I thought you might entirely confide Which I hope you have found confirmd by the behaviour of Mr Falkner & Vandoeveren.

However I hope it will be in your power to prevent any  disadvantage My Lord apprehends in leaving the place you are now in and as you are so desirous of going to Leyden he yelds to your Inclination in that particular although his Opinion is still the Same. As this Step is entirely our own he hopes you will be upon your Guard against any ill consequence it may have. He has not desired me to repeat any of the Remarks he formerly made upon your Plan of Study although he is still of the same Opinion & spoke from the Experience he has had in the Study you are now upon.

It distressed him greatly to find you still under some degree of Uneasiness, but he trusts to time for the Removing it & to the assurances you will always have of his Tenderness as well as Care & attention to whatever concerns you. Any thing from myself upon this occasion may be extremely improper, but I cannot help repeating the sincere concern which I & your friends here take in your welfare. We had no occasion for professor Rücker's Testimony to satisfy us as to your ability in your Studys and hope you will be able to make Leyden more agreeable to yourself as well as equally profitable in your business. I am 

 & 
most  






This Letter is wrote 
at my desire & 
with my Approbation 
signd And. Fletcher


My Dear Jack 

I received your Letter from Dover and forwarded the inclosed to Lord Milton who since I have been here has showed me a Letter of yours from Paris.

We are all very glad to find that your health is better and that you are so fortunate in the Duke of Bedfords attention and Civilities, Mr Forrester who is in this Country has written to second your former Recommendations. My Lord Approves of your following Doctor Pringles advice and thinks it very happy that you found so good an opportunity of going to France. He tells me that he will make up full Captains to pay to you from the date of your last Commission till you come to have it in the Regiment. The Regimentals of an English Officer are probably the finest Cloaths you need to wear even at Paris but in case the Stay you make there should be attended with a little extraordinary expence, he will make no difficulty of allowing you Fifty or Sixty pounds besides your ordinary Allowance for that purpose: but he thinks that you should not stay long there, that after two or three  weeks you shoud take your Leave of the Duke of Bedford in order to prosecute the Intention of your Journey.

I coud not tell who was Agent to your Regiment, but Mr Coutts I suppose will manage your Credite for you both with the Agent and in France. I beg you will write to let us know how you do.

Your Friends here were a little perplexed at first upon hearing you was going to France as they knew nothing of it from yourself at first, but I excused you on Account of the hurry & uncertainty you were in to the last moment. My Lord Milton was a little out of order the day I saw him which is the reason he desires me to inform you of the above particulars. This Country furnishes nothing new and I have got out of reach of London news. Your friends are all well. Your Horses leg continued a little sore and I was afraid to Trust him in so long a Journey. I left him with Home and took a Horse of Clerks which he had.

I am Dear Jack your most affect. 
 



My Dear Sr

If your other friends are as Slow in writing as I have been you will imagine that you are neglected. I have for some years taken the Liberty to abstain from writing where I do not hope to produce some Effect & even where I intend writing habit & lazyness frequently get the better of me. Your Brother has shown me your last letter, & I hope that the matters may turn out as you wish them. Sometime in January last Coll. Mc Dowal sent me a Message to meet him on the Subject of a Commission from you. He told me that he intended to quit the Regiment but not the Service having a view to Change into the Dragoons; that he promised you the first offer & that you had referred him to me; He demanded 4. 000 Guineas. And was at that time on his way to London where he now is. I carried his Proposal to Mr Fletcher & Mr Alston who after considering what was to be done in the particular State of Lord Miltons Affairs determined that the Money shoud be advanced on your Security & your Brother the Coll's. And Referred the terms & the Conduct of the whole Transaction to Colls Fletcher & Mc Dowal at London. I thought  the affair woud have been Speedily concluded between them: but it seems some Missunderstanding has arisen to delay it which I cannot thoroughly understand either from Coll. Fletchers or Coll. Mc Dowals letters. There is a regulation of the Price of Commissions been lately Made to Which I imagine Coll. Fletcher wants to have this Bargain restricted altho' he does not directly say so, And Coll. Mc Dowal seems to expect £4000. He mentions offers that are made to him. But we do not hear of any formed intention to put a Lieut. Coll. over your head. Mr Fletcher sent for me a few days ago to Communicate your Letter & to desire that I woud write to Coll. Mc Dowal Informing him that he woud not insist on the new Regulation in the Article of the Price & was willing to agree to the £4000 but that he must insist nobody shoud be put over you while you are in actual Service & willing to purchase that he had written to the Secretary at War upon the report of such an Intention from you. That he only meant to prevent your Receiving any Injustice that whenever the terms were Settled with Coll. Mc Dowal he woud immediately join him in applications to the War office to have the affair concluded. This is the State of the matter at this Present Moment, My letter is gone & I hope  will bring an Answer that will contain no Difficultys.

I waited for some Conclusion in order to write you upon it but it is of more consequence to tell you how matters are while they remain in Suspence than even after they are concluded for they will then discover themselves. Your Brother & Mr Alston considering circumstances have acted kindly and readily and are dissposed to continue to do so, & I am perswaded that no hinderance will arise from them. Tho I am a bad writer I am so unreasonable as to wish to receive letters. Your simplest commands in any matter or any account of your wellfare will be most agreeable to me. And whether you hear from one or no you may depend on my not neglecting any thing else. I am

My Dear SSr 
 
& most  








I received your letter lately and am sorry to find that the Climat is still at War with your health. I hope you will have no more attacks before your leave is obtained. It has been applied for some time ago & your claim is now Supported by such reasons as are irresistable. The Necessity of coming to settle your Affairs over & above your health & your having served your turn in the West Indies. You will probably have heard of your Father's Death. His faculties were very much impaired if not intirely gone almost two years & death came at last by the Slowest degrees. He has settled the Whole of his Personal Estate on his younger Children by which you are now Rich & in condition to make any purchase in the Army that offers. He always reckoned you in his Debt for the money advanced to buy your majority & pay Other accounts he often said so to me & did not forget it in making his Settlements.  He has ordered that your Brother The Colonel & Miss Fletcher shall draw each of them two Thousand pounds to put them as he seems to have understood it on a footing with you And The remainders to be equally shared with you. Mr Alston informs me that you will probably receive after all about eight thousand pounds. This will enable you to purchase when occasion offers & in the meantime will give a considerable addition to your income without encroaching on your Capital, Which I earnestly entreat you most carefully to Avoid. There is no fortune can bear the want of Oeconomy without it the Mogul would be a Bankrupt in six Months. Your Father is thought by most People here to have paired the Elder Brothers Estate very closs¤. He has left to the younger Children not only Brunstane but some farms likewise that were purchased contiguous to Salton. He has even left to them the Furniture, Plate, and even the Library in Salton House. I confess that I was sorry for this last Article And was  very much pleased to hear that Miss Fletcher had immediatly given up all claim to the Library to your Elder Brother. I feel it like a piece of proper Respect to your Ancestors & promised her that I would mention it to you. I shoud be very sorry that Andrew Fletcher of Saltons books were Sold away from the Family or that the Possessor of his Estate which you yourself may one day be shoud be obliged to buy them over again: but you will impute my saying any thing at all on the Subject to the freedom with which my very sincere regard inspires me.

If you have not written to your Coll. for his leave and Assistance in Obtaining The Kings [permission] for your return I beg that you do it soon. I have heard nothing of Col: Mc Douall for some time. I believe he was glad to gain time: but in reality he coud not Obtain leave to sell out Otherwise he woud have had without hesitation all the money he Asked: but you can now act here & every where else for yourself. I am in hopes of seeing you Soon. Dr Sr your most

Affectionate & most  





In compliance with your request intimated by Peter Roberston. Carlyle has procured the Duke of Buccleughs Roman Sword & I here with inclose a Shape with the Dimensions of it both Blade & Hilt in Paper. You have three patterns. Nº 1 is a Sword which I got made lately at Birmingham from a Pattern the Sword Slipper has by him & from which he told me that he had supplied some Corps in the Service. It cost twelve shillings but what is mettal in the hilt is plated &c. It weighs without Scabbard as you see marked upon the Paper one pound twelve ounces.

 Nº 2. Is the shape & Dimensions of the Duke of Buccleughs Sword The Blade seems to be Roman but The Hilt Gothick or Modern.  It weighs without the Scabbard two pounds four ounces and a half. Nº 3 is the Shape of a Weapon I got made by a Cutler here from the Idea I had of Antiques & drawings &c from imitating too closely a wooden Pattern I gave him. The Cutler made the Blade too heavy & the Hilt was to be made proportional so that the whole weighs no less than four pounds ten ounces & a half. But to make up for this inconvenience it is a Most tremenduous Weapon at either thrust or Cut or rather knock down. My Idea for the use of Such Swords to a modern Soldier was to have in Place of a Scabbard a Parma or oval shield to hang by a Hook to a little shoulder Belt reaching from the right shoulder to the left arm pit. That this shield should be broad enough to cover the Part of the Arm that carries it from the Elbow to the end of the Clenched fist. This I think in a man of considerable Size may be about 16 Inches & in length it  may be about two feet. To Stretch the Arm forward will be enough to parry &c. The Pattern I have got made is much too strong & heawy resists a Ball &c being a Plate of Iron & two plys of bend leather. The one I mean to have made for the Birmingham Sword Nº 1. Will be only a Plate of tinned Iron with one ply of bend Leather enough to resist a Stab or a Cut. I have the Project of a Shield which is to include the Knapsack & resist a Musket Ball but this must be for Some Other Paper.

You will expect to hear what is become of my tottering Nerves & Fibres. As I continued to mend at Bath so I have gone on since my Arrival in this Country & am wonderfully restored to my ordinary feelings so that making some allowance for the Diet you saw me keep & which I still probably must continue I have much animal Strength & my poor Pittance of Intellectual Strength in Statu quo. I mean to  use either however but Sparingly. I am getting my History transcribed And will begin as soon as I can with Safety to put My Lectures in writing but cannot set my Face to the labour of Delivering them this winter. So much for these matters.

I saw McPherson about five minutes when I was at London & our Other Correspondents about a certain bussiness not at all. I am something affraid your Announciation at Mr Edens may have been Mismanaged. I wrote to that effect as I hoped in time to reach before you: but perhaps not & if you are to be at Dublin the Effect if Material may be still to come. Your Friends here are all well. Poor John Home is much mortifyed at some feeling of neglect. I pray you correct it. He is gone to the highlands to see more of the Scene of the never ending War 45. I have brought the Picture from Sir Joshua Reynolds it is a Master Piece & greatly Admired. Believe me  your

most Affectionate & most 




I have just now received the inclosed Packet from Lord Glencairn & tho I flatter myself I may see you before you set out for the South I send this packet to find you if possible immediatly that I may not be obliged to send it after you by post. I was glad to be told in answer to my last inquiries that you was gone to the Country.

I am  



Argyle Square 15 May 1783
Edr 30th Septr 1784



Here is weather which puts an end to my Charioteering, I am affraid, for the Season. I have waited a few days to see if it woud change but as what I can use only in fair weather may serve at Boguhan as a provision against foul weather I detain it no longer. We are devouring your fruit, young & old, The Season must have been better with you than here. Otherwise it would not have grown & ripened So well without Fire & Glass neither of which I recollect you employ.

J. Home is to be a week or two longer  in the Country, as I am told, & soon after his return here will go to London. We are most of us Sick in this house but for Sick people are doing pretty well. The bearer will carry your Commands to Town. I am  

& most  

Argyle Square 27 Octr 




Dear Sir

you may believe that Since I received your intimation of a desire to be lodged for the winter Somewhere in this Side of the Town I have not neglected to inquire if there was any Sort of House to be had. I have not been very Successful: but am this Moment told that Mrs Betty Johnstones house in what we call the Society very near hear is to be left furnished. It is a Storey in a Land. The Rooms are a Dining Room Small drawing Room two bed Chambers & a Kitchen as I am told very well furnished. The Neighbours that is to Say the People over head are too two Old Women who neither Spin nor make any noise whatever. I have made no inquiry about the Rent but shall if you desire it. John Home has been returned to Edr sometime and is  gone Again for a few Days to burry his Father in Law Mr Home at Foggo uncertain when he may return. The Old horse Arrived safe upon his own Legs. And when it is a tolerable day I almost repent having returned your chaise so faithfully. But winter is now so much in earnest with us that it is likely I shall not drive any more before Lady Day. Who is here but General Clerk. My Infirmities absolutely prevent my trotting after him or meeting him any where except when he calls for a little here: but I hope for a compleat set down from him before he goes away. Send me your Orders if you have any about the House it is possible you may have been in it perhaps to see John Johnstone who used to be there with his Sister. I am Dear Sir 

& most  

[1784]

Dear Sir

Mrs Johnstones Maid was here looking for you once or twice last night. We could tell her only not to be out the way this morning, which I suppose she will mind.

Mr Thomson on the Calton Hill is empowered to let the house & will inform of the Terms.

yours &c 
A: Ferguson



Argyle 
Wednesday Morning
Argyle Sqr Tuesday morning 1st Febry 1785

Dear Sir

I wished to have got Speech of you yesterday to beg the Favour you would help at a party which is to be here at dinner on Friday next. The Company is Mrs Mure & one of her Daughters the Principal & his Family, And for your encouragement one of his Sons is come from India lately by Land & can tell of the Turks & Saracens so do not fail to engage yourself.

I am but a Sorry Landlord & this weather is likely to make me Still more Sorry

yours most Affectionately 

Argyle Square Tuesday Evening 28 June 






I find the Doctors or their Patients defer our excursion to Pennicuick sine die. And of this I think necessary to send this notice to Milton house that in case you be in Town the mere desire of giving us your Company should not carry you out of your way & give us the Mortification of missing you as well as Pennycuik in this fine weather.

I am Dear Sir 
 
Servant 

Dear Sir

My Man is just now returned from Bankhead having committed Such a Blunder as requires my going there tomorrow morning: but I wish to know whether I may hope to see you at any Other time, if not; This call to the Country must be neglected rather than be out of your way when you call. I should set out about 8 in the morning & return before four to Receive J. Home & General Mc Nab in the Evening. If I dont hear from you may I venture to think that you do not go before thursday  or Friday, so that I may find you at Milton House some of those days.

I am  
 
& most  








Argyle Square 
Tuesday 16 May 

Bankhead 17 June 1786



I received your Letter here a few nights ago & sent the inclosed to be put in the Post Office at Edinburgh next morning. I am much Obliged to you for the Attention &c you have bestowed on my Affair, and Am Satisfied with the account you give. The Principle upon which I proceed is implicit faith. If the undertakers are at ease I am satisfied: & with the immediate Prospect which you give of our seeing you shall for the present Say no more.

I am glad you remember the suggestion of some years back & should be still better pleased to think you in Earnest. Panurge is a Sage Counsel & his Scruples lead to the Point: So proceed. We have Still some  Sunshine here: but such a North east wind for Some days as requires more Cloathing than ever I carried in the coldest day in Winter & it puts me more in Mind of the See Blink which we read in the history of Green Land than of the Pine Apples you mention. We have better thing Viz. Eggs Butter Cakes & Cabbages & I have forgot every Complaint: but what the Soil & the Climat & the prospect of bad Crops of hay and Corn Occasion. It may be matter of curiosity to you to know that I have sold my house in Argyle Square for the house which I carried you to see at the Siennes, Property for Property without any odds or Ballance. And tho the Conveyances are not exchanged the Bargain is concluded as far as exchange of Missives can Accomplish it. My Object is  to have a farm yard at Edinburgh to communicate with this place. And exchange Dung for Hay & Corn &c &c &c. But since I am on the Subject of Property please know that I have three Mares & two of them taken [to] the Horse So that by this time next year I may have five Mares besides a She Ass that carrys her Load to town two or three times a week. But this is doing more tha[n] you desired. I was only to tell you that you[r] Letter came Safe which I hope the [xxx xxx] will also be in due time. I am Dear Sir

 
& most  

5 Dec. [1786]

Dear General

Least I should not have the pleasure of seeing you tomorrow and because the warning is already too short, I send to beg the favour that you will dine here on Monday next with Mrs Mure who nothwithstanding the lameness of one of her Horses has promised to come. I have endeavoured to rouse the Gallantry of John Home to bring her in his Carriage. If you had any thing in Town besides a Skittish Mare I should certainly  have applied to you. I am  


[1786]

Dear Sir

I am sorry that your Map, in emptying my Pockets, has been mislaid so that I cannot find it. I will continue to look for it: but that will be little consolation if it be not found when wanted.

yours most affectionately 

[?1786]



I dont know what to say of this man, it is very teasing & yet this Edition is rather more Correct than I should have expected. It is scarcely worth while to think of it any more. It is strange that he cant get a thing printed in the same portable form with the pamphlet it answers. If it were necessary to do any more I would try to find out who prints the Actual Grubs that are hawked in the Street & so employ the same hands-but I doubt it is not worth more trouble. We shall consider it more at meeting.

yours &c 

[?1786]



I am exceedingly pleased with the Sketch & the Appendix, I have touched it with my pen where that appeared requisite but you will judge of the propriety of keeping my Corrections &c &c. I send it back with the least possible delay.

yours &c



Friday Morning
[?1786]



I hope you dont intend to travel today. I had enough of the Sun yesterday & mean to try what repose & shade will do today. I wish you would trust your Dinner here today at three OClock. Dr Black is commonly here & Dr Hutton often in the Afternoon.

ly 

[1786] Argyle Square Thursday Morning

Dear Sir

This is to remind you of your promise to dine here at three O Clock. But more especially to let you know that Dr Hutton with all his impatience is to be of the Party. I told him of the Moor-fowls to tempt him. And so, he said, I shall have five minutes swallowing to make up for an hour or two waiting. Range matters if possible so as to dissappoint him of his waiting.

I am yours &c 

[?1786]



I will do my utmost to be with you on Thursday, & have not at present reason to doubt my Ability. It was mortifying that I could not be with you to day: but I must Sacrifice every thing to college Bussiness for which every slight cold almost dissables me altho I should feel no Other Symptom.

yours most Affectionately

A: Ferguson
Siennes 10th Febry 






This is to let you know that I called at Milton house some days ago to inquire whether you could do us the favour to meet the Poet Burns and some Others at Dinner here tomorrow. I had his works in my pocket to show you & still continue in the mind that he gives the most indubitable proofs of Genius, which I hope will be some inducement to your coming here tomorrow.

I write that this Letter may ly for your inspection any time you arrive whether tonight or tomorrow Morning. I have more than one Letter from Jn Home who has been Swearing to the Identity of a Packet  be carried from hence on My Account.

I am  with the greatest 
Respect  
 



I called to beg the favour that you will take your chance of a Dinner at the Sciennes tomorrow any time between three and Four. John Johnstone is now here and has promised to meet you with all his London news. I have also to tell you that I have a line from Sir John McPherson with news of an easy deliverance from his Tryal at the expence of £3000. He seems to be relieved of a great Load and breathes easily. Be sure you come tomorrow.

I am Dr Sr yours most affectionately 




Milton house 
Tuesday forenoon 
18th March 



I hope you mean to be here today at Dinner. Andrew Stuart is in Town & if he should not be engaged I will try to make him meet you if not we cannot help it. Mr Pulteney continued last night in the resolution of departing this morning.

I am Dear Sir 
most affectionately 
yours Adam Ferguson





Siennes Sunday Morning 
17 August 1788
Sciennes 8th Novr 






We came home last night & I would have been to call for you this morning if I had not begun my motions with a Travel to the west end of the new Town which disabled me both in point of time & strength to decline so far from my straight course home in the opposite direction. I write this least I should come too late in the morning to let you know I hope Bob Adam will dine here tomorrow on your Hare & Goose & will like them the better that you are here to Answer for their goodness so I beg no trivial accident may deprive us of the pleasure. I am

 
  

Dear General

As I trust David Hume the Professor is your acquaintance give me leave to ask the favour of your Company here to dinner on Tuesday next to meet the said Dd Hume & one of our Rumps of Corned Beef &c &c in doing which you will greatly Oblige your most

affectionate humble 
Servant 






Siennes Friday 
18 Decr 1789
Siennes Sunday morning [20 December 1789]

My Dear General

I have transferred Dd Hume to Wednesday for which day I hope you are ready to engage yourself. And that John Home also will be more free to come than on Tuesday the day on which he was engaged with you to Mr Rannies.

All this I hope will be more clearly discussed at Dinner if you favour us with the Sundays Call, Doctor Black declines exposing himself: but Hutton will I hope make his appearance at the usual time.

yours most 
Affectionately 

Dear General

In my way to visit the Hudsons bay colony on Leith Walk with Dr Hutton we met them coming up to Town. The principal Curiosity among them Sails for the Orkneys on Thursday: but I prevailed upon them to dine here tomorrow & shall be happy if you can be of the Company. Your most Obedient 



Siennes Tuesday Febry 9th 

Siennes 17th Janr y 






I may be dead: but will not Otherwise fail to make one of the Party you mention for Saturday next in the mean time I am 




Siennes April 30th 1791

My Dear Genl

I long much for the return of old habits & Practices, was twice in the street this week with intention to reach Frederic Street, if I could; but found it rather too much with the prospect of coming back on foot. I am however very Ostensible within these Walls & have for some time ventured to the Parlour at Dinner time. If you have lost the habit of coming here of a Sunday & trusting to such fare as ours we shall go into mourning but I hope not.

yours most Affectionately 

Siennes 21 Febry 1792

Dear Sir

I have notice of My Sons Josephs appointment a Cadet of Artillery to India & I feel a necessity of accompanying him to London that he may either take his passage in the Ships of this Season, or take benefit of the leave given by the Court of Directors to remain at Woolwich or some other Academy for a year the better to qualify him for the Service. I shall carry my Manuscript with me & so relieve you for the present of farther wading thro it. I think to be gone tomorrow or next day.

I am Dr Sir yours most affectionately


Hallyards 10th June 1796



I doubt both the Grey mare & I will be puzled to repay our Obligations at Boghuan. She never could come to me at a more favourable time, I have pasture for ten or twelve Beasts & am made to expect that I shall cut a thousand Stone of Hay: Such a Stock as yours I know well is apt to overgrow & be felt grievously at a Pinch of Backward Grass, my first impulse was to take away the old mare as soon as possible: but on recollection that, besides her first unexpected Production, she is possibly nursing or to nurse a Second, this may not be proper. I might relieve you of the Colt at any rate if I knew how to have him Conveyed but I am affraid he will neither lead nor Carry. Be so good as order what should be done & if any careful person could be found to lead the little animal here, I would willingly pay Costs. All the above Profusion of Grass is not  at the Castle as you Suppose but at a new post I have just taken having evacuated the Castle. I remained there till near Whitsunday in the same state of uncertainty I mentioned to you about Christmas: The Grounds there were coming to be let, but without any prospect of my being accommodated on any reasonable terms. The neighbouhood of a little Town brought competitors with whom, it would have been very imprudent for me to contend. The Land Lords Passion was for Grassum rather than Rent & tho I offered £707 Grassum & a Rent of £22 for about forty Acres part Rocky & covered by Wood. I took occasion of the Report of a higher offer to withdraw mine & laid hold of this little Settlement at Hallyards upon the Manor on the other Side of the Tweed from Nidpath, where I am accommodated at once as above with a Small House, indeed; but excellent Offices & some fine Pasture of which some small part inclosed. Letters directed to Nidpath will find me but my new direction is at Hallyards By Peebles.

I am 

 & most 


Hallyards near Peebles 25 October 1806



you have laid a difficult task upon me; to give way to my feelings & not to appear unworthy of your generous conduct towards me. I should indeed be unworthy if my feelings lay dormant untill this Occasion. You must it seems have heard of the difficulties I met with in trying to settle my Son in his Profession as a Writer at Edinburgh. There was a series of dissappointments & fruitless Attempts to Serve him, such as Obliged us at least to abandon the Project altogether, and has almost made me despond of any thing that can be proposed for him, to which his present inability to avail himself of your generous Intention contributes not a little. My Son had Friends who were kindly Occupied in his behalf. They projected a new line of Life for him connected with the Army but in respect to Bussiness rather Civil than Military. In this Line they hoped to assist him.  Of this I could not judge; but considering some of those who proposed it could not think it altogether Visionary.

The Scheme required in the outset that he should be a military man And that he should serve two years before any Such Appointment as that in View could be Obtained. In prosecution of this Plan Sir James Pulteney obtained a Commission of Second Lieu't in the 21st Regiment from the Goodness of H. R. H. The Commander in Chief. And My Son from his Experience as a Volunteer Office[r] made no indifferent Battalion Man. Soon after he had joined his Regiment the Earl of Selkirk proposed to take him as Private Secretary on his mission to America. This after some months expectation Misgave & he returned to Quarters. Soon after another Friend General Don commanding at Jersey invited him to be military Secretary at his Post: but the Establishment of Such an Office it seems was to be Obtained at Head Quarters & I doubt is not thought expedient as he has been detained many Months in Suspence at London. But I beg pardon for troubling you  with so long a Story, much less might have sufficed to Show that your Generous proposals tho so well devised for his benefit when in the Profession of a Writer at Edinburgh is now only matter of Gratitude on us.

He is now Military & whatever is thought of for him must be in that Line or not inconsistent with it. And I hope you have not proceeded any inconvenient length in the transaction you Allude to.

It will be Some Consolation to embrace you once before I go hence and in this hope I shall Still remain for a Little.

 

And Affectionate 
 

Hallyards near Peebles 26 October 1806



I write now to account if possible for a Strange dreaming Epistle which I wrote to you yesterday. With such Eyes as mine are become I have often to guess at what I read. With no better information upon the first glance, I set about answering your kind letter. The words MrJohn Home Officer & at your Command struck me with a Fancy that you had bargained with Mr John Home for his Office to be at my Command. For whom? But for my Son lately a Writer in Edinburgh. Hence my long Account of his case. My esteem of your proposal as being well devisd for him in his former Situation: but not being applicable now; my hope that you had not proceeded any inconvenient length in the transaction. In Short it is scarcely Credible that a Head so Old as mine could run away so fast with a mere fancy, when the real matter was open for inspection. But so it was. I wrote seald and dispatched  my letter without looking a Second time at yours. Soon after however I did what I shoud have done before I wrote & finding how my head had run wild have been Anxious enough for its Reputation with you. Your kind offer to Strengthen my hands in the present possible Exigence of my Family is matter of grateful feeling which I shall not attempt to express. And I trust that you will not Suppose me to be actuated by any Saucy Conceit of Independence When I say that whatever may become of the Subject at last, it is now better placed in your hands than it would be in mine. The Publick and the World have been more propitious to me in point of Provision than I deserved.

It is true that I neither eat nor drank like a Prodigal: but a restless Spirit of Activity engaged me in what was no less improvident, a Contest with the Surface of the Earth itself, when it had nothing to Offer but Cold & hunger. And that I have not been abandoned to these at last, is more owing to the Providence of my friends than to my own. I am now far from being indigent or even much Straightened. I am out of Debt, or nearly clear of that in which my  Sons Affairs engaged me. And it is not fit that I should be encouraged to spend now, even on my children what had better be spared for future occasions. Your Proposal is matter of Obligation which I neither do nor wish to decline. Nor do I fear that the effects of any kindness on your Part would engage me in any thing that I should not do from long confirmed Inclination. If any occasions called for Aid I shoud be proud to receive it on the Quarter from which it is now Offered. With the Hope I expressed yesterday of being yet once more able to embrace you & yours. I am

 with the most 
Sincere Respect & Affection 

most  

Hallyards near Peebles 27 October 1806



Here is yet another Letter. Since yesterday I have an unexpected Account of Debts to be payed for my Son which allarms me much, And the relief you have been so good as Offer will be most Acceptable.

If your Agent pay to Mansfield Ramsay and Co and send me their receipt to My Account, I shall still with the little Strength I have left be able to Surmount My Difficulties.

This from your &c &c 




To John Fletcher Campbell Esqr


Having heard yesterday that an Answer was coming out to the reasons against a Scotch Militia I sent for it, & got the Inclosed. I have since shown it no Mr N —  who is of the same opinion with me, that Such fine paper & Print &c is unsuitable to the Spirit of the performance, that it even mars the effect. He thinks it worth while to have another impression without loss of time that it should be in coarse Paper &c and Sold for a penny, no matter he says whether the Sale pay Costs that there  is some Subscription fund to which the ballance of expence may be charged &c &c. Upon this Idea I have Scratched a few touches for your use & correction. If you approve they may go into the impression proposed. N — is very desirous that it should be in the hands of the Cadies & sold for a penny at the Door of the Parliament house on Tuesday Morning. I hope that this will find you Safely arrived in Town. I am very glad you have had so good a day. We of this house hear much of your Olla on Tuesday but dont yet know whether we Should come to it or no.

Dugald Stuart was here to make an Appointment  to take us up in a Coach which I have agreed to at hazard tho upon counting noses I wish you may have room for every body whom the reputation of an Olla may Attract. Yours most Affectionately


London July 12, 1759

Dear John

This great bussiness is effected at last and I who never had a home till now must prepare to go home to Edinburgh O Dulcia Verba

I was with David last night to perswade him to go with me and if I coud conclude any thing from his hesitation I woud have hopes of bringing him but the Vis inertiae which I am now to pay to so great a regard to is all against me, & tho he went so far as to say that he wished he was in Scotland to put and end to all consultation about it yet I doubt much of his moving, he is gone out of Town to Stuarts for some days, & his want of resolution perplexs me, for Stowe wants me to go down with him & I cannot ingage till I know of Davids motions, I believe it will be proper for me to let Stowe set out & tell David I will be dissappointed of a companion if he does not go. I cannot yet fix upon a time  for being at Berwick. I have the Bussiness of some days besides a Visit or two to the Countrey. Lord Bute Garrick whom I have not yet seen Dido etiam qui rusticat & magnos timet Lucinae labores sed [xxx] vanae credo formidines.

You seem to expect Vigorous measures upon the present Alarm. I dont know what a grain or two more of fear will do, but we do not seem to be in a hurry here with any thing that points at arming the Countrey. We trust to the Fleet while the season keeps moderate weather & will allow our Ships to ly on the Ennemys Coast: by September we expect troops from Gibraltar &c & those who are at Home compleated enough to repell a French embarkation. We are again in expectation of a Battle in Westphalia. One Miss Grey who is lately returned from Holland was advised by the French Minister at the Hague not to go to England in this troublesome time or if she did he offered her letters of recommendation to Monsr Chevert . . . .

 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

 of Carlyle's affair

Clerk as per last with more bussy with the affairs of the Nation than people to whom they are entrusted. I will writec when I know of my time for setting out if I go he will desire our meeting at his house & [shoud] be pleasant, but I must lose as little time as possible on the road.

Make my comp[liments] to Mr & Mrs Home.

I am Dear John 
Affectionately yours 

Edinr Janry 27th 1776

Dear John

I find you have prevailed at last & if I were of opinion that successu crescat honestum  I should shoud now make some addition to my stile. I may be Silent but the little Children will some day bless you for what I may by these means if I live [to] be able to do for them. I shoud have written immediately on receiving yours but wished to be at leisure when I wrote the inclosed letters to make as sure as I coud not to make use of any improper expression. I have yet told nobody here haveing Missed David when I called upon him for that purpose. I shall endeavour to see him & Baron Mure this Morning I know that David will be Almost as Glad as myself. I had a line from Sir John Dalrimple Last night in which he tells me that Sr Grey Cooper upon making his application found the affair was already  done & wished me joy. I shall in a few Days beg the Favour of Sr John to offer My respects and acknowledgements to Sr Grey Cooper.

You will be pleased to hear that the sense of this Countrey where it has been taken is every where favourable to the Militia. This meanest County in Scotland was keept from making any declaration. I hear only of two Objections to the Bill from those who profess to approve of the measure. The first Objection is to the Clause which permits the Army to enlist Militia men in Scotland. The Second is to the Substitution of Commissioners of for Lords Lieutennant. The first point I hope will be given up by The Friends of Government. And the second I woud fain hope likewise may upon farther thoughts be found an immaterial point.

We had but seven at dinner yesterday at the Poker & wanted one of the number required to make an Election but with much ado Got Bob Chalmers to come after Dinner & so Elected The Lord Advocate & Captn Elliott two  good acquisitions. A Number of us have had copys lately sent of a Pamphlet on the Rights of this Countrey against the Claims of America. I never had any doubt on any of the rights Established in this Pamphlet. The only Question with me was what this Countrey in Wisdom ought to do in the Situation at which the Colonys were Arrived. This Question becomes every Day more complicated & more difficult. I hope that some plan of Operation going to the bottom of all difficultys will be concerted & Steadily Pursued. But that is the Affair of those it may concern.

O pray you to make Lord North & Mr Robinson understand that I am truly Affected with the honour of their Patronage as being persons so justly Possessed of the General Affection of the Nation.

I am Dear John 
most affectionately yours 



My Dear John

I am Such a Correspondent you see as usual & for some little time have been in doubt where a letter might find you. But David showed me a line from you today to day by which you desire to have your letters sent to London. And after such a preamble you may guess that my Silence proceeded in part from want of matter here. The Loss of one Friend & the danger of another  are not Subjects that make people in haste to write. David I am affraid loses Ground he is chearful & in Good Spirits as usual: but I confess that my hopes from the effects of the turn of the Season towards Spring have very much abated.

A Journey to the South Particularly to  Bath has been mentioned to him but the thoughts of being from home, hurried at Inns, and exposed to irregular meals, are very dissagreeable to him. Black is of opinion that he ought not to expose himself to any thing that is so. And that for his Complaints the Tranquillity and usual Amusement of his own Fire Side with proper Diet is his best Regimen so that I think the thoughts of any journey are at present laid aside. I hope we shall see you here soon . And that your Attentions will contribute to preserve what we can so ill spare.

 I am sorry to tell you that we receive the repulse of the Militia Bill  with great Tranquillity & for ought I know the treatment of which our National Pretensions have met with from Baulkers in the house of Commons in the same manner.

I hope that we may be able to return to the Charge but I confess that I do not foresse  a more favourable opportunity. I see that I begin to reap the first fruits of my Pension  not in money but in the news paper Abuse. This I confess when I have seen some people bear it ill, I have sometimes wished to try how I could Swallow, & so I shall may behave enough. I finish at College in about 10 days but you will find me at Edinburgh. As we have got a small house in Sight of our present Habitation,  where we mean to continue all Summer for the Conveniency of the Children Going to School  . . . .

 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .




Damn the actors that have damned the play, and think no more of it till you have time to do what may be necessary for the press, and then consider what is to be done with it. Besides the accidents you mention, I can conceive that the substitution of a love-interest for an interest of state, which the audience expected from the name of Alfred, may have baulked them; when they appeared to languish, you certainly did right to withdraw it.

I am, dear John, 
 Most affectionately yours 

[1786]

Dear John

I am put in mind by Creech of the meeting at Fortune's to-day, but dare not venture there. I have been colded for some days & am thrown into a Sweat by my Lecture which disqualifies me for any place but my  own fire or a little walk before I shift. This I am going to take & beg if General Campbell be in town you will explain my Absence to him.

I am yours &c



Argyle Monday 2 O'Clock
[Nydpath Castle, 3 Dec. 1795]



I was Far from wishing, that you should take to write to me in your Illness: And took measures by means of a correspondence which I solicited from Home with Miss Johnstone, to have such accounts as were passing in the Family. It is now proper, that I acknowledge the receipt of your Letter. And the Inclosed discharge for Joseph of which I will not say much. I should long since have perceived the generosity of your mind. If neither my Family nor myself had been concerned, as we are in the Effects of it. The Boy himself if matters do not mend, will shed tears [xxx] for us all.

If your disorder complaint resist the Medicine That was thought proper for it, we must Submit. Altho Something is yet to be expected from  So much original Vigour of mind & of body: From my age, & infirmities you should have been the Surviver: but what is a Prolongation of life, for days, or weeks, or Years unless one had a Specific object, for which to live, under every disadvantage. I am fully persuaded we shall meet thereafter And know one Another, that you will know your Brother, & that I shall know you both: but in what manner, it is Probable we can know now no more. Than the child unborn can Guess what will become of him in the world he is about to enter.

For the Future, as well as the Present, it is our joy, That we are in the hands of That Power, by wch The Universe is formed, & Reserved with Supreme wisdom, & Goodness. May his May his Blessed Influence rest upon your Mind: & give you the joyful empression That you never can for a Moment be separated from him: you will probably read with Calmness what I never write wt Some Emotion  more a weakness Than the feeling proper upon The Occasion. I[t] will be difficult for me to resist The desire of seeing you: & if I should indulge it soon or at a Milder Season, I beseech you to consider it no otherwise than a Message sent to enquire after your health. I shall dread to meeting your worthy Sister & your family more than yourself: but I wd fain hope they may have more occasion to rejoice before I See them.

I ever am 
your 

Hallyards April 25, 1809



I should have acknowledged your Favour along with the Russian Performance sooner but when I was about to do so a Letter to the same Effect from Dr Brewster telling me how the parcel came to him & that he had troubled with [xxx] of the Copies for me seemed as he was a Stranger to call for my first Acknowledgement so that he had the first Post & as I do not see to write more than once a day you have been deferred to the Second.

On p. 2 the handwriting is continued vertically, and it is as tremulous as in the last few letters, clearly from the hand of a very old man, endowed with imperfect sight.

Never was Parent less  able to distinguish his ofspring than I am in this Instance. All the Seasoning of Hallyards canno[t] even make out my Name on the Title Page. Dr Brewster calls it my Principles but you guess Better that it is the Text Book under its last title Institutes. Dr. B[r]ewster is your Acquaintance & I wish to be more known to him to this you can help on occasion. Observe how I have mismanaged this Letter in my blindness beginning on a wrong page but I am nevertheless with much Regard your most obedient humbl[e] Servant


Argyle Square 
19th Novr 







I know well how much I might rely on General Campbells kindness: but as I have been at some pains to bring matters to this point would rather borrow afterwards than not pay now So shall be glad to see you on Monday Evening as you propose.

I am Sir 

 

London 18th May 1779


Upon a Representation made by some of the Merchants of London trading to New York & Rhode Island; that the Commissioners of His Majestys Customs had declined clearing out any Goods for those Ports, as the Term limited for the Operation of the Proclamations issued for opening that Trade (being to the 1st of June 1779) must be expired before such Goods could Arrive at New York or Rhode Island; I am Commanded by their Excellencies His Majestys Commissioners appointed to treat &c of the means of quieting the Dissorders in America, to transmit the inclosed Copies of their Proclamations of the 22d April to continue in Force to the 1st of Decr 1779 their Former Proclamations relating to the Trade of New York & New Port in Rhode Island, & which were otherwise about to expire on the 1st of June; In order that these Instruments may if thought proper be communicated by the Lords Commissioners of The Treasury to His Majestys Board of Customs.

I have the Honour to be 
with great respect 
Sir your most Obedient 
& most  










John Robinson Esqr, Secretary to the Treasury





Sr

I have this moment received the inclosed Estimate by which the joiner work required in my Class amounts to £5. 19, which with about four pound allowed for Paper & Other repairs will I hope put the place in some decent order. This I hope the Comittee are sensible it needs & I beg that you will take the trouble to move the Council that I may be allowed ten pounds for this Purpose. I am Sr

With the greatest regard 







To John Stephen

I am now Charged by my Colleagues of this University to Return your Lordship their most Sincere thanks for the mark of your Attention and Esteem which they have received & which they will always think it a happiness to merit.

You will permit me My Lord in Particular to express my sense of the honour you have done me & to offer in excuse of my long silence my not having had an opportunity sooner of communicating your Lordships letter & presenting the Tournaline Stones at a public meeting.

I have made some trials of their force, and there is only one in which I once thought upon being heated with Scalding Water that the Electric power was Sensible. Among the numbers which are picked up in account of their appearances no doubt many must fail. I have the Pleasure to Observe that many of your Lordships Friends in this Countrey are well. And have the honour to be with the greatest Respect My Lord

your Lordships most Obliged & most 


Hallyards 25th August 1797



Your Queries came at hand yesterday; but in our Situation a day or two must intervene before we can Answer.

Ansr 1st I began by taking the Bath two or three mornings in the week, & as I found it agree with me came to take it every day. At first I remained in the Bath about fifteen minutes: but gradually prolonged the time.

‘2nd The hour of Bathing is in the morning, & the Patient returns to Bed that he may cool gradually.

3d My Apothecary's Name was Hay, a plain man without pretensions or Quackery.

4th I never used Dry Pumping.

Mr Hay prescribed a dose of Castor Oil to prepare for Bathing: but it did not operate & I went on nothwithstanding.

Whoever goes with the Single prescription of Bathing will scarcely need any direction but that of the Chairmen and Guides.

The Bath I used is called the Queen's Bath.

That which is called the Kings immediately over the Spring seemed too hot. 

There are Covered Baths made at a great expence with Marble Compartments for People who like to pay dear for what they have. I tried them but returned dissatisfied dispirited and felt colded for a day or two afterwards, so that I believe the Choice of the Queen's Bath is Material. It is open to the Air. Ladies, Gentlemen, Guides &c &c heep stalking about Pell Mell.

I felt or fancyed my Cure was advancing every time I bathed, & so I hope will Mr Stuart, or if it should come insensibly that will be alike in the end, & that he will make as good a Retreat into Old Age as I have done, that is shake off all responsibility and bless every day that he lives. I know nobody to whom mere existence should be more pleasing than to him. Let him have something to do that will neither confine nor fatigue, & then mere existence in the Company of God is exquisite. I have learned of late to call him The Principle of Existence, & in this denomination he can never be away: but I do not understand that the French Chemists have yet admitted him among their Principles. The Girls join me in best wishes. You should be well enough to make them a visit, the good weather is yet come and I am persuaded  The Excursion would do you good.

I am Dear Sir 
 
& most  








Doctor Black


Dear Sir

Give me leave to recommend to your Esteem & Good Offices my Friend Mr Gardiner who tells me his Friends in your University have proposed him for the Degree of Doctor of Laws. He has been long known to me by the best Character & I should have gladly Supported him in the Same Pretensions here: but his Application is so far gone with you as to make it necessary the matter should come to an Issue, which I make no doubt you will find Sufficient Reason to make the most favourable for him. I am Dear Sir, with the most Sincere Regard your most Obedient

and Most  





A letter from me may possibly surprise you. I was very sorry to be obliged to leave Aberdeen without preparing you more gradually for the subject of it; but I hope that you will overlook every circumstance in the manner, for the sake of the very sincere good intention from which I act. The esteem and the love with which I am seized to you make me earnestly desire a much more near relation than that which has produced me the happiness of your acquaintance. If the tremendous name of Husband does not alarm you, that is the cousinship which I wish to bear to you. I would willingly carry this request to Aberdeen myself, but you will perhaps rather answer a letter than a verbal proposal, especially if your answer be such as I should be sorry to find it. My happiness very much depends on your allowing me to hope that I may see you before winter, and return from Aberdeen, I would fain wish, in your company, with a heart as full of joy as it was of regret at my parting with you last. If this proposal be disagreeable to you, I shall be most sincerely afflicted; if otherwise, do not torment me with reserve, where frankness would endear you to me so much. I am, with a very solicitous expectation of your answer,  and most 






I am just now returned from Glasgow, where I have seen your uncle the doctor, and hope that what he writes to you will favour my request. I had written to your father before I set out from hence, and am very anxious to know his mind. Is it not possible to reckon me too among the number who have a great affection for you and a great concern for your happiness? I would fain hope that I shall be able some time or other to make my title to a place in that list very clear. Meantime, I can only have the pleasure of writing to you and assuring you of a tenderness which I had rather that my actions than my words should express. I have barely time to overtake the post, and conclude with the most earnest request that, whatever these gentlemen may think, you will pay some regard to the sincere affection with which I am, your most ,






I have received a letter from your father, and am happy that no difficulty, either real or imaginary, has cast up on any quarter. It is with the utmost tenderness and joy that I think of you now as my own, and the happiest acquisition I ever made. As many circumstances at present make time very valuable to me, I venture to write to your father about every particular, and request him to settle matters so as to suit my present engagements. My mind is greatly to abridge formalities and points of ceremony. I like them not on any occasion, but when the heart is most of all affected and moved, they are impertinent to a degree of abomination will write no more at present, as I find I have my words to seek for.

I have been in the country all day, and have hurried to town in order to write your father. I only desire that you will make no difficultys about trifles. — I am, with the most affectionate regard, my dear Kate, yours



I had written ‘Lothingness’, but erased it, perhaps feeling a little unhappy about the etymology of that word.


My Lovely Katie,

Your letter is the most pleasant I ever received. Doctor Black and I shall be at Aberdeen the second of October in the fore-noon. In the evening, about five o'clock, I expect that you will be ready with a clergyman to put over our ceremony, that I may not be detained in the place where you are without seeing you.

I was to have written your father about some particulars either forgotten or not explained in my last. Be so good as tell him that my residence here is in the West Kirk parish; that is the designation to be put in any certificate of proclamation. Let him read this, that he may write me in what parish 






You have a paper enclosed which I should have sent to your father, if it were not for the inclination I have to correspond with you. Please deliver it to him: he will easily understand what forms remain on your part and his, and if there is anything amiss, it can be set to rights when we meet. It is such as a man of business here has scrolled for me. I have a line from your uncle the Doctor this morning. He is to dine here on Sunday next, and we set out on Monday morning for Aberdeen. I told you what was proposed in my last. We may be at Aberdeen on Wednesday evening, but I at present think it will be pleasanter on the road than there, unless I am permitted to see you, and we shall probably ly at Stonehive and go in to Aberdeen on Thursday the second of October, in the morning, to meet that afternoon, and I hope not to part again in a hurry. You will not be surprised at my proposing to leave Aberdeen again sometime on Friday the third of October; I have much to do here. But there or here, or wherever you are will be Paradise and every inn on the road a palace. Pray write to me, that I may know you have received my last and this, that there is no mistake, and that I may have the pleasure of receiving what comes from you. I am, 

most passionately yours


Venice 19th Octr 1793

My Dear Katey

My last letter was from Verona where I stopped two or three days, I am now at Venice as you See from the Date. A Town built in the Sea & with Streets & lanes paved with Water with Boats for Coaches & Chariots without which you could not Stir from the threshold of your Door without plunging in the Sea. All this you knew but knowing & seeing I find is different. I am strongly impressed with wonder at such a Place but do not delight in it any more than I do in Wapping or the Pier & Share of Leith. There are numberless Palaces all of Marble & loaded with ornament but my feeling is not pleasure but Still wonder how the Devil they got there. I have lost all relish for what the Sailors call Ginger bread work even in Marble & in the designs of Famous Architects & so I shall bid this Amphibious Town farewell as soon as I have seen what  it is the fashion for Travellers to see here or at least some part of it. To Verona I came post, perplexed at every Stage with the exchange of money which it was impossible to know so fast as it changed among my hands, There I met with a Florentine Horse Hyrer who had brought some Travellers to Verona. I made use of his Horses in some little excursions from that Place, Afterwards engaged him to drive me to Padua. And we agreed so well on the Road that I have made a Contract to be driven & fed by him on the whole road to Rome at a certain Price. This is a sort of Bargain very common in this Country. We shall travel Slow but I do not want to hurry through a Country of which every part will take my Attention. My Driver Antonio Lapini tells me we shall be a fortnight on the Road & I shall probably write again from some place tho I begin to grudge the Postages of So many letters of which the cost now must be a Considerable Sum: but it is your desire to hear frequently how I go on & you will guess from so much said in this letter without any mention of my health that I have no Complaint. I am certainly stouter than when I left Edr & more independent of  little accommodations that used to be necessary to me.

My Blessing to my Dear Children if they follow all the Dates of my letters on the Map it will help forward their Geography, I shall endeavour as soon as Possible to lead their attention back again through some Route to Edinburgh: but the winter must pass here with me & hope it will do so with you at Edr better than usual. I do not attempt to write to any body else till I get to some end of My Journey. I am

My Dear Katey yours Affectionately




Dear Sr

I am strongly Solicited by a young Gentleman who is my Relation, to make offer of his Services & to beg your favour in procuring him a Commission in case the list of Subalterns in your Regiment be not compleat. He is confident that he coud in a few Weeks raise about thirty men, of whom Several, he says have already promised to follow him in case he shoud have occasion.

I have endeavoured to perswade him that it is next to certain your list is compleat  and that you must have had many applications for every Commission: but his importunity which I respect in the present Aspect of the Service has overcome my reluctance to take this Liberty with you. He is from Athol, his name Alexr Robertson, about twenty: is of a figure & Spirit that woud suit any Company of Granadiers. But this I am sensible may not entitle him to a preference among the many Solicitations which you must have had. But while I unwillingly trouble you with his request I am very glad of an opportunity to offer my respects & congratulations on the part you are able to take in what appears to us here a very pressing exigency of the State. And have the honour to be with the greatest Respect


& most  

Geneva, Sept. 20/1774

Dear Sr

I was Sorry that I had not pleasure of seeing you when you was at Geneva because if any thing had occurred relating to the performance which you do me the honour to translate it coud have been better explained than in writing. I have agreed to retain the Quotations for the reasons you mentioned altho the frequent reference to my own book proper enough in a text intended for the Students at College does not appear equally so in what comes or is offered to the wide world. I have still retained the term Idea as an example of Metaphor in Science, because altho it has become in common Language another word for conception or Notion yet in the Systems of Locke and others it is in fact a Metaphor & if taken for mere notion or conception many of their supposed discoverys fall to the ground appear mere tautologys. As that for instance of Master Locke, that we can have no knowledge where we have no Ideas . I have no Objection to the term Idea when these Systems are not in question. I have yesterday received a few more sheets of your Elegant translation containing the fourth parth or that which treats of Moral Laws and their more general applications, I know how troublesome it must be to you to have any changes to consider after you have been at the pains already to follow a Second Edition: but I beg that you will excuse the Solicitude of an Author who cannot withold his pen when any thing occurs to be added or retrenched. I have done something of this sort which will make it necessary to remit these sheets again to you. I have likewise endeavoured to explain myself in French trusting to your Corrections & I hope that my French such as it is may be less liable to be misstaken than my English. I have Observed that you found difficulty in translating the Title of Compulsory Law & the Articles that depend upon it & that you have thought it necessary to Substitute Perfect Obligation in the place of it. I have many objections to this Language of Perfect & imperfect obligation because which it woud be much too long to trouble you with. My intention was to disstinguish the Dutys that may be exacted by force from those which must come from Choice and good will. I have endeavoured to express this disstinction in my corrections of the Translation, in the words, Loix de Contrainte & Loix de choix. This may be Barbarous French but I beg that you will correct me: but employ any Circumlocution to the same purpose rather than recur to the term of Perfect Obligation which I apprehend has a tendency to Misslead as if the Obligation of a man was not to serve his friend were not as perfect as the Obligation to avoid a trifling hurt to a stranger, yet the last is matter of Compulsory Law & the first not. But I beg pardon for troubling you with this ill written Scrawl which I write on the Booksellers table: & I hope that you will likewise excuse the additional pains which this little work comes to cost you from my being here. I have the honour to be with great Regard Dear Sr


 
A: Ferguson
London 16 June 1775

Sr

My Lord Chesterfield has been pleased to show me a Note from you to His Lordship desiring to know whether I wished to have any thing in writing from The Duke of Chandos & yourself; as it is determined that I am not to go abroad with Lord Chesterfield & that the Commencement of my Successors Sallary is fast approaching. In order to discharge me from my Attendance on Lord Chesterfield; I am advised that directions in writing from both his Present and late Guardians will be necessary. You will Judge of the terms Proper for such a writing, & whether I shoud ask the late Guardians to put their names to the same Paper, or apply to them separately for their concurrence. As I conclude from your Letter to Lord Chesterfield that the £400 a year appointed for me during my Attendance on his Lordship is to cease on the 24th Instant, It is proper to inform you that I have received no payments by Advance And that £100 will be due to me at Midsummer for the Quarter that has passed from Lady Day. It is likewise material for me to know; to whom & at what terms I am to apply for the Payment of the £200 a year Settled upon me during my Life. Uncertainty on this point may Subject me to inconvenience As I have allotted to a Substitute all the Profits of my office at Edinburgh untill the Commencement of next winter Term, & shall not be entitled to receive any Sallary from that office before Whitsunday next year.

I have Also to inform you, that when on my Way  to Geneva last year I understood from Sr George Savile that the expences of that Journey were to be allowed me. I was detained about ten days at London waiting for instructions from My Lord Chesterfields Guardians and about as long at Paris waiting for a Pass by which means the whole expence amounted to £85. I have the honour to be &c


London, 16 June 1775

Sr

My Lord Chesterfield was pleased to show me a Note from you to His Lordship desiring to know whether I wished to have any thing in writing from The Duke of Chandos and yourself; as it is determined that I am not to go abroad with Lord Chesterfield and that the Commencement of my Successors Sallary is fast approaching. In order to discharge me from my Attendance on Lord Chesterfield; I am advised that directions in writing from both his Present and late Guardians will be necessary. You will Judge of the terms Proper for such a writing, and whether I shou'd ask the late Guardians to put their names to the same Paper, or apply to them separately for their concurrence. As I conclude from your Letter to Lord Chesterfield that the £400 a year appointed for me during my Attendance on his Lordship is to cease on the 24th Instant, It is proper to inform you that I have received no payments by Advance and that £100 will be due to me at Midsummer for the Quarter that has passed from Lady Day. It is likewise material for me to know to whom and at what terms I am to apply for the Payment of the £200 a year settled upon me during my Life. Uncertainty on this point may Subject me to inconvenience as I have allotted to a Substitute all the Profits of my office at Edinburgh untill the Commencement of next winter Term, and shall not be entitled to receive any Sallary for that office before Whitsunday next year.

I have also to inform you, that when on my Way to Geneva last year I understood from Sr George Savile that the expences of that Journey were to be allowed me. I was detained about ten days at London waiting for instructions from My Lord Chestefields Guardians and about as long at Paris waiting for a Pass by which means the whole expence amounted to £85. I have the honour to be with the greatest respect etc



I shall remain in Town till the Morrow Morning and shall wait upon you if you desire it.
To the Officer commanding in chief at Elizabeth Town (Lord Stirling).

Copy

New York 29th Octr 1778


I am commanded by their Excellencies His Majesty's Commissioners to request that you will forward the inclosed Packet, in the Manner and by such Comveyance, as to you shall seem proper.

If you are pleased to Order an Express the Expence shall be paid as you shall direct by the First Flag of Truce.

I am Sir with all due Respect your most obedient and most 



Exd a true Copy 
Adam Ferguson Secretary 
The Officer commanding in Chief 
at Elizabeth Town
London June 19th 1775


I was on Tuesday last informed by Mr Lovel Stanhope, that your Lordship with Sr George Savile & Mr Hewet, had resigned your Trust as Guardians to The Earl of Chesterfield, & had desired His Lordship to make choice of Persons more likely to be of use to him than had been in your Power. That Lord Chesterfield had accordingly made choice of the Duke of Chandos and Mr Lovel Stanhope to act in the Capacity of his Guardians. That a transaction had been some time depending & was then in a manner concluded, engaging Mr De St Germain to accompany Lord Chesterfield in his Future Tour abroad, And that after the 24th Instant my attendance on his Lordship woud be no longer required.

Some days after this communication, Mr Lovel Stanhope wrote My Lord Chesterfield desiring to know, whether I wished to have any thing in writing to the above purpose & informing him that If I did The Duke of Chandos & himself were ready to give it immediately. In Answer to this question, I wrote Mr Stanhope a Letter of which I trouble your Lordship with the following copy:

[transcribes the letter dated London, June 16, 1775; see above, no. 78.]

I saw Mr Stanhope a few hours after he had received this letter. He offered me a Copy of your Lordships & the other Guardians resignation, & told me The Duke of Chandos & himself woud give me a joint letter to discharge my farther attendance on Lord Chesterfield. That the £100 due at Midsummer shoud be paid. But that he was unacquainted with the other money Articles of my letter, & tho he believed they would fall upon My Lord Chesterfield at last, that he coud do nothing relating to them at present. I have last night received a joint letter from The Duke of Chandos & Mr Lovel Stanhope stating the change lately made in the Guardianship of Lord Chesterfield & notifying that my attendance on his Lordship will not be necessary after the 24th Instant, but without any mention of the other Particulars in my letter to Mr Stanhope. I have thought it My Duty, thus to inform your Lordship of what has past since your declining to act as Guardian to the Earl of Chesterfield, And as the Gentlemen  who were joined in this trust are now at a distance from each other in the Country I trouble each of you Separately with a Duplicate of this letter. And beg to know whether you have any Objections to my being determined in my farther Attendance on Lord Chesterfield by the Directions of The Duke of Chandos & Mr Lovel Stanhope. I have the honour to be with the greatest respect

My Lord 
your Lordships 
most Obliged 
& most  










P.S. your Lordship 
may be pleased to direct for 
me at Mr Maynes Banker 
in Jermyn Street London 
To Earl Stanhope



I took the Liberty, in the end of January last, to write a letter to The Earl of Chesterfield, in which I enclosed a Copy of your Lordships letter to me dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774. And Observed that the terms of that letter being conditional it was necessary for me to apply to His Lordship on the Subject. And referred him to Mr James Chalmer of St. Albans Street London who woud receive his Commands, being entrusted with My  letter to his Lordship & my Other Affairs at London. Mr Chalmers Called upon Lord Chesterfield several times, left my letter together with one from himself, waited some weeks for an Answer, & has since at my desire communicated his Bussiness to Mr Lovel Stanhope who has declined taking any concern [in] it. So that having no expectations of an Answer to my Applications from The Earl of Chesterfield I am under the dissagreeable necessity of stating the fruitless attempts I have made, and of referring the whole matter to your Lordship that some better way may be devised for comeing at the knowledge of Lord Chesterfields mind. I transmit this letter by Mr Chalmer that in case appearances be more favourable that they were when he wrote me last he may not trouble your Lordship with it.

I received last Summer by Mr Clow at  Glasgow A Copy of Mr Simsons Postumous works which he told me your Lordship did me the honour to order for me & I beg that you will now tho so late accept of my Acknowledgements.

I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect 
My Lord 
your Lordships 
most obliged 
& most  




I have some posts ago, had the honour of your Lordships Answer to my letter of the 10th of March. And am not surprised that Lord Chesterfield shoud forget particulars to which it is probable he gave very little attention. My Annuity never was mentioned in any conversation I ever had with His Lordship. But from what dropped from Others about the time of our separation I imagine that the Subject was then understood. Mr St Germain in particular  told me, that on his expressing some Reluctance at Supplanting me Lord Chesterfield to remove his Scruples said that I was to have my Annuity & to return to My Professorship, which it was likely I woud prefer to going abroad. I have taken the Liberty to communicate to M Chalmer your Lordships letter that he may know of Lord Chesterfields message to your Lordships man of bussiness. And have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

My Lord 
your Lordships 
most Obliged 
& most  







I have agreeably to your Lordships desire signified to me by Mr Smith enclosed with this a Copy of your Lordships letter to me dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774. And am sorry that for weighty reasons mentioned to Mr Smith & which if desired he will communicate I am not at liberty to send the Original. At the same time Mr Chalmer  My Agent at London will receive Copys of that & of two other letters from your Lordship to me compared and attested by a Notary Public & by the Lord Provost of Edinburgh. Of which with your Lordships permission he will make the necessary use. If My Lord Chesterfield declare that on having these Copys verifyed by a Comparison with the originals he will perform the Condition that is to Relieve your Lordship of the Obligation contained in that which is dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774 I will go to London & if he give me leave will wait upon His Lordship with the Original of that Letter. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

My Lord 
your Lordships 
most obliged 
& most  










To Earl Stanhope



I was last night agreeably surprised by the Arrival of Lord Chesterfield at this place. In a line which he wrote me from his Inn he mentioned his having acted improperly in the Affair of my Annuity, And afterwards told me that he meant to do all that the Law enabled him to do which was to bind himself for his own Life & for mine in case he survived me. He likewise gave me his Bankers name  that I might draw for £200 at Christmas next. I am extremely happy at this change of His Lordships mind as it may save himself from Censure & prevent any farther trouble to your Lordship.

Lord Chesterfield had been at york to see his Sister when he took the Resolution to come on here and after staying one night at his Inn is already Gone on his Return to England. I beg leave to trouble your Lordship with my humble Respects to Lady Stanhope & Lord Mahone & Am with the greatest Respect

My Lord 
your Lordships 
most Obliged & 
most  




I sometime ago communicated to my Agent at London the Contents of your Lordships letter on the Subject of what passed with My Lord Chesterfield here concerning my Annuity. And desired him to Consult with your Lordships man of bussiness on any steps that might be taken relating to that affair. I do not however find that any thing has been done, And in this state of suspence wish to know your Lordships opinion whether I may draw upon Lord Chesterfields Banker as his Lordship directed for £200 at Christmas to account of the Claim which he has acknowledged altho' he has not yet settled the mode of Securing it & of Relieving the your Lordship of obligations contracted on his Account.

I am extremely happy to hear of the Well fare of your Lordships Family. I had the pleasure to see My Lord Hadington & Lord Binnie here a few days ago. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

My Lord 
your Lordships 
most Obliged & most 
 




Your Lordship will see from the Inclosed letter that I have received by My Lord Chesterfields order £200 on account of my claim of an Annuity from His Lordship. I had transmitted the Contents of your Lordships last letter to My Agent Mr James Chalmer of Leicester fields & charged him to bring that matter to some final settlement. I cannot state his difficultys better to your Lordships  than by transmitting his Answer to me which I accordingly take the Liberty to do. And have the honour to be with the most affectionate respects to your Lordships Family

My Lord 
your Lordships 
most Obliged 
& most  




I have a few Posts ago received the Copy of an Indenture or Grant executed by the Earl of Chesterfield in my Favours of an Annuity of £200 during our joint Lives.

As I have in this matter, from the beginning of any Dispute concerning it, considered myself as a Trustee for my Family & not at liberty to obey any Impulse of sentiment that might arise in my mind I followed entirely the Judgement of Persons whose Authority might be Sufficient to Justify me, And am happy to find the matter come into such a State, as to require my  Releasing your Lordship fully of any Engagements to me, as Guardian to the Earl of Chesterfield.

Your Lordships Letter dated to me at Paris on the 6th of April 1774 has been some time in The Hands of my Agent at London who has Direction to return it in the same Cover with this.

I shall be happy to enjoy the Continuance of your Lordships favourable opinion & have the Honour to be with the most affectionate wishes for the wellfare of your Family.

My Lord 
your Lordships 
most Obliged & most 
Obedient  

London, 19 June 1775


I was on Tuesday last informed by Mr Lovel Stanhope, that your Lordship with Sr George Savile and Mr Hewit, had resigned your Trust as Guardians to The Earl of Chesterfield, and had desired His Lordship to make choice of Persons more likely to be of use to him than had been in your Power. That Lord Chesterfield had accordingly made choice of The Duke of Chandos and Mr Lovel Stanhope to act in the Capacity of his Guardians. That a transaction had been some time depending and was then in a manner concluded, engaging Mr De Saint Germain to accompany Lord Chesterfield in his Future Tour abroad, And that after the 24th Instant my attendance on his Lordship would be no longer required. Some days after this communication, Mr Lovel Stanhope wrote My Lord Chesterfield desiring to know, whether I wished to have any thing in writing to the above purpose and informing him that If I did The Duke of Chandos and himself were ready to give it me immediately. In Answer to this question, I wrote Mr Stanhope a Letter of which I trouble your Lordship with the following Copy.

I saw Mr Stanhope a few hours after he had received this letter. He offered me a Copy of your Lordships and the other Guardians resignation, and told me The Duke of Chandos and himself would give me a joint letter to discharge my farther attendance on Lord Chesterfield. That the £100 due at Midsummer shoud be paid. But that he was unacquainted with the other money Articles of my letter, and tho he believed they would fall upon My Lord Chesterfield at last, that he coud do nothing relating to them at present. I have last night received a joint letter from The Duke of Chandos and Mr Lovel Stanhope stating the change lately made in the Guardianship of Lord Chesterfield and notifying that my attendance on his Lordship will not be necessary after the 24th Instant but without any mention of the other Particulars in my letter to Mr Stanhope. I have thought it My Duty, thus to inform your Lordship of what has past since your declining to act as Guardian to the Earl of Chesterfield, And as the Gentlemen who were joined in this trust are now at a distance from each other in the Country I trouble each of you Separately with a Duplicate of this letter. And beg to know whether you have any Objections to my being determined in my farther Attendance on Lord Chesterfield by the Directions of The Duke of Chandos and Mr Lovel Stanhope. I have the honour to be with the greatest respect

My Lord 
Your Lordships 
most obliged 
and most  










PS Your Lordship 
may be pleased to direct for 
me at Mr Maynes Banker 
in Jermyn Street London



I took the Liberty, in the end of January last, to write a letter to The Earl of Chesterfield, in which I inclosed a Copy of your Lordships letter to me dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774. And Observed that the terms of that letter being conditional it was necessary for me to apply to His Lordship on the Subject. And referred him to Mr James Chalmer of St Albans Street London who woud receive his Commands, being entrusted with My letter to his Lordship and my other Affairs at London. Mr Chalmer Called upon Lord Chesterfield several times, left my letter together with one from himself, waited some weeks for an Answer, and has since at my desire communicated his Business to Mr Lovel Stanhope who has declined taking any concern [in] it. So that having no expectations of an Answer to my Applications from The Earl of Chesterfield I am under the dissagreeable necessity of stating the fruitless attempts I have made, and of referring the whole matter to Your Lordship that some better way may be devized for comeing at the knowledge of Lord Chesterfields mind. I transmit this letter by Mr Chalmer that in case appearances be more favourable than they were when he wrote me last, he may not trouble Your Lordship with it.

I Received last Summer by Mr Clow at Glasgow A Copy of Mr Simsons Posthumous works which he told me your Lordship did me the honour to order for me and I beg that you will now tho so late accept of my Acknowledgements. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

My Lord 
Your Lordships 
most Obliged 
and most  




I have some posts ago had the honour of your Lordships Answer to my letter of the 10th of March. And am not surprised that Lord Chesterfield shoud forget particulars to which it is probable that he gave very little attention. My Annuity never was mentioned in any conversation I ever had with His Lordship. But from what dropped from others about the time of our separation I imagine that the Subject was then understood. Mr St Germain in particular told me, that on his expressing some Reluctance at Supplanting me[,] Lord Chesterfield to remove his Scruples said that I was to have my Annuity and to return to My Professorship, which it was likely I woud prefer to going abroad. I have taken the Liberty to communicate to Mr Chalmer your Lordships letter that he may know of Lord Chesterfields message to your Lordships man of business. And have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

My Lord 
Your Lordships 
most obliged 
and most  




I have agreeably to your Lordships desire signified to me by Mr Smith inclosed with this a Copy of your Lordships letter to me dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774. And am sorry that for weighty reasons mentioned to Mr Smith and which if desired he will communicate I am not at liberty to send the Original. At the same time Mr. Chalmer My Agent at London will receive Copys of that and of two other letters from your Lordship to me compared and attested by a Notary Public and by the Lord Provost of Edinburgh. Of which with your Lordships permission he will make the necessary use. If My Lord Chesterfield declare that on having these Copys verifyed by a Comparison with the originals he will perform the Condition that is to Relieve your Lordship of the Obligation contained in that which is dated at Paris Aprile 6th 1774 I will go to London and if he give me leave will wait upon His Lordship with the original of that Letter. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

My Lord 
Your Lordships 
most obliged 
and most  




I was last night agreeably surprised by the Arrival of Lord Chesterfield at this place. In a line which he wrote me from his Inn he mentioned his having acted improperly in the Affair of my Annuity, And afterwards told me that he meant to do all that the Law enabled him to do which was to bind himself for his own Life and for mine in case he survived me. He likewise gave me his Bankers name that I might draw for £200 at Christmas next. I am extremely happy at this change of His Lordships mind and it may save himself from Censure and prevent any farther trouble to your Lordship. Lord Chesterfield had been at York to see his Sister when he took the Resolution to come on here and after staying one night at his Inn in already Gone on his Return to England. I beg leave to trouble your Lordship with my humble Respects to Lady Stanhope and Lord Mahone and Am with the greatest Respect

My Lord 
Your Lordships 
most obliged and 
most  




I sometime ago communicated to my Agent at London the Contents of Your Lordships letter on the Subject of what had passed with My Lord Chesterfield here concerning my Annuity. And desired him to Consult with your Lordships man of bussiness on any steps that might be taken relating to that affair. I do not however find that any thing has been done, And in this state of suspence wish to know Your Lordships opinion whether I may draw upon Lord Chesterfields Banker as his Lordship directed for £200 at Christmas to account of the Claim which he has acknowledged altho' he has not yet settled the mode of Securing it and of Relieving your Lordship of obligations contracted on his account. I am extremely happy to hear of the Wellfare of Your Lordships Family. I had the Pleasure to see My Lord Hadington and Lord Binnie here a few days ago. I have the Honour to be with the greatest Respect

My Lord 
Your Lordships 
Most obliged and most 
 




Your Lordship will see from the Inclosed letter that I have received by My Lord Chesterfields order £200 on account of my claim of an Annuity from His Lordship. I had transmitted the Contents of your Lordships last letter to My Agent Mr James Chalmer of Leicesterfields and charged him to bring that matter to some final settlement. I cannot state his difficultys better to your Lordships than by transmitting his Answer to me which I accordingly take the Liberty to do. And have the honour to be with the most affectionate respects to your Lordships Family.

My Lord 
Your Lordships 
most obliged 
and most  




I have a few Posts ago received the Copy of an Indenture or Grant executed by the Earl of Chesterfield in my Favours of an Annuity of £200 during Our joint Lives.

As I have in this matter, from the beginning of any Dispute concerning it, considered myself as a Trustee for my Family and not at liberty to obey any Impulse of sentiment that might arise in my mind I followed intirely the Judgement of Persons whose Authority might be Sufficient to Justify me. And am happy to find the matter come into such a State, as to require my Releasing your Lordship fully of any Engagements to me, as Guardian to the Earl of Chesterfield.

Your Lordships letter dated at Paris on the 6th of April 1774 has been some time in the Hands of my Agent in London who has Direction to return it in the same Cover with this.

I shall be happy to enjoy the Continuance of Your Lordships favourable opinion and have the Honour to be with the most affectionate wishes for the wellfare of your Family,

My Lord 
Your Lordships 
most Obliged and most 
Obedient  

Blackheath Aprile 29th 1775

My Dear Carlyle

In answer to the two or three letters which you have written to me I can give you five or six which I had written in my own mind to you before I received any of yours. The first was from Geneva where having had the advantage of Lodging in Calvins own house & having access to some of his most Secret Manuscripts I thought myself without Vanity qualified to give you some light into the more Intricate recess's of our Church. My second was from Fernex the seat of that renowned & Pious Apostle Voltaire who saluted me with a Complt. on a Gentleman of my family who had Civilized the Russians. I owned this Relation and at this & every Successive visit encouraged every attempt at Conversation even Jokes against Moses Adam & Eve & the rest of the Prophets  till I began to be considered as a person who tho true to my own faith had no ill humour to the freedom of fancy in Others. As my own Complt. had come all the way from Russia I wished to know how some of my Friends woud fare but I found the Old man in a state of perfect indifference to all Authors except two Sorts, One of those who write Panegyrics another who write Invectives on himself. There is a third kind whose names he has been used to repeat fifty or sixty years without knowing any thing of them such as Locke Boyle Newton &c. I forgot his competitors for fame of whom he is always either Silent or Speaks Slightingly. The fact is that he reads little or none his mind exists by Reminiscence & by doing over & over what it has been used to do Dictates Tales dissertations & Tragedys even the latter with all his Elegance tho not with his former force. His Conversation is among the Pleasantest I ever met with, he lets you forget the Superiority which the public  opinion gives him, which is indeed great[er than t]hat we conceive in this Island. But he is [able] to make me forget all the rest of my letters. The third was from the face of a Snowy Mountain in Savoye higher than all the mountains in Scotland Piled upon one Other & containing more eternal Ice in its recess's than is to [be] found in all Scotland in the hardest Winter. The bottom of this Ice is continually melting in the Valleys like the bottom of a roll of butter placed on end in a frying Pan. It is perpetually Creeping down from the Mountain where fresh Snows continually fall. It hangs in Snotters over Cliffs & Precipices till becomeing too heavy it breaks & with noise louder than thunder makes all the Valleys ring or groan which you please. Masses come down from the mountains sometimes and shake all the Rocks with a force that nothing but an earthquake can imitate & drive the Air out of the narrow Valleys with the force of a hurricane that roots up trees in the opposite hills. I wrote you this letter in the full  belief that you are a great Natural [xxx] & dissposed to believe every word I say [xxx xxx] fourth letter was written from the Inn[er]most parts of Swisserland on a Sunday after church when I saw the Militia exercise. They have uniform clothes and accoutrements all at their own expence which is not a great hardship for it is their only public burden. They appeard to me to be a very effective Military Establishment And as they were the only body of men I ever Saw under Arms on the true principle for which Arms shoud be carried I felt much secret emotion, & coud have shed tears. But to conclude my fifth & last letter was from the Devils own backside in the neighbourhood of This place where every thing from a pair of Snuffers to the Venus of Medicis and the great Diana of the Ephesians is better provided than any where else where every one is bussy enjoying & no one thinks whence it came nor how it is to be keept.

I thought to have finished all  my letters here but as a frank will carry another sheet I shall take room at least to Sign my name. As I have already written you five letters & this new sheet may pass for another you will please to Observe that you are at least four letters in my debt.

I am much Obliged to you for your Goodness to my Wife & My Bairns, if I live to return to them we shall not part so easily again. You may believe I was much surprised at the Attempt of the Town Council to shut the door against me : but am Obliged to them for opening it again. I may be a great looser but the end for which I am persecuted cannot be gained while I have it in my option to return.

I have been much Obliged to the general Voice that was raised in my favour as well as to the Ardent Zeal of Particular friends. Islay Campbell has given me proofs of Friendship  which I can never forget. Pulteney has behaved to me in every thing as he woud have done at the beginning of the Poker Club. I have allways been an Advocate for Mankind and am a more determined one than ever the fools & knawes are no more than necessary to give Others Something to do. I saw J. Home in Town yesterday Morning he goes as Usual. Mc is listening to the reports of his History. I do not live among readers and am really ignorant of the General Verdict. I have been living here above three Weeks. A Charming Villa in a Magnificent Scene sed quis me sistat gelidis in montibus Pentland and this I do not say on Account of the hot weather tho it has been for three days the greatest I ever saw in this Countrey. Remember  my Blessing to Mrs Carlyle & your young ones of whose thriving state I am happy to hear. Tell Edgar when you see him that I have lately a letter from Clarke & shall write to him — meaning Edgar — soon.

I am Dear Carlyle 
yours most Affectionately 

London Febry 9th 




My dear Carlisle

Lazy as I am I must Answer your Letter:first as to Politics:it was understood here before I received it that the Aversion of the People in Scotland was not to be idly Crossed. Your letter put that Aversion in a much Stronger light to me than I had conceived & the Particulars I heard this Morning from Lord Linton make me think it a kind of Phrensy. My Opinion is that in all Criminal matters the Law shoud have its Course but how that is to be, in this matter I know not. The Law is terrible in the hands of People that do not appear to delight in its Severitys, & that never Shrinks; but as it is the Fashion here to say we have lost America so I expect to hear that we have lost Scotland but in that case I hope to be Reckoned not among the  losers but the lost.

I am in great hopes nothing will be lost not even the Continent of North America. We have 1200 Miles of Territory in Length occupied by about 3.000.000 [xxx] People of which there are about 1.500.000 with Johny Witherspoons at their head against us And the rest for us. I am not sure that if proper measures were taken but we shoud reduce Johny Witherspoons to the small Support of Franklin Adams & two or three more of the most Abandoned Villains in the world but I tremble at the thoughts of their Cunning & determination opposed to us.

But so much for Politics. I was very happy in hearing that you had got the Better of your Complaints and of that Mrs Carlisle was [xxx] Well. You may tell that I pant after Scotland as the Hart Panteth after the Water Brooks & I have always thought myself within ten days or a fortnight of it but there is always some little remains of Commission Bussiness which woud need an Act of Parliament if the Commissioners did not Act. I thought to have ended the last  thing of that Sort to Day but it has become a Question whether it will not need an Act of Parliament & If so I decamp. I shall make no Answer to your fond imaginations about me because I know the meaning of them fully in your mind & how little there is corresponding to them here. I do not despair of the Republic, but it is every Man for himself & God for us all. If the Last shoud keep his Post we may do very well whatever part the others may think proper to take. I write to [xxx xxx] the Bell-man with a full [xxx xxx] to [xxx xxx] [w]henever he Rings. John Home is g[one] to Bath with every Appearance of being well. J: Fletcher went with him & is come back. I hope that John will likewise soon follow for I am told that Bath is tiresome & this Place as far as I could Observe did not dissagree with him.

I am My Dear Carlisle 
ly 

Bath 26th March 1781

My Dear Carlyle

I hope you will have the necessary Indulgence for An Invalid & endure my Delays in writing without abating of your own good will to Oblige us in that Way. You make great Allowance for our Anxiety about the Children: you may believe it is much the less for your concern in them, & indeed is none at all.

I wished to turn a Stoop or two in this Race, I am running, before I wrote again. The Progress is Slow but I hope not the less certain it is even sensible for the Better & as the fine season is coming on I hope to be reinstated in the use of My Limbs & of Strength enough for all I have to do in the remainder of My Life. I use the  Bath about twice a Week & have not yet begun to drink the Waters. The operation so far is exceedingly Pleasant. There is still a little Coldness in the Wind but the Fields & the Houses & the Town & the Sky look more like a View in a Showmans Box than what is commonly to be seen on this Terraqueous Globe.

I have heard from Coll. J: Campbell at London & hope to see him here in his way to Ireland. John McPherson was much hurried in his Departure from London. I have been Lucky enough to receive two or three short Letters, he sent in search of me, since I have been on the Road, & he embarked: The last, after he was under Sail. To the Purpose of your Letter to him soon after my falling Ill; He tells me of so many Efficient People that had promised to Johnstone & him to take charge  of it; from the Chancellour himself down to Private Secretarys that I am perswaded it can want nothing but a proper Remembrancer which I must think of, at least, when I go to London.

It grieves me to think of these cruel Fasts you undergo with the Laird of Gilmerton. I am [ang]ry it is not in my Power [xxx xxx] to mitigate their Severitys. I beg of you to indulge yourself now & then in a good Pot full of Kail Caststocks & a Bonum Magnum from some Chrystal Springs, I drink Bristol here but imagine that a good Stoup full from the Esk anywhere above Inveresk Village will be as good. I speak from Experience & begin to look as blooming & well on this Bread & Water diet as ever I did. We all join in the best wishes to Mrs. Carlyle & you

ly 

Bath 26th May 1781.

Dear Carlyle

I imagine that if you had no Other evidence of my Convalescence but my deficiency in writing Letters you would think I was coming fast to be in Statu quo.

My silence, for some time, has not been for want of Scolding, & indeed, since She Scolds you at the Distance of five hundred Miles, what am I to expect here. I got a pretty good set down for having once written to you that we were not Anxious about the Bairns. Her whole concern now is to wonder whether Jamie will know her again. We are grown such fine People here that poor Rustick Jamie will not recollect that he had ever seen us before. I figure to myself that you are now very bussy with the General Assembly, of which I wish you a good deliverance, and offer this wish, with Some Anxiety, as you are left this year by the People who used to take care of you, The Principal & the Lord Advocate: but I hope that the Other Side will have Mercy, & perhaps pull the less if they do not feel any body to pull against them.

We have had you here sometimes blocked up, & sometimes Bombarded by the Dutch Fleet. Bruntisland was actually Bombarded in the last Dutch War & therefore I think you may lay your account with it in this. I think Bayley Cochran ought to have the Causway of Musselburgh taken up and I pray you remember that when a Shell falls  near you: you are not to run away but ly flat down till it burst & then take to your heel, as fast as you can, least any more should come. If you can only protract the War for two or three weeks I will come to your Relief & will bring two or three Muskets & Bayonets from Birmingham to Arm my Corps which consists of Peter Anderson a Noted Poacher at Bankhead & George McLean an eminent marksman & fishing Tackle maker at Edinburgh.

We are meditating a departure from hence about the 5th of June when our three months at this place will be out. Our Excursion to Clifton was prevented by cold weather, which with very little intermission has continued ever Since, & is the more grievous that is altogether unexpected at a time when people used to retire from the Heat of this Place.

To do him justice the Sun has keept his Word but this Infernal East wind chills to death while the Sun Scorches. I am now much Agitated with wishes to Comply with People who think it will be of great use to Bell  to remain here some time behind us, & with the Difficulty of having her properly placed. We go by London, to make as short a Stay as Affairs real or imaginary will permit, you may be Sure that I shall endeavour to bring any commands your Friends may have for Scotland.

I am Dear Carlyle 
most affectionately yours 






Excuse my Intimacy with Johny Wilkes. If you should be questioned about your Correspondence with him. Remember not that which goeth in to the Mouth defileth but that which cometh out so keep a good Tongue in your own Head you need not care who writes to you.
Argyle Square 24 Decr 1783

Dear Carlyle

your Letter has put me into such a Flutter, that I dont know what to Answer to it. Suffice it, for the present, to say [th]at having been tempted on Friday last to venture through the Storm of an Edr Sedan Chair to dine with Sir James Grant where I drank Cannongate Water & fed up Country Potatoes Turnips & Cabbages was put to bed at night in a fever [which con]tinued ill for eight & forty hours [xxx xxx] then what would happen if I [should?] [xxx xxx] Suffer myself to be driven to [Muss]elburgh by your desires.  The Proposal makes me Shudder, and its coming from you makes my blood run Cold. If you have any Sinister intentions on my Life; I pray you may have a Sight of your Sins, & be forgiven: but such round about ways are not necessary; yo[u] need not take a Hammer to break an Egg, as the Saying is. You have only, the first time you Come to Town, to bring a Pair of Bellows in your Pocket & blow the Smallest blast into any Cor[ner] of Argyle Square, my bussiness is [xxx] your Blood thirsty designs a[ccom]plished. And so no more at this [xxx xxx] but like Compliments from my [xxx] Spouse who feeds on decoction of [xxx] & calls it Tea.

yours &c 
A.F.
Argyle Square 13th May 




Dear Carlyle

I am glad to hear of your safe return as also of your purchase and am abundantly eager to see my new property but sensible that I must have patience till there is a proper guide not only to conduct her to this place but to lead her on to the place of her destination as I have no convenience to keep her here above an hour or two & even that under the nose of Dr Blair who objected to the smell even of a Horse. If your Broker can broke me also a travelling governor for her upon reasonable terms as far as Bankhead be so good as settle the matter with him & send her on to Argyle Square to receive Instructions for the remai[n]der of her travels. I am sorry that her Pregnancy is not yet declared: as for the Opportunity you mention of making that matter sure, I am sensible there will be many able  performers: but what party do you recommend? I wish you may not mean to desert your own for in Such matters moderation does not become an Ass.

I expect two Forreigners and much broken English at dinner today so can even pun upon your Bonne Grace but imagine must be it is lined with something as you talk of its being too warm for Summer. My Wife joins in Complts to yours & is glad to find that her letter is still so near the first place Among her Comforts altho your Modesty is so great with respect to the first.

It is well for you that you got home on thursday night, if you had been with us at a certain Farm yesterday & drove home in the Evening in a certain Carriage with a certain wind & Rain in your Face your Comfort would have been cold with a witness & even that Witness not very warm. Once more for Dapple. If your Broker cannot provide me as above be so good as  let her pick about your Hedges till I can fix a time for her removeal, &c which I will do as soon as possible. I am with best respects from this house to yours Dr C your most

affectionate humble 
Servant 

Nydpath Castle 11 Septr 




My Dear Carlyle

The Girls tell me that Mrs Carlyle or you were so good as to say that when we should have made our Settlement you would come and see it. It should be fain to hasten that visit while we may hope for some tolerable weather, having entertainment in some sort for Man & Woman tho not for Man & horse being still without Hay or Oats or Stabling or Pasture, if it were not for an eventual engagement with Sir John Mc Pherson to accompany to Alva wherever he calls me to Edr for that purpose his time was uncertain & so must mine be till I hear from him. As soon as I know that you may expect to find me at home I will let you know & leave you to Select your days.

If Mrs Carlyle were a Chemist like you & me she would soon find that the whole Atmosphere  here about is made of Oxigene or if she were a Poet like other People she would find that our Water is Nectar & our very bear bannocks not to say Mutton is what the Gods of Old called Ambrosia: But I am sensible it is a Sin to be tempting Peoples Appetites till they are upon the point of Gratification which I hope will be soon.

The Post here is a great Comfort being punctual to his time every day between 3 & 4. So send us your news that whatever we do may be concerted.

I am Dr Carlyle 
most affectionately yours &c &c 






P.S. I might take it for granted you know our direction but to make more sure than ever Certainly please to direct for me at Nydpath near Peebles.
Nidpath Castle 17th March 




My Dear Carlyle

I rejoice to find we are both alive that is to say have not forgot one another, as the learned say dead people do, so as hereafter not to have the least remembrance of their best friends. For us it is only letting a maid to loose to see her friends and presently our Splanghna Are moved as before without any of these downward noises which the Review tells me Dr McNight makes the sign of Pity as well as love: for why should you and I pity one another, we are come only where every body virtually wishes to be who wishes to live long, And you are in hopes of having five windows added in Front of your House for which you pay no Tax, & I who pay Tax have only one window in the Front of mine. It is a whimsical Situation we have got into to be Sure: but has its Alurements both within doors & in the  neighbourhood, where the People as you are told are very good to us. All the women who have drunken husbands very earnestly press me for their Houses. I am sorry to understand Mrs Carlyle now has so little occasion for my Services: but look forward with great pleasure to the time when we may hope to see your Sobriety here: for that is what I understand you mean when you say you have lost all your convivial faculties. The Air is good the Water is Good The Earth is dry And the Castle is lodgeable there is nothing amiss but the Slow pace with which I get into Possession of Country accommodations.

They are yet to come at Christmas Whitsunday & Martinmas next & even then little more than will keep a Cow & a Horse. The Dukes Factor has been here lately & we have arranged so as that the needful for the above purposes may come to me as they come to be Out of lease: but if we have little the less we shall spend which is all I am now good for.

I slept to Dalkeith House one of the times I  was at Edinburgh & felt then as I always did great Satisfaction in having been there. Lord Dalkeith and his Lady were then not come: but I am happy to hear Such Accounts of them. John Home & I have not been so long Silent in the memory of man: but I hope that he too is jogging as usual & that we shall know one another at a Game of Romps with David who I hope will be grievously dissappointed in finding himself an Angel of Light.

One of our pleasures here is a dayby post so that I beg you may not wait thereafter for the Coming a Maid for your letters.

Put, in your Post office at Musselburgh a [xxx] letter will come to Nidpath Castle by Peebles for two pence.

I am with best respects to 
Mrs Carlyle 
My Dear Carlyle 
yours most affectionately 

Nidpath Castle 9th May 1796

My Dear Carlyle

I am happy to hear from you even when part of what you say is not so. I am not accommodated at Nidpath nor there to remain beyond Whitsunday. I have had a grievous time of Suspence but can neither greatly blame myself nor any Other person. I cannot blame other people because I came here so many months, more than a year, before much could be Settled: nor do I much blame myself because seeing the Situation desireable I saw also that to preserve the Castle in a State to be inhabited I must take charge of it in Autumn last. For another winter with open doors & windows would have put it past any moderate reparation. When the time of renewing Leases came I made my offers, as I thought very high, but there were higher, and at that moment Halyards a place within two Miles became open, & I secured it.

You know enough of the Country to have some notion of Halyards; if not let time and personal Inspection when at leisure inform Mrs Carlyle & you. I enter at once into possession of as much Ground as I wish for, and, what is to me an inconvenience, a furnished house. For the Room being Scrimp the addition of  our furniture will almost barricade it against us, but as the Offices are good we mean to Contend chearfully against all inconvenience. We can Scarcely begin to move before the terms altho the place is already empty. Our Man Servant has been a thief & would have been sent to the Galleys if we had any Galleys; but we can ill move till a new come in his place at the Term. So that from the whole My Dear Carlyle you see that your prospect of handing me over from the Goodness of a present Duke to the goodness of a future Lord has proved Abortive. Their Goodness when we do not much want it is ever Abundant & Pleasant but the Lord preserve me from depending upon it for any thing beyond a Day & a Dinner. I remember however in the mean time that I except your Duke & Dutchess who I believe

are a real blessing to themselves, & that, in my notion is the best thing that Can be Said of any human Creature. I shall be somewhat farther from Edinburgh than formerly & in all probability more Seldom there. We join in best wishes & Respects to Mrs Carlyle. I am D. Carlyle

most affectionately yours 

Hallyards 8th Septr 1796

My Dear Carlyle

I Observe in the mercantile Style that you have Surmounted the quicksands of Holy Island & the Feasts of Newcastle; if you could with equal Success encounter the Pot luck of Hallyards I should think you invincible.

This Post was taken, as the saying is, upon the Spur of the occasion because another appeared not to be tenable. It is in many respects what I should wish: but if I had been free to chuse, would certainly have preferred one with a little more lodging. In order to have a Spare Room for whomever Chance may send on a Stormy night we ly Some of us, three in a Room & others occupy what in the case of a less numerous Family was destined for Servants. In our Chamber of Dine are mounted two Beds so that we can lodge while they agree any two persons of  the same Sex & even two persons of different Sexes even if they should not agree provided they are legally Connected: but as for an Inn to which you look for relief there is not within any practicable distance so much as an ale house at which to lodge a Servant; So that if Mrs Carlyle & you or J. Johnstone & his Tutor honour & bless us with a Visit, you must march like the Army of Wurmser at last in two Columns; And warn us of the time of your Arrival that we may have a Sheep from the Hills to meet you & give you a Warm reception with Batteries of Mutton and advanced Corps of Sheeps Head Haggish And Puddings such as may keep you alive for better fare at another place: I have now given you my Manifesto, And if you decline the encounter from mere Cowardice or say upon tryal that matters were worse than you expected you must not blame me. The Hurry of Hay sow making is over; tho so late, my Hay being all meadow Grass; And I have no Corn; what I  may have another year, I know not: but should be glad to have your Agricultural Advice from an experience which you probably have bought as well as myself.

Our Pasture was good in its Season: but is now I doubt on its Wayne. The best I can say is that all concerned Women Men and Slots are in a thriving Condition as to Health &c. The Girls send their most affectionate Complimts and I have reason to bless them for the Chearfulness with which they accommodate themselves to my retiring or sequestered Humour. The Neighbourhood is Sociable & we visit one another in Cartloads. The way is, I am told, for I have not yet seen, to you at one end of the Country & gathering like a snow ball as they roll aloft leave no house unvis[i]ted & no Soul at home in any house to receive a Visit till the following Season when the Snow Ball returns again to take them up. If I knew when it is to Roll, I should wish to have you in the way of being picked up & carryed to the next house. In the mean time it would give the People of this House great Pleasure to see Mrs Carlyle & you wherever the fates may order.

I am Dr C. yours most affectionately 

My Dear Carlyle

Let us know what is become of you. Mrs Carlyles letter to Bell bears that you have Suffered much and been in danger, which is more than we knew of from the first reports of your illness, & we supposed it to be no more than one of these feverish colds which are frequent at this Season. I was vexed at missing you when last in Midlothian; & I was prevented from repeating my visit by a Cold which confined me some days & hurried me home. If you should be unable to attend to the little Johnston; the greatest loss will be his. I felt the whole force of what you wrote respecting him. He has been long kept under the Awe of a Master & by forcible means: for restraint was necessary. But the time must come at which he will either bear himself up on feelings of a Gentleman or be lost to his Friends. When this Ora should begin is a question: One inducement to begin it now, is that you are in the way to watch the Effects with Fortitude & Temper. By all means treat him like a Gentleman, & let it not be supposed that he is to be treated Otherwise: but without express declaration that he is at Liberty to be perverse if he please. Such a declaration while he lives with  those against whom he has the resentment of harsh usage & whom he can vex by misbehaviour because they are accountable for what he is permitted to do, is but an unfair tryal of what he mighta do if left to himself among people whose only concern is not to be troubled with any improper behaviour, andb who by merely turning their backs can make him feel the Scorn he deserves. If it were not necessary to continue his Attention yet some time to the bussiness of College I should think of nothing for him but the Company of those whose frowns would make him feel his mistakes. And if this should not have the proper effect with him, the dissappointment may draw tears from those who had the happiness of intimacy with his Family or who even are acquainted with himself in his more pleasant and better moments in which he has scarcely an equal among Boys. The Revolt against harsh measures of restraint however necessary, we may Still hope in his case to distinguish from mere frowardness unprovoked. I was dissappointed in not having him & the party you mentioned here & the more dissagreeably that it may have proceeded from my Mistake of your Letter,  in which I thought you wished me to write, if there was any Objection to their coming.

My Accommodation here needs the excuse of Surprise; and I have known people pleased with a Scramble when there was not time to do better & this was necessary to me whom time itself would not enable to do better that is than kill a Sheep for the Christians, & send the beasts to look for Provender where it best could be found. That is not a treatment for which to give formal invitations. The Cold I caught at Edinburgh is gone & my other infirmities are no more than this time has brought forth. I wish I could say as much for the Church and State now Contending with Antichrist himself in the form of Democracy & Atheism. Here we have got a most beautiful retired Kirkyard in which the Ashes of the faithful may have peace without praying for it. This would be security enough to me against impending Storms if I had nobody to think of but myself. But matters are seldom so good as we hope or so bad as we fear. I am

My Dear Carlyle most affectionately 
yours 






Hallyards 23 Novr 

Hallyards 2d October 




My Dear Carlyle

If what you write from all the sources of information in Scotland be not worth postage, what are you to expect from Manor Water where we have talked of nothing for three or four months but bad weather. G. Hamilton I think has got his revenge of H. G. of M. I would rather lose 3 Professor ships than run away from B. once.

I have got professor Robertsons Robisons book & have read the Introduction but cannot yet conceive what he is to make of a Subject meaning free Masonry without being to tell us first of all what it is. I am in hopes the Militia Act will be amended; for the Circumstances you mention make it a sort of Press Act; & the mad people it seems felt it so. If a young man is to be pressed because he is 18 & not 24 the natural Consequence and Spirit of the Act should be that at 24 he falls off to make way for younger men in their turn. My son now about 20 had some pretence to exemption his name being enrolled in some one of the  Artillery Companies but I thought the best I could do was to set an Example to my neighbour Farmers in chearfully giving up his name to the Ballot. And if College call him away I trust that money will procure a Substitute.

The French Revolution it seems is still a Curiosity; many things certainly led to it and the french heads a stir after new things made bolder and wider steps than ever were made before by Mankind in any case whatever: but all this would have come to nothing if the French Army had Adhered to their noblesse officers & to the Crown: but they did not; & they made the Revolution. They made & will continue to make every change that is to happen in France to the end of time. They were struck with democracy as with a Spark of Electricity or a Stroke of Lightening & have continued charged even Since. They will follow no General that swerves from Democracy & will cut the throats of all the Representatives of the People of France if the Cry of Royalism is raised against them. What sort of Whim is this? You will say, for an Army? But it is better founded than perhaps you think. 

Of all the Plebeians in France who felt the galling distinction of Noblesse Connected with the Monarchy. The Rank & File of the French Army did so the most. With Noblesse a man might have genius Bravery merit of any Sort; yet no Power could affect the meanness of his Condition or give him any hopes of preferment. The moment that the Sky broke over his head & he saw a Possibility of advancement he felt all the meanness of his former condition & grasped at the Change. Some of the first movements of the Democracy raised multitudes of Private men into Officers, & continue to allow a man in the Ranks to look up to any station in the Army. Do you wonder that they are Democratical. If Buonaparte or any one else should swerve from democracy, so long as they think Such Swerving leads to the former disstinction of Noblesse he would Succeed as ill as Du Murier or any one else. The moment I saw the Army Adresses to the Directory & to one another it was Evident that no Power in France could make Peace: that till the Army is disposed of & Satisfied, no one in France who has any thing to lose will wish to have Peace: for Peace  must bring the Army home; give them leisure to form pretensions & Claims in return for their Services or in Other Words to seize every thing at discretion Must they not therefore be kept abroad and otherwise employed. And if the Directory continue, this will one day gall them as much as it will any one else. What are we then to do you will say? Nothing in my opinion but defend ourselves & this with proper conduct we are certainly in Condition to do untill thing take some turn in France. The Name & Disstinction of Noblesse may be effaced in France & the Army come under the Management of Leaders and Reasonable men without the terror of falling back into the condition of Soldiers for Life without the Possibility of Preferment. I am perswaded that there is no high Officer, Civil or Military in that country who would not gladly be a General Monk if he could; but no one dares attempt it. What the Directory calls a Royalist conspiracy is the very Stale trick of Faction imputing Plots to those they are to ruin by taking the measures agai[nst] them which the prevention of Plots are supposed to justify & to require.

yours &c &c


‘your Friend Collingwood is Certainly a man of excellent sense, I shall say nothing of Teneriffe false intelligence might have misled any body: but the Bombardment of Cadiz could serve no purpose but to disstress & to Alienate a Prople who I believe in their hearts are disposed to be our friends. I respect Mr Blacket greatly & am sorry not to have seen him. You do not mention J. Homes health & I am in hopes that besides trouts he may get Some Vigour at Longfarmacks as I yet here at Hallyards. The account of your Ducal Neighbours is very agreeable all to the Dutchess' complaints for which I grieve very Sincerely but hope they are not very great. Mr Pitts Supposed financial Sch[eme]  sounds well. Every one I think should be willing to buy up his own Land Tax at 20 yrs [pur]chase &c &c. But let him not undervalue his Enn[emy] for want of Finance, there is nobody can tell how much they may still do without it. And let him not Scold the French Directory for refusing Peace they cannot make peace & they dare not attempt it. The Seeds in which I have been dissappointed this year & for some years past are not better than Carrots & Turnips: Robt Douglass at Galashiels has under taken for my field Turnips. And I shall move heaven & Earth rather than miss carrots another year. The kind I want is the Large Red Flander Carrot if you know any seeds man to be trusted with such a Commission let me know. They talk to me of horn Carrots orange Carrots &c &c but I like hemlocks as well . . . .

I have read more of the Robisons book & think he has disclosed a scene of Villany to much good purpose. As to free Masonry I have been long apprised of the power of Arcana in gulling mankind, & what a shallow fellow he is who has no Secrets
My Dear Carlyle

I join with this whole house in thanking Mrs Carlyle & you for the Boon of your Bun. I have been co[n]fined above three weeks by a Scald in my heels at first neglected but now an Obstinate Sore which will take time to remove. It not only Confines me but makes every motion and every posture uneasy.

James tells me there was a full attendance of all the militia men now under Ballot. But such is the effect of the Law that not one proposed to serve otherwise than by Substitute; & the Poorest Shepherd Boy proposes to spend the earnings of a whole life to procure a Substitute rather than enlist for an indefinite time for a Militia man. James and I are agreed if Substitutes  are not to be found he is to serve And he is the only one who will do so quasi willingly. But in these times every man must be military whatever else he may be.

Europe I see is to be again in a blaze of War greater than ever. God grant the fire Ball of France may break in the Scuffle. The Catastrophe of Greenfield is Afflicting beyond measure. To say that it is surprising is nothing; for such a thing certainly never entered into the head of any one to Conceive. It is miserable that no friend could interpose in time to save him: but what is to be done with Insanity for such it must have been of some kind or Other. For a Man to be convicted of eating turd when he not only had every Sort of precious food but also exposed himself to the gallows for what he did, is wonderful. I am Obliged to you for relieving me from the perplexity which  vague reports would have caused me.

My fingers are so cold & I write in so uneasy a Posture that I doubt your being able to read my letter & think it best to have done. I am with best respects to Mrs Carlyle.


Affectionate  






Hallyards near Peebles 
25 Decr 1798
Hallyards 3d Febry 1800

My Dear Carlyle

If letters were of much use; you would have but a bad bargain in such a Correspondent as me. I am like other Sinners open to the checks of Conscience when I find the Consequence of my ommissions as I now do in your Silence when matters that interest me are passing in your neighbourhood. Mrs Carlyle to our Girls mentions Admirals Homes Illness & turn for the better. I hope it is a continued & effectual Recovery & that you will be disposed to tell me so without loss of time. I am myself at present under very Anxious Concern on Account of my Boy whom the Admiral left on Board the Caesar. I have a letter from Portsmouth telling me that he is sent there among the Sick & is in a state of great debility from a Fever & Diarhea. I endeavour  to be prepared for my loss: but it is his present State of probable dejection that affects me most.

The person, who writes to me, is a Mr Hunt employed it seems in the Care of the Sick & Hurt Seamen at Portsmouth. His letter is Obliging & Consolatory. He had engaged a proper Nurse for him & bids me rely on every attention being given to his Case and I have written to this Mr Hunt to thank him & request the Continuance of his good Offices: but we are all here in Anxious & Silent expectation. If Admiral Home is well enough to be troubled with questions of that Sort & has any Confident at Portsmouth it will be charity to send me his address & recommendation to his good Offices for me in this case; that I may enter into Correspondence with him not being at all acquainted with the above Mr Hunt, tho disposed to think well of him from the Stile of his letter. I am glad to hear that Mrs Carlyle & yourself hold out well. 

Our accounts from Edinburgh are of many Complaints there that make people envy us the sour exposure of our Tweedale hills on which it is most Certain that all of us keep health much better than is common in Softer Climats. Our Government I believe had good Reason for declining present overtures of Negotiation: Namely that our Cue for negotiating is to be taken [xxx] our Friends; not from our Ennemys who may possibly & even probably mean throw Squibs of Jealousy & distrust among us. This Answer I believe would have saved a great many Idle words in Ld Grenvilles Note & many more in his tiresome Speech which seems to imply that we are never to get out of a War till we have an Enemy who will make peace & war for Conscience Sake. With common Enemies it is enough that we beat them into the humour of making Peace or that we make it their interest to do so. On any other principle than this no treaties could be less secure than those with the Court of Versailes.

I am Dr Carlyle affectionately yours 

Hallyards 10th Febry 1800

My Dear Carlyle

I have a second letter from Mr Hunt under whose Care our young Seaman is, informing me that he is so much better as to be able to sit up four hours a day & is likely to be able in a few days to write me himself. This is acceptable news here:But to the letter is written not at Portsmouth, as I formerly stated to you, but at Dartmouth in Devonshire so that I am in a sort of a Scrape with you and our Friends at Portsmouth. As for you I certainly do not grudge myself the very Affectionate & Obliging part you took in my concern: But I am a little out of countenance for the trouble we have given to Captain And Mrs Patton. They will be inquiring Anxiously for our Patient & not finding him will be at a loss how to account for it. Affraid to Alarm us least we should think the worst or imagine they had not made proper inquiry &c I must therefore wish you the farther trouble of a line to Captain Patton to tell him my mistake, or rather the Blunder I have committed  in reading Portsmouth in the date of Mr Hunts former letter when I should have read Dartmouth. But you will please to know that his D is very like a P having the upright line well marked but the round little or not at all marked till it comes on the back of the upright so (P) and I, reading his letter with some agitation having once read Portsmouth so likely to be the place of naval infirmary, did not return to his date for Correction but sent his letter immediately to my Son Adam at Edinburgh to direct him in making inquiry for a Student of Physick there to whom Mr Hunt referred me for information about himself & the treatment of Patients from the Fleet at that place. I at the same time altho Mr Hunt gave me no direction how to write to him guessed at his address & sent my letter to Portsmouth in haste to let him know I would Spare nothing that would contribute to my Sons recovery or present Comfort. This letter he will probably never receive:but he seems to have proceeded kindly without it & I now Answer his last in which he gives me his address pointedly. This explaination I owe to you & our friends & Portsmouth, not to  mention myself whose reputation for Soundness of head may be at Stake. It is not altogether the effect of Old Age: tho being now as I mantain in the 19th Century I have seen no less than two of them & if I should see a third will attend more particularly to the date of Strange letters.

The handwriting covers three and a half pages of the MS, the last half page being written upside down.

I have the long debate of last week And very much Respect our Friend D's Speech. But none of them all seem to know the real difficulty of Obtaining any other Sort of Government in France than this of a Military Usurpation. In [the] first place where there is a Professional Ar[my] that take it in their heads to Govern no Other go[vern]ment can ever take place. The French Army consisted of 2 or 3.000.000 low born men who never could hope for any preferment & 2 or 3000 Noblesse Officers who held the Others in the lowest State of Contempt. The Revolution dissmissed all the Noblesse Officers increased the pay of the Men & filled up every Rank to the highest without regard to Birth. Here is more than any revolution ever did for any Sort of men before. This is their liberty & equality they have fought for it with more impetuosity in Victory & with more perseverance under misfortune than ever any sort of men ever did before: They thought it most secure under a Republican Form: but they will prefer a Single leader if he is likely to secure them against the Noblesse Otherwise I doubt there is not force or perseverance enough in Europe to  reduce them under the old disstinction of Noblesse Officers, And every Mention of a Return to Royalty with Nobless does but strengthen the Rands of our Ennemies against us. And whatever we may think or wish or hope I would agree to whip a School boy who would talk to them of Restoring the King. Of all the people that dealt with Cromwell there was not such a fool to be found in Europe as to propose to him Restoring the King. Every Drummer in the French Army is a Cromwell & no man in France that is not a Soldier is worth a Pin.

yours &c Adam Ferguson
Hallyards near Peebles 8 Septr 1801

My Dear Carlyle

I am much Obliged for your letter; It opens one way to the Admiralty & which I shall certainly take when matters are ripe for it. I had not any Conversation nor did I mean to have any with Mr Dundas on the Subject untill I could say we were in Condition for his Interposition. As the Term of my Boys necessary Service as a Midshipman draws to a Close, I am desirous to know when & Where & by whom Midshipmens examinations to try their qualifications for a Commission is made. My natural recourse for Advice & direction in this matter should be to His present Captain Newman of the Loire: But there is something forbidding in that Quarter by whose fault I know not on that Quarter. The Boy from his entry into the Service had a succession of Captains partially kind to him & this perhaps had spoilt  him, or made him ill brook the treatment for which he should have been prepared of a mere Seaman. I have endeavoured all I can to make him think of his Duties on board only let others behave to him as they may think proper. He was very impatient to be on board a Frigate as being more Active than a line of Battleship And I was looking out for a Captain to whom I might recommend him, When he fell in with the Loire at Plymouth & chose of himself to be transferred to that Ship. Captain Newman is by every Account a brave man And soon after he took My son on board, by Admiral Homes Advice I wrote to thank him for that favour but had no Answer, which with some other Circumstances makes the unwilling to trouble him any more. As the Loire may be at Portsmouth before my Sons tryal can Come on, I should be glad, if it be not improper to trouble Captain Paton in Such a Matter, that without any thing like Complaint of Captain Newmans dissposition towards us, he would advise how  to proceed, and if he have any opportunity learn from Captain Newman what the Boys behaviour has been & the propriety of his proceeding to be examined at the end of this Term as [xxx] a midshipman. Captain Paton Can at the same time Answer the Questions I put, When Where & by whom such examinations are made. I should have endeavoured to see you in passing through Lothian [xxx] if I had not found out that the person I had entrusted with stopping my letters for me at Edinburgh had done with my newspaper but suffered every letter to be forwarded to this place in my Absence & I was impatient to receive Some packets which I had reason to believe were waiting for me & required Answers.

Here all is Safe and a general Concert of good Wishes for Mrs Carlyle & you in which no one joins more heartily than

your Affectionate  

Hallyards near Peebles 6 N[ovember] 1802

My Dear Carlyle

To answer as you desire by return of the Post I by no means feel bold enough to undertake for a Journey to Arniston in the course of a week from the present date. I have a very great desire to see My Lord Chief Baron but there are at present so many insurmountable difficulties that I must positively defer till I can find His Lordship at Edr. We are taken short here in the middle of Harvest with rainy and most Boisterous weather. There is not a Standing Stook to be seen but all leveld with the ground And the Pease sheaves are bickering over the Country at the Rate of ten miles an hour. As I have neither men nor horses but what the little farm requires the farm is my master and I cannot budge without its leave. Besides I do not know any safe Road from hence to Arniston but by Edr or at least Lasswaid.

You will make  my excuse for the present to My Lord Chief Baron. In going to Edr I but go from one little home to another & that is all I am fit for in the rest of My Life. You Youth have no idea of the bucklings I require Against Cold by day & Cramps by Night; and tho I envy your Ignorance, hope you never will know better from your own experience at least. I am really not a fit guest for any Gentlemans house above the rank of an Innkeeper. There are great preparations in this County for a Ball tomorrow, And a fine saddle I am told preparing to be run for by horses, which have been in Cart or Plough every working day for Six Months past: but I doubt my infirmities will keep me at Home. Here all join in best respects to Mrs Carlyle & yourself. I mentioned my wish for a Gardiner to you that is a fellow who would do any thing he is bid including digging & planting &c &c

Yours most Affectionately 

Blackheath April 29th 1775



In answer to the two or three letters which you have written to me I can give you five or six which I had written in my own mind to you before I received any of yours. The first was from Geneva where having had the advantage of Lodging in Calvins own house & having access to some of his most secret manuscripts I thought myself without Vanity qualifyed to give you some light into the more Intricate recess of our Church. My second was from Fernex the seat of that renowned & Pious Apostle Voltaire who saluted me with a Complt on a gentleman of my family who had Civilized the Russians. I owned this Relation and at this & every successive visit encouraged every attempt at Conversation even Jokes against Moses, Adam & Eve & the rest of the Prophets till I began to be considered as a person who tho true to my own faith had no ill humour to the freedom of fancy in Others. As my own Complt had come all the way from Russia I wished to know how some of my Friends woud fare but I found the old man in a state of perfect indifference to all Authors except two sorts, One of those who write Panegyrics, another who write Invectives on himself. There is a third kind whose names he has been used to repeat fifty or sixty years without knowing any thing of them such as Locke, Boyle, Newton &c. I forgot his competitors for fame of whom he is always either silent or speaks slightingly. The fact is that he reads little or none, his mind exists by Reminiscence & by doing over & over what it has been used to do, Dictates Tales, dissertations & Tragedy, even the latter with all his Elegance tho not with his former force. His Conversation is among the Pleasantest I ever met with, he lets you forget the superiority which the public opinion gives him, which is indeed great[er than w]hat we conceive in this Island . . . .

I am Dear Carly[l]e

Yours most affectionately,


Geneva Novr 9th 1774

Dear Sir

I hope that you will not impute to the want of a proper sense of your Friendship the Liberty I have taken to delay so long any direct answer to your Obliging letter. My Packet in returne was for Obvious reasons addressed elsewhere & those reasons however trifling might still hinder my writing if I coud possibly avoid thanking you for the part you have taken in my Affairs, and of which Dr Black has told me the likelihood of a favourable Ishue. He has likewise repeatedly informed me how much I owed to you in this bussiness as well as in the kind attention of your family to mine in this sort of Orphancy. Both of which circumstances give me greater pleasures than ever my opportunitys perhaps will enable me to communicate to any one else. I am here in appearance but my heart & my mind and all my Sensibilitys are with you. Fortunately what engages me without a rival in this Peregrination is the Object of my charge. In this I find many good Materials a little neglected & requiring much of the back game a Phrase which for want of knowing Back gaming you may not possibly understand. All my letters have been dated at Geneva: but I have been settled here only a few days, the summer was spent in the Countrey or in excursions to the Kingdoms Dukedoms & Cantons which touch this little territory on different Sides. I am on this account yet little acquainted with the place or its Inhabitants. I have seen two or three Ingenious men but am not yet properly  Speaking in habits with any of them. The Silence of Politics here and in the Aristocratical Cantons of Switzerland is amazing: Government does not think itself safe but by keeping out of Sight. Notwithstanding the Democratical Dash which this little Republic has lately received All Deliberations are Secret. Elections never heard of till the day & then made in profound Silence. Even the Doors of the Presbitery are shut, so that all idle expectations of being sometimes amused with Republican debates are intirely dissappointed.

D'Alembert passed some weeks here a few years ago, chiefly at Voltaires, when some of the younger clergy in haste to show their enlarged Views talked a little freely & he was idle enough to put in his Encyclopedia that they are all Socinians, This raised a great Ferment in the Church of Calvin that is but now in some measure appeased. We are in the way to see most people that come & go into Italy many of them remain some time and we are a numerous Colony of English amounting when all are reckoned to near a hundred.

The Countrey is beautiful beyond description. The Lake is equal to the Firth of Forth & the banks somewhat better, with a perpetual View of the Snowy Alps in the heat & bloom of Summer.

The Principal Curiosity however is Voltaire. If he were less a humourist by Nature the continual empressement of all Strangers to see him woud of itself inspire him with whims. You have been told how much he lys abed & how little he comes to his own Table. He has no certain hours like most old people, is sometimes up early enough & dressed in a full suit laced or Embroidered which cannot be less than thirty year old to judge from the fashion of the Cuffs & the buttons: but is for the most part in his Night Gown a dark Tye Wig & a laced Crimson silk bonnet: His common Salutation is qui veut voire une Ombre. Vous estes bien bon Monsieur-vous venez  voir un Mourant un Cadavre. It is very difficult to Converse with him on this Subject. If you say you are Sorry — And pray Sr why shoud you be sorry Or if you insist that he is wonderfully well & Robust for his Age he complains of the Cholic which is universally understood as a Signal to leave his house. So that the only way is to let him go on. When in a few Minutes altho his legs be feeble his tongue becomes as frolicsome as that of a boy of eighteen. He likes the Crack of every Whip especially that of Infidelity. He professes a great regard for the Late Lord Chesterfield & for this Lord of Course so that we can force ourselves upon him at most times; Some time ago after repeated excuses to avoid being seen by a person that wanted to be introduced to him he Answered at last. Si je suis en View je serai a vos Ordres, Si je suis mort je vous en demande pardon d'avance. & Pauvre Diable de Ferney. Hubert of whose Inimitable talent you have heard, can cut him or pinch him out of Cards or Crusts of bread so like that you imagine you see him and have your imagination quite filled with him, he has lately made a picture of him come out of bed stand[ing] leg & putting on his breeches dictating to his a very fair Specimen of his Way. [He] something which Cramer gets hold of a bring through all the forms of Anonymous Squibs Pamphlets And Volumes. People have a notion that there is something now in agitation between him & the King of Prussia. The Latter has had an Officer residing at Voltaires above eight Months & the most probable conjecture is that this officer has brought Memoires of the late Wars to be licked up & waits to carry them back again. But if this or any Other Serious matter is on foot between them the Secret is well kept.

So much for Voltaire. I have mentioned only his humours but you need not to be told that he is in general what the  French call Aimable dans la Société without formality communicative & Polite.

I condole with you most sincerely on the loss of Poor Keith. Such breacks make even home recur with an Air of Sadness. My best respects to Mr Bruce who I hope will succeed to our wishes. In case he should need farther orders from me to receive the Quarterly & Other Payments I shall not fail to send them punctually. I expect to pass the Winter here but may be in Spain in the Spring if you have any commissions there I beg to be employed. I am frequently questioned about the time of your next publication & make the wisest Answer I can. Your friend Lord Holderness has been here some months & has escaped from a dangerous fistula. He desires to be remembered to you & says you have put powder in his drink. My best Respects in your Family & at the Poker Club. My Little Stock I find is encreased. I trust that some of you will take Care of the Christening. My being so far off sometimes costs me reflections but better times I hope are coming.
Geneva Novr9th 1774



I hope that you will not impute to the want of a proper sense of your Friendship the Liberty I have taken to delay so long any direct answer to your Obligeing letter. My Packet in returne was for Obvious reasons addressed elsewhere & those reasons however trifling might still hinder my writing if I could possibly avoid thanking you for the part you have taken in my affairs, and of which Dr Black has told me the likelyhood of a favourable Ishue. He has likewise repeatedly informed me, how much I owed to you in this business as well as in the kind attention of your family to mine in this sort of orphancy, both of which circumstances give me greater pleasures than ever my opportunitys perhaps will enable me to communicate to any one else. I am here in appearance but my heart & my mind and all my sensibilitys are with you. Fortunately what engages me without a rival in this Peregrination is the Object of my Charge. In this I find many good Materials a little neglected & requiring much of the back game, a Phrase which for want of knowing Back gaming you may not possibly understand. All my letters have been dated at Geneva: but I have been settled here only a few days, the Summer was spent in the Countrey or in excursions to the Kingdoms, Dukedoms & Cantons which touch this little territory on different sides. I am on this account yet little acquainted with the place or its Inhabitants. I have seen two or three Ingenious men but am not yet properly speaking in habits with any of them. The silence of Politics here and in the Aristocratical Cantons of Switzerland is amazing: Government does not think itself safe but by keeping out of sight. Notwithstanding the Democratical Dash which this little Republic has lately received all Deliberations are secret, Elections never heard of till the day & then made in profound silence. Even the Doors of the Presbetery are shut, so that all idle expectations of being sometimes amused with Republican debates are intirely dissappointed. D'Alembert passed some weeks here a few years ago, chiefly at Voltaires, when some of the younger Clergy in haste to show their enlarged Views talked a little freely & he was idle enough to put in his Encyclopedie that they are all socinians. This raised a great Ferment in the Church of Calvin that is but now in some measure appeased. We are in the way to see most people that come & go into Italy. Many of them remain some time and we are a numerous Colony of English amounting when all are reckoned to near a hundred. The Countrey is beautiful beyond description. The Lake is equal to the Firth of Forth & the banks somewhat better, with a perpetual view of the snowy Alps in the heat & bloom of Summer.

The Principal curiosity however is Voltaire. If he were less a humourist by Nature the continual empressement of all strangers to see him woud of itself inspire him with whims. You have been told how much he lys a bed & how little he comes to his own Table. He has no certain hours like most old people, is sometimes up early enough & dressed in a full suit laced or Embroidered which cannot be less than thirty year old to judge from the fashion of the Cuffs & the buttons, but is for the most part in his Night gown, a dark Tye Wig & a laced Crimson silk bonnet. His common salutation is, qui veut voir une Ombre? Vous estes bien bon Monsieur, vous venez voir un Mourant, un Cadavre. It is very difficult to Converse with him on this subject. If you say you are sorry — And pray sr why shoud you be sorry? Or if you insist that he is wonderfully well & Robust for his Age, he complains of the Cholic which is universally understood as a signal to leave his house. So that the only way is to let him go on When in a few Minutes altho his legs be feeble his tongue becomes as frolicsome as that of a boy of eighteen. He likes the Crack of every Whip especially that of Infidelity. He Professes a great regard for the Late Lord Chesterfield & for this Lord of Course so that we can force ourselves upon him at most times; some time ago after repeated excuses to avoid being seen by a person that wanted to be introduced to him he Answered at last, Si je suis en Vie je serai à vos ordres, si je suis mort, je vous en demande pardon d'avance, L[e] Pavre Diable de Ferney. Hubert, of whose Inimitable talent you have heard, can cut him or punch him out of Cards or Crusts of bread so like that you imagine you see him and have your imagination quick filled with him. He has lately made a picture of him come out of bed standi[ng on o]ne leg & putting on his breeches dictating to his C[lerk which] makes a very fair specimen of his Way. He . . . produceing something which Cramer gets hold of a[nd] brings through all the forms of Anonymous squibs, Pamphlets and Volumes. People have a notion that there is something now in agitation between him & the King of Prussia. The latter had an Officer residing at Voltaires above eight months & the most probable conjecture is that this officer has brought Memoires of late Wars to be licked up & waits to carry them back again. But if this or any other serious matter is on foot between them the secret is well kept.

So much for Voltaire. I have mentioned only his humour but you need not be told that he is in general what the French call Aimable dans la société without formality, communicative & Polite. I condole with you most sincerely on the loss of Poor Keith. Such breacks make even home recur with an Air of sadness. My best respects to mr Bruce who I hope will succeed to our wishes. In cas he should need further orders from me to receive the Quarterly & other Payments I shall not fail to send them punctually. I expect to pass the Winter here but may be in Spain in the Spring. If you have any commissions there I beg to be employed. I am frequently questioned about the time of your next publication & make the wisest answer I can. Your Friend Lord Holdernesse has been here some months & has escaped from a dangerous fistule. He desires to be remembered to you & says you have put powder in his drink. My best Respects in your Family & at the Poker Club. My Little stock I find is encreased. I trust that some of you will take Care of the Christening. My being so far off sometimes costs me reflections but better times I hope are coming.  

A. Ferguson
London, 19th March 1792



The bearer, Joseph Ferguson, my son, carrys a letter from his Father to you which might be sufficient for every purpose, but I cannot let him depart without some expression of my affection for you and full confidence that as far as you have opportunity you will be as a brother to him. His uncle, Captain Burnett, will, I hope, be in Bengall to receive him at his arrival and be his parent there; but in his absence I shall rely on you and gratefully repay any supply that may be necessary to him. He has many letters: one in particular to Colonel Ross, in which I remind him of my thanks for good offices to you, of which I shall be glad to know the continuance. It will be obliging to drop me a letter with the return of ships from India with accounts of yourself and this young person in his joining the corps to which he is appointed. I am, ,  and most




Hallyards near Peebles, N.B., 1st March 1797

. . . before this will have come to hand you will, I trust, have heard of the arrival of your friend, my son Joseph, again in India. He goes at the head of a Company. May his health continue better than it was when he left you (1793). The lot of a military man is to go where he is ordered or to quit the service. My blessing to him and you. There will be a letter for him from this family by the same conveyance with this.

I am, , most affectionately yours


Hallyards 1st March 1797



I am sorry to acquaint you of your worthy father's departure from this life. At his age the event is not a matter of surprise, and he met it with great calmness and in the full possession of all his faculties to the last, though under much suffering and bodily distress. In the course of last year he had a paralytic stroke from which he in a great measure recovered; but in winter he became dropsical, and suffered so much from a stifling in his breast that for many weeks before his death he could not be laid in a bed. I enclose for your satisfaction copies of his will executed some years ago, and of a codicil subjoined during his last illness, in both of which he has with great humanity attended to the necessities of poor and deserving relations, by allotting certain annuities for which I make no doubt his funds are sufficient, although I have not yet received a particular state of them. This my son is now making out from the papers which are in his hands, and of which we shall transmit a copy to you. It was difficult to save much from the wreck of a fortune which was on the losing side of a great revolution; but there is reason to believe that he recovered as much as could be expected, and he lived in this country with but little expense besides some of the charities which he has continued in his will.

I reproach myself frequently for not more regularly acknowledging the letters with which you have favoured me. Not being much a man of business my habits have been during great part of my life to defer and procrastinate letters, till there was a danger of their being forgotten altogether; and as most of my friends know this failing, and that I would not neglect any matter of consequence, they were ever ready to forgive me, which I hope you will also, and not discontinue to me the satisfaction of hearing of your welfare. I send this little packet to my friend Sir John MacPherson, who I hope will forward it and direct it properly. As I have taken to a country life at this place you will please direct your letters accordingly to me at Hallyards. . . . Most affectionately yours


Hallyards, 2nd Sept. 1798

. . . I cannot enough express my obligation to you on his account, and your readiness in assisting him in getting forward in his line of preferment. It gave me some pain to hear of his anxiety to secure his debt to me by ensuring his life. The proposal when first mentioned to me I rejected, and signified so much to his correspondent at London; but it seems too late to prevent the Ensurance for one year being payed. I have since authorized my son Adam to forbid it altogether, and hope it will not be repeated. If there is to be an insurer, let me be the person. If there were to be a loss, that of the money would be the least. And I mention the subject to you, trusting you will be so good as to relieve his mind of all anxiety on this account. . . . I am commissioned by more than one person in this family to thank you for your letters, for if Joseph have reason to complain of our silence, we have you and Mr. A. Johnston of Calcutta to thank for the only account we have had of him for above 18 months. I am, , ly


St Andrews 4 April 1812

My Dear Lord

Give me leave to indulge myself in the Satisfaction I receive on your Lordships accession to the Head of the Admiralty Board when your name is endeared to the fleet by the Memory of your Fathers Beneficence.

I always experienced from him a Goodness which flowed from the Heart and to which I was not insensible.

If his Partiality should be hereditary I may meet with a Notice from your Lordship to which I am not otherwise entitled. It is indeed  but an ill return on my part to be adding to the load of importunities to which you are now exposed but I cannot forbear reminding your Lordship that I have a son in the Navy for whom to implore your Protection in the Way of his Profession a Way in which he may incur Competition with Persons of a Class and was never surpassed by any order of Men in the World: but it rests with him not to be exemptd from this [xxx] and if so it will rest with me  thankfully to acquiesce in the Judgement you will pass on his Claims. He will be to Lay his Respects to your Lordship soon and will trouble you with his name & Services in a more legible hand than mine.

I have the Honour to be with great Respect 
My Dear Lord 
your Lordships most affectionate 
most obedien[t] humble 
Servant 












P.S. Mr Ferguson had for some time discontinued to write for his Sight scarcely inables him to see the Paper, much less its see the point at which he Left off when he lefts the Pen for a supply of Ink- but as he never wrote to Lord Melville with any other hand but his own he was resolved to renew the attempt trusting that every person who bears the Title of Lord Melville will forgive the defects and if he cannot read favourably interprete his meaning.
MDL

The Inclosed having come to me without Name on hearing it read I have felt the Subject enough to think it Worthy of your Lordships Notice. There seems to be a plan in this great Bussiness for that a human Proceeding for which [xxx xxx] your name so distinguished and hence no doubt you will forgive this trouble.

Your Protegé is now at Sea more penetrated with your Lordships Favour than with any thing Else that befallen him . . . .’


Dear Sir

I am obliged to our friend Mr Gardner for the agreeable accounts with which he Sometimes favours me, of your Wellfare & of the kind remembrance with which you honour me. I believe he was Surprised, in communicating your last Letter & stating the Purport of your Remarks on the Intollerance of the Grecian & Roman Republicks, to hear me say I was of your opinion. A Passage from me had given occasion to your Researches, & I was Stated as an Antagonist. In that passage however I looked no farther than the Supposed  Law of the XII Tables of which I wished to point out Some remarkable Clauses, tending to convey Some notion of its Spirit.

But even with this restriction I am sensible that the expression to which you allude is not correct & endeavour to amend it in a blotted copy of the Book which is by me.

I had taken my impression hastily or been misled by unusual punctuation in the Copy from which I took it. Whatever Slips of this sort may have been made, I am conscious of very great care to avoid them & in my desire to state every part of the Subject fairly, lost every predilection I might originally have had for Persons or things. If I become more correct on the Subject of your Remarks I must thank you for it, as I had not yet attended to the matter & might have overlooked it. Examples of  Intollerance are frequent in the History both of Greeks & Romans. And men will ever be disposed to restrain by punishment and Severity whatever they conceive as Objects of Indignation and horror, even Slight deviations from what they conceive as holy in words or Actions.

The Vengeance of the Zealot is not a Safe Principle of Compulsory Law, but few nations I believe can boast that they never adopted or Abused it. So far as it operates in repressing overt Acts of Injurious or dissorderly tendency it may be justifyed on principles of necessity and sound Policy: but its abuses in one Nation certainly cannot be Sustained as precedent to justify its missapplications in another.

I should have acknowledged my Obligation to you in this matter sooner if a slight Indisposition from a Cold caught in these  easterly winds had not prevented me, & still disposed me to delay. I now hasten however least my letter should not overtake you at London as Mr Gardner tells you are to leave it about the middle of May. I am with great Respect

My Dear Sr your most Obedient & most 




Dear Sir

I have received the Favour of your Letter with the Paper which you do me the honour to communicate, in two Packets. Having been for some days in a bustle preparing for a remove to the Country I am Obliged to plead this As an excuse for my delay in complying with your desire of an immediate acknowledgement & hope you will accept of it as such however insufficient.

Dr Gardner is not in Town: but you may rely on my punctuality in what remains of your injunction. When I see Dr Gardner you may expect to hear from me, & tho you may observe that my notions agree with  yours in the main point & that I am even ashamed of having appeared to mistake it in any instance: yet there is perhaps some difference in respect to the Principle on which the Intollerance of the Antient Nations you mention & that on which which modern Nations proceed. May not such a difference be inferred from the meaning of terms now of great import[ance] but without any corresponding meaning in Other times. Such as Infidel contradistinguished to the Faithful or true Believer &c. The Error inconsistent with, or the Creed that is necessary to Salvation. The Zeal for Prosylitism. The detection refutation or suppression of Heresy. The Canon of Orthodoxy &c &c. If you find besides mere expressions of horror & vengeance against Profaneness, any conceptions of the understanding that correspond to the meaning of the terms recited. I must endeavour  to correct my present notions on the Subject. And here I shall leave the Matter having gone farther than I meant in this hasty acknowledgement of your Favour and of the sincere Respect with which I have the Honour to be Dear Sir





To Sir George Colebrooke Bar't



I have just received your letter inclosed to Mr Home, & am sorry that my omission in not writing you sooner shoud have given you the trouble of a second letter, or occasioned any degree of suspence with respect to my inclinations. I would have written immediatly on having the honour of your former letter, If I had not thought it unnecessary to give you that trouble. As Mr Home had Signifyed my intire Submission to My Lord Butes directions, & my willingness to be employed on any terms His Lordship thought proper. The proposal at first found one great difficulty with me in breaking in upon my Inclination to Setlement after some years of Wandering & uncertainty, of which I confess I was become tired: But there were considerations enough to remove that difficulty, & the principal one which remained upon My Lord Bute's Letter, was a very Sincere Anxiety about my qualifications to fill a place of so much consequence & such tender concern to His Lordship, & in which every circumstance I had access to know, made me think with pain of any degree of dissappointment to him.

I am extremely sensible of the honour of this Confidence from a Person who is so well apprised of the Nature & importance of it & shall endeavour to profit all I can by the views he will no doubt continue to give me.

I am just now upon terms for disposing of My Chaplaincy which is but a precarious Possession to one who has tired of following a Regiment, & who in time of service can have little more than the name & the chance of being suddenly called upon from Abroad. If I can get My Colonel to concur in this Affair I shall have litle further connection with the Clergy of Scotland & be under no necessity of appearing in their Character & shall be very glad if that Circumstance is equally  [xxx] agreeable to My Lord Bute.

Home has left his quarters at Braid & lives in Town. He has finished the first Acts of Agis & they are now in the hands of a Copyer, & will I believe be sent to you when done. I dread the difficultys which remain in the Plan from the Mixture of two Objects & Passions, but I have avoided ever discouraging him upon a point which coud not possibly be altered. He wrote you by last Post & is now gone to the Countrey for a Day or two. I hope you will forgive the Length & the freedom of this letter & believe me to be

With the greatest Respects 

& most Obedient  

Harrow March 19th, 1758


I intended to have waited on you a few days ago when I was in Town; but I found the House of Commons was Sitting & had no hopes of finding you at Home. I have a Brother in Scotland who is very desirous of being in the Army, & I wanted to ask your opinion whether in the Present Situation of Affairs, there might be any hopes of Obtaining a Commission for him.

Lord Milton gave me reason to believe it woud not be difficult, last year when there was a report of some new Levies, & My Brother had settled his Affairs w't this View: but these new Levies never were made; and I know it is more difficult to Obtain commissions when Regiments are formed, & every Colonel ingaged to Provide for his own connections. My Brother has some Military merit, which you must have the Patience to hear. He had been settled at Bourdeaux with an Uncle in the time of the last War, & from a fondness for The Army left that Place to go to Flanders, without consulting with any of his Friends or letting them  know what became of him: The Consequence of that Step was his inlisting in General Brags Regiment. Lord George Sackville I believe at that time had the Command of that Regiment. He was wounded at the Battle of Fountenoy & taken Prisoner. I afterwards found him out by Accident & prevailed upon him to let me apply for his discharge. I make no doubt but in your own Department your hands are full of Solicitations & ingagements, & it may be out of your Way to apply to any body concerned in the Land Service, and this may be My Lord Butes case too, & I woud not make use of the access I have to any body to teize them improperly. I will be determined by your opinion & have great confidence that you will excuse this trouble

I am glad to hear that Mrs Murray is well recovered. I have begun to revise the Paper you saw, & I am changing it to a Dissertation on the Vicissitudes incident to Human Society, & propose when that is done to write two more on the History of Manners, & on the History of Literature & to satisfy myself with what may be done in a reasonable time without planing out works for a Lifetime.

I am Sr 
with the greatest Respect 




Dear Sir

I am very much obliged to you for the trouble you took in writing me agreeable news, & I wish you joy of the Credit which such successes give to the Ministry among our Politicians. But I suspect you intended to Mortify Home & me who by the Conduct of the Admiralty are like to be dissappointed of our invasion which we both wished for, he to exhibit his Military Genius & I to practice my Philosophy which you may remember is the best calculated for invasions of any Philosophy now extant.

It seems plain that the French intended by Assembling their force to strike a blow in the Channel. And we are told here it has appeared by some papers taken from Marechal Contades that they had planned an Embarkation from the Weser & the Elb when they shoud become Masters of those Rivers, a stroke which woud have probably Surprised us in the North and  I make all the use of it I can here to horrify people who think we can be secure without a universal Militia but to no purpose, for Lord Littleton declared where he dined two days ago with the Provost that the only effectual way of serving our Countrey now was by helping to recruit his Majestys regular troops; which introduced great applause to your City Subscriptions & to the ingenuity of Poultney & Crawfurds double feathers.

Every measure seems to proceed on a Supposition that it is difficult to raise Men for the defence of the Island & those measures create difficultys. I wish by way of experiment that a King of this Countrey woud tell the people that he was threatened with a formidable Invasion, but that he was conscious of his Strength in the youth of Great Britain & desired they would give in their names in every Parish & County. You may easily figure what a list there woud be & what difficulty woud be found in reducing them to the necessary Numbers. I am affraid some of the Methods which are taken to defend us tend to make us not worth  defending. But this is perhaps more politics than you have time to read. I woud have troubled you sooner if any thing had occurred worth your Notice & if I had been less burried in Solids & fluids & Ratios. I like my Situation very well, & begin to admire Sr Isaac Newton as I did Homer & Montesquieu, but it is on Condition that he will let me go as soon as I become a tolerable Professor of Natural Philosophy. Home has been little here since I came, before he went last from Edinburgh he showed me a rough draught of the fifth Act which give me great pleasure but I am still affraid his Work is too great for his time. I have not heard from Robertson what he is meditating for the Subject of further Works; he probably declines being troubled with many opinions. The Wit and ingenuity of this place is still in a flourishing way, & with a few corrections, which however it is difficult to make, is probably the best place for Education in the Island. Ch:Townshend has got great Popularity here. Lord Littleton scarcely showed himself. I am D.r Sr

With the greatest 
Respect 

& most  








I suppose you are so bussy that you have no time to receive compliments either of condoleance or congratulation. I who only mix a little news paper politics with Natural Philosophy have been extremely embarrassed with the affairs of the Nation ever since the news of last week & as far as news papers go there is nothing you do likely to escape me for some time to come. With all the interest I take in the public however I would not have troubled you at this time, if some notions I have about a private Affair did not press me so strongly that I cannot possibly refrain. Home sets out for London this day it woud be ridiculous for any body to think that applications in his favour are necessary where he is going, but I am extremely Anxious that his friends should  think as I do of the manner of directing their kindness. It is for this reason that I trouble you and endeavoured to press the same notion on him at parting. A Subsistance altogether precarious however honourable for the present or big with hopes was never to my mind. Every man of Worth shoud have a firm bottom on which he may stand however narrow it is & I may say of myself what I believe is not true of him that I never coud love a man intirely whilst I remain in absolute dependance on him or at least that I never coud act if I did love him so. Give me ground enough to stand on as my Predecessor Archimedes said & then I will show you what kind of Mechanic I am. I therefore wish most earnestly that every Other act of Friendship for Home was thought of no avail till he is fixed in some moderate reasonable or even little provisions sure for his Life & if his fortunes carry more let him pay at hazard for the rest as much as he will. You will forgive me for  Supposing for a moment that you can need to have views suggested to you on a like this. But I am anxious that not[hing] escape you & am perswaded that doing wh[at] call Justice to one of the most Amiable that ever existed since mankind had a being is of more consequence than half the Public measures you will pursue this Twelve months for more than that proportion of them will result finally in getting more Victuals for John Bull, for which I do not care one single farthing.

I most earnestly beg that you woud make Homes Friends beware of that most cruel Idea that if he is secure or independent for Life he will write no more. Make them beware of too great a fondness for their own Generosity to keep him in a situation that woud make them feel it every moment. None of these cautions may be needed & that will be a happy case; but if you are Satisfied of the truth of what I say I wish you woud not partys [. . . . .] concerned depart from it for [an inst]ant. I know that tho Home is the bold[est] in the World in interposing for Others he is shy for himself & may not see in so strong a light as he shoud do & I wish you woud add your Authority to what I said to him about it. Whilst he continues in his present Situation or any like it I shall always think of him with pain, as a man who is misplaced & who meets with injustice, if he shoud otherwise meet with all the marks of kindness that ever was bestowed on Man. I must repeat it again that half your Public measures will not be of this consequence.

Adresses are preparing from every corner & from what I can understand the Militia may be inserted in some places merely to pay Court.

What blessed days these are. I begin My Labours again in a few days. I am with The greatest respect

 
your affectionate 
& most  

Lauriston, July 30th 




Dear Sir

I set out for the Highlands tomorrow morning with the Mr Grevilles. I wished to see you that I might receive my Manuscript & any remarks you have taken the trouble to make. If you have any that can be put in writing without too much trouble I beg that you will deliver them with the Book itself to Mr Russell the Professor of Natural Philosophy, who will call or send to you for it. I have informed him of my intentions & entrusted him with any negotiations that may arise with Booksellers in my Absence.

I am with the greatest Respect 
Dear Sir 

most  

London Febry 4th 1779


Since the Date of the Letter which I had the Honour to write to your Excellency by order of His Majesty's Commissioners inclosing Copies of their Correspondence & proceedings that have passed since Lord Carlisle Mr Eden left New York; Application has been made to Their Excellencies setting forth that Sundry Goods Particularly Flax seed Staves, & Mahogany, ready for exportation to Great Britain have been long detained at New Port in the Province of Rhode Island And it has appeared to them expedient with the Approbation of His Majestys Principal  Secretary of State for the Colonies, that the inclosed Proclamation shoud be Issued, for the relief of Merchants & Others interested in that Place granting them a Freedom of Export to the same Extent & Under Precautions Similar to those that were Employed in the Proclamation of the 26th Septr published at New York. That is instead of the Port Officers Established at New York, empowering the Commander of His Majesty's Treaty at New Port Rhode Island to grant the Permission therein Set forth.

The Extension of this Priviledge to Rhode Island did not take place at the same time it was Granted to New York because it did not then Appear that Goods for exportation had been Collected at the first of those Places.

Your Excellency will farther please to Observe, that your Name is by Order of The Other Commissioners inserted in the Title of this Instrument & a place left for your Excellency's Signature that in case you shall approve of it & nothing appear to render improper the Publication & Effect of this Proclamation, it may have the Sanction of your Authority & being Communicated to the Commanding  Officer at Rhode Island it may be published in the News Papers of that Place & of New York or Otherwise As your Excellency many shall be pleased to order.

I have the Honour to be with the Greatest Respect Sir your Excellencys most obedient & most 



To His Excellency Sir Henry Clinton 
Commander in Chief of 
His Majestys Forces in 
North America &c &c &c
London April 1st 1779


Originals of the within Proclamations having been sent to His Majestys Principal Secretary of State for His Majestys Approbation and if thought Expedient to be Committed to the Discretion of Sir James Wright Bar't now about to return to his Government of Georgia, it is thought at the same time proper to transmitt to you these Duplicates executed Signed & Sealed in the same manner & form with the Original Proclamations for Restoring the Provinces of Georgia & South Carolina to the Peace of The King, that in case  the Originals shall by any Accident Miscarry And that you find it expedient for the Service of His Majesty to declare either both of the Provinces of Georgia and South Carolina at the Peace of the King, one or both the Within Proclamations may be produced & published for this Purpose.

I have the Honour to be with the greatest Respect Sir 







His Excellency Sir Henry Clinton 
Commander in Chief of His 
Majestys Forces in 
North America

The State of my health having, for some time past, made it desireable for me to have a retreat from my labours in the College, I now resign my office of Professor of Moral Philosophy into the hands of your Lordship & the Town Council, presenting at the same time my sincere thanks for the honour, which has been done me and the protection I have always received.

I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect 
My Lord 
your Lordships 
most obliged & most 
obedient  












To James Hunter Blair Esqr 
Lord Provost of Edinburgh
London March 31, 1779


I am commanded by His Majestys Commissioners appointed in Pursuance of An Act of Parliament passed in the eighteenth year of His Majestys Reign, to treat consult & Agree upon the means of quieting the Dissorders now Subsisting in North America, to inform you, that upon the Appointment of Lieut. Coll. Archibald Campbell to Command a Body of His Majestys Forces in the Province of Georgia it was thought expedient at the same time to furnish him with a Commission of Civil Governour & Commander in Chief within the said Province, to be produced & carried into execution by him if he should find a reasonable prospect of being able to restore & preserve the Civil Government of Georgia under the Authority of the King. But that if the Situation of affairs should prevent his Acting under this Appointment he should preserve it carefully within his own Custody till he could Deliver it to His Majestys Principal Secretary of State to be Cancelled.

That this Provisional Appointment of Lieut. Coll. Archibald Campbell may not in any Way obstruct your Return to the Government of Georgia to which you were formerly Appointed by  his Majesty the Commissioners have thought Proper by the Inclosed Commission to you to revoke & Annul that which they granted at New York to Lieut. Coll. Campbell. But, if as they have reason to expect you should not have occasion to Act under their Appointment it is their Intention & desire that the Instrument herewith sent appointing you Governour & Commander in Chief in the Province of Georgia should be Suppressed & Cancelled.

I have the honour to be with great Respect, Sir, your most Obedient & most 



To Sir James Wright Baronet &c &c &c
[Edinburgh 1772] 



I thought to have written a long letter but shoud have done it before. I went out in the morning since which time I have by accidents been detained abroad. I coud not in my last tell you how much I approved of the Pamphlets inclosed. Tell F. that I had some knowledge of his Subject & I am highly delighted with his Picture. I am affraid we shoud not agree so well about American affairs. I think Greenvilles Stamp Act a very unlucky affair for this Countrey. It has brought on a disspute in which this Mother Countrey Countrey as it is very properly called has made a very shabby figure, And I am affraid cannot mend the matter. We are at once Tradesmen & Soldiers to America. When we bully them as Soldiers they threaten not to employ us as Tradesmen. And the Question has now become complicated in the highest degree. I cannot fully Satisfy myself about it: but I wish it had never  been Stated, or that Some way coud now be devised of leaving us just where we were in Possession of of all Monopolys with America. I mean the monopoly of Arms of Government and of Trade & leaving them the Right of Taxing themselves, as the exigency of their Affairs & the Influence of Government here coud Obtain. I dont wish to see this Countrey in Possession of many Provinces a Prey to Rapacity And perhaps an Engine to be turned against this Countrey itself. If this Countrey is to Subsist long enough till Engines destroy it from Abroad. I have often wished to be on the Spot that I might shoot at the flying follys of the times: but I am Sensible of the disadvantage of being at a distance & not hearing of a Subject untill it is too late. I find that People of Letters think there is a dignity in keeping aloof from present affairs & writing only for Posterity. I am of a Contrary opinion. I believe what is done for today has more Effect than books  that look big on the Shelve [. . . . . .] coud help to bring the [. . . . . .] to some innocent termina[tion] [. . . .]

 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Speak like a Stranger and lose the Effect. I am not at hand to repell first attacks or replys. In short I cannot write a Pamphlet but I will continue to write you what occurs to me. Adapt yourself to the meridian of the Place. If I had written the best that the occasion requires I shoud be averse to be mentioned to Grafton  as a writer. I coud come under no Obligations which I am affraid the Step your Friendship Suggests woud seem to Promise.

I promised in my last to recollect if any thing coud be done: but I have Succeeded very Ill in my Recollection: If I am turned out from being what I am I see nothing I am fit for but to be either King or Prime Minister either of which I woud Undertake without any Hesitation even bad as the times are. I am glad I have not Room to Sign this letter.




I have just received your letter by Coll. Campbell who being in haste has sent it with a very obliging Mess[age] & defers the pleasure of seeing him till his returne to this place about Christenmas. I have without a moments delay taken this paper & shall not think of any thing else till I have sent off a letter to you. Yours have all come safe at least do not refer to any more than I have received. I coud muster up some excuses for not writing: but mus[t] confess on recollection that the Principal cause has bee[n] a senseless habit of Procrastination. I sometimes waite[d] for one event & then for another. Some months of the long Silence passed even in expectation of seeing you in India & I had the womanish humour of wishing to surprise you: but of this you have heard as I guess from a letter of yours to Doctor Robertson and I need not to tell you how that matter went off, the wonder is that it ever  encreased a little since you heard of me.

Bell has got a little Brother about three year old & a Sister about eight months. The little boy has a good deal of Stuff in him, both attention and Vehemence. I begin to recommend him in Time & shall bequeath him your Friendship as the best part of his Inheritance.

His name is Adam & I shall call him McPherson too if you please. Mrs Ferguson & Bell Join in their be[st] Respects & acknowledgements for your new Present which was not landed when Coll. Campbell [le]ft London but they hope will come Safe. Mary too [w]ill have a share of it and thus you have a Catalogue of all my children. My demerits as a Correspondent [ha]s diminished the frequency of my Intercourse even [w]ith Charles Greville. His Father is dead within a few months. He will be in Parliament for the first time this winter. I have heard nothing directly from himself.

 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

 I did not expect the Instrument was to have Magnanimity enough to behave properly to you. The Lustre he wished to assume required keeping you out of Sight. But I hope that the other party concerned has had sense enough to see and acknowledge the truth. The Company has received some blows within this Twelve month & is still upon the Anvil to be hammered into nobody knows what. But I hope and believe, that no ha[rm] will happen. I shall be sorry if any thing be done [to] hinder The Companys Servants from acquiring fortunes in an Innocent way Abroad for after all that has been said this I believe to be the likelyest way of bringing wealth from India to Europe. The State I hope will leave the Company in all matters to Govern itself, & it will be wise in any Minister to leave them accountable for what happens there but it will be allowable likewise to squeeze them to the last farthing they can pay in consistence with that Interest they ought to have as trade to manage their aff[airs]  no opportunitys of writing to me, tho I do not deserve letters yet I enjoy them Sensibly & am anxious about the wellfare of my Friends tho I think my own shoud be taken for granted when they dont hear from. Mr s Ferguson joins me in most affectionate Respects & I in name of my little Children earnestly pray for your wellfare.

And Am  & 
most  

London March 31st 






I have just Received your Letter which came under Cover to Lord Warwick & deserve that you shoud hesitate about writing to me but shoud have been very unhappy if your Doubts had ended unfavourably. It is most certain that the habit of Procrastination & other reasons or rather faults have hindered my writing to you till about the beginning of Last winter when I determined without delay to acknowledge your Favour by Coll. Campbell. What I then wrote will I hope come to your hands sometime before this And Satisfy you that I am at least willing to acknowledge the Indefatigable  Affection with which you are pleased to honour me, I feel it and am vain of it beyond what I can express to you. But you will perhaps be Surprised to find me here & I must Satisfy you on this Point first. You must know then that I am as little as ever Connected with Ministers & find no reason to entertain the Views which you present to me. You have received Some Alterations in the Government of India at the head of which some time or Other I hope to hear of you. My views & Object here is different. I am on my Way to Join Lord Chesterfield now a young Man about 19 years of Age on Travels abroad. His Guardians secure me in an equivalent for my Place at Edinburgh & I am again come into the world  to Scramble. I am likely to be Separated for two or three years  from My Family, but Submit to this Circumstance in hopes of Seeing them again more at freedom to Disspose of myself. I Received your Letter from the hands of Charles Greville who is now elected Member of Parliament but has been prevented by an Illness of many weeks duration from taking his Seat.

He was made a Lord of Trade in the Room of his Brother upon his Election And I have every reason to believe will turn out a Man of Bussiness & in every Respect worthy of the Affectionate Regard you express for him. The Elder Brother is now Earl of Warwick as you will probably have heard. Robert is in Quarters with his Regiment. When any of this family are  Ministers I have some chance of being a Favourite as you propose, & that you and I may have much to Say in Europe as well as in Asia. Charles Grevilles Illness was what I believe the Physicians call an Abscess near the Anus and a fever the last is removed & the first in a fair way of being entirely healed. I set out for Paris in my way to Geneva tomorrow & in my hurry write this hasty letter rather than delay my thanks for your Affectionate concern in my Wellfare. And here you will perceive probably from the change of Ink that I have been interrupted & write at a place different from that in which I began my letter. You have Judged well in not deciding against me when you hesitated in writing for I consider your Friendship as the happiest  Circumstance of my Life. Fortune has taken a pleasure to cross me in many other things but in that she has been truly kind. I told you of my children in my Last. The Boy is destined to your Protection in case his Father should fail him which is very likely. I intend this letter shoud go by Joseph Burnet the youngest of My Wifes Brothers he has at present some hopes of getting A passage on Board a ship Captain Thomson bound for Madrass. He has been bred in a counting house at London but turned out of place by the failure of his Master. He has a brother Captain of Artillery on the Bengal Establishment & has been this year or two endeavouring to meke his way to India with no better Prospect  than that of hanging upon his brother till something could be done for him [xxx]. When there were thoughts of my going to India he was to have gone with me. The Ruin of Sr George Colebrooks Interest cut off all the hopes he had in me. A License to go abroad is all that we now hope for & tho he goes by a Madrass ship he is really bound for Bengal unless you can find some employment for him. And I shall say no more to recommend him to your friendship. If he shoud not himself find a Passage to India I have directed him not to fail in forwarding this letter which I scarcely find time in this Town of hurry & interruption to write. How do you find time in the midst of  Camps Conquests & Intricate detail of Bussiness to write to all your Friends. What do you think I feel on the Continual Proofs I have of your your Friendship. The Bill to Lord Warwick is not yet come to hand tho he too has received a letter. I leave the Management of it to John Home who remains here after I am gone. You cant imagine how fortunately that £100 had arrived to buy me French Cloaths while the Plan of your Appartment at Bankhead is making out. That place to be sure is my favourite & I now Submit to make the Tour of Europe that I may be at Liberty hereafter to Live there the year Round. & yet I hope that you & I may Meet on better Ground. I need not tell you any thing of your Private Friends here for they will probably write you. Fingal has got a Machine carrying ten or twelve Volumes in Folio which he turns round & extracts from them a History of England from the Restoration to the year 1720. The Adams have had a Lottery in which they heve sold but half the Tickets but having got most of the great Prizes are delivered from a dreadful Situation. Make my best Respects to Mahomed Aly or if he will not Accept of them to Flyder Aly. I forgot to tell you that your Friend Deprè is in perfect Esteem & good reception here nothing but extreme hurry coud have hindered my waiting on him as a relation of yours, & the same hurry must be my excuse for sending you such a Scrawl as this.

But I hope you will not hesitate to believe that you are the man in the world of whose merit I have the clearest conviction.


London SE. Blackheath 
 Aprile 9th 1775



My Dear Sr

I wrote you from this place about this time last year by My Wifes Brother Joseph Burnett for whom I coud do no more than procure a Passage to India where he wished to Join his Brother Captn. James Burnett of the Artillery who is since dead. A Missfortune which happened a few Months before Josephs Arrival & probably exposes him to much disstress. I have procured & sent him some recommendations in Bengale & I know that if you have any means of aiding us there you will not neglect it. I have passed last year mostly in France & Swisserland & Received your last letter at Geneva.

Lord Chesterfields Affairs have required his presence for a little in england & we have been out three months at London & are at last come to Blackheath for the remainder of our Stay in this Countrey. We have [xxx] about eighteen Months to spend abroad, At the Expiration of which I expect to returne to my usual Affairs at Edinburgh. I have keept my Professorship one year by a Deputy & mak[e] application to have the same Indulgence prolonged for another. My Wife & Children of who[m] I have four keep house with their Uncle Doctor Black. So much for my own Affairs, And  yet there is still something more. Charles Greville has payd me Since I have been here One hundred Pounds on your Account. I do not know if your Old Acquaintance the farm of Bankhead deserves to have so much Additional expence laid out upon it but if I live to see or to Inhabit that undutiful place I shall make it carry some mark of your Friendship which is a better fruit than it Commonly bears. Lord Warwick and his Brothers are in the Midwifes Phrase doing as well as coud be expected. Charles is in the board of Trade & if he were not carryed away by Virtü woud make a Statesman & I hope in spite of Virtü will do So. He applys to Bussiness & has been Speaking in the house of Commons. I never cease to Goad him on that Road. Robert has at least got the Rank of Captain in his Majestys Guards. He has Penetration attended with [xxx] Very pleasant humour & has in reality better Conduct than either of his Brothers. Your Friend James McPherson has Published his History in two Vols. 4to & his State Papers in [t]wo Vols more. I am told he has Sold greatly and [g]iven great Offence to Familys & State Partys. You know how little he is dissposed to Palliate [t]he vices or follys of Mankind & how little likely [to] please those who consider their own Party  or their own Ancestors as Heroes. I am apt enough to believe that he has carryed the humour of depreciating too far & from this way of expression you will learn that I have not yet Read enough to form a decisive Judgement. The Dissipation of London is inconsistent with any reading but news Papers. I have brought the Book hither last night & will be through it soon. As far as I have seen; The Characters he draws and other Prominent Passages are very Masterly. The General Course of the Narration Inferior.

John Home has been at London some weeks has in his hands some Dramatic Works for the Stage but not for this Winter. The Adams as you will have heard have by Means of their Lottery & great Good Fortune escaped from a Storm & are again in Prosperity. The Nephew a young man in whom I have always perceived much goo[d] Sense & excellent disspositions; having come into Parliament at a great expence, which was much Censured; has shown himself well qualif[ied] for that Station & has well Justified the Conduct of his Friends in bringing him Forward. Adam Smith tells me he is just finishing his long expected work on National Resources and the Policy of Trade. And now My Dear Sr for the Pen of Angels if I had it to tell you of the Critical State of this Nation, And  the wonderfull events that are in Suspence. The Americans have destroyed much of your Company Tea. Government here got Angry & made Acts to Chastise them. They have accumulated their Insolence And Government their Acts. They are Arming a[nd] we are Arming, each I believe hopes to bully the Other but Bullys have sometimes drawn themselves into a Serious quarrel and so may wem The consequences look so tremendous to m[e]. And are so slightly Treated by the Retainers of Government here that I am apt to think myself in a Misstake about them altho I wait at least with a very high degree of Curiosity [f]or the Ishue. I am affraid that we never sha[ll] have genius enough to turn the great resources [w]hich are presented to us in The East or the [W]est to Account. I have heard of your intention [to] returne to Europe & likewise of the Probability that Lord Pigots appointment & Arrival at [M]adrass will detain you in India. In that I wish [y]ou to do what is best but cannot help re[co]mmending to you to Collect the fullest detail [y]ou can of every circumstance relating to the [s]tate & operation of Policy in India & so equipped [to] be ready to present yourself here by the time India Affairs come again under the Review of Gov[ernm]ent, which cannot, by the term of the Charter, be [xxx] far off. This Letter goes by My  Friend Captain Thomson a young Man of great worth to whom I earnestly wish your Friendship. I have likewise a Friend and Namesake at Bengale whose Adventures, by the loss of a worthy Brother murdered at the Cape of Good Hope, have been more Tragic than those of my Brother in Law Jos. Burnett. If you can [xxx xxx] by your Correspondence there make him feel any Effects of your Friendship to me I shall be greatly Obliged if any thing can Add to the sense of Honour and of pleasure which your Affection gives me. That you may the better apprehend what I mean by the detail I have mentioned on the last page. Select some Town & its Disstrict. Procure if possible an account of its extent & numbers of People. The different class's of that People the occupations the resources the way of Life of each. How they are related & their mutual dependencys. What Contributions Government or Subordinate Masters draw from the Labourer of any Denomination & how it is drawn &c. But I beg Pardon for saying so much of an Object which you must know so much better than I do. The man who can bring light from India into this Countrey  And who has address to make his light be followed may in a few years hence make himself of great Consequence. And here I shall conclude my Letter. Be so Good as direct for me to the Care of Mr Robert Mayne Banker in Jermyn Street London. I am

 
 & most 
 





I had the pleasure of your letter from Dover & was extremely happy to hear you were arrived on British Ground. The Other Intimations in your letter Tho very general gave me likewise very great pleasure. I have waited with some impatience for your Second letter from London in which I hoped to find some time mentioned for your Appearance in This Countrey And this I still hope will be in your Power in this remiss time of Bussiness. You do not say whether you are come home for good & all as John Bull says, or only for Some Special bussiness. 

Nor do I know which to wish. Here is certainly much bussiness to be done relating to the Countrey you have left & I am very glad there is such a person as yourself in the Way to be employed in it. I hope we shall meet before the whole of it is adjusted & I will stretch all my Politics to show how much I wish you Success. We are so disspersed at Present that I have not seen either Jno Home, Carlyle, Dr Robertson or Doctr Blair Since I received your letter. Jno Home will certainly pass the greatest part of Winter in London but is here till near Christenmas unless some thing particular require his going away sooner. Your friend Mr McKenzie has been settled some time at London as an Agent. I saw him upon a Visit here a little before I received your letter but not Since. I sent your obliging  intelligence to Lieut. Bruces Father who expresses the warmest Gratitude and Affection for you. I am extremely happy to find that you come home on the best terms with Coll. Stuart. I saw a Letter from His Brother Andrew lately to his purpose. How Politics may steer I know not but this last I will venture to say among the Ablest & fairest men you can have Connection with in this Countrey.

I write merely to put you in mind of me & that I may hear more of you. My Wife & my five Children join in Respects. I am

 
 
 








Since writeing the Above I have received your last letter & am extremely happy to find you still think of comeing here. If Mr Charles Greville will be of the Party that will complete the pleasure.
Edr Octr 27th 1777



Your incloseing me a cover in your last letter was a Sufficient hint that I ought to write to you and you perhaps have not yet found out that it was directed to me instead of yourself & I shall now turn it back to London to see what it will bring from thence.

I did not want disposition to write even without this hint & had sent a letter inclosed to Governour Johnstone but from your not acknowledging it suspect the Governour has been out of Town & either not received it or not known how to forward it. Moreover Dr Robertson told me about ten days ago that your Brother by a letter of his own from Skye was comeing here in about a fortnight to meet you and I have long flattered myself with the hopes of seeing you, Circumstances which woud have damped  a much greater Ardour than mine is in writing letters & prompted by a much greater collection of materials than this place & my Situation Affords. I have however now lost all hopes of seeing you for the Season & procrastinate no longer. Andrew Stuart told me you had taken a house in Parliament Street but as he coud be no possitive and particular enough I send this under cover to that Never do well James McPherson.

I suppose you are deeply & I hope Successfully engaged in India Bussiness. Not merely who shall be condemned or acquitted in late Affairs but what is to become of the Interests of this Countrey in India for Centurys to come. It is full time at least that this Subject were, in the news paper Stile, on the Tapis And there is no time fitter than when you are at London to aid with  your Lights that reach not only to India but to Other Similar Scenes in the history of human affairs. My notion is that instead of making up the Suit here The Taylors shoud be sent to take the Gentlemans measure on the Spot endeavour to fit him & report on their return for the approbation or dissapprobation of those it may concern here. But I will not puzzle my brain with projects. Andrew Stuart is gone from here very earnest in his Brothers Cause & very Sensible of your Friendship which I shall be very glad what both of you Cultivate. I have been much with John Home lately & we were in hopes of being Surprised by you. He will probably be soon in London. Your Friends Robertson & Blair made a long Journey into England and I a short one into Perthshire. My wife has been in mighty disstress in the Rheumatism for many Months past. But my Children in Number five Comeing Six in the most perfect health and Vegetation. You are  probably as Anxious as we are to have news from America and I hope by this time more Successfully. We are certainly under a necessi[ty] at least for our own Credit, of giving that people if we can join them a sound drubbing: but I protest that if we had news to morrow that Howe had beat Washington and Burgoyne Arnold the use I woud make of it woud be to leave America with contempt. For it looks as if no Calamity woud force them to Submission & if it did their Submission is not worth haveing. Their whole resource for any Visi[ble] time to Come will not pay the Army that ke[eps] them in Submission. So I am partial enough to Great Britain to wish them in the bottom of the Sea. My Affectionate Respects to the Grevilles who I hope will soon be in London. And believe me to be

Most Affectionately 
yours 

Edinr Decr 23, 1777



I this moment have the pleasure of your letter & the only consolation I coud have in the present state of public news, to learn that our future Efforts are to be made with British Subjects not with forreigners. In this way if we neither acquire any thing abroad nor even keep what we have we shall end the War at least with Swords in our hands & be in Condition to defend ourselves.

My first Bussiness will be to see Banachar which I hope I shall before this letter is sent off. I will afterwards deliver your Message at Dalkieth. As to the  letter you left for my perusal perhaps the Silence you enjoin me woud be the best Course if it were practicable. In the first place the Thing Speaks for itself & I am very Ostentatious of it. Mr Wordie too I have made free with. You were not gone 24 hours from hence when I had a Call for part of what that hopefull place you was to see has cost me. I chose to owe you rather than the other person & even ventured to put your Building scheme to some risk at least of Delay. I Deliverd your Canes & Mrs Ferguson delivered your Muslins. I believe really that we are all vain of these marks of your Regard.

The Principal who is a great Speech Maker chose to expatiate on My part of the matter & without knowing the  whole ground said what is true that if my own Son had returned to me in Prosperity I coud not be made to feel it more Sensibly. And I who am not a Speech maker am nevertheless very glad that he has furnished me with this. My Blessing to the Grevilles. I hope to see you & them before Summer begins in the mean time get some franks from them directed to yourself & inclose them to me. I shall write and send packets with the less Scruple that they are not to be paid for. I have had long Conferences with Banchar Since the Above was written & been so much occupied with him that I do not know what is doing by any body else. I do not know what stir there is in the Nation in General or if any body be likely to move in this Countrey. I shall deliver your Message half joke half Earnest  to the Duke of Buccleugh & offer to make him Chief of the Mc Phersons the best feathe[r] if it were fixed in his Cap that is to be seen there. O thou General Howe who will put us again in the Pasture which we had the beginning of last Campaign & which you gave up. You Blockhead or Wor[se]. But I am so tired writing that I can scold no more And so Am

most affectionately yours 



I am to Answer your letter of the 9th and have much to Say. This is not the Season of building, & Bankhead Hall must remain in its present State till that season returns as must the settlement of my Accounts with you to a time when I can speak my mind with more Power & Freedom. I often feast even in the midst of circumstances that are dissagreeable to me or the Recollection of three Friends that have fallen to my Lot & who have more than Compensated all that ever has been adverse in My fate by the mere Sense of having had and having them. You will guess I am perswaded that I mean David & John Home & yourself. You will have some Sauntering Evenings or Mornings at Kensington Gore. I pray you collect all you can get Relating to the Emperor Julian & see whether he does not appear  to you as great a Man as [xxx] ever Nature Produced. Christian writers either from Prejudice or to avoid offence Speak of him with horror but it is Curious to See the touches of innexpressible praise that escape them . There is a short French life of him by an Abbé La Bleterie who will verify this description and point out the other Sources of information Concerning him. But it is probable that you will not have much time for matters of so old a Date.

I am much disspirited about every public Prospect. I hope it is not Supposed that India Affairs will wait till we have Settled America Or that the Councils of State in these times have nothing to think of but the Management of Parliament. I imagine that no less than three or at least two Powerful bodys will be wanted to retrieve the Affairs of Government in America. One to make War on the Coast of New England Another from Canada on the Back settlements & a third perhaps to mantain this Ground we have chosen to take in Pensilvania if Peradventure we  have it in the beginning of next Summer. And the Object of the Campaign shoud be to have the exclusive possession of Hudsons River with the Lakes. Places of Arms at New York and Albany & an open Route for the War from Canada on the North as well as from the Coast of the South. In our Way to this Object the Rebels may be induced to prefer accommodation to the Continuance of Such A War. But Lord have mercy on those who expect any Good in this bussiness without Sufficient Instruments of Terror in one hand & of Moderation and justice in the Other. And so much for the opinion of us here who Govern the world at our own fire Sides. I was Elated for a while with the Spirit which the people show for new Levys upon this occasion: but alass without Straining every Other Nerves & exerting high measures of Ability & Conduct how unequal to the Difficulties.

Your Caledonian Duke did not want desire to bear his Part but in the Quality of a Politician of this little Corner was Anticipated by the opposite Party & thought he coud not move without driving their Wheels. Such however I  Suspect was the motive of his Council seldom better advised. For his Countenancing a thing for the Public even when the Other Party by Accidents had the lead woud have been so much the Stronger Proof of his Affection. However he is capable of the best things & is a Noble and agreeable Connection. I wish that Ministry woud consider him apart from his Supposed connections here, who may be good Servants to him or to any body else but bad Masters. I have a Comm[ission] for my Nephew in the new Lewys in my Power but in this General exertion of Influence Power & Money on all hands have despaired that so poor a Man as my Brother coud make out the Quota. If in the Removes & Vacancys occasioned in the old Regiments by these Lewys an Ensigncy coud be got by way of favour I shoud be greatly Obliged by it.

I am happy C. Greville is likely to Succeed for his Friend Lord Seaforth you woud see that Benchar did not forget him in the State of the Highlands.

I had just heard before I received your letter with much concern how near we were losing our Worthy Friend G. Johnstone.

Send the Inclosed to J. Home & believe me to be yours

A F:


 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

. . . most sincere Attachment both to Master and Man in the Present Gov't And yet I earnestly wish that they woud hoist a Certain Sail, which without perhaps any better Steering than the present may land us somewhere. The Sail I mean woud be to America the very Signal which I think we shoud make to them of an Intention not to Invade their Libertys but of a Resolution to Support the Authority of the State by their destruction and at any hazard of our own. Nothing can be done,  for which a Minister, will not be exposed to be tore to pieces. We need bold men who will do the best they can in contempt of that Danger.

My Idea of a General Parliament for America may appear odd. What Unite them; shoud they not rather be keept Separate that we may govern by dividing. I have much to say on that Subject being much impressed with a notion that one great state is much more easily Governed than many Small ones.  As to Jo Homes Play, whether it was oweing to his own Neglect or to the Caprice of the Public let it go. We who know him must not mind such trifles as that. On looking back to this letter I find it so Abrupt & Enigmatical that I am tempted to keep it till I have time to translate it but perhaps it may Amuse you more as it is. Of all things let us not be lulled by any fancyed Appearances of peace not to double & redouble our Armament on that Very account. And so wishing you much Success with Tua & him success in all his Affairs

I am &
From on board The Trident Delaware River June 19th 1778

My Dear Friend

Leaving you to Suppose that we have had a Good passage and Every thing of that Sort agreeable I write now merely to tell you That as soon as Mr. Stracheys departure for Europe was known the Commissioners resolved to appoint me as their Secretary & have honoured me with a Commission of which the Inclosed is a Copy. No pecuniary appointments are Specifyed that Point must be fixed & the whole confirmed by the King. I need not mention how much I rely on Your Good offices  to help me in both these points, my Views are not high on the first, or rather I wish that something rather more Permanent than great were done. I write to The Solicitor General to Mr Robinson & to Mr Pulteney on the Subject with a Copy of my appointment to each. So you will take what help you can from those Gentlemen or any Other person you think Proper. I set out from Home Philadelphia with a Flag and a Trumpet for Washingtons Camp in my way to the Congress: but was met at one of the out Posts of their Army with a Very Civil Letter intimating that he from General Washington coud not grant a Passport without previous instructions from Congress. The Dispatches went but there is yet no return & we expect none till  after we are settled at New York. Proposals are made which the Congress will scarcely be being able to reject without losing The Support of their Constituents. And yet Gfalou and Dough so as I am at this writing very much affraid. I wish to God I had been at the Ear of Tua & listened to when certain orders were given. The reasons may have been good & the Event may dissappoint our fears in all which we shall rejoice. Pray Make up my Wifes letters in packets bundles & send them by The Packet to New York or Otherwise. Say nothing of My Conjectures when they happen to be dissagreeable. Write me what you may expose to be miscarryed inspected or lost. I am most Affectionately

Your Adam Ferguson

John McPherson Esqr
New York, August 20th 1778

My Dear Friend

I wrote you a short line as this is likely to be by the last Packet that was dispatched from hence. In the way of Bussiness I had only to put you in mind of what I hope you have learnt from My former letters That I have been appointed by The Commissioners here their Public Secretary. I cannot find out what The Appointments of My predecessor were & if I could find it out must look for The Kings Approbation before I can Avail myself of this Appointment. I have Ventured however  by the last & present Packet to write to Jeremy Sneyd at The Secretary of States Office in Cleveland Rowe who is Agent for the Commissioners to Undertake my Bussiness likewise in case My Nomination is confirmed by The King. I beg of you to try what can be done for me in the way of present Emolument & future Provision or half pay &c all which I must leave you to consider of on the Spot. I have written to Mr Sneyd that if he have any Funds of mine and my Bill on Doctor Black at Edinburgh for £100 is presented to him. He will be pleased to pay it I beg you will tell him the Same thing & Avail yourself of the Credentials I have given you in my letter to him to do in My Affairs as you think proper.  News nor Politics have I none or at least I do not chuse to break bulk till we meet nor trust Private thoughts to The Seas troubled as they are with Ennemys And Prying persons of so many descriptions.

If there shoud be any Good news however before this go Away you shall have it. I am

My Dear Friend 
most Affectionately 
yours 








I have been much dissappointed at not hearing from you or by you in the last Packet which Arrived with Miraculous Safety & Expedition.

Not dispatched till Septr 6.

The Rebels in concert with the French attacked Rhode Island but the French Fleet having gone to Sea after Lord Howe met with a Gale of Wind two or three of their ships were dissabled. Appeared again at Rhode Island but after a few hours Stay  put to Sea again Supposed intended for Boston to Refit. Lord Howe is after them & we are in some hopes he may intercept them. The Rebels in the mean time have retired from Rhode Island Re infecta.

I wrote by The last Packet to C:Greville. I began my letter in hopes of great News. If such news shoud come I shall soon have another occasion & will write him again.

yours most Affectionately 
A. 
Ferguson
Hotel in Jermyn Street Tuesday Evening 22 December 1778

My Dear Friend

I did not advert that your letter required an Answer I had just written to Mrs Ferguson full of Anxiety about my not hearing from her for eight months past. I have just opened the Letter again to tell her how glad I am to receive her letter. I can say nothing about a place of Rest for a Day or two I have come like lightning from New York to Jermyn Street & have not had off my Cloaths for three nights. Charles Greville wished you & me to come to him this Evening at 8 O'Clock. Let me know what you propose to do perhaps it woud be Charitable to make an excuse for me & put off the  Party to another Night that I may Sleep however I will do what you please. If you can within an hour look in here, I shall be glad to see you for a Moment although we cannot just devour every Subject that may Arise till we have more Leisure.

I am  
most affectionately yours 





I am arrived here about a week, found my little Flock in perfect good health & mindfull of you & your kind attentions.

I have delivered my very worthy young Friends safe at their Uncles as I hope by this time will have appeared from their own Letters. George fell in a Crying when my Children came about me, I was affraid he was ill, but upon my questioning him, as soon as he could Speak I understood it was the Memory of his Parting with his Father that moved him. I pray you to call next Door & mention the great Satisfaction I have had in their Company. I have likewise seen my Lands which I must confess, notwithstanding all the Mischief they have done me, in  this Bloom of the Season look gay & even pretend to be rich. I have seen but few of Our Friends. I have been with Smith & Black & Hutton. The Principal & Dr Blair called here when I was not at home. I am just now going to look for them & some Others but choose to write this Letter before I go abroad least I should be any way entangled for the Day & hindered as usual from writing at all. What is become of the War & the Politicks I have felt it very grievous to be moving away from the center of Intelligence & increasing The Distance from News by a week or a fortnight: but I hope you will not let me Starve outright, once it begins to drop we shall keep pace with you tho a few Days later: I have been thinking whether in case you are Conquered in the South we may not rebuild Grahams  Dyke or Severus' Wall & so set up for ourselves. If the Ennemy should land any where in this Island & attempt to keep a footing I am without any Joke of opinion that the Clans should be moved in a body against them, And think with as little Joke that the Posse Comitatus may be every where made of great Consequence against them. When you have got a good Post well manned with firm Troops that will keep the Ennemy at Bay what you want next is a great number of if possible a whole Countrey full of People firing & shooting at them from every Hedge & Bush & never Suffering them to move or to forrage or to halt undisturbed nor to be quiet in Front Flank or Rear. And never to hazard any Other Sort of Fighting with them except at a very great Advantage. And such is my Plan for the Invasion War if there should be Such a Bussiness  of which indeed I have no doubt unless it be prevented by our Vigilance & the imposing Aspect of our preparations.

But I pray you to send me News. You are the Person from whom I expect to hear What is. In return I can only tell you what ought to be; two things which I have generally found very different, & so there is some hopes that there may be some Commerce or exchange of Commoditys between us. When I was away from here I used to send my Blessing to those I liked best & not to change my Language at once pray God to Bless you all. Make up for any defect in my acknowledgements to those to whom you know I am Obliged And believe me to be most Affectionately yours






if you were a bad Correspondent that is to say lazy in writing Letters I should not be uneasie at your long Silence, but I have taken it into my head that you are disstressed or at least much occupied with news from India & wish much to hear from you merely to know you are Well. Perhaps you are Affronted that I did not send you immediate accounts of our Invasion here by Paul Jones: but the truth is that living at the Back of the Wall Paul Jones was gone out of the Firith a whole Day before I knew he had been there. We are grown familiar now with the American War The French  War The Spanish War The Combined Fleets And a Fig for their Invasion. I begin really to feel bold & wish I knew what our Land Forces at home now begin to Amount to that I might indulge myself in the thought that our Fleets may next Season be employed offensively whenever it may be proper & the Ennemy find it as Ridiculous to attempt coming in Force here as we should to attempt going to them without some previous footing or Possession in their Countrey. What I have always wished is to see this Countrey safe without a Fleet that is while our Fleet is protecting our Trade & Annoying our Ennemy with a few Hulks to make a Part in the Defences of Portsmouth & Plymouth. The People here are wonderfully Alarmed about Ireland & so I confess I am likewise: but willing to believe that after near a twelve months Warning we have certainly made some Arrangement &  have not left ourselves to be driven by demands into Concessions for which we shall receive no thanks & which in reality will lead to Other Demands with which we Cannot comply & end in a Flame which we Cannot extinguish. The utmost precaution should be taken to prevent a Flame in that Countrey for if it once break out many years will not extinguish it nor relieve this Countrey of the Internal troubles that have already so Effectually served the Purpose of our forreign Ennemys.

When I began to write I had no mind to trouble you with Politics tho I am fool enough Scarcely to think of any thing Else. I wish to make you write to me & took in hand to Solicit a Cause in which I am not much Interested for many reasons, 1st My Connection with the Man is very Slight no more than a recommendation which makes me believe him a very Innocent Person. Next My Opinion that he is in a wrong Scent for what all men desire bettering himself or mending his Condition: but to do Short. A Modest well looking young man brought up to Letters & on  the Point of becoming a Probationer was brou[ght] to me this Morning & gave me to Understand his Ambition was to be Chaplin to some of these New Regiments. That he had Applyed to Ld In Murray & came too late for Coll. Reid. That he heard 5. 000 men were to be raised for the West Indies, that these probably must have Chaplins, that he was willing to raise ten Men if he were appointed Chaplin to all the Rest of the Regiment. And in short I took the Resolution to write to you. If any Friend or acquaintance of yours is getting a Corps, ten men, may be a Conveniency to him & with or without that Circumstance I beg your Assistance in behalf of Mr James Scobie who appears to be a good young Man wonderfully smit with the Desire of seeing the World. Since he was here he has given me to understand that he would be happy even in being Appointed Chaplin to a Man of War. And so I pray you write a short Line.

I am anxious to hear of G:Johnstone but shall not write to him least my Politicks should become too Particular for the Post. All is well here & most affectionately mindfull of you.

A. Ferguson




I am much Obliged to you for the Scribles as you are pleased to call them they are my Sole Information or at least I never think myself sure of any thing untill I have the Hint of it from you. I am not at all Ashamed of being in your Debt, for where nothing is nothing can be furnished. In these times even Old Women & Children can speak of nothing but Politics & I have lost relish for that Subject without having any Other to put in its Place. I most Sincerely Respect & love the Perseverance of our Friend in tugging at this Oar while the Bark appears to be deserted or even misguided by every one else. To leave any principal Station at present to the first occupyer I fear might be ruinous. But in the name of all the wonders in the World how can  he think to go on without being able to command the Cooperation of Other Persons & without making it the Principal Study of his Life, to seize every little Spark of genius or Ability that any where Appears for the execution of Service. How comes the man who with so much Ability & Courage Covered the Attack of Silence to be no longer Employed? Mc Lean & Campbell one made Adjutant the Other made Quarter Master General at the principal Seat of the War in America are still capable of giving a favourable turn to our Affairs: but if we are to employ the first that offers without discernment or choice no Power no resources no perseverance can ever avail us in any thing. But so much for Politics which I had a Mind to foreswear in beginning this Letter but Naturam expellas Furca tamen usque recurret. And since I am in for it, take likewise my hearthy Approbation of the Propositions respecting Ireland. I willingly hope that  they will meet with no Difficulty besides that of the ordinary contentious opposition. For Reason and Justice I think should reconcile all Partys, who wish bona Fide to remove Grievances & obtain some Equitable Measures for the improvement of their Condition & Propertys. The Object I confess for which I pant is a compleat Union with Ireland: this may not be practicable at Present: but I am perswaded that in the last Period of twenty years it might have been Obtained And am willing to hope that in the coming Period ot twenty years more if the conjunctures are watched & improved it may Still be Obtained. And I should consider it as little less than doubling the compacted Strength of these Kingdoms.

As for America, I thought our Cause there was good & might be brought to a favourable Issue so long as we could make it likewise the Cause of a great Body of the People there, to whom, with our Exertions from Europe, we might give the Ascendant over their Ennemys & our own.

But if instead of improving this part  of our Strength, we Suffer our Friends there to moulder away or to be finally tore up and Ruined, not all the money that change Alley can furnish not all the Armaments we can fit out & what we seem to attend to more not all the Speeches we can make in Parliament will give me any Hopes. I troubled you with a young Clergymans Suit to be made a Chaplain without thinking the matter of much Consequence to him & without chargeing myself very deeply with it even if I had thought it more so having matters, if this were a time to urge them, of much more concern. I have a Brother a man of very great worth with a Numerous Family, who had Sold a little Property he had in the Country to a Gentleman in his Neighbourhood, thinking he could do better for his Family with the money than with the Land. The Money lay in the Purchasers hands, who has just now become Insolvent & reduced us to the Prospect of great  Disstress. If it were possible to procure him some of the Inferior Offices in the Custom house Department of this Countrey that of Land waiter or any Other it would be a seasonable relief and lay me under great Obligations. I mention it in perfect confidence that you will be as ready to forgive my mentioning proposing an improper thing as to help me in what is proper with our advice & Assistance. My Brother is the Father of the young Man whom C: Greville & you provided for in the Marines last year. And whether any thing can be done for him or no I could not sleep in quiet till I had communicated My Case to you.

John Home has come a few days ago with Leave of Absence from his Quarters at Aberdeen & has gone to the Countrey for Mrs Home to pass the Time of his Forloff here if the change which I am told is making in  the dissposition of our Forces here does not proceed upon Some Circumstance that may require his Attendance. I have been some time of opinion that if the Army upon Paper now within this Kingdom be properly formed & Commanded we are certainly in Condition to repell any Practicable or likely Invasion from our Ennemys & that our Fleets may act on the offensive wherever the Ennemy are Vulnerable. But I confess that I would not rely on the Levys made or now making for this Purpose so long as there was a Creditable & able bodyed Man within the Kingdom without Arms in his hands. I should not mean to embody the whole People. But I should certainly try to make it the Fashion for every Sober Landholder & householder to have a stand of Arms in his House. This I believe in Reality would make us invincible. If an Ennemys Army come here tho inferiour to our own  the chance of a Battle is doubtfull And I think that we should have a better Tenure than the Chance of one Battle however favourable Arms every where in the hands of the People will expose an Ennemy to be shot at wherever they go. And will enable us to raise Army after Army, if we should even be reduced ad Triarios in defence of our Countrey. And if we were fully in condition to make war to this Extent, I believe it would not do us any harm to be tryed. The Ways of some Men are past finding out. It is impossible for me to conceive why Government should give their Countenance to one part of the Countrey in Arming themselves & not the whole. If Government Suspect that they have Ennemys as well as Friends it is upon this account the more expedient & proper it is to Arm their Friends: for the Consequence of their neglect or equal treatment of Friends & Ennemys will be that their Friends will refrain Arming from Respect And there  Ennemys will be Armed in Resentment & Contempt. I pray you to write me as often as you can for the mere Satisfaction of seeing your hand writing & knowing of your wellfare. We have seen all overtaken here with an Epidemic Distemper and are somewhat Shattered with it. I intended to have written my respects to Mr. E. on the Subject of his Letters; sed ter Patriae cecidere manus & I am now too late.

My Little Flock here, any more than Mrs Ferguson & myself, never forget you. My Friend Johnstones Boys are at Dumfries where I do not hear from them but believe them to be well & there never were more promising Children. I pray you to offer my Respects to their Mother. The Father I hope fera parler de lui & to the Comfort of his Friends & the dismay of his Ennemys. yours &

A. Ferguson


My Dear Friend

I have written you the Inclosed Ostensible Letter as you advised on the Subject of my Brother. If his Case were less urgent I should make you Apologies: for I well Remember the Proverb relating to the Willing &c. I have had a Letter from him within these few Days which Disstresses me much. These are unsettled Times, my little Resources part depending on a Lawsuit which Lord Chesterfield not yet determined & part depending on Circumstances perhaps not less precarious will not enable me to Assist him Effectually or certainly. Among Other Evils of the times perhaps one will be that of making Such requests as these Appear impertinent. 

Fortune seems inclined to favour us, & the Nation is in Condition to make great & I hope successfull Efforts. The Affair of the Dutch Ships will require a Steady hand, nothing to be done but what the Laws of War & our own Defence make necessary: but this is not the moment to make a Single Concession: we had better be at open War with all the World than Suffer ourselves to be betrayed under the Shew of Neutrality or Peace. This Cloud that is gathering in Yorkshire Alarms me more. That County seems to be forming itself into a Republic, with meetings continued by Adjournement, different departments & an Executive Council. It should in Appearance be taken very Lightly by Government: but is in reality or may be a very Serious Matter. Countrey Gentlemen tasting of the Importance they get in Public Assemblies by making Speeches, tasting of Party Applause & receiving the Infection of Party Enthousiasm  rise above all considerations of Reason, of Private Interest or of public Order. Direct Opposition is like a Bellows to blow up the Fire. The Bulk of the Countrey Gentlemen throughout England I hope are on the Side of Government & Monarchy. I think it is probable that all the Counties as well as Burroughs must Speak upon this Occasion. & I am inclined to think that where the Majority is most inclined to Support Government, the Plan should be not to Fly in the Face of Yorkshire: but by a moderate Address to Parliament express their Zeal to Support the State in this Arduous Situation of the Nation recommending at once Oeconomy & the necessary Supplies. But the best way perhaps of Silencing all murmurs & discontents at Home is by vigorous & Successfull Efforts in the War to fill the Gazette &c. I am glad to hear Sr Joshua has done his Part he will eclipse the rest of My Gallery  but so much the better. I have not seen Carlisle but will execute your Commands when I do. J. Home is now a householder in this Town well in point of Health & I think recovered all the Effects of his Accident of last year. All this House joins me in most Affectionate Respects. I am My Dear

 
 






My Brothers Name 
is Alexander Ferguson
Edinr 12th of June 1780

My Dear Friend

I have written by this Post to the Lord Advocate in order to bind myself in obligations for whatever he may do at your request. He has many qualitys fitting him to be a considerable Man, Temper, Perseverance, Resolution. And, what is of most consequence is felt by his friends as a Man who will not desert them nor trifle with his connextion. He has likewise shown a disposition to carry the opinion of Respectable People along with him and as Matters now stand if he does not appear to run to[o] fast may securely outstrip his competitors.

This Town has been long thought of consequence, my opinion is that the way to gain it is not to make direct applications here but to show the  possession of power and consideration at London.

If your Riots are not over my nostrum is suspending the Habeas Corpus act that Idle people And Madmen may be laid up till the Sober. The law is slow and will not make effectual examples. Military execution in the streets would be dreadful and would introduce only the start of order that prevails at Constantinople; the consequence of systematic or repeated riots near the vitals of Government are such that I think the Habeas Corpus should be suspended as often as a Riot is continued or repeated after 24 hours. But this not appearing to wiser heads makes me doubt of the propriety of it.

yours affectly 




John MacPherson
Edinr 24th August 1780



I received a Packet last night on the Cover of which there were a few Words from you.

As to the Bussiness of the Packet, I should write to our Friend: but the Principal Party & Jn H- being absent & their latest Intelligence from the Countrey being unknown to me I remain in Suspence. How matters Stood or Appeared by the Tuesdays Post I believe they wrote. When I hear farther I will write fully.

I saw the Lord Advocate soon after my last to you. He told me there had been a Mistake in the Warrant for a Land Waiter Vice Gifford . That he had returned the Warrant, probably to Mr Robinson through whose hands it  had come to him. That he wrote to Mr Robinson his wishes in filling up the Landwaiters Place were for Mr Ferguson for whom Mr McPherson has asked the Place in his Name: but as they are very much Intent in Plying every Engine to direct the next Elections here, if they would Send down a Blank warrant he would endeavour to make the best Political Use of it or if nothing material could be done in that way he would fill up with the Name of Mr Ferguson to whom he wished and originally intended to give it, The Blank Warrant being out of Rule. They probably deferr the Appointment untill it appear what use may be made of it.

The Lord Advocate is much occupied since the Court of Session broke up & has been in the Country. I have been confined some Days with a Cold that affected  my Eyes: but the Inflammation is much abated & I will endeavour to See him in a day or two. I have perfect Confidence that he means me kindly in this Bussiness & acquiesce very chearfully in the cause of Hesitation. I am well aware of your probable occupations at this Time. The News Papers set your Friends agog by sending you to the Supreme Council in Bengal. Whatever be the Truth I hope it will be what you like: but do not pretend to Judge. Can you procure me a copy of the Code of Indian Law which Mr Hastings had procured to be Compiled & Translated. Johnstone had sent me a Copy by Jn Home but he has lost it & it is not to be bought.

All the Congregation here join me in most affectionate Complts. And I am most

Sincerely yours &c 

Edin., 16th April 1785

,

Since your last to me I have ventured to give some introductory letters to oblige my friends here, and I am sensible that I ought to spare you a trouble which your situation will draw upon you most abundantly; but the bearer of this has too strong a claim upon me to be resisted. He is the son of my brother, one of the honestest men that ever lived. He was born in America, and I have never seen him, but am certain he will not disgrace your protection.

His father and he are refugees from that lost continent, and partake in the distress which a rooted affection to this country has brought upon many. The son, by the unalterable kindness of G. Johnston, and his insuppressable favour in behalf of honest men, has obtained leave to go to India, though without any destination or appointment. I have reason to believe that he inherits part of his father's sense and worthyness, and is qualifyed for business, and hope you will find protection and good offices for him without interfering with pupils of more expectation. His name is Robert Ferguson, and so I present him to you.

We are here nearly in the same state as when you heard of us last. The children all well; your namesake John particularly thriving, though he is not yet apprised of his relation to you. The mother and I frail and useless, with little object but that of keeping ourselves alive till the others can do for themselves. In all this I hope you will not perceive any touches of melancholy, for my spirits play very easily upon a Gentoo diet without being tied down to the formalities of any caste or exposed to the caprice or rapacity of any master, whether Christian or Moor . . . .

I am, ,  and 






I have long since heard of your good Offices to My Nephew Robert Ferguson, & felt my Obligation the more that I had not ventured to Solicit you for favour to him. I supposed you indeed to have trouble enough of that Sort without any addition from me. I hope however you will give me leave to Assure you that your kindness has not been unobserved & to thank you most Sincerely. I have never had an opportunity of knowing the young man personally but have ever had the best accounts of him and trust he will deserve your Protection.

Captn Burnett who is just now  Setting out for London undertakes to forward this line from me. Mrs Ferguson you may believe joins me in thanking you also on his account. She regrets very much the Reports of your Intended return to Europe; but as the Time will depend on yourself or My Lord Cornwallis your Friends in this Country will expect it with pleasure. If I have the honour of being remembered by His Lordship I should beg leave to offer my most humble Respects, My best & most Affectionate wishes have ever attended him in every Bussiness in which he has been engaged.

As to news we have many things new in Europe of which the Gazettes will inform you as they do me. Not only a new Town and a new College of Edinburgh but a new Republick of France and a new States General of Brabant & Flanders. People ventured to tell the Court of France that in abeting the  Revolt of America they were setting a dangerous example to their own people: but even the persons who said so did not distinctly perceive or believe it. The Noblesse of France have had a greater fall than the King. It is resolved that for the future there Shall be no distinction of Persons in that Country, whether they can keep to their resolution is a doubtful question. The experiment is matter of expectation to us for a twelve month[s] or two to come & to you a matter of Curiosity at the Arrival of every Ship from Europe. I think that what they are engaged in will make them better neighbours both in Europe & Asia than they have been heretofore.

I have the honour to be 
 

Servant 



My Dear Friend

you have heard that there is more joy in heaven over one Sinner that repenteth than over ten thousand that never Sinned & so your Letter has gathered charms from your long Silence. Charles Greville forgot to Send me any intelligence & I picked up what I could from other quarters judging of you as I have frequent occasion to feel in myself that one days procrastination produces ten more & so on in decimal proportion. I wish this letter may overtake or meet you at Geneva for altho that is a most Sensible corner of the world there is not much laid out in the way of Courts or Parliaments to captivate strangers. My hopes are that some one will put it in your head to see Mont Blanc & his Glaciers that you may do homage for Bennevis & Cairngorm to that King of Mountains & take his Instructions  how to keep their Snows a little better than they do through Summer. My whole Flock little Johnston and all have been at Leith for Sea bathing about two months whilst I alone have been here en hermitage but they are coming up this very day when matters will be as usual. John Home is gone to Lochaber so that he may not hear of your Melpomené for some weeks. Dr Black shall hear of his heavenly muse very soon. And so shall the Principal & Others who are all well. Mr Pulteney has been here or hereabouts some time on occasion of Elections, he has made a good Batch of Parliament men five in England & one in Scotland. I think he is in better plight quoad animal Life than formerly. We have seen upon your Subject & his mind is as you know. The Hill is still to be fought up with certain persons with whom you will do more by giving them a good opinion of themselves than by giving them reason to think well of you. However [xxx] the matter may come round when you seem careless about it. 

The remaining copies of My History of the Roman Republic are now the Property of John Stockdale Esqr Bookseller in Piccadilly London.

General Clerk & even my Man of Bussiness altho he draws Six Shillings & eight pence for every conference were so sick of Booksellers that they could hold out no longer & so we have sold the remainder of the impression as above for a Slump Sum which I have pocketed. I am bound not to make another Edition for five years the Period Mr Stockdale thinks necessary to sell off &c. It may go faster however in his hands than it did in ours. The French are too bussy translating their Monarchy into a Democracy to mind the translation of Books. The Author of that you Saw is as bussy as the rest being in the National Assembly.

I am well disposed to take the course you mention with Joseph & shall point the few Guns I have in that direction. I have more Satisfaction in little Johnston than I expected when you Saw us. I have never ceased to think of an excursion to Italy: but the charge of George Johnstones Son  forbids it. If ever it take place it must be a Solitary course. My infirmities disqualify me to keep with any Companion & the notion that I was a hinder to Others in doing what they wished would be intolerable.

If France were perfectly  quiet I coud proceed in a Chaise d'une place from Edr to Brundisium or Rhegium without tiring. The many things I am prepared to look at perhaps to correct myself in, would be occupation enough. Your friend Smith is no more. We knew he was dying for some months & tho matters as you know were a little awkward when he was in health; upon that appearance I turned my face that way & went to him without farther consideration & continued my attention to the last. He burnt all his Papers except one on the History of Astronomy which will probably come to the Publick. I wish you may be able to read what I have written. The Paper being given to blotting I have used a sharp pointed pen & little Ink so that I can Scarcely read but your eyes are better & so God Bless you. From your most

affectionate  

Frankfort 25 Septr 1793

My Dear Friend

I wrote you a line from Ostend to give notice of my Safe Arrival on the Continent. I have Since made out so far of my Journey. To this place, where I halt a Day or two: but do not find that I can venture to go in Search of the Marquis Lucchesini & therefore inclose your Letter to him & consign it to the Post with my regret for not being able to do more. Military matters are well here, a Devision of French Prisoners has just past a Second is expected at Night & a third tomorrow amounting in all to about three thousand men taken in Battle lately by the Duke of Brunswick but I cannot learn where. You pelted me with Letters from the Continent to which I was not enabled to make any Answer, I should be sorry to return you the Compliment exactly. My pelting will be very Moderate And your Answers I hope will come, tho I dont at present know where to  direct them nearer than Rome to the Care of Mr Jenkins Banker, And there, in the name of God let them come as many & as soon as Possible that is to say much Sooner than Gleich  & Geswind  which I have generally found to be as slow as possible.

All I have to say for the present is that travelling even here is certainly a very healthy bussiness, for I thrive wonderfully upon it. I have some inducements to go by Munich & to take the Inland Route by Nurenburg &c as I know less of it than I do of the Other & the Road I am told is good. I sometimes torment myself with thinking what is become of the World: but as I have no Commission to govern it, the wisest course is to mind my Route & so shall do in the best humour I can muster. Believe me to be

Yours most Affectionately 

Munich 5 Octr 




My Dear Friend

Here I am at Munich in a most prosperous course of travelling waxing in Strength and Patience. I sent you a line from Frankfort intimating my intention of sending your Letter to the Marquis Lucchesini with my regret for not being able to hunt for Military Quarters in Person. I did so in the best french I could muster.

The Elector of Bavaria said at his Levee yesterday that the King of Prussia had declared his Intention to winter at Berlin & to leave his Army under the Duke of Brunswig. There is I find a hankering inclination to Censure his Majesty on a Supposition that more might have been done in the Campaign but I am of the opinion which I guess is also yours that to hem in the French and give them as few opportunities as possible to take what we call crop to themselves is the very Perfection of Conduct. There is a Report here that The Emperor is about setting out  for Brussels & that even part of his Equipage is in readiness.

I surprised James Stuart by meeting him here & find we shall be much together at Rome &c. It is now about forty years since I have known him to be one of the pleasantest Naive and best hearted Creatures in the World. I am introduced to Mr Walpole here & was a vraie diner D. Ambassadeur, all English at his house yesterday: but I shall make no Stay being very impatient to get within the Precincts of the Old Republick & no less impatient to be at some place where I can hope to hear from you & learn something of what is doing in the World for in this Way of Life we are hoodwinked and know no more than can be seen when the glasses of the Sulky are down. I am

My Dear Friend 

Affectionately 

Venice 19th Octr 1793

My Dear Friend

I write merely to let you know of what is become of me & the sum total is that I am well & have come on as prosperously as a Speculative Master and a dumb Servant could do without any Other Aid. I wrote a line also from Frankfurt or Munich  with an account of what I did with your Letter to Ct Lucchesini. I see from News Papers Since that if I had Stayed but a few days more at Frankfort I should have seen him there: but the Secrets of Kings who can know & I should have thought myself in a Scrape amidst the Scarcity of Horses caused by His Majestys Motions.

In the way I took by Nurenburgh & Munich I avoided that disstress, came prosperously through the Tyroll and at Verona began to reap the Fruits of my Labours. If you remember the Cimbri or Teutones are said to have performed wonders against Catulus the Roman General in that neighbourhood  And tho it be not of much consequence whether that Tale be exaggerated or not yet I was anxious to judge of its Credibility on the Spot & got on Horse back from Verona for that Purpose & reconnoitred the banks of the Adigé for Some little way.

neighbourhood

So far I had Come Post: but there I fell in a Florentine Vecturino who had brought Some Travellers from Florence. I rode his Horses at Verona & agreed with him to drive my [xxx] thing to Padua we agreed so well on the Road that I have I have lodged & boarded myself with him all the way to Rome. He Seems to be a good humoured Careful Creature & I am happy to escape the Blustering Postilions of the Ecclesiastical State. I told him I should be at Florence soon, tho at Present I go by Loretto, And if any Distress befal me my point of Rallyment will be Florence being under the Special Protection of Ct Manfredini so that Antonio Lapini this Veturino & I are already a Sort of Compatriots. I languish for news from England. I call for News Papers every where  but nothing has yet overtaken me more than I knew & in part witnessed in passing through Flanders. I sometimes flatter myself that you will not have waited for Accounts of my Arrival at Rome but will have written under Care of P. Moir or Jenkins the Banker, if you have not, pour l'amour de Dieu delay it no longer. I could not pass this place tho it is much too modern to be any Object to me: I wonder at it: but am not much delighted, Si je n'avais que Soixante & dix Ans as Voltair used to Say I would read its History with great Avidity: but that is for the world to come.

I went to the Opera last night & was truly entertained with the Audience.

I am My Dear Friend yours most Affectionately







My Dear Friend

I know very well the disinclination to write letters when one cannot trust the Post with whatever comes uppermost & have myself the folly to harp on publick affairs of which no part is entrusted to me; so wish I could let them alone; take my share of the profits when they go well & leave the Glory to whom it belongs. Go, as the Scripture says and do thou likewise . I have mentioned your Respects to those you mention & we are all happy in the thoughts of seeing you in Summer: But it is an ugly trick with you of the South to put off your Journeys north till July August or September when our rainy Season is come & little pleasure on the Roads. May & June tho less convenient in Some respects are Certainly preferable & so I think you should have as much of the Summer before you as possible at the outset. Poor Blair has lost his Wife within these few Weeks & I am sorry to say my case is so likely to follow. 

Mrs Ferguson is now so intirely worn out with Continued disstress to which a considerable degree of fever is now added that little hopes remain of her recovery. On seeing her just now my impression is that no one ever recovered whose Countenance & Aspect was so much altered. You will forgive me for troubling you with this particular I have reason enough to know that nothing Concerning me is indifferent to you. Doctor Black is also far gone in a Consumption & neither it is likely will long Survive the Other. But people who live long like me must be Content to be the last. Of my Books I would rather work on Philosophy than Roman History to which I have little heart in the present State of the world altho it is that to which the bookselling trade directs my attention.

In Philosophy I should be doing what I am more likely to continue when I quit this scene of things. But the truth is I do little of any thing & expect no Attention if I were to do more. Here we have been living in Nova Zembla & are yet travelling through Lapland: Many old people have died  but I am yet as well as you saw me. My thoughts are much set at present on retiring to the Country for the remainder of my Life. I have no bussiness and as little pleasure in Towns, And it is wonderful how little occasion I have for the bellows of Neighbourhood to flow up the little fire that is left in me. I cant yet cry and talk admire and blame by myself & so I did in my Sulky through all the Roads of Germany & Italy. When you Come here I shall not have the same liking to Solitude. I think with great pleasure that our friend at Florence has got the innocent people of Tuscany into some shelter from the Storm that threatens.

When you write be so good as mention the Respect & Affection with which he impressed me. My Blessing to the Grevils I hope Charles has forgiven that I claimed a 40 years acquaintance with him at my time of Life the difference of ten or twelve years goes for Nothing. If Robert be a favourite so much the better for the Court, I could Submit to be a King myself at that Rate. I am My Dear Friend  & 



The Event apprehended has taken place. Mrs Ferguson died about an hour after the within was written.





My Dear Friend

Tho' the time is now approaching at which I have for some time past flattered myself with the hopes of seeing you here; I take my chance of overtaking you at Brompton with a few lines.

The Scheme of a Country Life, which you proposed to dispute, still remains with me; And I have been looking out for some place at which to Settle. Among Others I have seen the Castle of Nydpath on the Tweed, belonging to the Duke of Queensbury. It has been lately dismantled or Stript of its furniture & so far destined to become the habitation of Bats & Owls or what is little Better such a Tennant as I am. The Servant who showed the place told me that His Grace has been asked to let it: but declined, which makes my prospect somewhat desperate. I have nevertheless made proposals in Form to the Man of Bussiness here. And beg the favour that if you should see the Duke of Queensbury you will try to incline His Grace not to forbid any transaction from with me. And I undertake to satisfy you that the Scheme I propose is the best for my family as well myself. I am 

 



My Dear Friend

I wrote to you a Post or two ago to request your Interposition with the Duke of Queensberry to be appointed Keeper of His Graces deserted Castle of Nydpath, as The King appoints keepers of that Sort without a Salary: but instead of saying more on that Subject I write now to request that you will renew your Thanks to Mr Mc Kenzie of seaforth for his kindness to my Son Joseph. He paid for his Lieutenancy & now would be glad to pay for a higher step which he mentions as likely to go in Regiment.

If so it will be a favour of Mr Mc Kenzie or whoever reports in the matter allow my Son to come on in his Turn for whatever may be going by purchase or Otherwise. You see that a long Silence is soon broken when any thing is to be got by it. I am My Dear Friend yours

most Affectionately 



My Dear Friend

I have just now the pleasure or your letter & feel greatly Obliged for your immediate movement in my Affairs & to the Duke of Queensberry on your Acc't. His Graces leave to live at Nydpath was the utmost I could wish.

The Castle has not been inhabited but has been kept tight appeared perfectly dry & so far as I Observed not in want of much expensive repairs: but before I take any resolution must have a tradesman to advise me. The taxes will amount to something & what Ground I have must pay rent: but with all this it may be the most Oeconomical Situation for me & this is my Object.

I have nothing to do in this Town & wish to avoid the expence of living in it. So that my continuing to breath may be of some use to my family which it now is not: but of this move when you favour me with your Arguments per Contra. I shall endeavour to have something agreed  upon with the Duke of Queensberrys Man of Bussiness here to be Submitted to his Grace as soon as possible. The He has already told me that The Duke cannot give a Lease beyond his own Life. But with this I should be Satisfied or even his Saying that he will not remove me &c.

The Timber I understand is to be Sold & the Place therefore not likely to Tempt a Succeedeng Lord so that I should have little apprehension of being removed during my Life. As for the Company in Seaforths Regiment I have had letters from Joseph about it. The Price he states of £950 which I have agreed and am ready to Lodge whenever called upon to do so. I do not know whether this price be considered as the difference between the Lieutenancy & Captaincy or how it is; but I am determined to make no Stop in the Matter. I pray you to ply the Duke of Queensberry for instructions to his Agent here to Settle with me as we best can: To say the truth I do not much regret the Prussian Peace &c &c yours most Affectionately


Edr 9th June 1795

My Dear Friend

In Consequence of your good offices and Coll' Mc Kenzies note, I, by this post do the needfull to forward My Son Josephs promotion. As my Credit at London is with Messrs Coutts & Co I have instructed them to pay to the order of F. H. McKenzie of Seaforth Esqr £950 or £1000 as he shall require upon my Sons Appointment to the Command of a Company in the 78 Regiment of foot. My Account from the Regiment mentioned the Lower Sum which occasions the Alternative in my instructions & you may be sure I do not chuse to volunteer even with £50 if it can be avoided but the needful must be done. Your letter refers the Appointment to the 2d Battalion my letters from Joseph refer to the first in which he now is. And tho it would be ridiculous to keep in the Army & yet talk of chusing the place of Service yet this is of some consequence to our feelings.

My Son was in India & returned hastily on account of his health we have a kind of Hydrophobia towards India: but in my Instructions to the Banker  I have mentioned the 78 Regiment without disstinction of Battalions. I know you will forgive my Sending this notice to you to be Communicated to Mr Mc Kenzie of Seaforth. And as Coll' Mc Kenzie required the money to be lodged with any Banker in London I trust that the ordinary place of my dealings will be found proper enough for the occasion. The Duke of Queensberrys being out of Town may account for his Silence to his Man of Bussiness here about my future Castle & Other matters: but his orders will come when Convenient to His Grace. And I hope you will appear in this Place also when Convenient to you.

I am in conjunction with all your Friend[s] whom I see here

 humble 
Servant 

Nidpath Castle 3d Septr 
 1795



Dr Ferguson

My Dear Friend

There is a kind of good luck in being Otherwise occupied till we can meet without interruption or Care. If you have Bussiness at Edr your  has had bussiness at Edr and here for Some weeks past that would overwhelm an Upholsterer a Bookseller & a Scavenger. No matter when it began it is continued & far from being ended.

The dinners you talk of &c &c may give time at least for so much order as to make this Castle habitable. The Woods The Hills The River &c are Elysian And the Atmosphere all composed of Vital Air. So that your journey hitherto has agreed with you you may here expect the Completion of all its Effects.

I write merely to prevent your making such engagements at Edinburgh as will detain you there longer than necessity requires. Beware of Edr it is a cramming Place & come here in time to digest and Evaporate all its Mischief. ly


Nydpath Castle 4th Septr 




My Dear Friend

if your bussiness be any way relaxed I pray you to come here, it is ridiculous to wait the final Settlement of Order either here or elsewhere.

The best that can be said even of the Universe itself or any Created thing is that it is Coming into order. And so are my Chairs tables & Books &c &c but if you were here we should not give ourselves any trouble about them. I have been just now writing a Long Letter to your Friend Sr William Pulteny & have told him of your being at Edr: but I had better be trying as I now do to bring you here without loss of time or if that be more Convenient to Summon me to Edinburgh. I am My Dear Friend

 
 

Nydpath Castle 17 Septr 




My Dear Friend

I received your letter yesterday and it is but this moment I have come to the resolution to let your dinner pass without my exemplary Sobriety to check the Consumption of Mr Walkers Wine & butcher meat. I am helped in this resolution by a little fretting uneasiness or inflamation in one of my eyes: but a more real cause is that I am indifferent about the mixed Companies and merry meetings & this is a natural effect when tete a tetes are interesting in a Certain degree. As you are to be so little time in this Country I Scarcely wish to see you any Otherwise than alone. But how is this to be? Your letter does not much savour of the excursion to Alva we mentioned & I am truly reluctant to your  breaking any party or deviating from any route merely that I may See you. If in reality you mean no more than to be transported to Ireland & reach your Port by Glasgow & Aire, Peebles is but a trifle out of your way & by Coming here you will see the fine new road which I am told is made from the through of Tweed to the through of Clyde not to mention that both these throughs are themselves well worth seeing & being traveled.

I have seen a letter from London in which are these words. The greatest Armament that ever went from the Ports of England is now assembling for the West Indies under Gl Abercrombie. I would give a great that I could forget the fate of great Armaments & not think of the Risks now to be run: but he who made the Seas & the Climats & the fevers dispose of us as to him seems best. The French Convention are Surely very impudent in pretending to prescribe to the great  infallible Sovereign People of France whom they shall elect. There are now two long years past since I have seen very clearly that the Armies are to dispose of France. These have shown themselves deeply impregnated with the democratical Furor consider themselves as the joint Sovereigns of the Country & will proceed to dispose of their interest in it as soon as external Ennemies permit. I hope that our fate is not to depend upon what they are pleased to do.

I want to hear from you with some anxiety 
And Am My Dear Friend 
Yours most Affectionately 








P.S. On comparing the dates I find your dinner must have been nearly over before I received your letter, And it is some Consolation to me for the want of your Company that my being of it was actually impossible. I deferred closing this letter till the post of today came. I have a letter from Sir William Pulteney which I hope you will see before you go to improve your understanding in Ireland.
Nydpath Castle Saturday 19th Septr 1795

My Dear Friend

The expedition to Alva is much to my mind but I would fain Spare your Carriage coming so far to fetch me when you may possibly have occasion to use it in Edr. We have a Fly goes of to Edinburgh on Tuesday by which if the tickets are not all out I may be with you at 2 OClock on Tuesday: as tomorrow is Sunday I do not know whether you will receive this letter before Monday morning & I certainly cannot have your Answer before Tuesday afternoon by that time the Tuesdays Fly will be at Edinburgh & the first appointment I can make to go by that conveyance will be friday following. If I knew your precise time of wishing to Set out for Alv[a] I may possibly be able to get a chaise at Peebles in the mean I am never from home & can be ready to depart at half an hours warning by day or by Night. I am My Dear Friend ly


Nydpath Castle 10th Octr 1795 Dr Ferguson

My Dear Friend

I am happy to receive your letter from Carlisle. Although I am not an Astrologer I thought I saw the right Ascension of Stars that caused your declination in our horizon & your course due south is what I wish.

The world is likely to become more tractable in proportion as its difficulties or next to impossibilities increase. What a Crisis? This comes of Waiting till our ennemies could not find paper to make Assignats or Shopkeepers not willing to take them even with a bayonet at their breasts. Your Poets and repeaters of Poetry are great fools. It is not Rusticus expectat dum defluat Amnis: for Rusticus knows better: but Aulius expectat is true reading.

The continual burden of my song has been, trust not to what the Ennemy may fail in, but to what you yourselves can do: but this was imputed to my drinking water while the world about me drank wine. But a Stout heart will yet do much;  Is all Europe to Shrink before this mixture of madness and Affectation? Yes, if Europe be on the verge of madness also what will save it. This Corner I think should be the last to take fire we have the sea to surround us and may have Armies of men interested to preserve order and repel Ennemies: but this is all raving & I write in haste to overtake you at Chester & should have written sooner if I had been at home to receive your letter when it came.

I went to Edr to meet our Friend Johnstone who at my perswasion came to Consult Doctors. Here the Sky continues to lour & makes me waken from every sleep with something heavy on my mind to be recollected as memory returns. My boys should have much to say to you. Adam is returned from Ireland and I doubt must think how he is to pass the Rubicon of Writership. For John I shall certainly think: but much should depend on the Charon into whose barge he is to Step. While this country lasts the Navy is likely to become its most important Limb & the career it opens very proper to be run by youth of Vigour especially with collateral Support. 

But as we are, it is best to take our chance & sink or rise in doing our best: the particular circumstances in which the first step is to be taken may determine much. God bless you. I shall write to Sr Wm p: soon meantime I need not tell you to mention my affectionate Respects. I am My Dear Friend your

most Affectionate and Obedient 
Servant 

Nydpath Castle 4th Decr 




My Dear Friend

If ever you enjoined me to return the inclosed; that Circumstance escaped me and it was carefully laid up among my Archives as a monument of the times. I rejoice however in the Idea that you have now occasion to call it forth. The times, upon the present Rout of the French on the Rhine & the difficulty of restoring their Force in the present state of their Finances, are probably as favourable as those to which the Paper refers. As to myself I have now only to tell you that I have no hopes of my Friend at Alva.

That I am impatient enough to have some settlement at Nydpath to Authorize the repairs &c which the weather shows to be necessary.

And that My Son Adam is now a Master writer or writer to the Signet at your Service & ready to take the trouble of any ones bussiness who will employ him. And finally that I am

My Dear Friend yours &c 

Nydpath 9th Janry 




My Dear Friend

I have just now received your affectionate Letter with the inclosed Commission of Bussiness for Adam The Writer to the Signet & write merely to get out my Breath on this plaguy Situation into which I have got; without the accommodation either of Town or Country. Till now we have yet Sheep to kill but this is at an End & nothing almost to be had nearer than Edinburgh with this we could fend for the present: but the prospect is yet no better for another year. I do not know Whether Mr Tait has sent my Letter of which you have a Copy to the D. of Q. nor whether it will procure any Answer if he has. You may remember I had some forebodings of this Situation but was in hopes that the D. would either extricate me or leave me to extract extricate myself by dealing with the Housekeeper for what he allowed her. I now see the  mistake of having thrust myself into this Situation before it was cleared for me one way or another: but I reasoned that I must either occupy this Castle before winter to keep it in repair or lay aside thoughts of it altogether to the last of which I was extremely reluctant.

I am sensible what I should do now is to wait the Chapter of accidents, but Patience. The great virtue for Succeeding in any thing has been but very Scantily dealt to me, Old as I am I had rather be doing any; than wait doing nothing, of which this letter is itself a Sufficient Proof for it certainly will do you no good nor me any other than employing some minutes of this woful time I have to wait for some Instruction to his Man of Bussiness from the D. of Q. So much for one Du[ke] if ever I have to do with another I will give them leave to Duck me in the first Horsepond. I am Most Affectionately

yours



P.S. I wrote what you have on the opposite leaf immediatly upon reading your letter but have time before the paper is folded to tell you upon reflection that the matter is worse than you are likely to conceive it. If the warning for the Housekeeper Mrs Donaldsons removeal is not here before the end of January I shall have no hopes of a Settlement & for ought I know die of wexation for having been such a fool, leaving my Children to shift for themselves. For Gods Sake try what you can do to have a speedy decision either for or against me for either sooner Obtained would have saved me from much inconvenience.

A decision in Conversation will not do: it must b[e] [acknow]ledged with the man of Bussiness.
Nidpath 10th Janry 




My Dear Friend

you would perceive in my letter of yesterday that a grievous dissappointment in my expectations of a Settlement at this place begins to stare me in the face, if it shoud actually come, I am certainly in a great Scrape with all my trumpery brought here at a great expence and dilapidation. And it stung me particularly to think that I had ventured so far upon mere words of Politeness from His Grace of Q. in conversation: but you will See from the inclosed Copy of a Letter which I obtained from Mr Tait that I was not so much to Blame & did not proceed so far without official Communication. And as I am more reconciled to myself shall wait the event with less perturbation. You would possibly Observe in the Copy I sent you of a Letter of Mr Tait, why I am so peremptory in my request to have the warning of removeal to the Housekeeper by the end of January. That is the time of warnings for the whole year. Then habitations are given up or taken & whoever does not provide himself  then must wait for another year, And this to me would be a more expensive & disstressing Situation than any I ever was in: But as I made a great Effort at my Age to get here, if the worst should come must repeat the same to get away. Mr Taits Letter even if I were disposed to go to Law is probably not Sufficient ground for any legal Claim, What he did was for the best: And there was nothing amiss but in having to do with a man of Quality whom the Concerns of little men do not touch & who must not be teased with such concerns or who is perhaps fully exculpated by his State of health. I write this merely to correct the Chagrin & impetuosity of what I wrote yesterday, & unless you should find it perfectly easy & proper to stir in the matter to beg that you will leave the Surge to beat as it may. I am glad to know your thoughts on the Prospect of Peace. One Effect the very prospect may produce which is to make Parties in France anticipate the Speculations or practices I Expected from them when relieved from the Pressure of War. I had a letter from Sr W. P. at Oxford in his way to Shropshire. He proposed that my family here should be an Asylum in Vacation time to his young Nephew upon the loss of his Second Father at Alva. I can no more think of declining it than if I were his nearest Relation. But I have not the necessary Accommodation at present & may not have any better when his Vacation begins.

I am Affectionately yours 

Nidpath Castle 25 Febry 




My Dear Friend

Here are no Events, no approach to Negotiation with France, no termination even to the treaty of Nidpath which tho least is not the last in Care. If any body think me a Philosopher he is grievously Mistaken. I have done nothing but Peste  and Scold inwardly for three or four weeks not to say Months. I do not mean to molest you with these fruits of my Philosophy: but if I do not write something there will be nothing from you. And from me it can be only what I have. The Dukes orders to finish with the Terms have been here about a Month And my Assent was not withheld a moment: but the Conclusion is Still unaccountably delayed. This I mention not in the way of Complaint. The Duke you say is already disspleased with this and other delays, let us do nothing to irritate: Mr Taits manner to me had every appearance of Candour & Obliging disposition. And tho I cannot explain the present delay but: am Anxious least  by any accident or interference of Interests here it should prove fatal to the Scheme of retreat I had formed & which I am now almost too old to look for any where else. Without molesting the Duke with more applications you may perhaps Observe what is passing & prevent any imputation of the delay from to any hesitation of mine in accepting the Terms. You do not tell me in what quarter of the map I am to look for your Country retreat. The extreme of Midlesex is too near. Hertfordshire is too Cold a Soil; Essex is too low. Kent or Surry must be the ground: but wherever it is I hope it will prove some break in the Eternal repletion of the London eating & drinking As for chearful festivity; from this I doubt you will find no retreat post Equitem sedet atra Cura: And so be as chearful as you please provided you keep a good clear Active meagre habit of Body. I have little correspondence with Edinburgh & feel nothing but the vexation of little troubles in my Situation here. But believe me most Affectionately yours


Nidpath Castle 29th Febry 




My Dear Friend

I wrote lately rather a flapper in the Laputa Stile to keep you in mind, than a letter. & it is but fair to tell you that I have since procured a Step to be made in the Nydpath Treaty. Having expostulated with Mr Tait on the delay he wrote me for Answer that untill he received my Letter he believed that a draft of the Lease was sent to me & that the delay was owing to Myself. It is a curious bussiness that goes on of itself without the knowledge of those who should be the doers of it. The draft however was then sent & I have demurred only to one Clause by which it is proposed that I or my Heirs shall be bound to leave the Castle &c at the end of the Lease in Sufficient Repair. I always imagined that as the Castle was dismantled & left to the mercy of the Elements I was to preserve it in the manner necessary for my own Accommodation & that whenever the Rent Taxes & Repairs exceeded my means, I was  to leave as I found it destined to be the Habitation of Bats & Owls. It never entered my head That the Duke meant, when my lease was out that there should be a ground of Action in favour of his Heirs of Entail against my Heirs of Nothing Obliging them to Rebuild his Castle for him altho it be already as old as the oldest Ruin in all the Country. This however I hope was matter of form in the draft & will not be persisted in. And this is certainly a negotiation very fruitful in Letters to you since you must hear both of its delays and its Advances. It is not however altogether the occasion of this present writing. I find in the Edinburgh news Paper The Death of a very Remarkable man & much in your Thoughts as well as Mine James McPherson The Reviver of Ossian. You certainly know if true what I was told that he had made out a fair Copy of the original Poems. Mr McKenzie Secretary to the Highland Society of London told me he had the Manuscript in his Possession and that a fund was already provided for the expence of Printing it: That it was deferred merely upon a question which had not been determined whether it should be printed in the Greek or Roman  Character. I had a Specimen sheet sent me two or three years ago, in the Roman & Another in the Greek Character. With a Literal Latin translation word for [word] on the opposite page, the form in which I was told it was intended to print the Whole. I now see or Suspect that the whole load will fall upon you. The question relating to the Character is a Trifle & whether the Greek or the Roman be employed, James McPhersons orthography differing much from that employed in the Bible &c will require to have prefixed an Alphabet in which the Power & Sound of every Letter will be ascertained as much as possible. You will be able to inform yourself fully how the matter stands & I most earnestly entreat that you will take it up Seriously & earnestly: for if we die also before it is done I doubt the Papers will be lost & the fund provided for Printing remain unaccounted for.

I have heard no particulars of the manner in which that Indignant Soul departed: but he seemed to be drooping about two years ago when I saw him last.

I am My Dear Friend yours 
most affectionately 

[March 1796]

My Dear Friend

I forward your Paper as desired to Jno Home & Dr Blair, we shall be happy to have the whole when done. My earnestness for pacific measures on our part has long been great but my hopes of actual Peace very little.

The Republick of France has no chance to exist but in the turmoil of War & if its leaders should have no pretence for war with Europe in General they will try to keep up the delenda est Carthago against this Country. What a Prospect for Ages to Come it has been louring upon me from the first day of the War & may not clear up while I live. And here is a new & most interesting Crisis. An Assembly of the Batavian People met on the first of March to Supersede all former Government and deliberate on a new one.

The Result is uncertain: but probably the  democratical leaven [xxx] once admitted into this Batch will never be cleard away So as to restore the former Self electing Aristocracy. It is also probable that the impulse given to that supposed but mistaken Phlegmatic mass on the prospect of Democracy or what is now called Liberty, will produce in that country a new Scene of Energy or national exertion. What are we to do in this case?Are we to brave the Hostility of this rising Power & press it down into the Scale of France So as to leave no chance of Counterpoise in the rest of Europe. May God who has preserved us hitherto forbid. We have nursed the French Republick in its Cradle we have tended it to school & brought it for ought I know to a state of Confirmed Vigour in the Issue dangerous if not fatal to Other Nations of Europe: or which certainly the half rotten or Slumbering monarchy can ill resi[s]t. If the new republick of Batavia is to have a separate existence from that of Gaul I would willingly nurse it as a young Hercules who may one day be our Friend and Assistant against this Hydra of France. Their own Jealousy may naturally enough take this turn against  the Power that is most likely to keep them in bondage & certainly some direction may be taken even in the Conduct of our present War with the seven provinces or in our declarations and Policy with respect to them that may facilitate their Coming into our Scale at last: but I must leave every body to his own Affairs & mind my own. The Negotiation of Nidpath is in a better form than I have known. While we were deliberating on the Safe clause of lease respecting the obligation to keep & deliver the Castle in repair the time of Advertising other Subjects in the Neighbourhood is come on. Mr Tait has been here visited the Premises & has agreed with me that the best form of Proceeding for me is to Come forward with other adventurers in an offer at once for the whole of what will accommodate me here & the whole be made out for me in one lease. In this I shall be ready before the 21st of April the time at which I am told that offers are to be Submitted to his Grace. And I trust you will be glad to find some load taken off your Back as well as my own.

I am my Dear Friend 
most affectionately 
yours 

Nidpath Castle 2d April 




My Dear Friend

I send this line without the usual cover because a little possible delay in passing through hands may occasion what I wish to prevent.

The direct call which you mention of my Son Adam to London. I dread for him the Plunge into idleness of which he has too much at Edinburgh. The example of Dissipation & the impression of what is called Genteel in opposition to Bussiness. He was at London some years ago to see the Town for a few days & this I trust is enough till bussiness carry him there at some unlucky Clients Expence. I wish Burnet & he to be diverted from it at present without any apparent negative from me. It is only letting it drop to another Season when it may be less inconvenient. If the matter were in a certain forwardness any restraint from  me might produce more pain than good & therefore I wish even Burnet who may blab not to know what I write. I have been at Edinr for a day to confer with Mr Tait. The Matter of Nidpath now is upon Such a footing that I must be a Bidder for the accommodations wanted & we cannot by any means wish that The Dukes interest should give way to favour. I mean to go as high as the Subject will bear upon me up. And trust only that Ceteris paribus, the keeping of the Castle will procure me a preference in the disposal of its appendages. One thing is pleasant that I now have my chance for the accommodations essential to my Settlement here, that I may or be entirely dissengaged, if these should fail me. If there should be any offer exceeding mine I shall request Mr Tait to let the Duke know my willingness to go as much farther as necessary. I called for Blair to discuss Some of his difficulties, relating to the Concern of Forreign Powers in the internal money Circulation of France; but he was confined with an Epidemic Cold &c &c.

yours most affectionately 

Nidpath Castle 7th May 1796

My Dear Friend

I Join the writer to The Signet in most sincere thanks for your good Offices; he has forwarded the letter to Ruthven & will transact the Bussiness with Mr Charles Gordon when he goes to Edinburgh. The Bussines of Nidpath is well over as you have seen by the documents I sent to you. Thank the Duke for me. My new Situation will not be so Ducal & of course more Professorial. We shall move soon but the direction of Letters may continue the Same till farther notice. You cannot long be at a loss for Places about London & therefore Ryegate need not disstress much. Your publick Language is what I have wished from the beginning of the War: but my Doctrines are not fit for Publication that is not fit to be told to the Ennemy as well as a Friend.

I therefore wish I could hold my Tongue even in Company: for I can Conceive what is said upon the Tweed to be repeated at Paris. The Ennemy ought not to be told what we rely on for that is telling them to what point they should direct their Force. For this Reason Divernois's Pamphlet appeared to me a  very improper as well as mistaken publication.

The French account of the Battle of Montenotte if true is very Allarming: but my Faith is not fixed. They write in the Stile of Quack advertisement & carry the same Caveat to distrust. The Battle I take it is fought to prevent their getting Possession of Genoa. And whatever happened in the Field that day: if they do not get Possession of Genoa they have lost the Battle.

I shall apply to the Dukes man of Bussiness to know what I owe for the time I have occupied the Castle. I am

My Dear Friend 
yours most Affectionately 






As I write in Some hurry I had almost forgot your Inquiries about the Dictionary of Italian Geography. It is here Safe, I have looked at the Article San Marino and see some short notes of yours Scarcely to be read by any one but yourself. I mean for the hand write. Shall I send the book to Edr to go by some conveyance from thence. There is another thing I should not forget. I have lately received a Letter dated at Turin & Signed the 5th of of July 1795 & Signed If I read it right Le Baron de Chambreis, together with two Copies of an Essay on the Law of Nations about which the Author wishes to Communicate with me & in which I am very desirous  to Comply. And if I knew how to forward a Packet would prepare one for him as soon as the plague of changin[g] Quarters will permit. In the meantime I would willin[gly] write a short Line to exculpate myself for the delay that has already taken place. If you have any Access to the Minister from Turin or any one who can tell us about the Baron de Chambreis & correct me if I read it wrong I beg that you will inquire. There is a great fault committed by People in writing names in the same Slurring manner that they write Sentences in these a Sentence The Sense helps to read: but in names there is no Help but the distinctness of the letters so as not be mistaken.

I will tell you next time what I hear about the Burroughs if any thing past worth attending to

yours Again & Again
Hallyards 2d June 1796 
Dr Ferguson



My Dear Friend

I approve much of your intention to be in Parlt.. It is well understood at London that is the only condition on which one can be of Consequence to the publick or himself. I am not for much of a new Ministry but a new Parlt may turn a new leaf & Something is necessary. If the Duke of Brunswick understands the State of France; he is I suspect the only Prince in Europe who does so. Who has looked so far beyond the present System of Europe, where National exertions are made only from the Surplus of Population & Revenue. So as to comprehend what a Nation can do bringing its whole capital of men & every resource at once into Action & where every individual from the Lowest is actuated or affects to be actuated with the Passion for democratick Power & national Glory. Such a Nation may want Constancy & steady firmness: but they may act with an impetus which cannot be withstood. Nothing can can destroy them but tranquillity & inaction from abroad which leaves them to pray upon themselves at home. To understand  this Game every mere Soldier is as impotent as any mere tradesman of any Other Sort. Regimenteering discipline, & even a good Military Head will not do. We must be prepared like the Antient Statesman to meet all the human Passions in their inmost recess. Nations of old brought their all into Stake in every Strugle if worsted they were undone if successful they made the world pay. This is the Game which France is renewing in Europe. And it is not by furnishing them with new occasions of exertion that we are likely to evade the Consequence. I should have been glad to have had you canvassing Burroughs in our Neighbourhood: but approve your having taken other Ground.

In this District there are 4 or 5 under the Separate influence of at least 3 Dukes who I am told have Compromised matters by agreeing to have the Seat for a Friend each in his Turn. Your D. has had his turn in the last Parlt. The D: of Buccleugh comes next & intends as I am told his Son in Law Ld Stopford. What the D. of Q. could mean by wishing to engage you I know not if it were not to keep up his Interest at your Expence at least in one burrough. I am glad to hear that by all accounts he is likely to gain a clear hundred of Grassum by my disertion of the Castle. I was certainly  a very improper Tennant to be in the way of his Operations. I am now at Hallyards about three miles from Peebles & my Letters may be directed as before changing the title of Professor for that of Grazier at Hallyards by Peebles. I am to have Highland Cattle to fatten for winter Beef in the mean time I & my Cabinet Council are as much embarrassed with a Refractory Cow that will not let herself be milked as you I hope will be with this explosion of madness that threatens Europe.

In a former letter you mentioned your namesake John, who is now boarded with the schoolmaster at Peebles & something of a destination of C Payne for India in which you proposed to embark him when ready but I was uncertain whether you meant when C. Payne was ready or Cabin Boy John.

It will be a pleasure to me to think that part of my Blood is to flow by Sea as well as by Land in this Contest & if it come any thing near a Catastrophe in My time I shall be happy to meet it with my old blood in the Front & survive to see the Country Safe or die before it is Otherwise. You may laugh at this but it is often the best consolation I have between Sleeps in the Night. Let me see your Frank as soon as possible, or never Spare me Postage out of the profess[ion] of Grazing. I am now glad to See that The Honble Robt can help us now as well as the Honble Charles. So God Bless you all

Ad. Ferguson
Hallyards near Peebles 20 June 1796

My Dear Friend

I must thank you imprimis for your Friend John. His Ardour for Seamanship seemd to abate at a distance from the Other Boys that were also so disposed; but he says that he would like it above any thing else. I do not trust much to his Judgement: but wish the choice to be his own that he may not blame me for his Sea Sickness. This I doubt might repell him in the first outset if he had a retreat before it is over & therefore I wish him to be in a Kings Ship & on a Cruiz[er] before he taste of it & will send him to London by Land if I can find a right opportunity: but this may require Some delay. As for the World I have no hopes but from God & the chapter of Accidents. It is like John Bull to cry out against all Continental Connections, now when his very existence is at Stake without them; And I can only repeat what I have formerly said that he never knows how to behave himself to Other Nations. At one time he would govern every body, at another he cares for nobody.

This war should have been merely defensive  from the first & terminate as soon a[s] Possible, for it has Served to rock the Demon of Mischief in his Cradle: but we would plunge into it trusting to the Cooperation of Other States & now we are over head & Ears & ought to Catch at a Straw, we will have no Assistance. This, in the Sequel of what is past, is the Continued Road to distruction over all Europe, to which there is no Safety now but in the Strict union & Concert of Nations whether in Peace or War. If we have given Other nations occasion to think that we mean or meant our own agrandisement, it is full time to undeceive them by the most Sincere declarations, that we withdrew from the Continent because we could promote the common Cause more effectually elsewhere. That we meant no acquisition: but in the way of pledge for the rights of our Allies as well as our own & there is no conquest but we are willing to relinquish for a proper Adjustment in the common Cause of Safety to the Nations of Europe. And there is no exertion which we ought not make in this matter. People talk of Allarms from Russia: but this compared with The Allarm from France is a trifle. I am not much  for Active Hostilities against France for this is like probing the wild beasts to make him foam & Roar: but show a firm Resolution throughout Europe not to be the Dupe of his Affectations: or the Ambition of a few upstarts to govern the world under the notion of Liberty to them. How I write, you will say, as if I were a Statesman Consulted in the Bussiness. I would give much that I could banish the matter from my thoughts but this being impossible my next resource is to give vent. I have retired to the Country on purpose that I might have a number of little Objects & Cares to divert me from things in which I can be of no use either in Practice or Speculation & so much for every mans importance to himself in which I know that you will forgive me my Share. I am My Dear Friend

 & most humble 
Servant 



My Dear Friend

I just now receive yours of the 23d about half an hour after the departure of your little Friend & Namesake for London, so that the Die is in some measure thrown for him. I had written to his Brother here to make inquiry about a proper conveyance for him, And yesterday between 4 & 5 in the morning at Hallyards received an Express informing me that my Friend Sir James Stirling Provost of Edr was to set out for London with a young Son of his own whom he is to enter an Officer in the Guards & that on hearing of my occasion desired to inform me that he would take Charge of my Boy & see him safely to any place I should direct in London. This was so favourable an opportunity that I could not hesitate for a moment in seizing it, accordingly, as fast as sleeping persons could be awakened and dressed, set out for Edinburgh, took my Boy in passing through Peebles who then heard for the first time of his immediate destination, & carried him through among his Companions waving with his hand in a transport of Joy. And he is set out this Morning with Sir Ja's  Stirling who will be a Father to him, till he is Consigned to his Uncle Samuel Burnett of Iron Monger Lane Nº 26 Cheapside or to your Order. He has letters written at Hallyards one to you & another to his foresaid Uncle given him more to serve as a direction where he is to be delivered than to carry any inside Contents.

He was taken up at Peebles & forwarded from Edinburgh in the very State of a Peebles Schoolboy, in which this Sudden order to March Surprised him, & it is perhaps better that he should be fitted out at London with Particulars suited to his destination than that we should attempt any equipment here & I write to His Uncle Samuel Burnett Nº 26 Iron Monger Lane Cheapside to find him in Necessarys at my expence. Be so good as let the your servant carry the inclosed to the penny Post for that purpose. You will decide for me what is farther to be done. I mentioned what Passed between Mrs Nugent & me on the Subject & wished you to disscuss the matter with her. She said Captn Nugent wished to take charge of a Boy of mine & offered to carry this Boy to London with her. I took the matter into Consideration but she departed without Saying any thing more of the matter; Least she should be affronted or affect to make a Quarrel of our taking to any Other protection at Sea; I pray you to take the choice whatever  it be on yourself & recollect what was my wish that Captn Nugents mind should be known before we recurred to any one else. There is indeed no one I should prefer to Captn Nugent & should think My Boy Happy either with him or C. Payne whose handsome Remembrance gives me reason to augur well of the Project.

My heart is full, & if you were by, my Silence would express enough. We look for Major Burnett with some fond expectation, if he should overtake me here it will be pleasant to show him the Way to our Country retreat: but if I should be gone Adam will attend him thither. I too perceived what Sort of Ennemy we had to do with & would have directed My Politics to guard against the Precise thing that has happened: but this world is a Series of Progress & Decline of Flood & Ebb. Of Volution & Revolution but the State of Europe &c before the year Ninety was such that I saw nothing but the too near approach of a Comet that could occasion any general Reverse. I am glad you see things in a more favourable light, And whatever is to be the event endeavour to perswade myself that it is more fortunate to have our Lot amidst great Events than in times of undisturbed tranquillity. I only wish if I am to live & see much that I were forty years younger.

yours most affectionately 

Hallyards 7 July 1796

My Dear Friend

Being to inclose in Covers within Covers unnumbered letters from this Family to the Soldier & Sailor, I acknowledge At the same time your kind reception of our little man at London. He will certainly profit at an Academy or School by any Object that is presented to his Senses & had by any little manual operation he is led to perform. It will grieve me if he should be much embarrassment or trouble to you & therefore I earnestly pray there may be no more of this than your usual temper will enjoy as a pleasure. I am full of Anxiety as usual about the publick & your share in it. Remember I pray to distinguish what is proper in Parliament from what would be so, in the executive Council.

In the first every thing that is said goes to Friend & Ennemy alike, whereas an Ennemy should know no more of our mind: but that we mean resolutely equitably & fairly to all Parties. To a person who has long revolved an Idea it appears perfectly  clear & in no need of explanation or Comment. To Others it is not so. It would instruct you on this head to have seen a correspondence which I held in the course of last winter with your Friend Dr Blair on the Subject of your Printed Paper which I sent him at your desire. He could not [do] away with the Idea that we who have so much paper Currency of our own should pretend to restrain the Currency, that is The making Assignats Ligal tender in France. How do you steer with Sir William now, there is no man I believe better meaning in the Kingdom: but I doubt he is tired of letters from me as I am of writing them. He does not Win by a popular Surface either within doors or without; yet all parties listen to him with respect & if he were the mover of a reasonable national measure I would have some hopes. It is pleasant to be talking pacifically when the tide of war as I hope it may is turning in our Favour. And I hope that our government will seriously think how they may convince the world that the continuance of War should not be imputed to them. Most Affectionately yours

A. Ferguson

I pray you excuse so many inclosures &c. The Letter to Sandie Johnston contains some letters from the young People here to the Soldier at the Cape of Good Hope or elsewhere. If S. Johnstone is not gone some of your people can give in The Letter at Mrs Fords in passing. The Letters to the sailor may lye till he cast up himself.
Hallyards 1st August 1796

My Dear Friend

your Letters always give me great Comfort And in Contemplation of the memoir Sur le project de L'Empereur Leopold in Particular I cannot refrain some hopes that the Nations of Europe will not tamely wait for a peace that is to arise from the Successive & Separate Surrender of every State to the Republick of France. If there were a Congress of Nations, it would Certainly hold a different Language. For the Memoir or project itself does it not need some farther explanation. Two questions may be asked. In what respect does the French Revolution invade the general System of property in Europe? And how is that invasion to be resisted? &c.

Much Obliged for the Plan of The Academy. It is certainly the best place at which our little Friend can wait for his Turn of going to Sea: but as I believe after all that the best Education for a Profession is had in the very scene of the Profession itself & in seeing the Actual duties of it performed. I hope it is consistent with The Plan of the Academy to  charge Pupils for the time they remain proportionally without remaining the year and that we shall be ready to accept of a Berth at Sea when a proper one opens.

In this I understand that there is School on board for young people & that our young Friend will find the proper lessons in Navigation as fast as his years qualify him to receive them. The midsummer vacation may not yet be over at the Academy: but I desire my Friend Burnet in Iron Monger Lane to take your orders respecting Johns Entry & to draw upon me for his outlay payable at the Counting house of Mansfield Ramsay & C Edinburgh, Which is all at present from your

most affectionate Friend 
&  






P.S. I live in hopes of hearing from you what is actually doing & mean to repay with what is thinking here.
Hallyards 1st Septr 1796

My Dear Friend

I have to thank you for two letters since I wrote last, one inclosing the Correspondence of our little Seaman to be, the Other informing me of your Country acquisition in which I cordially rejoice. I hope it will occasionally give you that possession of yourself which the Town is so apt to disturb.

You are still Consolatory on the State of publick Affairs which is very fortunate for me who have had no Other Consolation for years past. In recollecting some little experience of my own however I come to think that if one does properly what the occasion requires whether adverse or prosperous Events are not such bad things as they appear to be, & do I shall leave the subject of Politics a Vous Autre. Thank Mrs Nugent for me on her Project of having our little man rated on board the Caesar. I need not say how happy I shall think him under Captain Nugent. I trouble you with the inclosed Correspondence notwithstanding your being in the Country may increase that Effect. However it may be forwarded when you are writing to your people at Brompton however or when you go thither yourself. We have had a Visit of Dr Black here for about a week but we could not detain him, he cannot pass his time in Country, he says, or away from his ordinary Occupations. This I understand. I hope that if you do not take to Country Cares & attentions you will at least have your pen and Ink & if not Rus in Urbe, Urbem & Mundum in Rure.

My Hay is all Safely got up & yet I am not satisfied till I have better news of Europe. I am My Dear Friend

 Humble 
Servant 

22 Septr 1796 Morses [Hallyards]

My Dear Friend

I Sit down to write, without knowing what, farther than that I am to inclose Some Correspondence for our little Friend from his kindred here that he may not imagine that he is forgotten. It pleases me to think that he conciliates good will where he goes & I hope that he will not be deficient in Spirit but for this there is better chance the sooner he makes his transition from the ways of mere land men to those of the best Philosophers of modern times who Can mount the Waves & Triumph in the Storm. There is besides this enclosed Correspondence a certain duration of Silenc[e] which becomes difficult to endure. I blame myself for my not hearing from you when I recollect that there is more than one letter Since I wrote last. I hope you go on with an Anxiety, to be Sure, for the Subject deserves it: but not with so much expectation of what certain persons may be induced to do as can disstress or chagrin you. For my own part I like to put things at the worst & consider how I can bear that  and what is best to be done under it. If they should turn out better there will be less to endure. I have been diverted of late with a Hypothesis which I by no means adopt; That our two great German Allies have playe[d] booby in this War. That the Austrians have given way in order to be quit of the Low Countries & have pretensions to an equivalent more Conveniently Situated for them & That the Other has withdrawn from the Contest & never exerted himself in it to bring Ruin on the Former & have a farther distribution of Territory in which his Lot may be extended. I hope it will appear in good time that the Austrians, who certainly do not play Booby in Italy; will fall like the destroying Angel upon those who venture to drive them on their own ground. The Arch Duke Charles is I hope now in the first Act of this After Piece in the Drama. I flatter myself he is not to quit Mr Jourdan till he has completely cut him up. Even if Moreau in the mean time should advance to the Gates of Vienna his Situation may be made much the worse by a Victorious Army coming in his Rear while the Levies of Hungary & Bohemia salute him in Front. Yet with all this flattery of the imagination I have no Comfort in this Paradoxical War, in which Scarcely any event beyond the boundaries of France can do us any Good. Our Defeats  weaken us & Our Victories Strengthen our Ennemies they unite France against us & it is from the division of France that its present Rulers our Ennemies have any thing to Fear. If we should kill them fifty thousan[d] men in one Battle, they will have just so many fewer turbulent Subjects to Govern And the remainde[r] will be the more earnest to Support them against the ennemies of their liberties and of the Glory of France.

This is the engageing point of view in which we of this Island are made to appear whenever Fortune is pleased to favour us. The War I am told is by no means Popular in France: but the continuance of it is imputed to us & of course the less Popular it is the more we shall be detested. I am curious to know whether we Still expect to Make Conquests or at least that our Ennemies are on the Eve of being palsied a la Diverno[is]. That is certainly a Vexatious   Z   & not very wise to believe him. Yours most Affectionately

&c &c
Hallyards 23 Decr 




My Dear Friend

I acknowledge the receipt of Mr Wraxals Publication & have seen nothing else so likely to do good on both Sides of the Water and so having no more to say at present trouble you as usual for the mere Evasion of Postage. The enclosed is an Answer to My little mans first letter from Portsmouth, he has seen the Caesar and did not know there was so large a Ship in the world. His letter also includes one from a Poor Cottager here who has a Son on board The Glutton which the news Paper says is just now gone in to Dock at Portsmouth for a little repair. There used to be much intercourse betwixt John & the Parents & there will be great joy at the delivery of this Letter. The older Sailor I guess would risk his life at any time for the younger one. My head is full of news Since I read last nights Paper. What is become of our great & Good Ally the Empress of Russia ad Inferos out Superos . Will there be any great change of the Scenes. Or who is to be the Empress next: Will the Guards at Petersburgh put up with a Male Sovereign &c &c? What a Report from the executive Directory to the Counsel of 500? Never did State anounce its own extinction in plainer terms. It is a trick on which to found Some new measures of Finance. The news paper bears that it is meant to usher in the proposition of a new fabrication of Paper, if so now is the time for your Traveller to Speak or is it meant as a Ground of exculpation for the Concessions they are making towards Peace. This is what I wish. And I hope that we shall not quench the smoking flax by Screwing up our demands: for I return to my old Doctrine that tho Peace may be friendly to the Nation it is hostile to the present Rulers. And I am still of opinion that the best way of making War is to have peace with them. I think that I understand the State of affairs in Italy through the mist of opposite reports &c And the Party which perseveres, repairing its losses even under Defeat will prevail at last. I have not yet transmitted the Pamphlet to Dr Blair; being willing to Spare his Purse I wait for somebody that will bear it for nothing, and in the mean  time he may be Otherwise Supplied. I believe the Regions are dancing & that Nova Zembla is now here. We have little or no Snow but the Thermometer at 10° of Farhenheit, so much for the weather wishing to hear little from you

I am 
My Dear Friend 
 
& most  










P.S. The direction of the within should be to John Ferguson with Captain Nugent of His Majesties ship the Caesar at Portsmouth unless you know better.
Hallyards 9th Feb.ry 1797

My Dear Friend

in your last, I think, you ask me how the Farm goes on. O fortunatos nimium Agricolos : if they would mind their own Affairs & forget what may happen in Europe, till it come to their own doors & then is soon enough for all the good they can do. I asked a neighbour farmer lately why the late owner of this place was so fond of it as I had been told: because, he said, it gave him a great deal to do. And do you think it a good reason? For us, not, he said unless we gain by what we do ________. I do not expect much of that recommendation for what I do: but am never idle & can tramp about with unblacked boots or wooden clogs for two or three weeks together, for my Valet de Chambre is gone to the Plough and I am myself constantly at work opening drains & turning aside torrents and  yet I am more harrassed with news papers than with all this. It is Sun Shine with you Sometimes when it lours elsewhere: pray let me have a little Glimpse. Say that the Austrians tho' beaten in Italy more than any thing ever was beaten will not accept of terms for themselves without including us. That Buonaparte is not to go on forever &c &c. I blush for your Alexrs and Caesars who should be ashamed of having strutted so long [xxx] on the Stilts of military fame for having with some great advantage on their Side won a few Battles against inferior Ennemies: But now I think the Miles gloriosus bussiness has worn itself out, And I shall never admire any more, except the valour that is employed to repell wrongs & protect the Orphan & the Widow. To boast of mischief is the worst Sort of Pedantry & Nonsense. And yet I wish for a little of that Sort of Pedantry which the Ennemy seems to exhibit in all quarters, in order to meet them if they should come here.  Which I believe in my Conscience they will do Wind & weather Serving even if our fleet were as great again as it is. You and I it seems cannot agree about the Parish exercise of Arms, I grant that, like most new things, it may be attended with Risk: but the greatest Risk of all is from the want of it, I. E. Subjugation to a Petulant & outrageous Ennemy who will boast of the Horrors they excite. Government will come to this measure as they do to many others when too late: for its operation would not be immediate, if would only Cultivate the nursery from which Government would be enabled to transplant Shoots indefinitely for the Battalions to be formed for Specific Service at home or abroad. And the People even at their own homes instead of kneeling for Mercy might frown an Ennemy into Respect: But not to disspute any more; there is more good news I expect from you: That there is no ill military humour  on the Ganges; but what My Lord C can appease. No subject has been more in my thoughts than the danger of making the Use of Arms a Separate Profession. If so it must be the highest or lowest & fraught with mischief in either. To Civil Governments who must have Armies in the pay, one of my nostrums is, look forward to what the Army may, one day, reasonably Ask, and do it Silently before it come in their heads to ask it. And if possible let their heads never Come together upon any Subject of grievance or professional pretension. If you deferr to grant till they have demanded, no reason will satisfy them. What has the Court of Leadenhall Street done in this matter. But here is enough tho not much about farming.

We had a Letter from your little Friend at sea in bad weather he had been Sick he said at first but that was over. We hope he is now at Spithead & that we shall hear from him soon. I am

My Dear Friend most affectionately 
yours 

Hallyards 2d March 1797

My Dear Friend

I have to acknowledge two or three letters with their respective inclosures Since I wrote last, in return to which all I can do is to give inclosures at least in equal numbers. I owe some letters to our Seaman at Spithead which I now endeavour to repay. If you meet with Rear Admiral Nugent at London pray tell him that the Little Protegé began his letter from Spithead in these words, It is impossible to express how kind captain Nugent is to me. And you may be assured that I feel no less than he does. Congratulate the Admiral for me on his Promotion. And Congratulate me too on the nomination of Rhoddam Home to the Caesar on the prospect of his Flag being Removed to Some Other Ship. I  should long Since have written to my Relation Robert Ferguson in Bengale: but the Vis inertiae is so Strong that without some particular occasion I should never have acquitted myself of that Debt. The occasion on which I write to him now is no less than the Death of his Father A most respectable & original Brother of mine Whom if you had Known you would have thought a most precious Acquaintance. With the wreck of a Little fortune saved from the Revolution in America he has contrived in his will by little Annuities to asswage the Necessities of a Number of Poor Relations whom indeed he was Supporting for years past. As the Publick has become a painful Object at least to us in this Corner who can do nothing for it, I am glad to have any thing else to write. That your Farm should be pleasant and promise to be profitable I rejoice. Mine is I  believe like the general System of Nature itself better fitted to our exigences than we are always willing to acknowledge; that is; it is fitted to our exigences by giving us something to Complain of & by never allowing us to rest. What an exotic man you are who never complain. If you should ever again be in the humour of coming to this Countrey it will be matter of great joy to me.

I am My Dear Friend 
 
& most  








P.S. Be so good as amend or 
Supply my Direction to Rob't 
Ferguson if any way wrong
Hallyards 16 March 




My Dear Friend

Here I am bussy Sowing oats not wild oats but very tame ones I can assure you. Take my thanks for the Thoughts on the late Negotiations. I am perhaps the only person in Tweedale who can trace your Steps more or less; but I think I perceive them in certain meetings mentioned in the news paper. If the Snow is not too much frozen the Ball you have begun to roll must increase. And so I hope that good will come of it.

Having little to say I have long delayed writing & should delay still but for an occasion to Peebles that hurries me being in haste to be gone & we are both perhaps Obliged to it for preventing the effusion of human Ink. All I wish you to know for the Present is that I am most Affectionately yours

A. Ferguson
Hallyards 26 Septr 1797 Dr Ferguson

My Dear Friend

I dont know what has occasioned so long a Silence between us altho I myself am more to blame in it than you. On receiving your last I was to write immediatly & having scarcely any thing to write here except the weather was to descant as usual on the political Sky. The Aspect indeed to me though changeing to the common sight has been ever nearly the same. I saw the French Monarchy overturned by a flash of Democratical lightening, striking the Armies of France. And I now see the fate of Europe urged by the Continuance of a Democratical Change in that tremendous Conductor. This even the Officers commanding this democratical Army understood not And many of them have been knocked down Successively by coming too near a Battery which they did not know to be charged.

Layfayette  Dumurier Coustine Montesquieu &c &c thinking that because they got Victories & were Popular  the Army would follow & Support them in any plan they chose to follow. All these instances were much alike whenever the democrates became Jealous the Army Suffered them to crush any General or do what they pleased with him: but Dumurier is most to my purpose. He gained Signal Victories and the Army called him leur Pere but the moment he swerved from Democracy His Chamber and Quarters were crouded with Grandiers having the Buttside of their hats turned foremost & with Republique written upon them in letters of Chalk. A Brigade marchd without his Orders & when he questioned them on the Road he was obliged to swim a Canal or leap a Ditch to get away with a Shower of Musket bullets about his Ears. The Democracy of France is represented in the Council of 500 chosen by the People: but three men not chosen by the People, got into a Disspute in which they called the Representatives of the People Royalists & instantly the Armies of France declare against the Representatives of People And the Three had the whole military force of France at their disposal to Suppress the Civil & Political Democracy of the Country. Whence comes this. Have  the Military no feeling of the Democracy for which they affect so great a Zeal? or have they some view to a manner of enjoying it, which has not yet appeared to other People. It is possible they may have such a View or it may be opened to them: but for the time past & the present I believe that they felt the Spur which drove to Democracy more sharp than any part of the People. I believe that among the points in this Spur the sharpest was the Contemptuous distinction mantained on the footing of mere birth maintained against the whole Body of the people in France.

This disstinction was made more grievous to every common Soldier than to any other Person in France & the entire removeal of it is a triumph to him which he cherishes & glories in more than any other order of men can do. In the late Monarchical Army Officered with Noblesse & recruited from the People The private Soldier was a kind of Dog or worse. A Gentlemen would caress his Dog: but a Soldier might die in the Kennel he was too mean a thing to touch the gentlemans notice. The Line of Distinction between them was so insurmountable that no merit could carry a private Soldier over it, he might storm Castle  or turn the fate of Battles; no matter his blood might flow where it would; he must toil & Suffer & be a Slave for Life it would contaminate the whole Race Of Nobl[esse] to treat him with any Notice. Can any one wonder that when a prospect opened of being able to break this film all the privates in the French army ran thr[ough] the Breach & still glory in the Idea that they are in the vulgar Phrase as Good as their General & may come to Command in their turn. This for the present I believe is the great charm of Democracy to them & who Can doubt its Effect. They may in process of time demand Settlements & retreats from Military Service but that time is not yet come. Thus in my opinion Stands the case with what we and all Europe not excepting the Directory & Democracy of France has to Contend.

We Blame the Directory for not making Peace they neither dare nor can make Peace. The Army must have forreign Ennemies to Devour or will devour at Home. What Conduct this may suggest in this Country I know not: but I am sure that no conduct will be right where the case is not understood & hence the whole Series of our Conduct hitherto or The Coalition of Europe by which we roused excercised & confirmed the Democracy of France .

Within you have a full Sheet that is almost as much as your Unciarium priviledge can bear, but there must be a cover besides with room for much Wisdom if I had any to Spare. The Plan of operations in such a War is not very easily Settled. The Ennemy desire no better than to be violently threatened with attacks on their Republick one & indivisible. One thing however is certain that every nerve must be strained to put this country in condition not to be Subdued without having its people destroyed first & the more this is believed, and that we mean no more in the War so much the better.

There is talk of representations and Appeal to the sense of the world. Good words I pray, for what have we to do with censures of what French do to one another. There should I think however be one burden to every Song, that our enemies seem disposed instead of allowing their Armed Citizens to repose in the Arms of Peace with the rewards & Settlements they have merited, seem to meditate relief, from their claims & pretensions by their destruction in operations which cannot be of any benefit to themselves or their Country. God Bless you all from  &c

A.F.
Hallyards 14th May 




My Dear Friend

your writer at Edinburgh has a report that you are to be this way in May which I rather wish than believe. If it should be So you will find that I, tho a Warlike Philosopher, am far from being against your System of Property & National independence altho I do not know of any way to preserve it among Thieves high way men & conquering Nations but Force alone & to this we must look for Safety & even not rely on ordinary means of defence So long as there is Such an Army & Such a directory in France. As the Combina[tion] of Kings served the Jacobin cause in France The Threats of the Directory serve the National cause in this Island. They will teach & drive as I trust to assume a just Military Posture which no effort of theirs will reverse. And if they persist will I trust not be for a Moment or a Single generation but for Ages to  come. For this purpose I wish only in ad[d]ition to what is doing that the current of Estimation & honour should be turned as much as possible into this Channel. What is become of Trade? My Answer still is let so much of it as is inconsistent with National Safety go elsewhere. A Valiant People & independent State cannot want for Resources. My only difficulty is to hit the just mean between the danger of Subjugation & the danger of wishing to Subjugate Others for men are Such Idiots as to Think that conquests is prosperity & for themselves would sett no limits to either. We complain that the French would be a Conquering & the great Nation by Land: but our publick Scribblers at least are as Offensive in their turn by Sea. Is not rule Britania ov[e]r the Waves as bad as ça ira. The best of us should have a bridle in our mouth & a hook in our Nose or at least have our tongues pulled out.

There was a poor Idiot in my Country who used to call himself Rob machg an Duig: but Others called him Rob Gorrick. It is piteous to hear fools talk of the Sovere[i]gnty  of the Seas while they own that there should be no Sovereign of the Land beyond his own territory. If vainglory had effect to raise or preserve a just national Spirit it might be endured: but I distrust the effect it is provoking to Others & fraught with inefficient confidence in those who entertain it. So much for Moralization which if does not Correct the world may at least tell us what to think of it. I have seen some extract of a Work of Dumurier. It is strange that these Frenchmen should know human Nature & its affairs so much better than we do. We think that Law and Act of Parliament should do every thing they have more experience of the minds & humours of Men. What I liked most in the land tax Scheme was that it gave prospect of a more fair Assessment hereafter: but I think it seems to languish. If you be idle enough to come here you will find me at home for the printers are at work on the Roman History & tho they are far from sending me a proof to correct every part I am obliged to be in the Way &c. I am earnest to have it as right as I can make it.

&c &c yours 

Hallyards 3rd July 1798

My Dear Friend

My Silence is not negligence nor forgetfulness if I had ten thousand of the best letters that ever were written you should have them all: but what I can write from this post, at which my prime consolation is that I have nothing to do but to wait quietly till my time comes. The French I trust, altho they may tease, cannot subdue this Armed nation; and all Speculation on the Subject is at an end. I have in my view a most delightful Kirkyard retired & green on the bank of a running Water & faceing a Verdant hill which in your part of the World would pass for a tremendous mountain: but to me it gives the Idea of Silence & Solitude away from the noise of folly. And so I fancy myself laid there with a Stone to tell the Rustic Moralist what  he will not understand; because I sometimes project it should be in Greek as follows: ως εγω τον ϰοσμον εθαυμασα ϰαι συ θεασαμενος χαιϱε but then Again I wish to explain it. And so it should be. I have seen the Works of God, it is now your turn. Do you behold them and rejoice. I would speak my verve for Agriculture in Greek also Ανθϱωπος ιχνος γεοϱγια And you may judge of my willingness to write when I put all this on paper to you.

I have not stirred from home for many months past, till lately, when Admiral & Mrs Nugent being at Edinburgh, led me thither to gratify my sense of their kindness to my little Seaman. And I am Still the more Convinced that Nugent is the most amiable faultless Creature upon Earth. In that excursion I met our Friend Sr John Sinclair in the Street: this put it in his head to write to me since my return hither, an Account of works he is projecting to promote what he calls Statistical Philosophy. I hinted that his project is too vast: but he tells me that his mind  is made up, to draw it on a great Scale and on as perfect a plan as possible. And that he never Startled at any difficulty that could be Surmounted ever Since he collected as far back as the year 1780 One thousand & two hundred men & in one days time made a road of Six miles long over a mountain till then thought impassible . The fact is that he has got an instinct to be doing which other people ought to know how to employ without turning him out of place. Altho I have so many excuses for writing so seldom, I am not willing to Allow you any, so I pray when you are writing however let there be a Scrap for me even if you should not be able to tell me what is become of Buonaparte. By the by is that a genuine Prussian paper in answer to the French demands, which we have in the news paper. It is menacing and I do not see how the great Nation can give way to it without appearing to be cowed. They certainly meant to gall us & to secure the Co-operation of Prussia against us by transferring Hanover

&c &c ly 

Hallyards 1st August 1798

My Dear Friend

To begin where your letter ends. Amicus Amicissimus Indefatigabilis After having Splashed you before with bad Greek you are well off that there is nothing worse now than bad Latin. I do recollect hearing S. J. E. desire to have some land Property near his Native Spot but at present know nothing more nor do I know of any fit place at Peebles for your Ward: but shall inquire. There is no property in this Country you know without a Doer as Allan Ramsay used to call the Writers when he was Angry with them which he was indeed for the greatest part of every hour of his life. If there be any Subject on which to make us your Doer We shall not neglect to do what is proper, And for the Sequel if there be any Sequel it must Come as God will have it in the whims & inclinations of those Concerned. As to the World I am glad  you think Buonaparte is gone upon a mere trading or plundering Voyage. In that way he cannot ply long without having the Seas disputed with him. And I patiently wait for the Consequence without Supposing that every encounter of ours must be Veni Vidi Vici for even the great Julius was a Puppy at a time & more so than has yet appeared of Buonaparte.

A Combination of Europe including Russia if not properly directed would do us no good. You may possibly remember my Bull. That the proper way of Making War on the great Nation is to make peace with them. In this they are too wise to be caught. I mean their Directors but I think we may make a War as like peace as Possible especially if Europe Combine in it, by keeping them at Bay, leaving them no outlet from home nor goading them with any trifling attacks to keep their attention and Animosities directed abroad. There was an expedition to Ostend And there is one again now the newspapers say from Margate mere proofs that we have not yet learned the Character of our Ennemy or the nature of our Contest:  but of that no more. I am no oppositionist and this moment think the nation in a most prosperous State. That is to say we have Men Arms & Spirit, & if we should come to have less wealth we must consume the less either by having fewer mouths or putting less in them.

I was in Edinburgh for a day or two when your last letter came here to Hallyards. Or Otherwise having now three or four such favours to acknowledge shoud have done it sooner. The Roman History advances but Slowly. The Printers have much Other work when our Law Courts are sitting; Then much of the bussiness proceeds by a kind of paper War from the Press. Five Octavo Vols. are projected but little more than one is yet printed. I shall be Obliged to your German Author for his prolongation Scheme, tho having Annuities & Sellaries from Other People'tis like they think I have prolonged enough.

I went to Edr to see Our Friend G. Johnstone and was highly gratified. I am My Dear Friend

most affectionately yours 

Hallyards Decr 31st 1798

My Dear Friend

here is a are two packets in return for all your kind remembrances. If I had better you should have it: but confinement has given me something worse than nonchalance about writing: this comes from a Scald in my leg which I met with above four weeks ago. The Surgeon always tells me it is haleing but it is never hale. I am nearly of Dr Thompsons mind about the Ambition & projected Progress of France. I am only surprised that in this mimickry of the Romans so Aspiring a Genius does not stand in Awe of the proverb Imitatores Servum pecus. The case of Europe is truly alarming and if there were such a Profession as Physician of State I should be for calling a Consultation to prescribe for the Patient whose life is at Stake, Altho  if we are to believe Satyrists & dealers in Ridicule Of all the pretended Markets for Wisdom that of a Consultation of Physicians is the most ridiculous. If I were to prescribe myself, it should be a bandage of dead Wall round the whole Circumference of regal France so high & impervious that nothing could come to the Republick from without & nothing perspire from within for at least ten years if in this time there appeared no returns of Sanity I would agree to have the whole interrd under an appropriate inscription. Here lyes a Singular Genius possessed of eminence in every Science & Art. He lived a great statesman & Warriour but died a Coxcomb and now lyes here in sure and Certain hope of raising at the last day to have a dance.

In failure of the Above prescription my nostrum is that we should take such a Posture of defence as we Can keep till God & Nature  cause the Storm to pass away; for I really do not See any thing we can do to hasten its dispellation. The Armies of France will thrive in the midst of opportunities to Scatter their glories about & while they are pressed from abroad with Counterrevolution have such a Noblessephoibia that they will cling to any thing that calls itself Democracy the Reverse of all Armies in the World whose devotion has always been towards a Leader. I am glad H. R. H. keeps so good Company. If you can infect him with a little of your temper so much the better for us all at least for those who may live to See or feel it. This will probably find you at your Farm & I'm affraid the inclosed will be troublesome: but our little man has had so tremendous a Cruise that I am impatient to him & his Shipmates Joy of their Escape.

Believe me yours most 
Affectionately 

Hallyards near Peebles 21 Febry 1799

My Dear Friend

I have been in Edinburgh hunting a Militia Substitute for one of my young Men & we have had such falls of Snow & such storms of drifting wind, Since, as threatened to carry away our roofs and bury us alive so that I have literally forgotten at what point our last Correspondence ended. But I still retain my faculty of troubling you when any thing pinches. You see my young Seeman has made another Admiral & therefore has a new Captain perhaps another Ship to look for. It has run in his own head for some time probably at the Instigation of some of his Ship mates that it would be best for him to be on board a Frigate, and it may be so: but I have no will in the matter. Admiral Nugent has always expressed a Sort of Paternal good will to him And I  trouble you now merely that I may put you upon considering his Case with Admirable Nugent that if a proper berth occur to you for him it may be looked after. And since I am upon family matters I must recall to your memory what you Once questioned me about before I. E. The future Profession of another Son who is Still at College. He is a good figure & has not a fault: but I am sett against the Law or any profession more learned than a Soldier: besides that this is likely to be the Staple trade of this Country as long as we can defend ourselves against the devouring Volcano of France, and when that is no more we may be indifferent about every profession, but the Grave diggers.

I have hesitated too long & I believe must think seriously of concerting the matter with himself & so push for a first Commission in his Majesties Professional Forces by Purchase or Otherwise only wishing to  make the matter as Speedy and as easy as I can & I mention it to you that if you should have an Opinion on the Subject I may know it. Our Roads are so blocked up that I have no prospect of getting to Edr soon where my first Steps are to be taken.

I have not heard your Lamentations over the most Innocent King of Naples but have no doubt they are loud enough to be heard at Canterbury. I was blockhead enough to conclude from the Neapolitan March that all Germany was to be in motion at the same time: but I shall for the future as long as I live, think that an Italian Court may play the fool more readily than the torpor of Germany should rouse into Seasonable Action. It is said that the Neapolitans advanced because if they had not the Enemy was coming upon them: but is there no difference in Europe betwixt a Ruin which it will be said the King brought upon himself & therefore deserved And an act of unprovoked injustice & Rapin committed by the general Enemie of  all nations. After this I have for the present no more politicks Short of the Union with Ireland, in which I have no vote. If your Government have no controul over that publisher of the Sun newspaper let them say so. If they have for Gods sake Silence him that he may not continue fomenting bad humour by his impertinent Remarks & absurd Zeal for a cause which he is no way qualifyed to promote, non tali Auxilio nec defensoribus istis tempus egit. I am provoked at every turn of a leaf to see news mongers instead Of telling what has happened continually giving their opinion as if it were of any Consequence what they thought. And when I have said so much am sensible of idleness in thinking to controul news papers.

I am My Dear Friend 
most Affectionately 
yours &c &c 

Hallyards near Peebles 
2d March 1799



My Dear Friend

you have reason to expect a more immediate Answer to your last: but having to consult the principal party concerned in your kind offer of a Cadetship; the late irregularity of our communication with Edinburgh has occasioned this delay. You have made two happy persons. By the account I just now receive, my young Mans mind was nearly in the same state with my own; for some time past hopeless of his present Studies: but unwilling to disstress me whom he knew to be for Steadiness in a pursuit once begun. His thanks therefore are very Sincere. If the Cadetship be in the Cavalry so much the better but if in any other Department of the  Service your friendship is the same. And we shall be ready at a call upon the Shortest Warning. I can Scarcely find any Subject but this at Present for a letter & before I have done with it; please to know that you[r] young Friends Name is James Ferguson least this should be wanted before you hear more.

You ask about my Book in the press we are well entered on the fifth & last Volume: but our press is slow especially while the Courts of Law are sitting & it may be towards Summer before we are done. As to my part of the Edition I shall transcribe the Conclusion of a Note or Advertisement which I am preparing to be prefixed Containing a Summary View of the Authorities upon which the narration is founded for the Satisfaction of English readers, And shall inclose it with this if it can be [of] any Satisfaction to you. I will not answer if  it will be in the words: but to this purpose I sincerely wish your ArchDuke Bleu Ribbons and as much better things as he can desire: but for the Politics my trust is in Providence. I see no head in Europe that is fit to make peace or war in proper season. The French have dealt more Artfully by the House of Austria than people think. The transfer of Venice and its territory to the Adige is a masterly Stroke, Coming in place of the Low Countries it rounds their extensive Monarchy and cuts the thread by which they were Connected with us. As for the Russians poor passive bears I am affraid they come westwards only to be ridiculous. You are a great Medicin tant mieux . I am affraid the reverse is growing upon me: but if I knew how to live in hope & not to be dissappointed I would prefer it much. I congratulate Charles Greville on the Highland Presidentship. I hope he Sung his Gaelic Song: but all nonsense apart I am

My dear Friend 
most affectionately 
yours 

Hallyards by Peebles 
4 March 1799



My Dear Friend

I have just now received your Letter in the same cover with our Seamans dispatch & experience in every thing your kind attention to my requests.

My Answer to your last was delayed by Accidents but I hope will have reached you before this. You will there see our sense of your good offices & may perceive the joy with which we avail ourselves of them. It occurred to me that you might wish without loss of time to have the young mans Name Viz. James Ferguson. But his age I did not think of. He was born in the year 1778 of course is now turned of twenty but not twenty one which I hope is still within the Age at which Cadets are taken into the Service; if it should  exceed the Age of Admission we shall be woefully dissappointed As we have all agreed to prefer the Cadetship you mention even to an immediate gift of a first Commission in the Kings Service. I write merely to Convey this information of our name and Age & Shall not detain my Letter for any Other matter whatever. Believe me to be

My Dear Friend 
most Affectionately yours 

Hallyards 20th March 




My Dear Friend

I have received your packet inclosing Admiral Nugents line to you & our Seamans dispatch to me. In the last I am sorry to see some traits of ill humour like a spoilt child when he is taken away from his Mother & cannot brook any less attention than used to be payd to him. I wrote immediately without your Cover least you should be out of the way to check this as soon as Possible. He is impatient to be in a frigate & consequently out of humour where he is but my doctrine to him is implicit & even chearful Obedience & I hope he will recollect himself. His conditions as a Sort of favourite with his two last Captains may have spoilt him a little & piqued his Competitors in the Ship: But I hope it  will go off. And I shall be glad to take any occasion to trouble to Sr Jé Saumarez with my Solicitude on his account. Our wou'd be Cadet is now here Ayant pris congé d'Edinburgh And as we mean to do nothing here in the way of fitting out, can be at London when required as quickly as a letter by the Mail Coach. He is Armed with a proper Certificate of his Age from the Minister of the Parish. It appeared upon inquiry that he was born the 15th of March 1798 & consequently that it is thus & no nearer with him being now 21 out.

I have not yet seen Adam Since this bussiness came on the Anvil, he is much detained by Volunteer Duty & would have my Consent to accompany his Brother and thank you for me as I am too old to do so myself: but am doubtful whether in these times he can have the necessary leave of Absence. War here or in  Ireland if not on the Seas between us and the Enemy we are likely to have. So if we  are not victorious, in my mind happy is he who falls: but I am willing, here in your medicinal Stile to believe the best. If we have heads we want nothing. What say you. Will the Austrians who refused to answer a question be bullyed by the March of an Army. & so bid the Russians go back. My wish is that they would tempt the French to advance into Bohemia or Austria & then receive them on the flank with an Army of Russians & the other with Germans: but we shall see who is fool now. I am well enough Aware of my own chance for that Disstinction: but never cease to be my Dear Friend yours most affectionately


Hallyards near Peebles 15 July 1799

My Dear Friend

If you & I were two Ships at Sea we should have long since been haling what Chear Ho. But as we are at least one of us an Idle fellow at land who neglects the small duties on hand merely because he is overrun with leisure or nothing to do. This however is no new case I have known an Idle man delay Bussiness for months: which a very bussy man never deffers a moment to execute. With all this delay I have been not a little Anxious to hear from you What has become of your Friends at Florence. The news paper report put our Friend M —  in disgrace. This however undeserved, among Courts, will not greatly surprise me, & may have happened in particular under the Influence of Vienna &c. But I hope you can relieve me from this Apprehension. The Enemy I trust must Evacuate Italy And Swisserland &c. But our Project of restoring Monarchy with Priviledged  Noblesse in France has many difficulties. Property Again to change hands. Low Born men both in Civil & military Stations to lay their heads in the dust from which they arose. It was much easier to lay the frivolous corrupted pretenders to Aristocracy in the dust than it will be to bury their Rascally Successors. The former exclusive pretensions of Birth to consideration & preferment will never be restored as long any shred of the low born republican Army Subsists. I have been saying so for years tho nobody seems to mind it. Every Army would prefer the Monarchy of a favourite Leader to any Other Government. And the whole French Nation Soldiers & all may be asshamed or disgusted with their tryal of Democracy if they are only allowed to Suppose; that want of birth for the future is not to stifle merit of any Condition.

So much for the great Scene of Nations. There is another too about which I am somewhat anxious. Do you know Mr Mc Intosh whose project to give Lectures on the Law of Nature & Nations has been Announced in a preliminary  Discourse? Have his Lectures taken place? With what success? The Specimen I have seen inclines me to think he is one of the greatest Moralists this Island has produced & I consider the publick Character as involved in his Success.

Has my new Edition of the Roman Story reached you, have I done right in Spelling my forreign honours at full length, I could not find out the Customary Abbreviations; you may not be sensible of much improvement. It was a Satisfaction to me while in Italy that I was not made sensible of many Blunders by seeing the Country or its Antiquities. Believe me to be most

Affectionately yours 

Hallyards 2d September 




My Dear Friend

As the Summer is now passed I take courage to write in hopes we may pass through a winter and see a better one. Man is Surely a vegetable & will yield neither blossom nor Fruit when the season is backward. To this I hope you will impute my Silence & what is worse than Silence a listless indifference about every thing that is passing in world even about my own books Authors & Readers. I am nevertheless willing in the language of Lloyds Coffee House to under-write your Verses to the Arch-Duke if he will reinstate The Mentor where he found him. If you know any particulars I am very Anxious about him.

I hear very favourable accounts of Mr McIntoshs performances at Lincolns Inn. As I judge only from his pamphlet his Tone tho' perhaps more harmonious is in unison with mine. He had his reasons probably for not mentioning me & I am not Solicitous about them. He will probably procure the moral Philosophy that Popularity in England which I wished for but have been unable to Obtain. His taking  his ground in the Law is not so apt to allarm the Universities & the Church as if he had called his Object Moral Philosophy which those Authorities sometimes mention among the Corruptions of the Times. I need not Ask you about the Roman History; it would be very bad indeed if you did not commend it: but even if you should not I hope its faults are fewer than they were. I wish the same thing to befall my Other more recent Book, And have warned the Bookseller that if they think it will ever bear being reprinted now is their time; while I have faculties left to Curtail its faults. If not my amendments must go to my heirs & take their chance. By the By as we say upon the Tweed I am just now meditating a work of no great length or moment. It is to be dramatic and you with Some Others a Principal Actor. It is to tell what I would have done with my little effects after I am gone. I mean you to have a Duplicate & will place another with my Friend Sir William Nairne One of Our Honourable Judges if he accept as I doubt not he will. In the mean time My Land Lord is building for my Convenience an addition to my house as if I were to live on through the next century.

Your Magazines &c that talk of my Life have robbed me of a year for I was born in 1723 &  am of course 76 now past. So indulge me in a little prating about the times that were. If you should the times that are will not be offended; for I really think them better than any we have formerly had. The Madness of France has made us understand and relish the Sobriety of our own forms. The multitude & insolence of so near an Enemy has roused every Soul in Britain to Politics & War as well as Trade. Women & Children can listen to talk about matters of Consequence to Mankind. The Evils and follies of one quarter become lessons of Wisdom to another And so the world is guided. Storms & Tempests have produced Architecture And the Manufacture of Cloth. So much for moralizing & it is well the end of my paper is in sight otherwise you might have more. It is long since I heard from you, I am affraid by my own fault, however I hope to hear soon you are well & about reaping your harvest, if so late with you when may we look for it here. I am away from any means of knowing Fordyces Motions Otherwise should certainly endeavour to find him.

I am sensible of his kindness and always had a regard for him. Believe my Dear Friend yours &c

A. Ferguson
[14 February 1800]

My Dear Friend

I have had the inclosed from Dr Blair with instructions to return it to you. Justice is done to our financical Policy & if omnia si su  with our Armed Landmen & our Glorious Seamen we would be a fortunate People: but something as you hint is wanting in our Conception of things abroad. Some people I find are of opinion that we ought to be sending our Troops abroad to see Service. If this Policy be adopted let them go to the Rhine or the Danube to act under Suvarov or ArchDuke Charles: but not where [xxx] to retreat they must reembark in presence of an Ennemy & be cut off or lay down their Arms. The habit of begging for Quarter is not a good lesson of Service. You touch the Convention of Pilnitz. I believe very fairly & all I have to Say on that Subject is that whenever mentioned it should be particularly Specifye[d] & not passed over in general terms. When we are beat we desire no more than Safety to Publick and private property but when we are victorious we would have something more for our trouble. In the first Case our Ennemy woud give us peace in the Second we wont have it. So I dont know what is to happen to us. We would have a Peace in which  it will be safe for us to dissarm; But such a Peace I believe we are never more to See. While France exists whether under Military Government or a pretended Democracy This Island must be Armed to be Safe.

The late question has been not whether we would conclude with Buonaparte on any Specifyed Terms: but whether in the present circumstances we would Suspend all our efforts & those particularly in concert with our allies to try what sort of Terms Buonaparte would offer.

To the last Question I would give a decided negative tho I am inclined to think the terms in the present Conjuncture might be better than we may ever after get Sight of. This Recent Usurper might agree to any thing Short of his own resignation or a relinquishment of the Equality which his army claims. Any treaty Concluded with us would imply the Acknowledgement of his Sovereignty & this he would buy at a great Price. And he would have so much to do in restoring his Country from the dilapidations of recent folly: that I believe the person is not alive who would see it his interest to go to War. Nay but he would make a great Fleet so much the Better as Frederick of Prussia once said. The [E]nglish will take them all. Nations would never be [s]atisfied till they have nothing to fear from Abroad. And if they should ever Come to think so the greatest [n]ation on Earth would be undone. I am projecting this for a Cover merely to the inclosed as more might exceed the legal ounce: but how it is to fold I know not: be that as it may. I  must tell you of a recent relief from anxiety & even desponde[ncy] in the recovery of our little Seaman from a Fever under which he has been sent ashore to sick Quarter at Dartmouth. I have corresponded with his Medical Foru[m] and at last have a letter from himself saying he is almost quite well. It is pleasant to read with what triumph he speaks of his Captain Sr Jas Sumarez kindness & of every Officer & Man about him. That is a noble class of men noursed in continual hardship & danger to a contempt of every thing but generosity and Courage. God grant me but a little Spice of their Character.

yours most Affectionately 

Hallyards 29 April 




My Dear Friend

I have been remiss in my Correspondence of late And have to thank you as usual for kind attention to my Concerns, What you try to Alleviate my Affliction is not without Effect. Your own presence to my mind is powerful. It is indeed the condition of old age and long life to Survive many we would wish to preserve. Poor Josephs Life has been Short: but not Sunk in dejection. He had the esteem & regard of those about him without mortification in his little course of Ambition. And it is Some Consolation to me that when he looked to me for Aid my Circumstances did not Oblige me to refuse it. And for ought that appeared to him he was a fortunate man which is the utmost that mere life whether long or short can procure to any one. For the Sum when it is Gods Will we should die it is as good as to live Or rather as I am perswaded it is to enter on a new life. And thus reason is easily Satisfy'd altho  to Taste the draught is bitter. His name has never yet been mentioned here & we commonly meet with recent mark of Tears, which we endeavour to conceal And this he would have done for us.

You may believe I anxiously wish you[r] Success in the transaction you mention or what is Still better indifference to what may happen. It is supremely pleasant to lean upon those who are disposed to befriend us but not less so to be independent of those who are Otherwise. If you have a fault it is believing that all the world must be sensible of the good you intend them. I would be Selfish so far as to do what is right merely that I myself might enjoy it; Be the Theater on which I act great or Small. It is impossible to be more Obscure than I am in this place: yet my thoughts I trust will habitually place me in the presence of a Majesty beyond the Universe itself & to which the Observation of all mankind if it could be Obtained were as nothing. The Intelligence that Conducts  the Universe is here present & intimately know[s] what we think and do. May he never be Absent from our thoughts. Believe me most Affectionately yours &c


Hallyards 13 August 1802

My Dear Friend

I write merely to inquire, how you do. From hence there is little else to be either said or done. Let that then be the first question. Next are you likely to have any concern in this Liquidation of Arcott Debt which the news papers talk of. Then. What sense do you put upon this soi disant new Constitution of France. I understand that the Premier Consul is a great sovereign, Supreme & Absolute standing upon the Pinacle of Military Merit & Force. That apart from Subsistence & self preservation there is no principle of Action in the State but military Preferment. If there be any Other pray tell me of it: But dont put me off with saying that the publick Good is a great Object. I own it: but I never knew the hundredth part of mankind actuated by that alone. Men are like Planets they must at least have two forces to make them go in their Orbits. One a Projectile by which they would fly, God knows where. Another a Central whose pressure  in eyery moment is only Nascent but continued & keeps them from flying off. Mans Projectile Force is Directed to some personal Advantage: but there is a central force that keeps him more or less Correctly in a track of innocence or beneficence to those around him. Take the Projectile force from him, he might not go wrong:but for the most part would fall into the heap and not move at all. I must repeat however that this is to Speak only in General: For I believe that there are individuals who would be inactive if it were not for a principle of good will to their fellow Creatures which does not allow them to be idle. This Principle however I do not believe is yet the Ruling Passion in France. If you want me therefore to believe that this new Constitution of France is any thing more than a projected Contre Dance in which Couples are made to Stand up without a fidle to put them in motion you must tell me what is to bring the Cantonal Assemblies &c &c together. In short what is the Power or Emolument to be got by running the Career of Communes Cantons  Districts & Departments of Senates Tribunates Legislatures & Privy Councils. I know What is to make a man become a Soldier & seek preferment in his Battalion, in the Legion of Honour & so forth to the very Pinacle of Chief Consul. Even if there be emolument as well as Title in Civil preferment & Office, If such be in the gift of the Chief Consul alone The way will be to pay court to him not to run the Career of an Actual Political Life. Solve me all this & then I shall have the Pleasure of a letter from you.

By the Way I have one from our Friend Mr McKenzie Secretary of the Highland Society telling me of a Subscription on foot for some Badges of honour to My Friends the 42. When a list of Subscribers appears I shall be proud to stand at the tail of £5. 5 or some Such Pittance, And should beg of him to insert my name but nothing I doubt can be done without publication of Names and contributions as in Other projects of a publick Nature. Our Season I think begins to mend on our hands: but we shall have verdure here for the most part of two months to Come. You I trust are far gone in Harvest. But tell me how that is and Believe me to be most

affectionately yours 

Hallyards 26 Octr 1802

My Dear Friend

what is become of you? Are we to have Politics only in our letters? And has the peace made an end of our lucubrations? I hope that some of these questions will be Answered in the negative and that if we are not in the humour of writing long letters we may have the pleasure of short. Cicero that great Pattern of Eloquence epistolary as well as declamatory when from hope wrote to the Mother of His Family: Si Vales bene est ego Valeo and this with his name at top made a whole letter. I have sometimes attempted to mimick it & think I can do so now. If you are well so am I. I shall think such a letter from you Cheap of a Shilling, & therefore I pray you withhold it not. As for the peace I think it is a more alarming Crisis than any we experienced in the War. I am however far from thinking that War would relieve us.

God bless you & farewell yours &c 
A. Ferguson
Hallyards near Peebles 15 Dec'r 1802

My Dear Friend

I am at least two letters in your debt & yet find myself in a fair way to be waiting for a third without considering that at my time of Life there should be some evidence of experience & fact of my being alive to endure any one to trust matters of consequence under my address. The Fact then is that I am alive & will be happy on any occasion that may make what I know of your merits the topic of discourse. As to effects they may be little:but that is not what I have to Answer for. You have probably by this time seen your Friend Otto on Board & I am sorry for it as I believe he is averse to Mischief. I flattered myself once that his Principal  was so likewise: but now see that the mountain torrent of Idiotical Ambition is too Strong for any reason. What the Devil Inducement can Master Buonaparte have to be hasten[ing] all Europe under Despotism to the Ruin of France as well as the Rest & the Suppression of every Spark of Political Life or Ingenuity in the world. I trust we are to see an Age of Glory not of degradation for this Countrey. I pray you to Congratulate your Friends in Administration on the State of Political Controversy. They have got two or three excellent Props. Their own good Intentions. The attack of Grenvilles And the Support of Fox & Sherridan with all the Unshackled Artillery of publick expedience And good Sense. I long to hear from you & am &c &c

A.F.
Hallyards Fbry 12th 




My Dear Friend

I sit down in darkness or in a State approaching to blindness with sore Eyes to acknowledge your kind letters. & my Seamans Triumph in being passed for Lieutennant. Of what is to be done next I am intirely Ignorant & will therefore Submit to any orders he may receive & hope he will be ready Serve in any quarter of the World. My Constant injunction to him is to mind his own Duty not how Other People behave to him. It is not always Good to be a Favourite with those who Command.

I hope I shall at this time make no mistakes in closing My Letter. I recollect being in a hurry  when I proposed to inclose your Friend Otts letter. I have now Some Curiosity to know what went instead of it. I hope it was not a Billet Doux from any of the Octogenaire Nymphs of this Nighbourhood. If so I can only beg of you to be discreet. I am happy to think you have so much Scope for the exercise of your Beneficent & Peace Making temper. Reading or writing is a principal Prohibition under which I now lye & therefore Conclude with my most affectionate Respects to you &c &c


Hallyards 10th Novr 




My Dear Friend

I return Sir W. Ps letter as you desired And Mr Fordyces also as Sir J. Sinclair through whose hands it came is so good as to give a Pass for the return also. I doubt Mr F. mistook the effect of my meeting with him for the Ordinary State of my Being. I have heard of young or midle Aged People having their hair turned grey all in one night from the effect of some dissappointment or Sorrow, I do not see why a meeting of Friends might not turn grey hairs black; there is indeed nothing but the want of Facts that prevents my believing it. As for the twelve years he Assigns me I dont doubt but he would give them with health & joy also: but that is not  what I look for; decrepitude and dullness of Sense is the lot of Age And our Author is so good as to let us live sometimes till we are tired of Life. Even with this prospect I have my Comforts. The Beneficent and The Great at whose disposal I am does not permit to dread or to regret any thing I cannot help.

As to your affairs I need not entreat that you will let me know the Consummation as soon as it takes place. I am reading the life of Sir W. Jones & am glad to be confirmed in an opinion which I took upon seeing him as I once did in Company at London; that he was made for better things than the mere literary Curiosities Antient or Modern which his singular Talent for Language led him at an early period of Life to explore. This talent very naturally pointed him out as a proper Instrument of our Asiatic Government. But I am not so easily reconciled to the detrusion of our Country mana McIntosh into the same Grave. 

It is melancholy that we have no place in our Domestic System for Moral & Political Wisdom Armed with glowing Eloquence; these indeed I have been told from great Authority are not the Spring or Pulse which gives the movement to our Blood. We must have Party & the jargon of Party not the Love of our Country and the candid voice of unbiassed judgement in our debates: But be it so if this choice piece of Machinery would otherwise cease to move.

My Blessings be upon you & this I think is a more proper Stile for me than either Respects Complements or Services As I am in endless sincerity ever yours



Sir John Mc Pherson Bart
Hallyards near Peebles 13 May 1805

My Dear Friend

I cannot rightly account for my Silence Some time past: Anxious untill I heard the India Bussiness was so far Settled; & since somewhat remiss; or rather averse to the Subjects, which we used to write about; & but for the two last copies* which you have sent me, I should have no heart to write now. These Copies I approve much. Your own from Calcutta was a proper Warning to the Direction at Home. What they ought to have been prepared for & what they ought to have done but they were a part of that very Publick from which you had no popularity to expect. Montesquieu Attempted to fix the Principles of different Governments & if he had touched on Mercantile Government, he would have said the Principle was L'Argent not publick but private Pocketting: with your Publick & Liberal Views you was neither to be Understood nor Considered. You do  not tell me what Sr G. Dallas was, at that time: but if my feelings of the Mass be the reverse of Admiration, his part compensates. A more manly friendly & Sensible letter I never read; I am not anxious about any Effect his Suggestions might have. You are, I trust, above any uneasiness of Fortune; & his Testimony is worth many Millions to a Mind that can enjoy itself. Give me some Comfort, I pray you on the state of publick affairs; I mean the War.

We engaged, without the possibility of an Object: but that of defending ourselves: Are we in a Condition to do so? Are we now to find out that the Strength of our Navy was Neglected; And the Enemy have only to Threaten us at home to be masters every where else. De Republica non Desperandum  is for men in Active life. But for the Superannuated & Idle to be secure  is little better than Indifference. I am about closing my 82d year so I trust you will pardon a little peevishness.

Yours most Affectionately


Hallyards near Peebles 29th August 1805

My Dear Friend

I am sorry to hear Complaints of your Health; And wish you had been more particular. If it proceeds from the habits of a Town Life continued beyond the meridian, a retreat to the Country is surely the best remedy. This however I doubt is not to be had within the Atmosphere of Tunbridge Wells. And I am perswaded your wisest Course woud be an excursion to this Country & a few draughts of this Highland Air you would be surprised to see how we baffle even Old Age itself in this part of the World. That is to say by the Continuance of animal Life or at least Vegetation. As for capacity & Energy of mind these are reserved for another Life. I  Suspect you are too much Agitated with the winds that blow from so many different quarters of this Political Horizon. We who are not entrusted with either Sail or Rudder ought to take our Station as Passengers & not accountable even if the Ship should go down. Such is my Preaching if not my Practice. You may believe at least that I am not indifferent to L. Ms Affairs. That Brush is the worst Effect of Party that has past in my Time; but I trust that The Mass of the Country is still so untainted with Faction that he will have his Rank in the Publick Esteem. Two or three publick Measures which I am Confident were his would have set him very high in my mind even if he had been personally negligent of me as I am affraid he was too much so of you. The Commutation of a most Absurd & Oppressive Tax on Water borne Coal. The affection of all Highlanders gained to the State & The King by the R[e]stitution  of forfeited Estates. The Arming of the Country &c &c Are measures untainted with Party or with party Interest & the work of a mind that had leisure to do good as well as to Strugle for Power. I have not heard of his Arrival in this Country but when I do shall be proud to leave my Name at his Door.

Your kindness I am affraid does but tempt My Son to be troublesome at London. His present excursions thither is against My Mind. His Profession[al] Prospects in this Country as I formerly mentioned are Small: but the Horizon of London & the world beside is no better & I have wished him to abide by what I can do for him here: & if there be no World for him on which to Range that he be Contented with a Nook & a Kail yard on which to breath. Send him down then I pray you as soon as you Can & if you come with him so much the Better. You may growl over publick errata here as well as at London. 

A. Ferguson
Hallyards near Peebles 
7th June 1806



My Dear Friend

It is long since I wrote but I trust you will not Suspect my Silence of unkindness or neglect. You have heard of Old Age & its numberless defects: but indi[f]ference is none of them; it magnifies every Care & every Anxiety: but has no Energy to relieve them. I believe it is the Intention of Nature to wean from this Scene of things & reconcile us to the end of it. And I would willingly be reconciled to its Continuance & take the consolation which Madam Roland one of Revolutionary Ladies of France had in her imprisonment viz. that she had nothing to do: but to be there. But to have nothing to do because we can do nothing is but indifferent Comfort. 

Who is this Mr Keene who attacks you? Some of those perhaps who disliked your Government in India. Are your affairs Still in Suspence & likely to remain so beyond the present Session of Parliament by mere Arts of Procrastination. If so my firm perswasion is that you cannot do better this Summer than make an excursion to this part of the World. Two or three weeks at Hallyards with your namesake the Seaman whom we expect to see every Moment would repell every attack of Ill health &c.

People should be cautious how they Speak of themselves: but when attacked the Publick may Sympathize with Defence. If you were here I think that you  and I could give such a Simple and unvarnished Accou[n]t of all that has befallen you as would choak the breath of Malice if it succeed so far as to delay your Affair to another Session. Think seriously of this. And be Assured that independently of every Other Consideration the very journey is an Object & may do more to your Health than even your Farm Airy as you may Suppose it to be. My He[alth] is wonderfully Good. I go into the Wa[rm] Bath every Day like an Old Rom[an]. It has banished Cramps Rheum[a]tism & does not Confine me for a moment but while I am undressed in any weather Summer or Winter. I have been free of Colds or other Complaints for two years. I bath every Day because I have nothing else to do. If you were here you should have the bath every Other Day & I am Sure it woud do you good. Most Affectionately

yours 

Hallyards near Peebles 29 Decr 1806

My Dear Friend

There is a Gaelic Proverb which I once had occasion to translate VIZ. He who will not Sow in cold weather will not reap in Warm Weather. And I can match it now in the correspondence betwixt you & me. He who [w]ill not write Letters will not have any to read. For ought I have to write the Silence might still continue: but how am to bear your Silence on every Good or bad that befalls you & in which I have to partake. My Son The Man of War wrote me how much your looks were improved from the time he had seen you. And I hope that you are put on Some Moderate  Regimen neither Starvation nor repletion that may Support you in the State to which Cheltenham has brought you.

Man has been called a Microcosm but you are rather a Macrocosm & must have aliment for feet and Inches. The Rate must be fixed by Experience & dont decide hastily. The result of two or three Mo[nt]hs at least is Necessary to determine. I never felt any inconvenience from the lowest diet to which I have ever been reduced but this may not be the case with you. Have you any Leisure or Stomach for Politics now? You used to be a Medicin tant mieux  but I doubt you much change your ton. Half the Kings & Emperors of Europe  were your Friends. Never was such a Contrast of Ability on one Side to Torpor or folly worse than torpor on the Other. The Austrians were tempted to Temporize with Bonaparte by the gift of Venice which he made them. The Prussians by the gift of Hanover neither cons[i]dering that he who would make such Gifts could give away their Capitals. Europe is still ignorant of what has happened to France. A Revolution which kindled a Fire in the heart of every drummer in the French Army & plucked up Leaders of Supreme Genius from the very Mud in which the common State of Things would have burried them. The Cocks are now pitted on the Frontiers of two great Empires in Poland: For I  think that the West from the mouth of the Elb, the Straits of Dover and the Pillars of Hercules is as much united under one Head as the East from the Vistula to Camshatka. And if the latter can do nothing to rouse their People to some degree of uncommon exert[ion] they will very soon tire of the War.

I do not see why the Emperor Alexr despising the charge of Plagiarism may not copy Napoleons Legion of Hono[ur]. All Europe must now see that the Choice every State is to make, is either a Sort of Existence by the permission of France or an exertion for Independence.

But I have said enough to condemn myself for being so tardy in writing on the excuse of blindness & old Age. I have written this letter but cannot read it. But am most Affectionately yours


Hallyards 16 Septr 




My Dear Friend

I went into the Case  drawn up by your Friends at London, as soon as I received it, And very highly esteem their [xxx] part only in it, as well as the Ground That was laid for them, And attempted to write to you immediately; sed ter cecidere manus . I should be sorry to break upon that confidence in Mankind & in Justice which has been a Characteristic of you[r] life. At the same time I wished to guard you against the wounds of Dissappointment in this Appeal to Justice, and Candour. What we have to dread is no[t] a direct negative to our Claims, but the delays which Insidious malice may  still procure & with a more cruel Effect than any immediate decision could have. These were topics on which I could easily say too much and on which after I had written I wished to retract. In short, I applaud your confidence in all worthy men: but would join with al[l] indifference to those who are Otherwise. When Alexander saw Diogenes he felt immediately that next to Conquering the World that was the very part he should Act. Here is a Tub more roomy than that of Diogenes and it would be joyous for me to see you every moment of My Life.

You mention a letter of Sir John Dalling* but did not inclose it. If it be material that Fordyce should see it: please send it to him.

I am My Dear Friend 
ly 

Hallyards near Peebles Octr 24th 1803



I have a kind hint on the back of a letter from Sir Jn McPherson franked by you; that the Answer might go through your hands also. I accordingly take the benefit of this Hint & the Rather that it gives me an opportunity without attempting an adequate Return to the great dispatch with which you honoured me too many months ago, to deprecate your contempt of me for having so long failed in that matter. This failure at least may inform you that I am in fact superannuated & so far one of your Pets which you wish to preserve as long as possible. It is to be hoped that some of them are of more use than I am otherwise you may e'en let them go in course. Here are three of us born the same year Viz. 1723.  There is little difference in our Appearance only that I am the least weather beatten of the Three. I have had the advantage of exemption from Toil & they till of late have had the advantage of Sobriety: But there is another twelve years older than we are having been born in 1712, A Peasant of this Parish his Sobriety you need not doubt. The World for ought he has seen of it may not be twelve Miles broad or long: but he has been distinguished through Life for Vivacity, is Veridick open Spoken & quoted for bon mots. He was of a good Aspect & Stature: but is now blind & much Shrunk, goes through his usual haunts without any assistance or guide is even offended at being offered any. I see as well as you do of a dark night he said to me, & why may not I find my way as well as you do. They tell me I have lived long: but it is just a Gliff .

I have often thought to get our Minister to Answer all your Queries respecting this Person: but you know the Consequence of Procrastination after four Score. I have the honour to be

 
your obedient  






Sir John McPhersons address 
at Brompton near London
St Andrews Febry 26th 1812



I have just learned by a letter from my Seaman John that I am now possessed of your kindness and friendship to this Seaman as formerly to his Elder Brother and I would do more if I could than hasten in this way to Acknowledge it but I despair of being able to fulfill your kind intentions by attempting to write a letter of solicitation to His Grace the Duke of Buccleugh. The little access I personally had to his Noble Father would not justify any such liberty. I should by that means be known to his Grace together with my Son as a Bore for life this word is possibly now out of fashion but it was used in my time to Signify any person or thing that was carefully shunned forever. That man was a Bore who repeatedly teased you with long visits and dryed up the source of every agreeable  conversation by continual returns to some tiresome Matter in which he was concerned- he was called in Italian Siccatore a name more easily understood from its derivation than Bore which owed its meaning to the application alone.

The handwriting is in another hand than Ferguson's, apparently Sir Adam's. Just the signature, very tremulous, is in Ferguson's hand.

Unless therefore you think yourself Warranted to recommend our Seaman to the Duke of Buccleughs notice as a young man of Merit to be received occasionally into his Graces Company and unless his Grace should find him so upon tryal I should despair of any advantage to be gained by a connection formed in the Character of a Bore. His Grace's Father I had occasion to observe had some predilection for the Character of a Seaman — it is open — it is Candid — it is Manly and not to be shaken [by] trifling difficulties and therefore acceptable as a Companion to his Grace.

You will pardon any  thing that is wrong in this Letter and believe me to be though little accustomed to dictate what others are to write.

Most truely your obliged 
and affectionate 
 

Septr 8th 1778


His Majesty's Commissioners finding it expedient to ascertain the Quantity of ship Tonnage at present within the North & East Rivers and the Sound, I am to request the favour of you to prepare and transmit to me as soon as convenient an account of such part of Such Tonnage as is engaged in His Majesty's Service within your Department that I may lay the same before the Commissioners for their excellencies Information. I have the honour &c &c 

I have the Honour to be with Great Respect, Sir your most obedient and most 









I was made very happy last night by seeing your name on some covers directed to me & as I suppose you knew the Contents It is with great pleasure I hasten to give you my thoughts on the Subject. If Mr Wilkes had been contented to pass through Parliament inobserved I should have been averse to move his expulsion for the Prudential reasons with which This Speech concludes. But as he himself dared the house to enter on the consideration of his Subject, How was it possible for the house of commons to avoid declaring that he was or was not an infamous person unworthy of a share in the Legislature of his Countrey. On such occasions The Populace are to be told that The house of commons is not to be governed by the consideration of their disspleasure: but that they are to be Governed by the decisions of The House. 

The Whole Arguments of this Speech proceed upon false Suppositions a misstake of the Spirit of our Constitution and indeed of what is Possible in the Nature of things. The House of Commons is addressed as a Court of Justice & expulsion is treated as the Punishment of a Crime. In Our Constitution the Legislature & Judicature are carefully Separated, except in appeals to the House of Lords. But the several Branch[e]s of the Legislature must have the Power to Suspend all Jurisdiction and all execution of the Law whenever this Power is necessary for its own defence. It is in The Capacity of a Branch of the Legislature acting in its own defence that The House of Commons decides concerning the Priviledges Elections & Qualifications of its own members. When Acting in this Capacity the House of Commons has no Superior No Lawgiver no Equal. Its Duty requires that it should Effectually repell every attack and remove every Danger; that it should preserve every Priviledge & this with or Without Precedent, according as the case is new or otherwise  And according as the former proceedings of Parliament in such cases have been wise or Otherwise.

This I shall be told is supposing a Disscretionary Power in the House of Commons. I know how Odious the name of Disscretionary Power is. Our Constitution abhors it in the King or Courts of Justice except when acting in their own defence. It abhors it Likewise in either house of Parliament except where they concur with The King in some Act of Legislature or in the Defence of their own Priviledges and Separate Rights. But in all these Instances Disscretionary Powers are necessary in the Nature of things & no Government ever coud proceed without them. What is our Security against the abuse of such Powers in any branch of the Legislature. This abuse may be supposed to affect some other Branch of the Legislature. In this case the Security arises from the Collateral Power that is invaded & qualified to defend itself. But the Special abuse now apprehended is the encroachment of the house of commons on the general Rights of the People. Can any one imagine that  This Constitution coud have existed so long, if the security against this abuse had been derived solely from forms & Precedents. If forms and Precedents coud give this Security why are we at pains to send Representatives from all the different Parts of The Kingdom, why have we so carefully Specifyed their qualifications but in order that they might be men of Like Passions and Like Interests with ourselves. To continue the Language of Scripture our Security is that they are bone of our Bone & flesh of our flesh. That they cannot tear a bit of our flesh without tearing their own with it. This is what The Constitution means when it says that we are safe under the Protection of our own Representatives. If it be aledged that the Safety or the Authority of the Commons in any case [xxx] is in danger. This Alegation must be dissproved, or the necessary measures must be taken to remove the danger. How absurd woud it be to say that  these objects the safety or Authority of the commons must be given up because there is no Precedent according to which  they can be defended. With humble Submission therefore to the Able Speaker I must Insist that he ought to have shown that neither the Authority nor the Dignity of the Commons had been attacked in the case of Wilkes. Or if he confessed that they were attacked, his denial of former effectual precedents to guide the house; only proved the necessity of having Recourse to something new. He has reasoned with great Power and Elocution upon the same Supposition of a Judicial Tryal Against Punishing Mr Wilkes twice for the same offence &c. Does our Constitution then say that expulsion from the house of commons is a Punishment? What was it in those times of our Constitution when the Duties of Parliament were considered as a Burden? Is Mr Wilkes to be Punished only by putting him in the same Situation with every Gentleman in this Kingdom except a few hundreds that Sit in Parliament. The Courts of Justice have Punished Mr Wilkes And Our Constitution Says that he cannot  be tryed repeatedly nor by different courts for the same offence. He coud not therefore be tryed Judicially by the House of Commons: but it having appeared from his Tryal & Condemnation elsewhere & from the undenyed grounds assumed in the Motion; that he was an Infamous Person. The house expelled him. He was not Punished but declared unworthy of a share in the Legislature of this Kingdom, And this expulsion  [xxx] xxx of an Infamous person when moved or stirred by himself or any other I humbly think was necessary in order to Mantain The Authority and the Dignity of the Commons of Great Britain. I confess I am Surprised to hear any body alledge a dangerous precedent in this Case as if the House woud be led to do wrong hereafter by doing right now: An Unjust Action is always a bad precedent. Even a just Action performed by improper persons is a bad Precedent Likewise. But a Proper Action proceeding from the Proper Authority Cannot be a bad precedent merely because it is alledged there is no prior example to be followed  in the performance of it. This however is the Stress of this Speakers Argument. I do not conceive what he can gain by quoting the example of Mr Walpole: If the act of Corruption he mentions were true The House did right in expelling Mr Walpole And their the Successors did wrong in ever admitting him to sit in Parliament. If we consider the use which he afterwards made of his great Power I think we need not be affraid to say that this Nation coud have well disspensed with his Services. The first Resolution however with respect to him was held to be final & his Constituents did what the Constituents of Mr Wilkes must [xxx] apprehend for the Preservation of the Constitution be obliged to do: they must acquiesce in the Resolution of the Commons.

I allow that this Contest has brought on a dangerous Crisis & think it the more so perhaps for being at a distance from the Scene. But was this Crisis to be Avoided by giving way to the Pretensions of an Infamous Person Supported by a deluded Populace. I apprehend  for my own Part that if the Authority of Parliament and of the Government in all its Parts is not Properly Supported the State will be in the utmost danger. Our Constitution knows of no Authority but that of King Lords & Commons but we are now fostering a fourth Power in the State, That of the Populace of London, and at the time in which they are become most Corrupted we are inviting them to a share in the Government.

I know not the Present Ministers nor am qualifyed to Judge of the Rolls of Parliament but this I am sure of, that it is the Interest of Every Person Possessed of any Property or consideration in the Kingdom to Suspend their personal dissputes untill they have taught the mob of London not to Interpose. If the present Ministers were bad & the Present Parliament ill chosen I woud neither dissolve nor dissplace them, when such an Action must necessarily lay the foundation of Popular Pretensions ruinous to order & Government. I have heard with  some degree of Affliction that you had embarked with the opposition on the present occasion. I shoud not have regreted most assuredly your Opposing the Measures of a Minister on any Particular occasion. But if I understand the Term opposition, it is joining with a Party who are engaged in disstressing the Government in all Possible ways, who will allow no body to differ from them in any point whatever Nor to serve the Public in any office but in Conjunction with themselves. With this meaning in my head if I had been at London I shoud have prostrated myself at your feet to have hindered your forming any such Connections. But perhaps the Report is false. There are Views I am sure more worthy of your Understanding & of your heart. It is to try whether a Neutral Interest can be formed by men of Property & Family to Ward off the Evils with which the  Constitution is threatned in the Ishue of a Contest between Mobs & Military Power: for I tremble at the Thought of its coming to that without any body at hand to insist for the Constitution. Our Government is said by Mr Montesquieu and others to be perfect. They only think of the dangers to Liberty that come from The Crown. They do not consider the dangers to Liberty that come from the Populace. The Habeas Corpus & the Tryal by Juries bind up the hands of the King: but unless The Riot Laws are amended there are a thousand hands for one let loose. These reformations cannot be made untill our Present Gamblers for Power are made to feel that they cannot rise upon the shoulders of the Mob. I have written all this in great haste in hopes of Pardon for Inaccuracys & in confidence that one point will be well understood my meaning and Intention  towards yourself. If I had been at London & within reach of knowing your sentiments as they arose I make no doubt but you woud have carryed me along with you as you always did here. But I write in the Dark & without knowing Particulars. Believe me to be

My Dear Sr 
 
& most  








P.S. I cannot have done. The apprehension thrown out in this Speech that on the supposition that the House of Commons were to judge of the worthyness or unworthyness of persons to have a share in the Legislature of their Country: they woud become Electors is extremely groundless. In the first place the house of commons does not exist untill it is chosen by the People. In the next place persons so chosen act by their Majority. They may go wrong in Particular  Instances but never to any extent that is dangerous to the Rights of the People for they themselves are people & can have no rights when those of the people are given up. If it be said that they may sell their own rights and those of the People the Constitution on this supposition is undone & I am sure that the freeholders of Middlesex will not save it by chusing infamous persons to serve in Parliament, nor the Gamblers for Power by supporting them in that choice.
Bankhead Decr 1st 






I wrote a few days ago a short apology for my apprehensions of the London Mob. It is not the courage but the Cowardice of them & their opponents I Dread. Recollect & you will find that cowardice has raised & Perpetuated more Military Governments than ever courage did. Sylla is the only man since the Beginning of the World that ever had the Courage to lay down a Military Government at the head of which he had offended. If you drive a Coward to the wall he is more dangerous than a brave man in another Situation.

Having been bussy all the week with my affairs at College I came here to pass a night & find myself engaged in the affairs of the Nation. I threatned to differ from you about the test of well constituted Government, about the fact in our own constitution, & tho I might agree with you about its differ disstemper to differ nevertheless about the Remedy: but as I have not your letter by me must write at Random and  shall be very glad not to differ from you at all.

In speaking of well constituted Government I must define Arbitrary Power which you seem to think inconsistent with it. This is not a Power exempted from the obligations of Justice nor a Power that can make wrong right or right wrong. There is no such Power neither in heaven above nor on the Earth beneath. But an Arbitrary Power is that which may determine itself according to the Special[i]tys of every Particular case having no rule prescribed to it nor being accountable to any Other Power. Now the test of well constituted government is not the want of such a Power: but the committing of it to the safest hands. A Government without Supreme unaccountable or Arbitrary Power is as inconceivable as a circle without a Circumference. The Government of France is not well constituted because Arbitrary Power is committed to a very unsafe hand, that of the King who has a Partial Interest to Support & who sacrifices the Wellfare of the people to this Interest. But the Government of Great Britain is well constituted because it commits Arbitrary Power to King Lords & Commons, who according to the constitution in its sound State comprehend all the Interests in the Kingdom which ought to be reconciled in every particular case before any resolution can be agreed to by all these three members of our Sovereignty.

Now as to the fact in our constitution. King Lords & Commons have Arbitrary Power. And they have made a Good use of it. In the first place they have divested themselves of the exercise of this very Power as far as is consistent with their Supremacy. They coud not delegate Legislation without ceasing to be Supreme; but they have delegated Jurisdiction & the execution of the Law to Judges & officers of the Crown to whom they have Prescribed Rules & who are accountable to themselves for the Observance of those Rules. So much that every Subject knows as far as the Nature of Government will Permit the Rule according to which he is to be governed. In the next place they have enacted in general very good Laws & have interposed their Supreme & Arbitrary Power by Bills of Attainder &c only in extraordinary cases, & for the most part with good Effect to the Publick.  When you acknowledge that King Lords and commons Jointly are the Supreme Power in this constitution: you have acknowledged that each of them separately is Supreme in what is required to its own defence. I do not ask what their proceedings have been in matters of this sort the supposition of a Power is the supposition of a right to defend that Power. Let the Commons be attacked in the Priviledge of any member, in the improper nomination of any member, they cannot hold their share of the Supreme Power if they cannot repell that attack without being accountable to any other Power whatever. If they must have the Authority of a Statute for what they do: they cannot defend themselves without the Consent of King & Lords: Let the King or Lords then be the Invaders, as may well be supposed, & the Commons are undone. The Lords determine who are their own Constituent members & so do the commons. In this they are not jointly but each separately the Supreme Legislature the Supreme Judicature & the Supreme executive Power. Their  History will prove; considering the frailty of human Nature, that their separate as well as joint Powers have not been abused. Their Subjects have been the freest & securest Subjects on Earth. They act by the Majority & the Majority can have no interest in groundless oppressions that might one day reach any of themselves.

Now for the disstemper. The Majority of The Commons are under Influence of administration. And may abuse their Power to pay their Court. Granted.

What is the Remedy? A Farther extension of the Remedy that has been already in Part applied. All officers of the Revenue are already excluded from the House of Commons. Exclude if you will every other placed or Pensioned Man whatever. Or of this be too much let the Secretarys of State. The Boards of Treasury. Admiralty and Trade &c have each their single Representative in Parliament & no more. Give the Countys a greater Representation & the Burroughs less. Let the People take care whom they chuse. They are  concerned not to bestow unworthily a Power that in the Nature of things must be Arbitrary because there is no superior to give it Law nor to call it to account. It is the Spirit of our constitution that Members of Parliament shoud be well chosen but that being chosen they shoud be Masters. How absurd it woud be to name an Abeter with full powers without minding whether he were an honest man or a knave & then talk of Limiting his Power when there is nobody to controul or direct him. I woud fain think I do not differ from you in my notion of the Remedy Altho you talked of a Statute to restrain the Powers of the Commons. Which I think is either inconsistent with our constitution & woud either be neglected or have a bad effect: but the first it woud most certainly be. Let your Virtuous opposition Speak. I know what they will chuse when it is in their option when it is in their to hurt administration without doing good to the Public or to do good to the Public without  hurting Administration. I shoud be very sorry to see men all of one mind in Parliament: but either this manner of Party or the State itself I am perswaded cannot last. How can a State Subsist when every one out of Pension or place and even some that are in think themselves entitled to disstress it. I am perswaded that Sr George Saville & you cannot be serious in apprehending that the expulsion of Mr Wilkes is a bad precedent for you. I shoud think it a very bad precedent for you if such men were allowed to sit in the house. The Power of expulsion has never been so much abused by the house as to merit any notice in human affairs. Till now it has been in my memory never exerted at all & yet the Majority has always been on the Side of Administration and opposition has always been troublesome. Why shoud the Majority expell they are already Masters. Why shoud the most corrupted of the Majority chuse to expell, it woud only serve to Lessen their own Consideration & to bring down the Price of their Votes which is always highest when Partys are nearest Equality. 

Such men as Sr George Saville and you never were since the World Began expelled from any National Assembly or Senate except when there were Sentrys at the door to keep them out. The London mob may soon make it necessary to have sentrys in a certain Lobby to keep themselves out what farther use may be made of those Semtrys I know not. A Popular Party in the house having the Majority within & the Cry without may proceed to the fury of mere Party expulsions: but a Corrupt Minister will be glad to sneak through with his Majority & will surely avoid the odium of expelling any worthy man when by the very supposition of a majority he can go on without any such measure.

Since writing the Above I have returned to Edr & have read over your Letter with great pleasure. I think the difference between us may be reduced to the following points. You seem to deny the Supremacy of the house of Commons in matters of their own right Establishment. This Supremacy I hold to be as  well ascertained to the commons, as The Supremacy of all the Three orders is in matters that concern all three. The Practice of the Commons has been uniformly agreeable to this right of Supremacy & without that Practice in the Reigns of James & Charles they woud have ceased to exist.

You seem to think that this power to expell and disqualify is matter of new Pretension: but it has been exercised when occasion offered and never questioned till now.

You seem to think that a Supreme Power altho it cannot receive the Law from any other Power may nevertheless prescribe Rules to itself & cease to be Arbitrary. This I think a deception of words. A Persons own Rule is but his Resolution which he may keep or neglect at Pleasure unless there be some other to whom he must render Acc't.

If there be any Power so constituted as not to be subject to render Account, Care must be taken with whom that Power is  entrusted it is vain to employ ineffectual Rules. You will say perhaps that my Remedy mentioned above is impracticable. I am sure that in this Reign something very considerable in that way might have been obtained. If Gentlemen in Opposition had chosen to do any Good. You observe that Parliament men are not Bone of our Bone &c That is not the fault of the Constitution: but of their constituents, here the Remedy recurs again.

You insist that Expulsion from Parliament is to be considered as the Punishment of a Crime. Be it so. But it is still of such Crimes considered as rendering a person unworthy of Parliamentary Trust. I never knew a Person unworthy of that trust today become Worthy tommorrow. I am a Farmer if I had turned a fellow out of my barn for theft, I surely woud have a right to turn him out not only once but every time he attempted to come into it again. You observe that if the Character of Wilkes had not been infamous  the people woud have been unanimous on his Side. Most certainly if his Character had not been so I in particular woud never have thought that the House of commons did right in expelling him. It is hard in matters of Judgement to make people accountable for their actions & their motives too. If the action was right we must in Political matters put up with any motive or presume the Proper one.

As to the Resentment of People here to Mr Wilkes, if he deserved their Notice he woud certainly merit the other. There are some english Gentlemen established here & in the way of Preferment, if any body were to revile their Countrey in order to injure them I believe he woud be more detested here than Mr Wilkes ever was. If I know my own heart I shoud feel more indignation than ever my contempt of Wilkes Suffered me to feel in his case. The Reception his Scurrilitys found was inpitious not Provoking. When we find that the State is brought into some danger by such unworthy fools this is Provoking and Alarming too. 

I am a little piqued you shoud Suppose I thought the London Mob terrible in War. I know that they will fly from sharp shot but I know likewise that not only the Mob but the very Women & Whores at London may make Military Government appear Necessary to those who ought to prevent Military Government if they are encouraged & cannot be governed without it. I ought not tox have said any thing of the Riot Law without having read it, but in its Effects it does not appear to have been very Powerful where it was applied: Innocent and respectable people were attacked in the streets and in their houses & these crimes passed unpunished. In a Countrey where a fellow cant take a few shillings on the high way without being hanged.

I regret with the Deepest concern that you have not some Active hand in the administration. Government needs hands that can drive with resolution & stop short of extremes. I am glad of your opinion of some in Power: but the Party that wish for confusion & trouble are Strong & yet this may be a great Session. Pardon so much

yours Adam Ferguson







I wish I coud write any thing that merited your desire of hearing from me before the meeting of Parliament. A few hours conversation might do what I see that letters cannot effect, & I might be made Sensible that The Present opposition is innocent in respect to its means and its end & woud be innocent in its Success & that therefore any Gentleman may Lend his name on the present occasion as opposed to Government. At Present my opinions on all these points are extremely different. They The oppositions have acted very unwarrantably & their Success woud be a Ruinous encouragement to many Crimes. They have endeavoured to delude the People by representing an Innocent and even weak Reign as Violent & oppressive.

I speak not now of the particular point in disspute between you us but of Other Grievances and apprehensions with which they have dissgraced human Reason. Such falsehoods must disscredit even truth hereafter. They have employed the Populace of London to Intimidate the King and his adherents A Practice which if continued must in my opinion end in Military Government. Whoever attempts to Govern by force attempts to Establish Military Government. There is a great difference between a Mob of weavers or Taylors led by some folly of their own & having the whole Authority of Government and of all the Superior orders in the State against them. And a Mob that is raised by one half the leading men in the Kingdom against the Other. Townshend & Sawbridge Restrained the Weavers without Military force. And we may Always keep the lowest of the People in tolerable humour if we take  their Demagogues into office. But it is a question whether this be governing the Mob or being Governed by them. Tho I were fully of the opinion that The house of Commons exceeded its Powers in excluding Mr Wilkes from the Present Parliament: yet I woud think it my Duty to join Government in every measure the most effectual to keep the peace of the Countrey & repelling every Motion made to give Effect to Petitions that tend by raising Animosytis to promote the Interest of mere faction. I am sure that if people are to be judged from their motives as well as from Actions few in the present opposition woud have merit ever where the Action was right.

I am however extremely sorry to differ from you: Still in the main question between us. It appears to me as clear as day Light That the House of Commons is the supreme Judge of its own members. That it Judged right in the case of Mr Wilkes. That  Expulsion in the Nature of things must imply not merely the Trouble of Reelection but an exclusion from that Parliament. If there be any Instance from which it woud appear that ever the matter was Understood Otherwise I shoud think it an Instance of Mistake but I know not of any. If there be any Instance quoted in Pamphlets I beg the favour you will send me a Copy. I have the Journals of the Commons by me but we scarcely see any Pamphlets here. But this Power of the Commons whether inherent or usurped may be abused & one Point in controversy between us is how to Prevent this Abuse. The way you propose is by a Law to define or restrain it: That I mentioned was, by Laws to exclude those who may make a Majority in the house inclined or Interested to Abuse it. I give way to your Argument that Rules or Laws have effect even where there is no Authority to enforce them. And yet as far as I coud Observe,  former Laws had very little weight in determining the right of Elections where The House of Commons Judged. And I never coud Observe without regret the Indifference of many members Otherwise very independent and honourable on questions relating to Elections. The sneer with which the merits &c were treated, & the event in general of most Petitions. A Law directing the house of commons can have no Superior to enforce it unless the sense of the People at a Reelection is considered as such & to have this security short Parliaments are wanting. But a Law excluding or dissqualifying Particular Persons may have Penaltys Annexed of Which the Courts of Law may Judge, and Candidates may be Sufficiently deterred, as I believe all officers of the Revenue are, from ever coming before the House of Commons with Illegal Pretensions. When I dropt that any statute restraining the House of Commons in matters relating to their own Dignity & Priviledge  might have bad Effects. I meant that such Laws might if observed hinder their defending themselves against the Intrusion of very Improper persons. The Courts below as well as above may be corrupted or if they be not Will the Lawyers of the Crown Prosecute to conviction a Member of Parliament whom the Crown wishes to retain in the house. But I meant farther that the Proposing of such a Law might have a bad Effect by Missleading the attention from better & more effectual Preventives of the same Evil.

Reduce the Duration of Parliament again to three years at the utmost. Give us more Countrey Gentlemen that have a natural Interest & fewer buyers of Burroughs &c but I beg Pardon for repeating all this. If we can but confine the Authority of Government to persons interested to preserve the Constitution they will not need the Direction of many  Laws. And if restrictions on many occasions woud hinder them from doing wrong they will likewise on many occasions hinder them from doing right, for no Rule whatever can comprehend the specialtys of every Particular case And the Power of Every Judge in spite of what we can do, will be, in a high degree disscretionary. I mantain that Laws, in any controvertible Point do not inform the Partys what Judgement they are to expect. In this Countrey at least I should like as well the Throw of dice. But yet Laws here relating to Life & Property &c have this good Effect that they make it difficult to disspossess. This is not always Just but it is in general expedient. I say so much to show you that possibly when we meet we may differ about the Effect or Value even of Laws. My Object if I had influence in Government woud be to raise up men that might be trusted, not merely to make Laws to restrain knaves, which  I shoud consider as a hopeless attempt or not likely to serve the Purpose long. But while we are agreed about the means and we need not to disspute about the means, we may agree to take as much of every sort of means as we can get. But I enter my Caution against not only the means that tend to a Dissolution of Parliament but even a change of Ministers, Untill this contest between Mobbing & Government has ceased & untill that designing & Dangerous Demagogue L-Chatham has again taken the Gout.

But to return to the Contest with that honourable Gentleman Mr Wilkes. If the Populace of England Espoused his Cause for his Virulence to Scotland I think the Populace of Scotland do right in wishing to have him dissgraced. And I will mantain in behalf of my Countreymen that the Censorial Power of Parliament which has been frequently exercised was never  more Justly than in his case. I by no means think that even a single disgraceful member in Parliament is of little consequence. He may one day upon a chance equality of Partys give the Law to his Countrey. And What is worse he may render the Legislature itself contemptible.

The Romans were so sensible of the Ignominy of having dissgraceful persons on the Rolls of the Senate or the People that they empowered the Censors to Garble those Rolls & leave out whom they pleased. And I believe that in their case the exclusion of six unexceptionable members woud not do so much harm as suffering one exceptionable one to remain. If the Censorial Power is unsafe with the House of Commons so is the Legislative, and they may give up the Rights of their Constituents to the King & Lords or to Ministers in the form of Statute as well as of Resolution. If  they be dissposed to give them up in any form I think that the grounds of the present alarm do not imply that we are to expect Protection from The King or his Ministers. The fact is that the Safety of Popular Rights arises from the great Power of the Commons in our constitution. The Persons of Members are Priviledged as those of the Roman Tribunes were sacred & their resolutions in certain matters are Supreme that they may be irresistible in defending the People. The Separate Powers of the Lords are & must be somewhat analogous in defence of their own Order. The Case of Lord Banbury which you mention is for me. Lord Chief Justice Holt  Sustained his Peerage But he never sat in the House of Peers. Another chief Justice might now grant the Priviledge of Parliament to Mr Wilkes on the Credit of his Returne from Middlesex: but he woud not therefore  sit in the house of Commons. The House of Lords may for ought I know expell every Peer that has been Created since the Union And I know Nothing to hinder them only that they are not mad And this is likewise the only reason that hinders them from expelling Sr George Saville & you: Whose name I beg you will pardon my Coupling with yours for I am far from being Satisfied with his conduct, A Man who lends his name or his Purse to Support other Gamblers is as bad as if he were a Gambler himself. I care not whether Sr George Saville aims at Power in his own name or in that of The Marquis of Rockingham. I must likewise beg your pardon [xxx] for troubling you with so much loose & incoherent talk in the midst of Bussiness Private & Public which you must have. The Dissposition from which I write is my Security  that I can have said nothing Offensive to you. God Bless you & enable you to take a firm Clear & decisive part for yourself & your Countrey whomsoever it may please or offend. I never thought to see a time when a firm & resolute adherence to the measures of Government was to be as honourable as the most free and Independent Part that coud be taken in Parliament even in the worst of times. You say that all this dust which some people have endeavoured to raise has not distressed Government. I am glad of it: but I am sure its Authors then will be dissappointed. And so be it, for I am very Angry with them & expect no good from any of them, not even from their fine writer Junius. If my paper were not done I shoud run on idly enough: My only purpose is to please myself by writing to you and your taking so much notice of what I have written I consider as a mark of that Friendship which I have long valued above most circumstances of my Life.


Blackheath June 3d 1775

My Dear Sr

As my Situation is likely to become very delicate upon the Resignation which I am made to expect, I wish very much to have your opinion whether I shoud not before this change is declared apply to those by whom I am placed here for their Instructions how I shoud act upon this occasion. Or whether I shoud wait in Silence for their declaration & then observe to those with whom remain connected, that as the Authority by which I hold my place has ceased to exist a new appointment may be necessary to my continuing in it. And whether if they decline making any such appointment or otherwise declare their Intention to part with me & talk of the terms on  which I am to withdraw, I may not take the Liberty to mention you as a Person to whose opinion in concert with any one they may be pleased to appoint, I am willing to Submit all my Claims. Smith woud occur to some of them Perhaps as the proper person to treat on this occasion but one Philosopher is enough in any one bussiness, And as I have nobody else besides yourself I most earnestly beg that You will not decline it. The part you have always taken in my Affairs woud make any apology in this particular case or for this letter impertinent. When you take the trouble to write be so good as keep in General terms without nameing Persons or things least a letter shoud fall by or get into improper hands here. I am My Dear Sr with the greatest Respect 

and most 



Be so good as direct for me at Mr Maynes Banker Banker in Jermyn Street London
Fludyer Street Nº 21 12 May 1779

Dear Sir

I have had a pretty Long Conversation this Morning with Lord Cornwallis. Part of my Intention was to give him the Best Impression I coud of our Friend P. Ferguson & both for that & Other Purposes as I have an Apprehension that The Chief Command may devolve on His Lordship I wish to show him P: Fergusons Sketches & last letter to me: but in Strict Confidence. If you Approve of this be so good as send  me the Papers. I have promised Lord Cornwallis to see him again before he sets out. He has Understanding & Temper, that with a Proper Assortment of Officers to Form His Family [xxx], may do most Valuable things for this Countrey in the Present Situation of Affairs. I have already told him so much, & mean to continue the Subject, a Freedom which he takes in the best Part imaginable.

I am Dear Sir Most Respectfully & Affectionately yours









I write as you desired merely to tell you what is become of me. I continue to mend. & I hope soon, taking the whole complicated case of my Diet & recovery together to be in a better Animal as well as Intellectual State than I was before my late Illness.

I am hastening to put my Papers on the Roman History in a form to go out of my hands whenever it is proper. And shall proceed to fill up my Lectures to the same Purpose And then I shall be at Liberty to  commit myself entirely to the newspapers & watch the Affairs of the Nation. In the mean time I Observe it is said that Lord Cornwallis has joined Arnold: but to what Purpose I know not And the thing certainly merits consideration. I have been regreting all the Way in my thoughts on the Road that our Friend Gl Clerk is not in Parliament. A person may as well think to be of consequence in France without being a Gentleman as here without being in Parliament. I own The Case occurs in both Countrys: but what a difference there is here. A Private Gentleman may hunt a Minister for a whole Winter without being able to see him. A Member of Parliament demands an Interview at pleasure. A Private Gentleman can never see a Minister except formally & at an Audience, a Member of Parliament can catch  him familiarly in the House & fix his Ear in the time of dull Speeches & in the Intervals of Bussiness. The Minister shuns the Application of Strangers. He covets the Courtship of members of Parliament And fears to offend them. In Parliament without making long Speeches a person can discountenance nonsense with a very few Words And a Person who has once made an able Appearance in Parliament is a person of Authority within the whole Kingdom. Fools commonly consider every one who differs remarkably from themselves in Private as a Madman. But the Publick one way or Other where they are the judges distinguish between a Fool & a Man of Parts & Sense. I have Sometimes thought it might be made a question at the Robin Hood or some Other Such Place.

Who incurs most contempt a Fool among wise men or a Wise Man among Fools? If the wise Man should not take care to Manage  his Superiority he will be in the worst case of the two. In Parliament a Man of Parts is independent of Fools or more so than anywhere else. I hope that you will admit these Arguments as of Force And now that Gl C Health & every Circumstance makes the Ordinary Attention of Parliament easy to him I earnestly wish that some opportunity were seized to get a Seat: but of the matter I can say Nothing farther And say so much only to set you a thinking of it in case it has not occurred. I am Dear Sir With the greatest Respect

 




Dear Sir

I write to you in consequence of a conversation I have had with Mr John Clerk whose office of Secretary to the Commission of Annexed Estates determines on the proposed restitution of these Estates to the heirs of the former Proprietors. This very laudable measure I confess will cause some regret to me, if it ends in turning Mr Clerks Ardour & Ingenuity aside from the Publick Service in which I thought they were likely to be usefull. What Provision it may be thought reasonable to make for him upon the Reduction I know not: But I am satisfied that with respect to the Objects to which  publick money is destined in the change which is now to be now made his usefulness may be greater than it was likely to be in the former Establishment.

His Relations, not very wisely perhaps, in laying the Plan of his Life entered him first as a Student of Medicine, then changed his destination to that of a Merchant, next for that of an Undertaker in Coal Works, but in all these Capacities his thoughts turned upon Works & undertakings more fit for the Publick than himself, Canals & Fisheries, not to mention Naval Tacticks & the fighting of Battles at Sea. More than one of his Brothers was were an Engineers. and Four lost their Life Lives in the publick Service so it was thought impossible that he also could be destined to serve the publick in any such Way. The Consequence is that his genius has been continually pointing to one Sort of Objects & his Lot fixing him to another: But was in hopes that his Situation under the  Commission of Annexed Estates might open some way for it; nor do I think by any means that these hopes ought now to be laid aside. If the Publick now adopt the Forth & Clide Canal & set about nursing the Fisheries, Mr Clerk may be a most useful Agent in both, And I would fain think he may be continued in the publick Service without any Other Change than that of being employed to inspect the publick concern in the inland Navigation & fisheries. Whether he be employed or no, I doubt he will think of nothing else for some years to come, & he appears to me to have very sound & Ingenious conceptions on both these Subjects. But if I mistake not you know him nearly as well as I do, and can distinguish in this Account, what may be ascribed to personal kindness & what to conviction of Judgement. I certainly would not endeavour to pass the one of these upon you for the Other, And am willing to risk the  whole of my Credit with you upon this point that Mr Clerk will be a most useful Agent for it the Publick in what they do to compleat the inlan[d] navigation from Sea to Sea & to promote the the Fisheries.

This matter being So stated to the best of my judgement, I am next to intreat, that My Agent Mr Chalmer being soon to conclude my transaction with the Booksellers, may be allo[wed] to wait upon you with some Account of the matter before it is ended. It is of little consequ[ence] to the publick but not so to me: and it will [give] a great Satisfaction to me, to have your Approbation of what we do. I am with the greatest Respect

Dear Sir your most affecti[onate] & most humble Serva[nt]






I received your Letter on the subject of Mr Carmichaels dismission, & having had some conversation with Mr Williamson, went to my Friend of the Board of Customs, in whom I found no disposition to relent.

After reading the papers which were communicated to me I am intirely of your opinion, & returned the Papers with expressions of Surprise that we should differ so much; Said some strong things: but my Friend declined the Argument, said there was no redress to be hoped for but from the Treasury. That he would be glad the Treasury reversed their Sentence but that they themselves could not do it. I ventured to propound two maxims for the Policy of their Board. Imprimis. That no unfaithful or negligent Servant should continue to be employed. 2d & not less Essential to the Service, That no faithful & diligent Servant should be Sacrificed to private Malice or Pique.

All ths was true: but they could not recall a Sentence once given. And in the conversation a Case cast  up, relating to a recommendation of mine, which had past some years ago. The Person concerned had behaved so well at a Northern Post that they removed him to a more difficult & more profitable Station, the Bay of Glenluce; but he was not there many months, when upon a complaint like the present, he was dismissed. The Board I am now told soon after found that they had been imposed upon by a combination formed against this man whose Fidelity was not convenient to some of his Bretheren. And it was proposed to restore him: but it could not be done. No reason is Assigned to me for this Policy; but I Ascribe it to a rooted Jealousy of all the Underlings at the different Parts. And next, to a maxim that as often as a Smugled Cargo escapes; the nearest Officer concerned must Suffer Guilt or no Guilt. And last of all, that they are never to remitt a Sentence once past. This last may be thought to strengthen their Authority: but so long as the Treasury can reverse their Sentences, it would Shake their Authority less to be reversed by themselves.

If this matter must go to the Treasury, I was inclind to put the merits in the form of a reclaiming Petition which with the Answers given to it, might be more accessible to the Consideration of the  Treasury than the whole papers as they were given to me: but as the Board of Customs here is now very thinly attended, the effect of this measure would be delay.

Mr Reid a very Consequential member of this Board is now at London & it is material that you see him. I take for granted he will be heard of about the Treasury. I take a very Sincere concern in Carmichaels case. The Effect of the Policy above mentioned seems to be, that no one having Other pretensions, will risk them on Such a bottom, And the Board will have no Officers but such as they will be in the right to distrust, & to dispatch, as soon one after another, as possible.

Your Friend Jock is well, with a wonderfull proficiency in the Scots Tongue: but tenacious of some London Notions & habits to a degree that is Scarcely credible.

I have no Tidings of my application for a Cadetship: but wait with all due Patience & Resignation. I am 

with great Respect  most 


In a pamphlet, intituled An Enquiry into the Authenticity of the Poems ascribed to Ossian, having read the following passage, p. 45, — “Mr Smith mentions Dr Percy's Reliques of Ancient Poetry, in which he says, the Doctor confesseth, that he himself heard pieces of it recited; and being compared with the translation, exactly corresponded. Dr Percy does not understand a syllable of the Earse, and therefore could be no judge. The truth is, Dr Blair and Professor Ferguson, when Dr Percy was at Edinburgh, took care to introduce a young student from the Highlands, who repeated some verses, of which Professor Ferguson said such and such sentences in Fingal were the translation.” To prevent any inferences which might be drawn from my silence, I think it material to declare that the above passage, so far as it relates to me, is altogether false; and that I never was present at the repetition of verses to Dr Percy by a young student from the Highlands.




January 8, 1782

In an advertisement, dated Carlisle, November 10, and signed Thomas Percy, the attention of the public is recalled, among other particulars, to a declaration signed by me on the 21 of July last. My sense of how little consequence the subject is to the public, would hinder my intruding myself again in this manner; and my very great respect for the station in which Dr Percy is placed would incline me to be silent where I have the misfortune to differ from him on a matter of fact, if I did not apprehend that silence in this case might be interpreted against me.

At the date of my former declaration, I had found myself charged in a pamphlet, on the authenticity of Ossian's poems, as accessory to a cheat which was put upon Dr Percy, in a recital of some pretended specimen of that poetry, by a young student from the Highlands. Whoever may be the author of this charge, I thought and think myself entitled to say it is false.

I had many reasons likewise to deny my having ever been present at the recital of verses to Dr Percy by a young student from the Highlands; and it caused me much surprise to find, in a correspondence on this subject, which took place between Dr Percy and Dr Blair, that Dr Percy had conceived of me as having not only been present at the recital of verses by a student, but as sending for a student into his company, who, in a deliberate manner, passed upon him what he afterwards believed to be an imposition.

Dr Percy may not have been aware of the part which he assigned to me in this imposition, as it depended upon an inference to be drawn from my knowledge of the Earse language; nor was it credible that he meant to apply it to a person for whom he still professed some esteem. But whatever may have been the idea, I flattered myself that upon recollection he would think it more probable that he himself had committed some mistake in the fact, rather than that I should have concurred in such a cheat. In this persuasion I wrote to Dr Blair the following letter, to be transmitted to him; and am now very sorry to publish this or any thing else on a controversy in which neither the attack nor the defence can do credit to any person whatever.

[After transcribing the letter to Dr Blair, dated Edinburgh 18 August 1781, (see letter 200), Ferguson continues as follows:]

To the contents of this letter I must now add, that although the facts stated by Dr Percy might be admitted on less authority than his, yet as they are entirely contrary to any feeling or recollection I have of the matter, and have been employed to convey a very injurious imputation against me, he must excuse me, if I do not admit them. And if he still persist, that over and above the specimen of Earse poetry, which I gave him in my own handwriting, I likewise procured a student to recite other specimens to him, he will farther excuse me, if I insist, that every passage, of which the interpretation was vouched by me, was in truth what it was given for. As he allows, that I may not have been conscious of any deception in what passed between the student and him, I must, in return, allow that he may not be conscious of any misrepresentation of the fact. But I cannot allow that he has made the best use of his understanding, in thinking it credible, that any person, possessed of a decent character, could be concerned in such a cheat, as he supposes to have been practised upon him.


New York, 28th Sept. 1778

Having received the following letter from Governor Johnstone at his departure for England, I think it my duty to fulfil his intention by publishing it for the satisfaction of those who may desire to know the reasons that have induced him to suspend any particular discussion of the charge, on which a late resolution of the Congress, respecting himself, is founded. The intimation contained in this letter will, in the mind of every person in any degree acquainted with his character, have its proper effects; altho' I am, both by his injunction and by the considerations he mentions, restrained, at present, from giving any particular account of the evidence intrusted to me.



Be so good as furnish Mr Clason with a Copy of The History of the Progress & Termination of the Roman Republick to my Account. I am your most 










Altho Mr Creech has had access to know our progress in printing the work about which we have been some time agreed. It may be proper for me to acquaint you that it is now finished & that you may chuse your time of publication. I shall wish to have copies sent in my name to General Clerk in Mansfield St Cavendish Square. To Mr Pulteney Bath House Piccadilly. Mr Dundas Secretary of State Mr Pitt first Lord of the Treasury. Lord Loughborough Loughborough. Mr Small late Surgeon to the Garrison of Minorca. And Sir John McPherson when he returns to England to whom you may also give on my account as many copies as he shall be pleased to call for.

I have looked over the Essay on the History  of Civil Society : but find nothing material to offer. It is properly introductory & Stimulating to the Study of its Subject & without going farther into particulars must remain in its original form.

I am Sir your most Obedient & most 



P.S. Mr Strahan to whom I beg my best respects will know where to send to Mr Small
Whitehall, 9th Jan.ry 1779



Mr Eden has just now transmitted to me a Minute of Mr Smyth's which is of a very different Complexion from that which you understood to have been Sir Henry Clinton's Conduct towards him.

If you can give me any Information tending to corroborate or invalidate the one fact or the other, I should be obliged to you for it, as I much wish to send to Mr Smyth an Answer as soon as I can.

I am, 
Dear Sir, 

& most  
Thos De Grey Junr









I should be extremely sorry that a Fact so cursorily mentioned to me by Sir Henry Clinton and in which there may be some Mistake should in any degree affect the Consideration of Chief Justice Smith's Services & Claims. The Minute which you have done me the Honor to communicate to me appears to refer to extraordinary Services in his Journey to Fort Stanwick & repeated Voyages to Rhode Island, the last as Commissioner to enquire into the Loss of the Gaspee Sloop. For these Services he would probably have thought himself entitled to some Reward or Compensation, even if he had continued to receive the ordinary Emoluments of his Office in the Jerseys.

If he actually now receives, as I understood from Sir Henry Clinton, £400 a Year on the Army Contingencies, he considers this  Allowance probably as a Subsistence given to him as such Allowances are given to other displaced Officers of the Crown in America, as some Compensation for the Interruption of their usual appointments in the Provinces. If Chief Justice Smith really receives £400 a year it will be stated in the Army contingencies, and if not so stated, I must suppose that there is some Mistake in that Matter.

The very great Expence of living now at New York makes £400 a Year a very scanty Allowance, and may very naturally appear, to Chief Justice Smith, not enough to preclude him from stating any Claim he may have for former extraordinary Services.

I have the Honor to be &c



Thos De Grey Esqr &c &c
New York, 29th Octr 1778

Copy


I am by Command of their Excellencies His Majesty's Commissioners to inform you that having issued a Manifesto and Proclamation of which the inclosed are Copies, they did without delay direct Packets as in the inclosed list to be carried by an Officer with a Flag of Truce to Annapolis in the Province of Maryland; but having reason to believe that those Packets have not been delivered at the Place of their Destination; they think it their Duty in a Matter of such High Concern to direct a few Copies to you by a different Conveyance in order that you and the People of Maryland may know the Contents of said Proclamation.

And the more fully to enable all whom it may concern to avail themselves of the Gracious Intentions of His Majesty and of Parliament. I am farther commanded by their excellencies to inform you that the Original Instruments executed in due Form shall be sent as soon as your desire or that of the People of Maryland is signified to that Effect.

I am Sir with all due Respect your most obedient and most 



Exd a true Copy 
Adam Ferguson Secretary 
His Excellency 
Governor Johnstone 
   Maryland
Madam,

According to your desire I have read with attention Mr Alisons Essays on the Nature and Principles of Taste; and am happy to inform you that they have given me much entertainment & instruction. I consider them as a valuable addition to the Philosophy of the human mind. They are written with great elegance and purity of stile, and discover in their Author an uncommon share of sensibility to whatever is sublime or beautiful in the works both of Nature & Art.

At the same time they prove him to be possessed of a very considerable portion of philosophical acuteness in tracing the sources to which all our emotions of this kind ought to be referred.

The work now published, which consists of two Essays, is only part of what the author intends on the Subject of taste. In the first Essay he examines the effect which is produced on the Mind when the emotions of sublimity & beauty are felt: And, in the second, he investigates the qualities in material objects that are fitted to excite them.

The Theory which Mr Alison proposes on the first of these Subjects, as far as I know is entirely new. He ascribes the pleasures of taste, not to any  particular faculty implanted in us by Nature for receiving them; but to ‘the union of the pleasure of simple emotion with that pleasure which is annexed by the constitution of the human mind, to the exercise of imagination’. The effect therefore produced on the mind by a sublime or beautiful object is compounded, according to him, of the elevated or agreeable emotion which that object is fitted to excite independently of its sublimity or beauty, and of the agreeable exercise which it gives to the imagination by suggesting a train of associated emotions-He has conducted his investigation very like a Philosopher; in the course of it he has illustrated several important principles in the science of human nature; & in particular he has shewn more successfully than any preceding Author the extensive influence of the Principle of Association over all our pleasures & our pains-

The second Essay treats of the Sublimity and Beauty of the material World. The object of the Author here is to shew, that the qualities of Matter have not in themselves any natural & independent Sublimity or Beauty; but all their power to excite these emotions arises from their being associated in our imagination with  qualities that have a reference to Mind; or to use his own language, ‘from their being the signs or expressions of such qualities as are fitted by the constitution of our Nature to produce emotion’.

From this account you will easily discover that I have formed a very favourable Opinion of Mr Alison's present publication; and that his friends may safely refer to it as a full proof of his Abilities. I admire especially the graceful ease and perspicuity of his language.

I am Madam &c &c
Dr Sir

As the Charts belonging to Vancouvers Voyage are cumbersome and exposed to damage I have thought it best to have them & you will accordingly Observe that they are delivered by the bearer. I am Dear Sir


& most  






Chapel Street 
 25 Septr 1798
Hallyards 9th March 






I am happy to know you are in a fair way of recovery. I am little better than I was when you were here tho from a fresh cold. Europe is so different from what it was in my time that if I were going abroad myself it would be to grope my way & look for the places at which to make any Considerable stay.

The North of Germany however I believe is the least altered; And as one of your Objects very properly is to see military forms these are also to be found in the greatest perfection there. Brunswick in my time had many advantages there was an Academy And the Court was very gracious as I suppose it still is to travelers from this Country and as language is one of your first Objects, you may there learn both German & French. The People speak the one And Gentlemen the other.  But at whatever place you may settle for a time at first you will probably shift places to look about your Courts & Cities and fields of Battle or rather Campaigns are worth your seeing. And if you carry a few military narratives along with you And consider the Country itself as your Map in reading; that I think should help you to become a Soldier above the Common Brute. The method of traveling abroad is no where the same as in England. That is to say Chases are not to be had at every Stage you must have some vehicle of your own & post horses are to be met with every where. You should have a Sober & trusty Servant to continue with you from home. And trust to every place you come to for a Valet possessed of language & every other requisite for the place And try to find out what is best to be done.  I know not of any Rule but to be attentive & cautious not to offend against the manners of good Company wherever you come. And if there is much profit to be made of your travels most of it may come upon experience and reflection after you are done. Sett out with a Resolution to respect men & end with a proper knowledge of them. This is the best qualification of a Soldier as well as a Statesman or Gentleman. I am unwilling to detain your Servant or do not think myself qualifyed to be of much use if I should take more time. & I can scarcey write legibly for the returns of a Cough. You may however be assured of my good will.

I am  
 
and most obedt humble 
Servant 

[? Edinburgh]

. . . . If I had not been in the Highlands of Scotland, I might be of their mind who think the inhabitants of Paris and Versailles the only polite people in the world. It is truly wonderful to see persons of every sex and age, who never travelled beyond the nearest mountain, possess themselves perfectly, perform acts of kindness with an aspect of dignity, and a perfect discernment of what is proper to oblige. This is seldom to be seen in our cities, or in our capital; but a person among the mountains, who thinks himself nobly born, considers courtesy as the test of his rank. He never saw a superior, and does not know what it is to be embarrassed. He has an ingenuous deference for those who have seen more of the world than himself; but never saw the neglect of others assumed as a mark of superiority. . . .
Mr Goldie Principal of the College of Edinburgh who is come to a great Age is I am informed taken Ill & considered as dying. That place is at the Disposal of the Town Council. And in case of a Vacancy The person who appears fittest to me for the Office is Mr Adam Ferguson at present Professor of Natural Philosophy. His Character is well known to My Lord Bute & his Affection for His Lordship is a great merit with me. He has already given proof of his merit & Abilitys here by contributing in his Station to raise the Reputation of the University since he has been a Member of it & by increasing the number of Students particularly in that branch which he teachs. He has also gained the Affection of the youth and acquired a degree of Esteem & Authority peculiar to himself.
Mr Goldie Principal of the College of Edinburgh, who is come to a great Age is I am told taken Ill & considered as dying. That Place is at The Disposal of the Town Council in case of a Vacancy I woud recommend The person who appears fittest to me for the office Mr Adam Ferguson at present Professor of Natural Philosophy. He is well known to my Lord Bute & his affection for His Lordship is a great merit with me in his Station. He has already given proof of his merit & abilitys by contributing to raise the reputation of the University since he has been a member of it & encreasing the number of Students particularly in that branch which he teaches. He has alsogained the Affection of the youth & acquired a degree of Esteem & Authority peculiar to himself.

All the other persons who are supposed to be Candidates have either reached a Period of Life when Men cease to exert themselves in a new Situation or are engaged in cares & occupations that must in part call off their Attention from the Dutys of this Station Office; or have been already favoured with other Preferments. Mr Fergusons sole occupation is Science & Literature, there is no other kind of Preferment within his reach [xxx xxx] besides this office of Principal, which may be considered as the proper reward of a Professor who has disstinguished himself. As he stands at the head of the Course of Philosophy a sort of claim seems to result from thence & such a Claim is well supported by the Esteem of People of discernment, & by the Testimony of those who upon the occasion are his Rivals every one of whom I believe if he himself was out of the question woud name Professor Ferguson as the fittest man to be Principal. If being in orders was a necessary qualification which I believe it is not although the office has been generally possessed by Clergymen, Mr Ferguson has that qualification with this advantage that he retains the Character without being incumbered with any charge out of the University.

I shall be glad to know My Lord Butes opinion & yours in this matter. From the Papers which you sent me The Spanish War appears to be the Sequel of a haughty manner assumed & of unhappy Altercations which now begun by a former Minister, which his Successors could not Alter without Lowering the Character of the Nation. For ought appears to me both Nations may have been brought into a War which neither of them really intended shoud take place. And in this belief I woud willingly hope that from a proper Management we may still entertain the Prospect of no very distant peace.
Since My last Mr Goldie Principal of the College of Edinburgh is dead. I have already given you my opinion about the choice of a Successor.

The Clergy I am told lay Claim to any Preferments of this kind which fall in our University, as being the only rewards which their order has to expect & the only Objects which are left to excite their Emulation in Literature or any Other kind of Merit by which they may distinguish themselves. This claim of theirs however does not exclude Mr Ferguson who thoat present a Professor in the College is likewise an ordained Minister. But without excluding their Pretensions any prejudice to their Pretensions I think it unjust to exclude Professors in Universitys from the hope of the same preferments which may likewise excite their Emulation to distinguish themselves. Literary merit shoud meet with its reward in them as well as in the Clergy. Clergymen are frequently called to fill every kind of Vacancy in our Universitys and are made Professors in the different branch[e]s of Education Science. And I do not think that the little which I am told some of them pretend to have to be the exclusive Claim of being promoted to the head of Colleges shoud be acknowledged.

The practice hitherto has not been Regular in their favours. For at St Andrews and Aberdeen there were likely three heads of Colleges who were Laymen. One Mr Young a Layman was head of one of the Colleges at St Andrews before the two Colleges were United. At Aberdeen Mr Blackwall who is lately dead was Principal of the one College and Mr Chambers is now Principal of the other and both Laymen. were likewise exceptions to the Pretended Rules And I do not apprehend that any difficulty coud arise from this quarter in the present case. Mr Ferguson however whom I mentioned in my Last is not affected by this question because he is a Clergyman in fact tho at present a Professor in our University.
And I think it my Duty to inform you of every circumstance relating to matters of this kind this affair.
Gentlemen 26th December



£269. 12. 6

Please pay to Messrs Mansfield Ramsay & Co ten days after date two hundred and Sixty nine pounds twelve Shillings and Six pence being the ballance due in my account with you.


“Instead of transmitting the above circular letter [see Adam Ferguson to Sir William Erskine, baronet of Torrie, Fife, 8 September 1778 (Letter 121)] to the Agent for Army Victuallers and Store Ships and for Transport, it was judged proper to write the following to Rear Admiral Gambier Commanding the Navy and other Shipping in His Majesty's Service in the Port of New York and to Major Gen. l Pattison.”



 

New York Septr 11th 1778


His Majesty's Commissioners finding it Expedient to ascertain the Quantity of Ship Tonnage at present within the North and East River and the Sound, I am by their directions to request the favour that you will be so good to order the Agent for Army Victuallers and Store Ships, and the Agent for Transports to prepare and Transmit to me as soon as convenient an Account of such part of the Said Tonnage as is engaged in His Majesty's Service within their respective Departments, that I may lay the same before the Commissioners for their Excellencies Information.

I have the honour to be &c &c 




 

 
“The above Letter sent to Admiral Gambier was thus altered when sent to M. G. Pattison, instead of ‘the Agent for Army Victuallers and Store Ships and the Agent for Transports’ as follows ‘the Commissary of Artillery’ and instead of ‘within their respective departments’ as follows ‘his Department’”.
Ferguson informs William Adam of having seen in Edinburgh Mr Elphinstone of the India Board, on the subject of a Cadetship of Artillery on the Bengale Establishment for his son Joseph. He thanks his correspondent for his good offices of which he is not surprised, although ‘they bring the more pleasure that they were unsolicited’. He is nevertheless ‘grievously affraid of another years dissappointment’, because the boy should have gone out to India with his uncle, and asks William Adam to continue to help him in this matter. He sends respectful compliments to Mrs Adam.

Edr 17th Octr 1791
Hallyards near Peebles 12 April 1800

Ferguson recommends MrWalter Laidlaw  ‘A very worthy young man the Son of a respectable yeomanry family in this neighbourhood’. Mr Laidlaw has served in the Volunteers, and has taken the resolution to join ‘some of the Expeditions now preparing as a Volunteer Candidate’. He has been told that William Adam has ‘much Credit in the Court of His Royal Highness the Commander in Chief: And that I have much to Say with you’. The circumstances of his Family ‘move both respect & Compassion’.
Hallyards near Peebles 20th May 1801

Mr Adam has helped Mr Walter Laidlaw, but Ferguson hasn't answered the letter which William Adam has sent him, to inform him of the successful conclusion of his efforts. Ferguson assures his correspondent that this ‘did not proceed from Indifference to you’, since his friend W. Clerk informs him that his Silence ‘appears to be odd’. He adds that his habits with his correspondent and everyone relating to his family, in the past ‘were likely to have an effect very different from that of neglect’.

Mr Laidlaw has been sent to Portsmouth, and soon after to the coasts of Africa.
St Andrews Febry 3d 1816

. . . will be an Epoch in our History; and the luminous declaration with which the Court was Opened, will transmit your Lordships name with Honour to Posterity.

[He hopes to see William Adam in summer, for] . . . a moment of much pleasuring recollection, [and then it can be, for him] . . . a fit moment to take my departure . . . .
. . . . has of late been rather infirm and has suffered Considerably from the late Variable & severe weather,  Continues Vigorous & unimpaired. . . .
N B Hallyards near Peebles 22 February 1798


This will be delivered by Robert Stuart who, you inform me has been named by Mr Dundas, Cadet in the companies Service to India. I trust he is furnished with the proper Certificate of Age, & will be obliged to you for the proper credentials to the India House.

I am Sir your most Obedient and most 



Mr Cabell at the India Board
Hallyards near Peebles Janry 19th 1808

you call upon me to declare how I stand affected to the sale of my Palace in Rose Court. I persist in the purpose to sell it and a Purchaser may have possession at Whitsunday next. It would be [in] present circumstances very convenient to me to have it turned into cash.

Adam is threatened with a remove to far distant parts in his rank of Subaltern & presses for aid to buy Promotion. We are Straining every Nerve for that purpose. I believe I told you  the Price I sett upon the foresaid Palace was £500. I shall be glad to know your Resolution soon as the time of letting approaches when we must determine what is to be done for a year to come.

You should have told me how your Father holds out. He is to me the principal Figure in the Picture.

I am nevertheless with great affection to all  

Servant 

Hallyards 27 Janry 1808



I have received your Letter acquainting me that you accept my Offer of the House in Rose Court at Whitsunday next for five hundred Pounds you having entry to the Premises at that Term and paying the Price at the time of getting possession when I will give the proper Conveyance to the Property. To these conditions I now agree. And now write to Warn the Tennant of this Circumstance and the Necessity of her removeal at the next Term of Whitsunday 1808. And am Dear Sir your most obedt

& most 



P.S. As to publick Gardens on the House in Rose Court I can give no distinct Account. They had run in Arrear in Adams time. And I was made to pay £10 for the time he occupyd the House what was abt two years. The Regiment to which he belongs has warning to prepare for a Remove to the Cape of Good Hope and he tho now Aid de Camp to Gen. Don in Febry has warning to attend if whether we have hopes of being allowed to purchase a Company if occasion offer & have lodged mony for that Purpose but this is doubtfull.

I am Glad your Mother is recovered and that your Father is well. At any rate he must not presume to go before me who am his Senior.


Hallyards 19 May 






As the Tenement in Rose Court will be getting open to your Possession about this time, it was my purpose to be in Edinburgh to finish the Bussiness: but I am not so far recovered from my Spring indisposition as to venture so far from Home. And must refer you to Mesrs Ramsay Bonar & Co who have an ample Factory from me & do every thing for me. They are in possession of the Full Deeds to that little Property & when it is convenient for you to proceed in the transaction will employ to some proper  Person to attend you & when the Disposition is made out it may be sent here for my Signature before Witnesses. Mesrs Ramsay Bonars & Cos Receipt to my Account will be a Sufficient discharge for any Money on My part.

I am with most affectionate respect to your Father and Family

 







William Clerk Esqr Advocate
Dartford Aprile 1st 1774

Dear Sir

I was Surprised to find that no Copys of the Second Edition of my Institutes had been sent to London. In order to have a Copy to carry abroad with me I have been Obliged to Borrow from Sr John Pringle one which I gave him last Summer at Edinburgh. I must now beg the Favour that you will take the first opportunity to replace it & send him on my Acc't at least two Copys. Mr John Home likewise wants to have some Copys Sent him & this you may do by the Waggon. It is likewise called for in the Shops. I write in great hurry on my way to Dover. And Am Dear Sr your most Obedient 



Direct for Mr Home at Mrs Patersons in the New Bond Street London
Dear Sir

As I have a little business on which I should be glad to converse with you and am confined by a Cold you would Oblige me very much by calling here either now or any Other time today that may be most convenient for you.

I am most Obedient & 
most  






Argyle Square Wednesday Novr 7, 1781
Argyle [Square] 5th March 1783

Dear Sir

I wished to have called upon you today but the Air is so cold that I dare not venture into the Streets. Be so good as let me know if you have any accounts from London of any Parcel of the Roman History sent to you or when it is to be expected. I am told of some periodical Publication Review or Magazine in some  of the last numbers of which there is a Life of Mr Logan at Leith: this I mention as a mark of the publication I mean: be so good as send me so many of the late numbers as you have & order the coming numbers for me. I am your most

Obedt  



Dear Sir

I was informed last year by a Friend, who was then at the Court of Brunswick, That The Duke did me the honour to mention me as an Author, and it was Suggested at the Same time that if I should publish more it might be considered as a proper mark of respect to send a Copy to His Highness' Library.

I wish for an opportunity to do so & have mentioned the Commission to some of my Friends here who are going to the Continent particularly Sir James Hall and my Colleague Mr Dugald  Stuart who attends Lord Ancram in an excursion abroad.

Either of them if he goes by Brunswick will take charge of a Copy of my History And you will be so good as deliver it to my Account. I should be glad it were bound Simply & elegantly but not finely. And marked

‘For His Serene Highness 
The Duke of Brunswicks 
Library from the Author’










My transcriber being out of the ways I have been Obliged to run over the inclosed myself but hope it will be legible & serve the Purpose.

As I have not time for long negotiation I hope your Correspondent will be at a word with me & I shall wait his Answer.

I am Dr Sir





Janry 7th 1792

P.S. I should wish to have the work printed here that I might attend to it: for we should not have the command of the Post from London, now as formerly. If we do not agree I shall wish to have the inclosed returned to me here.

Mr Creech
Hallyards 5 July 1797

Gentlemn

you may remember I took from you when last in Edr Count Rumfords 6th Essay of which the Title is Of The Management of Fire & Oeconomy of Fuel. This is bound separately but is intended as part of a Second Vol. You will therefore now please send me the preceeding five Essays forming Vol. 1st, And all the Subsequent Essays except the 6th which I have already got as soon as they come out whether separate or in a Vol. If the 7th Essay is come to hand please send it now by the [xxx] Carrier & along with The first Vol. The Carriers name is Steel, he puts up at one Patersons the Sign of Harrow in the Candlemaker Row & leaves Edr on Friday morning. Direct your Parcels to me at Hallyards by Peebles.

I am your most 


Dear Sir

I return by the bearer Dryden's Works 4 Vol. 8vo: but as I have not had time to look into Thomson's Chymistry more than to incline me to see more. I take the liberty which I understood you gave me to carry the Book to the Country for more leisure.

I am Dr Sir yours &c &c



Chapel Street May 1st 1802
London Aprile 17th 




Dear Sir

I have just received your obliging letter & notwithstanding the other Prospect Home mentioned to you which is precarious I will make some inquirys about what you mention. When I heard some time ago that Mr Ruat was engaged to go abroad with Lord Hope I was told at the same time that he had obtained leave to keep his Professorship but that The D:of Argyle had insisted upon having the Salary for some other purpose of a public nature during his Absence. If that matter is intirely at the disposal of people here my information is probably right, yours seems to imply that the College will interpose & in that case the matter may be still uncertain. I have seen your Brother once or twice with John Home & that acquaintance has given me great pleasure, he has a great deal of Lord Elibanks Ingenuity of whom he talked by the hour with great Understanding. Youll have heard of J:Dalrymples Scuffle, it raised a sort of Laugh here against the Scotch Lawyers but Jack by good luck had none of the  ridicule but what was forced upon him. The Other sent a Chalenge to hinder his pleading a cause in which it seems he himself was formerly employed in Scotland. Jack went first to Mr Elliot to advise about this comical Situation, who remitted him to Sr Henry Erskine by whom & by him the Answer to the Challenge was dictated viz. That as he was engaged to plead the cause in question on the wednesday following he coud not in honour expose his Life till he had acquitted himself on that trust, that afterwards he woud be ready [to] wait upon him. After sending this Answer Jack stepped in to the Coffeehouse where he met his antagonist & being pressd to an immediate engagement declined it upon Sr Harrys principle And was called Scoundrel & Coward upon the Spot, which provoked him to draw and a Scuffle ensued in which the Combatants tumbled over chairs but were prevented from doing more mischief by some gentlemen from the other end of the Room who attended them up Stairs & made up the Quarrel before they parted. I send you this account partly to amuse you in case you have not heard it so particularly & partly on Jacks Account because such things are often misrepresented. 

We have scarcely heard of any thing this Winter but Scotch Authors, we have been impatient for Smith's book some time & I was vexed to hear Millar had some doubts about publishing it this season, however you will probably know more of that from himself. Here is a History of Gustavus published, which looks as like Hume & Robertson on the outside as can be conceived but it is the most amazing Stuff that ever was seen.

Remember me to all Friends at Edinburgh & Glasgow

I am Dear Sir with the most sincere Affection 

& most  

New York July 26, 1778

Dear Sir

Sir Henry Clinton has given me the draft of a letter he intends to send by the Packet to Lord George Germain in order to be Communicated to His Majestys Commissioners. I beg to know what time it will be convenient to receive it. The Packet will fall down to Sandy Hook tomorrow forenoon. I have the Honour to be with the greatest Respect




New York Septr 8th 1778



The Circular Letters being ready to be signed I am hindered by this heavy rain from waiting upon you for any farther instructions. I send you the Letter to Sir William Erskine which is in the same words with the Rest And that to Mr Law which Varys a little. You will please examine both & be so good as Return them if you think proper that I proceed. Observe whether Mr D'Erbage has not made a Misstake in Mr Laws Title.  Will it not be proper that I show the letters to Sir Henry Clinton and Apply for a Serjeant to carry them Round.

I am Dear Sir with the greatest Respect your most Obliged and most 



P.S. I have thought it is best to send you all the Letters that you may see the number is Compleat.
New York Septr. 14, 1778



Mr D'Erbage goes with The Letter to Admiral Gambier to be signed. To Avoid Repeating the word Received twice in places so near we have been Obliged to leave a Blank for the word favoured or honoured as you shall chuse. And Mr D'Erbage will fill it up as you desire.

When he comes back I mean to send him to Mr Cherry & Will Wait upon Admiral Gambier. If you have any Commands be so good as let me know  I am Otherwise to dine out of Town at Lord Cornwallis's but will wait upon you before I set out.

I have the Honour to be with The greatest Respect 

& most humble 
Servant 

New York Septr 26 




Dear Sir

I have just now received The Inclosed from Mr Rivington with Intimation that the whole impression of 200 is cast off & waits the orders of The Commissioners.

I imagine that no use can be made of this printed Copy till the Signed original is posted up & this can't be done till Sir Henry Clintons Subscription is Obtained.

It is of moment that it shoud not be delayed. And if you think so it may be proper to Apply to General Jones or The Commanding Officer here for An  Orderly Non Commissioned Officer to go to Sir Henry Clinton with it in the Jerseys in order to have it Signed. If you think that this can without inconvenience be delayed till monday I hope That I may then be well enough to Undertake that excursion. If you see Lord Carlisle tonight be so good as Settle what is to be done & let me know your Commands. I am

Dear Sir 

& most  

about 31 January 1779

Dear Sir

I must beg the favour that if you can stay at Home a few Minutes you will give me time to come to you with a Question which some Merchants of London have this moment put to me Respecting the Meaning of the Word Stores in the Commissioners last Proclamation on which I intend to wait on you at Greenwich.

I am 

 

Fludyer Street March 30th 




Dear Sir

I have been much disstressed yesterday & today; confined to My Bedchamber & mostly lying upon the Bed, which hindered my writing upon you for more particular Directions about the appointment you mention. I imagine I shall be able to make all the necessary alterations in Campbell's appointment to Apply to Sir James Wright  but wish to know whether his Name in this Manner will be designation enough. I am now ordered to go into the  Warm Bath, will stop at the office in My Way & endeavour to have the Clerk come to me this afternoon to have the Commission drawn up.

I am with the greatest Respect 
Dear Sir 

& most  

Fludyer Street 3d April 




Dear Sir

As the Secretary of State has taken upon himself the conduct & execution of the Proclamations respecting Georgia & South Carolina; I have been considering whether it will not be best to send the Duplicates likewise to the American Office, there to be employed, as the Secretary of State will think fit, for the purpose that Duplicates commonly Serve to Secure against accidents  the End for which the Originals were prepared. When it occurred that these Proclamations might be sent by me to Sir Henry Clinton it was expected that the Originals were to return from the Secretary of States Office & go with your Instructions to Sir James Wright. But as the matter now is I imagine these papers should go to Sir Henry Clinton from the Secretary of States Office. He may be at a loss what to do with them if they come from me without any Notice from thence. I am sorry to give you so much trouble. I shall send Coll. O'Fannings Papers & the proposed Answer to Ld. Carlisle this Morning.

Yours most Respectfully


Fludyer 10th May 1779

Dear Sir

I send you some Notes that have occurred to me in considering the tendency of the Inquiry now depending. I have been particularly Attentive as you desired to State the Rules of War &c but have been hurried into some General Animadversion of the whole Cause, you will attend only to what you think proper & consider if you please whether some General Views of this Sort ever Published might not have more Effect than longer & more Laboured Discussion. Whatever use may be made of it the faults  are Submitted to you & reserved for your Correction.

I have the Honour 
to be most Respectfully 

most  



Dear Sir

As your name in The Title of Letters addressed to the Earl of Carlisle surprised me very Agreeably I proceeded to read them as you may believe with great Avidity: And should have troubled you with my first thoughts on the whole or particular Part if I had not been prevented by a kind of Epidemical Cold or Fever which disqualified me some time for my ordinary Bussiness & by a Relapse which has given me a Listlessness under which nothing but your express commands could make me venture to Write.

The Example which you with a few  Others have set, tending to rescue the Subject of Politics out of the Hands of Anonymous Party Writers who too often abuse their Concealment, may I hope have very good Effects & multiply Publications from which we may expect Instruction as well as Entertainment & every degree of Ardour on public Affairs without Inventive or the Misrepresentation of Persons.

On the Subject of your first Letter in which you referr to the State of our Partys & the multiplied Descriptions of Persons who presume to think & to prescribe for the State The Sum of my opinion is that our Constitution has Always engendered such Partys & Multiplyed such Descriptions. That they are in our State the Symptoms of Political Life, And under this Aspect to be cherished in Speculation even while we censure & condemn them in Particular Instances. While the Constitution is safe; Ambition & Faction will be Vigorous & Free, & we may owe to them very great & Material Favours. 

But I would not be carryed by this Consideration so far as to justify Faction in any Single Instance in which it made a Sacrifice of the Public Safety to Private Ambition or Interest. If such offences are necessary, in such a Constitution as ours, we may trust to this Necessity for Produceing them. Men need not be tutored to Faction, we may even try what we can do to reclaim them. & now will remain to show that the Constitution Subsists & presents the Unusual Baits to Strife & Contention.

We may Applaud Mr Dempster for boldly passing to the Side of Government in great & Momentous Questions of State, we may Condemn Others for Persisting in Opposition to the very Brink of National Destruction without any fear that such Notions of Right & Wrong will mar our Politics or deprive us for the Future of all opposition to government the Acknowledged Check to Abuses & Spur to Public Exertions. I have heard People talk as if it were understood that because Faction  is a Physically necessary Physical appendage of in our Constitution, that therefore every degree of Faction is to be morally Licensed, & that we are so far to forget the Distinction of Right and wrong as to hold, that to be streight in Politics, which we hold to be crooked in Private Life. I mean Evading & Dissfiguring the Truth of Serving the Ennemys of our Countrey in order to hurt our Rivals in Power. I do not know whether this may Suggest any thing to you to be either affirmed or denyed in the additional Miscellaneous Remarks you propose on the Subject of your Letters: but this is the way of thinking to which I endeavour to bring my own mind, tho I am not Sensible that in Political Argument I should take the Liberty to Suppose an Antagonist guilty of the Political Vices I have mentioned.

As to the Nature & Object of the War although I set out with a resolution not to make any  Panegyrics yet I cannot help saying that you have stated them with Truth & great Energy. We certainly have many difficulties but The Stake is likewise great, & we may lose it, but it would be as Absurd, in my opinion, to cease Contending for it, because we may lose it; as it would be for a man to cease endeavouring to preserve his Life, because it is in Danger. There never was a National Cause more just than ours is at Present against France & Spain and all their Abettors & tho I trust nothing to this yet I hold it to be a matter of great Importance in the minds of the Partys themselves & of the Bystanders. I am not fond of National Animositys but I feel & indulge the Indignation of the present Case with much Satisfaction. Every well meaning Clergyman ought to Stuff his  Sermon with it on the Approaching Fast Day. And to tell the Americans in Particular how they Were favoured Spared by Providence, while their wishes in Appearance Sincere for the Redress of Grievances, but how they & their Mighty Friends have been Scourged since they rejected the Redress of Grievances to become Traytors to their King. And their Fellow Citizens & Instruments in the Hands of Inveterate Ennemys for the Destruction of Both.

I am sensible that we must endeavour to take the Offensive in this War & make every Effort to Annoy the Ennemy in order to preserve ourselves. The mere Defensive is always Tardy & Feeble & ineffectual. It was the Constant maxim & Practice of Caesar, whom I have been Studying much, to occupy the whole Attention of the Ennemy, as soon as possible, in finding out what he was  to do; so as to leave them no time to think of any Project for themselves. And this I think we should do without giving it out as our Intention: for Talking of which we have already too much often marrs Bussiness. I admire as you do the Talents that appear in both Houses of Parliament but I wish with all my Heart we could lend the use of them to our Ennemys for a year or two.

The Object of our Ennemys last years was to have the Superiority in the west Indies & on the Coast of North America & to have acted Offensively from the one to The Other as the Season or Other Circumstances required & with the Remainder of their Forces Collected to Strike at this Island. For this object they neglected their own Commerce & they spared ours. But as they have Failed in their Principal Intention the Secondary  Losses they have had And the Advantages we have had in the Petite Guerre will be felt very Sensibly. I cannot guess what their Object will be for next year. But I think that our first concern is at Home to have this Island in a Military Posture far above Insult. A Numerous Army well appointed in the Field And Arms every where in the Hands of the People. Many are Averse to the last Circumstance from a Notion that it will make the People Idle & endanger the Peace. And I have been so long upon that Hobby Horse that I am perhaps blind to his Defects: But the only People in Europe who are regularly Armed are the most Industrious & the most Peaceable Citizens, and I believe that there is no Power in Europe that can Invade their Countrey without exposing himself to Disgrace & Ridicule. There are many Differences between them & us, I own:but none to make me Suppose that a  Land holder & Father of a Family will become Idle & Riotous upon having a Stand of Arms in his House, here, any more than there.

Highly as I rate the Force of our Present Army I should be sorry to risk the Fate of this Kingdom on a Single chance of the Die between them & any Army which an Ennemy Superior at Sea may Land here from France. A People with Arms in their Hands, contain many Arms & gall an Ennemy with Hostilitys wherever he goes. This Aid would be usefull upon every Supposition & may be Absolutely necessary if to Act offensively we Detach much of our Army & Fleet to a Distance.

To Effect this I apprehend that little more would be necessary besides some little Honorary Prize to be Annually shot for by persons of a certain condition to exclude the Rabble who have Arms of their own.

There are besides Ideas respecting the Army & the State which haunt me, & which as  I have no character to lose by uttering things out of my Sphere you shall have with my other Dreams. I wish therefore for some decided way of distinguishing Officers who perform Successful Service. I mean not only some Reward to them which may excite Others by their Example but likewise a way of hastening them up into Situations where such Services are of most Consequence. This can be done only by giving one or more Steps to the Officer who is greatly distinguished by Success, for I wish not for many reasons to admit of any Other Proof of Merit. This it will be said may be hard on Other Officers who are equally Capable but have wanted the opportunitys: If Officers feel it so, let them Court the oportunitys & Strive to improve them: This is one great Purpose of the Rule. And if it were Established I imagine that Officers would be as little mortifyed to see another over them for having beat the Ennemy as they now are in Seeing officers over  them for having a Commission of an Older Date. This Rule of Seneriority which we profess to follow can produce nothing in the Army but Purchasing of Commissions & Mediocrity of Character or Patient Service. As for the mere Reward of Service that may be any thing which the Party likes. In the case of Prevost for Instance who by repulsing Destaign at Savanna has done this Countrey a most Signal Service, let him have almost any thing he will as be made a Baronet & Peer & have an Estate or any thing. I was angry with him for what I thought a premature expedition and Attempt upon Charles Town; But it is to his Success at Savanna I wish to Annex this Reward that The King may be understood to Say to every Officer in his Service go & do thou likewise beat the Ennemy.

My other Wish is that some Arrangement were thought of to make our Statesmen Warriours & conversely. I see you make some Objection to things being done on the Spur of the Moment: but  alass if things calculated merely for General Good are not begun at least, upon the Spur of the occasion that calls for them they will never be done nor attempted at all. What would you think of a Party of Chess played by six of a Side of whom each professed to know only the moves of one Piece.

If ever we are set down again in Peace with any thing like our Old Connection with America I should certainly Venture a Croisade to Obtain an Association of some Leading & fashionable People to send their Sons the Tour of America & the West Indies instead of France & Italy & to Visit Camps instead of Conversatziones and Operas. There is one thing however I am sure of; that our will not to put a Single word of all this, in your Additional Remarks. Nor should I, if I had credit to bring any thing like these about in the Army or among Persons of high Rank ever Say a Word about the Matter untill I had done what I could. It will be well if you dont turn away from every Thought of this  Kind with disgust, as being Visionary & impracticable. This is common enough with men of Bussiness, who mistake the Purpose of General Reasonings, which is not to Ascertain what is practicable in any Particular Case, but what ought to be aimed at as far as it is Practicable, a measure which they only who know all the Circumstances of the Case can Assign. I am far from any Hopes that we shall see, as in the best Times of the Roman Republic, a Head or Heads on the same Shoulders equally qualifyed for the Council, or Senate, The Popular Assembly, The Bar, The Judgement Seat, The Camp & the Head of the Army, & indeed Admirably well Qualifyed for all of them: but I am Satisfied it would be a very easy Matter to Make Military as well as Political Consideration a necessary recommendation to the Council the Cabinet or higher Departments of State, And every man who is to decide in great national Questions perceive with his own Senses the weight of  every Circumstance he is to admit in the Scale.

On the Subject of our Resources any more than the loss I have mentioned I certainly cannot say any thing that is worth your Reading. Our Resources are certainly great & our manner of calling them forth is certainly Fraught with great Present Efficacy & Power what may be the End I know not. It is matter of Conjecture & the Data from which to Conjecture are far scattered & deeply hid among the Circumstances which are to Limit Check extend or promote the Future Progress of our Wealth. The Politicians who pronounced the downfall of this Countrey from the Pressure of its Debts: forgot that no measure of Debt will ruin a Party whose wealth encreases more than his Debts or who is a gainer by the whole adventure in the case of every Debt he contracts. To Effectuate our Ruin it is not necessary that our Debt should encrease; the Diminution of our Funds to Pay it will have the same Effect: Nor, to save us, is it necessary that our Debt should deminish the Increase of  our Funds will do as well, & both would certainly do best of all. We have, I imagine, great as our Debt is, been gainers upon the Whole Adventure, tho Losers by Particular Parts: by that which we laid out for Instance in preserving the Ballance of Power in Europe unless we suppose, that this has saved us from Destruction, an Article which must be left out of every Account because it is invaluable. What we gained in East Indies if it could be ensured, would Ballance a hundred Millions: but alass Riches in that Part of the world have Wings. And I most earnestly recommend Plucking them as fast as is consistent with Justice & Prudence. For I see no immediate Resource so great as that.

I perhaps do not differ from you materially on the degree of Reliance to be had on contributions raised within the year & in some measure Voluntary to meet the Exigencys of Government. The measure is attended with so many Difficulties as to prevent its being attempted in the ordinary Course of things: but I should be unwilling to have it understood either  by the Ennemys of this Countrey or by the Lenders of Money that is impossible; That they may Urge us indefinitely, that we are ruined when we are driven to this Expedient. The Fact is that great & Prosperous Nations have been driven to this Expedient & have risen from it as with a new Principle of Life & resumed their Career with Fresh Vigour. Our Ennemys will never have felt the whole Force of this Countrey till a fourth of its People are in Arms & every farthing that can be spared by individuals given to the immediate expence of the War. This I own is a state not to be wished for but in computing the Chances of Life we are by no means to neglect or despise this last one which in our case will not fail if the Spirit with which it ought to be taken does not fail first.

This Letter is already so long that it ought now certainly to come to an End. From the State of Health in which I began it you may  believe it has cost repeated attempts, And I would close it for good & all begging every possible indulgence for the Contents. If I were not earnest to know whether I have the Missfortune to differ from you materially on the Subject of a Possible or Eventual Union with Ireland which you mention with some degree of Reprobation. My predilection is in favour of Small States & Separate Legislatures but I would carry this no farther with respect to the States I love than is consistent with their Safety. It appears to me that as our Rivals in Europe have been advancing the Union of Great Britain First & next that of the British Islands will be necessary to consolidate the Strength with which we are to withstand them. I therefore consider the Union with Ireland as the first great Political Event which some well improved conjuncture may bring about, & which will give us all our Boats  aboard to make us tight for any Storm that may Assail us.

I honour the Irish Patriots of our time [xxx] they have shown that the Effort they have made is a virtuous one for the Relief & Prosperity of their Countrey in which I wish them every Possible Degree of Success. I rejoice greatly over this & all the Other Fortunate Events in the Catalogue. I earnestly Pray that every Nerve may be exerted & every Capable & Brave man encouraged that Since Fortune is disposed to be with us we may put ourselves in the Way of her Favours.

I beg my most Sincere Respects to Mrs Eden Miss Eden & My fellow Traveller. My whole Seal & two or three more super-numerary members who have no Room on the Seal would join me if they had the Honour of being known to Her. I am with the greatest Respect

Dear Sir 

& most  





I am much Obliged to you for your fifth Letter & see with great Pleasure the same Tendency as in the former Letters to remove the gloomy Colours which Party is throwing upon our National Affairs.

I am not learned in the Writings of the Author to whom you chiefly refer on the Subject of Population. He deserves respect for openly standing forth in what I am perswaded he thinks a publick Cause but being myself no Calculator his numbers appear to me  too Abstruse & his Reasonings too Shallow.

I rejoice with you in the Continuance of favourable Events & begin to flatter myself with hopes from every Quarter. Mr Elliott of New York two Boys are arrived here & give very pointed accounts of Persons & things at that Place.

21 Febry 1780

I had written so far for some days ago when I was interrupted [by] a Circumstance which in my Way of Life is enough to put off a Letter for a week together. We were under some Uneasiness here about the Event of political Strugles or rather about the Effect of a new Species of Government forming in some of The Countys of England. This Cloud however may pass as Other Clouds have done with a day or two & a Debate. The Account of what has passed confirm this Expectation & I begin to hope that the State  will actually profit by the Labours of Opposition. That they will enable Government will be enabled to make some Reforms that might Otherwise be difficult and that our Fleets & our Armys will be employed to find Answers to their Complaints & Accusations. If I had written on, when I began my last I should have I should have given You a Dissertation on the Influence of the Crown & the Supposed Expedience of reduceing it, which you have happily escaped. I mean nevertheless to inclose a few Notes I had taken on that Subject after being somewhat puzled with it. I make no doubt but the Questions in Agitation may have given you thought more Apposite to The Times: but this is all you can expect from this Land of Speculation & Metaphysics.

I rejoice to See Lord Carlisles name at another Publick Appointment & feel the  Temptation to trouble him with my Congratulations as I did formerly, indeed more Strongly, in reading His Lordships Defence of the Commissioners Manifesto, published from his Speech in the House of Lords.

My poor Brother who is disposs[e]ssed in Rhode Island & come home writes me that he took the Liberty to Pay his Respects to you & to Lord Carlisle, And I am much Obliged to you for the Notice you were pleased to take of him. He has asked my opinion about the Chance of a Favour or Protection & I am very unable to Advise him, my opportunitys made me feel how much Government had to do in behalf of their Friends in that Quarter but not their means of doing it. I shall however in any proper way that may occur rely on your Kindness. I have the Honour to be

Dear Sir 






I have sent to My Lord Carlisle the original of which the inclosed is a Copy. And must repeat to you what I have mentioned to his Lordship, that I distinctly remember the particulars for which Mr Holland referrs to my knowledge; And that the other parts of his representation are agreeable to what I was made to understand when at New York. He is pleased to desire that I would add any things farther that my  recollection of his Services may Suggest. But I am sensible that the case is Sufficiently affecting not to need my assistence if the protection Mr Holland Sollicits depend on your feelings.

I am to take the opportunity to thank you on account of my Brother, who in writing to me of the Continuance of favour to him imputes it to you & Sir Grey Cooper, And I beg that you will accept of My Acknowledgements joined to his. I have the honour to be with great Respect

 your most Obliged & most 


[Groningen, October 1756] 

Dear Sir

as Mr Fletcher is a litle better within this day or two I have taken the resolution to set out on my return. I am sensible of the precarious Situation he is in but I think it more agreeable to his Fathers intentions to leave him here under the inspection of proper people than bring him back to Brittain where it woud be difficult to setle him so well as he now is with Le Moine. If it please God that he does Well it will give great Satisfaction to all his Friends. If any change to the Worse happens I hope he will not want for proper care. I have been With Dr Van Doeveren this morning he has promised to advise with you about Mr Fletcher & to take care of his health & as I have told him his whole case you may be free with him upon it.

Mr Le Moine will give you notice if he Observes any thing amiss about Mr Fletcher, in particular if he disscovers any intention of leaving this place, I should consider that as a symptom of his dissorder returning & woud think it necessary to detain him even by force & to hire a keeper for him, till further directions can be had from his Friends. It was his Fathers intention that he shoud have the laying out of his money,  & he has disscovered Nothing hitherto that shoud make one alter that circumstance for he seems at present no way dissposed to throw it away. I have desired the Favour of Le Moine to give great attention to his expence & in particular to bring to him regularly every week the demands of such people as furnish him any thing. If notwithstanding, you find that he does manage his Money matters well, pray take the trouble to give his Friends Notice of it, & use what methods you think most proper to keep his next quarters allowance from coming into his own hands. In that case some Friend here must have credit for, & the dissposal of what money may be necessary for him. I have not explained the whole case to Le Moine but he has promised me that upon seeing any thing amiss he will let Dr Vandoeveren & you know it immediatly, when you will be able to determine what to do. You see with what Freedom I trouble you & do not in the least doubt your Willingness to Oblige My Lord Milton & contribute to the Wellfare of a Very worthy young Gentleman.

I am &c
New York, Septr 5th 1778


I am by the Direction of His Majesty's Commissioners to inform you that they have received your Letter of the 1st of July, with printed copies of several Acts passed in the last Session of Parliament relating to America: that they have judged proper to have these Acts reprinted here and that the copies are accordingly sent to the Press.

I am with the greatest 
Regard 
Sir 

most humble 
Servant 














William Knox, Esq.
New York Septr 5th, 1778


I am directed by His Majesty's Commissioners to inform You that they received your Letter of 3d June inclosing the Petition of Zebidiah Story of Newport Rhode Island shewing that the Petitioner having bought Flax, Seed, Staves, Mahogany and other Goods or Merchandize was desirous to export the Same in two Vessels to Great Britain or Ireland and humbly praying that it might be recommended to His Majesty's Commissioners to grant him the Relief requird. Soon after the Receipt of Your Letter with Copy of the above Petition, Newport Rhode Island was invested by a Rebel Force on the Landside and blocked up by the French Squadron by Sea. The Subsequent Attacks on the Place have been defeated but with some Loss of Ships that were destroyed to avoid their falling into the Enemy's hands.

There is not any particular Account what Share Mr Zebadiah Story may have had in this Loss. But if he be still in Possession  of Merchandize which he wishes to export it is the Purpose of His Majesty's Commissioners to give Relief in this and every similar Case as far as shall appear consistent with the State of His Majesty's Service by sea and Land.

I am with the greatest 
Regard 
Sir 


 














William Knox, Esq. at the Secretary of States Office, Whitehall New York, 5th Sept. 1778
Duplicate Nº 18 New York, 19th October, 1778


As it appears that from some Inadvertency the Dispatches from His Majesty's Commissioners to the Secretary of State have not been properly numbered, I now inclose a List of them and beg you will number, according to this List, those You have received, as I have done the Copies We have kept.

I have the honour to be 
Sir 

most  










William Knox, Esq.
Fludyer Street Nº 21 March 26th 1779

Dear Sir

I delivered the day before yesterday, at your Office, a Letter from His Majestys Commissioners & to Lord George Germain inclosing a Copy of a Memorial from the Merchants trading to Georgia, And a Proclamation in consequence of their Request to restore that Province to the Peace of the King. I have Another Copy of the same Proclamation intended by the Commissioners to be sent to Sir Henry Clinton least the Former should be intercepted or lost. And you will please let me know whether the  measure is Approved of by His Majesty, in such manner, that I may proceed to forward this Duplicate to Sir Henry Clinton accordingly.

It is the opinion of His Majestys Commissioners that Similar Proclamation should be prepared & committed to the Discretion of Proper Officer in America for Restoring South Carolina likewise to the Peace of the King. Such Proclamations are accordingly prepared & already Signed & Sealed by two of the Commissioners & will probably have the Signature of The Third Commissioner today. Be so good as inform me whether I shoud send one of the Copys, as I did of that respecting Georgia, to Lord George Germain & if approved of transmit the other to Sir Henry Clinton to be produced or Suppressed at his Discretion or that of the Officer Commanding in South Carolina, in Case His Majestys Troops shall have obtained a Proper Footing there.

I shall wait upon you today at The Office or wherever else you shall appoint, at one O'Clock, to know what Report I shall make to The Commissioners on these Several Particulars.

I am with great Respect 
Dear Sir 

& most  

London April 3d, 1779


I enclose with this Letter Duplicates of the Proclamations framed to restore the Provinces of Georgia & South Carolina to The Peace of The King, and which The Commissioners have the Satisfaction to learn from Lord George Germains Letter of the 31st March are Approved by His Majesty, & confided with the necessary Instructions to Sir James Wright. These Duplicates it was thought proper to execute  in order that His Lordship if he thinks proper may send them by a Separate Conveyance, the better to secure the accomplishment of His Majestys gracious Purpose respecting those Colonys.

I am with great Respect Sir Your most Obedient & most 



William Knox esqr &c &c &c
Fludyer St. April 1779


I inclose with this Letter Duplicates of the Proclamations framed for Restoring the Provinces of Georgia & South Carolina to the Peace of the King & which The Commissioners have the Satisfaction to learn from Lord Geo. Germains Letter of 31st March are both approved of by His Majesty &  Confided with the necessary Instructions to Sir James Wright. These Duplicates, it was thought proper to execute, in order that His Lordship if he thinks proper may send them by a Separate Conveyance the better to Secure the accomplishments of His Majestys Gracious Purpose respecting those Colonies.

I am Sir with great Respect your most Obed.t & most 


Fludyer Street 22 April 




Dear Sir

The Commissioners find great Difficulties in executing the Proclamation to prolong the Effect of their former Proclamations at New York beyond the 1st of June. These Difficulties arise Partly from their not having received the Official Requisition to that Purpose from the Secretary of States Office & the opinion of The Law Officers. It is Proposed that they should meet at Lord Carlisles at  One O'Clock today & I apprehend that those Papers will be necessary to Enable them to take any resolution.

I am with great Respect 
Dear Sir 

 

Fludyer Street 22 April 





That no time may be unnecessarily lost in dispatching the Inclosed Proclamations respecting the Trade of New York & Newport in Rhode Island in case they shall have His Majestys Approbation I am directed to send them to you without waiting untill The Commissioners have Signed the Letter to Lord George Germain which ought to accompany these Instruments, & which may with Equal Propriety Accompany the Duplicates which I am directed to forward tomorrow.  In the mean time it may be proper to mention now for His Lordships Recollection what their Excellencies may State more fully in their Letter. That after the 1st of June Next there will not without a New Act of Parliament, remain any Power Sufficiently authorised to Annual Revoke New Model extend or Restrict any of these Regulations now made Respecting America.

I am with great Respect 
Sir your most Obedient & 
most  








P.S. I likewise Inclose with this a Letter for Sir Henry Clinton containing  a memorandum which I take the Liberty to Mention to him by Direction of His Majestys Commissioners, & must beg the Favour that you will be so good as forward in your Despatches.

William Knox, Esq.
London 24th April 1779


I had the Honour to send to the Secretary of States Office on the 22d late at Night two Proclamations executed by His Majestys Commissioners relating to the Trade of New York & Rhode Island, & hope that those Instructions arrived in time to be forwarded in case they were Approved by His Majesty, to the Place of their Destination And I have this Morning sent Duplicates of the same Proclamations with a Letter from his Majestys Commissioners to Lord George Germain. I herewith inclose to you  the Report of his Majestys Attorney & Solicitor General relating to the Validity of these Proclamation[s], having keept a Copy of this Report for the Satisfaction of the Commissioners.

I am Sir with great 
Respect 

& most  










Wm Knox Esqr &c &c &c
London 8th May 1779

Dear Sir

I send you with this Letter Duplicates of the two Proclamations of the 22d April respecting the Trade of New York & New Port in Rhode Island That His Majestys Secretary of State for the Colonies may if the said Proclamations are approved of by His Majestys order them to be forwarded & published agreeably to the Purpose for which they have been executed.

And Am Sir with great Respect 

& most  








Wm. Knox Esqr &c &c &c






I have often Encouraged my acquaintances here with hopes that the Friends of the English Militia woud support our Motions in Parliament, and was perhaps in danger of encroaching a little on the Art of Political Lying if I had not been sure of your Lordship to save me from that Reproach. If your Old Ennemys are still in Array against us there is no help for it. I joined in the Clamour of which I sent your Lordship some Specimens & did all I coud to encrease it, nor with any very Sanguine expectations of Success but with a Conviction that at all Events this one of the best objects which we can have in View. Even the English Militia may for ought I know fall into dissuse after a Peace; but I apprehend it has already given a twist to our manners, & may like the infusion of so much new blood bestow at least a temporary Vigour & serve to  prolong the Life of the State. The next best thing to the procuring of Actual Political Establishments for this purpose is turning the Attentions & desires of men to such Establishments & to make them think & disspute about them. There has been Nothing worthy of Notice published since the last Paper I sent your Lordship. But a Numerous meeting of Country Gentlemen has been held to think of the Proper methods of applying to Parliament for a Militia & that care is now devolved on about twenty of the Number under the Name of a Comittee who meet frequently & with other things have sent Circular letters to all the Counteys & Burghs of Scotland to recommend this Subject as a proper one on which to instruct their Representatives.

They write Likewise to some of The Members of Parliament at London who were most Active in supporting the former motion. We already see Some cause to rejoice in the Zeal which is discovered by Numbers here, we shall see more if Politicians Elsewhere from Affection Candour  Remissness or Stupidity in which last they are not perhaps always wanting shoud suffer our Motion to be made & our Law to pass. We shall at least by returning frequently put them to their Shifts for Evasions & this too in my Philosophy is doing a good thing. So that you see I am not hard to please on the Article of Success. I woud willingly hope however that we may prevail some time or Other. Mr Hume instead of being Averse to Turbulent Conversation has made himself Member of a Society who call themselves the Poaker Club in Alusion to the use of that Instrument when fires like ours need to be Stirred. But I write with so much pleasure that I forget the time it would take to read my letter. If there was any thing either to amuse or interest from this Country I woud lose no opportunity of expressing the Respect & Esteem with which I have the Honour to be My Lord

your Lordships 
most faithful  







I have made up a Packet of newspapers for your Lordship. It contains some Specimen of the Controversy which Subsists here about the Militia. Our Cold reasonings deserve very little notice at London, but there are some strokes of a different stile in some of these Papers, & I cannot resist indulging my own Partiality to the Subject. I believe your Lordship has been told of an object which I have a view to here in the way of Preferment. I mentioned it lately to Coll' Clerk & must refer to him for Particulars. It is the place of Principal in Our College, The person who holds it now is very old & I am just now informed that he is taken Ill & considered as Dying. How far your Lordship can or ought in Propriety to interfere in it a question which I avoid thinking of. It is a very great Pleasure to me to think that I coud have recourse  to your Lordships Protection & favour upon a proper occasion, without expecting any Attention to my request where it is improper. This place however stands in my way & is the only one which from my Situation I coud expect to Reach, Which is all the Apology I can make for this Trouble And am with the greatest Respect

My Lord 
your Lordships 
most faithful & most humble 
Servant Adam Ferguson
My Dear Lord

I have received your letter containing the two copies of the inscription on your fathers Monument one for Mr Dempster which I have delivered & know his Sense of yr Kind Remembrance as well as My own of the Honour you have done me — In these acknowledgements I am afraid you will think me all too Slow but this is now the mode of my Existence & ill qualified to change it. It has enabled me to communicate with some of the learned men who join me in applauding the Eloquence & the appropriate terms of that composition. The Authority of Dr Gregory has no need of such Supports but I am fond to mention it. I thought your Fathers Birth & mine had been more scarcely dated but I see his preceded Mine by two whole years — altho I have survived so long to become my own Monument perishing you will say — but only more so — as less permanent than some other Grave Stones. I remember to have seen in Italy Miles & Leagues of ancient high ways strewed on right & left with continual Vestiges of Monuments now destroyed or in ruins with scarce a Name to Mark for whom they were intended but your fathers Memory is independent of such materials more fortunate than Tacitus or Livy. His works entire remain for  ages indefinite to shew that in his time the British Stile in able hands was fit to Emulate & cope with theirs it were too much vanity for me to think the opportunity will last of giving judgement how little I had profited by the Example he set me of liking talents & intellectual Eminence. My way is now directed to the trackless Grave & there My course Should terminate but for the happy thought that there is somewhat after death to which this nursery & school of human life is no more than preparation or a prelude.

Meantime however I remain &c





Dear Sir

As I perceive that something must have happened to prevent my Manuscript going to the Press at the time you proposed; I shall be glad to know the present State of it & when I may expect a proof sheet, as I must take care not to be out of the Way during any part of the bussiness. I have intimation of Leave to dedicate to the King & shall in due time send you the Form in which I mean to profit by it. The fifth and Sixth books are under review & correction. Least a fit opportunity should not offer to send the whole at once I shall have a Copy  taken to go in separate Packets by the Post.

Be so good as advise me what is to be done in case the Dissolution of Parliament which is so much talked of should not take place. And whether we may trust to the Franks of the Post masters during the interval of Parliaments. I have set one of our Artists here to work in Sketching some Maps, but I find it difficult to give both the general views & the Particular Scenes which I wish for; you shall know what occurs in the progress of the bussiness. I most sincerely wish you joy of your late news from the west Indies. They may help us to procure Friends or to make peace with our Enemies. I would heap Mr Rodney with Rewards, not only for his own Sake, but as Voltair said of Mr Byngpour encourager les Autres. 

Here is miserable weather scarcely a day of Summer continual returns of east Wind & Rain. Your Friends of this Place are all well. I beg My Complts to Mr Strahan & Mr Cadel.






Dear Sir

I returne the first Proof & thank you most sincerely for the attention you have bestowed upon it. I hope you will always find me very ready to profit by your hints or corrections. When you proposed a change I have adopted it: or where you expressed a doubt have endeavoured to give some other turn to the expression.

I send it to the Post tonight but may not always have this in my Power, your Post may not arrive so early nor my labours be so light. I wrote to you on Thursday last wishing to know what your Packet of today has told me. I suspected that all your hands might be laid up with the Influenza or as one of my Correspondents calls it the news paper Fever which seems to  Spread as far any news paper can procure any Intelligence.

We had a report yesterday of a great addition made by Lord Rodney to his former Victory & Captures, come by Vessels from Jamaica into Clyde: but I have not heard what todays Post brings & need not inquire for your Information you will have it if true from Other Quarters. Wishing Success to our Work & our Correspondence

I am Dear Sr your most Obedient & most 



Wm Strahan Esqr


Dear Sir

I am much obliged to you for your Admonitions both general & particular, as you may see from the use I make of them. The danger is that I change too much. Hitherto I hope that the Number of Types or Letters is not much changed but be so good as tell me when I am likely to tresspass too far. My manner of writing exposes me to this need of correction to the last moment; The first draft is always made very rapidly in order to overtake the matter which is likely to escape me. In this work my Object was to state the Subject. & I thought simplicity the greatest beauty of Stile. If I could attain to Purity as well as perspicuity all would be well. In this I hope you will continue your Assistance. When I come before the Publick I shall hope for Indulgence. But the time to indulge me in any thing I can correct is not yet come.

The Death of our Worthy Friend Dr Blair is to me a very real Affliction. The Effect of it to his young Family will continue to be Felt. By one letter in which it is mentioned, he is said to have died Suddenly; but I have not yet got any particulars. My Complts to Mr Strahan & to Mr Cadel when you see him.

I am 
Dear Sir your most Obedient & most  






Willm Strahan Esqr
Edinr 15 July 1782

Dear Sir

I returned the proof sheets which I received on the 12th by the same post & then likewise gave my immediate determination on the question which you proposed relating to the delay of our publication for another year: you will possibly still expect my more deliberate Judgement upon it. The Gentlemen you mentioned & most of my literary Friends are in the Country or away in excursions to a distance And indeed if they were here, I could not in this state of a Bussiness so interesting to me be governed by any Other than the decided feelings of my own mind. From my Friends I have already had the most unequivocal encouragement to think as I do in forming the Resolution I have taken. I have been about twelve years employed on this Subject, my Efforts indeed have been directed chiefly to the matter: but the Stile I trust is plain & manly, if it does not abound in the ornaments of Composition it is probably not the less worthy of a Subject which is far above such ornaments. The want of them is an effect not of my failure but of my  Choice. I wished even where the grounds of Applause or Censure are evident to leave the application of them to the Reader Content to relate, to state the transaction, & to specify Characters without intruding with my Judgement. This sort of retention which I think proper to History I have not been always able to Observe even when perhaps most proper & the performance must come forth with this & other defects on its head. If it come with reports & prejudices against it: it may not meet with a fair reading but it will sometimes or Other meet with what it deserves & this is all I am entitled to wish.

Simplicity & plainness of Stile I confess do not imply negligence or want of Care. The Stile of Xenophon I believe was studied as much as that of Isocrates tho to a different & a better purpose.

I pant after propriety & purity more than I ever can reach. I have great confidence in your Ear accustomed to a better Dialect than my own & in your Eye accustomed to the minute inspection of the best writings. I have seized your Amendments greedily for I felt the propriety of them  for the most part, & even where I should not myself have felt the necessity of a change, gave way to your better discernment. It was sufficient that I did not perceive my meaning Suffer by it, I took it for granted the expression was bettered. But if the changes I myself have proposed be too much I pray you will admonish me: for I am willing to risk the Publication with such corrections as the press may require or such as are practicable & easy.

I do take very kindly your Solicitude on the question of delay. You promised that I should be Obliged to you & you have kept your Word. The 12th proof sheet is this moment Arrived with the King's Speech for which thank you and am glad to see an End of Such a Session. The post has been late of coming & I wish I may be able to return the Proof with this. In the mean time I finish my Letter

And am Dear Sir 

& most  



Dear Sir

I have received no Proofs since the 18th & was somewhat alarmed least any untoward accident had happened: but am now glad to see your Name on two packets received yesterday & today with Sheets of the Fair Copy. The Interruption is probably owing to some incidental Bussiness, & considering the kind attention you give me I must complain of Nothing: But you probably do not consider or know that my bussiness at College begins about the middle of November & that it would be of the greatest consequence to me to have as much of this work then over & as little to do after that time as possible. This makes me languish for every proof sheet that comes. In the mean time to be doing something I send you my Dedication with Copies of Lord Shelburnes Letters or  Messages to My Friend Mr Greville authorising me to prefix it. I send you likewise Copy of an Advertisement respecting the use I have made of Geographical names Antient or Modern. This likewise may be prefixed. I have now received all the sheets of the first Volume except one which was overlooked in making up the Packet I received yesterday. The Sheet 3M from page 448 to page 457 is missing be so so good as remind your People to send it. Now I have got the Whole to that Sheet stitched together & cut I can go over it more carefully & if there be any Errata which I suspect chiefly in the Quotations to which I gave least attention in the Proofs I will send you a Note of them & the whole together with the above Dedication & Advertisement may be printed on the same Sheet with the title page. As I suspect this first Vol. will be the thinnest, It may not be improper to annex the [xxx] Index of  each Separately. Each of the volumes as I now project will have a Map; the Second Volume will have four Maps or Plans. The sooner & the faster the press goes on the better. I am in the mean time with many thanks for your past attention & hopes of the future.

Dear Sir your most Obedient & most 



Wm Strahan Esqr


Dear Sir

I wish with all my heart that the addition you mention were made & the time may come when I may endeavour to accomplish it. But you will please to consider that it is actually one of the most Interesting parts of the Imperial History, that I should be obliged instead of breaking off into general Reflections at the Accession of Caligula to continue the detail through his Reign that of Claudius & Nero, with the great Contest that Followed to the Victory of Vespasian. This Reign with that of Titus, Domitian, & so on to the Blessed Scene which opened with Nerva & which I should be happy to be able to represent Altho I am affraid the Materials are rather fit to furnish Characters of men & opinions of things rather than detail.  For the present at any Rate the attempt is impossible. My College Bussiness which begins next month, altho it admits of what may be done by Snatches, is altogether inconsistent with the pursuit of any continued & uninterrupted Series of Subjects. I am now engaged in a bussiness of years, but what may fall in with my labours in the College as they come, to put in writing what I used to give there in the form of Prelections.

I am forbid much writing with my own hand & therefore try a new method of dictating to a Clerk. I am much Obliged to Mr Gibbon for wishing to have my hand come So near his Work & if the Publick do me the Honour to bear with a Second Edition should think myself very well employed. However the Reception that may be given to past Labours will very much determine what is to be done with respect to any Continuance.  As to my diligence in forwarding the proofs, I should certainly be very earnest to have the work go on with the least possible interruption, if it were only to catch you so long as you are in the mind to give me your Attention and Assistance And since you have done so well & will very near have Swallowed the Cow by & by, I hope you will not worry on the Tail. As to the Period of my History as it stands if you have looked at the last part of the Manuscript you will see it is Completed to my Idea landing the Roman Republick to a compl[ete] Revolution in a confessed & hereditary Monarchy.

If the Publick call for more however I shall be very glad to be able to furnish it. I am

Dear Sir your most Obedient & most 




I am not at all Surprised that you should lose patience or that I who abuse it should be scolded: but I hope that matters will turn better at least that they are coming to an end, Seriously I am exceedingly Obliged to you for your Continu[e]d attention: I have been considering often in what terms I could thank you; for I never felt my Obligation more in all my Life: but I hope that you are a Stock holder just now and that you will be rewarded  for your good deeds even in this life. I pray you mark me among the next corrections if we are to have Peace. I

am Dear Sir your most 
Obedient & most humble 
Servant 








Edinr 30th Novr 1782
Dear Sir

In this & two Other packets that go by this post I inclose a list of errata, on to the 321 page of the 3d Vol, so far only the fair copy has come to my hands, if any more should occur in the Subsequent parts I will endeavour to send them in time. Together with the errata I inclose The Table of Contents, the five books transcribed from the printed Copy & at every chapter referring to the page. The contents of the Sixth book are transcribed from a Manuscript & could not refer to the page: but this defect the Compositor I hope will Supply from the Printed [xxx] Copy which by the time he comes to this will have been in his hands. How far such a table as I send will be useful or acceptable to the reader you will please judge & determine accordingly; my health & engagements would not permit my attempting any thing more.

These particulars will find room enough in the first Vol. The Order as appears to me Should be the Dedication — The Table of Contents — The  Advertisment, which I sent you some time ago about the Geographical names.  And the Errata. In these last there are some, undoubtedly defects of the Manuscript rather than the Press.

You will find by a Letter from Mr Bell by this Post that the Plates with the Impressions he took of some of the maps are now sent off. I was willing to hasten the arrival of the Plates as much as possible & therefore have sent them by the Stage Coach paying the Carriage here. I have had them carefully packed in two Cases, to bear the violent motion to which they will be exposed in the Coach. If they should go safe there will be some danger in opening the Cases as every Vacuity is filled up with Slips of wood glued in. The Plates are wrapped up in Paper & this will help to distinguish them in forcing open the inner box which must be done very cautiously to avoid mischief be so good as caution the workman who opens them of all this. The Coach they go by, puts up at Mr Wilsons the Swan with two Necks Lad Lane London  You may expect them to arrive on Wednesday the 15th & I am promised they will be delivered to you on Thursday the 16th Inst. — Mr Bell will inform you that he has at the same time sent a packing Box with some of the impressions he had taken &c. This I am affraid you will not receive before the 30th. The waggon puts up in Basing hall Street.

I am Dear Sir 

& most  









 Janry 9th 1783





Dear Sir

Before I had the very great Satisfaction of your last of the 18th past, I looked impatiently for the time at which I should repeat my thanks for the continuance of your kind attention to my publication. I am very sensible that if this work should meet with a favourable reception, much will be owing to that attention & to the indulgence with which you favoured me in my manner of treating the proofs. I inclose all that occurs to me for the Title page. You will please to consider whether the reference to my former publication will help to make  me known or any way contribute to set off this. I am

 
Dear Sir 
with the most sincere Respect 
& Esteem 

 



Dear Sir

My having been abroad on an excursion for some weeks has delayed my troubling you as you will find I have done by this post. Six months being elapsed on the first Ins't from the Publication of my History of the Roman Republick; I have according to our agreement drawn upon you to Mansfield & Co' at twenty days after date for a thousand pounds.

I mentioned this matter to Mr Creech who thought I should proceed in this manner leaving the partners  to settle this with other particulars of the transaction among themselves.

I am Dear Sir 
with great Regard your most obedient & most  






William Strahan Esqr



——————

416:13:4

416:13:4

Wm Ss'

416:13:4F.C.

416:13:4

F.C.

166:13:4Th. Creech

166:13:4

Th. Creech

——————

——————

1000:θ:0 

1000:θ:0





Dear Sir

As our second term of payment is come I have drawn upon you of this Date payable at twenty Days after Date for £500. This is the time of Payment which gives me Par here. And I hope that this Advice will find Publick Affairs verging towards some settlement that we may cease to be what I am told we are the derision of Europe. I forgot to Mention that My Bill is to Messrs Mansfield Ramsay & Co. I am Dear Sir with great Regard




The Gentleman's Magazine 
and Hiſtorical Chronicle: 
volume LI. 
For the Year MDCCLXXXI.







. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The Gentleman’s Magazine; 
for December, 1781



. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Though the Controverſy reſpeckting the Authenticity of the Poems aſcribbed to Oſſian *, has already filled many Pages of our former Volumes, we cannot forbear inſerring the following Elucidations that have lately been adderſſed to the Public.

No I.

In a pamphlet, intituled An Enquiry into the Authenticity of the Poems aſcribed to Oſſian, having read the following paſſage, p. 45, — “Mr Smith mentions Dr Percy's Reliques of Ancient Poetry, in which he ſays, the Doctor confeſſeth, that he himſelf heard pieces of it recited; and being compared with the tranſlation, exactly correſponded. Dr Percy does not underſtand a ſyllable of the Earſe, and therefore could be no judge. The truth is, Dr Blair and Profeſſor Ferguson, when Dr Percy was at Edinburgh, took care to introduce a young ſtudent from the Highlands, who repeated ſome verſes, of which Profeſſor Ferguson ſaid ſuch and ſuch ſentences in Fingal were the tranſlation.” To prevent any inferences which might be drawn from my ſilence, I think it material to declare that the above paſſage, ſo far as it relates to me, is altogether falſe; and that I never was preſent at the repetition of verſes to Dr Percy by a young ſtudent from the Highlands.

Adam Ferguson.



No II.

Having no intereſt to gratify but the love of truth, I have no reaſon to be ſorry when any falſehood is detected. Mr Ferguſon has denied that he was preſent when the attempt was made to convince Dr Percy of the genuineneſs of Oſſian. My relation was not from my own knowledge. I deſire to acquit Mr Ferguſon, whoſe preſence or abſence makes no difference in the queſtion; and I am too well ſupported by truth to need, or to wiſh, the help of falſehood. The attempt was really made, and Dr Percy was for a while credulous, with which I do not mean to reproach him; for I have confeſſed that I once was credulous myself: but I shall be credulous no more till the Works of Ossian are produced.

W. Shaw.

Aug. 31

No III.

In one or two pamphlets lately publiſhed, concerning the authenticity of Oſian’s Poems, great liberties have been taken with my name, and two advertiſements on the ſame ſubject, ſigned Adam Ferguſon and W. Shaw, have appeared in the news-papers; one of which only came to my notice very lately. It is with the greateſt reluctance I enter at all into a controverſy of which I am ſo incompetent a judge, from my utter ignorance of the Earſe language; but regard to truth compels me to give the following relation of a fact reſpecting it, which has been greatly miſrepreſented.

On October 8, 1765, I arrived at Edinburgh, where I paſſed five days with the Rev.  Dr. Blair, who, among many learned and ingenious men, introduced me to Dr Ferguſon, Profeſſor of Moral Philoſophy. To this gentleman he mentioned ſome doubts I had entertained concerning the genuineneſs of Oſſian’s Poems: and he, in the evening before I left Edinburgh (viz. October 13), invited us to drink tea at his houſe, where he produced a ſtudent, a native of the Highlands, who recited ſeveral paſſages, or verſes, in Earſe (ſome of which he afterwards ſung to me) as what he had heard in his own country; and I perfectly remember, that when he interpreted the verſes to me, ſome of them appeared to contain part of the deſcription of Fingal’s chariot. Dr Ferguſon alſo gave me, in his own hand-writing, ſome ſpecimens of Earſe poetry in the original. Dr. Blair afterwards deſired me to mention the recital I had heard, in the next edition of the Reliques of Ancient Poetry; and, in compliance with his requeſt, I gave a ſhort account of what had paſſed, in a note to the firſt volume of my ſecond edition, 1767 (p. xlv.) Some years after, on diſcuſſing this ſubject with a very judicious friend, a native of Scotland alſo, who knew much more of the grounds of the Earſe poetry than I did, he made it credible to me, that there might be ſome deception in the caſe, and adviſed me to ſuppreſs the paſſage in queſtion; which I did, soon after, in my third edition, in 1775. But as I never believed Dr Blair to have been conſcious of any deception in what paſſed between the ſtudent and me, ſo the ſame may have been the caſe with Dr. Ferguſon alſo, as he now appears ſo entirely to have forgot the whole tranſaction. 

Thomas Percy.

Carlisle, Nov. 10, 1781.
