s-, - '1' H. * ' '. : "-,.i.

..

,. (N ,'

. . ..
X EAS Of -N

For applying to

*_ . ***. 'i;.^';.

- .:

The King and Parliament
An Augmentation of Stipend o tothd

Ministers of the Church of Scotland
..

*g X E

·; 1D OB

£ j
'A LETTER to a FRIENDl

te @econo eEHition, - -

g 2D .If N'B U R G -i r
Trinted in the. Year MIDCCX'LV -1I .

Price Two Penc -

S I R,
I Have read the Pamphlet you sent me; and

sincerely believe, that whoever has advised
our Ministers to this unreasonable Demand,
has been no personal Friend to them nor
their Cause either in Church or State,

It is a common Notion, that the Ministers of

the Church of Scotland have very small Revenuesi
and are ill supported. This appears true to such
as are dazzled with the Splendor of the dignified.
Clergy of some Countries: But, on Inquiry, it will.
be found, that the Incomes of our Ministers are
not only sufficient, but that they possess a greater
Proportion of the Revenues of their Country than'
any other Protestant Clergy whatever.

It can easily be made appear, that. the whole A-

mount of the Land and Houses of Scotland posses-
fed by the Laity, does not exceed L. 820,000 per
annum. Our Land-tax, at two Months Cess, a-,
mounts to L. i2o0oo: And it is universally
known, and I believe will not be contradiced,
that, take the Kingdom throughout, two Months
Cess amounts to above 3- d. in the Pound of the
real Rent: And it will be difficult to find any
County in Scotland, which, at eight Months Cess,
that is, four Shillings in the Pound Land-tax, does
not really pay one Shilling and two Pence. Ad:
mitting this, it follows, that as 14 d. is to 240d.
i. e. one Pound Sterling ; so is L. 48,00oo, our
Land-tax, to L. 822,858, the Rent of the whole
Land and Houses of Scotland possessed by the Lai-
ty. One sixth, or L. 8000, of this, is to be paid
by the Boroughs, and is to be confidered as a Tax
on Houses or Trade, rather than on Land which

. A 2 being

4 ]

being deduEted, as it ought, reduces the real Rent
of all the Land in Scotland to L. 685,714.

It is disagreeable to find one's self obliged to

publilh this to the World, when Money is at least
as much refpeEted as it ever was in former times;
and is become the Standard for ascertaining the
Value, not only of individual Men and Things,
but of Nations too. However, as I am persuaded
it is from not having confidered the State and Po-
verty of this Country, that so pious and disinter-
efted a Set of Men, as the Synod of Glasgow and
Air, have been misled, and the fame Error might
mislead others; I hope I shall be forgiven for en-
deavouring to reconcile those Gentlemen to their
Circumstances, by making them sensible, that it
is only owing to the Poverty of our Country, if
they are not the richest Protestant Clergy in Eu-
rope; for, on Inquiry, it will appear that they
really possess above one tenth of. the Revenue of
the Kingdom, take it in what Shape one will.

I am assured, there are above a thousand efta-

bliihed Clergymen in Scotland, including Second
Ministers, Professors of Divinity, King's Cha-
plains, &c.; and I believe it will not be disowned,
that the Stipends of these amounts to at least L. 65
per annum, one with another: It will likewise be
allowed, that the Glebe, which must be four Acres
at least, and generally consists of the best Land in
the Parish, is worth 2os. per Acre: The Cow and
Horse Grass, and Church-yard, one can hardly
value at less than 40 s.: The Exemption from
Land-tax, Rogue-money, Highways, &c. can-
not be computed at less than L. 5 per annum: And,
laft!v, the Manse or House Rent, in which the
Minister will hardly drive a Nail, and where all

~~- ~ Reparations

L 5 J

Reparations must be done by the Heritors, is
certainly worth L. 7, o1 s. per annum, especially
as there is generally a Garden to it; and I ima-
gine it cannot be proved, that any Manse has
of late been built for less than . oo; and it is
but moderate to allow 74 per cent. for Money laid
out on Houses, where one is bound to uphold.--
Thus the thousand Ministers in Scotland actually
possess and enjoy above L. 80,ooo per annum out
of L. 685,7I4, the Rent of the Land, or of
L. 822,857, the total Amount of Land and Bo-
roughs in Scotland. And as the Number ot Peo;
pie in Scotland is thought to exceed L. I,ooo,ooo,
it appears that iooo Clergymen possess above a
tenth of the Income of that ,ooo,ooo0, i. e. 100oo
Shares each, and yet are not contented.

The great Noise one is used to hear about the

overgrown Revenues of the Church in England,
has probably produced the Proposal in queftioni
and yet I can assure the Reverend Gentlemen,
that, on Inquiry, they will find themselves infi-
nitely better off than the Englilh Clergy, notwith-
standing all that is said of their huge Livings.

There are I,000o Parifles in England: The

Amount of these Livings taken together, does not
come to L. 120, one with another; and taken
feparately,-there are not 500 out of the wholethat
exceed L. 200 or 250 a-piece.

It will not be amiss to compare the Income of

an Engli/h Clergyman of L. I20 a-year, with that
of a Scots Minister of L. 70.

Living

# Living of the English Clergyman, L. 120.

r 6

Living of the English Clergyman, L. 126.
Out of which he pays down for First Fruits

and Tenths, Institution, and Induai-
on, L. 120.
This at double Interest, he being only Te-

nant for Life, -- 2 0

Land-tax, at 4s. in the Pound, - i8 o
Window-tax, Poor-rates, High-ways,

Church-wardens Rates, &c. - 12 o
Vifitation-money to the Bishop, L. 5 once

in two Years, - - 2 IO
Reparation of his House and Offices, par-

ticularly vast Barns for the Tythes, 5 o

In all L. 49 io
Thus there remains to the Parson, - 70 10

I will appeal to any Man that knows England,
if any Part of this Sketch is exaggerated.

Scots Minifer's Stipend, L. 70

Glebe, - - 4
Cow and Horse Grass, - 2

In all L. 76

Thus a Scots Minister, with L. 70 a-year Sti-

pend, fees more Money than any English Clergy-
man who has a Living of L, 120 a-year.

The

[ 7 ]

The Clergy in Holland, except at Amferdam,

foterdam, the Hague, and two or three other
great Towns, have none of them oo000 Guilders
per annumn, which, with the Taxes they pay, does
not make L. 70: And there is no Protestant
Country in' Europe, where the Income of the
Clergy amounts to one twentieth of the Rent of
the Lands, except in Great Britain. And in
England the Revenue of all the Clergy, Cathe-
drals included, and even the Revenue set apart
for keeping up these fumptubus Edifices, does
not exceed L. I,6oo,0oo. Tho? the Land of Eng-
land is confessed to amount to L. 20,000,000 per
annum; which is but two twenty fifths of the
whole: Whereas our Clergy cost us one tenth.

Harrington propofes'an fgrarian'Liw, by which

in England he would restrain the Poffeflion of one
Man to L. 2000 per annum in Lahd; and thinks,
that in Scotland no one Man ought to possess more
than 500 a-year. Our Countryman; Fletcher of
Salton, was of Opinion, that no Man in Scotland
ought to have above L. 200 a-year. Surely, in a
Country where these Patriots thought it of dan-
gerous Corifequence, that any Person ihould pof-
fess more than L. 5 or 200 a-year, they would
never have recommended a Man as an Obje&t
bs Charity who enjoyed L. 70,

Suppose Mr. Fletcher's Country Gentleman to

succeed to L. 200 a-year in the common Way in
Scotland,after having buried Fatherand Mother, and
let us state the Cafe between him and a Minister,

Suppose him to owe for burying his Pa-
'rents, entering Heir, Infeftment, and
some old Acormnp.ts, '
- 3- 0o

To

[ 8 ]

Brought forward 300
To two Sifters and one Brother's To-

cher, at L. 200 each, - 600

Interest of theit Sums, - - 4
Land-tax, &c. for L. 200 a-year, - 13
Reparations of all Kinds, including Kirk

and Manse, - 10

Loffcs by Tenants, -
Some little extraordinary Expences that the

World requires of a young Laird, and
from which a Minister, who is supposed
to poffcfs Philosophy and Religion, is ex-
empted,
But supposing this fame Laird to be left

io,ooo Merks of Debt, or a Jointure, and let
one only imagine how the Comparison will stand.

On the whole, I sincerely wish the Rent of

Scotland amounted to more, and could afford
more. In that Cafe the Ministers might hope to
be listened to; but, as Matters itand, they have
an ample Share of the Property of their Country.

Scotland is really poor: And one would expec

from the Christian Clergy, they would Ihow us
an Example of Moderation, to reconcile us to
the Inconveniencies of our Situation. I own it
kiTens them not a little, in my Opinion, to find
them set an Example the other Way: But no
Step of theirs ihall provoke me to forget, that
they are Ministers of Christ, are good Subjeas,
and generally Men of Virtue; though I cannot
thir.k this unreasonable Scheme quite consistent
with that Characer.

We are all sensible, that, especially since the

Union, our young Gentlewomen are very ill
o1f, TheirSex debars them from the Advan-

tages

[ 9 ]1

tages theMen reap from it, by eftabliffling theIn-
selves in our Plantations, the Fleet, Army, &c.
Suppose a Petition was to be offered up to Par-
liament in behalf of all the young Women and
unprovided Widows of genteel Education and
Behaviour, humbly begging the Legislature to
take their Cafe under Consideration, and repre-
senting, That whereas the great Demand the Pu-
blick has had for young Men in our Wars by
Sea and Land, our Colonies abroad, &c. they
have not, nor, by the Nature of the Thing, can-
not pollibly be provided for by Marriage; there-
fore they beg to be allowed an Eftabliflment of
L. 20 a-year each, out of the Rent of the King-
dom.

I think a great deal might be said in support

of such a Petition. But what would blow it up at
once is this: - There are at least 20,000 such
young Women in the Kingdom, and the A-
mount of their Demand exceeds one half of the
untaxed landed Rent of Scotland. And the An-
fwer would be: Ladies, since you have the Mif-
fortune to be born in a poor Country, you muff
submit to what Nature seems to have intended
and corre&t the Inconveniencies of your Situation,
by Frugality, Temperance, and Patience. These
are the Ornaments of your Sex in all Countries;
but it is decent in your Circumstances, to make a
Virtue of Necessity.

I flall now examine the Reasons set forth

in the Pamphlet, and fliall follow the Order
in which I find them there.

Reason I. The Support and Education of a Fa-

mily is vastly more expensive now, than when the
Stipend was fettled by King Charles I. a hundred

B Years

[ O

10

Years ago. At that Time indeed it bore such a
tolerable Proportion to the Rates of Things, and
Circumstances of the Times; that for a while the
Ministers of the Church of Scotland lived com-
fortably: But 'n6w it must be owned by every
Person, that the necefiary Expence of'living is
generally doubled, yea in many Articles near tri-
pled, above what it was then': All Vivers,
Cloathing, and Goods of every fort, are vafly ri-
fen in their Value; the Wages of Artificers; and
Servants of all kinds, greatly advanced. So that,
on there Accounts, the Maintenance'of a Family;
and the Education of Children in any measure
of Decency, according to our Station in the
World, is become impossible; for the Stipend
in most Parihes does not exceed sixty or sixty five
Pounds, and in many not fifty, in some not for-
ty, nor even thirty: So that an Augmentation
seems to be absolutely necessary, if those thatferve
at the Altar, are to live by the Altar. Had our
Encouragement been assigned us'in Church-lands,
our Subject would have risen with the other
Lands in the Country, and would' have kept
with them a growing Proportion to the necessary
Expence of Life; but our Subject, being stated
and unimprovable, is now greatly left behind in
Value, even in Proportion as the Necessaries of
Life are' advanced. The Clergy 'are the only
Set of Men in Scptland, whose Income is not in'
:reafed'with the Expence of the Times. The
Land-rents are greatly raised, Salaries of all pu-
blick Employments considerably augmented, and
the Profits of Traders and Mechanicks increased
according to the Expence of Living. As for
thoti Augmentations of Stipend-which- have beeti

...**
. *='~- .granted

[ ii 3

granted within these hundred Years, they have
been but few in Number, the Additions which
have been made, very inconsiderable, and, of late,
Applications for Augmentations have been gene-
rally rejeted.

Answer. It is by no means true, that Neceffa.

ries are bec'ome dearer than they were ioo Years
ago. It appears from Bp Pleetwaod's Chronicon
pretiofumn, a Bool no body should be without,
that Corn, on the Price of which all o'ther Things
depend, has been cheaper within these 50 Years,
at a Mlediurm, than in any Period of Time for
ioo Years before. The fame Principle appears
from Sir Henry Spelmaniis Works, publiffed by
Gibson, in the Article on Coin. Cloathing of all
Kinds is cheaper now than in Charles I.'s Time t
And Woollen and Linen Goods, of the fame Qua-
lity, never were so cheap in Scotland as now. The
Difference is, that Luxury has crept in amongst
us, and we do not content ourselves with what
our Forefathers never aspired to.-No doubt Eng-
lijt Broad Cloth is not so cheap as home-spun,
nor Holland as Linen, nor Silk as Stuff: But I
will venture to fay, with Sir Jo/iah Child, that no
Man of Sense ever chose a Wife in a Silk Gown,
that he would have reje&ted in Worsted. I am
afraid our Enemies will fay, the plain Englilh of
this first Reason is:-Truly it is grown the FaJbi-
on to be luxurious; and, as the Clergy ought to have
the Lead on all Occasions, may it please your Maje.
fly, &c. to put us in a Condition to vie with the
best of thez: in it.

It will be found, that the Augmentations and

new Creations since the Time mentioned far ex-
ceed the neat Profit on the Improvement of Lands

B 2 in

[ 2 ]

in Scotland: For it is not fair, where a Man has
laid out a large Sum in improving Land, to itate
all that to the Account of Improvement. If I lay
out L. Ioo on Land, and raise my Rent only
L. io a-year, all that can be stated as Improve-
ment, is the odd L. 5 a-year. And I am afraid,
if L. 5 per cent. is to be allowed for all the Mo-
ney laid out on Improvement of Land there Ioo
Years, it will be found our Improvements have
been backwards. And once eftabliflh the Princi-
ple, That Stipends are to be increased as Land
improves, it will be deemed such a Tax on Indu-
firy and Agriculture, as will put a total Stop to it.

I beg to know, whether the Pay of an Officer,

Soldier, and Sailor, is increased within the Time
mentioned ?

The Augmentations have been rejected of late,

because the Judges of the Land thought the Cler-
gy had enough.

Reason II. The Parishes in Scotland are general-

ly much more populous, and consequently the
Toils of the Ministerial Office, in visiting, exa-
mining, baptizing, marrying, and attending the

m ning, t--J--· -----s-

Sick, much greater than when our Encouragement
was fixed; our Labours are greater, and possibly
more useful, both in a religious and civil Sense,
than the Labours of any Set of Men in Scotland,
who are so ill paid.

.fik-wer'. It cannot be made out, that Scotland is

incrca'ed in Number of People within there hun-
dred Years: But Evidence can easily be brought
to the contrarv ; for which one needs but appeal
to their ovn Siffion-books.

Reason III. It is impossible for us, upon our
present small Income, to maintain that Influence

and

[ 13 J

and Regard which is due to our Fun&tion and Cha.
rater. Wants and Straits naturally depress our
Spirits, bring us into a mean Dependence on our
People, and greatly fink the Credit of our Office
with those of better Rank.

Answer. This is borrowed from 7eremiah Col-

lier; and indeed has been so often exploded, and
is so liable to Ridicule, that one needs only put
them in mind when it was they have had most In-
fluence, and have been most regarded; whether in
the poor, or wealthy Times of the Church ? and,
whether a good Life and Character, or a Coach
and Six, commands most Refpe& to a Clergy-
man and Philosopher ?

Reason IV. The Smalnefs of our Stipend is apt

to divide our Attention betwixt the Duties of our
Office, and some secular Projet, for maintaining
ourfclves in our Station; whereby our Thoughts
must be diftrated, our Cares divided, and our fa-
cred Labours become enervated and fruitless.

Answer. This differs widely from the received

Opinion of all Nations, ancient and modern: Not
to mention, the ancient Philosophers, far less the
modern Papiffs, this really looks as if the Au-
thor had forgot the Evangelists, the Acts of the
Apostles, and had never read any Ecclesiastical
History.

Reason V. Our present Circumstances render us

incapable of that glorious and divine Part of our
Character, which conifts in Kindness, Hofpitali-
ty, and good Works; without which the best
Sermons and most assiduous Labours of the Mi-
niftry, will prove in a great measure ineffe&ual
with our People, and afford only an unsatisfying
Pleasure to ourselves, With what Grace or Zeal

can

[ I4 3

,eah we recommend Beneficence and generous Deeds
to our Hearers, when we want Power to rhake the
Light of our own Example shine before them i

Answer. This is so ludicrous, that one is at a

Loss how to treat it. The Subjec is of a serious
Nature; and'yet lappeal to every thinking Man, if
it is here seriously treated; not to take Advantage
of the Indecency of the Expressions, Hospitality,
and the Light of oar own Example jhine before them.

What is proposed, is, not to augment every

Stipend, but only such as are below L. ioo a-year.
Are such as have theHappinefs to possess that Sum
remarkable for Hospitality ? Is it by the Light of
that Virtue that they instruct their Flock ? or are
we so unhappy in poor Scotland, where that Reve-
nue can fall but to few People's Share, that a Man
cannot shew a good Example to his Neighbours
without L. ioo a-year ?

Reason VI. Were our Encouragement more

considerable, Gentlemen capable of giving their
Sons a liberal Education, would be more likely
to educate them for the Ministry; whereby the
Church would be adorned with able Ministers, and
.the civil Constitution remarkably strengthened
by their Influence and Connexions.

Aifwer. This is tfill founded on a supposed In-

tention to increase the Revenue of every Minister,
as well as the poorest. Gentlemen, when bred to
the Ministry, never doubt of obtaining a good Li-
ving, if they have Merit. And I dare fay, it ne-
ver was an Obje&ion to a Gentleman's breeding
his Son to the Church, if he inclined to it other-
wife, That he was not certain of obtaining one of
the middling Livings for him.

Reason VII. If there were such an Augmenta-

tion

L 5 J'

tion made to the Stipends over Scotland, as would
make the Minifters'live'with Comfort in their re-
fpeEtive Parishes, Transportations, with the ma-
nifold Inconvenieniies attending them," would be
in a great measure prevented.

Answer. This tilakes greatly against the Scheme.

No body'will'deny, that it is an Objetion, and
perhaps'the strongest,' againft'our Ciurch-govern-
' nent, That as there'is ho Room for Preferment
in it, Men who naturally delight in Ease, want
one of the chief Motives to Appilication. This
is a Proposal to take away the only Incitement
left us. Besides, if all Livings were rmade alike,
it is likely futh as corfidered their own Inter-
eft, would make 'Application, to quit a labo-
rious and populous Charge, for a small and remote
one. Thus one might expet tb fee Translations
from large Towns and Parishes, to the remote
Parts of the Country.

1 Reason VIII. The Attachment of the Church
of Scotland to the Royal Family on the Throne;
and to our prefeht happy Constitution, has always
been both dutiful and zealous, particularly in
Times of Rebellion and 'publick Danger. This
gives us Ground to expect a fair Hearing with his
Majesty King George, and every lioneft Whig in
the Britit Parliament.

.Infwer. 'As to this, the King is the Head of

the Church butt he is' likewise the Father of his
People. It must be confessed the'Clergy did their
Duty on a'late Occasion and so did the Country
Gentlemen. Such as did otherwise have defer-
vedly suffered fur it; or have; it is to be hoped,
been set right by his Majesty's Clemency. The
Country Gentlemen have suffered greatly by the
Rebellion, from tte double Taxe trhey paid iM
' .... : - .

* ;:
' ....- moRt

most Courfties during that unhappy Period; thie
were put to great Expence and Inconveniencies, ir
removing their Goods, Vexation of their, Tenants,
Neglect of their Business, furnilhing Carriages and
Horics to both Sides; betides the Risk ofthe to.
tal Loss of their Prpperty. I do not know that
any Miniiter in Scotland loft any Part of his $ri-
pend; and if any Manse has been injured, the
Parish is bound to make it up. I muff add, that
it looks ill for the Clergy of a Kingdom, who owe
so much to the Royal Fanily, and are. under e-
very Tie, human and divine, to support our hap-
py Eltablilhment, to make.aMerit of having done
their Duty on that Occasion,. since they must have
deserved the severest Censure if they, had done o-
therwife: And, not content with that,-to ask a Re-
ward out of the Pockets of their Fellow-fubjets,
whole Poverty they ought to commiserate, vaill
ever be thought unworthy the Ministers of Christ,

I mluftobterve, that what is;mentioned in the

Pamphlet, of levying the Stipends as the Land-
tax is, viz. by Quartering and Dragooning, is-a
Method which I should imagine will hardly re-
commend the Doctrine of Christ;' as, I am sure,
it can receive no Sanction from it.

P. S. I will perhaps be said, that the Mini-

irers in Scotland have not L. 65 a-year, one with
another. It is the fame Thing to my urpofe, if
their Revenue amounts to L. 70,000 a-year in all,
It is imagined their Numbers exceed IooO; and
whether that Sum is spread amongst i Iop, or con.-
fined to 50o, is the fame with relation ,to the:Rent
of the Kingdom. Besides, it will-be found, on dIn
quiry, that 3^d. ii the Pound isconfiderablydlefs
than the Land-tax of Scotland at two ,Months

. es .
·u t -.. . .... .. .
- -: - I $.

.~ ~ ~ 2
.S
