~路 ' /,2路

/"

The Juficc and Necefsy of the WAR wvith

our AMERICAN COLONIE.S Examincd.

A
S ERMO N,

Pnzcbcd at Ixsaitst, Dtccmbcr i. x7;6,
The YAtT.DAr appointd by Ihe Xtuo, on account of

Tb. AMUrtcAU RIUILLIoW.

yALEXIANDER CARLYLE,D.D.
Wnilzt of Ianvcn, and Almoncr to hiibb Mjy.

~1 ~OD A C X U OR 0
Numol so 3~- U lft LA 1~ , LP1oo0

(Paid; QNZSDSLtuo.)

# ADVERTISEMENT.

ADVERTISEMENT.

HIS Sermon should have been publish-
ed some time ago, in deference to

the request of the hearers, had it not been

for the author's reluctance to trouble the

Public with his thoughts on a fubje&, that

had so often employed much abler pens. He
will be happy if his discourse shall contri-
bute in the leat to increase that great tide

of national opinion, by which even Sove-
reigns and legifiators mufl be carried along.

# Shall I yet again go out to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? Judges xx. 28.

The justice and necefity of the WAvR

with our AM ER IC A CoLoN ES,
confidered.
Shll I yet again go out to battle againfl the

children of Benjamin my brother, or Jhall I
cease ? Judges xx. 28.

HESE words are taken from the hifto-
ry of that war which the children of

Israel carried on against the tribe of Benja-
nin, on account of an enormous a& of
cruelty and injustice done to a private per-
son of Israel, by the men of Gibeah, a town
of Benjamin. Compensation for this inju-
rywas at first demanded; but it was refuted
with insolence. War ensued ; and the Israel-
ites were defeated in two great battles, with
the loss of forty thousand men. They had
consulted the Lord each time they had ta-
ken the field; but, for wife reasons, only
known to himself, he fought not on their
fide. The children of Israel, affliced and
dismayed, and affraid that their fins we

A the

thl fi-;-ct cifc G

! ller difo :T'.tlrc, kep-c a

blc ,tn lhl unto te l.ord, ' and v(ci;t up,
' and ca;.Ce unto tile ho;ife of God, and wept,
' and there lft bLio!rc he Lord, and fafl-
' ed that d:.iy untiil even, and ofi'rcrl brnt-

o;(er'ings, and pcace-oferings c!;ifrc the
L' ord.' Aitertl;is h.!: prcpar tic,: , they a-

gain inquired of the .Lord, ' lhall I yet a-
' gain go out to battle againfi the chil-
'dren of Beoja.i in my brother, or ifhali
'I cease ?' 'I he plain concluihon from
this conduC. of the !iraelitcs is, That na-
tions must persevere with fortitude in a righ-
teous cause, and continue to apply to God
by prayer, and all thlc dutics of rLligi.n, if
they hope for success in war.

On former occafolis, frr.iiar to this, when

wvc have been called upon, by our present
Sovereign, to address the King of Kings, for
a blelling upon his counfcs and arms, it
has been on account of forci';n wars, in
which the safety or honour of the nation or
its ailies, have necefilarily engaged us on the
clearclt grounds; and there is no need of cx-
plaining the:l to you. The very last war
was :n'Jictsken on iuch grounds; for it was

路 i n1

in dcfence of our ancient colonies, (now in
arms againat thieir protectors), who were then
in danger of being subdued by the enemies
of the Britilh empire. You may remember
with what zeal and afiedeion you espoused
their cause, and what sincere and fervent
prayers you repeatedly offered up to hea-
ven in their behalf, touched with the sense
of their calamities, and alarmed at their
danger. How soon are things changed!
and how great the change ! Not long after
the conclusion of that bloody and expensive
war, in recent remembrance, while that ge-
neration still lives and flourishes which we
saved from the foe, those ungrateful colo-
nies, by their foul 'revolt, have forced us in-
to the must unnatural and dangerous war a-
gainft themselves. And, left your minds,
my brethren, should not be prepared to
change as fafl as theirs, left the remains of
your partial affeaion should make you
fliut your eyes to thejuftice and necessity
of this war, I think it incumbent on me, as
a proper exercise for this day, to flhew you
the grounds on which we are gone out, and
ought agagn to go out a.nainlZ the children of

Benjamin,

( 4 )

Beijamini, our brother, andsJhould not cease,
that your prayers for success to almighty
God may be equally rational and fervent.

I shall, in the ifl place, endeavour to shew

thejuftice an nciceliity of this war. And
then,

zdly, Point out our duty, in the present
circumflances, to God and to our country.

In the ift place, I am to shew the justice
and necessity of this war.

But how (hall I enter into so wide a field ?

or in what method (hall I treat such a co-
pious subjel ? The {ketch I can now give
you of it, must of necessity be ihort: And
I muff trust to your previous knowledge, to
fill up and fupply.my brief and imperfeet
delineation.

Let us examine the grounds of this re-

volt, and try if we can find them in an-
cient right, or in recent provocation; or, if
there ihould fail, let us then fee if expedi-
ency obliges, or the honour of the nation
permits us, to yield to their demands.

The adventurers who first set out from

Europe to the new discovered country of
America, went all in search of the pre-

cious

k S )

cious metals. Our colonists engaged in
-*their enterprizes with the fame view; and,
when they were disappointed, they chan-
ged their object for others more lucrative to
themselves, and to the mother-country.
Discontent with the various forms of
government, civil or ecclesiastical, that pre-
vailed in their turns at home, during the
last century, led many afterwards to seek
for more peaceful abodes in that distant
region. But, whatever were the objecs of
the first settlers of our American domini-
ons, separation from the government of
Britain was none of them; for, to preserve
their connection with their native land,
they went all under charters granted by
the sovereign of this country, with certain
rights to the lands where they fettled, and
with the grant of certain powers defined by
the charters, and to be administered in such
manner as they prescribe. As corpora-
tions, they had rights given them to make
bye-laws for themselves ; and, as corpora-
tions derived from, and subsisting by high-
er authority, they continued subjed to the
controul of that authority. It is impossible,

indeed,

(6)

indeed, to conceive any other idea of a cor-
poration erecdcd by charter, than that it
hlould continue fubjedc to the author of'
that charter.

And if they, for their own interest, an-

xioufy preserved their connecion with
Britain, it was clearly her part to keep them
in fubjeiion and dependence. For what end
did file fend out colonies, but to benefit her-
self, to extend her commerce and her power,
to increase induflry and population, and ad-
vance her happiness and prosperity ? Why
(hould fle have nourifled and protected
them in their infancy, supplied them with
the neceflaries of life, and the means of
improvement, if fie had not confidered
them as part of herself? Why ihould she
have fettled them once and again, when dri-
ven off by the natives, and encouraged and
strengthened them at great expence of blood
and of treasure, it not for her own com-
mon benefit and theirs? And why have
the colonies, for almost two centuries, been
such favourite objects of her legislation?
Those who are acquainted with our body of

laws,

(7)

laws, know well how great a part of it re-
fpe&s the colonies. Their affairs of go-
vernment and commerce are so thoroughly
incorporated with that code, that they
could not be erased from it, without al-
inoft dcftr(ying the whole. This of it-
self fiufficiently ihewvs how much their inte-
refl and ourG6 have been blended together,
and firongly marks their dependence on the
legislature of Great Britain.

On this subjed, indeed, till of late years,

there has been no dispute. The colonifis ac-
knowledged the authority of the King and
parliament, and submitted to them on all oc-
cafions. In return for their obedience,
they claimed the protection of the fiate,
which was given them, with every mark
of partiality and indulgence. And thus,
with all the advantage of distant fettle-
ments for the improvement of their for-
tunes, they and their poferity remained
denizens of Great Britain, with the power
of returning when prompted by inclination
or wealth, and of enjoying the most ample
privileges of native subjeCts. Antient right
then furnishes no ground for this revolt.

Let

(8)

Let us next fee if it can be justified by
recent provocation.

You all know, my brethren, the neceffi-

ty of taxes for the support of the state.
As we give up part of our natural liberty,
and submit to be reltrained by laws, that
our persons and property may be safe from
the criminal invasions of other men, we
likewise yield part of our property to secure
the reft: That is, to pay the neceflary ex-
pence of government and the execution of
the laws; to support the supreme magifirate
and his judges and officers in suitable dig-
nity, and to defray the expence of fleets
and armies, for the common defence and
proteEtion of the whole. And, left the co-
vetous should with-hold his share, the law
forces it out of his hoard, that the reft of
his fellow-citizens may not pay more than
their just proportion. By the happy confti-
tution of our country, these taxes are not
arbitrary demands, but laid on by the re-
presentatives of the people, with the content
of the house of Lords and the Sovereign ; so
that no nation was ever so well secured a-
gainft an oppressive or unequal taxation.

T,~

(9)

To make it compleat, every person within
our wide extended empire ihould contri-
bute according to his ability, otherwise the
burden must fall unequally.

When the colonies were in their infant-

slate, struggling with difficulties and with
enemies, they were not in a condition to
contribute to the common charge. They
needed bounties and rewards for their en-
couragement; and accordingly they received
them from the parent-ftate. But afterwards,
as their commerce and wealth increased,
they were sometimes diretly taxed, as well
as the reft of the Britifi dominions, and
that as early as the times of Cromwell
and Charles the Second, and down. to
the period immediately previous to the
dispute. These taxes, indeed, were laid
on with a sparing hand, because the co-
lonies had but lately emerged from infant-
weakness: But the authority of the aas
of parliament was never disputed till now,
and the taxes imposed by them were paid
when demanded.

B But,

( )'

But, if there had been no exercise of this

right of the legislature, prior to our own
days, the right must have remained entire,
because it is eli:; tial to government, found-
ed in justice and equity, and in the law of
nature ta i] nations. The supreme power
of the slate would, at any time, have been
entitled to impose part of the public burden
on our fcllow-lubjeds in America, provided
tho{e iinpolitions were just and fair. For
I do not contend for passive obedience
and non-reiiltance to supreme authority:
But then the only jul: ground of reliitance
is the oppressive, tyrannical, or unconfii-
tutiona! exercise of that authority. `

The

* The colonies pretended, at the beginning of th-

dispute, that it was unccnhtitutional to tax them, because
they were not represented in parliament, and a new
diftinflion was formed, in their behalf, between the
right of legilsation :and that of taxation. Consuetude
was .:fficicnt to obviare these obje-ions. All the argu-
ments in support of them have, however, been again and
again ably refuted, and particularly of late, in a sermon
on a!legiance, by Dr Campbell Principal of the Mari-
llhall College, Aberdeen. See also the rights of Great
Britain aflcrted, and an Enquiry into the guilt of the
war, &c. by Dr Roebuck.

( t )

The Americans, however, do not plead

that they were taxed beyond their proportion
or ability: They aboblutely deny the right
itself. This docrine is entirely new, and
is the undoubted offspring of their wealth
and power. Let us trace the fats that ap-
parently led them to take arms, as they rife
in their order.

After a war, undertaken, as I have said,

entirely on account of the colonies, which,
though fuccefsfui beyond our mnofl sanguine
*wiflhes, was expensive to the en,)rmous ex-
tent of near one hundred millions; when, to
lessen this grievous burden in a fmrall de-
gree, the slate laid on them an incontider-
.^ble tax, the amount of which was to be
applied to their own internal government,
they would not fublnit to it. Though they
could neither justly complain of the quan-
tity imposed, nor of the application of
the tax, nor plead their inability to bear
it; for their trade and-riches were greatly
increased; yet they wantonly refused pay
ment; and, without the leait provocation,
riotously dcltroyed the property of fair mer-
chants, to a great amount, that happened to

be

( 12 )

be the subjea of that taxation. Compenfa-
tion was demanded for this great injury to
private proprietors, and fatisfation for such
a daring affront to the laws. Both were
haughtily refused.

On the refusal of fatisfadion for their

violation of private property, and outragi-
ous contempt of public authority, the le-
giflature, equitable and steady, enaded laws
to punilh the offenders, and to enforce the
authority of the state. As it was impof-
fible to bring the guilty to junice in com-
mon form, it became neceflary to pu-
nifh the community that screened their
crimes; but the penalty was to cease
the moment they delivered up the offen-
ders, and made compensation. But the
colonifls made choice of the nmoR violent
part; they obftruaed the execution of there
laws, and an armed force became necessary,
as in other ca!es of resistance againfi law.
They attack the troops in the execution of
their duty: Then, coinfcious of the atrocious
nature of their offence, or rather in the
train of a concerted plan, they combine,
from Dan to Beersheba, from one extre-
mity of the land to another. ,Trufling to

their

( 13 )

their distance from the parent-flate, and the
firength they had acquired under its genial
wings, they overturn the antient chartered
governments, and ered new ones in their
place. They inflame the ignorant multi-
tude. By ieducion, or by force, they arm
every man. They oppress his Majesty's
loyal fubjeas, and the best friends of the
conRfitution, and drive them from their e-
states and poffeflions *. At las, after vari-
ous subtile and artful professions, they pull
off the mask; they declare themselves an
independent republic, make war upon the
parent-ftate, and implore the aid and pro-
teaion of fur antient foes, from whom we
so lately delivered them.

Such is the recent provocation of which

the colonies complain. Such rather are their
pretences to justify the effeas of their info-

lence

* Their treatment of the episcopal clergy has been

remarkably barbarous, and demonflrates that, to be
Whigs with them, men must be of the highest republi-
can and antimonarchial principles The church of En.
gland supports the revolution on good grounds, and, in
South Britain, is indisputably the firmest barrier againt
fanaticism, either in religion or politics.

( 4 )

lence and pride. They excitethe few by the
profpes of ambition: They intangle the
many in the mazes of fophiflry. They dig-
nify their own unreasonable claims, lately
propounded, by the name of sacrcd rights,
though hofile to the conflitution. The
inildef execution of the laws, they hold to
le tyranny, and jult punilhmncnt, or felf-de-
fence, they exclaim againi: as the molt bar-
barous murder. Though, in every refped, a
part of our dominions, united to this go-
vernment and subjea to its laws, they as-
fume the language of a separate ard inde-
pendent state, and thereupon form reafonsfor
acually becoming one; they rebel against
lawfulgovernment, and, fiom the necessary
consequences of their own conduct, they form
arguments to justify rebellion. But these
colours are employed only to impose on and
deceive the giddy multitude, who are not to be
driven to arms without either real or imagi-
nary oppressions. The project is of a more
antient date, coeval with the century it-
self, with the dawn of their wealth and pro-
fperity; and, when Canada yielded to the
British arms, the long-wifhed for profpe&
at last arose on the cloudy imhagination of
the New-England fanatic, the flattering

idea

( I5 )

idea of power and independency, and a
glorious republic.

It is their ambition, then, that has led

them into an unjufi and unprovoked rebellion
against the patent-ftate. Let us now inquire,
what motives may be derived from expedi-
ency to engage us to yield to their claims,
or how far we can honourably agree to them.

From the (hort representation I have

given of the cafe, you will observe, that
this is a war merely in defence of. our
eftablilhed constitution and government,
and the rights of the state. On our
part, it took its rife from a legal attempt to
enforce the laws, and preserve their authori-
ty. And, though the legiilative powers, in
abhorrence of civil diflention, were willing to
depart from their just claims; yet their mild
propositions were rejeaed with disdain:
And we are now involved in a war, (how
tedious, expensive, or bloody, God only
knows), in defence of that constitution
which was eftabliffed by the wildom, the
courage, and fortitude of our forefathers,
those venerable ancestors, who proteted
and cherished, with so much care, the first

inhabitants

( z6 )

inhabitants of our plantations, and impart-
ed to them that freedom which they had so
nobly acquired.

Under this government, we have lived

with more security and happiness than any
nation ever did. In their religion, all men
have enjoyed an ample toleration; in their
property, undisturbed security; and, in their
persons, a liberty inviolate. Far superior to
the republics of antiquity, the govern-
ment of Britain has maintained the rights
of human nature, with a happy equality:
And, while the multitude has been an object
of her molt tender care, the avenues of lau-
dable ambition have been opened wide
to talents and merit of every kind. Not
only have we lived equal, and safe, and free,
under the government of laws interpreted
with equity and adminiftred with modera-
tion, but, in consequence of this peculiar
slate, we have attained to the highest degree
of national felicity, prosperity, and glory.

Shall we then susser the befl of govern-

ments to be shaken to its centre, to be in-
vaded, to be dismembered, to be destroyed ?
No, surely; for, besides that the dignity of

the

( 7 )

the state, makes it highly inexpedient to let
rebellious iiibjecs go unpunifled, our va-
luable interelts, and the security of that con-
flitution which we hold so dear, call upon us
to go out to battle agaiIf the children of
Benjaminl, our brother. You will observe,
that every argument which is used in behalf
of the revolted Americans, except what
arises from their distance alone, applies e-
qually to many other parts of the British
empire; and the views of their adherents on
this fide the Atlantic extend, if not to
the entire deltruction of this happy govern-
ment, at leait to so new amodel of it, as would
not leave one flone upon another of the an-
cient and goodly fabric. Without upbraid-
ing the colonists in this place, by observing,
that the distance which they now alledge
with so much arrogance against our inter-
fering in their affairs, was not pleaded by us
when of late they lb humbly implored our
protection, it is obvious, that, if the feet, be--
cause they are more distant, ihall be suffered
to withdraw their fubjeaion from the head,
soon will the hands and arms and evcrymem-

C bar

( is )

ber of the body revolt, in their turn, against
their guide and conducor.

But, fay some, it is more expedient to

yield even to their unreasonable claims,
than to engage in a war so expensive, and so
bloody, as this is likely to prove. The first
counsels of prudence are not always wife,
nor the fitft ditates of humanity always
humane. Such counsellors do not confider,
that, by one-great exertion to re-establish the
authority of the state, we ihall save millions
that would be loft in the violent disjun&ion
of this mighty empire; that, by carrying
on this great war with perseverance and forti-
tude, we shall prevent innumerable and end-
less wars that might ensue; and that it is as
just and necessary to shed our blood now, in
reducing our ungrateful children to a sense
of their duty, as it was so lately to defend
them against their foes.

Nor is it our interest alone that obliges

us to reject their demands, but their interest
also. Now, indeed, they are deluded by sub-
tie leaders, ambitious of pre-eminence and
power, who have known by what arts to in-
flame the people, even to madness: Yet

' they

( 19 )

they very lately confessed, that, under this
government against which they revolt, they
have been free and happy, and have grown
to that height of wealth and population
which, we fiy, has made them forget or de-
fpifeall obligation,and aspire atindependen-
cy. What region of the world indeed could
boaR of greater felicity ? They enjoyed un-
bounded liberty of conscience, and civil li-
berty in perfetion; they were governed
by their own laws, that partake of the
fame liberal spirit with ours; they possessed
a fertile country, and aflourifhing trade;
they paid next to no taxes*; and, in ex-
change for their fubjetion to the fove-
reignty of Britain, provincial animosity
and rivalfhip was kept within bounds by her
controlling power, and foreign hostility was
warded off by her fleets and armies. In
ihort, the state of mankind was so happy
and so inviting in that diflant region, that
the mother-country was in danger of being
depopulated by the passion with which men

were

* Not above the soth part of what is paid by every
person in Britain.

( 20 )

were seized to go, in quest of prosperity, to
that fortunate and favourite clime. While
we languified under a heavy debt, contrat-
ed on their behalf, they were flourishing
in commerce, and increasing in numbers,
from the happy effeds of that war which
cold us so dear: And the comparion with
their fate made ours leem the more grievous.
And yet they at once darken the glory of
this golden age by their own perverlity: For,
when we call upon them, in the fillnefs of
their opulence, to pay a finall proportion of
the expence of government, they resist the
law that imposes it, and fly to arms. The
annals of mankind do not contain a more
unprovoked or inexcusable revolt.

Let them not add falf:hood to rebellion!

Let them not lay, that we are the aggref-
fors! The British parliament had enacted
laws that bound the colonies, from their
firil establishment. By their charters they
were fubjeQed to taxes, and they had been
frequently taxed by aats 'of parliament.
Was it a just ground of refinlance to law,
that we did not yield at once to their new
request to be exempted from taxes ? Was it

a

( 21 )

a foundation for a civil war, after we had
put them in a prosperous slate, that they
were jealous left we should one day lay
heavier taxes upon them ? This might have
been the subjet of proper representations,
and of new plans offered to the slate; but
surely no just cause of war. For what go-
vernment can give up the antient and efta-
blifhed mode of raising a revenue, till a
new and better method is substituted in its
fiead?

I said, that it was for their interest *, no

less than ours, that we should reduce the
plantations again under the legal govern-

ment

It has been often said in private conversation,

That, whatever we may think as Britons, yet surely,
were we Americans, we would think and at as they do;
and I have often heard it rashly answered in the affir-
mative. I call it rashly; for, besides all the ties which
ought to bind the people of that country to this state,
from allegiance, affection, or gratitude, as the objet
of all government is the happiness of the people, a wife
and good man would deliberate maturely, before he.
would agree to a change that might, in place of cer-
tain freedom and prosperity, introduce the moRl uncer-
tain effects, perhaps slavery and the worst of all govern.
ments.

( 22 )

ment of Great Britain; for, betides the relief
that may bejufly expeced by his Majesty's
loyal and suffering fubjeds, who have been
expelled in great numbers from their
homes, and robbed of their property, who
can foresee, supposing the revolted colonies
to prove successful in their attempt to be-
come independent of the parent Rate, under
what form of government they may fall, in-
to what divisions they may be broken, to
what foreign yokes some of them may
yield, or what species of defpotifin may a-
rife among them ? When the branches fall
off from a mighty tree, not only are they
deprived of the principle of life that
made them flourilh, but the bond that u-
nited them together is dissolved. But, on
the supposition that they shall remain in
union, in cafe of success, and form one
great independent late, mufl not that fate
be the rival of Great Britain ? and would she
not soon subdue our remaining provinces on
the.continent, and make herself miltrefs of
all our islands in the weft Indies, whence
we derive so much wealth and power?
Would not all the arts follow the riling

Empire,

( 23)

Empire, and Britain be left a gloomy and
desolate isle, to furnish new abodes for the
Danes and Normans of a future age?
May heaven avert so great a calamity! I
love my country, I revere her constitution.
No form of government ever diffused such
equal happiness over the human race.
And shall I fee that sacred temple of liber-
ty reduced to ruins, on the uncertain pro-
jet of rearing an Utopia in a diltant land ?
Religion and reason, as well as every feel-
ing of a British heart, forbid me to behold
filch a profpe& without grief and indig-
nation. If forget thee, 0 ! Jerusalem, Let
my right hand forget its cunning: If I do
not remember thee, Let my tongue cleave to
the roof of my mouth. Pfal. cxxxi. 5. 6.

To yield to the unreasonable demands of

our colonies, would be no less dishonour-
able, than it is highly inexpedient.

The prosperity of nations depends, under

God, in a great measure, on the credit they
maintain with their neighbours around them,
on their reputation for wisdom and arms.
Such as are ill able to defend themselves, if
they have acquired wealth, are so much the

more

( 24 )

more a tempting prey to braver and more
warlike nations. It is imprudent to rely
entirely on the law of nations, or on
the faith of treaties: To be faie, or to pre-
serve peace, a people must be firong; for
a name in arms is the most formidable of
all barriers. How must we fink, then, in the
eyes of all Europe, if we susser our laurels
to be torn by our own degenerate and
rebellious sons, whom we have long softer-
ed with so much care ?
Twenty years are hardly elapsed, since
(might we believe their loud supplications)
they were in the utmost danger from their,
neighbouring colony of Canada. To have
listened to them, one would have believed,
that fifty thousand Canadians were enough
to have driven no less than two millions of
British Americans, that is, fort- times their
own number, from their abodes and posses-
fions,fron their cities and their havens, and
overwhelmed them in the Atlantic ocean. On
their alarms and complaints, we engaged
in that most expensive war. They had not
then roused their warlike spirit; they refer-
ved it for rebellion; but retired behind the

shield

( 25 )

ihield of Britain;. and it was owing to their
unmanly countenance and feeble defence,
that the enemy gained so much ground, as
made it difficult to expel him. At length he
was expelled-from our dominions; and, to
deRroy the very root of fear in time coming,.
all the colonies of the enemy on that conti-
nent were subdued, and, at the peace, more
important conquests were ceded, to retain
the former as provinces to the parent-ftate.
What return have we received for placing
them in a state of perfect security ? They
have become proud, and turned against their
deliverers. The indignant spirit of the na-
tion mull rife on the baseness of their con-
duet; and the recentness of the benefit
heightens the guilt of their ingratitude *.

D . To

* It may be said, that gratitude is not avirtue to be ex-

pe&ed from one nation to another: But that I deny; for,
though it is not wife always to trust to the good faith of
nations, because their governors may be prefidious,
yet, without julfice, and good faith, and gratitude, all the
great societies of men would be no better than robbers
or banditti. Besides, the Americans are not another na-
tion, (on which fuppolition, there has been much false
reasoning), but apart of Britain, united to it by every tye.

( 26 )

To ingratitude they have added the mofl

false and insidious arts. At first they
make the most ample declarations of duty
and allegiance to the King: They profess
the warmest desire of preserving their con-
nection with this goveinment: They dif-
claimn all pretentions to independency: They
assec to lay themselves at the foot of the
throne, imploring deliverance from the thral-
dom of parliament: And, firange to tell, are
delirous of fubiitting to the will of one
man, in order to be freed from the govern-
ment of laws. But, when our Sovereign, like
atrue friend of liberty, refers theircomplaints
to the great council of the nation, this wisdom
and virtue difgul their poisoned minds, and
they spurn at that royal authority which they
pretenu ro revere. They frame false and in-
fidious addresses to the neighbouring colonies,
whom, for their loyalty, they had just now
treated with the utmost contempt. They e-
ven attempt to mislead the inhabitants of
these ilands. Thyc endeavour to ihake our
allegian. e to the King. and to destroy our
reverenc: for the constitution. They try
to pervert our undciert;,:J;nds, to reduce our
willsinto revolt. They would convinceus, that

despotism

( 27 )

despotism is etablifhed, while we feel
that we are governed only by laws: And
that we are a wretched nation of slaves,
while we enjoy perfect freedom under the
mildest administration. And, to crown all
their insults on our underlandings, they at
last break out with their declaration of inde-
pendency, their first and darling objed,
which they concealed so long under a
cloud of grievances and fears. Turning
their aversion and malice from the parlia-
ment on the King, they represent our mild
and gracious Sovereign, who reveres the
laws, and supports the constitution, as the
most cruel, vindiaive, and despotic tyrant.

But why need I enumerate their iniideenis

After the most violent outrage on private
property, the mos haughty refusal of satis-
fation when demanded, and the most da-
ring refinance to the execution of the laws,
they have resorted to open rebellion to juiti-
fy their conduct. T hey are in arms againit
their country. They have mustered a force
which they deemn invincible: Their ships of
war cover the ocean: Their hosts of armed
men croud the flore of the vast Atlantic.

They

( 2S )

They lift themselves up against that paternal
arm which so long cherished and proteted
them: They would sheath the sword in those
bowels from whence they sprung. Liberty
was but a pretence, for they were always
free; independence was their aim. They
complained of grievances that did not exist,
and mustered up phantoms of ideal appre-
henfions, that, under the colours of pall or
present oppression, and jealousy of the future,
they might raise such a power as would
cancel those obligations they were unwil-
ling to repay.

Who then can doubt for a moment on

whom tolay the guilt of this war? T he faith-
ful magifirate who stops his ear to the crimi-
nal's desire to escape from justice, or the
kind parent who does not yield to the un-
reasonable demands of a froward child, may
as well be accused as Great Britain on
this occasion. The very name of Brethren,
by which, with all the ties that it implies, we
have so often been obtested to desist from
this cruel and unnatural war, demonfirates
the jultice and necessity of it on our part,
since it points out their connecion with us,
marks their dependence andobligations,

and

29 )

and aggravates the treachery and violence
of their conduct. These unsteady measures
with which they have upbraided us; that
lenity which they have conltrued into inca-
pacity to govern; that reluctance to punish,
which they held to be weakness and fear;
now that, from seditious fubjeats, they have
become open enemies, are so many incite-
ments to us, to ad with unanimity and vi-
gor.

Let us, then, no longer hesitate, Whether

we fhallgo out to battle againJf the children
of Benjamin our Brother, or j/hall cease.
The oracle of reason (and the sacred oracles
support it) obliges us to conclude, that it is
most expedient and honourable, as well as
just and necessary for the ltate, our com-
mon parent, to bring back by force this fa-
vourite and froward child, made rebellious
by indulgence, to a just sense of his duty,
and to the happiness he so long enjoyed in
his father's house.

I come now, in the second place, as

I proposed, to point out our duty, in the
present circumstances, to God and to our
country.

And

( 3o )

And here, without queflion, we ought, in

the first place, to confess and lament our
fins, and to turn to God and our duty.
Ior, though we cannot be accused of any
guilt in refpet of the immediate occa-
sions or grounds of this war, yet, as they
lie in the order of Providence, 1 am as-
fraid we cannot clear ourselves of blame.

From the beginning of the world unto

this day, fin has occafioned-the downfall of
nations and of kingdoms. Infidelity and
irreligion, neglect of God and of his wor-
ship, and the most licentious morals, as
they are intimately conneCted together,
so have they generally preceded the de-
clenfion and fall of states. And who can
deny, that these are theJigns of the times ?
that these are the strong features of iniqui-
ty which mark the present age?

If men retain found principles, however

much they may fiSometimes depart from
them in practice, being led away by tempta-
tion and the error of the wicked; yet there is
hope that they may one day return to theirdu-
ty, because a slumbering conscience may Rill
awaken, and dying principles again revive.

But

( 3I )

But what can be expected, when there is a
profelted disbelief of all moral diftindions,
when truth, and jufice, and honesty, and
the love of our country, and indeed every
principle but daring ambition and vile felf-in-
teref. are ridiculed, despised, and exploded ?
While the inferior ranks of men are cor-
rupted, by the delire of gain or pleasure, in-
to fraud or profligacy of manners, the fu-
perior ranks fall sacrifices to luxury and es-
feminacy. Infead of the manly pursuits
that would lead thein to acquire fuchtalents
and qualities, as might enable them to a-
dorn and detend their country, and strength-
en her constitution, they waste their health
and fortunes in everlasting gaming and vo-
luptuoufnefs, and in all the modes of living
that debate or debilitate the mind, no
less than the body. I speak only of the
many; for, God be praised, we have still
tome in the higher ranks of life, who
would do honour to the most virtuous
age: We have still some, who, in spite of
the infection of the times, think it glorious
to lead or to join the fleets and armies of their
country, and are now exposing their lives

i1

32 )

in defence of that conflitution, which, of
old, was the nurse of patriots and heroes.

But, when we confider our fad degeneracy,
uponthe whole, mufl we not confess, that we
are afinful nation, a people laden with iniqui-
ty, afeed of evil doers, Ifai. i. 4. &c. and may
we not fland juflly amazed to confider, that
even the God of all patience should have
born with us so long, and suffered our pro-
fligate manners? When we reflect on the
high degree of prosperity and glory to
which this nation was raised in the last war,
by the hand of the God of battles, and confi-
der our own dreadful ingratitude, by the
fad abuse of our great and singular pri-
vileges; have we not jult reason to fear
that God is now faying to us, as he said
formerly to the Jews, Shall Inot visit, for
the/e things, faith the Lord? andJhall not
my foul be avenged onfuch a nation as this ?

What then can be more proper, on such a

day as this, than to deprecate God's difplea-
lure, andjoin in humble supplications tohim,
that he would be pleased to avert thofedread-
ful judgments that hang over us, and which
we have such just cause to fear may fall

upon

( 33

upon us! What can we do, but every one
of us this day commence a thnroti,h rcfor-
mation ofthofe particular vices and crimes,
which, though small in our eyes, accu.:.u-
late the mighty fu.n of national guilt ? 'nd
let us join the holy prophets of Israel, who,
on their solemn days of fafiing and prayer,
besought God to remove his judgments,
and turn away his anger from them: And,
particularly, let us join with the prophet
Daniel, when he thus addresses the almigh-
ty, Dan. ix. 6. &c. O ! Lord, accordingto all
thy rtighteoufinef, 1 befiech thee, let thine anger
and thy fury be turned away from thy city
Jeru/alenm, thy holy mountain: because, for
our fins, and for the iniquities of our fathers,
Jerusalem and thy people are become a re-
proach to all that are about us, &c.

I have mentioned in general that torrent

of corruption which overwhelms this nation,
and may be the cause (as it has been in
other ages and regions of the world), why
God should now visit us with fore calami-
ties. But this observation applies to other
nations as well-as to us. Let us try if we
can point out some particular grounds of
fear, which are more peculiarly applicable to
our own country, that we may lament and

E correCt

( 34 )

correct them as far as we can. For, though
the plans and conduct of providence are
laid deep, and are carried on in silence and
darkness, yet the moral causes that under-
mine the greatness of nations, may some-
tirnes be traced. Allow mc to mention a few
that seem to me to have been immediately
productive of our present danger.

The i/t I illall mention is unbounded
ambition, and national pride.

In the late war, which was undertaken

in defence of the colonies, though we were
at firfl unsuccessful; yet the spirit of the
nation being roused at last, and well con-
ducted, we were victorious in every quar-
ter of the globe, and left not our enemies
a single province or island that could be
the subject of contest. When the negocia-
tions for peace were entered upon, you
may remember how difficult it was for his
Majesty's prudent and moderate ministers
to frame such a peace as would please the
people; and, after it was made, there a-
rose a storm of violence and clamour that
has hardly fitbfided to this day. Nothing
less would satisfy the national pride and
ambition, than the retaining all the con-
quests their arms had made. Time and

experience

( 35 )

experience have flewn the truth of what
some then boldly averred, that we kept by
far too many of our conqueRts; enow indeed
to threaten perpetual commotions, if not
downfal to the state. To the retaining of
Canada for the security of the Americans,
it is entirely owing that they have become
so insolent as to rebel against the parent-
state. And, in so great and unwieldy an
empire, we may expec convulsions everyday.

The great objec of a free Rate ought to

be to perpetuate its liberty; and no tempta-
tion of wealth or of power should ever fe-
duce such a Rate into a conduct that may
prove fatal to its chief object. History
proves, that great conuefts have always been
ruinous to free governments: And similar
causes will operate similar effees to the end
of the world. Such dominions are too un-
wieldy to be governed. If they consist of
fertile regions, in climes favourable to hu-
man nature, they are in danger of depopula-
ting the mother-country : If they are barren
and unhofpitable deserts, they are not worth
the expence of retaining them.

Europe, for fomne centuries past, has been
themoft flourishing quarter of the world.

The

( 36 )

The govcrtnmrnts of it, though various, have
been balanced by eachi other; and the
people in general have been happy even un-
der the n:oit dcfpot:c fcrms it contains, be-
cause the views and conJuf of princes have
becc moderatdt b)y ;icir mutual jealousies.
Was it for us, who I;d exclainmed lb loudly
againi} universal m onarchy, and had laid
out fb much blood and treasure to oppose
those ambitious p:lwers, who, at different
per'ods,l were iu!rpoed to have conceived
the idea, was it fir us to extend our do-
minions from pole to pole, and to all the
fliores that are wathed by the Indian or
Atlantic oceans ? Was it wiic in a free Rate
to raise such a jealoulf in other states, as
wxould produce a combination againf: us,
which mioht one day prove our ruin, whether
we conquer or are conquered ? For, in the
first cafe, we Ihould certainly perish by our
own corruption, as, in the fcond, by the
pomwer of the enemy.

To tiis caule is prcbably owing that

weakn.is cf government, which has been of
late so much felt and' complained of, and
which no capacity seems hitherto able to

repair.

( 37 )

repair. 1 mean, the machine of government
itself, (not the adminiifration of it), which
has lot mnuch of the spring and energy it
had in former times; witness the infamous
abhue that has been suffered, the dangerous
tumults that have passed unpuniflled, and
the relaxation of the executive power, even
in refpedt of crimes against itself. In vain
has opposition, with her warning voice, and
fahcion, with her clamorous tongue, ascribed
this imbecillity to the hands who direca the
machine; for the chiefs of every party in the
Iate have directed, in their turns, with
no better success. And no wonder that it
is so; for the internal force that was fuffi-
cient to move those wheels of government,
which so long guided these happy islands,
and their ancient colonies, could not fail to
prove too weak, when loaded with new con-
quests, distant as the extremities of the
globe, and larger than all our former domi-
nions. Such are the effects of unbounded
pride and ambition: And such are the re-
bukes which the wife providence of God
has contrived for the haughtiness of man.

In

( 38 )

In the 2d place, Let me mention, as one

of the more immediate causes of our pre-
sent danger, that unbounded licentiousness,
which, for a long time, has prevailed in
writing and discourse.

The liberty of the press is indeed a most

sacred right of Britifl freedom; but, like
all other privileges, it may be abused, and,
and when it is, may be produtive of the
most pernicious consequences. No charac-
ter has been sacred enough to be safe
from the torrent of calumny and reproach,
which, f)r fiome time pall, has poured itself
upon the public ear. The most private a-
fylum of domestic peace has not been secure
against that malignant poison that glides in
every breath, and is scattered about on e-
very page. The throne has been openly
attacked; and not only have the measures
of government been arraigned, as in former
times, but the legislature itself has been ri-
diculed, traduced, and almolt libelled in its
own hearing. And what is the consequence
of this vile licentiousness ? Has the tongue
of sedition, and the pen of faction proceed-
ed to such outrage, that they are now no

路 longer

( 39 )

longer believed ? That may be true with
refpea to the characters of individuals; but
we may reft assured, that the unbounded
freedom which has been used has lessened the
relped due to the Soveregin; has destroy-
ed that reverence in which the legislature
Ihould be held; and, while itj has overawed
the magistrate in the execution of his office,
it has, at the fame time, impaired the dignity
and weakened the force of the laws them-
selves. We may be certain, that this ram-
pant licentiousness has overturned all ideas
of subordination, which is the bond that
holds men in society together, and prepared
their minds to meet, without concern, if not
to wish for, a revolution of government.

How can we otherwise account for the

publications that have proceeded from men
of gravity, of professedly good intentions,
and of no mean talents *? With what other
view, than to a revolution, have those elabo-
rate treatises been composed; or what other
can be the aim of their authors, who, amidst

pro-

* See the works of the Reverend Dr Price, aad o-
thers.

( 40 )

professions of allegiance too, take so much
pains to decry the present government of
Britain, and to present us with an idea of
something infinitely more perfet, which we
are soon to fee eftablilhed in America, and
which they seem to wifli, and hope may
likewise take place at home ? But a repu-'
blic of such unbounded extent, as that of A-
merica would prove, is an experiment that
remains to be tried in the hiftoryof the
world. We know that our ancestors tried
it in vain, within far narrower limits. They,
too, had great expectations of that perfeetion
to which human government was going to
arrive: They believed that a millennium, and
the kingdom of the faints, was at hand: But
they were sadly deceived; for they found, in
their fiead, the iron sceptre of an usurper,
supported by military force.

There is a line Somewhere between the

liberty of the press, and that licentiousness
which would subvert the very government
which supports the liberty of the press.
When the times are calm, that line will be
found out and applied.

Allow
I

( 41 )

Allow me to mention, as one other more

immediate cause of the present danger, in the
3d place, The murders, and rapines, and
enormities that have been committed in va-
rious places of the British empire, and uill
remain unaccounted for, unpunilhcd, and
unarraigned.

Besides, that filch inflances of impunity

to great crimes, demonitrate the \veakneis of
the executive power, and tend to increase
corruption, making men more daring and
obllinate by their pernicious example, they
likewifc continue to cry to almighty Gcd
for vengeance: For blood mufl have
blood. And who can fay that the God of
heaven is not now stretching out his arm
to recompense those nations who have that
guilt Rill hanging on their heads ? The Indi-
an tribes of America have almost entirelyva-
nifhed, through the treachery or cruelty of
the new possessors. Those very colonies,
who plead so high for liberty, and alledge
that they have taken up the sword only in
its defence, under pretence of driving out
the heathen, (a pretence in Christians no !ess
impious than it is bloody,) by barbarous

F policy,

( 42 )

policy, or by force, have almost wholly era-
dicated the ancient inhabitants of those regi-
ons; while they hold thousands and ten thou-
sands of wretched Africans under a cruel
bondage, from which the most painful death
would be a joyful deliverance.

Can we believe, that deeds have been

committed in another quarter of the globe,
by natives of these islands, that will make
the odious names of Cortes and Pizarro be
forgotten, and slain the British annals to the
latest poflerity ? In times of ignorance and
bigotry, the minds of men have been known
to run a career of enthusiastic fury that
aftonilhed themselves when they became
cool; and stern war is an apology for the
most atrocious actions. But, in a period en-
lightened likethe present, in profound peace,
amidst intercourses of mutual confidence,
and thb mild operations of commerce, to
surpass all former ages in perfidious barba-
rity! Ah! Cursed thirst of gold! thou
canst transform man, even when refined
and civilized, into a furious beast of prey!

Nor can we, as a nation, clear ourselves of
the guilt of tlefe great crimes, if we have

' uffered

(43 )

fiffered thole under our controul to commit
them with impunity: Or if, after making
cxtenfive conquefls, we have robbed inno-
cent and defenceless nations of the benefit
and protetion of their ancient governments,
without establishing new ones in their flead:
Thus leaving them an easy and a tempting
prey to avarice and cruelty. The bloody and
deceitful man, the vengeance of God will
surely overtake.

But, in the midst of all our fubjeds of

confession and sorrow and lamentation, whe-
ther of a private or public nature, and with
a firm resolution to contribute all in our
power to correct what is amirs, and to do
our utmo.f for the national welfare, by
carefully keeping every man of usfrom his
iniquity, now that the Hofl has gone forth
againfl the enemy, we shall do well also to
turn our thoughts on the peculiar and sea-
fonable blessings which the Almighty has
poured down upon us, left, if we ihould fail
to mark them, or prove ungrateful for
them, he may turn a deaf ear to our luppli-
cations for farther mercies.

Among

( 44

Amrong such peculiar and seasonable blef-

sings, we are to rank the plentiful crop
which he hath heftowed on us in all corners
of the land; insomuch, that we shall have no
dependence on foreign nations, who might
have taken advantage of our necessity. We
ought also to mark, with gratitude, the pro-
vidential opening of new channels of trade
for all our manufadures, the demand for
which has increaled beyond our most fan-
guine expedations, jult tin the moment
when the breach with the colonies might
have occalioned a molt dreadful calamity.
Let us trace the over-ruling hand of heaven
to(, in the present peaceful disposition of
our potent neighbours, who seem to attend
nore to the general interest of Europe, than
to yield to the dictates of national rivalfhip
and animosity. Let us likewise observe, with
pleasure and thankfulness, the alacrity and
courage of our soldiers in the cause of their
country, after much inidilous pains had been
taken to make them cool and backward in
the service. Let us, with the warmed grati-
tude and praise, mark the ardour and fuc-
cess with which they defend that antient go-
vernment, which the pretended ibns of liberty

spurn

43 )

ipurn at with contempt, whilfl they fly be-
fore that manly spirit which is its genuine
produd ; and let us return thanks and blef-
iings to the Lord of Hofls, the God of bat-
tles, by whose inspiration alone heroes and
patriots are formed, who girdeth our loins
to might, and teacheth our hands to war.

It would be highly improper, it would

be impious indeed, to apply the oracle of
God in the present cafe, and to fay, with
prophetic authority, Go uip,for to morrow
the Lord will deliver them into ycur hands.
No ; this I may not venture to fay. The
event is in the womb of providence ; and
the iace is not always to the wist, nor the
battle to theJflong, for God often counter-
aas the probability of second causes. But
this I will fay, in opposition to the authors
of feeble and timid counsels, that a righte-
ous cause, and persevering valour, joined to
a pious truftt in the Almighty, give the belf
ground to hope for success in war.

In the wars usual in Europe, when rival

nations have contended with each other,
it has often been on points of small im-
portance, and the parties have gained no-

thing

( 46 )

thing in the end by the contefl, but the ex-
ercire of arms. In such wars the interests of
mankind in general are safe. For that equal
balance which has been maintained so long
in the great European republic, does not ad-
mit of one nation's making large encroach-
ments, or conquests, on another. But, in
the present war, we are to retain, or lose
forever, not our new provinces, that are
hardly yet a part of the fate, but our an-
tient colonies, that are coeval with our navi-
gation and commerce, those great branches
that are deeply engrafted into the common-
wealth, which have grown with our
growth, and cannot now be lopt off, with-
out hazard that the tree Shall thereby
perish. An objet of such importance re-
quires national fortitude and perseverance.

As Christians, and as men, no doubt, we

ought to wish and pray for peace. Every
thing in the present cafe prompts us to such
a prayer; but always with this condition
underlood, that it be equitable and safe.
How far we may hope for a return of as-
fedion and allegiance from the present ge-
neration of colonists, who are now in aaual

rebellion

( 47 )

rebellion against the British goverhment,
I pretend not to fay. God can turn the
hearts of men as he pleases, in opposition to
common rules. But one thing is clear
and certain, that, as the sword should not be
drawn against the fubjeds of the state,
without the most urgent necessity, so should
it not be Iheathed without full security and
submission on the part of the offenders;
for a peace, on any other terms, would only
prove a short and dangerous truce, to pre-
pare them for a fresh revolt.

Fully employed in our own private oc-

cupations, far removed from the feat of
war, and in perfe&d repose, we are apt to be
indifferent to the interests of our country,
and careless about that very government
that gives us security and repose, till we are
roused by such a call as this, to reflect on
the blessings we enjoy. Let us feel the ge-
nerous spirit of Britons, rising with just in-
dignation against those degenerate and re-
bellious colonists, who would rob us of our
glory, and defiroy that sacred temple of the
constitution, that can only secure their li-
berty and ours. And, as our patriotism

thould

48 )

should be roused, so should our loyalty;
for, on this occasion, they mufR go hand in
hand together. In times of peace and tran-
quility, the exercise of this duty is not al-
ways apparent, even in the most faithful
fubjeds. They are not called upon to per-
form any as of fealty; and, being at a dif-
tance from the feat of government, the
personal qualities, and even the royal dig-
nity of the sovereign, seems to be forgotten.
But, when disturbance or danger approach,
those principles and affetions that lay dor-
mant, soon awaken with the alarm, and
the most zealous loyalty appears in the
condua of every good citizen.

Let us now support the throne, for it is

fiaken! Let us unite in warm affeCtion to
our King, whose character, like the fun,
hfines the brighter for the spots with
which facion and rebellion, for a while,
have endeavoured to obscure it. And let
us demonstrate our patriotism and loyalty,
not by loud and empty professions, but by
a meek andrefpe&ful spirit to those that
are set over us, by our reverence for the

laws,

(49)

laws, and thankfulness to heaven, that we are
fill under their government.

Above all, let us not 1upprefs that war-

like ardour for which we have ever been
diflinguithed. Without magnanimity and
valour, wealth and power are precarious,
and wisdom and liberty but empty names.
To be secure, we must be brave. All Ame-
rica is now in arms; shall we remain feeble
and unwarlike ? The plough and the loom
must be left for a while, that we may not be
obliged to abandon them for ever. For, if
the Almighty does not interpose to subdue the
minds of our domeflic foes, or if we do not
exert our native flrength, in vain ihall we think
to conquer them by foreign hands. If we
could, they might, perhaps, in future, learn
tofear thefeverityofa mafler, but neveragain
would they revere the authority of a parent.

Since, then, my brethren, to yield to the

claims of America would be inexpedient and
dishonourable; since the war is juRt and ne-
ceffary, let us prosecute it with vigour, with
chcarfulnefs and perseverance, till the re-
bellious children of our brother Benjamin
find, that the fame ardent national spirit

G that

( 5Q )

that could cherish, can also corret; and
that the fame powerful arm that firetch-
ed across the Atlantic to save, is not now so
weak but it can punish. Thus shall we
do all in our power to preserve to pofteri-
ty a government, the most favourable to
human nature that ever existed, and to pro-
long theperiod of light, and liberty, and hap-
piness among mankind.

But, while we are of necessity at war with

the children of Benjamin our brother, let
us not forget the near relation they stand in
to us; let us not entirely extinguish our
affeaions to the child, because he is for the
present froward and disobedient. Let us
bend his will, but not subdue his spirit. Let
us chastise him in kindness, not lay him in
anger. Like good King David, when his
son Absalom rebelled against him, Let us
give our captains and our mighty men a
charge, that they deal gently with the young
man; and, when he returns to his duty, let us
receive him with open arms. AMEN.

0yj
