The TENDENCY Of the CONSTITUTION

of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND, to
form the TEMPER, SPIRIT, and CH4RACP
TER of her MINISTERS,

Pointed out in a

S. E R M 0 N,
Preached in the HIGH-CHURCH of EDIN-

BURGH, May 5. I7h7.

At the Opening of the SYNOD of LOTHIAN
and TW(EEDDALE.

By ALEX. CARLYLE, D.D.
MINISTER of INVERESK, and ALblONEi to his MAJESTY.

EDINBURGH:
Printed for JAMES DICKSON, Front of the EXCHANGE.

MlDCCLXVII.
[Price eight Pence.3

# PSAL. xlviii. 12, 13. Walk about Zion, and go round about her: tell the towers thereof. Mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces: that ye may tell it to the generation following.

The TENDENCY of the CONSTITUTION

ofthe CHURCH of SCOTLAND to form
the Temper, Spirit, and Characer of
her MINISTERS.

PSAL. xlviii. I2, 13,
Walk about Zion, andgo rolund about her: tell

the towers thereof: Mark ye well her bzl-
wuarks, coifider her palaces: that ye may tell
it to the generation following.
1 T is an important queflion, what effet

moral causes have in forming the cha-
racers of men, since on that depend the

utility and excellence of laws and inftitu-
tions. For if natural causes solely, or chiefly,
operate on the human mind; if men are
formed like plants, by the heat of the fun,
and the fertility of the foil; the labours of
the sage and the legislator are in vain: But
if, on the other hand, they can be moulded

A by

[41

by discipline and laws, and may attain to
dignity and virtue by the force of wife in-
ftitutions, the best service that can possibly
be done them, is to bring them under the
power of good government, or to preserve
it among them when already eftablilhed.

IT is with a view to this question, that

I propose, in this discourse, to confider the
conifitution of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND;
not as it is founded in the word of God, or
as it is agreeable to the plan of the primi-
tive times; more important propositions still,
which have often received as much illuftra-
tion, and been confirmed with as much
proof, as the nature of the thing would ad-
mit; but only in certain points, as it is con-
nected with focietv, and as its external laws
and regulations, that are of human inven-
tion, have a tendency to form the temper,
character, and spirit of its members. The
goodness of its institutions, in this refpeit,
I fhail beg leave to confider as the towers,
bulwarks, and palaces of our Z; ON, which help
at once to protect and adorn her; which will
recommend her to the love and reverence of

all

[s]

all her sons; and prove, by one argument
more, that, even in her outward fabric, the
is not unworthy of that wjfdom which cometh
from above.

MY Reverend FATHERS andBRI THREN,

I hope, will forgive me, for attempting a
subjet, which I humbly apprehend becomes
me better, than if I held up a model for their
behaviour as ministers of CHRIST; which
has often been done by masterly hands, on
such occasions. I am sure they will hear me
with candour on points with refpee to which
I may be so liable to mistake; and on which
I shall, nevertheless, speak with freedom,
prompted 'by the love of my own order, and
veneration for this CHURCH.

IN discoursing of this fubjeat to an audi-

ence of another kind, I should firfl delineate
the conffitution of this CH U R H, as consist-
ing of different orders, formed into fubor-
dinate judicatories, with all the powers of
government so equally and properly divided,
as to make a republic of no imperfel kind,
But this is so well underifood by my reverend

A 2 hearers,

[6]

hearers, that it would be impertinent in me
to consume their time upon it.

IT shall therefore be the chief object of

this discourse, to fliew the tendency of the
conifitution of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND
to form the temper, spirit, and character of
her members. And this, by the blessing of
God, I ihall endeavour to point out in three
material instances, that refpec them as mi-
nifters, as BF.ITONS, and as men. For I
wvill 1few, in the

if; place, The tendency of our ecclesiastical

constitution, to preserve good morals, and
purity of doctrine.

2d.l/, Its tendency to inspire us with the

love of liberty, and the free government of
our country.

d7;. Its tendency to form the personal cha-
racer of its members.

I am, isJ, To si1ew- the tendency of our

eccleiaftical conftiution to preserve good
morals, and purity of docirine.

THE

[7]

THE apostle PAUL, speaking of the mini-

fters of the gospel, requires it as their first qua-
lity, that they be blameless, or irreproach-
able, i TI M. iii. z; for thisreafon no doubt,
left the people, to defend themselves from
their rebukes or censures, Ihould fay, Phjfi-
cian, heal thyself! a reproach, that, whene-
ver it falls with julfice, takes from them all
liberty of speech, and obliges them to tole-
rate vice, and to fear the vicious. For
though their charater and miflion is inde-
pendent of the merit of their lives, yet the
bulk of mankind are neither refined nor e-
quitable enough to make this distinction;
but when they despise a man's private asi-
ons, they will despise his public miniftra-
tions too.

IN other churches, the pomp and splendor

of worship, the power and dignity of the fu-
perior clergy, and their temporal wealth and
dominion, will preserve influence and re ipe&
to their order, even after corruption of man-
ners has crept in among them. But the
members of this H R C H, without dignities,
without power, without wealth and domi-

nion;

[8]

nion, hold their ascendant over the minds
of men, only by their virtue and abilities.

AND happy is it for us, that, being men

of like frailty with others, we are laid under
the restraint of discipline: a discipline by the
laws of the realm still vested in this cH UR CH,
by which she can not only exclude from her
highest privileges such of her lay-members
as lead vicious and disorderly lives, but en-
tirely expel such corrupt ecclesiastics as bring
disgrace upon their order: a discipline that,
though strict in its own nature, yet is mild
and gentle in its execution; for the censorial
power is committed to the most subordinate
court that has jurifdidion over the clergy;
its inspection is near, its vigilance perpetual;
and, by giving check to the first appearance
of faults, it prevents their growing into
crimes.

BY the nature of our constitution; there is

little danger that the CHURCH mhould be-
come remiss in the exercise of her discipline:
for the depends on that, in a great measure,
for the esteem mhe has in the world, and for

her

[ 9

her influence over the people, to whom the
last appeal is made in the trials of a candi-
date for the ministry, for they are at liberty
to objet to his morals or his dotrine ; so
that the virtue and credit of her members
are deeply interested in the execution of it.
Her discipline is still further secured by this
means, that as there is a perfect equality a-
mong all those in whom the censorial power
is vefied, the connection of protecion and
dependence, which has a tendency to screen
faults, and to flatter vices, cannot take place;
but, on the contrary, the jealousy and rival-
Ihip of a republican spirit, will never fail to
favour the firic execution of the laws.

WHAT I have said with respect to the mo.

rals of the clergy, extends also to the duties
of the patforal office, the diligent execution
whereof is committed to the fame watchful
care. It likewise applies to doctrine, the
purity of which it is necessary to secure.
For as the minds of men are not formed to
think exactly in the fame manner on all
points, and as the love of singularity, ordif-
tinction, might carry them far, were they

at

[ o1 ]

at liberty to give vent to their peculiar opi-
nions, it is a wife restraint, that confines
our public teachings within certain limits
prefcribedby the CHURCH. Hard as this may
seem to bear on liberty of conscience, there
cannot be a national church without it; for
if full freedom was allowed to the extrava-
gant fancies of men, they would soon divide,
and branch out into a thousand different
sects. It is necessary too, that the magi-
firate, who is to protect the public religion,
should know what it is, and have it clearly
defined.

BUT it may, perhaps, be objeced to what

I have said on this point, that the sac is a-
gainft me; and that our discipline, which I
have represented to be of so much utility,
and of so much force, has, in reality, loft
its effect. This I cannot think clear, by a-
nyv means: for it is much more probable,
tiat the complaints on this head should
take their rife from that peeviih humour,
which, in every age, leads men to depreci-
ate the worth and virtue of the present times,
when compared to the former ; or to a spirit

of

[ I 'j

of faction, to an alteration of manners, or to
some other less obvious source; than that
our constitution of government, without a-
ny visible cause, should have loft its vigour,
or the principles I have mentioned no lon-
ger operate on the human mind.

BUT, my Reverend FATHERS and BRE-

T H RE N, let us look round us into the world,
and we ihall do ourselves the justice that the
reft of mankind are willing to do us; for,
in this respect, there are no ecclesiastics that
stand higher in the general esteem, than the
clergy of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND. And,
in fact, after all the complaints that have
been made, of degeneracy, and corruption
of morals, of what crimes have they been
guilty ? Of what kind, and of what num-
ber have they been convicted ? What ordcr
of men can boait of so many members whose
characers are unfullied even with the impruta-
tion of crimes? They are not angels,but men:
They cannot boast of perfect innocence and
virtue; they do not pretend to an exemption
from the infirmities of human nature: And
if now and then, a man of like pafion.s with
others, has yielded to the force of tempta-

B tion,

[ ]

tion, and surfered the jufI punilhment pre-
icribed by the laws of the CHURCH, is not
this a firo:ngr proof of the goodneis of our
discipline, than of the licentiousness of our
mrcrals

IF tome guilty persons have escaped, is

that to cb imputed to the corruption of our
courts, rather than to the imperfedion of all
human tribunals: Are not the essential
fonrs or tial to be observed, without which
the innocent could not be safe ? For what
crime has any person been tried and acquit-
ted of late, before cur judicatories, of so deep
a die, as it would be for a member of our
sitwreinme court, in his capacity of a judge or
juirmlan, to decide in a particular cafe, up-
on impr'clns of charater received out of
Cecrs, or on his own general ideas of expe-
Cdienc-: ?nd public gocd

.ce can I readily admit that our difci-

!.nue h.-s of iate growln more remiss, or that
!e or.l-s of t:. cicrgy- are now less pure,
*t:.n ill cr.rer periods of this CHURCH. For

lv.-.ci. !at- nl any ilrefs on the general

G; .i-a.:ion, That great crimes are leail
cii-tr n i:n :er:cds of refinement, when

mens

[ 13 J

mens minds are foftcned by the pro-
grefs of knowledge and the arts, and brought
under habitual restraint by the flability of
legal goverment; I apprehend, that the com-
plaints on this head may be, in a great mea-
sure, accounted for, by attending to a plain
dililnlionbetween IMAN^NERS and MORALS.

IGNORANCE and fuperfition, from age to

age, have fixed on things quite indifferent
in their own nature, and, by stamping on
them the characters of vice and virtue, have
rendered it extremely easy for the artful and
designing to impose upon mankind, and
raise a charader of sanctity, at the finall ex-
pence of being rigid and exact in trifles,
that have no connection with religion or
moraiity ; like the Pharisees of old, who
paid tithes of mint, ani/e, and ciuimin, but
neglec7ed the weightier matters of the la w,
jtudgment, merec), and faith. But the incredal
of knowledge, and the progress of society,
have restored many of there artificial virtues
and vices to their own class again: and
while religion and virtue have, in reality,
gained by this alteration of manners, the
ignorant and fuperfiitious, (for there are some

B in

[ 14 1

in all ages), continue fill to think them of
the fame importance as before, and judge of
characters by the false standard of former
times.

WH A T then is called MIANNERS, in gene-

ral, or even the DECORUM of a particular
charac'er, are not properly the objecs of
laws and discipline. No rules can be pre-
fcribed for modes that are changing every
day, no landard can be fixed for what is
shifting continually; but every person must
be left to the corrections of ridicule and con-
tempt from the world, which are always ap-
plied to singularity, affectation, and inde-
cency. Yet, even in this refpec, the mi-
nilters of this CHURCH are aided by her in-
it-tufions : lor this ipecies of faults, though
not subjects of law, are liable to the private
ac.dmlonitons. and fraternai rebukes, of the
cerforiia pov-er.

So far then as la. -s and regulations, and

the ieftrailrs of diicicline, conduce to make
men virtuous, or to keep them lb, the con-
ifitutioi of the CHURCH of SCOTLAND has
been wifely framed. I proceed, in the

2d

[ I5 1

2d place, To fllew its tendency to inspire

us with the love of liberty, and the free go-
vernment of our country.

BE SIDES the sentiments natural to a BRI-

TON born since liberty was eftablifled by
law; betides the liberal education of clergy-
men, and their early acquaintance with those
books of antiquity that inspire mankind
with elevated thoughts, and the love of free-
dom which reigned in the state of society
they describe; there are circumstances pecu-
liar to this cHURcH, which muff endear
the free constitution of their country, more
to her members than to other men.

WH EN the reformation was first attempt-

ed in SCOTLAND, under that form which
is now eftabliihed, and which had the incli-
nations of the people in every age; it was
not only for the rights of conscience that our
forefathers struggled and fought, .but for
the rights of men: they made war not on-
ly on priests, but on tyrants; and when thev
conquered, they eftablifihed civil liberty, as
the only guardian of true religion. The

hard

[ 16 3

hard contentions of the times had, of them-
selves, a tendency to route and enlarge the
mind ; and being engaged against the fame
enemies, and involved in one common cause
with the patriots, in every period of our
hiiory, the PRESBYTERIANS appeared ftre-
nuous afiertors of the liberties of mankind,
and of their country. On the other hand,
during all the efforts of illegal power, our
CHUR CH, as one of themoft determined and
formidable foes of tyranny and tyrants, was
sure to feel the firit effets of their wrath;
at least, examples of lenity were so rare, that
ihe was not deceived into the false confidence,
that such flattering suspensions of hostility
were designed to produce.

AND not only are the members of this

CHURCH excitcd to the love of liberty, by
their attachment to their friends, and their
avefion to their enemies; but our very mode
of government, and its genius and spirit,
must form the mind to liberty, independent
of the connec'ion of interests, or our attach-
ment to the ILLUSTRIOUS FA1MILY on the
throne, and our gratitude for the many blef-

sings

[ I7 ]

sings we have derived from them: For equa-
lity, which is the foundation of freedom,
is the foundation of our ecclesiastical con-
flitution too; and the spirit of democracy is
so entirely preserved in all its institutions,
laws, and forms, that none of her members
can possibly be subjects of any other than a
firee fiate.

BUT this is a quality that our CHURCH

has always been owned to poflefs; and to
such a degree, that her enemies have en-
deavoured to represent it as one of the worst
of her faults. For it was long objected to
the PRESBYTERIANS, that they were of
such a turbulent and seditious spirit, so vio-
lent and factious, as to be incapable of rule,
and particularly incompatible with monarchi-
cal government, such as that of BRITAIN
has ever been. But, on ftrit inquiry, this
very complaint will be found to conduce to
their praise: For in what times were they
turbulent and seditious ? Only in the times
of tyranny; when to submit, was to degrade
human nature; when to be peaceable, was
to be a save. But, under the government

of

[ I8 1

of laws, with a race of KI NG s on the throne
who have asserted and enlarged, not en-
croached on the rights of mankind, no
church in the world has been more obedient
or more loyal. Witness her condu&t in eve-
ry period of danger to the state; witness
her unshaken attachment, her active zeal, in
the rebellions that have of late torn the bow-
els of our country.

BEFORE the principles of toleration, that

do so much honour to the last age, were
established, the CHURCH of SCOTLAND
was, no doubt, often seized with a spirit of
violence against other denominations of
Christians, that, had fie been singular in that
respect, would have juitly rendered her an
object of aversion. But this was far from
being the cafe: file was not, in this point,
more ignorant, or more revere, than her
neighbour-churches; and having often felt
the heaviest hand of persecution, it was no
wonder that fle was sometimes violent and
unrelenting in her turn. But for half a cen-
tury past, since the minds of men have be-
come calm and steady under a legal govern-

ment,

[ I9 ]

ment, and since the ardent zeal of enthufi-
afm has given place to, or been tempered,
by the benign principle of CHRISTI A
CHARITY, the CHURCH of SCOTLAND has
demonstrated the truth of that position of a
great author, " That uniformity is an idea
" of weak and vulgarminds:" For infubmif-
sion to thelaws, in loyalty to the CROWN,
and in liberal and generous sentiments to
those who differ from her, she is outdone by
no church in the world.

IN this view, the CHURCH of SCOTLAND

may be confidered as of great utility to the
public; for without power or temporality to
make her dangerous, the breeds a set of men
with principles of freedom, who afting in
a body, and having an ascendant over the
minds of the people, mull, while uni'ducedl
and uncorrupted, be one of the bulwarks of
the slate. Before the happy mra of the union,
the commons of S o T L A ND, led by attachmlent
to their chiefs, or prompted by religious zeal,
appeared often indeed in the field, on the
fide of liberty; but it was a liberty they
neither enjoyed nor underflood. And on

C account

[ 20 1

account of certain untoward circumstances
that relate to the bails of government in this
country, the diftinc sense and knowledge
of civil and political liberty, has not diffifed
itself so far among them as might have been
expeced. But the clergy of this CHURCH,
fully fenfble of the blesings we enjoy, and
well-infTructed in the nature of government,
in some degree compensate for this defect;
for they fill up the middle rank between the
commons and their Superiors, and, in their
intercourse with the people, fail not to im-
press them with just ideas of the rights of
men and of BRITONS, and to inspire them
with that love of the public which binds
them t- their country. While they retain
their characder for piety and good morals,
they will not abuse this influence over the
people: when they depart from it, and be-
come vicious and corrupt, they will no
longer be believed.

BUT I proceed. in the

3d place, To point out the tendency of our

ecciefiaflical constitution, to form the per-
fonal characters of its members.

IT

[- 2 ]

IT is thought, that allmen receive a certain

caRl, or turn of charaCter, from their pro-
session and manner of life; and, so far as
this influence extends, it is of importance
what diredionit takes. It must be owned,
that there are some general prepoffiefions a-
gainft the clerical profeifion, as unfavour-
able to certain amiable and manly qualities,
and as giving so deep a'tindure to the very
virtues that belong to it, that the piety of
churchmen is believed toborder on hypocri-
fy, their morals on austerity, their learning
on pedantry, and their zeal for religion aid
the good of mankind to be, for the molt
part, assumed as a pretence to aid or to co-
ver their pride and ambition. But 1 am of
opinion, that the tendency of the coniiitu-
tion of our CI-IU RCH, not only obviates theie
general objections, but also that it has force
enough to form a very refpedable character;
and, in particular, that admitting ibme few
peculiar disadvantages to which her mmni-
iters are liable, there are not, on the whole,
many orders of men, and no clergymen of
any denomination, whoie functions and
manner of life are better suited than theirs

C 2 to

[ 22 ]

to produce a spirit of independency, or to
exercise and strengthen some of the best fa-
culties and afediions of the mind.

IF it be true, that it belongs to the righ-

trous, and the free, to be bold as a lion, the
miniLter of this c H U R C H muf derive for-
ti;tde and elevation of mind from the causes
already mentioned. His very manner of
obtaining a living, never by purchase, fel-
dom by personal application; the conscious-
ness of being well-qualified for the office,
after having had his abiiities and morals
everely tried; together with that equality
oi rank with the fathers of the CH RCH, to
xwhich he is at oace admitted; tend, in the
beginning, to inspire him with manly and
generous sentiments: and the natural effed
of the paforal employment, in which he is
afterwards ,engaged,, is to raise, and not de-
press the spirit. He has made choice of a
profe-ion lwhicih, though not opulent, is li-
beral ; he has entered into a ltate which,
though not improvcable, is independent.
W -ithout the habits that contradc the heart,
without lthe views that enslave the mind,

the

23

the member of this CHURCH therefore refts
his hopes, in this world, on personal dif-
tindions alone; on his talents, his learning,
or his virtue.

IN other churches, the great power and

wealth of dignified clergymen, no doubt,
throw a splendor on the whole body, and
may often be strong incentives to a noble
and manly ambition: but as they leave the
bulk of the order at so great a distance, and
make preferment a constant objec of atten-
tion, it may be questioned, how far they are
favourable to some of the belt qualities of
the mind. In our CHURCH, equality of
rank, whatever inconveniencies may o-
therwife attend it, effectually prevents the
growth of some kind of vices; for every one
of her sons standing on the fame ground
with another, looks neither down with faf-
tidioufilefs, nor up with adulation.

THE part, besides, that every clergyman

of this CH U RCH engages in, whenever he is
ordained, not only to teach but to rule,
must strengthen and invigorate the mind.

For

[ 24 ]

For though the objects may appear but small
in comparison with the great affairs of civil
government; yet the fame talents are exert-
ed, the fame affections and paflions are ex-
ercifed, the fame powers and energies of mind
are employed in church-courts as in others.
And in the freedom ofdebate, in the bustle of
popular assemblies, in all applications to men,
force and spirit are improved more than in
any other exercise; and the faculties of the
foul are not only whetted, but enlarged. It
is more than probable, that our situation
will ever prevent us from excelling in ele-
gance of behaviour, in poliihed manners,
orin graceful accomplishments; nor is it
of much importance that we mhould. But
if we do not attain those better qualities,
that enable a man to adt a vigorous and in-
dependent part, whenever his own opini-
ons and affections, or the public good, {hall
engage him, we are without excuse; for
no churclhmen were ever placed in a fitua-
tion of more advantage for acquiring them.
We stand at present, as I apprehend, diftin-
guiled, as a body of men, for some of the qua-
lties I have mentioned. Piety, good morals,
and fidelity in his office, are indifpenfible in

[ 25 1

a minister; but without a free and indepen-
dent mind, he will want one of the best and
most effectual guards to his virtues,

AN eminent author has ascribed certain

peculiar vices to the clergy, which, he fays,
are derived from their profession and man-
ner of life, in so much as to justify, in a
great degree, the trite maxim, that " priests
" of all religions are the fame," and tend
naturally to destroy the candour and inge-
nuity of their tempers, to render their pro-
bity for the most part suspicious, and to
make them dangerous to civil government.
Now as these reflections coincide but too
much with the prepossessions of many, and
as religion itself may susser by such imputa-
tions upon her ministers. it will not be im-
proper to hew, that this charge does not
apply to the members of this CHURCH, and
that our constitution itself obviates these ge-
neral objetions.

THE charaderiftical vices of clergymen,

that he chiefly dwells upon, are hypocriiy,
ambition, and pride. "To hypocrisy," he al-

ledges,

[ 26 ]
ledges, " they are inclined; because, being

drawn from the common mass of man-
kind, they will either have no great turn

"for devotion; or, were they ever so good,
"to support the character of their profef-
"sion, and to impose upon mankind, they
" must appear to be fiill better than they
"are." But our CHURCH is so happily con-
flituted, that this objection does not apply
to her members.

FOR admitting that the restraints of difci-

pline might give check to the natural cha-
radcer, were they to operate alone; yet, when
they are counteracted by the principles of
freedom and the spirit of independency,
which I have flewn to belong in a remarka-
ble manner to the miiifters ofthis CHURCH,
they cannot possibly overpower the candour
and ingenuity of the mind. Our republi-
can form of goverment, which exposes every
man's character and conduct to be near-
ly inspected by his equals ; our contentions
in church-courts, where our talents and pas-
sions are fuficiently employed ; prevent both
the inclination and the power of imposing a

feigned

[ 27 ]

feigned character on the public. Our early
and constant intercourse with the world, our
daily communications with our people, the
simplicity of our worship, and, perhaps, e-
ven the flight distinction ofdrefs between us
and other men, are all circumstances that
disqualify us for acting the part of impof-
tors.

NOR is this all: For if artifice and disguise

were attempted, they would now meet with
buta cold reception. Superfition and mona-
chifm having been long banished from PRO-
TE S T A N T churches,the characer of a clergy-
man that is most beloved and respected a-
mongft us, is that which is most amiable and
respectable. The arts of popularity may, no
doubt, sometimes be tried, and particular
prejudices and weaknesses of the people may
be applied to: but these arts cannot long be
successful. The other parts of a man's con-
duct that are inconsistent with his arts and
his pretences, being exposed to the near in-
fpection of familiarity, and the vigilance of
rivalfliip, will soon betray or detect his real
character. Popular virtues only, can al-

D ways

[ 28 ]

ways retain the love and esteem of the people.
An unfeigned piety, a tender humanity, di-
ligence in the paltoral office, integrity and
candour, liberality of mind, steadiness of
conduc, uniformity of zeal; these are the
qualities that render a man a popular and re-
fpeciable minifler of this CH URCH. And
there, I hope, we do not in general need to
feign, to please our people, or impose upon-
mankind.

WITH as little force can the charge of

ambition, in the fene he means, be brought
against the ministers of this CHURCH.

HE alledges, " That,while the ambition of
other men is commonly satisfied by excel-

" ling in their particular profession, and
" thereby promoting the interests of focie-
"ty, the ambition of the clergy can only

be satisfied by promoting ignorance and

" fuperfition, and implicit faith, and pious
' frauds : and having got, what Archime-
"des only wanted, (viz. another world on
" which to fix his engines), no wonder they

move this world at their plcafure ; which

"being

[ 29 ]

"being added to the close union of intereits
"that takes place among clergymen of the
" fame religion, makes them extremely for-
"midable to society."

How much soever such objeAions may

apply to the priests of the church of ROME,
whose hearts are hardened, by celibacy, to
the interests of society, there is no PROTES-
TANT church against whom they can just-
ly be laid. And with refpedt to the CHURCH
of SCOTLAND, nothing can be more so-
reign to her constitution, or to the spirit and
practice of her members. For, to cure the
jealousy of the state, fle has admitted to a
parity of rule with her ministers, the order
of lay-elders, who are incorporated in all her
judicatories in such numbers, as to be effec-
tual guardians of the interefis of society,
against every poflible combination of the
clergy. And as I have already observed, that
we could not impose on the people, were we
ever so much inclined to it; I must add, that
every clergyman, being a member of the
great community of BRITAIN, which in-
volves in it the interests of religion and li-
berty, as well as of our particular CHURCH,

D 2 the

[ 3o ]

the private corporation-fpiritis thereby couri°
teradced and controlled, so that it can never
be dangerous to society. And to this great
public we are bound, not by our principles
alone, but by one of the strongest assertions
of the human mindj the love of our fami-
lies and children.

IF the charge of pride and obstinacy, when

laid against the members of this H U CR H
is not already fully answered by what has
been said concerning the two preceding ob-
jeeions, lee it be farther observed, that
mens minds are wonderfully softened since
toleration was eftablilied; for fecdaries ha-
ving no longer the power of hurting each o-
ther, their animofities are in a greatmeafure
at an end. And let me add, that our c H R c
in particular, guards against there vices, by
the equal power of its members, as rulers in
a free and independent community, where
pretence and authority have no effect, and
nothing but reason and superior powers of
periuafion can prevail.

THUS

[ 31 ]

THUS have I endeavoured to liew the ten-

dency of our ecelefiaftical constitution to
form the temper, spirit, and character of its
members: or, in other words, 1 have mark-
ed the towers, bulwarks, and palaces of our
Zion; which' though not sumptuous and
costly edifices, yet are founded deep, and are
well-calculated for strength and duration.
But they are not perfect so far as they are
human, like all things else, they are liable to
defects a few of which I beg leave to point
out, before I conclude, that we may Ikilfully
bend our endeavours to support our JERU-
SALEM where she is weak, and to repair her
where she has fallen into decay.

THE sirs 'defect I shall mention, is in

the very fabric of our constitution itself;
which intrusts the fame bodywith the high-
eft judicative and executive powers, and even
with great part of the legislative too: A
combination that, in some cafes, would be
extremely dangerous ; and, even in our cafe,
is attended with this inconvenience, that
our courts, in their judicative capacity, may
Sometimes decide on general expediency, ra-

ther

L 32 1

ther than particular laws; and with the tem-
per of judges, less than the spirit of legifla-
tors. Hence it is, that partiality and in-
justice may be exercised, the innocent may
be condemned, and the guilty may be ac-
quitted. One compensation or balance,
however, there is to this defec in our con-
flitution, which is this, that the supreme
power is not lodged in a permanent body,
but in a court ofreprefentatives chosen every
year; and who being themselves the peers
of all those who are tried before them, are
not likely to be either able, or willing, to
persist in any plan of oppression or injustice.

Afecond defect is a certain consequence of

our republican constitution, which makes us
liable to faction and party-fpirit.

AN evil no doubt fraught with many

breaches of charity, and with much aliena-
tion of mens mind from each other. For
men who set out with the firm belief that
they are promoting public good, and serving
the great ends 6f virtue and religion, and
who are countenanced and confirmed by

their

[.33 1

their associates in this opinion, are apt, when
aching in a party, to go lengths, of which,
in other situations, they would be utterly a-
{hamed. Hence the liberty that is taken of
making truth and conscience to be only of
one fide; of branding each other with the
names of LIBERTINE, and HYPOCRITE ;
of magnifying an indecorum into a crime,
or of conitruing a revere or morose demea-
nour to be vile grimace; while the enemies
of our C H U R c H lie in wait for such fair op-
portunities of seducing the credulous from
every fide, and the foes of all religion fit in
the scorner's chair and laugh.

TH I s evil, which calls for the attention

of all men of worth and virtue to mitigate
and assuage its more violent symptoms, is
however the genuine product of our confli-
tution; and as long as we are free and in-
dependent, and, at the fame time, imperfect
creatures, can never be wholly cured. But
it is happily controlled in its most perni-
cious effects, by the broad basis of our fu-
preme court, which brings members from
every corner, uninfected with each others

local

[ 34

local passions; and by the institution of el?
ders: an order not only most wifely calcu-
laed to promote religion and good morals
among the people, and reconcile them to the
discipline of the CHURCH ; but also to unite
us more closely with the commonwealth, to.
prevent the jealousy of government, to
guard against the encroachments of ecclefi-
aftical power, and to abate the ferment of
minds sometimes overheated with party-
zeal and itrife.

THE third and laj1 defect that I fiall men.

tion, is the incompetent provision for tile
clergy: a defecL that I do not unjuilly a-
scribe to the conflitution; which was formed
on a surrender 6f the patrimony of the
church, and all temporal power and domi-
nion, with entire reliance for its support on
the sense which the public should have of
its utidli. Tlis is an evil not only severe-
ly felt by the miniftcrs of this establishment.
(who. I am bold to f-v. would :io, diihonour
ar.- focicty upon earth), but of che m:-s
tLreaLening asped on the CHURCH ; since
It -ay soon fill her with persons of inferior
birth and mean education, to the ruin of

learning,

[ -35 1

learning and religion too: an evil, however,
that we cannot justly impute, in all its ex-
tent, to the illiberal spirit of the generations
that are past, since they could not possibly
foresee the rapid progress of commerce; o-
therwife, it is probable, they would have
fixed on such a kind of provision for the
clergy, as would have risen, in some propor-
tion, to the prosperity of the country, and
not fallen in its value every day.

WHAT we may hope for from this fplen-

did age, so fertile in grand and magnificent
projecs, is beyond my conjecture. But if
the CHURCH of SCOTLAND is such as I
have represented her to be, of so much utili-
ty, and of so little danger to the public, her
falling Rate, in this refpet, will one day be-
come an objed to Legislature itself: and
men, capable of great and extensive views,
will fee that, by preserving our CHURCH in
her vigour, they will execute a work truly
worthy of themselves ; they will strengthen
one pillar of religion and liberty that is in
danger of decay, and help to prolong the pe-
riod of light and happiness to mankind.

~E ~BUT,

[ 36 ]

But, my Reverend FATHERS and BRE-

THREN, tho' this defect in our constitution is
a subjed of anxiety and regret, and of uneasy
forebodings, we need not yet fall into de-
fpair. There are some considerations that
serve, for the present, to extenuate this evil,
and from which we may derive a temporary
comfort,

MA 1Y we not hope for a partial, at least, and

gradual redress of this evil, from the wis-
dom and attention of our own Supreme
Court of Law, f .ar as our i-tation is in-
trusted to their care ? Have not many mini-
fters of this CHURCH already experienced,what
iult slntimersr that learnedand venerable bo-
d- entertain 6f the narrow allowance made
for them, when compared with the flourifil-
ing itare o this couniry Though the provi-
sion for the clergy has fallen very much in
its value: -zr Is not their rank, in some re-
sied, railed; not on:l b, the removal of
cel ain political prejudices, which separated
them f2rom many of fperior order; but also
by the ri' of aii orders or men beneath them,
throuhal tihe impro-vements of industry, and
the incri.ai oGf w-eath ' \hat advantage

may

[ 37]

flay not be gained, from the clergy's ha-
ving become the chief depofitaries of general
learning, now that the attention and efforts
of almost all other men are devoted to com-
merce alone ? Do not our universities borrow
many of their fairest ornaments from the
CHURCH? And what glory may not be won
in that field of diftindtion so lately opened
to the learned of this country, I mean, com-
position, and the art of writing; where the
whole range of science is before them, where
there are laurels enough to satisfy the most
ardent ambitionofpliterary fame It is here, ye
sising hopes of our JER U AL E M my young-
er friends, who are still candidates for the
ministry, who have forsaken all to follow
this ungainful profeflion; it is here that
you must look for your rewards in this
world. Here you will find obje&s suited to
your taftes; here you will perceive a Ihining
path to reputation, that will answer the de-
fire of your hearts : For admiration is the
passion of young and generous minds; and
the love of diflinaion is predominant with
the youth of genius, far above the love of
wealth. It were indeed happy, if, by our

E 2 re-

[ 38 ]

regulzatons and our own concduc, we could
make it a mark of diatinclion to be admit-
ted of our order.

IT might now be expected that I should

address mrnfelf to the reft of my audience,
and offer rome apology to them for having
made, what they may think, an encomium
on my own order; an encomium to which
they may alledge they are bound to pay but
little regard. All that I {hall fay is, that an
njuft panegyric is the severest satire. But
if the view 1 have given of the constitution
of this c H r C H be true, I have not impro-
perly followed the Psalmist's advice, to -ialk
about Z-clz, to tell her towers, to mark well
her bulwarks. a.nd conjider her palaces, that
ye ;.I' tell it to the generatil.i following; that
-vcu may impress on your own minds a sense
of the excellent churchl-government you are
under, and may inculcate on your children
and rofterity a just efteerm ofthofe whooha.v
the charge of your foulsj who have 4ot doii-=
sii; over your lfaith, but are helpers of your joyr

LET us then join together in fervent prayer

to

[ 39 ]

to the KING and HEAD of his CHURCH,
*who hath not only fenced her with towers
and with bulwarks, and adorned her with
palaces, but hath made her all glorious with-
in, that he would bless all his own divine in-
flitutions, to the salvation of men, and the
glory of his kingdom; and that whatever
he hath left us to devise for the fake of peace
and good order, may, through him who
alone infpireth with wisdom, conduce to the
fame great ends that our Jerusalem may al-
ways have prosperity, and that the gates of
hell jmay never prevail agaijl her. AME N,

F IN I S.
