A

S E R M O N
SERMON

ON T HE DE A TH OF
SIR DAVID DALRYMPLE, BA.RT

LORD HAILLES;
FRnor ECCLES. VII. 3,

PREACHED
In the CHURCH of INVERESK, on SUNDAY the 9th

Day of DECEMBER, I792.

BY

ALEXR. CARLYLE, D. D. F. R. S. E.
CHAPLAIN TO HIS MAJESTY, 3 MINISTER OF THAT PARISH.

WIT H
AN ADDRESS TO THE CONGREGATION

SUITED TO
THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE TIMES.

EDINBURGH:
PRINTED FOR JOHN BALFOUR,

M DCC XCI.
[Price SIXPENCE.]

# ECCLES. vii. 3. Sorrow is better than laughter, for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better.

SERMON.

ECCLES. Vii. 3.
Sorrow is better than laughter,for by the fad

ness of the countenance the heart is made
better.

K ING Solomon, like other wife men,
of whom he was the chief, sometimes com-
municates truth in paradoxes, to raise at-
tention, and excite enquiry. The direct
contrary of those sayings, at first fight, ap-
pears to be true, but a close examination
brings round the mind to yield its firmest
assent. A good name, fays he, verse i., is
better than precious ointment, and the 'day of

A death

[4]

death than the day of one's birth. V. 2. It
is better to, go to the hoife of mourning, than
to the hoife offefting, for that is the end of
a!/ men, and the living will lay it to his heart.
In confirmation of which last he adds, in
the words of my text, Sorrow is better than
tllaghter, fr by the fadntefr of the countenance
the heart is made better. As if he had said,

IT is true, and you may be assured of it,

however incredible it may appear, That the
grave and serious difpofiti6n of the house of
mourning, the compafion and grief, which
arise on the folamn occasions of performing
the last offices of humanity to our friends
and brethren, is far preferable, on many ac-
counts, to the gay and frolicsome temper
of the house of feasting, to that mirth and
laughter which is excited in feflive aflem-
blies; and those serious occasions ought e-
specially to be fought after, and a corre-
fponding disposition cultivated by us mor-
tals, who are in a slate of preparation for
another world, because they have a happy
influence in mending the heart.

THE

[S 3

IN our journey through this life, we mufl

tot be so much amused with the entertain-
ments of it, as to lose fight of the heavenly
Jerusalem, whither we are going. And to
assure to ourselves a mansion in that blessed
abode, the proper method is, not so much to
please our fancies, as to improve our hearts
in virtue. For this purpose, ease and fePci-
vity are not experienced to be friendly, but
seasons of afflicion have been found by the
wife to have a salutary efficd. It shall be
the aim of this discourse, to impress you with
a sense of the necessity of sometimes encou-
raging a serious and recollected temper of
mind, and to reconcile you to those fad and
mournful scenes, that are moll likely to pro-
duce such dispositions.

WITH this view, all I propose to do,

under divine assistance, is to set forth, in
some instances, the chief excellence of for-
row, or the sadness of the countenance, That
by it the heart is made better. In the

FIRST

( 6 )

FIRST place, then, By sorrow and the

sadness of the countenance the heart is made
better, because it is of great use to mortify
our pride.

Tbo' pride was not made for man, whose

foundation is in the duif, and whose gloy, is but
like the flower of the grass, yet doth he often
exalt hinflEf agaijl the Moji High God, and
fay with dreadful infoience of heart, what is
the Almighty that I fiould serve him; and
what profit hall I have f I pray unto him ?
Thus departeth he from God, aud his heart is
turned from the Lord his Maker, by that pride
which is hateful to God and Man, and which
is the beginning offin, ECCL. x. iS. and vii.
13. And what disease of the mind, what
moral illness can be a greater obftacie to our
lalvation and happiness, what more danger-
ous to the life of our fouls? For it is the
very nature of this disorder to rejeEt all of-
sered assistance, to despise and resist all pro-
pofals and attempts towards a cure.

BUT

(7)

BUT the Almighty and kind Physician of
fouls withholds not his saving help, nor
ihortens his friendly arm, though we are
froward, and think ourselves whole. For he
deals around the humbling strokes of his
Providence, to raise in us that fadcs es fthe
counteiance, by ' wicb ibe h:eart i' made better.
He casts the neceftary portion of sorrow in-
to the cfale, to counterbalance that immode-
rate elation of the heart, which is the nou-
rifher of pride.

Now sorrow is a felf-annihilating passion,

that dwells upon the weakness and vanity of
our condition, and sets before us, in the moit
striking light, every circumstance that can
render us mean and contemptible in our
own eyes. It brings down every vain thought
and high imagination, presents us with
the mortifying profped of all our boafled
endowments and possessions laid in the dust,
and reduces the mind to such a low and de-
solate tfate, that then, if ever, it will have
recourse to its first principles of trodt in the
Lord Jebovah it will bring to remembrance

the

( 8 )

the Man offorrows, whop was meek and lowz
ly of heart, and revive that sense of present
Deity, which alone can give it relief.

AND what, my brethren, can more effec-.

tually humble the pride of human nature
than a serious attention to the objets of for-
row ? What is there so well suited to pro-
duce in us that fecf-abafement, he which
who poffejes not JJall never be exalted ?

To behold the pride of riches brought

down to the level of the grave ! allthe pomp
and magnificence of life conclude in the dii-
mal solemnity of a funeral ! To fee the re-
nowned hero, for whose valour and activity,
this spacious globe was but a scanty theatre,
circumscribed within the narrow limits of
a coffin and a tomb ! To observe the tongue
of the wife and learned, that swayed the mul-
titude to all his designs, become mute and
silenced forever ! To behold man, the lord-
lieft creature in this world, in all the unfore-
feeing haughtiness of youth perhaps, brought

down

[ 9

down in a few hours to the humble bed of
sickness and of death: his bloom of beauty
changed into ghastly paleness; the glory of his
strength turned into infant weakness ; help-
less, forlorn, and agonized, beyond the reach
of power or of riches, of art or of science,
to relieve or detain for one moment ! These
are fad and mournful scenes ! To make us
athamed of our pride! Surely these are
scenes of sorrow, by which the heart is made
better ! Again,

SECONDLY, By sorrow, and the sadness

of the countenance-the heart is made better,
because it lefrens our attachment to the world,
and the things of the world.

As ridiculous as it appears, for an immor-

talfoul to labour for the nzeat which peri /eth;
to waite its noble faculties in making provision
for the JflJ, and in laying 'p treafJres upon
earth, since these things can never satisfy
the desires of a free and rational spirit,
which God made for himself, and which
must be restless and unhappy when it is not

B returning

[ I '

returning to him again ; as strange as this
conduc may seem, yet it is undeniably true,
that we are all too apt to set our affecions
on the world and its enjoyments, and to place
our highefi hopes, and seek our chief felici-
ty in them; than which fond attachment,
there is nothing that enters into the heart
of man more opposite and hoffile to all re-
ligious improvement.

Now sorrow has an excellent influence in

leflening this vicious attachment to the world,
inasmuch as it greatly abates that keen relish
for outward enjoyments, which renders
them so dangerous to the welfare of our
fouls. Sackcloth and alhes, silence and dark-
ness, and abstinence from whatever could
delight the senses, which was the mourning
of the ancient patriarchs according to the
Old Testament, might sometimes indeed be
pradifed then, as it may be still, in oftenta-
tion of a grief,they did not feel. But the
simplicity of their manners, as well as the
nature of the thing itself, leaves us no room
to doubt, that it was, for the most part, a ge-

nuine'

.[ II ]

nuine effect, and expression of true and un-
dissembled sorrow. Thus did these good
men, and thus do all of us who are not
greatly corrupted, in some measure, fulil
the days of our mourning. For what heart
has ever been deeply finitten with sorrow,
that has not felt the truth of this obferva-
tion ? In those hours of uneasiness and wo,
have not all that can take too fast hold of
the foul, the most pleasant gratifications of
sense, and even the joys of friendship and
sweet society, been rendered insipid and dif-
tasteful!

THERE are certain persons, indeed, of a

more refined temper of mind, and more de-
licate sentiments, than to admit the gross en-
joyments of sense to the pofefflion of their
hearts, who will notwithstanding take the
world into their bosoms in a more plausible
shape, and raise therein as dangerous rivals
to God and religion. For theyallow it to infi-
nuate itself into their minds,under the appear-
ance of natural affection, fiiendfhip, or some
other commendable passion, till it chain

B 2 them

[ 12 ]

them down with those cords of love, and bands
of a man, to a state of as abject slavery, as
that of the greatet sensualist upon earth.
The most beautiful affedions of our nature
are not incapable of abuse and vicious ex-
cess; for he that loveth father or mother,
fays Christ himself, more than me, is not
·worlby of me; and be that loveth on or dazigh-
ter more than me, is not worthy oJf e. MAT.
x. 39.

IN this cafe, the heart-improving effe&

of sorrow, must be evident to all: For the
Great Governor of the world chaflifes his
creatures with the kindness of a father, when
he fends his messinger, Death, for those dar-
lings of their hearts, and throws down those
idol gods that profane his most sacred tem-
ple. Thus rebukes he at once their forget-
fulness of him, and removes the cause of it;
awakens them into a sense of their duty,
and clears away the impediments to the per-
formance of it; and snatches from them
those dear objects that engage all their love
and attention, that they may perceive and

acknowledge

[ I3 ]

acknowledge that sovereign and bountiful
hand which gives them ail things richly to
enjoy. Nor can it be doubted, that such is
truly the effed of a deep-felt sorrow; for
when can the mind be more sensible of the
vanity of all earthly pofleffions, when is it
more likely to perceive the folly of violent
attachments to frail and mortal men, than in
those days of fad reflecion, when the death
of a dear relation, or beloved friend, has dif-
solved as it were the charm that made this
world delightful, broke the chain that tied it
to sublunary things, and destroyed all its i-
maginary schemes of happiness?

BUT, besides the grief which arises on

those interesting occasions, what can more
discredit the goods of fortune, and all out-
ward things, than a serious attention to the
general objects of sorrow ? For what does
outward good avail against disease or death ?
Can the pofleffion of all the enjoyments of
sense, through a long and prosperous life,
afluage the pains of a bed of sickness ? And
if they cannot relieve the body, how much

leis

[ I4 3

less influence must they have to - sooth the
anguith of the mind? Can they heal a
wounded spirit, or Jfop the gnawings of the
worm that dieth not ? Can they draw a veil
over the terrors of the future world,that come
awfully near in that dreadful extremity?
No surely. Something else muff attend the
death of the righteous; Something more fpi-
ritual muff prepare a foul for the other
world, and enable it to enter with confidence
and joy into the presence of the Great Cre-
ator. Thus the discovery of their useless-
ness to man in his greatest necessity, must
lessen our attachment to the world, and the
things of the world.

AGAIN,in the THIRD place, another heart-

improving effeEc offorrow and thefadnefi of
the countenance, is, that thereby tender and
charitable dispositions are strengthened and
cultivated in our minds.

THE temper of the hortfe of feaJling, that

levity of mind which accompanies immode-
rate indulgence in outward pleasure, has a

most

[ Is5

most unhappy tendency to fifle the senti-
ments of humanity, and to render us insen-
fible to the wants and calamities of our bre-
thren. Attention to the distress of others is
painful to us in that state, because it inter-
rupts, and in some measure upbraids our
joy; and therefore, hardening our hearts,
we dismiss it as soon as we can. Thus do
voluptuous men flop their ears at the cries
of the poor, and turn away their eyes from
beholding piteous objets; flattering their
consciences perhaps with the false excuse of
Behold we knew it not; and forgetting that
he who pondereth the heart doth coniider it,
and will render to every man according to
his works. PRov. xxiv. I , 12.

Now sorrow is undoubtedly a very pro-

per cure for this disease of the mind; for it
softens the heart to an extreme degree of
sensibility, and raises in it all those kind,
gentle, and compassionate dispositions, that
are so nearly akin to itself, so deeply rooted
in our nature, and so useful ahd ornamental
to human life. This all good men have ac-

knowledged

[ i6 ]

khcewledged to be one of the greatest and
most certain effeds of sorrow and afflicion;
and for this cause our blessed Saviour him-
self was in all things made like unto his bre-
thren, fubjefed to the wants, the pains and
griefs of human nature; that being touched
with the feeling of our infirmities, he might be
a merciful andfaithfil Hi-gh PrieJ/. But this
effed of sorrow is so obvious, that it needs
no further illustration, and therefore I pro-
ceed to the FOURTH instance,

AND it is the LAST I shall mention;

wherein by fArrow and the sadness of the
countenance the heart is made better, that is,
That we are thereby roused to a sense of
our own mortality, and excited to prepare
for death.

As much as all we fee around us, and

every day's experience concur to the proof
of man's mortality; although we cannot fail
to perceive the frailty of our nature, and to
feel the feedsof death ihooting forth in a
thousand various diseases in there frail bodies

of

[ I7 3

of ours, yet so much are we engaged in the
pursuits of this world, that we seldom betlow
on that awful event, the serious consideration
it undoubtedly deserves, but hastily dismiss it
from our thoughts, when it presumes to en-
ter there, and chace it as far as possible from
our relutant fight,

IT is therefore one of the greatest spirit-

ual advantages of sorrow and the sadness of
the countenance, that it awakens men out of
that fatal unconcern, and gives them the
loudest alarm to prepare for an hereafter.
And indeed when our pride is mortified,
our love of the world subdued, and every
humane and tender affedion kindled in our
breafts,-then, if ever, will we be in a fa-
vourable disposition, to attend to the cir-
cumftances and condition of our nature, to
confider our latter end, and the measure of our
days, and to know howfrail we are.

THIS is the reason why the wife Solomon

prefers the house of mourning to the honfe of
feafling, because it is the end of ll men, and

C the

[ I8 ]

the living will lay it to his heart. And who
that i snot-more insensible than things ina-
nimate, can remain unmoved on those inter-
efting occasions ? Who can fee his dearest
acquaintance and friends ly down in the
dust, not to rife again till the heavens be no
more, and to have no portion forevec in any
thing that is done under the fin; Who can
behold this end of all men without laying it
to his bxart ? without deeply revolving in
his mind, That he also must soon go to his
long home, that he also must be involved in
that universal calamity, which cometh alike
unto all ?

AND if we are fully impressed with the

sense, and duly affcted with the importance
of death, that will surely stir us up to pre-
pare for it. Can we behold the dreadful
despair of such as are without hope in their
death; can we be witnefles to their forlorh
and defoiate condition, who have lived with-
out virtue, without religion, without God in
the world, and not take warning to fliun
the rock on which they made ]jipwreck of

their

[ I9 ]

theirfalvation ? And,onthe otherhand can we
behold the dying tranquillity of those who
have made their peace with God, who have
coifciences void of offence towards ( od ard
towards men; Can we be fpedators of the
faith, the hope, the joy, with which they
enteron a new state of being, and not be
excitedby that noble example, to live the ive
of the righteous, that we may alo die like him .?

THUS have I endeavoured to illustrate the

truth of the wife man's observation in our.
Text, That sorrow is better than laughter,
for by thefadnefs of the countenance the heart
is made better. And according to this max-
im it will be our wisdom, and our interest
to regulate our conduc.

BUT let us not imagine, that this doctrine

obliges us to bear down our disposition to
innocent mirth, which is a part of our na-
ture, orto abstain from all amufemnents or re-
creations, as if they were altogether incon-
fiftent with the gravity and recollecion of a
Christian. Our religion enjoins not, nor

C 2 does

[ 20 ]

does our spiritual interest require such aufte.
rity. All that is demanded of us, and all in.
deed that is neceffary,is thatwe use amusements
seasonably and moderately, that we love them
with no greater affection, and pursue them
with no more eagerness, than is proportion-
ed to their value; and that we never allow
them to interfere with duties of everlasting
obligation. Add to this, that whatever is
natural, is attended with some fatisfastion;
pity which is a mixture of love and sorrow,
diffuses a kind of pleating anxiety over the
mind; and grief itself is not without its ten-
der joys. Gravity and composure, is the
source of the greatest and most excellent
pleasures; for the highest joy is no more ex-
prefled by laughter, than the deepest sorrow
by tears.

LET us not, therefore, in future, addict

ourselves so much to the house of feadqing,
Let us not be so eagerly solicitous about
mirth and pleasure, and so restless and irn-
patient when we cannot procure it. Let us
not encompass sea and land, to find where-

withal

f 2 ]i

withal to make our hearts glad. Nor let us
dread sadness and sorrow as the greatest e-
vil that can befal us; and, in compliance with
fashionable mistakes, shun the house of
mourning, and lose many opportunites of
exercising iome of the be ft alTetions of our
nature.

You may not unreasonably expet-, my

brethren, that on this occasion, I should fay
something of that most worthy person of e-
minence, Lord Hailles, who has so lately
disappeared from among us, and been ga-
thered to his fathers. For though our church
does not encourage funeral discourses in ge-
neral, because they are liable to much abuse;
yet would it be improper to allow those,
whose distinguished talents and virtues as-
ford a theme of inftruation to mankind, to
fink down to the grave in silence, without
endeavouring in the hour of sorrow, for
your loss of such persons, to draw your at-
tention to their example.

YouR

[ 22 ]

TOUR loss did I fay? and'furely if ten

righteolus were enough to have saved a wick-
ed city from deftrudion, in the days of the
patriarch Abraham, we have good reason in
our degenerate days, deeply to regret the loss
of one person of marked and pre-eminent
virtue.

IT would not become me to enlarge on his

charader as a supreme Judge in the civil and
criminal courts, capacities in which he ated
in the view of his country, from which he
meritedand obtained high confidence and ap-
probation; forhis knowledge of the laws was
accurate and profound, and he. applied it in
judgment, with the molt scrupulous integri-
ty. In his proceedings in the criminal court,
the fatisfadion he gave to the public could
not be furpafed. His abhorrence of crimes,
his tenderness for the criminals, his respect
for the laws, and his reverential awe of the
Omniscient Judge, inspired him on some oc-
cafions, with a commanding sublimity of
thought, and a feeling solemnity of expref-
sion, that made condemnation seem just, as

the

[ 23 ]

the doom of Providence to the criminals
themselves, and raised a salutary horror of
crimes in the breast of the audience.

CONSCIOUS of the dignity and import.

ance of the high office he held, he never de-
parted from the decorum that becomes that
reverend characder: which indeed it colt him
no effort to support, because he aced from
principle and sentiment, both in public and
private. Affectionate to his family and re-
lations, simple and mild in his manners, pure
and conscientious in his morals, enlightened
and entertaining in his conversation; he left
society only to regret, that, devoted as he was
to more important employments, he had so
little time to spare for intercourse with
them.

WHTY should I mention to you, his exten-

five learning, and his exquisite taste as a
scholar? Hewaswell known tobe of high rank
in the republic of letters, and his loss will be
deeply felt through many of her depart-
ments. His labours in illustration of the

hiftorv

t 24 1

history of his country, and many othef
works of profound erudition, remain as mo-
numents of his accurate and faithful research
for materials, and his found judgment in the
feledion of them. It is of more importance
to you, that I remind you of his unfeigned
piety and devotion, of which you have so
very often been witnefles where we now
are. I must add, however, that his attend-
ance on religious ordinances, was not merely
out of refped to the laws, and for the fake
of example, (motives which mhould never
fail to have influence on persons of superior
rank, for the most obvious reasons) but
from principle and conviction, and the most
conscientious regard to his duty; for he not
only pradifed all the virtues and charities in
proof of his faith, but he demonstrated the
sincerity of his zeal, by the uncommon pains
he took to illustrate primitive Christianity,
and by his elaborate and able defences of it a-
gainft its enemies. Him therefore our reli-
gion itfelfhasjuft cause to lament, as a fallen
bulwark of our Jerusalem ! May the King
and Head of the church speedily repair her

loft

[ 25 ]

loss, that the gates of hell may never prevail
rngainjt her !

THERE is another part of his character

which I muff present to your view, because
it has refped to the times, and because I
know that you had a reverence for his worth,
and a just regard for his opinions. Ill in-
deed can the times bear the loss of such an
affecionate patriot, and able guardian of the
laws of his country. But we must not mur-,
mur at the will of Providence, which in its
mercy, may have withdrawn the good man
,from the evil to come. In mercy I fay to
him, whose righteous spirit was so deeply
grieved, when he saw the wicked rage, and
the people imagine a vain thing.

His profound researches into history, and
his thorough knowledge of the laws, made
him perfecly acquainted with the progress of
the conftitutionof Britain,froim the first dawn
of liberty in the common law of the land,
and the trial by jury which precede all writ-
ten records, and afterwards in the origin and

D establishment

[ 2.5 ]

efPablifhment of parliaments, through all its
riciffitudes and dangers, till at last by the
blessing of divine Providence, which brought
many wonderful events to concur to the
fame end, it was renewed, strengthened,
and finally confirmed by the Revolution. At
this blessed xra all the rights of men were
defined and secured, and have ever since
been sacredly preserved. Since that time,
there has been no encroachment on per-
fonal freedom, or the security of property,
on liberty of conscience or on the liberty of
the press. The road to riches and preferment
has been open to all men. The laws restrain
us from nothing, but the power to violate
the rights of.others. They have been ena&-
ed with common content. They have been
adminifteredwithjuftice,andhavebeen equal-
ly applied to rich and poor, to high and low.
An exadt balance has been preserved among
all the springs of the political machine; and
through all the rough gales of foreign wars,
and softer breezes of opposition, the vessel
of state has been steered with safety and filc-
cess. It was this goodly and venerable fa-
bric of the British Constitution, which the

deceafecl

1 27 ]

deceased most refpedable character contem-
plated with admiration and delight, (of late
indeed with a mixture of anxiety and fear)
as the temple of piety, as the genuine source
of greater happiness and freedom, to a lar-
ger portion of mankind, than ever flowed
from any government upon earth. Gracious
Heaven ! Why haft thou at this critical hour,
deprived us of so able and zealous a friend
to our afiaulted constitution ?

FOR, wonderful to tell, in the midftof this

happy period of our history, which for a
century past. has been such as cannot be par-
ralelled, in any country under the fun, when
we were reaping the happy effecs of our
free and equal government in the most bril-
liant prosperity, when by its natural force,
it had corrected some errors, and was in the
train of preventing others; when the load
of debts which had accrefced, by means of
wars formerly begun and carried oil with
the united voice of the nation, was rapidly
diminifling by our late wife and fortunate
.mneafures; when every man was fitting un-

D 2 der

[ 28 3

der his own vine and his ownfig-tree, to use
the language of Scripture, enjoying the fruits
of his industry, and contemplating with
pleasing hopes, the future glory and happi-
ness of his country;-Lo ! ,The enemy of
human happiness, who is ever watchful, to
sow tares in the good man's field, has most en-
vioufly interfered, to mar so promising a
harvest.

SOME evil spirits, taking advantage of the

late occurrences in a neighbouring country,
whose former government, it must be obferv-
ed, was totally the opposite of ours, and of
the ferment and expeEtation, that has there-
by been raised in the minds of men, have
endeavoured of late, by sophistry and false
arguments, by misrepresentation and lies, by
raising fears and hopes that are equally
groundless: By traducing all the superior or-
ders of men,by every bold and insidious art,
that malice could invent, and scurrilous
tongues and pens express, to subvert the
minds of a peaceful and happy people, and
to persuade them, that they now are and

have

[ 29 ]

have long been under a fad deluflon: That
their condition is totally the reverse of what
they have experienced it to. be; that they
have no constitution of government, that
they enjoy no liberty; that their equal laws,
are oppressive and unjust; that though the
poor man enjoys the fruits of his labour un,
disturbed as he ought to do, yet the rici has
no right to what has been acquired by the
labour of his forefathers; and that even our
mild and virtuous king, who holds histhrone
no less by the love and affeteion of his sub-
jeds, than by the law of the land,, is an U-
furper and a Tyrant.

AND what is the purpose and design of

all this false representation ? It is not, as
they give out, merely to correct abuses in
government, or to amend any defets that
may be in the conffitution. No, no. These
objects require no such violent mean for
their accompliflhment. These are fubljeds
of a parliamentary reform, whenever they
are of moment enough to decferve its atten-
tion, and lead to no opportunity ofmifchief.

NT(o,

[ 30 ]

No, their design is, though concealed from
the simple and the weak among them, yet
avowed by the master spirits, to excite the
minds of the people to commotion, to tu-
mult, to revolt and rebellion, that they may
lay in ruins the goodly fabric of this go-
verment, the work of ages, the envy of all
the nations of the world, which so happily
unites the possession of all the rights of men,
with national prosperity; and by means of
which at this hour, over all the world, aciti-
zen of Britain wherever he comes, is treat-
ed with distinguished refped, as a being of
a superior order.

WHAT, my brethren. can my feeble efforts
do to flop the progress of this kindling fire
could reasoning and argument avail, there
is no time for it at present. All I can do
now, is to warn you to take heed and be-.
ware ! To beware of those lying spirits who
would reduce you to your ruin. Would to
God ! that I had that warning voice, which
cried aloud of old, when.Satan was let loose
to take revenge on men, JWoe, woe, woe, /o

ibe

[ 3I 1

the inhabitants on earth ! Or that I could
speak to you with the weight and authority
of him, who so lately descended to the tomb,
and now I trust enjoys the fruits of his
righteousness ! Then would I beseech you,
by all you hold dear, by your parents and
families, by your wives and children, by
your religion and liberty, by all your hopes
in this world and that which is to come, to
turn a deaf ear to the lying words of the
reducer! What are your grievances? Did
you perceive them till you were told ? Do
you now feel them ? Will you not trust to
your own experience, rather than to a band
of dark conspirators ?

WHO are they? ó\nd what are their

means for accomplishing their boasted de-
signs ? Itwouldbeimproper, from this place,to
give them the harhieft epithets they deserve;
but surely they are not the most enlightened
and wife, the most liberal and disinterested,
·the most fober and industrious members of
society: Not those who have either much
characer or property to lose, but the difcon-

tented

[ 32 ]

tented, the disappointed, or ambitious, who
are devoid of talents to gratify their passions,
unless it be in times of confusion; And
what are their means for accomplishing their
designs? They have none, but either a
foreign force, which would at once turn the
rage of every Briton against them, or follow-
ing the example so lately set before them
by that very foreign .enemy on whose aid
they can only rely, to raise an ignorant, an
unruly and desperate mob, which all great
cities can furnifi, who, having nothing to
lose, delight in scenes of riot and confusion;
and with them, as with an engine that has
no w ill or direction of its own, to perpetrate
their wicked purposes, and through rapine,
havock and blood, to overturn religion,
law, and the ancient constitution, that,
under pretence of a free democracy, they
may acquire dominion and wealth to them-.
selves.

BUT I trust in Divine Providence, that

they ihall not be permitted to execute their
execrable designs. I fee the wife and good,

the

[ 33 ]

the enlightened and intelligent, the fober and
industrious, the quiet and peaceable of all
ranks, have taken the alarm, and are forming
Leagues of defence around the constitution,
that is,around religion and liberty, property
and law. I fee the Genius of Britain rif-
ing indignant, to punish her ingrateful sons,
and to repel the threatened invasion of her
insolent foes. May divine wisdom and for-
titude preside over her counsels, that light
may spring out of darkness, and order fron
confusion. AMEN.

THE EINP.
