NATIONAL DEPRAVITY
THE CAUSE OF NATIONAL CALAMITIES,

A
S E R M ON,

FROM JEREMIAH vi. 8.
PREACHED IN THE CHURCH OF INVERESS,

ON THURSDAY FEB. 25. 1794;
Being tbe Day appointed by his MAIs7tr

for a General Fafi.
BY ALEX. CARLYLE, D.D. F. R. S. EDN.

MINISTER OF THE PARISH,
And one of his MajeJfy's Chaplains.

EDINBURGH:
PUBLISHED BY JOHN OGLE, BOOKSELLER PARLIA-

MENT-CLOSE, FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE POOR

OF TIlE PARISH OF INVERESK.

L.DCC.XCIV.

60/ 40-7

.. i .S
*\ S^

# JEREMIAH vi. 8. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee: lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited.

A
SE RMON.

JEREMIAH Vi. 8.

Be thou inJiruAed, 0 Jerusalem, left my foul de-

part from thee: left I make thee dejolate, a
land not inhabited.
ON hearing these words, as a ground of me-

ditation on a day of falling, of contrition

and repentance, to avert national calamities, I
doubt not but every one of us, as' usual, will
endeavour to throw the blame from himself,
and fix it on his neighbour. The poor will ac-
cufe, in their hearts, the rich and the great,
for their pride, and luxury, and inhumanity;
and the rich and great will, in like manner,. ac-
cufe the poor, for their faithlessness, their in-
gratitude, and their double dealings. They
who govern, will accuse those who are govern-
ed, of difaffetion, wantonness, and sedition;
and the governed will accuse their governors,
of corruption, and venality, and the abuse of
their power. But we mufl not forget, my bre-

A thren,

thren, that although the imrnedaie caunel of
the downfal of states may be ascribed to the ini-
quities of particular orders of men, yet it is the
accumulated guilt of a whole nation, colleated
often for many years, that forms the procuring
cause, in the counsels of the Almighty, of the
dreadful calamities that befal nations.

LET us then lay aside all partial and particu-

lar views, till they fliall rife before us.with full
convidion, in tracing the history of our present
state, and, with the blessing of God, turn our
thoughts, for a little, on the following obferva-
tions,' which appear naturally to arise from:the
iwords of the Prophet.

1 thefirft place, That the Almighty governs

the world, not merely by general laws, but by
constant superintendence and frequent interpo-
fition.

Secondly, THAT he gives long warning of ap-

proaching calamities, and waits with patience,
to try if men will be inftrudted, and repent.

'hirdly, TIAT fin is the cause of all natibnal

calaniities, and if perfilled in, will provoke the
Almighty to make bh foul depart from them.

Fourthly,

C :3

Fourtbly, THAT a consequence of this depar-

ture must be, that the kingd m,'Jball become de-
solate, and tbe la d not inhabited.

AFTR. which, I shall apply this fubjdet to
our prefen state.

MY jirjl observation is, That the Almighty

governs the world, -not merely by general laws,
.but by constant superintendence and frequent
interposition.

WERE we to review the hiltory of the world,

we should find this great truth clearly manifest-
ed, that though God hath eftabliihed order in
the universe, and a chain of causes and effets
which link all things together, invisible indeed
for most part to mortal eyes, yet He frequent-
ly interposes in an extraordinary manner, to
demonitrate that He attends to -human affairs,
and to-create constant awe of, and dependence
upon Him. The history of the Jews, which
Jias been preserved by divine Providence for
this purpose, and with which you are bed ac-
quainied, affords the clearest proof on this sub-
jee.

You muf have observed out of what small
beginnings Jehovah reared the people of Israel,

till

L 4

till they'became a mighty nation: With what
tender care he brought his vine out 'of Egypt,
when it was a feeble plant, and nourished and
watered it, till it became a mighty tree. The
great empires of the world were made subser-
vient to the designs of Providence in their be-
half. It was the will of God, that even Alex-
ander the Great should feel some refpeOt for
that obscure nation, and 'that 'he and his fuc-
ceflors should protect them. It was the fame
Divine though Tnvifible Power, that direted the
Romans to preserve their liberty against the at-
tempts of the latter Kings of Syria, till Jesus
the Meffiab Jhould come, and when him with
bloody bands they bad crucified andlfain, these
very Romans became the instruments of Divine
Providence finally'to exterminate that impeni-
tent and ungrateful people.

THE fame hand of God is visible in the pro-

grefs of Christianity. You must ,have observed
with what design, the Almighty seems to have
united all the nations of the known world un,
der one empire, to make it subservient to the
propagation of the gospel. And when the fame
Roman empire, for the space of three hundred
years, persecuted that new people of God, which
grew up in all its immense extent, those perfecu-
tions confirmed and etablifhed the Christian

Church,

s 5]

Church, and made her shine gloriously in the midst
of herfaith and patience. Thus the leajl of feeds
became a mighty tree. Thus, by means seeming-
ly inadequate and improbable, the word of God
pnightily grew and prevailed.

COULD we take an exat survey of the history

of the world, as by means of the sacred books
we are enabled to do of this single nation, it
would fully confirm the observation we have
made, that whether it proceed from the chain
of causes and effects, or from the more particu-
lar interposition of the Almighty, that empires
and kingdoms rife or fall, yet all depends on the
secret designs and operations of Providence. It is
the Almighty and'all-wife ruler of the world who
prepares events in the molt distant causes. Urn.
expected success on one occasion, leads to confi-
dence and presumption on another. The vir-
tues of patriots bring nations to that degree of
prosperity, which tends to such corruption of
manners, as generally proves fatal to those very
talents and qualities that produced it.

THE empire is now to be overturned; the

minds of men become degenerate, and all their
counsels are irregular, weak, and unitable.
Egypt, heretofore so wife, when her ruin drew
pigh, as we read in the Prophecy of Isaiah xix.

became

L[ 6

became weak arid feeble; and 'ber heart melted
within her, and her Jpirit failed in the midJI of
her:: And the Egyptians fought. every one againJf
hit. brother,. city against city, and region againjI
region: And tbey fought to idols, and to charmers,
and to them that had familiar spirits. Because
the Lord had mixed irresolution and change-
ablenefs, and fear, into their counsels. Egypt
knows no longer to which hand to turn; she
is undone.

HE who ruleth in Heaven, is the Blefed and

only Potentate ; the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords; and they who rule upon earth, be they
many or few, who hold the sceptre, must al-
ways feel themselves controuled by a Superior
Power. All their views and operations are im-
perfet, and unexpeted events proceed from
all their designs: For they neither can disco-
ver the preparations that are made in the ages
which are pall, nor foresee the course which
futurity may give to all the plans of human de-
vice. For God alone reignetb unchangeable, and
holdeth all events in his hand.

MIlfccond observation is, That God giveth

long warning of approaching calamities, and
waits with patience to try if men will be in-
ftruded, and repent.

TIlE

[i7

--THE history of the Bible furnifhes.many corin
fpicuous proofs of this observ.ation.' How great
was the patience of God towards the old world,
when He waited, in the days of Noah, for the
space of one hundred and twenty years ? How
great was his patience with refpet to Sodom
dnd' Gomorrah ?, For. when the cry of their
fins had reached Heaven, and called loud for
vengeance, yet God is represented as coming
down from Heaven to earth, to enquire- into
the truth of the report, and fee whether thiing
were altogetber according to the coy that .ina
come up unto Him. And when every thing was
found as bad as possible, He is represented as
still willing to save them, bad there been but-
ten righteous in these wicked cities.

WHAT can be imagined more flow, and mild

and merciful, than the proceedings of Divine
justice. against a sinful people ? God is represent-
ed in scripture as taking a long time to make
ready his bow,' and to whet his glittering sword,
before his hand taketh hold of vengeance. Many
a time he threatens and lifts up his arm, before
he gives the fatal blow. And' when good men
interpose, to prevent the execution of his
wrath, he confiders it as the'niofm mdritorious
service. Therefore he said, 'speaking of the
Israelites, Ps. cvi. 23. Thkat had not Moses, his

cbofen,

chosen, flood before him in the breach, to turtr a-
way his wrath, he Jhould have defiroyed them !
And how does he receive of Phinehas, as a most
acceptable service done to him, and which he
hardly knew, speaking after the manner of men,
sufficiently to reward, that he had put a flop to
his anger againit, the people of Israel; as you
r may fee in the 25th chapter of Numbers.

THUS did God deal with his people Israel;

and thus has it come down to us as an example,
purposely recorded, 1 Cor. x. i. for our admoni-
tion, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

OF this aftonifiing patience of God, there is

a lfriking example in the context, for after God
had threatened deftruiion to Jerusalem for her
manifold and heinous crimes, he nevertheless
gives her a merciful warning, to prevent the
threatened ruin, by repentance, ver. 6, 7. Thus
hath the Lord of hoisfJsaid, Hew ye down trees,
and cast a mount against yerufalem: This is the ci-
ty to be vifited,Jhe is wholly oppreffon in the midst
of her. As a fountain cajteth out waters, foJhe
cajieth out her wickednefs.-Before me continual-
ly isgrief and wounds. Then follow the words
of the text, Be thou inJlru led, 0 Jerusalem,
left my foul depart from thee, left I make thee de-
solate, a land not inhabited. Be thou inftru&ed,

0

O' Jerufalei! t 'i tihis last countel ai8' waih-
ing, which by my servant the Prophet, thdu
hail been Offered for the space of foity yeairs,
and still mayest thou' prevent the dreadftul cala-
mities that arie coming upon thee.

MY tbird observation is, That fin is the cause

of all national evils, and if persisted in by any
people, will provoke the Almighty to caute his
foul depart from them.

THIS is so clear and obvious, that it hardly

needs illustration. General corruption of man-
ners at firfi unhinges all government, for it
makes men weary of the controul of laws. As
the private vices of the individual make him
daily trample on the laws of God and man,
they make him spurn at the regulations of po-
litical order, and ready to rebel against them,
when his interest or pleasure Ihall seem to make
it necefiary for him. Universal depravity leads
to irreligion, for men love darkness better than
light, wben their deeds are evil; and when God
is no longer acknowledged among any people,
it is tirme that his foulJ hould depart from them.
This is the greatest provocation they can give
the Almighty. They are no longer guided by his
counsels: They are left to the devices of their
own hearts. And when a due refpet to religion

B no

[ 1o 3

no more pervades and conducs the counsels of
any nation, you may be certain that they are
in the high road to perdition. They have loft
their light, and must wander in darkness. They
have loft that sacred inffuece which overawes
and restrains mankind and must remain at the
mercy of human passions uncontrouled.

WITH what anxiety did the wisest people of

antiquity, though ignorant of the true religion,
inculcate the principle in general ? What pains
did they take to preserve a sacred regard to
oaths in the minds of the people ? and by how
many costly ceremonies did they not daily re-
mind them of their :dpendence on the gods for
every success ? And how observable is it, that
when that false philosophy prevailed, which ei-
ther denied the existence of Deity, or his pro-
vidential care of the world, they soon became
depraved, and loft the love of their country
with their refped for the gods, and suffered
their boasted Republic, with but little firuggle,
to end in a military despotism. Be thou in.
fJruraed, 0 Jerusalem, left my foul depart fromn
thee.

MYfourth observation is, That the certain

consequence of this departure must be, that the
kingdom Jhall become deflate, a land not inha-
bited.

THIS

L " J

THIS must infallibly be the consequence,

when there is an end of order and good govern-
ment; for men will not long remain where nei-
ther person nor property are secure; and, n
the contrary, it is a certain pioof, that the go-
vernment is not radically wrong when ,he ccun-
try is populous, and when the inhabitants are
industrious and prosperous; for the end of go-
vernment is the happinefs.of the people.

THE abolition of religion, and the dissolution

of government, likewise engender faction and
strife, and rapine and bloodIhed, which draw
down the vengeance of the Almighty, and
render a nation an easy prey to its external
eneniies. With refpeft to that nation to whom
this prophecy was directed, the sacred historian
leaves us in no doubt of what besel them for
their impenitence; for the city of Jerusalem
and the temple were taken and sacked by Ne-
buchadnezzar King of Babylon, and the people
led into captivity, and the land left in defola-
tion. And with refpeft to their second capti-
vity, which happened long after they had been
restored and led back to their land, by Cyrus
King of Persia, it pleated God to raise up an
historian of their own nation, who was perfo-
nally engaged in their wars, and has left a faith.
ful narrative of the particulars of the siege,

and

I 2 1?

and of Etheir fhal qcftructSio.by Titus Vef-
pafian.

IN his preface to this tragical history, Jose-

phus tells us, " That all the calamities and mif-
"fortunes that the world had ever seen, cpm-
"pared with this of the Je ws, were but flight
, and inconsiderable." Of which he fayp, their
civil dissentions were the immediate cause, and
which they continued with little interruption
of bloodlhed and naffacre of one another. Du-
ring the whole length of the siege, amidst their
party rage, they scorned and mocked at all ho-
ly things, and derided their sacred oracles as fa-
bles. Which made their hiitorian conclude with
this character of them, "That as he thought no

city had ever suffered such things, so po na.

"tion, from the begihning of the world, did
"ever so abound in all manner of wicklednefs
"and iniquity." A certain proof that God's
Jful was departed from fbem.

THus, as I propose4, have I endeavoured to

illustrate those general observations I made from
the text. It remains, that I fliould make appli-
cation of the subjed to the business of this day
of failing and humiliation. The matter is co.
pious, and at hand; but you are already so well
informed, and I have so frequently thought it

my

[ I3, 1

iy duty to touch upon. the subjet, that I Thall
Dnly at this time briefly trace the history of our
present situation, mark those fins that may be
supposed to bring on such dire calamities as be-
fel the Jews, and point out the warning and in-
Aruaion which we may derive from history and
experience, to regulate our present and future
conduct.

IN executing what I sirss proposed, I Ihall

lead you no farther back than to the conclusion
of the las war, which we carried on against our
revolted colonies with so much inauspicious con-
duct, and To many adverse events.

You mayall remember howmuch humbledand
dismayed we receded from this contest. Our
strength was wafted, our funds exhausted, and e-
ven our credit at the lowel ebb. Our commerce,
it was fuppofed,had received a deadlyblow. The
most fatal presages were entertained in the hour
of our ihame and disgrace; and few they were,
indeed very few, who fRill had hopes that Britain
might again rear her head among the nations.
But if it is true, that when pride cometb, then
copneSlb'ame; it proved equally so in our cafe,
That before honour, is humility.

IT pleased God soon to revive our drooping
spirits, and to give us rulers and counsellors who

gained

[ 14 ]

gained the confidence of the nation. Our stock
and industry opened for itfelfnew channels; our
commercial spirit was restored in all its energy;
and our fears of being undone, by the lots of
our colonies, were soon dissipated. Our enor-
mous debts, by wife management, were rapidly
diminishing. We reared our head again among
the nations, and escaped two threatened wars,
by timely and vigorous preparation. We reco-
vered, and secured our ancient allies; and, with
a prudent policy, acquired new ones. The pro.
fperity of the nation, and the peace and fulness
of bread, and happiness of the people, were ne-
ver so great in any period of our social union.
In nb aera of the world, indeed, and in no re-
gion of this globe, was ever the multitude of
men so free, prosperous, and happy.

We had already forgotten our late state of hu-

miliation, and were ready to fay with Job in his
prosperity, IJhall die in my nefj, and multiply my
days as the fand.-I break the jaws of the wick-
ed, and I pluck the spoil out of his teetb.-My
root isJpread out by the waters, and the dew lies
all night on my branch. My glory isfreh in me,
and my bow is renewed in my hand. Job xxix. 18.
&c.

NOT

[ 15 1

NOT many months had elapsed since all this,

and tenfold more we boasted in all the arro-
gance of national pride, forgetting the viciffi-
tude and change that is attached to all things
under the fun. You know the sequel, my bre-
thren. The history of it is too recent to be for-
got or mifunderfPood. The cloud which had
gathered in the south, at last burst out, threaten-
ing ruin to the neighbouring nations. The
minds of the lower orders, had been prepared
by repeated factious appeals from the decrees of
the Legislature, to their better judgment. Se-
ditious writings were thrown in among them.
Daily papers of the most pestilent nature aug-
mented the flame. Foreign correspondence en-
couraged the levelling spirit. T hey became
ripe for revolt. They believed the false pro.
sessions of the devouring monster, which, un-
der pretence of fraternising the world, meant
to give law to all nations. They were ready to
rife around the mock Tree of Liberty, though
planted by a foreign hand.

HENCE the arrogance of the new usurping

Republic. Britain united is a match for all the
world, but divided by facion, may become a
prey to every invader. Hence their attempt on
a neighbouring Protestant ally, that they might
direct her naval power against us; and hence

their

[ i6 1

(heir declaration of war, Without any just pre.
tence, though we, forgetful of their treache.
rous interposition in our dispute with our colo-
rnies were far from intermeddling in their in-
ternal divisions. It pleased God, by a blessing
on our vigorous counsels, and on our arms, and
those of our allies, to disappoint their favourite
projec, and for that time to turn the battle from
our gates; and during the reft of the year to
crown us with various victories and conquests.
But let not him that putteth on his armour, bonaf
like him that putteth it of. We must confess,
that our lofty thoughts have been thrown down,
and that our dream of uninterrupted prosperity
is at an end. We are moR unexpectedly en-
gaged in a war with the most powerful nationrin
the world, the termination and consequences of
which it is impossible to foresee. Ourbefl hopes
of being soon relieved from it are, under God;
derived from that' spirit of diflenfion and anar-
chy which prevails atong them, and their total
renunciation of those religious and moral prin-
ciples which bind men together, and their ac-
tual commiflion of every dreadful crime, that
can provoke the Almighty, and make his foul de-
part from them.

How we have brought upon ourselves so great
a calamity, is a fubjecd of serious inquiry on

such

[ 17 ]

such a day. Our fins are the cause; nothing
else can interrupt the course of divine favour.
Let me briefly mention such as are most likely
to bring upon us the dire calamities with which
the prophet threatens the Jews. The

First I shall mention is, our ingratitude to

God, by whom we have been so highly favour-
ed, and our spirit of murmuring and discontent.

HERE, if your time allowed me, I might enu-

merate the many national dangers we have efca-
ped, and the many blessings we enjoy. I might
delineate that admirable constitution of govern-
ment, the work of ages, the result of the wis-
dom and courage of our forefathers, by means
of which we enjoy freedom and security, both
personal and political, beyond any nation under
heaven. I might dwell on the peculiar felicity
of this constitution, which has so happily united
the three simple forms of government, which
has feleded the best parts of each, and ba-
lanced them so nicely, that none of them can
exceed its limits, because they are all defined
by the laws; which laws are enated by com-
mon consent, whilst the execution of them is
entrusted to a body of judges, separate from and
independent of the Legislature. I might re-
mind you of the happy and flourjfihing fiate

C you

C is 3

you have so long enjoyed, and of the Innumerable
bleflings which have been conveyed to you
through the channels of civil and political order.

WITH such great advantages, with such pe-

culiar blessings, what might not have been ex-
pe&ted from us in gratitude, or required in wife
improvement ? but alas! we have not only Wmif-
employed our talents, but have provoked God
by committing many heinous fins. What gift
of heaven have we not abused, turned against
the hand that gave it, or perverted from the
purpose for which it was given ? Our nation-
al prosperity has swelled us with arrogance and
pride. We have made our wealth subservient
to luxury and dissolute manners. Our liberty
has degenerated into the most ungovernable li-
centioufnefs, and that government of laws in
which we gloried with so much justice, we
have to the utmost of our power subverted, by
our contempt of all the restraints of law.

BUT not only have we shown our ingratitude

to God, by the abuse of his blessings, but by
murmuring and discontent, and even by denying
the exijence of those bleflings, which of all of-
fences is the most provoking to a benefactor.

MANY among us have listened to the false
assertions of those who having nothing to

lose,

[ I9 1

lose, either of charaSter or property, hage
been long endeavourihg to make the populace
of this country believe, that they are more
wretched'than any nation; that their natural
rights are withheld' from them, and their ac-
quired privileges torn away; that they are op-
prefled with intolerable taxes; that their King
iS-a cruel tyrant; their nobles' degenerate and
fe'Vile and base; in short, that they are wholly
ruined and uidone; every one of which bold
aflertidns ate false or greatly exaggerated.

FOR, with refpe't to taxes, which no doubt

have been increase'd, by means of the wars in
which we were engaged, with the almost unani-
m'ous consent, however, of the nation, yet the most
prudent care has been taken, that they shall as
little as possible assec the labouring poor; for it
has been demonstrated, that a person in that
condition, if he lives with becoming frugality,
has not to pay in taxes for all he purchases
during a whole year, above the value of the
wages of five days labour. It is true, that the
price of some' of the necessaries of life is
railed; but that rife, it must be observed, bears
but a very fnrall proportion to the rife of the
wages of labour. Whilst some of the most
common articles of living are not at all raised,
and some only by a third or a fourth, you must

admit,

[ 20 3

admit, that the wages of labour in every in-
fiance has been doubled, which has mended
your situation much more than could have been
imagined by any one who had not been a wit-
ness, (as I have been), how your fathers and
grandfathers lived before you. ·

No better foundation has that reproach, with

which the enemies of our peace and happiness
endeavour to irritate the minds of the commons
against their superiors, particularly the Order of
nobility, by traducing them as infamous for
vices of every kind, and especially for pride and
inhumanity. Nothing can be more contrary to
truth than this assertion. The nobility of Bri-
tain have their faults, because they are men.
But I will be bold to fay, that their characers
in general, will fland a comparison with those of
any other order of men in the kingdom, for
many of the prime qualities of man, particular-
ly for a delicate sense of honour, a nice regard to
probity and truth, and a generous beneficence and
kindness to the human race. As for luxury and
prodigality, and debauchery, the common vices
of the opulent, you know that the nobles are of-
ten far outdone by those who are many degrees
their inferiors, who assec to imitate the man-
ners of their betters, without having any of their
virtues to dignify or reitrain them. Were we

to

[ 21 J

to search into and enumerate the vices of the
poor, you would find that catalogue still larger,
and of a deeper dye. But charity disposes us to
cover theirJins, till they become so clamorous a-
gainft all who are above them, as to provoke
justice and truth to retaliate in its own defence.

SUCH are the insidious devices by which the

enemies of our happiness endeavour to prepare
your minds for the total overthrow of fubordina-
tion, the subversion of property, and the intro-
duction of universal anarchy. No wonder they
are so bold, when they have not even spared our
most gracious King, the pattern of every private
virtue, whose reign is the acknowledged model
of mild and legal government ?

Afecond fin, which, if carried to excess, mult

produce the greatest national calamities, is a
spirit of faction and party.

A party spirit is inseparable from our free con-

rtitution, and when kept within due bounds, is
salutary to the state; for a prudent jealousy of
sovereigns and ministers keeps them anxiously
on their guard, not to infringe the rights of the
people, and raises a nice feeling of liberty, and
a vigilance against encroachments in the minds
of all. But when this party spirit becomes sac-

tious,

[ 2a 3

tious, when it sets no bounds'tb its oppofitidn,
let the measures' be ever fb necessary, then it' en-
courages dfapffetion andfedition, which are'nibft
likely to end in revolt'and'rebellion. Happy and
rever'd be tbofe diJingui/hed Patriots who have
been able to draw the line between falutary.op-
position and dangerous fation, who have with-
drawn from their' ancient afibciates; when they
thought their country and: the conflitttion in
peril, and have thereby opened' the eyes of their
niimerous friends, who look up -to them for an
example.

NOT so the deluded party among the Corm-

mons, or rather ihould I call them, the Deter-
mined Band of dark Conspirators, who first ap.
peared by expressing their harmless with for a
Reform, which they did not understand, and
then, under the specious name of the Friends
of the People, to attract the multitude; and
lastly, when they became more daring, after
the French had declared war, and promised
them assistance, when they assumed the proud
Title of the Britih Convention, with the avowed
purpose of forming a league among the people;
for overturning the constitution, and introdu-
cing such a republican anarchy as that of
France. The civil magistrate at last took the
alarm, and with that justice which the danger

called

23

called for, and :the laws authorised, have in,
flited deserved punilhment on some of the ring-
leaders.

AND now it were madness in the extreme,

for any such enemies of their country, openly
to ihew themselves, till such time as their boast-
ed deliverers arrive. In the mean time, it is
your duty to be jealous and vigilant, to disco-
ver their secret counsels, and to watch their first
motions; for if their designs are successful,
what man is there among us, who has but even
a cottage he can call his own, whose property,
or person, or life, would be secure for a day?
And for what is it that this dreadful overthrow
is to be effeted? Equality of rights we fully
possess already. The King is not more secure
in his right to his palace, than the labourer to
his hut: And for preferment, there is but one
ltation in the kingdom, (which is the throne,
for the fake of public peace), to which the low-
eft person in it may not successfully aspire, if
he has ambition and ability. It is then the le-
velling principle that atuates there men. It
must be equality of property that they aim at.
But this plan cannot be carried through, with-
out the utmost violence and injustice, and cruel-
ty and bloodshed. And how long will such e-
quality last, after it is obtained ? Only while J

anarchy

[ 24 ]

anarchy and war prevail. When they subside,
and whenever peace and permanent government
are eftablilhed, property must be again secure;
and whenever that is the cafe, a few will be-
come rich, and many will remain poor, as it has
been since the beginning, and will continue to
the end of the world.

A third fin which gives room and occasion

for the last mentioned, is the disregard of the
public, and the extinction of the love of our
country.

THIS is an evil that precedes the fall of na-

tions. While the love of a country remains in
vigorous exertion, the fate of empires must at
least be suspended, for it is the most unconquer-
able of all the passions. But unless when.zeal
has been excited by a seditious spirit, with dan-
gerous views, there has been such a total indif-
ference about public good, openly avowed by
some, and initilled into the populace by filch
insidious arts, that this pristine virtue seems to
be loft altogether, and buried in felfifhnefs and
avarice. In great empires, such as ours, with
all the arts of life in perfection, and the most
flourifling commerce, luxury makes rapid pro-
grefs, and corrupts the manners of men. All
ranks pursue pleasure, and the gratification of

vanity,

a25 ]

vanity, with impetuous desire; and to fulfil
that desire, seek after wealth and riches with a
rage that seems to approach to madness. They
lose fight of the public in the midst of those in-
terested views, and there seems not to be one
noble, generous, and difintereited person in the
world.

THIS general itate of society gives occasion

and encouragement to the ambitious and design-
ing, not only to palliate their own vices, but
to seduce the multitude to become their tools,
by making things seem worse than they are.
Till at last that portion of intelligence and vir-
tue, which the Almighty has infused into all
nations, breaks forth in times of imminent dan-
ger. The few wife and good, who love man-
kind and their country, are roused into exertion.
The latent sparks of the patriotic fire are ex-
cited. The multitude arrested with her words
of truth and soberness, as happened so lately in
this affrighted land, awake from their delusion,
and faction detected, abaihed and terrified,
shrinks back into the gloomy caves of sedition
from whence file sprang.

THEfourth and InJa fin which I shall men.
tion, by which we may provoke the Almighty

D Is

C 26 ]

to make his foul depart from us, Is the abuse of
our religious privileges.

WERE we to take a view of the History of our

Church, we should find abundant reason to bless
the interpofinghand of Heaven on many occasions.
From the first dawn of the Reformation, we
had in this part of the united kingdom, the most
violent itruggles to maintain against the civil
power, as neither the vices nor virtues of our
Princes, were interested in our behalf. And
even after our Sovereigns were of the Reformed
church, they had retained such an aversion to
our mode of worlhip and government, that we
endured the fire of persecution through the
greater part of las century, and yet we were not
consumed.

AND when it pleased God in his mercy to

fend us a deliverer at the Revolution, to free us
from slavery and arbitrary power, he at the
fame time did not forget this suffering church,
but directed that wife prince to yield to the
wilhes of a zealous and faithful people, and to
re-establish our favourite form of worship and
church-government amongst us. From that
happy period, we date our religious as well as
our civil freedom; for then it was that tolera-
tion first introduced true religious liberty.

BUT

27 ]

BUT alas! have we not abused this precious

boon from heaven, so much wiihed for, and at
first so much prized, either by our neglect of it,
or by endless and fantastical divisions ! As there
is now no outward constraint, some have taken
advantage of that, and so live, as if they dif-
avowed the obligations of religion. The in-
fluence of bad example has but too much de-
scended amongst the lower ranks; for there are
not a few of those, whose chief consolation for-
merly lay in the hopes presented by our most
holy faith, and who are incapable of refiraint
by any other principle, who absent themselves
wholly from religious ordinances. :Whilst a
greater number substituting their own humour
and caprice, in place of reason and conscience,
have separated from those societies of Chriflians,
to which they were originally joined, without
examination and without just cause; and itrange
to tell, it is chiefly among those who think
themselves too pure to join with the eftablifnled
churches in either division of the realm, that
are to be found the most zealous friends of that
dreadful tyranny, which has made the renuncia-
tion of Christianity their badge of fraternit,,
and professed Atheism their test offidelity.

MAY not this neglec of the superior orders,
and their imitators, and the wavering difpofi-

tion

l 2a ]

tion of the multitude in refpea to modes of wor-
Ship, be a preparation in Providence for' ome
dreadful catastrophe, as the just punishment of
such an horrid abuse ? If the higher ranks will
-not take warning from the events that have hap-
pened so lately, and so near them; if they will
not use their influence and example for the pre-
servation of those religious principles which
they confess to be the great bond of society, and
the chief guardian of morality, they muf be left
to feel the effects of their own infatuation. The
judgments of God, unless prevented by a change
of manners, must proceed with unrelenting e-
nergy and effect: For if Jerqfalem will not be
inflrusted, his foul Jhall certainly depart from
her,

THUS, as I proposed, have I briefly delinea-

ted some of those fins by which God may be
provoked to make his foul depart froml us, and
consequently expose us to the judgment of be-
coming desolate, a land not inhabited.

I HAVE only to conclude, by exhorting you

to the duties of the day, which are humble
supplication, and sincere repentance and amend-
ment.

IM

L 29 J

IN private distress, and in public calamity, the

mind of man flies for comfort, and aid and pro-
tetion to the Deity, to that everlaJfing arm which
only can save. But it is impiety and vice that
separate us from God, and piety and virtue that
unite us to him. We must lay aside our fins,
if we would escape impending judgments. We
must perform the duties required, if we would
obtain a return of blessings. We muff be fin-
cerely religious, if we would obtain the protec-
tion of that God whom we adore. We must
love our country, if we would fee her flouriih.
We must lay aside party spirit, ere we can hope
for vigorous exertions. We muff quel domeffic
sedition, before we can as with one heart and
onefoul, or expec to frufirate the machinations
or repel the attacks of our enemies. With trai-
tors in our bosom, every danger is doubled. Let
us rouse that warlike ardor, for which we have
ever been distinguished. Without magnanimity
and valour, wisdom and liberty are but empty
names. Let usfJandfaft, and quit oulfelves like
men, and belirong in the Lord.

Be thou inflruaed, 0 Jerusalem! Let us take

warning from the fate of that highly favoured
nation, to whom this address was originally di-
redted, and which, after repeated trials and de-
liverances, by the most obstinate impenitence,

at

t 30 ]

at last finally loft the favour of the Almighty,
and was driven from its ancient feat, and con-
tinues to this day a wandering people, in con-
firmation of the prophecies, and as a monument
of divine vengeance.

Be thou inJfruted, 0 Jerusalem. Let us look

back to the events of last century, and take warn-
ing from the fatal experience of our forefathers

A Prince of many private virtues, misled by

evil counsellors, and the example of some of his
predecessors, presumed to at contrary to the
laws. A long civil war ensued, in which the
King and his party were worfed. They who
were uppermost, finding it necefTary for their
safety, that the King ihould susser, frustrated
all plans of conciliation, and brought him to the
block. After a short struggle for a settlement
in a republican form, the dispute terminated in
a military (djpotimi, when Cromwell the usurper,
with an army at his back, reigned for seven years
vith a nore arbitrary fw.a' than any monarch
i 1.urope. At his death, his iron sceptre fell
i. le feeble hands of his son, who held it but
for a fewv months, and left the republicans to
ct,, 'd once more for their favourite govern-
ment. .lhe jarring parties, however, could not
agree; but in their turns usurped dominion for

one

[ 31 ]

one year more, in swift succession; the supreme
power being thrice changed within that space.
When, at last, by Divine Providence, one wife
man, at the head of an army, had the sagacity
to provide the only remedy for the diftra&ed
state of affairs, and to meet the almost unani-
mous with of the nation, by calling back to the
throne, the heir of the kingdom.

SOME of you well know, that previous to this

usurpation, and while it lasted, the fame wild
levelling doctrines which of late have poisoned
the minds of the people, and the fame frantic
plans of government, were disseminated through
the kingdom; with this only difference, that
the first were intermingled with a high religious
fanaticifin, whilst those of our days are pervaded
and inflamed throughout, with afanaticifm of
a different kind, with thatfor atheism and infe-
delity. Look back, my brethren, to the blood-
shed and tyranny and diftrations of that pe-
riod, and try, if without the lead provocation,
from grievance or encroachment, you can bear
the thoughts of having the fame scenes ated
over again !

Be thou intru7ed, 0 Jerusalem. Turn your

eyes abroad, and be warned and inftrudted
by what has befallen our infatuated neighbours

ill

[ 32

in so Short a space of time, and hold fast the
plan of government so dearly purchased by our
forefathers, and conveyed to us as our most va-
luable inheritance. Happy was it for us that
our conflitution is so firmly eftablilhed in
the laws of the realm, and in the affiefions of
the people, that it tsood unmoved the first ihock
of threatened danger, and that even the rash
and inconsiderate have had time to observe in the
dire disasters that have befallen our neighbours,
what the dreadful consequences must have been
to this highly favoured isle, had their plans of in-
novation been received and executed. The most
prejudiced must admit, that this frantic people,
not remaining contented with a moderate reform,
and a limited monarchy, with which they began,
have committed themselves to the unruly direc-
tion of a furious mob, who paved their way to
power at first by rapine and blood, by the over-
throw of all order and subordination, all justice
and law, and fill maintain it by the fame ini-
quitous means, with the addition of Atbeiin
profejfed, as any religion must be a check and a
rebuke to their impious deeds. Confider the
fieps in the broad way to deftrudtion, which
they have taken with giganticJirides, and shun
them as the gates of hell, for they lead infallibly
to perdition.

Be

[ 33 ]

Be thou inruEted, 0 Jerusalem. As there is

not to be found in the annals of the world, such
a cruel and bloody tyranny, as for more than
eighteen months past has been exercised in that
devoted country; if you would not fee your
own fertile fields laid waite, and streaming with
blood, and the remaining inhabitants driven or
carried into foreign lands, let me beseech you,
my dear friends, to resist every attempt to in-
troduce such a desolating anarchy among you!
And to this end, you must support this inevi-
table war with unanimity and vigour, with
more than common exertions; for the necessity
of the cafe requires them at your hands. In
this war, you are not merely to fight for
some diflant province, nor in defence of your
allies, nor for the support of your trade, nor
for the honour of your arms; you are to fight
for all that is dearest to man, for your religion
and your liberty, and the power of governing
yourselves; for, this insolent Convention, if they
are able, mean to overturn every government,
and to give laws to the whole world.

FINALLY, my brethren, liften to the advice

of the wife man, Fear thou the Lord, and honour
the King, and 'meddle not with them that are gi-
ven to change. A sense of religion, and a due

E reverence

[ 34 1

reverence for laws and magistrates, are prin-
ciples inseparably united; and in whose ever
breaf they reside, that man will not be greatly
moved, by the projects of the idle, or the plots
of the wicked. Amen.

F IN I S.
