USEFULNESS AND NECESSITY OF A LIBERAL

EDUCATION FOR CLERGYMEN,
A S ER M ON,

FROM MATT. V. 14.

PREACiED IN TIIE TRON CHURCH or EDINIURiH,
BEFORE THE SOCIETY FOR THE BENEFIT OF TIE SONS OF

THE CLERGY, ON TIIE 28. OF MAY, 1793.

BY ALEX. CARLYLE, D.D. F.R.S.E.
CHAPLAIN TO 1llS MAJESTY, -AND MINISTER OF INVERESK.

PUBLItSHED B2^ DESIRE OF THE SOCIET2r.

TO VWHICII IS ADDED,
AN ACCOUNT

OF THE
PBJECTS AND CONSTITUTION OP

THE SOCIETY,

E D I N B U R G IH.
PIrNTED FOR AND SOLD BY WIILLIAMI CREECTI.

AM DCC XCIiI.

# MAT. V. 14. Ye are the light of the world.

A
SE RMONO

MAT. V. 14.

Ye are the light of the world,

SURPRISING as it may seem to be, there
have been some who have thought, that
a learned education was not necessary for
Ministers of the Gospel. Nor has this been
the opinion of enthusiasts alone; for not a
few of the fober minded and truly pious,
have not been able to fee the utility of
the accompliflments of learning to a
Chriifian pallor. And even in our own
days, it has been roundly asserted, " That
" polite literature and elegant erudition

A " are

" are of no use to a clergyman, in the ex-
L ercife of his ministerial duties; and that
C they by no means enter, as an esential
< ingredient, into his pastoral charaCter."

One would have imagined, that the

slightest view of the nature of the office,
might hlve checked the rife of such
ideas; for the Chriflian paflor has unit-
ed in one, what was divided into two a-
mong the Gentiles and Jews. The pontiff
and the philosopher, the priest and the
prophet of those religions, form but one
character in the Minister of the Golpel;
who not only presides in the sacred rites
of our holy religion; but is likewise the
teacher of its doctrines and precepts. At-
tention to the progress of Christianity
might have prevented this error: For
though the twelve apoflles of our Lord
were chofcn from among the rude and il-
literate, to prevent suspicion of imposture,
while the attestation of facds was the prin-
cipal obj et; yet, when the Christian faith
was to be cxtended beyond the bounds of

Judea,

( 3 )
(3)

Judea, the wifdorn of that Spirit, which
presided over the propagation of the gof-
pel made choice of St. Paul for that impor-
tant work, a man bred at the feet of Ga~
maliel; that is, trained up in all the learn-
ing of the Jews, and likewisfe well ac-
quainted with the language and philofo-
phy of the Greeks; as appears from his
writings. The very intlitutions of our
own church, when adverted to, may serve
to correc so abfard an idea; for they have
very anxiously guarded against the igno-
rance of clergymen, no lets, than against
their immorality, by the long course of
fludy they have prescribed to intrants, and
thoie ftrid, and painful, and various pieces
of trial, which they have ordained thern
to undergo, before they can be admitted
into holy orders.

But as, nctwitlhfanding all tlhei argu-

ments, there are flill Ibme who look back
for an example to the firfi age. hecdiefs of
the different rfares of the church, and of
the world; and as uneducated pret:ndcrs

A a are

( 4 )

are too apt to catch the vulgar, I propose
in this discourse, with the blesing of God,
to hsew the usefulness and necessity of a
liberal education for clergymen ; which if
1 am able to do, I shall illustrate one of the
primary objects of this most beneficent
and liberal inflitution. I fliall then,

I. Endeavour briefly to draw the out-

line of that education which befits a clergy-
man; or flhew, wherein a liberal education
may be supposed to consist.

II. I shall endeavour to shew the great
advantages of such an educacion.

II. I fliall make application of the sub-

jc(c to this Society; who I hope will for-
give me, if, emboldened by the duty they
have afligned me, and presuming too much
perhaps on my age and experience, I fiall
offer inftrution to their enllightned minds.

I. I am to point out wherein a liberal
education may be said to consist; or draw

the

( s )

the outlines of that plan of inftrucltion
that befits a clergyman.

It has often of late been the subjeC of

doubt, whether or not the time that is spent
in early youth, with so much labour and
pains, to acquire the knowledge of the
dead languages, is necessary in modern
times, or is ever repaid by any equivalent
advantages. But however plausible the
arguments may be, against this unnecef-
fary waste of time as it is called, in some
other lines of life, yet they cannot poffi-
bly be applied with justice to any of
the learned profeflions, especially to that
of the divine: For the sacred books hav-
ing been written in these languages, it
would be unpardonable ignorance in the
candidate for our profefllon, to be unac-
quainted with them, or to be unable to
study all that is comprehended in the
wide compass of biblical knowledge. Or
how are the sublime beauties of Scripture,
from whence so much internal evidence is
derived, and which is the sacred armou-

ry

( 6 )

ry for the weapons of our warfare, to be
felt or underflood, if the student is igno-
rant ol or a mere novice in, the languages
in which they are written ! To be firmly
eftabliflied himself in the belief of the
f:crptures, and to be able to communicate
the foundations of that belief, in a clear
and convincing manner ; and still more,
to have a decided taste for those lofty
firains of the sublime and the pathetic,
which captivate the foul of man, and
make his bowels to yearn within him, the
Chrif-ian teacher surely ought to be a maf-
ter of the original languages.

Add to this, that the classics in two of

the ancient tongues, have been handed
down to us, with the contenting voice of
every age, as the mofi perfect models of
composition; as the highefl efforts of hu-
man genius; as exhibiting examples of
good sense and taste; and even such glow-
ing pictures of virtue, as are congenial to
the young and feeling mind, and make a
more lasting irnpielion, than can be clone

by

( 7 )

by formal rules. No wonder then that
clafical learning fliould be conrfdered as
an essential branch of a liberal educat;.,n.
So far flould we be fi-om laying afidc the
antients for tlhe moderns, and abridging
the labour of a learned education, that if
there is any defect to be correctedl in ours,
it is that the youth are hurried too Lilt
into science, before they have had time or
maturity enough, to acquire perf:el 11ย ill in
thl;fe languages, or to imbibe part of that
spirit, to catch fonie portion of that celcf-
tial fire of benius, with w'lichl thefc fupc-
rior writings are composeld.

And if our pupil ought to be a mafrer

of the claflics, it follows of course, that
he mufr be conversant in criticifin and
rhetoric, and every branch of the belles
lettres, that he n.ay fully co.n!pre: end the
beauty and lublimity of anticnt conpofi-
tion. I-ere it must be obfirsved tlhat our
vernacular tongue mufu not be negleted.
It was perhaps, by means of their close at-
tention to the study of their own lan-

guagcs,

( 8 )

guages, that the Greeks and Romans attain-
ed to that degree of perfection in them,
which has made their writings of all kinds
the admiration and the models of succeed-
ing ages. We in particular, who speak
and write a provincial dialedc of the nation-
al tongue, that not long ago was hardly
understood in the capital, had much need
to apply with the utmost diligence in early
youth to acquire the pure idiom of that
language in which we speak and write; be-
cause, in more advanced years. it will not
only be a more difficult acquisition, but
may retain an inaccuracy, or a stiffness at
least, which are the marks of imperfection.

When this branch of erudition is finifil-

ed, or towards its conclusion, it will be pro-
per to initiate our student in logic and the
elements of mathematics, as not only ne-
ceffary to exercise his mind in close reason-
ing, and thereby to fhrengthen and im-
prove his faculties, but to enable him to
comprehend the sublime science of natu-
ral philosophy in all its parts, when it is

opened

( 9 )

ripened up to his admiring mind: and
cf;eciay those which in tracing the won-
derful effects of power, wisdom and good-
ness in the diversified fTiame of nature, lead
direily with the mnoic f)lendid demon-
firation to the firit Cauie, that supreme In-
telligence which created and prelides over
tlhe whole.

Thus prepared, with his mind expand-

ed to explore the works of God, our pu-
pil may venture to look within htlilelf; to
fludy the fcicnce of mind or spirit; to in-
vefligate the inteilectual, the ;iive, and
moral powers of man, the molt mytlcrious
and diflicult of all the sciences; that withl
faculties enlarged, and more infallible la-
gacity, he may be able to search to the bot-
tom the principles of ethics and politics,
as they are dif;tlayed with iuch boundless
divcrfity, in the hiIfory of man either as
an individual or in society.

And now, well able to diflinguifh be-
tween truth and faliehood, between cer-

B tainty

( IO )

tainty and doubt, and to mark the line
that divides their boundaries, he may ven-
ture to explore the sublime regions of
Theology, to trace what is comprehensible
by finite, in infinite Mind; to perceive the
connexion between the visible and invisible
world; to deduce natural and revealed re-
ligion from the fame source; and, in the
hiflory of man and his moral agency in
this life, to descry his future destiny in the
next.

And here commences our student's most

arduous tafki, for which all the other parts of
his education are chiefly preparatory; I
mean the study of Theological Learning.
To this he must for several years of his
maturer age, devote his molt serious at-
tention and assiduous labour; for it is
from the inftruc'ion he shall receive, and
the knowledge he shall acquire, in this
important course, that he can be properly
furnished for the defence of revealed reli-
gion, and for the refutation of sceptical
cavils: that he can become thoroughly ma-

fter

( II )

fter of the history and doCtrines of the Re-
formation, and be able to establish the
great principles of Christian faith, againfl
all heretical opinions. ltowfoever great a
proficient our pupil may be in classical
knowledge, or however much an adept in
philosophy, yet, if he is deficient in theo-
logical erudition, he will fall short of
what is expected in his profession, his pro-
per work will be always laborious to him,
and a degree of llightnefs will be attached
to his character as a divine, which may
derogate from his usefulness. But on this
part of education, though in itself so im-
portant, I need not enlarge, as its necefi-
ty is so obvious and inconteftible; but shall
proceed to mention others that may be
overlooked.

Of these let me recommend as a branch

of politics, the constitution and laws of
his country, as a most necefary part of
his fludy. It were well too, if to the gene-
ral knowledge of human nature, our pupil
could add some kl?,noleode of the world;

no t.

( 12 )

not that which terminates in felfifhnefs
and cunning, nor that which may qualify
him to be a ringlea(ler in the vices of the
age, but that kno!ledge of the world
wrhich is so needful to induce politeness of
behaviour, and thole agreeable manners,
which taking rife in benevolence and cha-
rity, mufL nevcrthe!if receive their form
fr-om the practice of iociety, fiomi conver-
Iation and habits w;th the elegant and :c-
fined.

In antient phraseology, the scholar and

the ,gentlelnlan were fy'noniiious terms,
an(d were confidered as inflparalle. In
nodccrn language, this has fbmctilmes bcen
unfortunately changed, for th'e Lnalme of
gentleman las IcenC as nmuci a terml of
obloquy amongl; the rl.vc as that of pedant

1-s been of contempt among the gay; by
.which means the bad qualities only of
eachI, have been generally annexed to the
characers, and a gentleman by the multi-
tude has too often been underiood to be
-menrely a pcri.n illivterat, idle, and mif-

cll.evous,

\ '3 )

chievous; and a pedant acknowledged to
be learned, and heavy, and rude. This
Li:t charaecr on account of a variety of
circumstances was long ascribed to the
clergy of this church, and they were then
not unjustly afraid of the appellation of
gentlemen, as with the unthinking vulgar
of all ranks, that implied licentious man-

elers.

It is high time to change this perversion

of words and ideas ; and the change is bc-
gun: for an accomplilhed gentleman is now
underflood to mean evcry thing praifc-
-worthy in a characecr, to comprehernd all
the qualities that attracd the eflecrl, or at-
tach the afTeEions of mankind, learning
and virtue, agreeable talcnts and poii!ice:
manners. And the opinion of .lC public,
no longer reflrainetd by Gothic nanners
and the exclusive cl:imns of the iipicrior
orders, but equal and free as their laws,
is 'now ready to give every man his due,
in proportion to t :' val:eC oj his talents and
accomplishments.

To'

( 14 )

To make the world of easier access to

our fludent than it formerly was, the vir-
tues and vices have resumed their places
again, after having been long deranged by
the disorderly hands of superstition and
cnthufiafm. It is no longer a crime to be
well-bred, nor ridiculous to be learned.
The amusements of the gay are not held
to be profane, nor the fludies of the grave
to be absurd or useless. The muses have
replaced the graces in their train, and re-
covered their wonted attractions. But if
hypocrisy has pulled off her disguise, and
the catalogue of fins extends no farther
now than to things prohibited by the law
and the gospel, surely the more liberty
the manners of the age allows our fludent
in things lawful or indifferent, so much
less temptation has he to overleap the bounds
of 'wJhat is rbiddenz, and follow fashion-
able dissipation; so much the stronger in-
ducemment, to preserve that professional
decorum which becomes his dignity. But
why should I dwell longer on this imper-
ted delineation ? The luminous method of

intlruction

( Is )

inf-rution, prescribed in our universities,
and executed with so much honour and
success, is a far better guide than any im-
perfect sketch of mine can be. What I
mean to inculcate is this, That the line of
education for clergymen, cannot be too
extensive or liberal, and that of the three
learned professions, ours can least admit
of a limited or narrow fyflem of inftruc-
tion.

The profession of the law, though on

many accounts the leading profession in
this country, is not necessarily conver-
sant in any but outward things, the pro-
perty of man, and the restraints of law
on his actions. The study of the law and
its accessories, is therefore all that is necef-
iary in this laborious profession. T he fame
thing may be said of the medical art, whose
object is the bodies of men. But the bu-
finess of those of the clerical profeflion, is
with the mind of man, and therefore their
preparatory knowledge is of the most bound-
less extent, embracing the whole circle of

science,

( 6 )

.iience, all the objecs and operations of
intelle2c, and all the objects and motions
of the will and the paflions; for each and
every one of them, m.ay occasionally serve
as useful inflruments in the Chri/lian orator's
vocation; which is, by enlightning the minds,
and purifying the paflions of men, to make
them wife and virtuous and happy. 'c
are the light of the worlJi

Add to this, that the operations and es-

fcds of the two other profefions are at
ian end and cease forever, rwhen the tenure
of all earthly goods is cancelled by the
hand of death, and when the body is laid
in the grave; but those of the Christian
philofbpher, while they tend to make the
rich man haplpy n b7c'nevolence, and the
poor serene and contenltd tvith hope, and
the sick and .fflictcl patient -nnmarnani-
n-tius through faith, even in this life, pro-
vide for them all in the life to come, zwhat
'ye has not feel;, nor ea eard, wvhat it hath
not entered into the lheart of mian to conceive,.
joy zimeneakab/e amld everlI;ing and fidl ol glor'.
But I come

Iln

( 17 )

In the second place to point out the

great advantages of such an education; and
here i shall be confined to three particulars,
as it refpeds a clergyman's personal cha-
racler; as it refpeds his fitness for the
office; as it may prove ornamental to the
society.

_si, I shall confider the advantage of a

liberal education,as it reipeds a clergyman's
personal character.

Mankind may be divided into the edu-

cated and uneducated, learned and igno-
rant, wife and foolifil; and it is obvious
to which division the preference must be
given. For though it does not neceflarily
follow, that all the learned are wife, and
all the ignorant foolifhl; yet, in the opi-
nion of mankind, there is a marked fipe-
riority attached to theformer. 'Tej7all be as
Gods, said Satan to our firit parents, 7,when7
he temptedthem to ta/le of the tree of know-
ledge. Riches and poverty, the moit ob-
vious of all divisions, mark the lines of

C powerC

(18 )

power and of dependance; but for refpe&
and authority in all the important affairs
of life, for advice in perplexity, for coun-
fel in danger, for every office of weight
and confidc'-tion in human society, the
advantages of a liberal education have ever
been acknowledged. /[ hen the city is be-
fieged, the izvfe man is rev oted to, even
though he Jhould be psor. Eccles.

In the common intercourse of life, the

educated man must every moment feel
the superiority he polfeiTes, not in the out-
ward marks of respect, which are frequent-
ly denied him, but in the ascendant he
perceivcs he has over the minds of other
men, the mot flattering of all the qualities
and talents a man can pollefs ; becaufl it is
derived fromn no foreign circumilance,
but solely from peroinal merit; because
it is the homage which nature has prefcri-
bed the weak in intellect shall pay to the
strong. It has sometimes been questioned
whether or not the mofl consummate ge-
neral, the hero in war, in common opi-

nion

( I9 )

nion the most splendid of all characters,
ought to be accounted of talents superior
to the philosopher who enlightens the
world ? Of their comparative usefulness
to mankind there has been no doubt: Could
the queflion be solved by the temper and
conduct of kings and heroes themselves,
it would be decided in favour of the lat-
ter; for we shall find that they have not
always been satisfied with the fulness of
their own qualities and glory, but have
often languished on their thrones, for that
kind of celebrity which belongs to the
works of fages and philosophers. Not con-
tented that their actions were to fill the
hi/foric page, and their renown to animate
the poet's lays, they have foinetimes firove,
with vain emulation, to excel them in their
several arts.

But not only in public opinion, but

in his own felf-government, is that strength
of character which is derived from a li-
beral education of the greatest advantage
to a minister of this church. 'Tis in his

C 2 conscious

( 20 )

conscious superiority of wifdorn and vir,
tue, that he is able to maintain his digni-
ty, in that nice and difficult situation in
which he is placed. To mix daily with
the people, and yet be uninfeted with their
manners; to hold the middle course, be-
tween the aufRerity that difgufls, and the
facility that breeds contempt; to have all
the nice feelings of an elegant and enlight-
ned mind, and yet to bear the shocks to
which it is liable, and be denied moit of
the gratifications for which it creates a
taste. To be contfantly firiving with nar-
row circumstances in the midlt of a com-
mercial slate without hope of improving
them, and yet to preserve equanimity, and
maintain a dignity of conduC, sufficient
to draw the respect that is due to his fta-
tion:-Thefe are parts of that arduous un-
dertaking, which ministers engage in,
when they enter into this church ; which
never could be sustained, but for that ele-
vation of mind and force of character,
which is acquired by a liberal education.

'Tis

( zI )

'Tis by this means that he is felf-fatisfied,

even in the midst of the most trying cir-
cumftances that can befal him; that re-
posing himself on the enjoyments of a phi-
lofophic mind, he can calmly bear the ne-
glet, or even the contumely of the world;
and, retiring to contemplation and solitude,
can content himself with the consolations
of learning, the exercises of piety, and the
duties of his charge.

A 2d advantage arising from the liberal

education of clergymen, is, that it fits
them for their profession.

Personal merit in some degree qualifies

a man for every thing; and he who brings
a strenuous, an elevated, and enlarged mind
into any profession, is most likely to shine
in it. Yet there is a certain meetnefs and
fitness of talents and profeflions for each
other, without which excellency cannot
be attained.

It was taught by the ancients that the

good

( 22 )

good and virtuous man alone was quali-
sied to fline as an orator in their public
afifenblies. How much more clearly must
it be understood, that he who is to teach
virtue to others, mufl hinmfelf be eminent-
ly virtuous; thathe who is to inftrud man-
kind in knowledge, must himnfelf be fully
inftru ded ? Both are the fruits of a libe-
ral education; and both are necefliry in
the clerical profession. For though proof sus-
ficient to convince the hearers of any truth
may be at the command of the intelligent;
yet the power of asseting the passions of
men, and of conveying irrefiflable and last-
ing impressions of morality to their minds,
belongs only to him, who to superior know-
ledge, joins the virtues of ths heart. And
though learning and virtue are not infe-
parable companions, yet who so likely
to acquire that divine quality, or to im-
prove it, when already bestowed by theffra-
merof the human foul, as the man who
having trod the whole circle of science,
with enlarged views, has discovered what is
good and ihat is evil; what we ought to seek

after,

( 23 )

after, and to lihun; how contemptible allout-
ward things are; and that the dignity and
happiness of human nature confilRs in the
exercise of its talents and virtues? For the
pious and virtuous man, whose mind is
enlarged and invigorated by the moll ex-
tensive range of knowledge, as he must
have nobler views of all the objedts of
piety and virtue than others, cannot fail
to possess all the feelings that belong to them
with greater poignancy, and perform all
their ads with greater energy, than can
be done by the untaught and illiterate.

As the clergyman's profe.lion is the only

one that is entirely set aside and devoted
to the service of mankind, he had much
need to have. a double portion of difinte-
reflednefs, and thelove of his species; neither
of which can be acquired without that
high nobility of foul, and ample capacity
of heart, which is the portion of thole
who are deeply conversant with all the li-
beral arts and sciences, and have the most
intimate knowledge of the hiitory of man.

And

( 24 )

And yet the first is necessary to make his
labours acceptable and efficacious among
those for whom they are employed; and
the second is necefary to make them easy
and pleating to himself.

But besides the general fitness for his

important office, which is the fruit of a
liberal education, there are particular parts
of it, for which our candidate could not
be tolerably well qualified, without this
previous course of erudition. The inftruc-
tion of the young or ignorant, for instance,
the visitation of the sick, the giving ad-
vice to the perplexed, comfort to the afflit-
ed, rebuke to the profligate, which are his
daily ministrations, how could they be per-
formed, confidering the infinite variety of
characters, unless the Christian pastor per-
fecly understood the intricate ftruture of
the human mind, knew all its fecretreceffes,
and subtle wiles, all the springs of the pas-
sions and motives of action

But farther, when we confider his func-

tion

( 2s )

tion as a Chrifian orator, in what point
can it be viewed, in which the advantages
of a liberal education are not strikingly
manifest? In the course of his tniniflrations
there is almost no fuibjec on which he
may not have occasion to ipeak Univer-
fal knowledge must then be ever at his com-
mand; since he cannot speak to advantage
of what he does not thoroughly know.

I-s intimate acquaintance with t'-:e holy

scriptures, which contain tlh fyife:ni of
docbtines, and the code of laws to which
he niuil confiantly appeal, widch are full
of examples both of a public and private
nature, and are particularly enriched witil
the gofiel of our Lord, the history of his
life and death, and the propagation of our
faitll; the lknowledge of thefc alone, Inuft
ultimately prove a rich provision fur the
Chriflian teacher: for it is chiefly to facili-
tate his just and accurate discernment ds
the sense and design of those books, that
he has made iuch a laborious preparation.

D His

( 26 )

His knowledge of the art of reasoning

will enable our intrant into holy orders,
to define and to prove with accuracy, and
to unravel all the intricacies of sophistry.
His fikill in rhetoric will teach him to form
his orations in such a manner, as best to
answer the purpose of eloquence, which is
persuasion. His being an adept in the fci-
ence of ethics, his perfecA acquaintance
with the ftrucuure of the human mind, will
dire: him to point the scope of his dif-
courses, so as to sway the passions of men,
the Iprings of their condut1. History will
furnifli him with fads and illustrations:
and even poetry itself will be subservient
to his purpose ; because a great part of scrip-
ture is poetical, and because the lofty dic-
tion and figures of poetry have a near re-
lation to those of oratory.

In short, the mind of the Christian teacher

being fully stored with all forts of know-
ledge befbre he begins to compose or speak,
it will not be difficult for him to be a maf-
ter in his art, Without this original fund

of

( 27 )

science, even considerable talents will prove
deficient, and genius itfelffeem barren and
deserted. The most painful preparation
will produce discourses meagre and jejune,
or at belt splendid patchwork of ill-confort-
ed parts. Whereas they who have laid
up in store an ample fund of many years
preparation, can at all times, without any
seeming effort, fend forth fi-om their never-
failing fountain of knowledge, such co-
pious fireams, as flaall enrich and fertilize
wherever they flow.

But not only does this general prepara-

tion of our Christian orator render easy
and effectual his daily labours; but every
part of a liberal education is occasionally
of very particular advantage to a minister.
I flall give an instance or two of such as
appear motl problematical.

Of what use, it may be said, is the know-

ledge of the world, and elegant accompliflh-
ments to a clergyman ? They are not ne-
ceflary in the exercise of his vocation; and

they

( 2g )

they tend rather to raise aversion in the
lower orier-:, and to excite ridicule in the
higher. But this objeclion is taken from
what is too often to be seen, the (aIe&'ation ,of
those qualities, and not the reality. ior
the true knowlcdge of the woorld, and ge-
nuMilne accolmplifhn-icnts, must always ap-
pca. in o f imple a form, as nor to oilend,
but to conciliate. They are a crown and
ornament to all other talents and qualities,
andt these lead the pofieifor ro produce
them with such moodeft propriety as to over-
come the molt pr-judiced. The preach-
er of rz-h.'eou/ncl/s inuft: be converfimnt witi
imen of all ranks, if polilble to goain their
rcfpect and good will, and reconcile therr
to the truth: and that kind of dceeanour
is ikcly to be motI l;iceisful, the prime
quality of lwhich is, that it cannot cfend.

It is our0 duty at all times with our ut-

molt addrcfs, to draw the attention and(
countenance of the upper ranks of life ta
the duties of religion ; and never was it
Ynore io than at pirefent ; vwhen men's

principles

( 29 )

principles of every kind are afloat, and when
the angel with his warning voice seems to
proclaim, J.oe to the inhabitants on earth ! It
is in the nature of man when he is in high
prosperity to dread no reverse of fortune;
when the age he lives in is highly enlight-
ned, to believe that an ara of darkness can
never return. But we have only to look
back into the annals of the world to be
undeceived. Look back, did I/fy ? \Ve have
only to look. at the present moment, to
our neighbouring state, to be convinced
that xras of indifference and fanaticii': ,
of infidelity and fiipe.flition, arc nor fb
ditfant from each other as we apprehend.
And we ihould in such a slate, never cease
to zwar-n with jlrongefq emphasis, those whom
it chiefly concerns, that if they whos- si-
tuation entitles them to keep the teas, in
the rational and manly, and most benevo-
lent s{ystem of faith and worfilip which we
now enjoy, fhiould negleed it; the tilne may
be at hand, iz'.ten they u'ho in all things
otzht to Jo.:/oi, may seize those reins which
drop from feeble and indolent lhands, and

realize

( 30 )

realize again in this favoured isle, the fury
and barbarity and darkness of former ages.

Of what use, it may be said, is political

knowledge to a clergyman ? That teems
entirely foreign to the duties of his func-
tion. And it must be confefled, that to
make men pious and virtuous, through
the knowledge of the truth as it is in Christ
7e/us, is the great objec of our ministry;
for sincere and faithful Christians will of
course be good fubjedts, obedient to the
laws, and refpedtful to magistrates. But
bc.ldes that, it must be observed, that we
are placed in the middle between the high-
er and lower ranks of men, and as an efta-
blilhed church, are entrusted by our coun-
try with the charge of forming the minds
of our people, to a due sense of the blef-
fn.gs of that good government, which we
lave fiorn to maintain and defend; to
inftrudc them in the nature of their rights
and privilcges, as well as their duties ; and
create in them a reverence and attachment
to that constitution by which they hold

their

( 3i )

their religion and liberty, and all that is
dear to them. Besides this necelfary duty
in peaceable times, a minifier of this church
ought to be well enlightened, and firmly
eflablifled indeed, in his pclitical princi-
ples, that he may be able to stand faF:
himself, and to confirm his flock on the
rising of fJich low ring clouds of/edition, as
of late threatened this guilty laind with uni-
versal ruin. Had the clergy been uninfor-
med, or diaTfecreed, or even lukewarm
on that occasion, God only knows what
a dreadful storm we might have now been
encountering! Blefed be his name ! who
hath delivered ius: by who/e mercy it is, that
the proud waters have not overwhelmed our
Jouls !

A 3d advantage to be derived from the

liberal education of clergymen is, that it
may prove ornamental to the society.

Besides thecharacterof individuals, there

are characters annexed to whole bodies of
men which procure them the eiteem, or

fix

( 32 )

fix on them the contempt, of the world.
An ignorant or immoral clergy could not
fail to be disregarded. Church courts that
ihould be variable in their decisions, and
inconsistent in their measures, could ne-
ver acquire or deserve the confidence of the
public. Let us be thankful that the mem-
bers of our church are held in general to
be as learned and pious, and virtuous and
orderly, as any ecclesiastics in the world.
And our fulpreme court has justly obtain-
cd a due authority over the minds of the
people, on account of the uniformity of
its decrees, and the wisdom of its proceed-
ings.

But amidst the luminous sphere of our

ecclesiastical heaven, there are conflellations
that furpats the reft of the stars in fplen-
dor and beauty; which enlighten at once
and adorn. VWhat branch of literature is
there, in which fbme of the ministers of
this church have not excelled ? What sub-
jec of fine writing is there, in which they
do not, as authors, stand in the foremofl

ranks

( 33 )

rank:, which is a prouder boast than all
the wealth and splendor of a hierarchy?
time would fail me filould I attempt to
enumerate the works of the members of
this church, who have fticcefsfully endea-
voured to enlighten the world in alnoft
every branch of knowledge.

Not to mention treatises in defence of

Christianity, or learned difiertations on fa-
cred criticifin, or eloquent illustrations of
every branch of Chriatian dodtrine and mo-
rals, which more immediately belong to
the clergy ;-Who are they who have wrote
the most excellent hiflories antient and mo-
dern ? They are clergymen of this church*.
WVho have given the clearef delineation
of the human undertlanding. and the molt
ihblime system of ethics that the world
has ever een ? They are clergymen of this
church--. Who has written the best lyf-
tern of rhetoric in our tongue, and exem-

E plified

* I)rs Robertson, Ferguson, Watson, Henry.
t Drs Reil, IFrgufon, Campbell, Gerard.

(34 )

plificd it by his most eloquent orations-L .
A clergyman of this church. Who have
excelled in some of the higheftparts of poe-
try t ? Who have been and still are the nioft
illultrious philosophers, mathematicians,
and astronomers of their times, or have ex-
celled in natural history. or have given
the mofl useful leflons in agriculture, the
first of all the necessary arts ? They have
been clergymen of this church.

There were no end in displaying the

laurels so juflly won by the members of
our body. And were I to point out the
sons of the clergy ยง, who fline as flars of
the first magnitude in this contfellation of
genius, which adorns our literary sphere,
i might be supposed to excite envy per-
haps, which I would anxiously shun;
but, surely I would encourage and excite

the

e Dr Blair.
I' IHome and Wilkie.
: Leechman, Stcwart, Playfair, Greenfield, Finlay-
son, Walker, Dickson, &c. &c.

ยง Robertson, Ftrgufon, Campbell, MILaurin, M'Pher-

son, Brydone, Stewart, Hardie, Dickson, Mickle, Thom-
son, Armstrong, Richardson, Simpson, Hutchefon, &c.

( 35 )

the minds of this society, to prosecute
with the ardour of hope, that most liberal
design which they have so happily begun.

Thus it is that the liberal education of /

clergymen proves ornamental to the whole
society, and fiupplies in some degree the
want of wcalth and dignities. Hence, it
is, that we are of some name in diitant re-
gions, and that our order fleds some rays
of glory on our native land. We are
poor indeed, but we are rich in the best
goods a church can poirefs, in the learn-
ing, the manners, and character of its
members Ours. is a fplelndid poverty,
it is the paupecrtas ;/cziida viUorium.

Thus have I fulfilled my purpose,

which was to fihew the utefulnefs and
necessity of a liberal education for clergy-
men.

Let it not be forgot however, that this

education with all the advantages I have
ascribed to it, must be underitood, as de-

riving

( 36 )

riving all the good that attends it, fiom
the blessing of God, and the influence of
his grace. For, though this influence is
generally confidered as chiefly applicable
to virtue, and the power of leading holy
lives, while we ascribe all other talents
and accomplifliments bflely to ourselves
and our own efforts, yet the least refec-
tion will lead us to arrange these also un-
der the divine agency. In himz .we live,
and move, and have our being, without ex-
ception, or limitation; and we Ihall find
that in all ages and nations, any extraor-
dinary fikill in the useful arts, or any ex-
cellent knowledge of the sciences, has been
attributed to the immediate in!piration of
God.

I have only now in the third place, to

make application of what I have said to
this Society.

Is it then true, that a liberal education,

in the moit extensive sense, is of the great-
eit adcvatage to the clergy of this church ?

I'Then

(37)

Then may I congratulate and extol this
society, for having undertaken a wct-k,,
that may ultimately prove of so much u-
tility to our country. For, although your
views are not limited to a tingle profeiioln,
yet, the families of clergymen, having
been long the most fruitful femiinaries ol
the church, it is not improbable that Ihe
may chiefly reap the benefit of your bene-
volence and care. For alas ! without
your sOftering hand, how few of them
will, in future, be able to procure even
that education which the rules of the
church so wifly require !

When the Presbyterian church escaped

fiom the hand of periecution, and was re-
itored to the willes of the people of this
country at the revolution, she partook of
the narrow principles and illiberal spirit,
whlich pervaded the minds of men in that
tumultuous age. The sudden demand
for candidates to fill up every charge, o-
bliged her to receive many, whu were but
half educated, of low habits and vulgar
manners. Popular elecions continued for

some

( 38 )

some time to prolong the evil, and the
clergy were neglcted, if not defiifed by
the superior orders. At length, the in-
trants of the church, having been reliev-
ed from the fear of being reje&ced, for
those very qualities that adhere to a libe-
ral education, began to avail themselves of
their acquired talents and accomplish-
ments. Among the firif, was that dif
tinguifiled person, * who for so lor.g a
period, filled the place where I now stand,
who ventured to leave the beaten trat of
dry fcholaflic preaching, and enforced the
morality of the gofj-el as well as its doc-
trines, with much ability and elocution.
'I'his Tillotfon of the church of Scotland,
as he has been called, was followed, and
even excelled by some of his juniors, in
the art of composition and eloquence,
which he lived to fee and to rejoice in,
with the mort cordial exultation.

' hen began that aira of ability and ge-
nius, which I have already mentioned,

wherein
'L Dr George Wifhart.

( 39 )

wherein so many members of this church
have diftinguiihed thicmnfelves in the an-
nals of literature, and almoit every indi-
vidual in his ieveral sphere, has displayed
the effefts of a liberal and learned educa-
tion. How happy is it for those, far in
the vale of years, who have so long sus-
tained the honour and dignity of their
profession, whose evening was clouded
with the forebodings of the falling slate
of the church, that they can now look
with glad presage, to this most benevo-
lent and generous inflitution, which pro-
mises to prolong the day of light and li-
berality to our order.

Their hopes I trust are not too fan-

guine; for the design of this society has
already drawn the attention of our most
gracious /overeign, whose watchful eye is
upon every corner of his dominions, to
preserve and extend the reign of liberty
and happiness among his people. His
Majesty's approbation was first expressed,
by his grant of a royal charter, by which

you

( 40 )

you are formed into a corporate body;
which was soon after inforced by a most
liberal donation. His illustrious exam-
ple will be followed. For, whatever marks
of degeneracy may belong to this age,
a want of munificence is none of them,
nor a low standard of virtue; else the king
on the throne would not be so much lov-
ed and revered.

Need I address myself to you, my Reve-

rend Brethren, who are so deeply interest-
ed in those who are to reap the benefit of
this humane and beneficent institution,
which along with relief, however, carries
with it a proof of your indigent condition.
The commencement of the wonderful pro-
grefs of this country in industry and
wealth, is within the remembrance of the
-,'oungeft among you. You have contri-
buted to this national prosperity, by those
excellent lelTons of sobriety and virtue, of
industry and oeconomy, which you have
given your people, and by the example
that you have set before them. All ranks

have

( 4I )

have profited by it, but you. The pro-
prietor has more than doubled his rent,
the tradefinanhis flock, the husbandman
and labourer his profits and wages. You
alone remain in general with the ifme
scanty allowance, which was fettled on you
almnoft a century ago : Which then indeed
bore some reasonable proportion to the
state of the country, but is now depreciat-
ed to one third of the value it had then.
Your good conduct, has likcwifc had no
fnall fiare in preserving the peace of the
country, as well as in promoting its pro-
fperity, while it has raised your reputation,
as high as that of any clergy in Europe.
What recompence might have been expect-
ed for your uniform and tfeady virtue ?

You wish for no more, than is abfo-

lutely necessary to preisrve the credit of
your order. You with to be put as nearly
as may be into the fame proportional itate,
in refpec to the advanced opulence of your
country, as was held by your predecessors,
for some time after the Presbyterian church

F wras

(42 )

was restored. Preferment and rewards'
are out of the question. Our eftablihmnent
admits osso few that they need hardly be
mentioned. But set apart as you are, and
devoted to the public welfare and .happi-
ness, and precluded from every lucrative
employment, you surely ought to be raii-
ed above a degrading slate of poverty.
You are entitled to a competency, that
you may perform your duty with due
freedom of spirit; that you may occasion-
ally exercise the evangelical virtues of hof-
pitality and almsgiving; that you may
give your children the rudiments of a libe-
i-al education, and, having nothing else to
befirow, may leave them the credit and pro.
tection of 3your good name.

If this is denied you, ascribe it not to

the want of countenance from those who
hold the executive government of this
country, for they have exprefTid their fa,
your fr r yo, in the moit unequivocal
terms. Afl-ibe it not to the supreme court
of law ; for, governed by a manly and li-

beral

( 43 )

beral spirit, that body must often regret
that their powers are too much limited.
Surely you cannot ascribe it to the ariflo-
cracy of this country; whose generous
minds, expanding with their fortunes,
muff prompt them to impart to you some
Jhall share of their accumulated wealth,
for your faithful services, and to preserve
you in the capacity of serving them more.
Surely, warned by the danger to which
they were bo lately exposed, they mull
wifl to unite you, as much as poflble, to
themselves, and to tie closer the bond of
amity between you; and, foreseeing the
future in the pait, mutl wifely provide a-
gainft the next evil day, when the demon
of sedition lhall rage once more, and the
people again imagine a vain thinlg

Whatever fiall liappen, console your-

selves with this, that the public opinion
is strongly in your favour, and that as
there is no government so much swayed
by opinion as ours, if you preserve your
character for purity of manners, and im-

portance

( 44 )

portance to your country, sooner or later
lhe must do you justice. In the mean time,
should any of you be cut off in the mid-
time of your clays, which is frequently
the lot of the best of men, you are not so
forlorn as many of your predecessors of
late have been, for you may comfort
your elves withr the pleasing profped that
is opened up to you, in the paternal care
and guardianship of this moit benevolent
society. W/hom nzmay the God of theJather-
Iejs prosper and blejs f

Let me conclude by addrefilng myself

to the contributors at large, and all who
encourage this most laudable und-ertak-
ing. If there is any truth in what I have
represented, you have the fatisfacion and
the honour of contributing to preserve, in
some degree of credit, an order of men
noft useful and necessary for the support
of religion, of morals, and good order in
the state. To you it will be owing that
a minister of the gospel, who has laboured
ail his life for the good of fouls, and who,

conscious

( 45 )

conscious of diligence and fidelity in his
laster's work, has nothing to fadden the e-
vening of his days, but anxious fears for
those he ihall leave behind him, may now
meet the last hour with unconcern, be-
cause his children if they are worthy, may
become the adopted children of this Soci-
ety; will be treated with all the prudent
care, if not with the fond partiality of
paternal affection, and with more wisdom
and providence than they could have
fliewn, will be safely ushered into the
world.

You understand the full force of that

faying of our Lord's, It is more blefed to
give than to receive. You look forward
with joy to that great day when all you
have done ffiall meet with that kind inter-
pretation from your Redeemer and Judge,
ForaJinuch as rou have done it unto the leafi
of the/e you have done it unto me. You have
discovered the chief good. You have learn-
ed to anticipate celestial joys; for charity
is heaven begun in the heart of man, and
paradise itfelfis only the consummation of
charity. Amen.

SI N IS.
