Mussh May 3d 1796

My Dear Ferguson

On Looking Over my Unanswered Letters I find one from you Dated in the Middle of March Which reproaches me. I Intended to have wrote you after Two Pleasant Visits we had from your Son Jamy, of Whom I may Say as Justly, That He has been Né pour La Philosophie, as a Print I once Saw Said of Lewis the 14.th That He was Né pour Les Attitudes. Nor to be Sure Jamy is a Douce chield, and Converses very much Like Solomon, & hereafter may prove a very Safe Conveyancer.

As we have Some thoughts of paying you a visit about the Latter End of May or beginning of June, I hope you have Got all your points Settled with your Great Duke & his Factor, and that you are to Enter Immediatly on the Whitsunday part of your Farm. His Grace Seems to have behav'd better to you Than I expected. For tho' He is a Distant Kinsman of Mine (as I am Descended from the Queensberry Family by two Great Grandmothers, much at the Same Distance as you are from that of Argyle) yet I must Confess that by all I could Learn, I concluded him to be a Good for nothing rascal. John Hume & Dr Robertson us'd to Extoll him, tho in very Different Motives, but I could never Acquiesce in their Praises. I Suppose however that having Now past his 70th year [xxx], He begins to have some Concern about his Immortal Soul, and foresees, (for Robertson Said He had a large Head); That you may be of Some use to him in The Regions below, and Introduce him to Some better Company there than Geo. Selwin and Jen. Shaftoe, and the Grooms of Newmarket. I hope & trust that you are now Settled for Life, and have Got a Moderate Farm of 50 or 60 Acres, the produce of Which may redound as much to your profit, as one in the Parish of Kirknewton Described by a Geo. Robertson in his account [of]  the Agriculture of Midlothian.

As I have an occasional Correspondence with the Duchess Buccleugh, Whom I hold to be the Most perfect of all human Beings, can tell you that they are all well, and that Lady Dalkeith holds on as the Friends of the Family Could wish, And I hope by the End of June will bring an Heir to the Family, by & by to inherit the Estate (tho' I trust not the Qualities) of your Great Landlord. But I forget Nidpath Goes to Lord Wemyss, who is one year older than Queensberry, and has Much the Same Ideas of Justice, tho' I believe he has More Charity. But He'll be Good to you if He Survive Q:

Dr Hugh Blair was very ill of the Influenza, & Said He was Going, but He Did not think So, As I know from Certain Circumstances: for He was all the While composing his Sermon Which He is to preach before the Society for the Sons of the Clergy, on Friday the 20th of May, the Prayer Day of the Genl assembly. With much Difficulty I prevailed with him to Undertake it, by the Help of Betty Hunter and John Hill. What can you do better than come & hear it, and Dine with the Society that Day, & rejoice over the Large Collection we Shall Get! Not so Great however as that Wc Dr John Erskine raised tother Day, by his Sermon before a New Society for propagating the Gospel among the Heathen. Their Favourite Missionary was a Glassmaker at Leith: but Geddes, Dr Blacks Friend, had perswaded him to Draw Back: For as the British & Russian and Austrian Missionaries among the French Pagans, have had Such Small Success in Spite of the Weight of their arguments, There was no Great Chance of his Doing much by himself Alone, among the Children of Ham on the Coast of Africa.

John Home is remarkably well Just now, and bears Situations that you or I would long ago have [xxx] away from, with  Remarkable Patience & Good humour.

I heard ‘tother Day that James McPherson has left Sir John his Fine villa near London & his Library. Is this true?

My wife has been wonderfully well thro this Whole Season. April indeed was as Warm as July is for Common. I am in My Ordinary, and Continue to be an Example of Temperance & Sobriety.

We Sent our Nephew on Monday morning to visit his Far & Friends As it must be Determind this Summer what Line of Life He is to be in, I wish'd that his Father should be first Acquainted with him. He is to Return in June. I'm affraid the Wind is first in the East for Some time, Especially as we have a Baltic Fleet of 200, assembled at Leith; and During this Whole Season your Ocean [xxx] have been unfavourable to us. But the Hour of the Departure of our post is arrivd, and I must close, with Saying that my Wife presents her best respects to you, & her Love to the Girls.

I am 
My Dear Ferguson yours affectionatly 
Alexr Carlyle
