Geneva, Sept. 20/1774

Dear Sr

I was Sorry that I had not pleasure of seeing you when you was at Geneva because if any thing had occurred relating to the performance which you do me the honour to translate it coud have been better explained than in writing. I have agreed to retain the Quotations for the reasons you mentioned altho the frequent reference to my own book proper enough in a text intended for the Students at College does not appear equally so in what comes or is offered to the wide world. I have still retained the term Idea as an example of Metaphor in Science, because altho it has become in common Language another word for conception or Notion yet in the Systems of Locke and others it is in fact a Metaphor & if taken for mere notion or conception many of their supposed discoverys fall to the ground appear mere tautologys. As that for instance of Master Locke, that we can have no knowledge where we have no Ideas . I have no Objection to the term Idea when these Systems are not in question. I have yesterday received a few more sheets of your Elegant translation containing the fourth parth or that which treats of Moral Laws and their more general applications, I know how troublesome it must be to you to have any changes to consider after you have been at the pains already to follow a Second Edition: but I beg that you will excuse the Solicitude of an Author who cannot withold his pen when any thing occurs to be added or retrenched. I have done something of this sort which will make it necessary to remit these sheets again to you. I have likewise endeavoured to explain myself in French trusting to your Corrections & I hope that my French such as it is may be less liable to be misstaken than my English. I have Observed that you found difficulty in translating the Title of Compulsory Law & the Articles that depend upon it & that you have thought it necessary to Substitute Perfect Obligation in the place of it. I have many objections to this Language of Perfect & imperfect obligation because which it woud be much too long to trouble you with. My intention was to disstinguish the Dutys that may be exacted by force from those which must come from Choice and good will. I have endeavoured to express this disstinction in my corrections of the Translation, in the words, Loix de Contrainte & Loix de choix. This may be Barbarous French but I beg that you will correct me: but employ any Circumlocution to the same purpose rather than recur to the term of Perfect Obligation which I apprehend has a tendency to Misslead as if the Obligation of a man was not to serve his friend were not as perfect as the Obligation to avoid a trifling hurt to a stranger, yet the last is matter of Compulsory Law & the first not. But I beg pardon for troubling you with this ill written Scrawl which I write on the Booksellers table: & I hope that you will likewise excuse the additional pains which this little work comes to cost you from my being here. I have the honour to be with great Regard Dear Sr

your most obliged 
humble Servant 
A: Ferguson
