[Edinburgh 1772] 

My Dear Sir

I thought to have written a long letter but shoud have done it before. I went out in the morning since which time I have by accidents been detained abroad. I coud not in my last tell you how much I approved of the Pamphlets inclosed. Tell F. that I had some knowledge of his Subject & I am highly delighted with his Picture. I am affraid we shoud not agree so well about American affairs. I think Greenvilles Stamp Act a very unlucky affair for this Countrey. It has brought on a disspute in which this Mother Countrey Countrey as it is very properly called has made a very shabby figure, And I am affraid cannot mend the matter. We are at once Tradesmen & Soldiers to America. When we bully them as Soldiers they threaten not to employ us as Tradesmen. And the Question has now become complicated in the highest degree. I cannot fully Satisfy myself about it: but I wish it had never  been Stated, or that Some way coud now be devised of leaving us just where we were in Possession of of all Monopolys with America. I mean the monopoly of Arms of Government and of Trade & leaving them the Right of Taxing themselves, as the exigency of their Affairs & the Influence of Government here coud Obtain. I dont wish to see this Countrey in Possession of many Provinces a Prey to Rapacity And perhaps an Engine to be turned against this Countrey itself. If this Countrey is to Subsist long enough till Engines destroy it from Abroad. I have often wished to be on the Spot that I might shoot at the flying follys of the times: but I am Sensible of the disadvantage of being at a distance & not hearing of a Subject untill it is too late. I find that People of Letters think there is a dignity in keeping aloof from present affairs & writing only for Posterity. I am of a Contrary opinion. I believe what is done for today has more Effect than books  that look big on the Shelve [. . . . . .] coud help to bring the [. . . . . .] to some innocent termina[tion] [. . . .]

 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Speak like a Stranger and lose the Effect. I am not at hand to repell first attacks or replys. In short I cannot write a Pamphlet but I will continue to write you what occurs to me. Adapt yourself to the meridian of the Place. If I had written the best that the occasion requires I shoud be averse to be mentioned to Grafton  as a writer. I coud come under no Obligations which I am affraid the Step your Friendship Suggests woud seem to Promise.

I promised in my last to recollect if any thing coud be done: but I have Succeeded very Ill in my Recollection: If I am turned out from being what I am I see nothing I am fit for but to be either King or Prime Minister either of which I woud Undertake without any Hesitation even bad as the times are. I am glad I have not Room to Sign this letter.
