Edinburgh Septr 14th 1759

Dear Sir

I am very much obliged to you for the trouble you took in writing me agreeable news, & I wish you joy of the Credit which such successes give to the Ministry among our Politicians. But I suspect you intended to Mortify Home & me who by the Conduct of the Admiralty are like to be dissappointed of our invasion which we both wished for, he to exhibit his Military Genius & I to practice my Philosophy which you may remember is the best calculated for invasions of any Philosophy now extant.

It seems plain that the French intended by Assembling their force to strike a blow in the Channel. And we are told here it has appeared by some papers taken from Marechal Contades that they had planned an Embarkation from the Weser & the Elb when they shoud become Masters of those Rivers, a stroke which woud have probably Surprised us in the North and  I make all the use of it I can here to horrify people who think we can be secure without a universal Militia but to no purpose, for Lord Littleton declared where he dined two days ago with the Provost that the only effectual way of serving our Countrey now was by helping to recruit his Majestys regular troops; which introduced great applause to your City Subscriptions & to the ingenuity of Poultney & Crawfurds double feathers.

Every measure seems to proceed on a Supposition that it is difficult to raise Men for the defence of the Island & those measures create difficultys. I wish by way of experiment that a King of this Countrey woud tell the people that he was threatened with a formidable Invasion, but that he was conscious of his Strength in the youth of Great Britain & desired they would give in their names in every Parish & County. You may easily figure what a list there woud be & what difficulty woud be found in reducing them to the necessary Numbers. I am affraid some of the Methods which are taken to defend us tend to make us not worth  defending. But this is perhaps more politics than you have time to read. I woud have troubled you sooner if any thing had occurred worth your Notice & if I had been less burried in Solids & fluids & Ratios. I like my Situation very well, & begin to admire Sr Isaac Newton as I did Homer & Montesquieu, but it is on Condition that he will let me go as soon as I become a tolerable Professor of Natural Philosophy. Home has been little here since I came, before he went last from Edinburgh he showed me a rough draught of the fifth Act which give me great pleasure but I am still affraid his Work is too great for his time. I have not heard from Robertson what he is meditating for the Subject of further Works; he probably declines being troubled with many opinions. The Wit and ingenuity of this place is still in a flourishing way, & with a few corrections, which however it is difficult to make, is probably the best place for Education in the Island. Ch:Townshend has got great Popularity here. Lord Littleton scarcely showed himself. I am D.r Sr

With the greatest 
Respect 
your most Obedient 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
