Edinburgh 4th Septr 1781

My Dear Sir

In compliance with your request intimated by Peter Roberston. Carlyle has procured the Duke of Buccleughs Roman Sword & I here with inclose a Shape with the Dimensions of it both Blade & Hilt in Paper. You have three patterns. Nº 1 is a Sword which I got made lately at Birmingham from a Pattern the Sword Slipper has by him & from which he told me that he had supplied some Corps in the Service. It cost twelve shillings but what is mettal in the hilt is plated &c. It weighs without Scabbard as you see marked upon the Paper one pound twelve ounces.

 Nº 2. Is the shape & Dimensions of the Duke of Buccleughs Sword The Blade seems to be Roman but The Hilt Gothick or Modern.  It weighs without the Scabbard two pounds four ounces and a half. Nº 3 is the Shape of a Weapon I got made by a Cutler here from the Idea I had of Antiques & drawings &c from imitating too closely a wooden Pattern I gave him. The Cutler made the Blade too heavy & the Hilt was to be made proportional so that the whole weighs no less than four pounds ten ounces & a half. But to make up for this inconvenience it is a Most tremenduous Weapon at either thrust or Cut or rather knock down. My Idea for the use of Such Swords to a modern Soldier was to have in Place of a Scabbard a Parma or oval shield to hang by a Hook to a little shoulder Belt reaching from the right shoulder to the left arm pit. That this shield should be broad enough to cover the Part of the Arm that carries it from the Elbow to the end of the Clenched fist. This I think in a man of considerable Size may be about 16 Inches & in length it  may be about two feet. To Stretch the Arm forward will be enough to parry &c. The Pattern I have got made is much too strong & heawy resists a Ball &c being a Plate of Iron & two plys of bend leather. The one I mean to have made for the Birmingham Sword Nº 1. Will be only a Plate of tinned Iron with one ply of bend Leather enough to resist a Stab or a Cut. I have the Project of a Shield which is to include the Knapsack & resist a Musket Ball but this must be for Some Other Paper.

You will expect to hear what is become of my tottering Nerves & Fibres. As I continued to mend at Bath so I have gone on since my Arrival in this Country & am wonderfully restored to my ordinary feelings so that making some allowance for the Diet you saw me keep & which I still probably must continue I have much animal Strength & my poor Pittance of Intellectual Strength in Statu quo. I mean to  use either however but Sparingly. I am getting my History transcribed And will begin as soon as I can with Safety to put My Lectures in writing but cannot set my Face to the labour of Delivering them this winter. So much for these matters.

I saw McPherson about five minutes when I was at London & our Other Correspondents about a certain bussiness not at all. I am something affraid your Announciation at Mr Edens may have been Mismanaged. I wrote to that effect as I hoped in time to reach before you: but perhaps not & if you are to be at Dublin the Effect if Material may be still to come. Your Friends here are all well. Poor John Home is much mortifyed at some feeling of neglect. I pray you correct it. He is gone to the highlands to see more of the Scene of the never ending War 45. I have brought the Picture from Sir Joshua Reynolds it is a Master Piece & greatly Admired. Believe me My Dear Sir your

most Affectionate & most humble Servant

Adam Ferguson
