Edinburgh 21st July 1781

Dear Sir

We have at last made our Way to this Place through many halts & much slow travelling. The Route we took by Birmingham Manchester &c considered as a Specimen of all England would give a very high Idea of your Industry & Skill in the use of Labour & consequently of your Numbers & Wealth, fully equal to the Arduous Contest in which you are engaged. By the Way You did not seem to know when I was in the South how much you owe to Lord Cornwallis. He has gained the Victories & made the Marches we see in the Gazette without consuming any Provisions from Europe. A Gentleman who is here & left him at Wilmington after having made the March  with him tells me so. He paid Friends for what was taken from them And gave Ennemies Notorious or doubtful, receipts of which they may avail themselves hereafter in case of any mistake now made to their prejudice. The heavy and almost insufferable burden of this War comes from the Necessity of feeding an Army in America from Europe why it is not published that we have done without it in this case & may in other Cases I do not conceive. But in this Zeal for National Affairs I must not forget what touches myself. In the first Place. The Pamphlet you showed to me at Windsor is but just now come to hand. Upon considering the Passage relating to me it appears that the author would fairly insinuate that Dr Piercy had a cheat put upon him at Edr in which I was a principal Actor. This puts me upon my Defence & I can do no more than plead not guilty. I trouble you with a Copy of My Declaration, if you chuse to permit me, I wish very much it should be addressed to yourself & be to so published in the most Current of the News Papers. If that  should not be proper, let the address be changed to the Publisher & if you will be so good as forward it with my signature I will be Obliged to you. Dr Piercy I believe passed some Days with Dr Blair & I do not know what may have passed between them: but I never saw him but once.

Although I do not remember the Authenticity of Ossian Poems was then Questioned, the Conversation certainly turned upon Antient Poetry: for I remember very distinctly having Shown to Dr Piercy and even left with him Some Scrap or Scraps of Poetry in the Earse Language as I myself had written them without any regard to the Supposed Orthography which I never acquired nor Attended to. If Dr Piercy is a keeper of Scraps he may have this still. Having long neglect and lost what I had picked up in this way myself I had got some such things both from Mr McPherson & from Mr Mc Lagan Chaplain to the 42d Reg't & cannot from memory distinguish which it was I gave to Dr Piercy. These Gentlemen I see are never to be convinced. If conjectural Evidence is brought they call out for direct Testimony: If Testimony they call out  for the Ipsa Corpora. If the Ipsa Corpora, then Mr Mc Pherson or some one Else has made a Translation into Earse from the Original English of Mr McPhersons Forgery. And I despair of seeing the matter cleared up to their Satisfaction as neither Original nor Scotch much less highland Testimony is to be admitted. If there be no merit in those produc[tions] they ought to have been forgotten So long ago. If there is I wish we had the Supposed Originals. The Specimens I have seen apart from The Curiosity of them are very Interesting as Efforts of the Imagination & the Heart Equal to any Poetry I know, & whether genuine or Spurious. I shall never be Ashamed of having mistaken them for Originals.

I am about to have the Roman History transcribed fair & am only Sorry I have not the means of Submitting it to your Inspection. I should be unwilling to make Booksellers risk their money without some better grounds than their belief of my Industry & Talents. Mrs Ferguson joins in best respects to Mrs Douglass. Yours most Sincerely

Adam Ferguson
