Venice 19th Octr 1793

My Dear Katey

My last letter was from Verona where I stopped two or three days, I am now at Venice as you See from the Date. A Town built in the Sea & with Streets & lanes paved with Water with Boats for Coaches & Chariots without which you could not Stir from the threshold of your Door without plunging in the Sea. All this you knew but knowing & seeing I find is different. I am strongly impressed with wonder at such a Place but do not delight in it any more than I do in Wapping or the Pier & Share of Leith. There are numberless Palaces all of Marble & loaded with ornament but my feeling is not pleasure but Still wonder how the Devil they got there. I have lost all relish for what the Sailors call Ginger bread work even in Marble & in the designs of Famous Architects & so I shall bid this Amphibious Town farewell as soon as I have seen what  it is the fashion for Travellers to see here or at least some part of it. To Verona I came post, perplexed at every Stage with the exchange of money which it was impossible to know so fast as it changed among my hands, There I met with a Florentine Horse Hyrer who had brought some Travellers to Verona. I made use of his Horses in some little excursions from that Place, Afterwards engaged him to drive me to Padua. And we agreed so well on the Road that I have made a Contract to be driven & fed by him on the whole road to Rome at a certain Price. This is a sort of Bargain very common in this Country. We shall travel Slow but I do not want to hurry through a Country of which every part will take my Attention. My Driver Antonio Lapini tells me we shall be a fortnight on the Road & I shall probably write again from some place tho I begin to grudge the Postages of So many letters of which the cost now must be a Considerable Sum: but it is your desire to hear frequently how I go on & you will guess from so much said in this letter without any mention of my health that I have no Complaint. I am certainly stouter than when I left Edr & more independent of  little accommodations that used to be necessary to me.

My Blessing to my Dear Children if they follow all the Dates of my letters on the Map it will help forward their Geography, I shall endeavour as soon as Possible to lead their attention back again through some Route to Edinburgh: but the winter must pass here with me & hope it will do so with you at Edr better than usual. I do not attempt to write to any body else till I get to some end of My Journey. I am

My Dear Katey yours Affectionately

Adam Ferguson
