Edinburgh 16 Janr y 1792

My Dear Sir

I received your Letter on the subject of Mr Carmichaels dismission, & having had some conversation with Mr Williamson, went to my Friend of the Board of Customs, in whom I found no disposition to relent.

After reading the papers which were communicated to me I am intirely of your opinion, & returned the Papers with expressions of Surprise that we should differ so much; Said some strong things: but my Friend declined the Argument, said there was no redress to be hoped for but from the Treasury. That he would be glad the Treasury reversed their Sentence but that they themselves could not do it. I ventured to propound two maxims for the Policy of their Board. Imprimis. That no unfaithful or negligent Servant should continue to be employed. 2d & not less Essential to the Service, That no faithful & diligent Servant should be Sacrificed to private Malice or Pique.

All ths was true: but they could not recall a Sentence once given. And in the conversation a Case cast  up, relating to a recommendation of mine, which had past some years ago. The Person concerned had behaved so well at a Northern Post that they removed him to a more difficult & more profitable Station, the Bay of Glenluce; but he was not there many months, when upon a complaint like the present, he was dismissed. The Board I am now told soon after found that they had been imposed upon by a combination formed against this man whose Fidelity was not convenient to some of his Bretheren. And it was proposed to restore him: but it could not be done. No reason is Assigned to me for this Policy; but I Ascribe it to a rooted Jealousy of all the Underlings at the different Parts. And next, to a maxim that as often as a Smugled Cargo escapes; the nearest Officer concerned must Suffer Guilt or no Guilt. And last of all, that they are never to remitt a Sentence once past. This last may be thought to strengthen their Authority: but so long as the Treasury can reverse their Sentences, it would Shake their Authority less to be reversed by themselves.

If this matter must go to the Treasury, I was inclind to put the merits in the form of a reclaiming Petition which with the Answers given to it, might be more accessible to the Consideration of the  Treasury than the whole papers as they were given to me: but as the Board of Customs here is now very thinly attended, the effect of this measure would be delay.

Mr Reid a very Consequential member of this Board is now at London & it is material that you see him. I take for granted he will be heard of about the Treasury. I take a very Sincere concern in Carmichaels case. The Effect of the Policy above mentioned seems to be, that no one having Other pretensions, will risk them on Such a bottom, And the Board will have no Officers but such as they will be in the right to distrust, & to dispatch, as soon one after another, as possible.

Your Friend Jock is well, with a wonderfull proficiency in the Scots Tongue: but tenacious of some London Notions & habits to a degree that is Scarcely credible.

I have no Tidings of my application for a Cadetship: but wait with all due Patience & Resignation. I am My Dear Sir

with great Respect your most Affectionate most humble Servant

Adam Ferguson
