Blackheath Aprile 29th 1775

My Dear Carlyle

In answer to the two or three letters which you have written to me I can give you five or six which I had written in my own mind to you before I received any of yours. The first was from Geneva where having had the advantage of Lodging in Calvins own house & having access to some of his most Secret Manuscripts I thought myself without Vanity qualified to give you some light into the more Intricate recess's of our Church. My second was from Fernex the seat of that renowned & Pious Apostle Voltaire who saluted me with a Complt. on a Gentleman of my family who had Civilized the Russians. I owned this Relation and at this & every Successive visit encouraged every attempt at Conversation even Jokes against Moses Adam & Eve & the rest of the Prophets  till I began to be considered as a person who tho true to my own faith had no ill humour to the freedom of fancy in Others. As my own Complt. had come all the way from Russia I wished to know how some of my Friends woud fare but I found the Old man in a state of perfect indifference to all Authors except two Sorts, One of those who write Panegyrics another who write Invectives on himself. There is a third kind whose names he has been used to repeat fifty or sixty years without knowing any thing of them such as Locke Boyle Newton &c. I forgot his competitors for fame of whom he is always either Silent or Speaks Slightingly. The fact is that he reads little or none his mind exists by Reminiscence & by doing over & over what it has been used to do Dictates Tales dissertations & Tragedys even the latter with all his Elegance tho not with his former force. His Conversation is among the Pleasantest I ever met with, he lets you forget the Superiority which the public  opinion gives him, which is indeed great[er than t]hat we conceive in this Island. But he is [able] to make me forget all the rest of my letters. The third was from the face of a Snowy Mountain in Savoye higher than all the mountains in Scotland Piled upon one Other & containing more eternal Ice in its recess's than is to [be] found in all Scotland in the hardest Winter. The bottom of this Ice is continually melting in the Valleys like the bottom of a roll of butter placed on end in a frying Pan. It is perpetually Creeping down from the Mountain where fresh Snows continually fall. It hangs in Snotters over Cliffs & Precipices till becomeing too heavy it breaks & with noise louder than thunder makes all the Valleys ring or groan which you please. Masses come down from the mountains sometimes and shake all the Rocks with a force that nothing but an earthquake can imitate & drive the Air out of the narrow Valleys with the force of a hurricane that roots up trees in the opposite hills. I wrote you this letter in the full  belief that you are a great Natural [xxx] & dissposed to believe every word I say [xxx xxx] fourth letter was written from the Inn[er]most parts of Swisserland on a Sunday after church when I saw the Militia exercise. They have uniform clothes and accoutrements all at their own expence which is not a great hardship for it is their only public burden. They appeard to me to be a very effective Military Establishment And as they were the only body of men I ever Saw under Arms on the true principle for which Arms shoud be carried I felt much secret emotion, & coud have shed tears. But to conclude my fifth & last letter was from the Devils own backside in the neighbourhood of This place where every thing from a pair of Snuffers to the Venus of Medicis and the great Diana of the Ephesians is better provided than any where else where every one is bussy enjoying & no one thinks whence it came nor how it is to be keept.

I thought to have finished all  my letters here but as a frank will carry another sheet I shall take room at least to Sign my name. As I have already written you five letters & this new sheet may pass for another you will please to Observe that you are at least four letters in my debt.

I am much Obliged to you for your Goodness to my Wife & My Bairns, if I live to return to them we shall not part so easily again. You may believe I was much surprised at the Attempt of the Town Council to shut the door against me : but am Obliged to them for opening it again. I may be a great looser but the end for which I am persecuted cannot be gained while I have it in my option to return.

I have been much Obliged to the general Voice that was raised in my favour as well as to the Ardent Zeal of Particular friends. Islay Campbell has given me proofs of Friendship  which I can never forget. Pulteney has behaved to me in every thing as he woud have done at the beginning of the Poker Club. I have allways been an Advocate for Mankind and am a more determined one than ever the fools & knawes are no more than necessary to give Others Something to do. I saw J. Home in Town yesterday Morning he goes as Usual. Mc is listening to the reports of his History. I do not live among readers and am really ignorant of the General Verdict. I have been living here above three Weeks. A Charming Villa in a Magnificent Scene sed quis me sistat gelidis in montibus Pentland and this I do not say on Account of the hot weather tho it has been for three days the greatest I ever saw in this Countrey. Remember  my Blessing to Mrs Carlyle & your young ones of whose thriving state I am happy to hear. Tell Edgar when you see him that I have lately a letter from Clarke & shall write to him — meaning Edgar — soon.

I am Dear Carlyle 
yours most Affectionately 
Adam Ferguson
