London March 31st 
1774



My Dear Friend,

I have just Received your Letter which came under Cover to Lord Warwick & deserve that you shoud hesitate about writing to me but shoud have been very unhappy if your Doubts had ended unfavourably. It is most certain that the habit of Procrastination & other reasons or rather faults have hindered my writing to you till about the beginning of Last winter when I determined without delay to acknowledge your Favour by Coll. Campbell. What I then wrote will I hope come to your hands sometime before this And Satisfy you that I am at least willing to acknowledge the Indefatigable  Affection with which you are pleased to honour me, I feel it and am vain of it beyond what I can express to you. But you will perhaps be Surprised to find me here & I must Satisfy you on this Point first. You must know then that I am as little as ever Connected with Ministers & find no reason to entertain the Views which you present to me. You have received Some Alterations in the Government of India at the head of which some time or Other I hope to hear of you. My views & Object here is different. I am on my Way to Join Lord Chesterfield now a young Man about 19 years of Age on Travels abroad. His Guardians secure me in an equivalent for my Place at Edinburgh & I am again come into the world  to Scramble. I am likely to be Separated for two or three years  from My Family, but Submit to this Circumstance in hopes of Seeing them again more at freedom to Disspose of myself. I Received your Letter from the hands of Charles Greville who is now elected Member of Parliament but has been prevented by an Illness of many weeks duration from taking his Seat.

He was made a Lord of Trade in the Room of his Brother upon his Election And I have every reason to believe will turn out a Man of Bussiness & in every Respect worthy of the Affectionate Regard you express for him. The Elder Brother is now Earl of Warwick as you will probably have heard. Robert is in Quarters with his Regiment. When any of this family are  Ministers I have some chance of being a Favourite as you propose, & that you and I may have much to Say in Europe as well as in Asia. Charles Grevilles Illness was what I believe the Physicians call an Abscess near the Anus and a fever the last is removed & the first in a fair way of being entirely healed. I set out for Paris in my way to Geneva tomorrow & in my hurry write this hasty letter rather than delay my thanks for your Affectionate concern in my Wellfare. And here you will perceive probably from the change of Ink that I have been interrupted & write at a place different from that in which I began my letter. You have Judged well in not deciding against me when you hesitated in writing for I consider your Friendship as the happiest  Circumstance of my Life. Fortune has taken a pleasure to cross me in many other things but in that she has been truly kind. I told you of my children in my Last. The Boy is destined to your Protection in case his Father should fail him which is very likely. I intend this letter shoud go by Joseph Burnet the youngest of My Wifes Brothers he has at present some hopes of getting A passage on Board a ship Captain Thomson bound for Madrass. He has been bred in a counting house at London but turned out of place by the failure of his Master. He has a brother Captain of Artillery on the Bengal Establishment & has been this year or two endeavouring to meke his way to India with no better Prospect  than that of hanging upon his brother till something could be done for him [xxx]. When there were thoughts of my going to India he was to have gone with me. The Ruin of Sr George Colebrooks Interest cut off all the hopes he had in me. A License to go abroad is all that we now hope for & tho he goes by a Madrass ship he is really bound for Bengal unless you can find some employment for him. And I shall say no more to recommend him to your friendship. If he shoud not himself find a Passage to India I have directed him not to fail in forwarding this letter which I scarcely find time in this Town of hurry & interruption to write. How do you find time in the midst of  Camps Conquests & Intricate detail of Bussiness to write to all your Friends. What do you think I feel on the Continual Proofs I have of your your Friendship. The Bill to Lord Warwick is not yet come to hand tho he too has received a letter. I leave the Management of it to John Home who remains here after I am gone. You cant imagine how fortunately that £100 had arrived to buy me French Cloaths while the Plan of your Appartment at Bankhead is making out. That place to be sure is my favourite & I now Submit to make the Tour of Europe that I may be at Liberty hereafter to Live there the year Round. & yet I hope that you & I may Meet on better Ground. I need not tell you any thing of your Private Friends here for they will probably write you. Fingal has got a Machine carrying ten or twelve Volumes in Folio which he turns round & extracts from them a History of England from the Restoration to the year 1720. The Adams have had a Lottery in which they heve sold but half the Tickets but having got most of the great Prizes are delivered from a dreadful Situation. Make my best Respects to Mahomed Aly or if he will not Accept of them to Flyder Aly. I forgot to tell you that your Friend Deprè is in perfect Esteem & good reception here nothing but extreme hurry coud have hindered my waiting on him as a relation of yours, & the same hurry must be my excuse for sending you such a Scrawl as this.

But I hope you will not hesitate to believe that you are the man in the world of whose merit I have the clearest conviction.

Adam Ferguson
