Hallyards 20th March 
1799



My Dear Friend

I have received your packet inclosing Admiral Nugents line to you & our Seamans dispatch to me. In the last I am sorry to see some traits of ill humour like a spoilt child when he is taken away from his Mother & cannot brook any less attention than used to be payd to him. I wrote immediately without your Cover least you should be out of the way to check this as soon as Possible. He is impatient to be in a frigate & consequently out of humour where he is but my doctrine to him is implicit & even chearful Obedience & I hope he will recollect himself. His conditions as a Sort of favourite with his two last Captains may have spoilt him a little & piqued his Competitors in the Ship: But I hope it  will go off. And I shall be glad to take any occasion to trouble to Sr Jé Saumarez with my Solicitude on his account. Our wou'd be Cadet is now here Ayant pris congé d'Edinburgh And as we mean to do nothing here in the way of fitting out, can be at London when required as quickly as a letter by the Mail Coach. He is Armed with a proper Certificate of his Age from the Minister of the Parish. It appeared upon inquiry that he was born the 15th of March 1798 & consequently that it is thus & no nearer with him being now 21 out.

I have not yet seen Adam Since this bussiness came on the Anvil, he is much detained by Volunteer Duty & would have my Consent to accompany his Brother and thank you for me as I am too old to do so myself: but am doubtful whether in these times he can have the necessary leave of Absence. War here or in  Ireland if not on the Seas between us and the Enemy we are likely to have. So if we  are not victorious, in my mind happy is he who falls: but I am willing, here in your medicinal Stile to believe the best. If we have heads we want nothing. What say you. Will the Austrians who refused to answer a question be bullyed by the March of an Army. & so bid the Russians go back. My wish is that they would tempt the French to advance into Bohemia or Austria & then receive them on the flank with an Army of Russians & the other with Germans: but we shall see who is fool now. I am well enough Aware of my own chance for that Disstinction: but never cease to be my Dear Friend yours most affectionately

Adam Ferguson
