[March 1796]

My Dear Friend

I forward your Paper as desired to Jno Home & Dr Blair, we shall be happy to have the whole when done. My earnestness for pacific measures on our part has long been great but my hopes of actual Peace very little.

The Republick of France has no chance to exist but in the turmoil of War & if its leaders should have no pretence for war with Europe in General they will try to keep up the delenda est Carthago against this Country. What a Prospect for Ages to Come it has been louring upon me from the first day of the War & may not clear up while I live. And here is a new & most interesting Crisis. An Assembly of the Batavian People met on the first of March to Supersede all former Government and deliberate on a new one.

The Result is uncertain: but probably the  democratical leaven [xxx] once admitted into this Batch will never be cleard away So as to restore the former Self electing Aristocracy. It is also probable that the impulse given to that supposed but mistaken Phlegmatic mass on the prospect of Democracy or what is now called Liberty, will produce in that country a new Scene of Energy or national exertion. What are we to do in this case?Are we to brave the Hostility of this rising Power & press it down into the Scale of France So as to leave no chance of Counterpoise in the rest of Europe. May God who has preserved us hitherto forbid. We have nursed the French Republick in its Cradle we have tended it to school & brought it for ought I know to a state of Confirmed Vigour in the Issue dangerous if not fatal to Other Nations of Europe: or which certainly the half rotten or Slumbering monarchy can ill resi[s]t. If the new republick of Batavia is to have a separate existence from that of Gaul I would willingly nurse it as a young Hercules who may one day be our Friend and Assistant against this Hydra of France. Their own Jealousy may naturally enough take this turn against  the Power that is most likely to keep them in bondage & certainly some direction may be taken even in the Conduct of our present War with the seven provinces or in our declarations and Policy with respect to them that may facilitate their Coming into our Scale at last: but I must leave every body to his own Affairs & mind my own. The Negotiation of Nidpath is in a better form than I have known. While we were deliberating on the Safe clause of lease respecting the obligation to keep & deliver the Castle in repair the time of Advertising other Subjects in the Neighbourhood is come on. Mr Tait has been here visited the Premises & has agreed with me that the best form of Proceeding for me is to Come forward with other adventurers in an offer at once for the whole of what will accommodate me here & the whole be made out for me in one lease. In this I shall be ready before the 21st of April the time at which I am told that offers are to be Submitted to his Grace. And I trust you will be glad to find some load taken off your Back as well as my own.

I am my Dear Friend 
most affectionately 
yours 
Adam Ferguson
