Edinburgh August 9th, 1777

My Dear Sir

I had the pleasure of your letter from Dover & was extremely happy to hear you were arrived on British Ground. The Other Intimations in your letter Tho very general gave me likewise very great pleasure. I have waited with some impatience for your Second letter from London in which I hoped to find some time mentioned for your Appearance in This Countrey And this I still hope will be in your Power in this remiss time of Bussiness. You do not say whether you are come home for good & all as John Bull says, or only for Some Special bussiness. 

Nor do I know which to wish. Here is certainly much bussiness to be done relating to the Countrey you have left & I am very glad there is such a person as yourself in the Way to be employed in it. I hope we shall meet before the whole of it is adjusted & I will stretch all my Politics to show how much I wish you Success. We are so disspersed at Present that I have not seen either Jno Home, Carlyle, Dr Robertson or Doctr Blair Since I received your letter. Jno Home will certainly pass the greatest part of Winter in London but is here till near Christenmas unless some thing particular require his going away sooner. Your friend Mr McKenzie has been settled some time at London as an Agent. I saw him upon a Visit here a little before I received your letter but not Since. I sent your obliging  intelligence to Lieut. Bruces Father who expresses the warmest Gratitude and Affection for you. I am extremely happy to find that you come home on the best terms with Coll. Stuart. I saw a Letter from His Brother Andrew lately to his purpose. How Politics may steer I know not but this last I will venture to say among the Ablest & fairest men you can have Connection with in this Countrey.

I write merely to put you in mind of me & that I may hear more of you. My Wife & my five Children join in Respects. I am

My Dear Sir 
your most Affectionate 
humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson







Since writeing the Above I have received your last letter & am extremely happy to find you still think of comeing here. If Mr Charles Greville will be of the Party that will complete the pleasure.
