London June 19th 1775

My Lord

I was on Tuesday last informed by Mr Lovel Stanhope, that your Lordship with Sr George Savile & Mr Hewet, had resigned your Trust as Guardians to The Earl of Chesterfield, & had desired His Lordship to make choice of Persons more likely to be of use to him than had been in your Power. That Lord Chesterfield had accordingly made choice of the Duke of Chandos and Mr Lovel Stanhope to act in the Capacity of his Guardians. That a transaction had been some time depending & was then in a manner concluded, engaging Mr De St Germain to accompany Lord Chesterfield in his Future Tour abroad, And that after the 24th Instant my attendance on his Lordship woud be no longer required.

Some days after this communication, Mr Lovel Stanhope wrote My Lord Chesterfield desiring to know, whether I wished to have any thing in writing to the above purpose & informing him that If I did The Duke of Chandos & himself were ready to give it immediately. In Answer to this question, I wrote Mr Stanhope a Letter of which I trouble your Lordship with the following copy:

[transcribes the letter dated London, June 16, 1775; see above, no. 78.]

I saw Mr Stanhope a few hours after he had received this letter. He offered me a Copy of your Lordships & the other Guardians resignation, & told me The Duke of Chandos & himself woud give me a joint letter to discharge my farther attendance on Lord Chesterfield. That the £100 due at Midsummer shoud be paid. But that he was unacquainted with the other money Articles of my letter, & tho he believed they would fall upon My Lord Chesterfield at last, that he coud do nothing relating to them at present. I have last night received a joint letter from The Duke of Chandos & Mr Lovel Stanhope stating the change lately made in the Guardianship of Lord Chesterfield & notifying that my attendance on his Lordship will not be necessary after the 24th Instant, but without any mention of the other Particulars in my letter to Mr Stanhope. I have thought it My Duty, thus to inform your Lordship of what has past since your declining to act as Guardian to the Earl of Chesterfield, And as the Gentlemen  who were joined in this trust are now at a distance from each other in the Country I trouble each of you Separately with a Duplicate of this letter. And beg to know whether you have any Objections to my being determined in my farther Attendance on Lord Chesterfield by the Directions of The Duke of Chandos & Mr Lovel Stanhope. I have the honour to be with the greatest respect

My Lord 
your Lordships 
most Obliged 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson









P.S. your Lordship 
may be pleased to direct for 
me at Mr Maynes Banker 
in Jermyn Street London 
To Earl Stanhope
