Edinburgh 11 August 1784

Dear Sir

I write to you in consequence of a conversation I have had with Mr John Clerk whose office of Secretary to the Commission of Annexed Estates determines on the proposed restitution of these Estates to the heirs of the former Proprietors. This very laudable measure I confess will cause some regret to me, if it ends in turning Mr Clerks Ardour & Ingenuity aside from the Publick Service in which I thought they were likely to be usefull. What Provision it may be thought reasonable to make for him upon the Reduction I know not: But I am satisfied that with respect to the Objects to which  publick money is destined in the change which is now to be now made his usefulness may be greater than it was likely to be in the former Establishment.

His Relations, not very wisely perhaps, in laying the Plan of his Life entered him first as a Student of Medicine, then changed his destination to that of a Merchant, next for that of an Undertaker in Coal Works, but in all these Capacities his thoughts turned upon Works & undertakings more fit for the Publick than himself, Canals & Fisheries, not to mention Naval Tacticks & the fighting of Battles at Sea. More than one of his Brothers was were an Engineers. and Four lost their Life Lives in the publick Service so it was thought impossible that he also could be destined to serve the publick in any such Way. The Consequence is that his genius has been continually pointing to one Sort of Objects & his Lot fixing him to another: But was in hopes that his Situation under the  Commission of Annexed Estates might open some way for it; nor do I think by any means that these hopes ought now to be laid aside. If the Publick now adopt the Forth & Clide Canal & set about nursing the Fisheries, Mr Clerk may be a most useful Agent in both, And I would fain think he may be continued in the publick Service without any Other Change than that of being employed to inspect the publick concern in the inland Navigation & fisheries. Whether he be employed or no, I doubt he will think of nothing else for some years to come, & he appears to me to have very sound & Ingenious conceptions on both these Subjects. But if I mistake not you know him nearly as well as I do, and can distinguish in this Account, what may be ascribed to personal kindness & what to conviction of Judgement. I certainly would not endeavour to pass the one of these upon you for the Other, And am willing to risk the  whole of my Credit with you upon this point that Mr Clerk will be a most useful Agent for it the Publick in what they do to compleat the inlan[d] navigation from Sea to Sea & to promote the the Fisheries.

This matter being So stated to the best of my judgement, I am next to intreat, that My Agent Mr Chalmer being soon to conclude my transaction with the Booksellers, may be allo[wed] to wait upon you with some Account of the matter before it is ended. It is of little consequ[ence] to the publick but not so to me: and it will [give] a great Satisfaction to me, to have your Approbation of what we do. I am with the greatest Respect

Dear Sir your most affecti[onate] & most humble Serva[nt]

Adam Ferguson
