Edinburgh, 18 August 1781

Dear Sir,

I have just seen in the hands of Dr Black the letter which you have received from Dr Percy, and am exceedingly vexed to have a difference on a matter of fact with a person whose character I so much respect; I did not imagine that Dr Percy, any more than you, could have been affected by the late declaration relating to a passage in a pamphlet, on the authenticity of Ossian's Poems, farther than the repetition of your names, which were already made free with. If I had thought Dr Percy any way committed, I should certainly have troubled him with a copy of my declaration, and waited his commands before it was published. But it did not occur to me that he, any more than you, could be cited in support of any allegation which it concerned me to deny.

The most respectful thing I can now do to Dr Percy is to remind him, as far as my memory serves me, of the fact in the only conversation which I had the honour to have with him. Among other subjects that of Earse poetry was mentioned, and I remember to have shewn him, in my own hand-writing, some scraps which I had received from Mr James Macpherson, or from Mr Maclaggan, Chaplain of the 42d regiment. I remember a line, or expression, in which the Poet, describing the time and the scene, said, the sun of day was scorching the mountain, and that Dr Percy was pleased to say it was a Pleonasm, but a beautiful one. I remember to have left the paper with Dr Percy, and have since lost every other copy of it.

The difference between Dr Percy and me is perhaps not very material; no more, as he states it, than that he remembers what I have forgot. If, nevertheless, what he pleased to publish shall seem to corroborate the charge which I have already thought myself called upon to deny, I must recur to the intire sense and consciousness of my innocence, and renew my declaration, that I was not present at the repetition of verses to Dr Percy by a young Student from the Highlands; and I give my denial in these positive terms, because I not only do not remember the repetition of verses in Earse, by a Student from the Highlands, by a Student upon that occasion, but because I do not remember the repetition of verses in Earse on any other occasion; and because, though intimate with some students from the Highlands, I do not remember that any of them ever repeated verses in my presence beyond a song or a catch; and this circumstance remains with me with respect to some of them, as a circumstance I noted; so that I am entirely persuaded Dr Percy, in recollecting the passages of his few days stay at Edinburgh, must have jumbled together circumstances that, in point of time, were actually separate; the repetition of verses by a young Student, with the communication of verses in writing by me. If this supposition does not compose the difference, I must despair of being able to remove it, and must leave the matter to the candour of those who are pleased to bestow any thought on me or my affairs.

If I should be under the necessity of publishing any more on this subject, I shall, with your leave, send a copy of this letter to the press. In the mean time, as I have not the honour of a personal correspondence with Dr Percy, must beg the favour that you will transmit it to him. I am, with great regard and esteem, dear Sir, your most obedient and humble servant

Adam Ferguson

The Rev Dr Blair

To the contents of this letter, I must now add, that although the facts stated by Dr Percy might be admitted on less authority than his, yet as they are entirely contrary to any feeling or recollection I have of the matter, and have been employed to convey a very injurious imputation against me, he must excuse me, if I do not admit them. And if he still persist, that over and above the specimen of Earse poetry, which I gave him in my own hand-writing, I likewise procured a Student to recite other specimens to him, he will farther excuse me, if I insist, that every passage, of which the interpretation was vouched by me, was in truth what it was given for. As he allows, that I may not have been conscious of any deception in what passed between the Student and him, I must, in return, allow that he may not be conscious of any misrepresentation of the fact. But I cannot allow that he has made the best use of his understanding, in thinking it credible, that any person, possessed of a decent character, could be concerned in such a cheat, as he supposes to have been practised upon him.

Adam Ferguson
