Nydpath 9th Janry 
1796



My Dear Friend

I have just now received your affectionate Letter with the inclosed Commission of Bussiness for Adam The Writer to the Signet & write merely to get out my Breath on this plaguy Situation into which I have got; without the accommodation either of Town or Country. Till now we have yet Sheep to kill but this is at an End & nothing almost to be had nearer than Edinburgh with this we could fend for the present: but the prospect is yet no better for another year. I do not know Whether Mr Tait has sent my Letter of which you have a Copy to the D. of Q. nor whether it will procure any Answer if he has. You may remember I had some forebodings of this Situation but was in hopes that the D. would either extricate me or leave me to extract extricate myself by dealing with the Housekeeper for what he allowed her. I now see the  mistake of having thrust myself into this Situation before it was cleared for me one way or another: but I reasoned that I must either occupy this Castle before winter to keep it in repair or lay aside thoughts of it altogether to the last of which I was extremely reluctant.

I am sensible what I should do now is to wait the Chapter of accidents, but Patience. The great virtue for Succeeding in any thing has been but very Scantily dealt to me, Old as I am I had rather be doing any; than wait doing nothing, of which this letter is itself a Sufficient Proof for it certainly will do you no good nor me any other than employing some minutes of this woful time I have to wait for some Instruction to his Man of Bussiness from the D. of Q. So much for one Du[ke] if ever I have to do with another I will give them leave to Duck me in the first Horsepond. I am Most Affectionately

yours

Adam Ferguson

P.S. I wrote what you have on the opposite leaf immediatly upon reading your letter but have time before the paper is folded to tell you upon reflection that the matter is worse than you are likely to conceive it. If the warning for the Housekeeper Mrs Donaldsons removeal is not here before the end of January I shall have no hopes of a Settlement & for ought I know die of wexation for having been such a fool, leaving my Children to shift for themselves. For Gods Sake try what you can do to have a speedy decision either for or against me for either sooner Obtained would have saved me from much inconvenience.

A decision in Conversation will not do: it must b[e] [acknow]ledged with the man of Bussiness.
