Hallyards near Peebles 15 July 1799

My Dear Friend

If you & I were two Ships at Sea we should have long since been haling what Chear Ho. But as we are at least one of us an Idle fellow at land who neglects the small duties on hand merely because he is overrun with leisure or nothing to do. This however is no new case I have known an Idle man delay Bussiness for months: which a very bussy man never deffers a moment to execute. With all this delay I have been not a little Anxious to hear from you What has become of your Friends at Florence. The news paper report put our Friend M —  in disgrace. This however undeserved, among Courts, will not greatly surprise me, & may have happened in particular under the Influence of Vienna &c. But I hope you can relieve me from this Apprehension. The Enemy I trust must Evacuate Italy And Swisserland &c. But our Project of restoring Monarchy with Priviledged  Noblesse in France has many difficulties. Property Again to change hands. Low Born men both in Civil & military Stations to lay their heads in the dust from which they arose. It was much easier to lay the frivolous corrupted pretenders to Aristocracy in the dust than it will be to bury their Rascally Successors. The former exclusive pretensions of Birth to consideration & preferment will never be restored as long any shred of the low born republican Army Subsists. I have been saying so for years tho nobody seems to mind it. Every Army would prefer the Monarchy of a favourite Leader to any Other Government. And the whole French Nation Soldiers & all may be asshamed or disgusted with their tryal of Democracy if they are only allowed to Suppose; that want of birth for the future is not to stifle merit of any Condition.

So much for the great Scene of Nations. There is another too about which I am somewhat anxious. Do you know Mr Mc Intosh whose project to give Lectures on the Law of Nature & Nations has been Announced in a preliminary  Discourse? Have his Lectures taken place? With what success? The Specimen I have seen inclines me to think he is one of the greatest Moralists this Island has produced & I consider the publick Character as involved in his Success.

Has my new Edition of the Roman Story reached you, have I done right in Spelling my forreign honours at full length, I could not find out the Customary Abbreviations; you may not be sensible of much improvement. It was a Satisfaction to me while in Italy that I was not made sensible of many Blunders by seeing the Country or its Antiquities. Believe me to be most

Affectionately yours 
Adam Ferguson
