Nydpath Castle 17 Septr 
1795



My Dear Friend

I received your letter yesterday and it is but this moment I have come to the resolution to let your dinner pass without my exemplary Sobriety to check the Consumption of Mr Walkers Wine & butcher meat. I am helped in this resolution by a little fretting uneasiness or inflamation in one of my eyes: but a more real cause is that I am indifferent about the mixed Companies and merry meetings & this is a natural effect when tete a tetes are interesting in a Certain degree. As you are to be so little time in this Country I Scarcely wish to see you any Otherwise than alone. But how is this to be? Your letter does not much savour of the excursion to Alva we mentioned & I am truly reluctant to your  breaking any party or deviating from any route merely that I may See you. If in reality you mean no more than to be transported to Ireland & reach your Port by Glasgow & Aire, Peebles is but a trifle out of your way & by Coming here you will see the fine new road which I am told is made from the through of Tweed to the through of Clyde not to mention that both these throughs are themselves well worth seeing & being traveled.

I have seen a letter from London in which are these words. The greatest Armament that ever went from the Ports of England is now assembling for the West Indies under Gl Abercrombie. I would give a great that I could forget the fate of great Armaments & not think of the Risks now to be run: but he who made the Seas & the Climats & the fevers dispose of us as to him seems best. The French Convention are Surely very impudent in pretending to prescribe to the great  infallible Sovereign People of France whom they shall elect. There are now two long years past since I have seen very clearly that the Armies are to dispose of France. These have shown themselves deeply impregnated with the democratical Furor consider themselves as the joint Sovereigns of the Country & will proceed to dispose of their interest in it as soon as external Ennemies permit. I hope that our fate is not to depend upon what they are pleased to do.

I want to hear from you with some anxiety 
And Am My Dear Friend 
Yours most Affectionately 
Adam Ferguson







P.S. On comparing the dates I find your dinner must have been nearly over before I received your letter, And it is some Consolation to me for the want of your Company that my being of it was actually impossible. I deferred closing this letter till the post of today came. I have a letter from Sir William Pulteney which I hope you will see before you go to improve your understanding in Ireland.
