Nidpath 10th Janry 
1796



My Dear Friend

you would perceive in my letter of yesterday that a grievous dissappointment in my expectations of a Settlement at this place begins to stare me in the face, if it shoud actually come, I am certainly in a great Scrape with all my trumpery brought here at a great expence and dilapidation. And it stung me particularly to think that I had ventured so far upon mere words of Politeness from His Grace of Q. in conversation: but you will See from the inclosed Copy of a Letter which I obtained from Mr Tait that I was not so much to Blame & did not proceed so far without official Communication. And as I am more reconciled to myself shall wait the event with less perturbation. You would possibly Observe in the Copy I sent you of a Letter of Mr Tait, why I am so peremptory in my request to have the warning of removeal to the Housekeeper by the end of January. That is the time of warnings for the whole year. Then habitations are given up or taken & whoever does not provide himself  then must wait for another year, And this to me would be a more expensive & disstressing Situation than any I ever was in: But as I made a great Effort at my Age to get here, if the worst should come must repeat the same to get away. Mr Taits Letter even if I were disposed to go to Law is probably not Sufficient ground for any legal Claim, What he did was for the best: And there was nothing amiss but in having to do with a man of Quality whom the Concerns of little men do not touch & who must not be teased with such concerns or who is perhaps fully exculpated by his State of health. I write this merely to correct the Chagrin & impetuosity of what I wrote yesterday, & unless you should find it perfectly easy & proper to stir in the matter to beg that you will leave the Surge to beat as it may. I am glad to know your thoughts on the Prospect of Peace. One Effect the very prospect may produce which is to make Parties in France anticipate the Speculations or practices I Expected from them when relieved from the Pressure of War. I had a letter from Sr W. P. at Oxford in his way to Shropshire. He proposed that my family here should be an Asylum in Vacation time to his young Nephew upon the loss of his Second Father at Alva. I can no more think of declining it than if I were his nearest Relation. But I have not the necessary Accommodation at present & may not have any better when his Vacation begins.

I am Affectionately yours 
Adam Ferguson
