Edinburgh, Aprile 18th, 1776

Dear Sir

I shoud make some apology for not writeing you sooner in Answer to your Obligeing letter: but if you shoud honour me frequently with such requests you will find, that with very good intentions I am a very dilatory, irregular correspondent. I am sorry to tell you that our Respectable Friend is still declining in his health, he is greatly emaciated & loses strength. He talks familiarly of his near prospect of dying. His Mother it seems died under the same symptoms. And it appears so little necessary or proper  to flatter him that no one attempts it. I never Observed his Understanding more clear or his humour more pleasant & Lively. He has a great Aversion to leave the tranquillity of his own house to go in search of health among Inns and Hostlers. And his Friends here gave way to him for some time: but now think it necessary that he shoud make an Effort to try what change of Place & Air or any thing else Sir John Pringle may advise can do for him. I left him this morning in the mind to comply in this Article & I hope that he will be prevailed on to Set out in a few days. He is just now Sixty-five.

I am very glad that the Pleasure you give us recoils a little on yourself through our Feeble Testimony. I have as you suppose been employed at any intervals of Leisure or rest I have had for some years, in taking  notes or collecting Materials for a History of the Disstractions that broke down the Roman Republic & ended in the Establishments of Augustus & his immediate Successors. The Compliment you are pleased to pay I cannot accept of even to my Subject. Your Subject now appears with advantages which it was not supposed to have had. And I suspect that the Magnificence of the Mouldering Ruin will appear more Striking, than the same building when the view is perplexed with Scaffolding Workmen & dissorderly lodgers And the Ear is Stunned with the noise of destruction & repairs & the Alarms of Fire. The Night which you begin to describe is Solemn & there are Gleams of Light Superior to what is to be found in any Other time. I comfort myself that as my trade is the Study of human Nature I coud not fix on a more interesting Corner of it than  the end of the Roman Republic. Whether my Compilations shoud ever deserve the attention of any one besides myself must remain to be determined after they are farther Advanced. I take the Liberty to trouble you with the inclosed for Mr Smith, whose uncertain stay at London makes me at a loss how to direct for him. You have both such reason to be pleased with the World just now that I hope you are pleased with each other.

I am, with the greatest Respect, Dear Sir, Your most Obedient, and most humble Servant

Adam Ferguson
