Hallyards near Peebles 28 Janry 1802

My Dear Sir

your bearing with these impertinence without taking any offence is what I expected: And I fear to tresspass on your good Nature: but cannot refrain my Assent my Assent to the Idea of Universal Training for publick Defence. I agree with The Persians of old who are said to have taught all their Children to shoot the Bow as well as to Speak Truth. In these indeed there was no matter for Separate Professions, any more than, in our Case, there is reason to withhold the Powers of Defence from any one who has a Country to defend. The only question is How the powers of Defence may be most effectually extended to all who have a Share in the Stake.

One way is by Compulsory Statute as  in other instances of publick Arrangement. In this way no doubt every Subject may be forced to handle a Firelock: but this is soon Obtained and is of little value if the Heart does not go along with it. There is danger that whatever is forced may leave an impression of Servitude and consequently some degree of repugnance to the Bussiness. It was not the use of Arms but the National Spirit that has of late decided the Fortune of Europe. Another Way is one on which we are already entered. That of fostering Volunteer Corps with attainable marks of Disstinction and Honour. On this Point, what I said, I am affraid a little too flippantly. That The King himself might be a Volunteer, could mean little more, than that His Majesty on certain occasions might wear The Volunteer Uniform as he bears the Collar of an Order, that of the Garter or Thistle on its Day.

In the Volunteers there can be no repugnance; for they consist of the Willing, and as such are likely to be a Selection of the most Worthy. The honours they bear will be alluring  to Numbers, & take like a fashion; infect the mass of the People & to make free with a familiar Allusion: like jest propagate a kind of Military Ferment or Verve through the Whole.

At Rome for Some Ages the Lower Class of the People were not received into the Legions. Every Roman nevertheless was a Soldier in his Heart: both he who was enrolled, and he who Aspired to be so.

You will infer from this that I am partial to the Volunteer Corps; & the more so that we have them Actually in Use. There is a French Proverb, with Cautions, when we have already what is good in our hands, against Aspiring to what is better, but may not be attainable: Le plus grand Ennemi du bien c'est le mieux.

I have the honour to be with Respect and affection 
My Dear Sir 
your most obliged 
and most obedt 
humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
