Edinburgh January 15th 1778

I am to Answer your letter of the 9th and have much to Say. This is not the Season of building, & Bankhead Hall must remain in its present State till that season returns as must the settlement of my Accounts with you to a time when I can speak my mind with more Power & Freedom. I often feast even in the midst of circumstances that are dissagreeable to me or the Recollection of three Friends that have fallen to my Lot & who have more than Compensated all that ever has been adverse in My fate by the mere Sense of having had and having them. You will guess I am perswaded that I mean David & John Home & yourself. You will have some Sauntering Evenings or Mornings at Kensington Gore. I pray you collect all you can get Relating to the Emperor Julian & see whether he does not appear  to you as great a Man as [xxx] ever Nature Produced. Christian writers either from Prejudice or to avoid offence Speak of him with horror but it is Curious to See the touches of innexpressible praise that escape them . There is a short French life of him by an Abbé La Bleterie who will verify this description and point out the other Sources of information Concerning him. But it is probable that you will not have much time for matters of so old a Date.

I am much disspirited about every public Prospect. I hope it is not Supposed that India Affairs will wait till we have Settled America Or that the Councils of State in these times have nothing to think of but the Management of Parliament. I imagine that no less than three or at least two Powerful bodys will be wanted to retrieve the Affairs of Government in America. One to make War on the Coast of New England Another from Canada on the Back settlements & a third perhaps to mantain this Ground we have chosen to take in Pensilvania if Peradventure we  have it in the beginning of next Summer. And the Object of the Campaign shoud be to have the exclusive possession of Hudsons River with the Lakes. Places of Arms at New York and Albany & an open Route for the War from Canada on the North as well as from the Coast of the South. In our Way to this Object the Rebels may be induced to prefer accommodation to the Continuance of Such A War. But Lord have mercy on those who expect any Good in this bussiness without Sufficient Instruments of Terror in one hand & of Moderation and justice in the Other. And so much for the opinion of us here who Govern the world at our own fire Sides. I was Elated for a while with the Spirit which the people show for new Levys upon this occasion: but alass without Straining every Other Nerves & exerting high measures of Ability & Conduct how unequal to the Difficulties.

Your Caledonian Duke did not want desire to bear his Part but in the Quality of a Politician of this little Corner was Anticipated by the opposite Party & thought he coud not move without driving their Wheels. Such however I  Suspect was the motive of his Council seldom better advised. For his Countenancing a thing for the Public even when the Other Party by Accidents had the lead woud have been so much the Stronger Proof of his Affection. However he is capable of the best things & is a Noble and agreeable Connection. I wish that Ministry woud consider him apart from his Supposed connections here, who may be good Servants to him or to any body else but bad Masters. I have a Comm[ission] for my Nephew in the new Lewys in my Power but in this General exertion of Influence Power & Money on all hands have despaired that so poor a Man as my Brother coud make out the Quota. If in the Removes & Vacancys occasioned in the old Regiments by these Lewys an Ensigncy coud be got by way of favour I shoud be greatly Obliged by it.

I am happy C. Greville is likely to Succeed for his Friend Lord Seaforth you woud see that Benchar did not forget him in the State of the Highlands.

I had just heard before I received your letter with much concern how near we were losing our Worthy Friend G. Johnstone.

Send the Inclosed to J. Home & believe me to be yours

A F:
