Edinburgh October 2d 1762

My Dear Jack 

I received your Letter from Dover and forwarded the inclosed to Lord Milton who since I have been here has showed me a Letter of yours from Paris.

We are all very glad to find that your health is better and that you are so fortunate in the Duke of Bedfords attention and Civilities, Mr Forrester who is in this Country has written to second your former Recommendations. My Lord Approves of your following Doctor Pringles advice and thinks it very happy that you found so good an opportunity of going to France. He tells me that he will make up full Captains to pay to you from the date of your last Commission till you come to have it in the Regiment. The Regimentals of an English Officer are probably the finest Cloaths you need to wear even at Paris but in case the Stay you make there should be attended with a little extraordinary expence, he will make no difficulty of allowing you Fifty or Sixty pounds besides your ordinary Allowance for that purpose: but he thinks that you should not stay long there, that after two or three  weeks you shoud take your Leave of the Duke of Bedford in order to prosecute the Intention of your Journey.

I coud not tell who was Agent to your Regiment, but Mr Coutts I suppose will manage your Credite for you both with the Agent and in France. I beg you will write to let us know how you do.

Your Friends here were a little perplexed at first upon hearing you was going to France as they knew nothing of it from yourself at first, but I excused you on Account of the hurry & uncertainty you were in to the last moment. My Lord Milton was a little out of order the day I saw him which is the reason he desires me to inform you of the above particulars. This Country furnishes nothing new and I have got out of reach of London news. Your friends are all well. Your Horses leg continued a little sore and I was afraid to Trust him in so long a Journey. I left him with Home and took a Horse of Clerks which he had.

I am Dear Jack your most affect. 
humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
