Edr 1st September 1780

My Dear Sir

The Express to CC arrived & has been delivered to him this Morning. You should have heard from me very full a Post or two ago if I had not supposed you Sufficiently informed by Letters which I knew were written by Our Friends CC & J: M: relating to the Declaration of P: against us; a very important Emergence in the Progress of our Affairs.

We had then almost lost Heart:but the Partizans employed elsewhere made favourable Reports particularly from St. A. which Revived our Hopes & Induced CC to hasten a second time to F — . His Antagonist being there, & certain Persons  being engaged in his Company, prevented any Decisive Conversation, at That Time, tho Overtures were made, Supposed Sufficient, to prevent any Actual Engagements against us, untill the Bussiness could be farther Adjusted. Letters however from thence, received this Morning, represent the Vote of that Town as engaged against us.

A Declaration of the Council Signed by the Provost & the two Bailies to that Purpose is actually given in Writing: But as it has been said of this Place that the People there are open to Conviction to the Last: a Tryal will be made, more, to Satisfy, that the utmost has been done; than from any real hopes of Success. It appears now that the Encouragement conveyed to you as from the principal B — s was altogether without Foundation. The Report of it may have Piqued them to declare themselves  Otherwise. St. A:: has been gained not by the Influence of Coll. Nairne who has till very lately avoided CC & his Friends but by a very Active Friend and some Expence which had produced the Effect before the Letter to Nairne Arrived. That to Ld Kinnoul was Instantly sent as was that likewise to Mr Fothuringham of Purie but, as I now believe, all too late, as well those which are received & forwarded this Morning. Whatever farther CC may do here for the Credit of Ad-n or his own The time is come when his Hopes of being Elected must come intirely from your Quarter of the World. And I most Earnestly Exhort you to fix without Delay the Alternative on which he proceeded as necessary to justify his Expence; save his Credit upon a dissappointment here, & enable him to Patronize the Friends of Govt. & his own in these B — s. I am well perswaded that Governt will find in him a very Respectable Friend & able Support. Yours most Affectionately

&c
