Nidpath Castle 17th March 
1796



My Dear Carlyle

I rejoice to find we are both alive that is to say have not forgot one another, as the learned say dead people do, so as hereafter not to have the least remembrance of their best friends. For us it is only letting a maid to loose to see her friends and presently our Splanghna Are moved as before without any of these downward noises which the Review tells me Dr McNight makes the sign of Pity as well as love: for why should you and I pity one another, we are come only where every body virtually wishes to be who wishes to live long, And you are in hopes of having five windows added in Front of your House for which you pay no Tax, & I who pay Tax have only one window in the Front of mine. It is a whimsical Situation we have got into to be Sure: but has its Alurements both within doors & in the  neighbourhood, where the People as you are told are very good to us. All the women who have drunken husbands very earnestly press me for their Houses. I am sorry to understand Mrs Carlyle now has so little occasion for my Services: but look forward with great pleasure to the time when we may hope to see your Sobriety here: for that is what I understand you mean when you say you have lost all your convivial faculties. The Air is good the Water is Good The Earth is dry And the Castle is lodgeable there is nothing amiss but the Slow pace with which I get into Possession of Country accommodations.

They are yet to come at Christmas Whitsunday & Martinmas next & even then little more than will keep a Cow & a Horse. The Dukes Factor has been here lately & we have arranged so as that the needful for the above purposes may come to me as they come to be Out of lease: but if we have little the less we shall spend which is all I am now good for.

I slept to Dalkeith House one of the times I  was at Edinburgh & felt then as I always did great Satisfaction in having been there. Lord Dalkeith and his Lady were then not come: but I am happy to hear Such Accounts of them. John Home & I have not been so long Silent in the memory of man: but I hope that he too is jogging as usual & that we shall know one another at a Game of Romps with David who I hope will be grievously dissappointed in finding himself an Angel of Light.

One of our pleasures here is a dayby post so that I beg you may not wait thereafter for the Coming a Maid for your letters.

Put, in your Post office at Musselburgh a [xxx] letter will come to Nidpath Castle by Peebles for two pence.

I am with best respects to 
Mrs Carlyle 
My Dear Carlyle 
yours most affectionately 
Adam Ferguson
