Hallyards 9th March 
1802



My Dear Sir

I am happy to know you are in a fair way of recovery. I am little better than I was when you were here tho from a fresh cold. Europe is so different from what it was in my time that if I were going abroad myself it would be to grope my way & look for the places at which to make any Considerable stay.

The North of Germany however I believe is the least altered; And as one of your Objects very properly is to see military forms these are also to be found in the greatest perfection there. Brunswick in my time had many advantages there was an Academy And the Court was very gracious as I suppose it still is to travelers from this Country and as language is one of your first Objects, you may there learn both German & French. The People speak the one And Gentlemen the other.  But at whatever place you may settle for a time at first you will probably shift places to look about your Courts & Cities and fields of Battle or rather Campaigns are worth your seeing. And if you carry a few military narratives along with you And consider the Country itself as your Map in reading; that I think should help you to become a Soldier above the Common Brute. The method of traveling abroad is no where the same as in England. That is to say Chases are not to be had at every Stage you must have some vehicle of your own & post horses are to be met with every where. You should have a Sober & trusty Servant to continue with you from home. And trust to every place you come to for a Valet possessed of language & every other requisite for the place And try to find out what is best to be done.  I know not of any Rule but to be attentive & cautious not to offend against the manners of good Company wherever you come. And if there is much profit to be made of your travels most of it may come upon experience and reflection after you are done. Sett out with a Resolution to respect men & end with a proper knowledge of them. This is the best qualification of a Soldier as well as a Statesman or Gentleman. I am unwilling to detain your Servant or do not think myself qualifyed to be of much use if I should take more time. & I can scarcey write legibly for the returns of a Cough. You may however be assured of my good will.

I am My Dear Sir 
your most affectionate 
and most obedt humble 
Servant 
Adam Ferguson
