Hallyards 2d June 1796 
Dr Ferguson



My Dear Friend

I approve much of your intention to be in Parlt.. It is well understood at London that is the only condition on which one can be of Consequence to the publick or himself. I am not for much of a new Ministry but a new Parlt may turn a new leaf & Something is necessary. If the Duke of Brunswick understands the State of France; he is I suspect the only Prince in Europe who does so. Who has looked so far beyond the present System of Europe, where National exertions are made only from the Surplus of Population & Revenue. So as to comprehend what a Nation can do bringing its whole capital of men & every resource at once into Action & where every individual from the Lowest is actuated or affects to be actuated with the Passion for democratick Power & national Glory. Such a Nation may want Constancy & steady firmness: but they may act with an impetus which cannot be withstood. Nothing can can destroy them but tranquillity & inaction from abroad which leaves them to pray upon themselves at home. To understand  this Game every mere Soldier is as impotent as any mere tradesman of any Other Sort. Regimenteering discipline, & even a good Military Head will not do. We must be prepared like the Antient Statesman to meet all the human Passions in their inmost recess. Nations of old brought their all into Stake in every Strugle if worsted they were undone if successful they made the world pay. This is the Game which France is renewing in Europe. And it is not by furnishing them with new occasions of exertion that we are likely to evade the Consequence. I should have been glad to have had you canvassing Burroughs in our Neighbourhood: but approve your having taken other Ground.

In this District there are 4 or 5 under the Separate influence of at least 3 Dukes who I am told have Compromised matters by agreeing to have the Seat for a Friend each in his Turn. Your D. has had his turn in the last Parlt. The D: of Buccleugh comes next & intends as I am told his Son in Law Ld Stopford. What the D. of Q. could mean by wishing to engage you I know not if it were not to keep up his Interest at your Expence at least in one burrough. I am glad to hear that by all accounts he is likely to gain a clear hundred of Grassum by my disertion of the Castle. I was certainly  a very improper Tennant to be in the way of his Operations. I am now at Hallyards about three miles from Peebles & my Letters may be directed as before changing the title of Professor for that of Grazier at Hallyards by Peebles. I am to have Highland Cattle to fatten for winter Beef in the mean time I & my Cabinet Council are as much embarrassed with a Refractory Cow that will not let herself be milked as you I hope will be with this explosion of madness that threatens Europe.

In a former letter you mentioned your namesake John, who is now boarded with the schoolmaster at Peebles & something of a destination of C Payne for India in which you proposed to embark him when ready but I was uncertain whether you meant when C. Payne was ready or Cabin Boy John.

It will be a pleasure to me to think that part of my Blood is to flow by Sea as well as by Land in this Contest & if it come any thing near a Catastrophe in My time I shall be happy to meet it with my old blood in the Front & survive to see the Country Safe or die before it is Otherwise. You may laugh at this but it is often the best consolation I have between Sleeps in the Night. Let me see your Frank as soon as possible, or never Spare me Postage out of the profess[ion] of Grazing. I am now glad to See that The Honble Robt can help us now as well as the Honble Charles. So God Bless you all

Ad. Ferguson
