[Nydpath Castle, 3 Dec. 1795]

My Dear Sir

I was Far from wishing, that you should take to write to me in your Illness: And took measures by means of a correspondence which I solicited from Home with Miss Johnstone, to have such accounts as were passing in the Family. It is now proper, that I acknowledge the receipt of your Letter. And the Inclosed discharge for Joseph of which I will not say much. I should long since have perceived the generosity of your mind. If neither my Family nor myself had been concerned, as we are in the Effects of it. The Boy himself if matters do not mend, will shed tears [xxx] for us all.

If your disorder complaint resist the Medicine That was thought proper for it, we must Submit. Altho Something is yet to be expected from  So much original Vigour of mind & of body: From my age, & infirmities you should have been the Surviver: but what is a Prolongation of life, for days, or weeks, or Years unless one had a Specific object, for which to live, under every disadvantage. I am fully persuaded we shall meet thereafter And know one Another, that you will know your Brother, & that I shall know you both: but in what manner, it is Probable we can know now no more. Than the child unborn can Guess what will become of him in the world he is about to enter.

For the Future, as well as the Present, it is our joy, That we are in the hands of That Power, by wch The Universe is formed, & Reserved with Supreme wisdom, & Goodness. May his May his Blessed Influence rest upon your Mind: & give you the joyful empression That you never can for a Moment be separated from him: you will probably read with Calmness what I never write wt Some Emotion  more a weakness Than the feeling proper upon The Occasion. I[t] will be difficult for me to resist The desire of seeing you: & if I should indulge it soon or at a Milder Season, I beseech you to consider it no otherwise than a Message sent to enquire after your health. I shall dread to meeting your worthy Sister & your family more than yourself: but I wd fain hope they may have more occasion to rejoice before I See them.

I ever am 
your 
Adam Ferguson
