Hallyards 26 Septr 1797 Dr Ferguson

My Dear Friend

I dont know what has occasioned so long a Silence between us altho I myself am more to blame in it than you. On receiving your last I was to write immediatly & having scarcely any thing to write here except the weather was to descant as usual on the political Sky. The Aspect indeed to me though changeing to the common sight has been ever nearly the same. I saw the French Monarchy overturned by a flash of Democratical lightening, striking the Armies of France. And I now see the fate of Europe urged by the Continuance of a Democratical Change in that tremendous Conductor. This even the Officers commanding this democratical Army understood not And many of them have been knocked down Successively by coming too near a Battery which they did not know to be charged.

Layfayette  Dumurier Coustine Montesquieu &c &c thinking that because they got Victories & were Popular  the Army would follow & Support them in any plan they chose to follow. All these instances were much alike whenever the democrates became Jealous the Army Suffered them to crush any General or do what they pleased with him: but Dumurier is most to my purpose. He gained Signal Victories and the Army called him leur Pere but the moment he swerved from Democracy His Chamber and Quarters were crouded with Grandiers having the Buttside of their hats turned foremost & with Republique written upon them in letters of Chalk. A Brigade marchd without his Orders & when he questioned them on the Road he was obliged to swim a Canal or leap a Ditch to get away with a Shower of Musket bullets about his Ears. The Democracy of France is represented in the Council of 500 chosen by the People: but three men not chosen by the People, got into a Disspute in which they called the Representatives of the People Royalists & instantly the Armies of France declare against the Representatives of People And the Three had the whole military force of France at their disposal to Suppress the Civil & Political Democracy of the Country. Whence comes this. Have  the Military no feeling of the Democracy for which they affect so great a Zeal? or have they some view to a manner of enjoying it, which has not yet appeared to other People. It is possible they may have such a View or it may be opened to them: but for the time past & the present I believe that they felt the Spur which drove to Democracy more sharp than any part of the People. I believe that among the points in this Spur the sharpest was the Contemptuous distinction mantained on the footing of mere birth maintained against the whole Body of the people in France.

This disstinction was made more grievous to every common Soldier than to any other Person in France & the entire removeal of it is a triumph to him which he cherishes & glories in more than any other order of men can do. In the late Monarchical Army Officered with Noblesse & recruited from the People The private Soldier was a kind of Dog or worse. A Gentlemen would caress his Dog: but a Soldier might die in the Kennel he was too mean a thing to touch the gentlemans notice. The Line of Distinction between them was so insurmountable that no merit could carry a private Soldier over it, he might storm Castle  or turn the fate of Battles; no matter his blood might flow where it would; he must toil & Suffer & be a Slave for Life it would contaminate the whole Race Of Nobl[esse] to treat him with any Notice. Can any one wonder that when a prospect opened of being able to break this film all the privates in the French army ran thr[ough] the Breach & still glory in the Idea that they are in the vulgar Phrase as Good as their General & may come to Command in their turn. This for the present I believe is the great charm of Democracy to them & who Can doubt its Effect. They may in process of time demand Settlements & retreats from Military Service but that time is not yet come. Thus in my opinion Stands the case with what we and all Europe not excepting the Directory & Democracy of France has to Contend.

We Blame the Directory for not making Peace they neither dare nor can make Peace. The Army must have forreign Ennemies to Devour or will devour at Home. What Conduct this may suggest in this Country I know not: but I am sure that no conduct will be right where the case is not understood & hence the whole Series of our Conduct hitherto or The Coalition of Europe by which we roused excercised & confirmed the Democracy of France .

Within you have a full Sheet that is almost as much as your Unciarium priviledge can bear, but there must be a cover besides with room for much Wisdom if I had any to Spare. The Plan of operations in such a War is not very easily Settled. The Ennemy desire no better than to be violently threatened with attacks on their Republick one & indivisible. One thing however is certain that every nerve must be strained to put this country in condition not to be Subdued without having its people destroyed first & the more this is believed, and that we mean no more in the War so much the better.

There is talk of representations and Appeal to the sense of the world. Good words I pray, for what have we to do with censures of what French do to one another. There should I think however be one burden to every Song, that our enemies seem disposed instead of allowing their Armed Citizens to repose in the Arms of Peace with the rewards & Settlements they have merited, seem to meditate relief, from their claims & pretensions by their destruction in operations which cannot be of any benefit to themselves or their Country. God Bless you all from your most affectionate &c

A.F.
