Hallyards 9th Feb.ry 1797

My Dear Friend

in your last, I think, you ask me how the Farm goes on. O fortunatos nimium Agricolos : if they would mind their own Affairs & forget what may happen in Europe, till it come to their own doors & then is soon enough for all the good they can do. I asked a neighbour farmer lately why the late owner of this place was so fond of it as I had been told: because, he said, it gave him a great deal to do. And do you think it a good reason? For us, not, he said unless we gain by what we do ________. I do not expect much of that recommendation for what I do: but am never idle & can tramp about with unblacked boots or wooden clogs for two or three weeks together, for my Valet de Chambre is gone to the Plough and I am myself constantly at work opening drains & turning aside torrents and  yet I am more harrassed with news papers than with all this. It is Sun Shine with you Sometimes when it lours elsewhere: pray let me have a little Glimpse. Say that the Austrians tho' beaten in Italy more than any thing ever was beaten will not accept of terms for themselves without including us. That Buonaparte is not to go on forever &c &c. I blush for your Alexrs and Caesars who should be ashamed of having strutted so long [xxx] on the Stilts of military fame for having with some great advantage on their Side won a few Battles against inferior Ennemies: But now I think the Miles gloriosus bussiness has worn itself out, And I shall never admire any more, except the valour that is employed to repell wrongs & protect the Orphan & the Widow. To boast of mischief is the worst Sort of Pedantry & Nonsense. And yet I wish for a little of that Sort of Pedantry which the Ennemy seems to exhibit in all quarters, in order to meet them if they should come here.  Which I believe in my Conscience they will do Wind & weather Serving even if our fleet were as great again as it is. You and I it seems cannot agree about the Parish exercise of Arms, I grant that, like most new things, it may be attended with Risk: but the greatest Risk of all is from the want of it, I. E. Subjugation to a Petulant & outrageous Ennemy who will boast of the Horrors they excite. Government will come to this measure as they do to many others when too late: for its operation would not be immediate, if would only Cultivate the nursery from which Government would be enabled to transplant Shoots indefinitely for the Battalions to be formed for Specific Service at home or abroad. And the People even at their own homes instead of kneeling for Mercy might frown an Ennemy into Respect: But not to disspute any more; there is more good news I expect from you: That there is no ill military humour  on the Ganges; but what My Lord C can appease. No subject has been more in my thoughts than the danger of making the Use of Arms a Separate Profession. If so it must be the highest or lowest & fraught with mischief in either. To Civil Governments who must have Armies in the pay, one of my nostrums is, look forward to what the Army may, one day, reasonably Ask, and do it Silently before it come in their heads to ask it. And if possible let their heads never Come together upon any Subject of grievance or professional pretension. If you deferr to grant till they have demanded, no reason will satisfy them. What has the Court of Leadenhall Street done in this matter. But here is enough tho not much about farming.

We had a Letter from your little Friend at sea in bad weather he had been Sick he said at first but that was over. We hope he is now at Spithead & that we shall hear from him soon. I am

My Dear Friend most affectionately 
yours 
Adam Ferguson
