Hallyards 23 Decr 
1796



My Dear Friend

I acknowledge the receipt of Mr Wraxals Publication & have seen nothing else so likely to do good on both Sides of the Water and so having no more to say at present trouble you as usual for the mere Evasion of Postage. The enclosed is an Answer to My little mans first letter from Portsmouth, he has seen the Caesar and did not know there was so large a Ship in the world. His letter also includes one from a Poor Cottager here who has a Son on board The Glutton which the news Paper says is just now gone in to Dock at Portsmouth for a little repair. There used to be much intercourse betwixt John & the Parents & there will be great joy at the delivery of this Letter. The older Sailor I guess would risk his life at any time for the younger one. My head is full of news Since I read last nights Paper. What is become of our great & Good Ally the Empress of Russia ad Inferos out Superos . Will there be any great change of the Scenes. Or who is to be the Empress next: Will the Guards at Petersburgh put up with a Male Sovereign &c &c? What a Report from the executive Directory to the Counsel of 500? Never did State anounce its own extinction in plainer terms. It is a trick on which to found Some new measures of Finance. The news paper bears that it is meant to usher in the proposition of a new fabrication of Paper, if so now is the time for your Traveller to Speak or is it meant as a Ground of exculpation for the Concessions they are making towards Peace. This is what I wish. And I hope that we shall not quench the smoking flax by Screwing up our demands: for I return to my old Doctrine that tho Peace may be friendly to the Nation it is hostile to the present Rulers. And I am still of opinion that the best way of making War is to have peace with them. I think that I understand the State of affairs in Italy through the mist of opposite reports &c And the Party which perseveres, repairing its losses even under Defeat will prevail at last. I have not yet transmitted the Pamphlet to Dr Blair; being willing to Spare his Purse I wait for somebody that will bear it for nothing, and in the mean  time he may be Otherwise Supplied. I believe the Regions are dancing & that Nova Zembla is now here. We have little or no Snow but the Thermometer at 10° of Farhenheit, so much for the weather wishing to hear little from you

I am 
My Dear Friend 
your most affectionate 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson









P.S. The direction of the within should be to John Ferguson with Captain Nugent of His Majesties ship the Caesar at Portsmouth unless you know better.
