22 Septr 1796 Morses [Hallyards]

My Dear Friend

I Sit down to write, without knowing what, farther than that I am to inclose Some Correspondence for our little Friend from his kindred here that he may not imagine that he is forgotten. It pleases me to think that he conciliates good will where he goes & I hope that he will not be deficient in Spirit but for this there is better chance the sooner he makes his transition from the ways of mere land men to those of the best Philosophers of modern times who Can mount the Waves & Triumph in the Storm. There is besides this enclosed Correspondence a certain duration of Silenc[e] which becomes difficult to endure. I blame myself for my not hearing from you when I recollect that there is more than one letter Since I wrote last. I hope you go on with an Anxiety, to be Sure, for the Subject deserves it: but not with so much expectation of what certain persons may be induced to do as can disstress or chagrin you. For my own part I like to put things at the worst & consider how I can bear that  and what is best to be done under it. If they should turn out better there will be less to endure. I have been diverted of late with a Hypothesis which I by no means adopt; That our two great German Allies have playe[d] booby in this War. That the Austrians have given way in order to be quit of the Low Countries & have pretensions to an equivalent more Conveniently Situated for them & That the Other has withdrawn from the Contest & never exerted himself in it to bring Ruin on the Former & have a farther distribution of Territory in which his Lot may be extended. I hope it will appear in good time that the Austrians, who certainly do not play Booby in Italy; will fall like the destroying Angel upon those who venture to drive them on their own ground. The Arch Duke Charles is I hope now in the first Act of this After Piece in the Drama. I flatter myself he is not to quit Mr Jourdan till he has completely cut him up. Even if Moreau in the mean time should advance to the Gates of Vienna his Situation may be made much the worse by a Victorious Army coming in his Rear while the Levies of Hungary & Bohemia salute him in Front. Yet with all this flattery of the imagination I have no Comfort in this Paradoxical War, in which Scarcely any event beyond the boundaries of France can do us any Good. Our Defeats  weaken us & Our Victories Strengthen our Ennemies they unite France against us & it is from the division of France that its present Rulers our Ennemies have any thing to Fear. If we should kill them fifty thousan[d] men in one Battle, they will have just so many fewer turbulent Subjects to Govern And the remainde[r] will be the more earnest to Support them against the ennemies of their liberties and of the Glory of France.

This is the engageing point of view in which we of this Island are made to appear whenever Fortune is pleased to favour us. The War I am told is by no means Popular in France: but the continuance of it is imputed to us & of course the less Popular it is the more we shall be detested. I am curious to know whether we Still expect to Make Conquests or at least that our Ennemies are on the Eve of being palsied a la Diverno[is]. That is certainly a Vexatious   Z   & not very wise to believe him. Yours most Affectionately

&c &c
