Hallyards 29 April 
1800



My Dear Friend

I have been remiss in my Correspondence of late And have to thank you as usual for kind attention to my Concerns, What you try to Alleviate my Affliction is not without Effect. Your own presence to my mind is powerful. It is indeed the condition of old age and long life to Survive many we would wish to preserve. Poor Josephs Life has been Short: but not Sunk in dejection. He had the esteem & regard of those about him without mortification in his little course of Ambition. And it is Some Consolation to me that when he looked to me for Aid my Circumstances did not Oblige me to refuse it. And for ought that appeared to him he was a fortunate man which is the utmost that mere life whether long or short can procure to any one. For the Sum when it is Gods Will we should die it is as good as to live Or rather as I am perswaded it is to enter on a new life. And thus reason is easily Satisfy'd altho  to Taste the draught is bitter. His name has never yet been mentioned here & we commonly meet with recent mark of Tears, which we endeavour to conceal And this he would have done for us.

You may believe I anxiously wish you[r] Success in the transaction you mention or what is Still better indifference to what may happen. It is supremely pleasant to lean upon those who are disposed to befriend us but not less so to be independent of those who are Otherwise. If you have a fault it is believing that all the world must be sensible of the good you intend them. I would be Selfish so far as to do what is right merely that I myself might enjoy it; Be the Theater on which I act great or Small. It is impossible to be more Obscure than I am in this place: yet my thoughts I trust will habitually place me in the presence of a Majesty beyond the Universe itself & to which the Observation of all mankind if it could be Obtained were as nothing. The Intelligence that Conducts  the Universe is here present & intimately know[s] what we think and do. May he never be Absent from our thoughts. Believe me most Affectionately yours &c

Adam Ferguson
