Hallyards near Peebles 29th August 1805

My Dear Friend

I am sorry to hear Complaints of your Health; And wish you had been more particular. If it proceeds from the habits of a Town Life continued beyond the meridian, a retreat to the Country is surely the best remedy. This however I doubt is not to be had within the Atmosphere of Tunbridge Wells. And I am perswaded your wisest Course woud be an excursion to this Country & a few draughts of this Highland Air you would be surprised to see how we baffle even Old Age itself in this part of the World. That is to say by the Continuance of animal Life or at least Vegetation. As for capacity & Energy of mind these are reserved for another Life. I  Suspect you are too much Agitated with the winds that blow from so many different quarters of this Political Horizon. We who are not entrusted with either Sail or Rudder ought to take our Station as Passengers & not accountable even if the Ship should go down. Such is my Preaching if not my Practice. You may believe at least that I am not indifferent to L. Ms Affairs. That Brush is the worst Effect of Party that has past in my Time; but I trust that The Mass of the Country is still so untainted with Faction that he will have his Rank in the Publick Esteem. Two or three publick Measures which I am Confident were his would have set him very high in my mind even if he had been personally negligent of me as I am affraid he was too much so of you. The Commutation of a most Absurd & Oppressive Tax on Water borne Coal. The affection of all Highlanders gained to the State & The King by the R[e]stitution  of forfeited Estates. The Arming of the Country &c &c Are measures untainted with Party or with party Interest & the work of a mind that had leisure to do good as well as to Strugle for Power. I have not heard of his Arrival in this Country but when I do shall be proud to leave my Name at his Door.

Your kindness I am affraid does but tempt My Son to be troublesome at London. His present excursions thither is against My Mind. His Profession[al] Prospects in this Country as I formerly mentioned are Small: but the Horizon of London & the world beside is no better & I have wished him to abide by what I can do for him here: & if there be no World for him on which to Range that he be Contented with a Nook & a Kail yard on which to breath. Send him down then I pray you as soon as you Can & if you come with him so much the Better. You may growl over publick errata here as well as at London. Your most affectionate

A. Ferguson
