Hallyards 1st March 1797

My Dear Sir

I am sorry to acquaint you of your worthy father's departure from this life. At his age the event is not a matter of surprise, and he met it with great calmness and in the full possession of all his faculties to the last, though under much suffering and bodily distress. In the course of last year he had a paralytic stroke from which he in a great measure recovered; but in winter he became dropsical, and suffered so much from a stifling in his breast that for many weeks before his death he could not be laid in a bed. I enclose for your satisfaction copies of his will executed some years ago, and of a codicil subjoined during his last illness, in both of which he has with great humanity attended to the necessities of poor and deserving relations, by allotting certain annuities for which I make no doubt his funds are sufficient, although I have not yet received a particular state of them. This my son is now making out from the papers which are in his hands, and of which we shall transmit a copy to you. It was difficult to save much from the wreck of a fortune which was on the losing side of a great revolution; but there is reason to believe that he recovered as much as could be expected, and he lived in this country with but little expense besides some of the charities which he has continued in his will.

I reproach myself frequently for not more regularly acknowledging the letters with which you have favoured me. Not being much a man of business my habits have been during great part of my life to defer and procrastinate letters, till there was a danger of their being forgotten altogether; and as most of my friends know this failing, and that I would not neglect any matter of consequence, they were ever ready to forgive me, which I hope you will also, and not discontinue to me the satisfaction of hearing of your welfare. I send this little packet to my friend Sir John MacPherson, who I hope will forward it and direct it properly. As I have taken to a country life at this place you will please direct your letters accordingly to me at Hallyards. . . . Most affectionately yours

Adam Ferguson
