Bankhead Decr 1st 
1769



My Dear Sir

I wrote a few days ago a short apology for my apprehensions of the London Mob. It is not the courage but the Cowardice of them & their opponents I Dread. Recollect & you will find that cowardice has raised & Perpetuated more Military Governments than ever courage did. Sylla is the only man since the Beginning of the World that ever had the Courage to lay down a Military Government at the head of which he had offended. If you drive a Coward to the wall he is more dangerous than a brave man in another Situation.

Having been bussy all the week with my affairs at College I came here to pass a night & find myself engaged in the affairs of the Nation. I threatned to differ from you about the test of well constituted Government, about the fact in our own constitution, & tho I might agree with you about its differ disstemper to differ nevertheless about the Remedy: but as I have not your letter by me must write at Random and  shall be very glad not to differ from you at all.

In speaking of well constituted Government I must define Arbitrary Power which you seem to think inconsistent with it. This is not a Power exempted from the obligations of Justice nor a Power that can make wrong right or right wrong. There is no such Power neither in heaven above nor on the Earth beneath. But an Arbitrary Power is that which may determine itself according to the Special[i]tys of every Particular case having no rule prescribed to it nor being accountable to any Other Power. Now the test of well constituted government is not the want of such a Power: but the committing of it to the safest hands. A Government without Supreme unaccountable or Arbitrary Power is as inconceivable as a circle without a Circumference. The Government of France is not well constituted because Arbitrary Power is committed to a very unsafe hand, that of the King who has a Partial Interest to Support & who sacrifices the Wellfare of the people to this Interest. But the Government of Great Britain is well constituted because it commits Arbitrary Power to King Lords & Commons, who according to the constitution in its sound State comprehend all the Interests in the Kingdom which ought to be reconciled in every particular case before any resolution can be agreed to by all these three members of our Sovereignty.

Now as to the fact in our constitution. King Lords & Commons have Arbitrary Power. And they have made a Good use of it. In the first place they have divested themselves of the exercise of this very Power as far as is consistent with their Supremacy. They coud not delegate Legislation without ceasing to be Supreme; but they have delegated Jurisdiction & the execution of the Law to Judges & officers of the Crown to whom they have Prescribed Rules & who are accountable to themselves for the Observance of those Rules. So much that every Subject knows as far as the Nature of Government will Permit the Rule according to which he is to be governed. In the next place they have enacted in general very good Laws & have interposed their Supreme & Arbitrary Power by Bills of Attainder &c only in extraordinary cases, & for the most part with good Effect to the Publick.  When you acknowledge that King Lords and commons Jointly are the Supreme Power in this constitution: you have acknowledged that each of them separately is Supreme in what is required to its own defence. I do not ask what their proceedings have been in matters of this sort the supposition of a Power is the supposition of a right to defend that Power. Let the Commons be attacked in the Priviledge of any member, in the improper nomination of any member, they cannot hold their share of the Supreme Power if they cannot repell that attack without being accountable to any other Power whatever. If they must have the Authority of a Statute for what they do: they cannot defend themselves without the Consent of King & Lords: Let the King or Lords then be the Invaders, as may well be supposed, & the Commons are undone. The Lords determine who are their own Constituent members & so do the commons. In this they are not jointly but each separately the Supreme Legislature the Supreme Judicature & the Supreme executive Power. Their  History will prove; considering the frailty of human Nature, that their separate as well as joint Powers have not been abused. Their Subjects have been the freest & securest Subjects on Earth. They act by the Majority & the Majority can have no interest in groundless oppressions that might one day reach any of themselves.

Now for the disstemper. The Majority of The Commons are under Influence of administration. And may abuse their Power to pay their Court. Granted.

What is the Remedy? A Farther extension of the Remedy that has been already in Part applied. All officers of the Revenue are already excluded from the House of Commons. Exclude if you will every other placed or Pensioned Man whatever. Or of this be too much let the Secretarys of State. The Boards of Treasury. Admiralty and Trade &c have each their single Representative in Parliament & no more. Give the Countys a greater Representation & the Burroughs less. Let the People take care whom they chuse. They are  concerned not to bestow unworthily a Power that in the Nature of things must be Arbitrary because there is no superior to give it Law nor to call it to account. It is the Spirit of our constitution that Members of Parliament shoud be well chosen but that being chosen they shoud be Masters. How absurd it woud be to name an Abeter with full powers without minding whether he were an honest man or a knave & then talk of Limiting his Power when there is nobody to controul or direct him. I woud fain think I do not differ from you in my notion of the Remedy Altho you talked of a Statute to restrain the Powers of the Commons. Which I think is either inconsistent with our constitution & woud either be neglected or have a bad effect: but the first it woud most certainly be. Let your Virtuous opposition Speak. I know what they will chuse when it is in their option when it is in their to hurt administration without doing good to the Public or to do good to the Public without  hurting Administration. I shoud be very sorry to see men all of one mind in Parliament: but either this manner of Party or the State itself I am perswaded cannot last. How can a State Subsist when every one out of Pension or place and even some that are in think themselves entitled to disstress it. I am perswaded that Sr George Saville & you cannot be serious in apprehending that the expulsion of Mr Wilkes is a bad precedent for you. I shoud think it a very bad precedent for you if such men were allowed to sit in the house. The Power of expulsion has never been so much abused by the house as to merit any notice in human affairs. Till now it has been in my memory never exerted at all & yet the Majority has always been on the Side of Administration and opposition has always been troublesome. Why shoud the Majority expell they are already Masters. Why shoud the most corrupted of the Majority chuse to expell, it woud only serve to Lessen their own Consideration & to bring down the Price of their Votes which is always highest when Partys are nearest Equality. 

Such men as Sr George Saville and you never were since the World Began expelled from any National Assembly or Senate except when there were Sentrys at the door to keep them out. The London mob may soon make it necessary to have sentrys in a certain Lobby to keep themselves out what farther use may be made of those Semtrys I know not. A Popular Party in the house having the Majority within & the Cry without may proceed to the fury of mere Party expulsions: but a Corrupt Minister will be glad to sneak through with his Majority & will surely avoid the odium of expelling any worthy man when by the very supposition of a majority he can go on without any such measure.

Since writing the Above I have returned to Edr & have read over your Letter with great pleasure. I think the difference between us may be reduced to the following points. You seem to deny the Supremacy of the house of Commons in matters of their own right Establishment. This Supremacy I hold to be as  well ascertained to the commons, as The Supremacy of all the Three orders is in matters that concern all three. The Practice of the Commons has been uniformly agreeable to this right of Supremacy & without that Practice in the Reigns of James & Charles they woud have ceased to exist.

You seem to think that this power to expell and disqualify is matter of new Pretension: but it has been exercised when occasion offered and never questioned till now.

You seem to think that a Supreme Power altho it cannot receive the Law from any other Power may nevertheless prescribe Rules to itself & cease to be Arbitrary. This I think a deception of words. A Persons own Rule is but his Resolution which he may keep or neglect at Pleasure unless there be some other to whom he must render Acc't.

If there be any Power so constituted as not to be subject to render Account, Care must be taken with whom that Power is  entrusted it is vain to employ ineffectual Rules. You will say perhaps that my Remedy mentioned above is impracticable. I am sure that in this Reign something very considerable in that way might have been obtained. If Gentlemen in Opposition had chosen to do any Good. You observe that Parliament men are not Bone of our Bone &c That is not the fault of the Constitution: but of their constituents, here the Remedy recurs again.

You insist that Expulsion from Parliament is to be considered as the Punishment of a Crime. Be it so. But it is still of such Crimes considered as rendering a person unworthy of Parliamentary Trust. I never knew a Person unworthy of that trust today become Worthy tommorrow. I am a Farmer if I had turned a fellow out of my barn for theft, I surely woud have a right to turn him out not only once but every time he attempted to come into it again. You observe that if the Character of Wilkes had not been infamous  the people woud have been unanimous on his Side. Most certainly if his Character had not been so I in particular woud never have thought that the House of commons did right in expelling him. It is hard in matters of Judgement to make people accountable for their actions & their motives too. If the action was right we must in Political matters put up with any motive or presume the Proper one.

As to the Resentment of People here to Mr Wilkes, if he deserved their Notice he woud certainly merit the other. There are some english Gentlemen established here & in the way of Preferment, if any body were to revile their Countrey in order to injure them I believe he woud be more detested here than Mr Wilkes ever was. If I know my own heart I shoud feel more indignation than ever my contempt of Wilkes Suffered me to feel in his case. The Reception his Scurrilitys found was inpitious not Provoking. When we find that the State is brought into some danger by such unworthy fools this is Provoking and Alarming too. 

I am a little piqued you shoud Suppose I thought the London Mob terrible in War. I know that they will fly from sharp shot but I know likewise that not only the Mob but the very Women & Whores at London may make Military Government appear Necessary to those who ought to prevent Military Government if they are encouraged & cannot be governed without it. I ought not tox have said any thing of the Riot Law without having read it, but in its Effects it does not appear to have been very Powerful where it was applied: Innocent and respectable people were attacked in the streets and in their houses & these crimes passed unpunished. In a Countrey where a fellow cant take a few shillings on the high way without being hanged.

I regret with the Deepest concern that you have not some Active hand in the administration. Government needs hands that can drive with resolution & stop short of extremes. I am glad of your opinion of some in Power: but the Party that wish for confusion & trouble are Strong & yet this may be a great Session. Pardon so much

yours Adam Ferguson
