Edinburgh 18th Decr 1779

My Dear Sir

I am much Obliged to you for the Scribles as you are pleased to call them they are my Sole Information or at least I never think myself sure of any thing untill I have the Hint of it from you. I am not at all Ashamed of being in your Debt, for where nothing is nothing can be furnished. In these times even Old Women & Children can speak of nothing but Politics & I have lost relish for that Subject without having any Other to put in its Place. I most Sincerely Respect & love the Perseverance of our Friend in tugging at this Oar while the Bark appears to be deserted or even misguided by every one else. To leave any principal Station at present to the first occupyer I fear might be ruinous. But in the name of all the wonders in the World how can  he think to go on without being able to command the Cooperation of Other Persons & without making it the Principal Study of his Life, to seize every little Spark of genius or Ability that any where Appears for the execution of Service. How comes the man who with so much Ability & Courage Covered the Attack of Silence to be no longer Employed? Mc Lean & Campbell one made Adjutant the Other made Quarter Master General at the principal Seat of the War in America are still capable of giving a favourable turn to our Affairs: but if we are to employ the first that offers without discernment or choice no Power no resources no perseverance can ever avail us in any thing. But so much for Politics which I had a Mind to foreswear in beginning this Letter but Naturam expellas Furca tamen usque recurret. And since I am in for it, take likewise my hearthy Approbation of the Propositions respecting Ireland. I willingly hope that  they will meet with no Difficulty besides that of the ordinary contentious opposition. For Reason and Justice I think should reconcile all Partys, who wish bona Fide to remove Grievances & obtain some Equitable Measures for the improvement of their Condition & Propertys. The Object I confess for which I pant is a compleat Union with Ireland: this may not be practicable at Present: but I am perswaded that in the last Period of twenty years it might have been Obtained And am willing to hope that in the coming Period ot twenty years more if the conjunctures are watched & improved it may Still be Obtained. And I should consider it as little less than doubling the compacted Strength of these Kingdoms.

As for America, I thought our Cause there was good & might be brought to a favourable Issue so long as we could make it likewise the Cause of a great Body of the People there, to whom, with our Exertions from Europe, we might give the Ascendant over their Ennemys & our own.

But if instead of improving this part  of our Strength, we Suffer our Friends there to moulder away or to be finally tore up and Ruined, not all the money that change Alley can furnish not all the Armaments we can fit out & what we seem to attend to more not all the Speeches we can make in Parliament will give me any Hopes. I troubled you with a young Clergymans Suit to be made a Chaplain without thinking the matter of much Consequence to him & without chargeing myself very deeply with it even if I had thought it more so having matters, if this were a time to urge them, of much more concern. I have a Brother a man of very great worth with a Numerous Family, who had Sold a little Property he had in the Country to a Gentleman in his Neighbourhood, thinking he could do better for his Family with the money than with the Land. The Money lay in the Purchasers hands, who has just now become Insolvent & reduced us to the Prospect of great  Disstress. If it were possible to procure him some of the Inferior Offices in the Custom house Department of this Countrey that of Land waiter or any Other it would be a seasonable relief and lay me under great Obligations. I mention it in perfect confidence that you will be as ready to forgive my mentioning proposing an improper thing as to help me in what is proper with our advice & Assistance. My Brother is the Father of the young Man whom C: Greville & you provided for in the Marines last year. And whether any thing can be done for him or no I could not sleep in quiet till I had communicated My Case to you.

John Home has come a few days ago with Leave of Absence from his Quarters at Aberdeen & has gone to the Countrey for Mrs Home to pass the Time of his Forloff here if the change which I am told is making in  the dissposition of our Forces here does not proceed upon Some Circumstance that may require his Attendance. I have been some time of opinion that if the Army upon Paper now within this Kingdom be properly formed & Commanded we are certainly in Condition to repell any Practicable or likely Invasion from our Ennemys & that our Fleets may act on the offensive wherever the Ennemy are Vulnerable. But I confess that I would not rely on the Levys made or now making for this Purpose so long as there was a Creditable & able bodyed Man within the Kingdom without Arms in his hands. I should not mean to embody the whole People. But I should certainly try to make it the Fashion for every Sober Landholder & householder to have a stand of Arms in his House. This I believe in Reality would make us invincible. If an Ennemys Army come here tho inferiour to our own  the chance of a Battle is doubtfull And I think that we should have a better Tenure than the Chance of one Battle however favourable Arms every where in the hands of the People will expose an Ennemy to be shot at wherever they go. And will enable us to raise Army after Army, if we should even be reduced ad Triarios in defence of our Countrey. And if we were fully in condition to make war to this Extent, I believe it would not do us any harm to be tryed. The Ways of some Men are past finding out. It is impossible for me to conceive why Government should give their Countenance to one part of the Countrey in Arming themselves & not the whole. If Government Suspect that they have Ennemys as well as Friends it is upon this account the more expedient & proper it is to Arm their Friends: for the Consequence of their neglect or equal treatment of Friends & Ennemys will be that their Friends will refrain Arming from Respect And there  Ennemys will be Armed in Resentment & Contempt. I pray you to write me as often as you can for the mere Satisfaction of seeing your hand writing & knowing of your wellfare. We have seen all overtaken here with an Epidemic Distemper and are somewhat Shattered with it. I intended to have written my respects to Mr. E. on the Subject of his Letters; sed ter Patriae cecidere manus & I am now too late.

My Little Flock here, any more than Mrs Ferguson & myself, never forget you. My Friend Johnstones Boys are at Dumfries where I do not hear from them but believe them to be well & there never were more promising Children. I pray you to offer my Respects to their Mother. The Father I hope fera parler de lui & to the Comfort of his Friends & the dismay of his Ennemys. yours &

A. Ferguson
