[14 February 1800]

My Dear Friend

I have had the inclosed from Dr Blair with instructions to return it to you. Justice is done to our financical Policy & if omnia si su  with our Armed Landmen & our Glorious Seamen we would be a fortunate People: but something as you hint is wanting in our Conception of things abroad. Some people I find are of opinion that we ought to be sending our Troops abroad to see Service. If this Policy be adopted let them go to the Rhine or the Danube to act under Suvarov or ArchDuke Charles: but not where [xxx] to retreat they must reembark in presence of an Ennemy & be cut off or lay down their Arms. The habit of begging for Quarter is not a good lesson of Service. You touch the Convention of Pilnitz. I believe very fairly & all I have to Say on that Subject is that whenever mentioned it should be particularly Specifye[d] & not passed over in general terms. When we are beat we desire no more than Safety to Publick and private property but when we are victorious we would have something more for our trouble. In the first Case our Ennemy woud give us peace in the Second we wont have it. So I dont know what is to happen to us. We would have a Peace in which  it will be safe for us to dissarm; But such a Peace I believe we are never more to See. While France exists whether under Military Government or a pretended Democracy This Island must be Armed to be Safe.

The late question has been not whether we would conclude with Buonaparte on any Specifyed Terms: but whether in the present circumstances we would Suspend all our efforts & those particularly in concert with our allies to try what sort of Terms Buonaparte would offer.

To the last Question I would give a decided negative tho I am inclined to think the terms in the present Conjuncture might be better than we may ever after get Sight of. This Recent Usurper might agree to any thing Short of his own resignation or a relinquishment of the Equality which his army claims. Any treaty Concluded with us would imply the Acknowledgement of his Sovereignty & this he would buy at a great Price. And he would have so much to do in restoring his Country from the dilapidations of recent folly: that I believe the person is not alive who would see it his interest to go to War. Nay but he would make a great Fleet so much the Better as Frederick of Prussia once said. The [E]nglish will take them all. Nations would never be [s]atisfied till they have nothing to fear from Abroad. And if they should ever Come to think so the greatest [n]ation on Earth would be undone. I am projecting this for a Cover merely to the inclosed as more might exceed the legal ounce: but how it is to fold I know not: be that as it may. I  must tell you of a recent relief from anxiety & even desponde[ncy] in the recovery of our little Seaman from a Fever under which he has been sent ashore to sick Quarter at Dartmouth. I have corresponded with his Medical Foru[m] and at last have a letter from himself saying he is almost quite well. It is pleasant to read with what triumph he speaks of his Captain Sr Jas Sumarez kindness & of every Officer & Man about him. That is a noble class of men noursed in continual hardship & danger to a contempt of every thing but generosity and Courage. God grant me but a little Spice of their Character.

yours most Affectionately 
Adam Ferguson
