London July 12, 1759

Dear John

This great bussiness is effected at last and I who never had a home till now must prepare to go home to Edinburgh O Dulcia Verba

I was with David last night to perswade him to go with me and if I coud conclude any thing from his hesitation I woud have hopes of bringing him but the Vis inertiae which I am now to pay to so great a regard to is all against me, & tho he went so far as to say that he wished he was in Scotland to put and end to all consultation about it yet I doubt much of his moving, he is gone out of Town to Stuarts for some days, & his want of resolution perplexs me, for Stowe wants me to go down with him & I cannot ingage till I know of Davids motions, I believe it will be proper for me to let Stowe set out & tell David I will be dissappointed of a companion if he does not go. I cannot yet fix upon a time  for being at Berwick. I have the Bussiness of some days besides a Visit or two to the Countrey. Lord Bute Garrick whom I have not yet seen Dido etiam qui rusticat & magnos timet Lucinae labores sed [xxx] vanae credo formidines.

You seem to expect Vigorous measures upon the present Alarm. I dont know what a grain or two more of fear will do, but we do not seem to be in a hurry here with any thing that points at arming the Countrey. We trust to the Fleet while the season keeps moderate weather & will allow our Ships to ly on the Ennemys Coast: by September we expect troops from Gibraltar &c & those who are at Home compleated enough to repell a French embarkation. We are again in expectation of a Battle in Westphalia. One Miss Grey who is lately returned from Holland was advised by the French Minister at the Hague not to go to England in this troublesome time or if she did he offered her letters of recommendation to Monsr Chevert . . . .

 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

 of Carlyle's affair

Clerk as per last with more bussy with the affairs of the Nation than people to whom they are entrusted. I will writec when I know of my time for setting out if I go he will desire our meeting at his house & [shoud] be pleasant, but I must lose as little time as possible on the road.

Make my comp[liments] to Mr & Mrs Home.

I am Dear John 
Affectionately yours 
Adam Ferguson
