Vilvorden Camp Septr 11 1745

Dr Jack

Were you now in your old place and I at my old Corner of the table, I coud tell you a great many Storys and adventures, as how I dined with Yappie Findornard at the Briel, and how I slept at Rotterdam, no matter whether true or false so I might be allow'd to assume the airs of a traveler and a great fellow, in which Character whether you allow of it or not, I intend to write this Letter. I promised to write you from London but we are often under Obligations to do what is not so easily performed. I was so bewildered and lost in that great place, and my Brain so jumbled that I could not think of doing any thing orderly. During the short time I was there I got into great variety of mixed Company, which afforded a deal of entertainment to which before I had been pretty much a Stranger; every fellow reads the publick papers and talks his mind concerning them with all the vehemence immaginable. What does the King do abroad quoth one. Bring home the Army quoth another if they woud make Lord George Graham Admiral of the Fleet we are a match for all Europe Still. You see, these vast oddities of Character, as might naturally be expected, in a place where a great many of the Inhabitants come from different corners of the World, and bring their own peculiaritys along with them, and where the Characters of others are Shaped amidst a Multitude, as Chance or their different applications will have it.

But how come I, say you who was but two short Weeks in London to see all this. You or I may go to an Eating House a Beer or any house, set at what Board join what company you will, and talk familiarly with people who neither know you nor one another, and whom perhaps you never will have another sight of. As for the Whores Villains and Robbers that throng the Streets at Night John Blair can give you a very good account of them. I saw John Spencer Esq.r who is like a footman in his Dress and a Yorkshire Jockie in his Air and manner. The Famous Lord Chesterfield is as short as my friend Drysdale and has as great a head as my Brother Robertson, I saw him lookie, with great patience reading a beggars paper in the entry to the Cockpit as he was going in to settle the affairs of Brittain and Europe. And not to forget you Sir, I have seen St Paul's which in my shallow judgements is a grand Building. I heard a preaching there concerning Modesty and Bashfulness, which was  somewhat Speculative like the Sermons of Davie Dickson according to Andrew Grey. But not to forget myself concerning whom you are no doubt anxious to know somewhat, I went to our Agent, who told me that my £60 at Least was mounted to upwards of 90, and I am since made to understand that the Duke of Cumberland has orderd that pay to all in my way whilst the Army is Abroad. The Agent gave me thirty Guineas and so I bade him farewell and marched away in the Stage Coach to Harwich. In a few hours after I came there, the packet sailed, and with the Assistance of a little bit of a hurricane we were dashed from England to Holland in about fourteen hours. I can tell you little about the Dutch but that they are grave odd like fellows, and speak a language I don't understand. They are the greediest for Money of any people I ever saw; profit is their life and joy nor will they allow you one doit of advantage though your life were at stake. There appeared amongst many one remarkable Instance of this at Rotterdam, there were other two Gentlemen in Company, after we had taken three places in a kind of Posting Coach that goes from Rotterdam to Antwerp and had all payd our pistoles each, one of the Company went aside to the Petit Maison, ad exonerandum alveum, the people immagining some body had not payd, went first to one, then to another, at length they came to the Gentleman in his retirement from which place he was dragged by a Man and a Woman in all the Dishabile common on such occasions without being able to Satisfy them till he came to an interpreter, so little delicacy have they in money matters and so impatient are they till their demands are Satisfied. We set out from Rotterdam in the Morning and drove it away to Antwerp that Night. The appearance of the Country was very strange to me who was mostly conversant with the highlands of Scotland, such dead extended plains, such a Cold invary'd prospect, where a paltry Bush will terminate the view to as good purpose as a Mountain were wonder enough to a Highlander. And indeed in so far as I could observe it the Temper of the People seemed to be pretty much what the objects they were conversant with woud inspire. Tho Sunday there especially in the afternoon be a mere play day, I cannot say, but the people keep it with as much Gravity as they do in Scotland, no Gamboling no Quips or Quidities, every fellow sets on a form before his Door with perhaps Six Pair of Breeches on, and a tobaco pipe,  smoaking with as much Gravity and wisdom as the Minister of Gladsmuir himself, you'll perhaps too see a houshold thing or two with shining Morning face and Green Purse on Side creeping like Snail about her own affairs.

In the Country the People are mostly Bours, that is each holds as his own Property a piece of Ground equall to a good farm with you, for which he pays some tax to the Republick only. To this it is owing that in all the way through Hollandd I coud not see a house beyond that of a Ministers manse at Gladsmuir. No Gentilhomes or Highland Dune wassels. Mr Allen McLean of Brolas in the Isle of Mull a Gentleman of as good Blood as any in all that country, observed that the D—l ha him if he believed there was any thing of a tolerably good Gentleman in all Holland, which Observation I leave John Hume to make his remarks on, as he can trace their blood from the Siege of Leyden even until this day, and prove that they have had their five senses in as good condition as if they had been descended of the best family in Scotland. When you come near Antwerp and in that City itself the face and apearance of things are pretty different. The City is large but thinly peopled, the Low people are very poor and ragged and The great extravagantly fantastick in their dress and equipage. It is their dayly custom to ride round the whole Streets every afternoon, bowing and saluting one another as they pass, and I am told many of them can alight from a most princely Coach and come home to dine on a little Sallad and Greens because they cannot afford a better dinner, the Coach horses and Laqueys eating up all their Revenues.

There is in that place I am told about 100 Churches and 6000 priests. I myself was in more Churches than I coud well number and in many of them Saw very admirable Pictures, but the Grandest piece they have is one of Rubens in Notre Dame Church, it is our Saviour taking down from the Cross, I never coud conceive such perfection in that Art before, the whole and each figure being so masterly designed and finished. You may possibly have heard of the Grand spire of Antwerp, I wish I could give you a Draught  of it, I never saw such a piece of Gothick Architecture in my life. It shoots to a vast heght and is just a pyramid of minute ornaments crusted and baked together to the very top, on the top of it your view is boundless it being higher than any ground within a hundred Miles of it. Nor must you be surprisd Ladies that I write about Steeples, for by that means I Instruct your Brother let you know that I was at Antwerp whether you will or not. After I had spent upwards of ten days in this place I went forward to the Camp, where I became acquainted with my officers all at once, we here form a body whose interests are all Connected together, and it is the easiest matter to fall into acquaintance. I'm extremely happy in my Colonel nor would I change him or his Regiment for any in the Service, I preached to them yesterday over a Couple of Drums, and tho it was my first I had no more fear or concern than if it had been my hundredth and nineteenth time. A few days after I came we had a General Review of all the Troops, they were all drawn out in their lines, and his Highness rode from on[e] end of the Line to tother, and myself be sure in his Retinue, you cannot immagine how much I was roused by the Spirit Stirring Drum and the ear piercing fife with all the Pomp & Circumstance of glorious War. In the evening we had a fire of Joy on account of the Election, which was the Grandest noise I ever heard. The Dutch began upon the Left and from thence the fire came roaring and flashing along thro the whole line, for near ten or twelve Miles, that being the length of our present Camp.

I am mightily pleased with every thing in this way of life, as for the Grand Monarque he fled to Versailles, whenever he heard of my coming, which you may remember I told you would be the Case. Our Army is far from being in the desperate condition you immagined when I left Scotland. What our numbers are I cannot positively tell, but I believe we are little less than 40000, we expect the Hessians to join us in a few days. For some days after I came here the French advanced guard mounted every day in Sight of ours, and every night we were giving and receiving Alarms, but now the French have moved their Camp to Allost & we live quite peaceably how long it may be so I know not, but the Enemy seem not to chuse to hazard much fighting with us at present. And now ye Dear Beings all after amusing you with a deal of Skimble Skamble stuff, I must tell you that I long exceedingly to hear from you: I own that it is my own fault that I did not extort a Letter from you sooner by writing sooner; but that I hope you will forgive and I am sure if you are sensible of the Pleasure it will give me to hear from you you will not delay it Long. I coud send you Services from all my heart but I hope it is needless. 
Dr Jack, yours with



Sincere Affection 
Adam Ferguson
