New York, August 20th 1778

My Dear Friend

I wrote you a short line as this is likely to be by the last Packet that was dispatched from hence. In the way of Bussiness I had only to put you in mind of what I hope you have learnt from My former letters That I have been appointed by The Commissioners here their Public Secretary. I cannot find out what The Appointments of My predecessor were & if I could find it out must look for The Kings Approbation before I can Avail myself of this Appointment. I have Ventured however  by the last & present Packet to write to Jeremy Sneyd at The Secretary of States Office in Cleveland Rowe who is Agent for the Commissioners to Undertake my Bussiness likewise in case My Nomination is confirmed by The King. I beg of you to try what can be done for me in the way of present Emolument & future Provision or half pay &c all which I must leave you to consider of on the Spot. I have written to Mr Sneyd that if he have any Funds of mine and my Bill on Doctor Black at Edinburgh for £100 is presented to him. He will be pleased to pay it I beg you will tell him the Same thing & Avail yourself of the Credentials I have given you in my letter to him to do in My Affairs as you think proper.  News nor Politics have I none or at least I do not chuse to break bulk till we meet nor trust Private thoughts to The Seas troubled as they are with Ennemys And Prying persons of so many descriptions.

If there shoud be any Good news however before this go Away you shall have it. I am

My Dear Friend 
most Affectionately 
yours 
Adam Ferguson







I have been much dissappointed at not hearing from you or by you in the last Packet which Arrived with Miraculous Safety & Expedition.

Not dispatched till Septr 6.

The Rebels in concert with the French attacked Rhode Island but the French Fleet having gone to Sea after Lord Howe met with a Gale of Wind two or three of their ships were dissabled. Appeared again at Rhode Island but after a few hours Stay  put to Sea again Supposed intended for Boston to Refit. Lord Howe is after them & we are in some hopes he may intercept them. The Rebels in the mean time have retired from Rhode Island Re infecta.

I wrote by The last Packet to C:Greville. I began my letter in hopes of great News. If such news shoud come I shall soon have another occasion & will write him again.

yours most Affectionately 
A. 
Ferguson
