The Gentleman's Magazine 
and Hiſtorical Chronicle: 
volume LI. 
For the Year MDCCLXXXI.







. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The Gentleman’s Magazine; 
for December, 1781



. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Though the Controverſy reſpeckting the Authenticity of the Poems aſcribbed to Oſſian *, has already filled many Pages of our former Volumes, we cannot forbear inſerring the following Elucidations that have lately been adderſſed to the Public.

No I.

In a pamphlet, intituled An Enquiry into the Authenticity of the Poems aſcribed to Oſſian, having read the following paſſage, p. 45, — “Mr Smith mentions Dr Percy's Reliques of Ancient Poetry, in which he ſays, the Doctor confeſſeth, that he himſelf heard pieces of it recited; and being compared with the tranſlation, exactly correſponded. Dr Percy does not underſtand a ſyllable of the Earſe, and therefore could be no judge. The truth is, Dr Blair and Profeſſor Ferguson, when Dr Percy was at Edinburgh, took care to introduce a young ſtudent from the Highlands, who repeated ſome verſes, of which Profeſſor Ferguson ſaid ſuch and ſuch ſentences in Fingal were the tranſlation.” To prevent any inferences which might be drawn from my ſilence, I think it material to declare that the above paſſage, ſo far as it relates to me, is altogether falſe; and that I never was preſent at the repetition of verſes to Dr Percy by a young ſtudent from the Highlands.

Adam Ferguson.

Edinburgh, July 21, 1781.

No II.

Having no intereſt to gratify but the love of truth, I have no reaſon to be ſorry when any falſehood is detected. Mr Ferguſon has denied that he was preſent when the attempt was made to convince Dr Percy of the genuineneſs of Oſſian. My relation was not from my own knowledge. I deſire to acquit Mr Ferguſon, whoſe preſence or abſence makes no difference in the queſtion; and I am too well ſupported by truth to need, or to wiſh, the help of falſehood. The attempt was really made, and Dr Percy was for a while credulous, with which I do not mean to reproach him; for I have confeſſed that I once was credulous myself: but I shall be credulous no more till the Works of Ossian are produced.

W. Shaw.

Aug. 31

No III.

In one or two pamphlets lately publiſhed, concerning the authenticity of Oſian’s Poems, great liberties have been taken with my name, and two advertiſements on the ſame ſubject, ſigned Adam Ferguſon and W. Shaw, have appeared in the news-papers; one of which only came to my notice very lately. It is with the greateſt reluctance I enter at all into a controverſy of which I am ſo incompetent a judge, from my utter ignorance of the Earſe language; but regard to truth compels me to give the following relation of a fact reſpecting it, which has been greatly miſrepreſented.

On October 8, 1765, I arrived at Edinburgh, where I paſſed five days with the Rev.  Dr. Blair, who, among many learned and ingenious men, introduced me to Dr Ferguſon, Profeſſor of Moral Philoſophy. To this gentleman he mentioned ſome doubts I had entertained concerning the genuineneſs of Oſſian’s Poems: and he, in the evening before I left Edinburgh (viz. October 13), invited us to drink tea at his houſe, where he produced a ſtudent, a native of the Highlands, who recited ſeveral paſſages, or verſes, in Earſe (ſome of which he afterwards ſung to me) as what he had heard in his own country; and I perfectly remember, that when he interpreted the verſes to me, ſome of them appeared to contain part of the deſcription of Fingal’s chariot. Dr Ferguſon alſo gave me, in his own hand-writing, ſome ſpecimens of Earſe poetry in the original. Dr. Blair afterwards deſired me to mention the recital I had heard, in the next edition of the Reliques of Ancient Poetry; and, in compliance with his requeſt, I gave a ſhort account of what had paſſed, in a note to the firſt volume of my ſecond edition, 1767 (p. xlv.) Some years after, on diſcuſſing this ſubject with a very judicious friend, a native of Scotland alſo, who knew much more of the grounds of the Earſe poetry than I did, he made it credible to me, that there might be ſome deception in the caſe, and adviſed me to ſuppreſs the paſſage in queſtion; which I did, soon after, in my third edition, in 1775. But as I never believed Dr Blair to have been conſcious of any deception in what paſſed between the ſtudent and me, ſo the ſame may have been the caſe with Dr. Ferguſon alſo, as he now appears ſo entirely to have forgot the whole tranſaction. 

Thomas Percy.

Carlisle, Nov. 10, 1781.
