Edinburgh 10th Janry 1780

My Dear Friend

I have written you the Inclosed Ostensible Letter as you advised on the Subject of my Brother. If his Case were less urgent I should make you Apologies: for I well Remember the Proverb relating to the Willing &c. I have had a Letter from him within these few Days which Disstresses me much. These are unsettled Times, my little Resources part depending on a Lawsuit which Lord Chesterfield not yet determined & part depending on Circumstances perhaps not less precarious will not enable me to Assist him Effectually or certainly. Among Other Evils of the times perhaps one will be that of making Such requests as these Appear impertinent. 

Fortune seems inclined to favour us, & the Nation is in Condition to make great & I hope successfull Efforts. The Affair of the Dutch Ships will require a Steady hand, nothing to be done but what the Laws of War & our own Defence make necessary: but this is not the moment to make a Single Concession: we had better be at open War with all the World than Suffer ourselves to be betrayed under the Shew of Neutrality or Peace. This Cloud that is gathering in Yorkshire Alarms me more. That County seems to be forming itself into a Republic, with meetings continued by Adjournement, different departments & an Executive Council. It should in Appearance be taken very Lightly by Government: but is in reality or may be a very Serious Matter. Countrey Gentlemen tasting of the Importance they get in Public Assemblies by making Speeches, tasting of Party Applause & receiving the Infection of Party Enthousiasm  rise above all considerations of Reason, of Private Interest or of public Order. Direct Opposition is like a Bellows to blow up the Fire. The Bulk of the Countrey Gentlemen throughout England I hope are on the Side of Government & Monarchy. I think it is probable that all the Counties as well as Burroughs must Speak upon this Occasion. & I am inclined to think that where the Majority is most inclined to Support Government, the Plan should be not to Fly in the Face of Yorkshire: but by a moderate Address to Parliament express their Zeal to Support the State in this Arduous Situation of the Nation recommending at once Oeconomy & the necessary Supplies. But the best way perhaps of Silencing all murmurs & discontents at Home is by vigorous & Successfull Efforts in the War to fill the Gazette &c. I am glad to hear Sr Joshua has done his Part he will eclipse the rest of My Gallery  but so much the better. I have not seen Carlisle but will execute your Commands when I do. J. Home is now a householder in this Town well in point of Health & I think recovered all the Effects of his Accident of last year. All this House joins me in most Affectionate Respects. I am My Dear

your most Affectionate 
humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson





My Brothers Name 
is Alexander Ferguson
