Edinburgh 17 Febry 1780

Dear Sir,

I am much Obliged to you for your fifth Letter & see with great Pleasure the same Tendency as in the former Letters to remove the gloomy Colours which Party is throwing upon our National Affairs.

I am not learned in the Writings of the Author to whom you chiefly refer on the Subject of Population. He deserves respect for openly standing forth in what I am perswaded he thinks a publick Cause but being myself no Calculator his numbers appear to me  too Abstruse & his Reasonings too Shallow.

I rejoice with you in the Continuance of favourable Events & begin to flatter myself with hopes from every Quarter. Mr Elliott of New York two Boys are arrived here & give very pointed accounts of Persons & things at that Place.

21 Febry 1780

I had written so far for some days ago when I was interrupted [by] a Circumstance which in my Way of Life is enough to put off a Letter for a week together. We were under some Uneasiness here about the Event of political Strugles or rather about the Effect of a new Species of Government forming in some of The Countys of England. This Cloud however may pass as Other Clouds have done with a day or two & a Debate. The Account of what has passed confirm this Expectation & I begin to hope that the State  will actually profit by the Labours of Opposition. That they will enable Government will be enabled to make some Reforms that might Otherwise be difficult and that our Fleets & our Armys will be employed to find Answers to their Complaints & Accusations. If I had written on, when I began my last I should have I should have given You a Dissertation on the Influence of the Crown & the Supposed Expedience of reduceing it, which you have happily escaped. I mean nevertheless to inclose a few Notes I had taken on that Subject after being somewhat puzled with it. I make no doubt but the Questions in Agitation may have given you thought more Apposite to The Times: but this is all you can expect from this Land of Speculation & Metaphysics.

I rejoice to See Lord Carlisles name at another Publick Appointment & feel the  Temptation to trouble him with my Congratulations as I did formerly, indeed more Strongly, in reading His Lordships Defence of the Commissioners Manifesto, published from his Speech in the House of Lords.

My poor Brother who is disposs[e]ssed in Rhode Island & come home writes me that he took the Liberty to Pay his Respects to you & to Lord Carlisle, And I am much Obliged to you for the Notice you were pleased to take of him. He has asked my opinion about the Chance of a Favour or Protection & I am very unable to Advise him, my opportunitys made me feel how much Government had to do in behalf of their Friends in that Quarter but not their means of doing it. I shall however in any proper way that may occur rely on your Kindness. I have the Honour to be

Dear Sir 
your most obedient & most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
