St Andrews, June 3, 1812

My Dear Sir

I am sorry to feel that I can do but little to supply the defects of your materials, in framing the intended Memoir relating to the life of my very particular friend John Home. My intimacy with him began at College, about the year 1743, or 44. I left Scotland in the summer 1745, did not return till the year 1751, and had no fixed residence in Scotland till near 1760, and my recollection of transactions, or rather of dates, within this whole period, is very imperfect, and even perplexed.

As to Mr. Homes early visits to London, I heard of one in company with some of Mr. Adam's family, and believe it was then he met with his repulse from Garrick, and made his address to Shakespeare's monument. I know not whether he was then presented to Lord Bute, but have heard of his interviews with Mr. Pitt, afterwards Earl of Chatham. His openness, ardour, and warmth of  heart, recommended him equally to Mr. Pitt and Lord Bute; but the political difference which arose and increased betwixt these personages, lost him the one in the same degree as he acquired the other.

It was, I think, in his first visit to London, he fell in with Collins the poet, perhaps introduced by Mr. Barrow, who, as you suppose, was his fellow adventurer in the castle of Doune, and continued through life his warm and affectionate friend, as I too experienced by Home's recommendation. Home's access to Lord Bute procured Barrow the office of paymaster to the army, during the American war, where scores of millions passed through his hands, and left him returning to England, I believe, nearly as poor as he went.

I lived, as you suppose, with Mr. Home, at Braid, a farmhouse two miles south of Edinburgh; but as to the date, I can say nothing, but suppose it may have been after the first representation of Douglas at Edinburgh, and after he was far gone in the favour of Lord Bute.

I remember he was then much engaged in versifying, but cannot say what. I think, but may be mistaken, it was in some changes or amendments wished by Lord Bute, in the tragedy of Agis; and even in concert with Garrick, who was beginning to regard the influence of Lord Bute more than he had formerly regarded the applications of Home. I  am by no means qualifyed to mention what different subjects, or works, Mr. Home attempted or executed, as I myself, during the busiest time of his life, was much engaged abroad, sometimes in the Low Countries, in Germany, Switzerland, and even in America. As to any attempt of his in comedy, I never heard of any such thing; and, if the public are not much interested to know the failures as well as successes of literary men, I should be willing to have the attempt in comedy you mention entirely suppressed, as one of the mistakes we commit in moments of dulness or error.

As to what you call the party at Moffat, I cannot pretend to recollect the date to which it may be referred. I believe it was not any concerted party. John Home was there by himself — lived at the Ordinary — and met with James M'Pherson at the Bowling Green. M'Pherson was there with his pupil, young Graham of Balgoun (now Lord Lynedoch), living with his mother, Lady Christian Graham, at her Brother, Lord Hopetoun's house, in that village. What passed between John Home and James M'Pherson, I soon after heard of; and had no doubt it was a continuation of what had passed frequently betwixt Home and myself, on the subject of reported traditionary poetry in the Highlands. There was another highlander there, who, as well as Mr. Home, I understood, obtruded on M'Pherson  with inquiries on that subject. M'Pherson confirmed the report; and being asked whether he could exhibit any specimens, said he was possessed of several; and on Home's wishing to have some translation, M'Pherson agreed, and furnished him with some of those fragments which were afterwards printed in a pamphlet, and drew that public attention which gave rise to the further proceeding on the subject.

David Hume was not at Moffat when these interviews with M'Pherson took place; he was, you know, a professed sceptic, and cannot properly be said to have ever formally affirmed or denied the authenticity or imposture of the poetry in question. He began, and continued to call for evidence-perhaps for more evidence than the circumstances of the case could admit; but this, you know, is the essence of scepticism; —to most men, day- light is sufficient evidence that the sun is rising or risen; but the sceptic would always have more, even if the rays are vertical.

As to the project and subscription which afterwards took place, to dispatch M'Pherson to collect more poetry in the Highlands, I was not then in Scotland, nor heard of it till some time afterwards.

Mr. Home certainly never entertained any doubt that the original of Mr. M'Pherson's translations was traditionary in the Highlands.

As to the society he mostly frequented at London, you seem to be sufficiently informed. Lord Bute generally treated him with an uncommon degree of affection; their minds were much at unison in all the sentiments of admiration or contempt. The sphere of attentions paid to Mr. Home at London, no doubt extended after the representation of Douglas; but I have ever since been too little in London to be apprised of particulars for your information; and as to the defects of what you might expect from me on the subject of this letter in general, I trust you will forgive it, being now for many years declining, while you and many other younger men are advancing in knowledge and power.

I am visited sometimes by Dempster, who is possibly too old for your acquaintance, but I call him a younker, being myself about to enter on my ninetieth year.

I am, My Dear Sir, 
with great 
esteem, Your most obedient, and most Humble servant 
Adam Ferguson
