Edinr Decr 23, 1777

My Dear Sir

I this moment have the pleasure of your letter & the only consolation I coud have in the present state of public news, to learn that our future Efforts are to be made with British Subjects not with forreigners. In this way if we neither acquire any thing abroad nor even keep what we have we shall end the War at least with Swords in our hands & be in Condition to defend ourselves.

My first Bussiness will be to see Banachar which I hope I shall before this letter is sent off. I will afterwards deliver your Message at Dalkieth. As to the  letter you left for my perusal perhaps the Silence you enjoin me woud be the best Course if it were practicable. In the first place the Thing Speaks for itself & I am very Ostentatious of it. Mr Wordie too I have made free with. You were not gone 24 hours from hence when I had a Call for part of what that hopefull place you was to see has cost me. I chose to owe you rather than the other person & even ventured to put your Building scheme to some risk at least of Delay. I Deliverd your Canes & Mrs Ferguson delivered your Muslins. I believe really that we are all vain of these marks of your Regard.

The Principal who is a great Speech Maker chose to expatiate on My part of the matter & without knowing the  whole ground said what is true that if my own Son had returned to me in Prosperity I coud not be made to feel it more Sensibly. And I who am not a Speech maker am nevertheless very glad that he has furnished me with this. My Blessing to the Grevilles. I hope to see you & them before Summer begins in the mean time get some franks from them directed to yourself & inclose them to me. I shall write and send packets with the less Scruple that they are not to be paid for. I have had long Conferences with Banchar Since the Above was written & been so much occupied with him that I do not know what is doing by any body else. I do not know what stir there is in the Nation in General or if any body be likely to move in this Countrey. I shall deliver your Message half joke half Earnest  to the Duke of Buccleugh & offer to make him Chief of the Mc Phersons the best feathe[r] if it were fixed in his Cap that is to be seen there. O thou General Howe who will put us again in the Pasture which we had the beginning of last Campaign & which you gave up. You Blockhead or Wor[se]. But I am so tired writing that I can scold no more And so Am

most affectionately yours 
Adam Ferguson
