Hallyards near Peebles 
2d March 1799



My Dear Friend

you have reason to expect a more immediate Answer to your last: but having to consult the principal party concerned in your kind offer of a Cadetship; the late irregularity of our communication with Edinburgh has occasioned this delay. You have made two happy persons. By the account I just now receive, my young Mans mind was nearly in the same state with my own; for some time past hopeless of his present Studies: but unwilling to disstress me whom he knew to be for Steadiness in a pursuit once begun. His thanks therefore are very Sincere. If the Cadetship be in the Cavalry so much the better but if in any other Department of the  Service your friendship is the same. And we shall be ready at a call upon the Shortest Warning. I can Scarcely find any Subject but this at Present for a letter & before I have done with it; please to know that you[r] young Friends Name is James Ferguson least this should be wanted before you hear more.

You ask about my Book in the press we are well entered on the fifth & last Volume: but our press is slow especially while the Courts of Law are sitting & it may be towards Summer before we are done. As to my part of the Edition I shall transcribe the Conclusion of a Note or Advertisement which I am preparing to be prefixed Containing a Summary View of the Authorities upon which the narration is founded for the Satisfaction of English readers, And shall inclose it with this if it can be [of] any Satisfaction to you. I will not answer if  it will be in the words: but to this purpose I sincerely wish your ArchDuke Bleu Ribbons and as much better things as he can desire: but for the Politics my trust is in Providence. I see no head in Europe that is fit to make peace or war in proper season. The French have dealt more Artfully by the House of Austria than people think. The transfer of Venice and its territory to the Adige is a masterly Stroke, Coming in place of the Low Countries it rounds their extensive Monarchy and cuts the thread by which they were Connected with us. As for the Russians poor passive bears I am affraid they come westwards only to be ridiculous. You are a great Medicin tant mieux . I am affraid the reverse is growing upon me: but if I knew how to live in hope & not to be dissappointed I would prefer it much. I congratulate Charles Greville on the Highland Presidentship. I hope he Sung his Gaelic Song: but all nonsense apart I am

My dear Friend 
most affectionately 
yours 
Adam Ferguson
