Edinburgh April 10th 1776

My Dear John

I am Such a Correspondent you see as usual & for some little time have been in doubt where a letter might find you. But David showed me a line from you today to day by which you desire to have your letters sent to London. And after such a preamble you may guess that my Silence proceeded in part from want of matter here. The Loss of one Friend & the danger of another  are not Subjects that make people in haste to write. David I am affraid loses Ground he is chearful & in Good Spirits as usual: but I confess that my hopes from the effects of the turn of the Season towards Spring have very much abated.

A Journey to the South Particularly to  Bath has been mentioned to him but the thoughts of being from home, hurried at Inns, and exposed to irregular meals, are very dissagreeable to him. Black is of opinion that he ought not to expose himself to any thing that is so. And that for his Complaints the Tranquillity and usual Amusement of his own Fire Side with proper Diet is his best Regimen so that I think the thoughts of any journey are at present laid aside. I hope we shall see you here soon . And that your Attentions will contribute to preserve what we can so ill spare.

 I am sorry to tell you that we receive the repulse of the Militia Bill  with great Tranquillity & for ought I know the treatment of which our National Pretensions have met with from Baulkers in the house of Commons in the same manner.

I hope that we may be able to return to the Charge but I confess that I do not foresse  a more favourable opportunity. I see that I begin to reap the first fruits of my Pension  not in money but in the news paper Abuse. This I confess when I have seen some people bear it ill, I have sometimes wished to try how I could Swallow, & so I shall may behave enough. I finish at College in about 10 days but you will find me at Edinburgh. As we have got a small house in Sight of our present Habitation,  where we mean to continue all Summer for the Conveniency of the Children Going to School  . . . .

 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
