Hallyards 13 August 1802

My Dear Friend

I write merely to inquire, how you do. From hence there is little else to be either said or done. Let that then be the first question. Next are you likely to have any concern in this Liquidation of Arcott Debt which the news papers talk of. Then. What sense do you put upon this soi disant new Constitution of France. I understand that the Premier Consul is a great sovereign, Supreme & Absolute standing upon the Pinacle of Military Merit & Force. That apart from Subsistence & self preservation there is no principle of Action in the State but military Preferment. If there be any Other pray tell me of it: But dont put me off with saying that the publick Good is a great Object. I own it: but I never knew the hundredth part of mankind actuated by that alone. Men are like Planets they must at least have two forces to make them go in their Orbits. One a Projectile by which they would fly, God knows where. Another a Central whose pressure  in eyery moment is only Nascent but continued & keeps them from flying off. Mans Projectile Force is Directed to some personal Advantage: but there is a central force that keeps him more or less Correctly in a track of innocence or beneficence to those around him. Take the Projectile force from him, he might not go wrong:but for the most part would fall into the heap and not move at all. I must repeat however that this is to Speak only in General: For I believe that there are individuals who would be inactive if it were not for a principle of good will to their fellow Creatures which does not allow them to be idle. This Principle however I do not believe is yet the Ruling Passion in France. If you want me therefore to believe that this new Constitution of France is any thing more than a projected Contre Dance in which Couples are made to Stand up without a fidle to put them in motion you must tell me what is to bring the Cantonal Assemblies &c &c together. In short what is the Power or Emolument to be got by running the Career of Communes Cantons  Districts & Departments of Senates Tribunates Legislatures & Privy Councils. I know What is to make a man become a Soldier & seek preferment in his Battalion, in the Legion of Honour & so forth to the very Pinacle of Chief Consul. Even if there be emolument as well as Title in Civil preferment & Office, If such be in the gift of the Chief Consul alone The way will be to pay court to him not to run the Career of an Actual Political Life. Solve me all this & then I shall have the Pleasure of a letter from you.

By the Way I have one from our Friend Mr McKenzie Secretary of the Highland Society telling me of a Subscription on foot for some Badges of honour to My Friends the 42. When a list of Subscribers appears I shall be proud to stand at the tail of £5. 5 or some Such Pittance, And should beg of him to insert my name but nothing I doubt can be done without publication of Names and contributions as in Other projects of a publick Nature. Our Season I think begins to mend on our hands: but we shall have verdure here for the most part of two months to Come. You I trust are far gone in Harvest. But tell me how that is and Believe me to be most

affectionately yours 
Adam Ferguson
