January 8, 1782

In an advertisement, dated Carlisle, November 10, and signed Thomas Percy, the attention of the public is recalled, among other particulars, to a declaration signed by me on the 21 of July last. My sense of how little consequence the subject is to the public, would hinder my intruding myself again in this manner; and my very great respect for the station in which Dr Percy is placed would incline me to be silent where I have the misfortune to differ from him on a matter of fact, if I did not apprehend that silence in this case might be interpreted against me.

At the date of my former declaration, I had found myself charged in a pamphlet, on the authenticity of Ossian's poems, as accessory to a cheat which was put upon Dr Percy, in a recital of some pretended specimen of that poetry, by a young student from the Highlands. Whoever may be the author of this charge, I thought and think myself entitled to say it is false.

I had many reasons likewise to deny my having ever been present at the recital of verses to Dr Percy by a young student from the Highlands; and it caused me much surprise to find, in a correspondence on this subject, which took place between Dr Percy and Dr Blair, that Dr Percy had conceived of me as having not only been present at the recital of verses by a student, but as sending for a student into his company, who, in a deliberate manner, passed upon him what he afterwards believed to be an imposition.

Dr Percy may not have been aware of the part which he assigned to me in this imposition, as it depended upon an inference to be drawn from my knowledge of the Earse language; nor was it credible that he meant to apply it to a person for whom he still professed some esteem. But whatever may have been the idea, I flattered myself that upon recollection he would think it more probable that he himself had committed some mistake in the fact, rather than that I should have concurred in such a cheat. In this persuasion I wrote to Dr Blair the following letter, to be transmitted to him; and am now very sorry to publish this or any thing else on a controversy in which neither the attack nor the defence can do credit to any person whatever.

[After transcribing the letter to Dr Blair, dated Edinburgh 18 August 1781, (see letter 200), Ferguson continues as follows:]

To the contents of this letter I must now add, that although the facts stated by Dr Percy might be admitted on less authority than his, yet as they are entirely contrary to any feeling or recollection I have of the matter, and have been employed to convey a very injurious imputation against me, he must excuse me, if I do not admit them. And if he still persist, that over and above the specimen of Earse poetry, which I gave him in my own handwriting, I likewise procured a student to recite other specimens to him, he will farther excuse me, if I insist, that every passage, of which the interpretation was vouched by me, was in truth what it was given for. As he allows, that I may not have been conscious of any deception in what passed between the student and him, I must, in return, allow that he may not be conscious of any misrepresentation of the fact. But I cannot allow that he has made the best use of his understanding, in thinking it credible, that any person, possessed of a decent character, could be concerned in such a cheat, as he supposes to have been practised upon him.

Adam Ferguson
