Hallyards 25th August 1797

My Dear Sir

Your Queries came at hand yesterday; but in our Situation a day or two must intervene before we can Answer.

Ansr 1st I began by taking the Bath two or three mornings in the week, & as I found it agree with me came to take it every day. At first I remained in the Bath about fifteen minutes: but gradually prolonged the time.

‘2nd The hour of Bathing is in the morning, & the Patient returns to Bed that he may cool gradually.

3d My Apothecary's Name was Hay, a plain man without pretensions or Quackery.

4th I never used Dry Pumping.

Mr Hay prescribed a dose of Castor Oil to prepare for Bathing: but it did not operate & I went on nothwithstanding.

Whoever goes with the Single prescription of Bathing will scarcely need any direction but that of the Chairmen and Guides.

The Bath I used is called the Queen's Bath.

That which is called the Kings immediately over the Spring seemed too hot. 

There are Covered Baths made at a great expence with Marble Compartments for People who like to pay dear for what they have. I tried them but returned dissatisfied dispirited and felt colded for a day or two afterwards, so that I believe the Choice of the Queen's Bath is Material. It is open to the Air. Ladies, Gentlemen, Guides &c &c heep stalking about Pell Mell.

I felt or fancyed my Cure was advancing every time I bathed, & so I hope will Mr Stuart, or if it should come insensibly that will be alike in the end, & that he will make as good a Retreat into Old Age as I have done, that is shake off all responsibility and bless every day that he lives. I know nobody to whom mere existence should be more pleasing than to him. Let him have something to do that will neither confine nor fatigue, & then mere existence in the Company of God is exquisite. I have learned of late to call him The Principle of Existence, & in this denomination he can never be away: but I do not understand that the French Chemists have yet admitted him among their Principles. The Girls join me in best wishes. You should be well enough to make them a visit, the good weather is yet come and I am persuaded  The Excursion would do you good.

I am Dear Sir 
your most affectionate 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson







Doctor Black
