Edinburgh Febry 3d 
1762



My Lord

I have often Encouraged my acquaintances here with hopes that the Friends of the English Militia woud support our Motions in Parliament, and was perhaps in danger of encroaching a little on the Art of Political Lying if I had not been sure of your Lordship to save me from that Reproach. If your Old Ennemys are still in Array against us there is no help for it. I joined in the Clamour of which I sent your Lordship some Specimens & did all I coud to encrease it, nor with any very Sanguine expectations of Success but with a Conviction that at all Events this one of the best objects which we can have in View. Even the English Militia may for ought I know fall into dissuse after a Peace; but I apprehend it has already given a twist to our manners, & may like the infusion of so much new blood bestow at least a temporary Vigour & serve to  prolong the Life of the State. The next best thing to the procuring of Actual Political Establishments for this purpose is turning the Attentions & desires of men to such Establishments & to make them think & disspute about them. There has been Nothing worthy of Notice published since the last Paper I sent your Lordship. But a Numerous meeting of Country Gentlemen has been held to think of the Proper methods of applying to Parliament for a Militia & that care is now devolved on about twenty of the Number under the Name of a Comittee who meet frequently & with other things have sent Circular letters to all the Counteys & Burghs of Scotland to recommend this Subject as a proper one on which to instruct their Representatives.

They write Likewise to some of The Members of Parliament at London who were most Active in supporting the former motion. We already see Some cause to rejoice in the Zeal which is discovered by Numbers here, we shall see more if Politicians Elsewhere from Affection Candour  Remissness or Stupidity in which last they are not perhaps always wanting shoud suffer our Motion to be made & our Law to pass. We shall at least by returning frequently put them to their Shifts for Evasions & this too in my Philosophy is doing a good thing. So that you see I am not hard to please on the Article of Success. I woud willingly hope however that we may prevail some time or Other. Mr Hume instead of being Averse to Turbulent Conversation has made himself Member of a Society who call themselves the Poaker Club in Alusion to the use of that Instrument when fires like ours need to be Stirred. But I write with so much pleasure that I forget the time it would take to read my letter. If there was any thing either to amuse or interest from this Country I woud lose no opportunity of expressing the Respect & Esteem with which I have the Honour to be My Lord

your Lordships 
most faithful humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
