Hallyards near Peebles, 26th March 1798

My Dear Sir

I have, within these few days, been honoured with a circular letter from the Committee of the Highland Society, with Queries relating to the poems of Ossian.

In answer to the first query, the committee will please to know, that about the year 1740, I heard John Fleming, a taylor, who in the manner of the country, worked with his journeymen at my father's house, repeat, in a kind of chiming measure, heroic strains relating to an arrival or landing of an host and a subsequent battle, with a single combat of two chiefs. This I took down in writing, and kept for some time; but was not in possession of when Mr MacPherson's publication appeared. I had no doubt, however, in recognizing the same passage in the arrival of Swaran, and the single combat with Cuchullin, in MacPherson's translation of Fingal.

The few words I can recall, are, 1st, in relation to the hosts engaged:

Iomma colan, iomma skia, iomma tria, is lurigh gharibh.

And in relation to the chiefs who grappled, and in whose struggle

Bha cloghin agus talamh trom moscle fo bhonn an cos.

The Committee will be so good as excuse my spelling, and guess at the words as they best can. As John Fleming was then an oldish man, he is probably long since dead.

As to the second query-the Committee will please to know that I have, at different times, heard other scraps or fragments repeated; but the principal use I made of them was, to tell my friend and companion at College, Mr John Home, that there were such relicks of ancient poetry in the Highlands, and which led him to the inquiries which produced Mr MacPherson's communications.

The fragments I afterwards saw in Mr MacPherson's hands, by no means appeared of recent writing: the paper was much stained with smoke, and daubed with Scots snuff.

To the third and fourth queries, I can say nothing, as I am not now in the neighbourhood to which they refer.

To the fifth, please to know that I have, very early in my life, and of course very long, heard of Fingal and his race of heroes, and of poetry on their subject, to be found some where in the Highlands. But as to my qualification to give evidence in this matter, the Committee will please to know, that the place of my nativity in Athole, is barely within the limits at which Gaelic begins to be vulgar tongue, and where the mythology and tradition of the highland were likely to be more faint than in the interior parts. I am sensible that mere opinion must go for little in the midst of such evidence as the Committee are in search of. I cannot, however, entire ly suppress my own, in addressing the committee of a society of which I have the honour to be a member, though prevented by my infirmities from taking any active part in the meritorious pursuits in which they are engaged. In the communications which Mr MacPherson at any time made to me, I was far from apprehending any imposture; but when the poems of Fingal and Temora appeared, I was inclined to think some pains must have been bestowed, and even liberties taken, in piecing together what was found in separate or broken fragments, with defects attending all such traditionary strains. What the collector had to do, or actually did, of this sort, it is impossible to know, if he himself has kept silence on the matter. May we not, without attempting to compare the subjects together, recollect a similar tradition relating to the scattered rhapsodies of Homer himself? and as the collector left no intimation of the pains or liberties he took, we embrace Homer, as we may now do Ossian, as the sole author of strains which bear his name. When I consider the late fashion of the times, respecting the contents of a language which is now thought so interesting, I am not surprised that the gleanings of Mr MacPherson has left so little vestige behind. It was a language spoken in the cottage, but not in the parlour, or at the table of any gentleman. Its greatest elegancies were to be learned from herdsmen or deer-stealers. It was connected with disaffection, and proscribed by government. Schools were erected to supplant it, by teaching a different language. There were no books in it, but the manuals of religion, and these in so awkward and clumsy a spelling that few could read them. The fashionable world in the neighbourhood, as usual, derided the tone and accent of Highlanders, believing their own to be models of elegance and harmony. It was more genteel to be ignorant than knowing of what such a language contained; and it required all the genius, learning, and courage of James MacPherson, to perceive and affirm that the ancient strains of Gaelic poetry might compare with those of other nations more celebrated. If it should still remain a question with many, whether he collected or composed these strains, I shall not be surprised; for I believe, that what he got in writing was unknown to those who gave it, and the merit of what was repeated scarcely felt. And, in short, that he himself at times was not averse to be thought the author of what became so much celebrated and admired throughout Europe.

In writing so much, and so little to the purpose of the Committee's letter, I trust to your usual favour and good nature in helping me to the proper excuses; and am, with the most sincere and perfect regard,

My Dear Sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant

Adam Ferguson
