Groningen October 4th 1756

My Lord

Mr Fletcher and I arrived safe here a few days ago, & have introduced him to some of my acquaintances [xxx], & engaged a lodging for him at which he slept last night, in the house of a Person who has passed some time in England, & is now setled here as a teacher of the English and French languages. This House was recommended by Mr. Swartz the Professor of Law, & I thought it lucky for Mr Fletcher at first to find a Landlord he coud speak to.

We have not yet fixed upon an Ordinary for him, but hope in a few days to setle that point likewise. I have been inquiring into the particulars of his expence here, & will be able to inform your Lordship fully in my next or on my return to Scotland. We have drawn upon Mr Crawfurd for five and Twenty Pounds, as Mr Fletchers Allowance for the first quarter. This money as far as I have hitherto been informed, may probably be sufficient for him at this place.

One of the Persons I have made him acquainted with here is Professor of Anatomy & has very good reputation as a Physician. If Mr Fletcher's health shoud require his Attendance, I have great confidence in his Skill & Attention. We have a Countreyman setled here, Mr Falkner a Brother of Lord  Hackertons. Mr Fletcher brought him a letter from Mr Crawfurd to procure him Credit & give his assistance in any thing thing else he might stand in need of. Mr Falkner has been very Civil & I hope, will be extremely usefull to Mr Fletcher while he stays here. Our expence in all to this place amounts to about three & thirty Guineas, we stayed for a Wind at Harwick some Days after I wrote your Lordship & had a very tedious passage, which detained us in all about ten days. I have delivered your Lordships letter to Mr Fletcher, he was much affected with it, & tells me he will send the Copy of it by me. As I hope He will be fully setled here in a litle time, I can scarcely expect to hear from your Lordship at this place. The way from here to Amsterdam is almost impassable when the Winter weather begins, which will make it necessary for me to set out the sooner.

We made no stay at any place in Holland & gave litle attention to the Publick news. The People I have talked with seem to think this Countrey in the Utmost danger from all Quarters. They are threatned by every formidable Power in Europe, & required to declare themselves, which they are so far from Venturing to do that they dare not make the least augmentation of their Troops for fear of giving Umbrage to their Neighbours. The People at Present seem to be stromgly affected to the King of Prussia, they consider the War in Germany as a Religious one, & think the Protestant Interest at Stake, so much for news which I remember your Lordship was pleased to desire .

I shall be able in my next to inform your Lordship of every thing relating to Mr Fletchers setlement at this place.

I am 
With great Respect 
your Lordships 
most obedient & most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
