London Aprile 17th 
1759



Dear Sir

I have just received your obliging letter & notwithstanding the other Prospect Home mentioned to you which is precarious I will make some inquirys about what you mention. When I heard some time ago that Mr Ruat was engaged to go abroad with Lord Hope I was told at the same time that he had obtained leave to keep his Professorship but that The D:of Argyle had insisted upon having the Salary for some other purpose of a public nature during his Absence. If that matter is intirely at the disposal of people here my information is probably right, yours seems to imply that the College will interpose & in that case the matter may be still uncertain. I have seen your Brother once or twice with John Home & that acquaintance has given me great pleasure, he has a great deal of Lord Elibanks Ingenuity of whom he talked by the hour with great Understanding. Youll have heard of J:Dalrymples Scuffle, it raised a sort of Laugh here against the Scotch Lawyers but Jack by good luck had none of the  ridicule but what was forced upon him. The Other sent a Chalenge to hinder his pleading a cause in which it seems he himself was formerly employed in Scotland. Jack went first to Mr Elliot to advise about this comical Situation, who remitted him to Sr Henry Erskine by whom & by him the Answer to the Challenge was dictated viz. That as he was engaged to plead the cause in question on the wednesday following he coud not in honour expose his Life till he had acquitted himself on that trust, that afterwards he woud be ready [to] wait upon him. After sending this Answer Jack stepped in to the Coffeehouse where he met his antagonist & being pressd to an immediate engagement declined it upon Sr Harrys principle And was called Scoundrel & Coward upon the Spot, which provoked him to draw and a Scuffle ensued in which the Combatants tumbled over chairs but were prevented from doing more mischief by some gentlemen from the other end of the Room who attended them up Stairs & made up the Quarrel before they parted. I send you this account partly to amuse you in case you have not heard it so particularly & partly on Jacks Account because such things are often misrepresented. 

We have scarcely heard of any thing this Winter but Scotch Authors, we have been impatient for Smith's book some time & I was vexed to hear Millar had some doubts about publishing it this season, however you will probably know more of that from himself. Here is a History of Gustavus published, which looks as like Hume & Robertson on the outside as can be conceived but it is the most amazing Stuff that ever was seen.

Remember me to all Friends at Edinburgh & Glasgow

I am Dear Sir with the most sincere Affection 
your most faithfull 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
