Geneva June 6th 1774

My Dear Sir

I wrote you a short line from London as Other people do when they draw Money. Matters here were then & still continue in some dissorder but I hope that from this time forward I shall be able to draw my appointments pretty Regularly & shall in a little time endeavour to replace what you so kindly favoured me with. My Journey to this place has furnished no adventures worthy of being told. It has been extremely pleasant & tho we have lately spent a month in making the Tour of Swisserland I am not yet tired of Wandering. That Country is Curious by Nature by Art & by Politics. In the Aristocratical Cantons all Councils are Secret & the people are well Governed nobody knows how. As for the Democratical I could be mad enough to put on great breeches and let my Beard grow if the people would admit me to be one of them. In the meantime I think myself very happy in the Prospect of returning to Scotland after I have passed a year or  two in this way of Life I hope not unprofitably.

I think I am very fortunate in the Character of My young Friend as well as in the whole of the Connections I have formed. He has Vivacity Parts & good Disspositions, a little spoilt perhaps by certain Circumstances but if every thing were already Perfect there would be nothing further to be done.

I am now writing on the Very Spot where Calvin reformed the reformed Churches this being the place of his house & Garden where we Live & I feel the warmth of my Zeal sufficiently against all reprobates altho I shall not indulge it in this letter. I am likewise in sight of Voltairs Castle another worthy tho of a different description. I have seen him but it is probable can tell you nothing new of him. He is worn to a shadow but has all his Vivacity & his Genius Intire. The last proof he has given of it is a Satire in Dialogue between Pegasus & himself which I think is perfectly equal to what he used to write. He writes frolicking Cards to Lord Chesterfield & calls him, mon droit honor  honorable Seigneur & Signs himself Le Pauvre Diable de Ferney. A Geneva Lady had a dispute with him lately about the Trinity, When she had finished a Speech he Answered

Jusqu'a ce jour Iris la Trinité 
Dans mon Esprit n'a pas fait fortune 
mais unissant les trois graces en une 
Vous confonde[z] mon Incredulité







He entertained us with a Philippic against France and its Bigottry. Lord Chesterfield said he should go to england, Ah si je n'avez que Soixante & dix Ans Said.

So much for Voltair. I hope you favour me with a line & that I shall Peggy is not fallen off in her Cookery in your Eating, when I have finished Education, I hope to be better Judge of matters. Please to direct for me at the Ed . . . .

 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
