Hallyards Decr 31st 1798

My Dear Friend

here is a are two packets in return for all your kind remembrances. If I had better you should have it: but confinement has given me something worse than nonchalance about writing: this comes from a Scald in my leg which I met with above four weeks ago. The Surgeon always tells me it is haleing but it is never hale. I am nearly of Dr Thompsons mind about the Ambition & projected Progress of France. I am only surprised that in this mimickry of the Romans so Aspiring a Genius does not stand in Awe of the proverb Imitatores Servum pecus. The case of Europe is truly alarming and if there were such a Profession as Physician of State I should be for calling a Consultation to prescribe for the Patient whose life is at Stake, Altho  if we are to believe Satyrists & dealers in Ridicule Of all the pretended Markets for Wisdom that of a Consultation of Physicians is the most ridiculous. If I were to prescribe myself, it should be a bandage of dead Wall round the whole Circumference of regal France so high & impervious that nothing could come to the Republick from without & nothing perspire from within for at least ten years if in this time there appeared no returns of Sanity I would agree to have the whole interrd under an appropriate inscription. Here lyes a Singular Genius possessed of eminence in every Science & Art. He lived a great statesman & Warriour but died a Coxcomb and now lyes here in sure and Certain hope of raising at the last day to have a dance.

In failure of the Above prescription my nostrum is that we should take such a Posture of defence as we Can keep till God & Nature  cause the Storm to pass away; for I really do not See any thing we can do to hasten its dispellation. The Armies of France will thrive in the midst of opportunities to Scatter their glories about & while they are pressed from abroad with Counterrevolution have such a Noblessephoibia that they will cling to any thing that calls itself Democracy the Reverse of all Armies in the World whose devotion has always been towards a Leader. I am glad H. R. H. keeps so good Company. If you can infect him with a little of your temper so much the better for us all at least for those who may live to See or feel it. This will probably find you at your Farm & I'm affraid the inclosed will be troublesome: but our little man has had so tremendous a Cruise that I am impatient to him & his Shipmates Joy of their Escape.

Believe me yours most 
Affectionately 
Adam Ferguson
