Hallyards near Peebles 18th January 1802

My Dear Sir

I have not lost sight of the subject on which you permitted me to write. And have been kept back more by want of Strength than of good will to the work. You may consider what follows as a last effort of impending Fourscore & treat it accordingly.

You know that I glory in the Volunteer Corps of Great Britain and Ireland not as adepts in the mysteries of War & Military Tactics but as a Specimen of what the Country may expect in time of need And an Evidence that no varieties of Condition or occupation can Silence the great Behest of Nature to defend what they possess. With this in my head  I attacked you on the subject of those Corps That the Peace might not be allowed to extinguish that Fire of which the War had struck out such Sparks.

The Publick is well apprised of your merit in Arming so great a Body of the People in defence of their Country, And will look up to you for Support in case any question arise relating to that measure. It was no doubt Idle in me to think of prompting you in a matter so well understood; And this Specimen might have warned you of what was to be expected: but you are now in some measure pledged to bear with what may Come. It is a gratification to me; And if real Respect and the utmost deference to your Judgement of what may or may not be entertained or Attempted can attone for seeming presumption I may hope to be forgiven.

Before the preliminaries of Peace were known to be Signed I had my doubts whether The present government of France was ripe for such a conclusion: but when this  appeared to be the Case & there is so much bussiness to be done for themselves at home, Unless the Republican faction force a War, we may look for a peace of some Continuance & take our measures accordingly.

It is nevertheless wise to consider the longest Peace but as a long Truce and a time of preparation for War. Such are human Affairs And no single Party can mend them, without, what never can be obtained, A consent of the whole.

It requires no foresight to Arm when an Ennemy is at the Door; any more than to Cloak when it rains: But the Proverb enjoins to Cloack when it is fair, leaving the Traveller to do what he pleases when it is foul. You may not need this lesson: but you will not prevail on your People to Arm in time of Peace with the same Alacrity as in time of War. Then the Threats of an Ennemy to give us Law on the Thames: The Insolent attempts that were made to seduce our People from their Allegiance Suggested the Idea of Volunteer Corps; And the pressure of generous Nature into what appeared a post of danger & of honour soon filled the Ranks. But now it is peace and the danger has  vanished; let us not think the occasion is over for such Institutions; nor neglect any measure we can take to preserve them.

It is here if ever that speculation itself may be of use and Stumble upon things that do not occur in practice. My Fancy however I doubt is barren, And terminates in little more than one general prescription To make that appear honourable to which you wish the Honourable and the Worthy to repair. In this I need not say that the gracious Regard of the King & the Example of those about him will have a Powerfull Charm. His Majesty is not a Soldier by Profession I see no reason why he may not be a volunteer: This language may be too free: but it is only to you.

In well ordered Communities the Military Function however highly respected is Still Subordinate to the Civil. Or in other words the sword tho powerful should be directed by Justice. For this I know not any security so effectual as that of placing the Sword, When Education, the Sense of high Rank, And a mighty Station  in the preservation of order, have already placed the virtues of Candour Magna[ni]mity and Justice.

This, in general so wise a measure of Policy, is happily favourable to what we have So earnestly to wish, on the Present occasion. These Islands have their Barrier fortifyed by Nature but to be Safe must have a guarison formed in the bosom of their People And the very organs of Civil & Political order turned into Sinews of Strength.

Nations for the most part would have it in their Power to force the Service they require: And would command rather than accept of Voluntary exertions. This indeed it is fit they should have in Their Power. But the less that the Iron hand of necessity is felt, the Better. If it be Supposed that persons retained to serve the publick as Soldiers can do nothing else; The Power of Defence must be restricted within very narrow limits, unless the People at large & otherwise employed be allowed in consistence with their employments to choose the portion of time they will employ in preparing themselves  for those pressing occasions on which defence may become an Act of necessity equally devolved upon all.

In this the expedience of a Voluntary Militia is sufficiently manifest: but I ought to beg your pardon for couching that point. The means of cultivating the happy disposition of our People to join the use of Arms even during Peace to their other occupations is what I meant to consider.

Here it is Evident that in admitting Recruits we are rather to Select than to solicit; For besides that it is no recommendation to any Institution, that it is open to every one; here is a Trust that must not be prostituted. The Magistrate is to be Supported in the discharge of his Duty & his Supporters must be taken from among those who are likely to respect his Person & the Laws he is Appointed to execute. Those who had volunteered during the War may not be questioned: but for Entrants in future, a Patrimonial or pecuniary qualifications may be required, And a Character without reproach Certainly: For this Purpose a proper form of Attestation may be entrusted with a Magistrate, The Parish Minister &c bearing that the Subject is without reproach, And in his  Condition of Life Orderly Independent and frugal. If our Institution should become fashionable as I hope it may, may we not hope that these Qualifications may become fashionable also.

As Fashions however for the most part descend from the High to the Low; it is surely not too much presumption to hope that there are many well informed liberal & high minded in the upper Ranks who will be pleased to set an Example of so much advantage to their Country.

If I had my wish; every member in either house of Parliament under fifty years of Age, should enroll his name in some Volunteer Corps and give due attention to its forms. There is no question of Precedence on this Parade, a place in the Ranks is as honourable as the first Station of Command. The Object of this Wish is perhaps already more than fulfilled: but it is no more than a Wish and must rest with those concerned. If I durst talk of Enactment: looking forward to a future period, Suppose twenty one years after the present date; might it not be enacted, That after the year 1823 no one should be qualified for a seat in either House of Parliament untill after sixteen years of Age his name had stood enrolled five years in a Volunteer Corps and his Attendance on its duties been  regular.

This it is true would not bring a great Force into the Field; not even if all the members of both Houses should Serve for life. It is not their numbers we trust to; but their Estimation and example. Nor is our Strength to be calculated by numbering the Arms at any one time in hand over the Country: The Object is to exhibit the practice of Arms in such a form of distinction & honour as will excite the Ambition of every ingenuous youth & become a necessary Article in the course of every Liberal Education.

The young and the Active may be allured in this matter, by many little circumstances of Celebrity & publick Notice attending the Military array joined with Other County Solemnities. The Ball The Race the Hunt &c &c And honorary prizes for competition in Facts of Agility & Strength.

We are perhaps too apt to slight such facts as unworthy at least of Gentlemen: but in this we differ from the wisest nations of Antiquity, who sought for vigour of mind And the Emulation  of Glory in the excercises and display of a Vigorous body. If what is called Learning were the sole or principal Objects of education for all ranks and Conditions of men: few nations could boast of advantages in that respect superiour to ours. Many Foundations for publick Instruction were laid before it was known in what men ought to be instructed; but successive Ages have arrived at last at real Science and Elegant Literature which in one degree or Another are supposed the general Objects of Education for all.

There is an Account from Mecklenburg no less pleasant than new. Of no less than an Institution of a School for Schoolmasters. It is wonderfull that this never occurred before; And that we who who have Boards for Agriculture & Trade &c &c should never have a Board for Education to Observe and Supply the wants of succeeding Ages in this Important Article. I would willingly emulate the wisdom of Mecklenburgh: but begin with the Establishment of a Board the Highest and most Dignifyed the State can Compose with the  King himself at their Head And next to His Majesty all who serve or served any of the higher Offices of State Primates Chancellors Secretaries of State &c &c &c. From such a Board all the Instruction might Issue relating to what might be taught & how. It is not likely that they would find any thing to Suppress in our present Universities:b ut the recent institution of a Military College & Practical Institute for The Application of Theory to Art show that somethings may be added. And why not annex Military & Practical schools to every University That beneficial Endowments may not be separated That letters might accompany Practice & the Literary student be kept in mind of his Manhood & the common cause of His King and his Country which may at some interesting time require his exertions. While every Individual is opening a Separate Career for himself it is surely a supreme Object of State, that none should be lost to the Community  in any of its essential Departments whether of Order Resource or defence.

I need not trouble you with my reasons for so much Anxiety about our internal Strength. Please take for an Emblem The great Gyant Briareus. He had 100 Arms & hands, 50 heads & breathed fire at 100 Nostrils. With all this he had but one little Heart on which the whole depended. While the Heart was safe, Briareus could deal his blows and make himself respected at any distance: but if this failed him he was a mere carrion for Vulturs and beasts of Prey.

I once thought before I had done to be upon you with an Idea, which has long pressed on my mind, no less than a Project of giving the Privates whether of the Army or Navy a Scale of Estimation & small advance of Day on which every entrant might hope to better himself by good behaviour: What Happy effect if it could render the Application or even the fear of Punishment less necessary. Besides the Policy of this measure it might appear a proper expression of Gratitude for the honours they have procured  to the national Character.

One word more and I have done. Away with the absurd Fable, Sovereign at the Sea, which we sometimes so idly repeat. We and every Party on Earth to the extent of our force, have a right to impede Search & detain everything from going to an Ennemy, by which he might be enabled to annoy us. But the Sea is not a Subject of Properly Idle Prentensions to homage on: that Element will sett the world against us, more than real usurpations at Land might do: for the first is galling to Thousands: the other only to a few Statesmen.

The weather has reduced me to be mostly in bed where I have repeatedly taken up and laid down this paper & now endeavour to make out my treatise. The labour has not been painful. You have been ever present to my mind. Farewell. My Blessing forever attend you.

A. F.
