Bath 26th March 1781

My Dear Carlyle

I hope you will have the necessary Indulgence for An Invalid & endure my Delays in writing without abating of your own good will to Oblige us in that Way. You make great Allowance for our Anxiety about the Children: you may believe it is much the less for your concern in them, & indeed is none at all.

I wished to turn a Stoop or two in this Race, I am running, before I wrote again. The Progress is Slow but I hope not the less certain it is even sensible for the Better & as the fine season is coming on I hope to be reinstated in the use of My Limbs & of Strength enough for all I have to do in the remainder of My Life. I use the  Bath about twice a Week & have not yet begun to drink the Waters. The operation so far is exceedingly Pleasant. There is still a little Coldness in the Wind but the Fields & the Houses & the Town & the Sky look more like a View in a Showmans Box than what is commonly to be seen on this Terraqueous Globe.

I have heard from Coll. J: Campbell at London & hope to see him here in his way to Ireland. John McPherson was much hurried in his Departure from London. I have been Lucky enough to receive two or three short Letters, he sent in search of me, since I have been on the Road, & he embarked: The last, after he was under Sail. To the Purpose of your Letter to him soon after my falling Ill; He tells me of so many Efficient People that had promised to Johnstone & him to take charge  of it; from the Chancellour himself down to Private Secretarys that I am perswaded it can want nothing but a proper Remembrancer which I must think of, at least, when I go to London.

It grieves me to think of these cruel Fasts you undergo with the Laird of Gilmerton. I am [ang]ry it is not in my Power [xxx xxx] to mitigate their Severitys. I beg of you to indulge yourself now & then in a good Pot full of Kail Caststocks & a Bonum Magnum from some Chrystal Springs, I drink Bristol here but imagine that a good Stoup full from the Esk anywhere above Inveresk Village will be as good. I speak from Experience & begin to look as blooming & well on this Bread & Water diet as ever I did. We all join in the best wishes to Mrs. Carlyle & you

your most affectionately 
Adam Ferguson
