Hallyards 10th Febry 1800

My Dear Carlyle

I have a second letter from Mr Hunt under whose Care our young Seaman is, informing me that he is so much better as to be able to sit up four hours a day & is likely to be able in a few days to write me himself. This is acceptable news here:But to the letter is written not at Portsmouth, as I formerly stated to you, but at Dartmouth in Devonshire so that I am in a sort of a Scrape with you and our Friends at Portsmouth. As for you I certainly do not grudge myself the very Affectionate & Obliging part you took in my concern: But I am a little out of countenance for the trouble we have given to Captain And Mrs Patton. They will be inquiring Anxiously for our Patient & not finding him will be at a loss how to account for it. Affraid to Alarm us least we should think the worst or imagine they had not made proper inquiry &c I must therefore wish you the farther trouble of a line to Captain Patton to tell him my mistake, or rather the Blunder I have committed  in reading Portsmouth in the date of Mr Hunts former letter when I should have read Dartmouth. But you will please to know that his D is very like a P having the upright line well marked but the round little or not at all marked till it comes on the back of the upright so (P) and I, reading his letter with some agitation having once read Portsmouth so likely to be the place of naval infirmary, did not return to his date for Correction but sent his letter immediately to my Son Adam at Edinburgh to direct him in making inquiry for a Student of Physick there to whom Mr Hunt referred me for information about himself & the treatment of Patients from the Fleet at that place. I at the same time altho Mr Hunt gave me no direction how to write to him guessed at his address & sent my letter to Portsmouth in haste to let him know I would Spare nothing that would contribute to my Sons recovery or present Comfort. This letter he will probably never receive:but he seems to have proceeded kindly without it & I now Answer his last in which he gives me his address pointedly. This explaination I owe to you & our friends & Portsmouth, not to  mention myself whose reputation for Soundness of head may be at Stake. It is not altogether the effect of Old Age: tho being now as I mantain in the 19th Century I have seen no less than two of them & if I should see a third will attend more particularly to the date of Strange letters.

The handwriting covers three and a half pages of the MS, the last half page being written upside down.

I have the long debate of last week And very much Respect our Friend D's Speech. But none of them all seem to know the real difficulty of Obtaining any other Sort of Government in France than this of a Military Usurpation. In [the] first place where there is a Professional Ar[my] that take it in their heads to Govern no Other go[vern]ment can ever take place. The French Army consisted of 2 or 3.000.000 low born men who never could hope for any preferment & 2 or 3000 Noblesse Officers who held the Others in the lowest State of Contempt. The Revolution dissmissed all the Noblesse Officers increased the pay of the Men & filled up every Rank to the highest without regard to Birth. Here is more than any revolution ever did for any Sort of men before. This is their liberty & equality they have fought for it with more impetuosity in Victory & with more perseverance under misfortune than ever any sort of men ever did before: They thought it most secure under a Republican Form: but they will prefer a Single leader if he is likely to secure them against the Noblesse Otherwise I doubt there is not force or perseverance enough in Europe to  reduce them under the old disstinction of Noblesse Officers, And every Mention of a Return to Royalty with Nobless does but strengthen the Rands of our Ennemies against us. And whatever we may think or wish or hope I would agree to whip a School boy who would talk to them of Restoring the King. Of all the people that dealt with Cromwell there was not such a fool to be found in Europe as to propose to him Restoring the King. Every Drummer in the French Army is a Cromwell & no man in France that is not a Soldier is worth a Pin.

yours &c Adam Ferguson
