London July 11th 1758

My Lord

Mr Kinloch I believe informed your Lordship, by the last post, of my intention to attend him on his journey Abroad, & I was extremely willing to be of any use to him; & went in to his proposal with little hesitation, till upon recollection I saw the difficulties which might attend by my being out of the Way at this time. He bore with the thoughts of allowing me to return when Necessary: but when I thought of the difficultys which might Attend my Return in time of War, & the inconveniency to him of being left in a Strange Countrey I determined it was better to lay aside thoughts of it Altogether.

I think Myself extremely Obliged to your Lordship for the trouble I understand you are pleased to take in what concerns me. Mr Home writes in very Sanguine terms on the prospect of Success in Making an Agreement with Mr Abercrombie: but his friendship as it may have led him to give your Lordship  trouble on my Account may likewise have made him think Other Circumstances equally easy. The Purchase is greatly beyond my Stock; but I am made to believe that the income of the place, with diligence in the Profession might enable me in a few years to clear the debt it woud bring upon me. And if it takes place I am determined to quiet my own Mind against any loss to my friends, by Ensurance. This affair however filled me with a good deal of Anxiety & made me a very improper Companion for Mr Kinloch; who I am affraid has taken my hesitations amiss. I took the Liberty to Recommend his continuing Mr Congalton; but he is not determined & Stays here a few days longer, he was told today that the Sailing of the Packet is interrupted by two French Cruizers which ply in the Passage, & that none will sail till a Man of War which is ordered Round comes to protect them. It made me uneasy that he imputed part of his delay to me: but many things have occurred to me that make it impracticable for me to go along with him as I at first intended. Among others I have been informed that the Gentleman in whose hands the greater part of my little Stock is lodged, has a prospect of Going to America. It is necessary for me to settle my affairs with him before he goes & to have my little funds in readyness if there is any prospect of making a Bargain with Mr Abercrombie. I am sorry to give your Lordship the trouble of so long a letter but it is owing to my Concern, for the Offence which Mr Kinloch seems to have taken, & to explain the Reasons of my not being able to accompany him as he wrote I intended.

Whatever be the Event of projects formed for me in Scotland I shall rest Satisfied in the Proofs I have received of your Lordships Goodness &

am with the greatest Respect 
My Lord 
your Lordships 
Most obliged & 
most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
