Hallyards 10th Novr 
1804



My Dear Friend

I return Sir W. Ps letter as you desired And Mr Fordyces also as Sir J. Sinclair through whose hands it came is so good as to give a Pass for the return also. I doubt Mr F. mistook the effect of my meeting with him for the Ordinary State of my Being. I have heard of young or midle Aged People having their hair turned grey all in one night from the effect of some dissappointment or Sorrow, I do not see why a meeting of Friends might not turn grey hairs black; there is indeed nothing but the want of Facts that prevents my believing it. As for the twelve years he Assigns me I dont doubt but he would give them with health & joy also: but that is not  what I look for; decrepitude and dullness of Sense is the lot of Age And our Author is so good as to let us live sometimes till we are tired of Life. Even with this prospect I have my Comforts. The Beneficent and The Great at whose disposal I am does not permit to dread or to regret any thing I cannot help.

As to your affairs I need not entreat that you will let me know the Consummation as soon as it takes place. I am reading the life of Sir W. Jones & am glad to be confirmed in an opinion which I took upon seeing him as I once did in Company at London; that he was made for better things than the mere literary Curiosities Antient or Modern which his singular Talent for Language led him at an early period of Life to explore. This talent very naturally pointed him out as a proper Instrument of our Asiatic Government. But I am not so easily reconciled to the detrusion of our Country mana McIntosh into the same Grave. 

It is melancholy that we have no place in our Domestic System for Moral & Political Wisdom Armed with glowing Eloquence; these indeed I have been told from great Authority are not the Spring or Pulse which gives the movement to our Blood. We must have Party & the jargon of Party not the Love of our Country and the candid voice of unbiassed judgement in our debates: But be it so if this choice piece of Machinery would otherwise cease to move.

My Blessings be upon you & this I think is a more proper Stile for me than either Respects Complements or Services As I am in endless sincerity ever yours

Adam Ferguson

Sir John Mc Pherson Bart
