Edinburgh 19 Janr y 1790

My Dear Sir

I have long since heard of your good Offices to My Nephew Robert Ferguson, & felt my Obligation the more that I had not ventured to Solicit you for favour to him. I supposed you indeed to have trouble enough of that Sort without any addition from me. I hope however you will give me leave to Assure you that your kindness has not been unobserved & to thank you most Sincerely. I have never had an opportunity of knowing the young man personally but have ever had the best accounts of him and trust he will deserve your Protection.

Captn Burnett who is just now  Setting out for London undertakes to forward this line from me. Mrs Ferguson you may believe joins me in thanking you also on his account. She regrets very much the Reports of your Intended return to Europe; but as the Time will depend on yourself or My Lord Cornwallis your Friends in this Country will expect it with pleasure. If I have the honour of being remembered by His Lordship I should beg leave to offer my most humble Respects, My best & most Affectionate wishes have ever attended him in every Bussiness in which he has been engaged.

As to news we have many things new in Europe of which the Gazettes will inform you as they do me. Not only a new Town and a new College of Edinburgh but a new Republick of France and a new States General of Brabant & Flanders. People ventured to tell the Court of France that in abeting the  Revolt of America they were setting a dangerous example to their own people: but even the persons who said so did not distinctly perceive or believe it. The Noblesse of France have had a greater fall than the King. It is resolved that for the future there Shall be no distinction of Persons in that Country, whether they can keep to their resolution is a doubtful question. The experiment is matter of expectation to us for a twelve month[s] or two to come & to you a matter of Curiosity at the Arrival of every Ship from Europe. I think that what they are engaged in will make them better neighbours both in Europe & Asia than they have been heretofore.

I have the honour to be 
My Dear Sir 
your most humble & most Obedient 
Servant 
Adam Ferguson
