Hallyards 7 July 1796

My Dear Friend

Being to inclose in Covers within Covers unnumbered letters from this Family to the Soldier & Sailor, I acknowledge At the same time your kind reception of our little man at London. He will certainly profit at an Academy or School by any Object that is presented to his Senses & had by any little manual operation he is led to perform. It will grieve me if he should be much embarrassment or trouble to you & therefore I earnestly pray there may be no more of this than your usual temper will enjoy as a pleasure. I am full of Anxiety as usual about the publick & your share in it. Remember I pray to distinguish what is proper in Parliament from what would be so, in the executive Council.

In the first every thing that is said goes to Friend & Ennemy alike, whereas an Ennemy should know no more of our mind: but that we mean resolutely equitably & fairly to all Parties. To a person who has long revolved an Idea it appears perfectly  clear & in no need of explanation or Comment. To Others it is not so. It would instruct you on this head to have seen a correspondence which I held in the course of last winter with your Friend Dr Blair on the Subject of your Printed Paper which I sent him at your desire. He could not [do] away with the Idea that we who have so much paper Currency of our own should pretend to restrain the Currency, that is The making Assignats Ligal tender in France. How do you steer with Sir William now, there is no man I believe better meaning in the Kingdom: but I doubt he is tired of letters from me as I am of writing them. He does not Win by a popular Surface either within doors or without; yet all parties listen to him with respect & if he were the mover of a reasonable national measure I would have some hopes. It is pleasant to be talking pacifically when the tide of war as I hope it may is turning in our Favour. And I hope that our government will seriously think how they may convince the world that the continuance of War should not be imputed to them. Most Affectionately yours

A. Ferguson

I pray you excuse so many inclosures &c. The Letter to Sandie Johnston contains some letters from the young People here to the Soldier at the Cape of Good Hope or elsewhere. If S. Johnstone is not gone some of your people can give in The Letter at Mrs Fords in passing. The Letters to the sailor may lye till he cast up himself.
