Edinburgh 18th July 
1781



My Dear Sir

I write as you desired merely to tell you what is become of me. I continue to mend. & I hope soon, taking the whole complicated case of my Diet & recovery together to be in a better Animal as well as Intellectual State than I was before my late Illness.

I am hastening to put my Papers on the Roman History in a form to go out of my hands whenever it is proper. And shall proceed to fill up my Lectures to the same Purpose And then I shall be at Liberty to  commit myself entirely to the newspapers & watch the Affairs of the Nation. In the mean time I Observe it is said that Lord Cornwallis has joined Arnold: but to what Purpose I know not And the thing certainly merits consideration. I have been regreting all the Way in my thoughts on the Road that our Friend Gl Clerk is not in Parliament. A person may as well think to be of consequence in France without being a Gentleman as here without being in Parliament. I own The Case occurs in both Countrys: but what a difference there is here. A Private Gentleman may hunt a Minister for a whole Winter without being able to see him. A Member of Parliament demands an Interview at pleasure. A Private Gentleman can never see a Minister except formally & at an Audience, a Member of Parliament can catch  him familiarly in the House & fix his Ear in the time of dull Speeches & in the Intervals of Bussiness. The Minister shuns the Application of Strangers. He covets the Courtship of members of Parliament And fears to offend them. In Parliament without making long Speeches a person can discountenance nonsense with a very few Words And a Person who has once made an able Appearance in Parliament is a person of Authority within the whole Kingdom. Fools commonly consider every one who differs remarkably from themselves in Private as a Madman. But the Publick one way or Other where they are the judges distinguish between a Fool & a Man of Parts & Sense. I have Sometimes thought it might be made a question at the Robin Hood or some Other Such Place.

Who incurs most contempt a Fool among wise men or a Wise Man among Fools? If the wise Man should not take care to Manage  his Superiority he will be in the worst case of the two. In Parliament a Man of Parts is independent of Fools or more so than anywhere else. I hope that you will admit these Arguments as of Force And now that Gl C Health & every Circumstance makes the Ordinary Attention of Parliament easy to him I earnestly wish that some opportunity were seized to get a Seat: but of the matter I can say Nothing farther And say so much only to set you a thinking of it in case it has not occurred. I am Dear Sir With the greatest Respect

your most affectionate humble Servant

Adam Ferguson
