Edinr Janry 27th 1776

Dear John

I find you have prevailed at last & if I were of opinion that successu crescat honestum  I should shoud now make some addition to my stile. I may be Silent but the little Children will some day bless you for what I may by these means if I live [to] be able to do for them. I shoud have written immediately on receiving yours but wished to be at leisure when I wrote the inclosed letters to make as sure as I coud not to make use of any improper expression. I have yet told nobody here haveing Missed David when I called upon him for that purpose. I shall endeavour to see him & Baron Mure this Morning I know that David will be Almost as Glad as myself. I had a line from Sir John Dalrimple Last night in which he tells me that Sr Grey Cooper upon making his application found the affair was already  done & wished me joy. I shall in a few Days beg the Favour of Sr John to offer My respects and acknowledgements to Sr Grey Cooper.

You will be pleased to hear that the sense of this Countrey where it has been taken is every where favourable to the Militia. This meanest County in Scotland was keept from making any declaration. I hear only of two Objections to the Bill from those who profess to approve of the measure. The first Objection is to the Clause which permits the Army to enlist Militia men in Scotland. The Second is to the Substitution of Commissioners of for Lords Lieutennant. The first point I hope will be given up by The Friends of Government. And the second I woud fain hope likewise may upon farther thoughts be found an immaterial point.

We had but seven at dinner yesterday at the Poker & wanted one of the number required to make an Election but with much ado Got Bob Chalmers to come after Dinner & so Elected The Lord Advocate & Captn Elliott two  good acquisitions. A Number of us have had copys lately sent of a Pamphlet on the Rights of this Countrey against the Claims of America. I never had any doubt on any of the rights Established in this Pamphlet. The only Question with me was what this Countrey in Wisdom ought to do in the Situation at which the Colonys were Arrived. This Question becomes every Day more complicated & more difficult. I hope that some plan of Operation going to the bottom of all difficultys will be concerted & Steadily Pursued. But that is the Affair of those it may concern.

O pray you to make Lord North & Mr Robinson understand that I am truly Affected with the honour of their Patronage as being persons so justly Possessed of the General Affection of the Nation.

I am Dear John 
most affectionately yours 
Adam Ferguson
