Leipzig Decr 1st, 1754

Dear Sr,

I wrote last from Groninguen & told you of Mr Gordons Intention of passing the Winter at this place. The impressions he had got of Groninguen upon the Road woud have made him constantly Dissatisfied at that place, for people sometimes think meanly of themselves at an University of litle repute, as in a Coat that is out of Fashion, otherwise I am not well qualified to Judge of the Superiority of this University.

There are a great Variety of Professors, & all who have got the Degree of Mr of Arts here may advertise a College upon any Branch they please, they have scarcely any Vacations. The publick lectures are in German & Strangers are Obliged to have private lessons in Latin for themselves which make the fees very high. Mr Gordon attends three in Company with Mr Abercrombie. The Civil Law, The Law of Nature & Nations, & Modern History, which are rather too many at once, at least they woud be so to one who coud give application to books & pursue a Point steadily, but that habit is seldom acquired by People in Mr Gordons Way; he likes very well to hear about matters of Study but what is called Poring, is not much to his mind. I have no trouble in advising him against Irregularitys, & the whole remittances are very safely  entrusted to his own management so that you may call me a very happy Governour, provided you will always keep in mind how far the happiness of a Governour mounts. This is not a place of Conversation to me, there may be agreeable people but I have not yet been able to find them out or relish much through the Medium of bad Latin & bad French, I am already of opinion that Learning is very frequent here, but have not met with any Glimmering of Taste, or very elegant Reflexions: but you must consider me as a Stranger [xxx] who may know more hereafter.

A Gentleman passed some days ago in his way from Paris to Berlin, & told some Storys of Mr Fontenelle, one that he was in Company with a Lady who happend to drop her Fan, he put himself immediatly in motion to take it up, but she prevented him, for he is a hundred year old, upon which he said, Plut a Dieu que je n'avois que quatre Vingt Ans. Another Lady who it seems had removed lately to his neighbourhood made him a Visit & told him; she expected to see him often for that reason; he replyed that wont be my reason, that will be only my Pretence. I wish you may relish these Bons mots, that come so far as Germany, if not you may make reflections upon the length of time it may take to turn a Frenchman Sour. I saw lately some Smart letters in Manuscript that Passed between Voltaire, & a Church Man of Dignitee in France on account of his Infidelity, They say he is Constantly Complaining of his Health & threatning to Die.  

A Lady here tells me she saw him in his way from Berlin, & that he caressed one of her Children & said he woud be fond of him even if he had been begotten by Maupertuis. We Lodge here with a Frenchman, who is a litle Foolish, for the sake of learning his Language; he has taught French in this Place for Some years, he has translated some of Mr Hume's Works into French & has the the Title of Secretary to the King of Poland, all which is very fine in a Landlord. The King when he has a mind to Flatter a Man cannot give A Title of Nobility but makes many Secretarys & Members of the Privy Council. The Nobility waste away here to Nothing; for all the Sons share alike in the Estate & Title; all ranks almost have Voluminous Titles, if you was a Professor at Leipzig instead of Glasgow I shoud have directed my Letter. To His Excellency The most learned & Celebrated &c. I shoud be sorry to have written all this Idleness to a Man who is not well & I hope to hear you don't Complain this Winter.

Make my Complts to Mrs Smith Miss Douglas & Other Friends at Glasgow. If Mr Bagwell & Mr Reid be at Glasgow my Complts to Both. I woud write to them if I was quite Sure of their being there. Mr Gordon Joins me in Good Wishes. I am Dear Sr your most affectionate

humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson



My Complts to your 
Mr Gordon
