Edr Octr 27th 1777

My Dear Sir

Your incloseing me a cover in your last letter was a Sufficient hint that I ought to write to you and you perhaps have not yet found out that it was directed to me instead of yourself & I shall now turn it back to London to see what it will bring from thence.

I did not want disposition to write even without this hint & had sent a letter inclosed to Governour Johnstone but from your not acknowledging it suspect the Governour has been out of Town & either not received it or not known how to forward it. Moreover Dr Robertson told me about ten days ago that your Brother by a letter of his own from Skye was comeing here in about a fortnight to meet you and I have long flattered myself with the hopes of seeing you, Circumstances which woud have damped  a much greater Ardour than mine is in writing letters & prompted by a much greater collection of materials than this place & my Situation Affords. I have however now lost all hopes of seeing you for the Season & procrastinate no longer. Andrew Stuart told me you had taken a house in Parliament Street but as he coud be no possitive and particular enough I send this under cover to that Never do well James McPherson.

I suppose you are deeply & I hope Successfully engaged in India Bussiness. Not merely who shall be condemned or acquitted in late Affairs but what is to become of the Interests of this Countrey in India for Centurys to come. It is full time at least that this Subject were, in the news paper Stile, on the Tapis And there is no time fitter than when you are at London to aid with  your Lights that reach not only to India but to Other Similar Scenes in the history of human affairs. My notion is that instead of making up the Suit here The Taylors shoud be sent to take the Gentlemans measure on the Spot endeavour to fit him & report on their return for the approbation or dissapprobation of those it may concern here. But I will not puzzle my brain with projects. Andrew Stuart is gone from here very earnest in his Brothers Cause & very Sensible of your Friendship which I shall be very glad what both of you Cultivate. I have been much with John Home lately & we were in hopes of being Surprised by you. He will probably be soon in London. Your Friends Robertson & Blair made a long Journey into England and I a short one into Perthshire. My wife has been in mighty disstress in the Rheumatism for many Months past. But my Children in Number five Comeing Six in the most perfect health and Vegetation. You are  probably as Anxious as we are to have news from America and I hope by this time more Successfully. We are certainly under a necessi[ty] at least for our own Credit, of giving that people if we can join them a sound drubbing: but I protest that if we had news to morrow that Howe had beat Washington and Burgoyne Arnold the use I woud make of it woud be to leave America with contempt. For it looks as if no Calamity woud force them to Submission & if it did their Submission is not worth haveing. Their whole resource for any Visi[ble] time to Come will not pay the Army that ke[eps] them in Submission. So I am partial enough to Great Britain to wish them in the bottom of the Sea. My Affectionate Respects to the Grevilles who I hope will soon be in London. And believe me to be

Most Affectionately 
yours 
Adam Ferguson
