Hallyards near Peebles August 2d 1802

My Dear Sir

As you gave me leave to write what I thought of your Volunteer Corps, I trust you will take in good part also what occurs to me on the Subject of Buonapartes Legion of honour. I am the more inclined to trouble you with my impressions, upon seeing that Institution slightly treated in some news-paper Articles on both sides [of] the water. This I can believe the Government of France is not averse to, because this Legion is certainly not meant to allarm us: but to strengthen their own hands without being noticed. Such Institutions operate as Alternatives are said to do in Medicine without any instantaneous effect, but requiring time are not to be counteracted by any similar contrivance once the Consequence begins to Appear.

The French Soldiers Enthousiasm for equal claim to preferment is likely [to] abate when the object is secured or no longer contested,  and the State may be obliged to rely on a discipline in which it was is not to have any Advantage over its neighbours. For this reason it might be hoped that France should be less formidable in the nineteenth Century than it had been at the close of the Eighteenth. But the Genius of a Statesman & Warrior who in a few years & by a general consent [xxx] [of] competitors of great renown & Ability has mounted step by step from a very Obscure to the highest Situation is it seems not to suffer the streams of Revolution to spread on the Plain and lose their force. This Policy is likely to be as formidable in Peace as in War. He has actually said or rather enacted, That every French man is to consider himself as the Defender of his Country. That Armies are to be formed by conscription 1st of the young & unmarried, next of an Age more advanced & so on untill the Force that may be employed is that of the whole.

While The Law holds this Language to every Frenchman Such allurements are presented as may engage sufficient numbers to covet the distinction of a soldier, & fill the ranks with Men not pressed but with adventurers who press to be foremost in the Career of Honour. To this purpose we may refer the frequent Military shows, in which  new standards are erected under oaths of Devotion to the Military Duty, with the Ostentatious distribution of honours by which Military Service is signalized and Rewarded. But more especially the Institution of a Legion of which every Rank from the highest to the lowest is to be a place of honour to which those of every Rank may Aspire.

It is surely not necessary to devise any higher Reward than that with which meritorious Commanders of Armies & Fleets are vested in this Country: but the immediat[e] Effect of such rewards, except in mere votes of Thanks and Praise does not descend below the Commander in chief, So far it is good, but partial, while a place in the Legion of Honour is a Spur to Emulation in every Rank. May we not hope that after witnessing the Effects of National Spirit in our Forces abroad & our Volunteers at home, while mere discipline every where else gave way to the fury of a revolutionary madness, that much may be done to show our sense of this Spirit & contribute to foster & Preserve it. I am not partial to former times, or disposed to ascribe the Virtues of men to Ignorance & Poverty: but rather believe that Ranks well employed are favourable to Virtue and Elevation of mind. No Nation Surely ever exhibited  a better Spirit than Britain has done in the height of its affluence: but there is no reason why that Spirit should be neglected or [xxx] because they are a great Resource [xxx] adopted as the only standard of Estimation & ho nour. The Manufacturer I trust will not be less qualifyed to ply his Loom because he is conscious that no Enemy will dare to invade his family or his Property. I am far from being disposed to undervalue the Virtue that has been taken of Military merit: but I wish if Possible to have something devised in the way of that Institution I have mentioned to Penetrate the Souls of men with Sentiments of Elevation & Honour. That Institution never can be slighted because The Sovereign honour is of it And never can lose the Regard payed to it in every rank unless we suppose its appointments prostituted to Subjects unworthy which cannot be frequent in a Country where the Sense of the Army is every thing.

I may not be able to see you in this tour to the Country but be Assured of the most sincere respect And affection as well as confidence in your Ability & Love to your Country. I have the Honour to be with the highest consideration

My Dear Sir 
your most Obliged 
and most Humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
