Nydpath Castle 10th Octr 1795 Dr Ferguson

My Dear Friend

I am happy to receive your letter from Carlisle. Although I am not an Astrologer I thought I saw the right Ascension of Stars that caused your declination in our horizon & your course due south is what I wish.

The world is likely to become more tractable in proportion as its difficulties or next to impossibilities increase. What a Crisis? This comes of Waiting till our ennemies could not find paper to make Assignats or Shopkeepers not willing to take them even with a bayonet at their breasts. Your Poets and repeaters of Poetry are great fools. It is not Rusticus expectat dum defluat Amnis: for Rusticus knows better: but Aulius expectat is true reading.

The continual burden of my song has been, trust not to what the Ennemy may fail in, but to what you yourselves can do: but this was imputed to my drinking water while the world about me drank wine. But a Stout heart will yet do much;  Is all Europe to Shrink before this mixture of madness and Affectation? Yes, if Europe be on the verge of madness also what will save it. This Corner I think should be the last to take fire we have the sea to surround us and may have Armies of men interested to preserve order and repel Ennemies: but this is all raving & I write in haste to overtake you at Chester & should have written sooner if I had been at home to receive your letter when it came.

I went to Edr to meet our Friend Johnstone who at my perswasion came to Consult Doctors. Here the Sky continues to lour & makes me waken from every sleep with something heavy on my mind to be recollected as memory returns. My boys should have much to say to you. Adam is returned from Ireland and I doubt must think how he is to pass the Rubicon of Writership. For John I shall certainly think: but much should depend on the Charon into whose barge he is to Step. While this country lasts the Navy is likely to become its most important Limb & the career it opens very proper to be run by youth of Vigour especially with collateral Support. 

But as we are, it is best to take our chance & sink or rise in doing our best: the particular circumstances in which the first step is to be taken may determine much. God bless you. I shall write to Sr Wm p: soon meantime I need not tell you to mention my affectionate Respects. I am My Dear Friend your

most Affectionate and Obedient 
Servant 
Adam Ferguson
