Bath 26th May 1781.

Dear Carlyle

I imagine that if you had no Other evidence of my Convalescence but my deficiency in writing Letters you would think I was coming fast to be in Statu quo.

My silence, for some time, has not been for want of Scolding, & indeed, since She Scolds you at the Distance of five hundred Miles, what am I to expect here. I got a pretty good set down for having once written to you that we were not Anxious about the Bairns. Her whole concern now is to wonder whether Jamie will know her again. We are grown such fine People here that poor Rustick Jamie will not recollect that he had ever seen us before. I figure to myself that you are now very bussy with the General Assembly, of which I wish you a good deliverance, and offer this wish, with Some Anxiety, as you are left this year by the People who used to take care of you, The Principal & the Lord Advocate: but I hope that the Other Side will have Mercy, & perhaps pull the less if they do not feel any body to pull against them.

We have had you here sometimes blocked up, & sometimes Bombarded by the Dutch Fleet. Bruntisland was actually Bombarded in the last Dutch War & therefore I think you may lay your account with it in this. I think Bayley Cochran ought to have the Causway of Musselburgh taken up and I pray you remember that when a Shell falls  near you: you are not to run away but ly flat down till it burst & then take to your heel, as fast as you can, least any more should come. If you can only protract the War for two or three weeks I will come to your Relief & will bring two or three Muskets & Bayonets from Birmingham to Arm my Corps which consists of Peter Anderson a Noted Poacher at Bankhead & George McLean an eminent marksman & fishing Tackle maker at Edinburgh.

We are meditating a departure from hence about the 5th of June when our three months at this place will be out. Our Excursion to Clifton was prevented by cold weather, which with very little intermission has continued ever Since, & is the more grievous that is altogether unexpected at a time when people used to retire from the Heat of this Place.

To do him justice the Sun has keept his Word but this Infernal East wind chills to death while the Sun Scorches. I am now much Agitated with wishes to Comply with People who think it will be of great use to Bell  to remain here some time behind us, & with the Difficulty of having her properly placed. We go by London, to make as short a Stay as Affairs real or imaginary will permit, you may be Sure that I shall endeavour to bring any commands your Friends may have for Scotland.

I am Dear Carlyle 
most affectionately yours 
Adam Ferguson





Excuse my Intimacy with Johny Wilkes. If you should be questioned about your Correspondence with him. Remember not that which goeth in to the Mouth defileth but that which cometh out so keep a good Tongue in your own Head you need not care who writes to you.
