Nidpath Castle 29th Febry 
1796



My Dear Friend

I wrote lately rather a flapper in the Laputa Stile to keep you in mind, than a letter. & it is but fair to tell you that I have since procured a Step to be made in the Nydpath Treaty. Having expostulated with Mr Tait on the delay he wrote me for Answer that untill he received my Letter he believed that a draft of the Lease was sent to me & that the delay was owing to Myself. It is a curious bussiness that goes on of itself without the knowledge of those who should be the doers of it. The draft however was then sent & I have demurred only to one Clause by which it is proposed that I or my Heirs shall be bound to leave the Castle &c at the end of the Lease in Sufficient Repair. I always imagined that as the Castle was dismantled & left to the mercy of the Elements I was to preserve it in the manner necessary for my own Accommodation & that whenever the Rent Taxes & Repairs exceeded my means, I was  to leave as I found it destined to be the Habitation of Bats & Owls. It never entered my head That the Duke meant, when my lease was out that there should be a ground of Action in favour of his Heirs of Entail against my Heirs of Nothing Obliging them to Rebuild his Castle for him altho it be already as old as the oldest Ruin in all the Country. This however I hope was matter of form in the draft & will not be persisted in. And this is certainly a negotiation very fruitful in Letters to you since you must hear both of its delays and its Advances. It is not however altogether the occasion of this present writing. I find in the Edinburgh news Paper The Death of a very Remarkable man & much in your Thoughts as well as Mine James McPherson The Reviver of Ossian. You certainly know if true what I was told that he had made out a fair Copy of the original Poems. Mr McKenzie Secretary to the Highland Society of London told me he had the Manuscript in his Possession and that a fund was already provided for the expence of Printing it: That it was deferred merely upon a question which had not been determined whether it should be printed in the Greek or Roman  Character. I had a Specimen sheet sent me two or three years ago, in the Roman & Another in the Greek Character. With a Literal Latin translation word for [word] on the opposite page, the form in which I was told it was intended to print the Whole. I now see or Suspect that the whole load will fall upon you. The question relating to the Character is a Trifle & whether the Greek or the Roman be employed, James McPhersons orthography differing much from that employed in the Bible &c will require to have prefixed an Alphabet in which the Power & Sound of every Letter will be ascertained as much as possible. You will be able to inform yourself fully how the matter stands & I most earnestly entreat that you will take it up Seriously & earnestly: for if we die also before it is done I doubt the Papers will be lost & the fund provided for Printing remain unaccounted for.

I have heard no particulars of the manner in which that Indignant Soul departed: but he seemed to be drooping about two years ago when I saw him last.

I am My Dear Friend yours 
most affectionately 
Adam Ferguson
