Hallyards near Peebles, N.B. 11th January 1798

Dear Sir

you do me great pleasure by calling upon me for any thing that can be of use to you. My late worthy Brothers Esteem and Obligations have made you more than a Relation.

I certainly could interpret some of the names in the list you have sent me: but think I do better in referring you by the inclosed to My Friend Mr Bisset Minister of the Parish who by this daily use of the language and view of the places can much better connect the name and description together. I know it is a received Notion with Antiquaries here that most names of places in the Country are of gallic original and actually descriptive of the Situation. Much of this no doubt is true  & not a little imaginary as you will easily admit when you consider by what accident names are affixed to places without any meaning.

The district of Scotland in which the gallic etimologist is most Successful in this Way is the Counties of Air & Galway, where no Gallic has been Spoken time out of mind. And yet the inference is fair that it must have been the vulgar tongue formerly. As to the fact I have just heard it asserted & no more that a very Old man in the memory of People in the last Age used to say he remembered when the Common people spoke Gallic about him. And yet the total change of one Language for another totally & radically different is Scarcely to be accounted for without the Absolute extirpation of one Race & Substitution of Another. We perceive how the Latin has been changed into Italian Spanish & even French by time & a mixture of Races. But I  dont believe that the Saxon has come to be Substituted for Welsh or Gallic and a total change made without the removeal of those who Spoke the one to make way for those who Spoke the Other. And our imperfect account of these removeals & Supplantations has made me very Sceptical respecting the Authority of our History in many parts.

But this is perhaps little to your purpose. Altho' one impression your Dictionary will make on the mind of your readers is: That the Scoto Saxon[s] as well as Anglo Saxons are now in possession of a Country originally Gallic. I return the list of names as it may save you the trouble of recurring again to the Map and together with my letter to Mr Bisset send you one also to Mr McLaggan Minister at Blair in Athol who is highly reputed as a Gaelic Scholar and Antiquary. If he have proper Maps within his  reach I trust he will extend his Observations & interpretation of names beyond his own Parish or immediate Neighbourhood.

I am dear Sir with the most Sincere regard your most Obed.t 
& most humble Servt 
Adam Ferguson





George Chalmers Esqr
