Hallyards 2d March 1797

My Dear Friend

I have to acknowledge two or three letters with their respective inclosures Since I wrote last, in return to which all I can do is to give inclosures at least in equal numbers. I owe some letters to our Seaman at Spithead which I now endeavour to repay. If you meet with Rear Admiral Nugent at London pray tell him that the Little Protegé began his letter from Spithead in these words, It is impossible to express how kind captain Nugent is to me. And you may be assured that I feel no less than he does. Congratulate the Admiral for me on his Promotion. And Congratulate me too on the nomination of Rhoddam Home to the Caesar on the prospect of his Flag being Removed to Some Other Ship. I  should long Since have written to my Relation Robert Ferguson in Bengale: but the Vis inertiae is so Strong that without some particular occasion I should never have acquitted myself of that Debt. The occasion on which I write to him now is no less than the Death of his Father A most respectable & original Brother of mine Whom if you had Known you would have thought a most precious Acquaintance. With the wreck of a Little fortune saved from the Revolution in America he has contrived in his will by little Annuities to asswage the Necessities of a Number of Poor Relations whom indeed he was Supporting for years past. As the Publick has become a painful Object at least to us in this Corner who can do nothing for it, I am glad to have any thing else to write. That your Farm should be pleasant and promise to be profitable I rejoice. Mine is I  believe like the general System of Nature itself better fitted to our exigences than we are always willing to acknowledge; that is; it is fitted to our exigences by giving us something to Complain of & by never allowing us to rest. What an exotic man you are who never complain. If you should ever again be in the humour of coming to this Countrey it will be matter of great joy to me.

I am My Dear Friend 
your most Affectionate 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson







P.S. Be so good as amend or 
Supply my Direction to Rob't 
Ferguson if any way wrong
