Harrow March 19th, 1758

Sir

I intended to have waited on you a few days ago when I was in Town; but I found the House of Commons was Sitting & had no hopes of finding you at Home. I have a Brother in Scotland who is very desirous of being in the Army, & I wanted to ask your opinion whether in the Present Situation of Affairs, there might be any hopes of Obtaining a Commission for him.

Lord Milton gave me reason to believe it woud not be difficult, last year when there was a report of some new Levies, & My Brother had settled his Affairs w't this View: but these new Levies never were made; and I know it is more difficult to Obtain commissions when Regiments are formed, & every Colonel ingaged to Provide for his own connections. My Brother has some Military merit, which you must have the Patience to hear. He had been settled at Bourdeaux with an Uncle in the time of the last War, & from a fondness for The Army left that Place to go to Flanders, without consulting with any of his Friends or letting them  know what became of him: The Consequence of that Step was his inlisting in General Brags Regiment. Lord George Sackville I believe at that time had the Command of that Regiment. He was wounded at the Battle of Fountenoy & taken Prisoner. I afterwards found him out by Accident & prevailed upon him to let me apply for his discharge. I make no doubt but in your own Department your hands are full of Solicitations & ingagements, & it may be out of your Way to apply to any body concerned in the Land Service, and this may be My Lord Butes case too, & I woud not make use of the access I have to any body to teize them improperly. I will be determined by your opinion & have great confidence that you will excuse this trouble

I am glad to hear that Mrs Murray is well recovered. I have begun to revise the Paper you saw, & I am changing it to a Dissertation on the Vicissitudes incident to Human Society, & propose when that is done to write two more on the History of Manners, & on the History of Literature & to satisfy myself with what may be done in a reasonable time without planing out works for a Lifetime.

I am Sr 
with the greatest Respect 
your most obliged & most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
