Edinburgh Thursday 20th July 1780

My Dear Sir

your Express was Received    . In Consequence of it, I have been with the Duke of Atholl. Told him I was to do what Coll. C: was to have done himself in case he could have got back from Ireland by his Time. & that I had in charge to make this Intimation if my Friend was detained in that Countrey beyond the time at which he meant to make it himself. That he was expected every Hour in this Countrey & would then certainly pay his Respects with such Recommendations as might encourage him to hope for Countenance & Support. That he had some time last Spring Consulted  his Friends in Government on a different Object & had this Recommended to him that his Friends in that Quarter therefore would probably think themselves the more Indispensibly called upon to support him that this attempt was their own Suggestion ——— The Answer was that He had not fully considered what Part he should take in the Elections of that District, or if any Part. That his Family however had an Interest there & he must Attend to the means of Supporting it. That he must deferr Coming to any final Resolution till the Arrival of Col M. who was Expected from London in a few Days.

I told him that no Other or more Decisive Answer could be immediatly Expected. The Day & the Evening passed in much Hospitality & Politeness on the Part of his G: I  set out Early next morning for this Place.

Pray send us the Remainder of our Letters to Ld Kinoul &c Lord Gray . And now I think one may with propriety be written to the Duke of Athol.

The Others are Delivered. I met Ld Privy Seal at Perth, he on his Way to Bute, & I to Dunkeld, he is over & above his Respect to the Recommendation friendly to Ld Miltons Family.

General Skene I have seen he is a Man of Influence in one Burrough & puts his hand to the work Cordially & Willingly. The Circumstance we Anxiously wish for is the Arrival of the Principal. For in such Matters the great & needful operations can be performed only by the Principal. You may believe that all your Letters have been understood Tua  not excepted.

Yours most 
Sincerely & Affectionately &c 
Jas Mc Pherson Esqr
