Edinburgh 31st July 1790

My Dear Friend

you have heard that there is more joy in heaven over one Sinner that repenteth than over ten thousand that never Sinned & so your Letter has gathered charms from your long Silence. Charles Greville forgot to Send me any intelligence & I picked up what I could from other quarters judging of you as I have frequent occasion to feel in myself that one days procrastination produces ten more & so on in decimal proportion. I wish this letter may overtake or meet you at Geneva for altho that is a most Sensible corner of the world there is not much laid out in the way of Courts or Parliaments to captivate strangers. My hopes are that some one will put it in your head to see Mont Blanc & his Glaciers that you may do homage for Bennevis & Cairngorm to that King of Mountains & take his Instructions  how to keep their Snows a little better than they do through Summer. My whole Flock little Johnston and all have been at Leith for Sea bathing about two months whilst I alone have been here en hermitage but they are coming up this very day when matters will be as usual. John Home is gone to Lochaber so that he may not hear of your Melpomené for some weeks. Dr Black shall hear of his heavenly muse very soon. And so shall the Principal & Others who are all well. Mr Pulteney has been here or hereabouts some time on occasion of Elections, he has made a good Batch of Parliament men five in England & one in Scotland. I think he is in better plight quoad animal Life than formerly. We have seen upon your Subject & his mind is as you know. The Hill is still to be fought up with certain persons with whom you will do more by giving them a good opinion of themselves than by giving them reason to think well of you. However [xxx] the matter may come round when you seem careless about it. 

The remaining copies of My History of the Roman Republic are now the Property of John Stockdale Esqr Bookseller in Piccadilly London.

General Clerk & even my Man of Bussiness altho he draws Six Shillings & eight pence for every conference were so sick of Booksellers that they could hold out no longer & so we have sold the remainder of the impression as above for a Slump Sum which I have pocketed. I am bound not to make another Edition for five years the Period Mr Stockdale thinks necessary to sell off &c. It may go faster however in his hands than it did in ours. The French are too bussy translating their Monarchy into a Democracy to mind the translation of Books. The Author of that you Saw is as bussy as the rest being in the National Assembly.

I am well disposed to take the course you mention with Joseph & shall point the few Guns I have in that direction. I have more Satisfaction in little Johnston than I expected when you Saw us. I have never ceased to think of an excursion to Italy: but the charge of George Johnstones Son  forbids it. If ever it take place it must be a Solitary course. My infirmities disqualify me to keep with any Companion & the notion that I was a hinder to Others in doing what they wished would be intolerable.

If France were perfectly  quiet I coud proceed in a Chaise d'une place from Edr to Brundisium or Rhegium without tiring. The many things I am prepared to look at perhaps to correct myself in, would be occupation enough. Your friend Smith is no more. We knew he was dying for some months & tho matters as you know were a little awkward when he was in health; upon that appearance I turned my face that way & went to him without farther consideration & continued my attention to the last. He burnt all his Papers except one on the History of Astronomy which will probably come to the Publick. I wish you may be able to read what I have written. The Paper being given to blotting I have used a sharp pointed pen & little Ink so that I can Scarcely read but your eyes are better & so God Bless you. From your most

affectionate humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
