Hallyards near Peebles 20 June 1796

My Dear Friend

I must thank you imprimis for your Friend John. His Ardour for Seamanship seemd to abate at a distance from the Other Boys that were also so disposed; but he says that he would like it above any thing else. I do not trust much to his Judgement: but wish the choice to be his own that he may not blame me for his Sea Sickness. This I doubt might repell him in the first outset if he had a retreat before it is over & therefore I wish him to be in a Kings Ship & on a Cruiz[er] before he taste of it & will send him to London by Land if I can find a right opportunity: but this may require Some delay. As for the World I have no hopes but from God & the chapter of Accidents. It is like John Bull to cry out against all Continental Connections, now when his very existence is at Stake without them; And I can only repeat what I have formerly said that he never knows how to behave himself to Other Nations. At one time he would govern every body, at another he cares for nobody.

This war should have been merely defensive  from the first & terminate as soon a[s] Possible, for it has Served to rock the Demon of Mischief in his Cradle: but we would plunge into it trusting to the Cooperation of Other States & now we are over head & Ears & ought to Catch at a Straw, we will have no Assistance. This, in the Sequel of what is past, is the Continued Road to distruction over all Europe, to which there is no Safety now but in the Strict union & Concert of Nations whether in Peace or War. If we have given Other nations occasion to think that we mean or meant our own agrandisement, it is full time to undeceive them by the most Sincere declarations, that we withdrew from the Continent because we could promote the common Cause more effectually elsewhere. That we meant no acquisition: but in the way of pledge for the rights of our Allies as well as our own & there is no conquest but we are willing to relinquish for a proper Adjustment in the common Cause of Safety to the Nations of Europe. And there is no exertion which we ought not make in this matter. People talk of Allarms from Russia: but this compared with The Allarm from France is a trifle. I am not much  for Active Hostilities against France for this is like probing the wild beasts to make him foam & Roar: but show a firm Resolution throughout Europe not to be the Dupe of his Affectations: or the Ambition of a few upstarts to govern the world under the notion of Liberty to them. How I write, you will say, as if I were a Statesman Consulted in the Bussiness. I would give much that I could banish the matter from my thoughts but this being impossible my next resource is to give vent. I have retired to the Country on purpose that I might have a number of little Objects & Cares to divert me from things in which I can be of no use either in Practice or Speculation & so much for every mans importance to himself in which I know that you will forgive me my Share. I am My Dear Friend

your most Affectionate & most humble 
Servant 
Adam Ferguson
