St Andrews 21st July 1810

My Dear Sir

I have received your letter acquainting me that Trustees whom you do not name are now deliberating on the publication of my worthy Friends and your late Uncle's Manuscripts. Of this you must be sensible that I cannot give any opinion. The small part I saw or with my impaired sight could decipher did not appear to me intended for publication: but rather the amusement of leisure in the exercise of a talent in which our friend excelled, the easy satisfactory detail of familiar occurrences affording a pleasure which his correspondents experienced in every letter he wrote to them. I was so pleased in reading the part you showed me or I could attempt to read but  it related to things and persons, most of us so obscure as not to be entitled to publick notice, that I should not be willing to exceed what I believed to be the Authors original intention by publication. And I thought myself the more at liberty to give this opinion, that I found my own name repeated with that partial favour which I always experienced from my friend. It was our lot thro' great part of our time to be neighbours so near as to be frequently together and the opportunities I believe were never willingly omitted by either. We were Socii Criminis in the countenance we gave to the first representation of our friend J. Home's Tragedy of Douglas, a charge for which I was never called to Account But Dr Carlyle was more known & had more enemies who by prosecuting him for this offence declared him innocent of any thing more likely to serve their spite. We were also accessory to the formation of a Poker Club, & survived most of its members, & thus had occasion of regret which are but ill refrained in the solitary comforts of sequestered Old Age. You cannot doubt my desire to promote  the respect which is due to the memory of Dr Carlysle's memory; But how I know not beyond the testimony if it were called for that I never knew a more steady friend or more agreable companion, and in this I should have so many concurring witnesses as to make my words of little Account. I shall be anxious to know how you proceed, and I beg I may hear from you.

I am with best respects to Mrs Bell

yours most affectionately

Adam Ferguson
