Mr Goldie Principal of the College of Edinburgh, who is come to a great Age is I am told taken Ill & considered as dying. That Place is at The Disposal of the Town Council in case of a Vacancy I woud recommend The person who appears fittest to me for the office Mr Adam Ferguson at present Professor of Natural Philosophy. He is well known to my Lord Bute & his affection for His Lordship is a great merit with me in his Station. He has already given proof of his merit & abilitys by contributing to raise the reputation of the University since he has been a member of it & encreasing the number of Students particularly in that branch which he teaches. He has alsogained the Affection of the youth & acquired a degree of Esteem & Authority peculiar to himself.

All the other persons who are supposed to be Candidates have either reached a Period of Life when Men cease to exert themselves in a new Situation or are engaged in cares & occupations that must in part call off their Attention from the Dutys of this Station Office; or have been already favoured with other Preferments. Mr Fergusons sole occupation is Science & Literature, there is no other kind of Preferment within his reach [xxx xxx] besides this office of Principal, which may be considered as the proper reward of a Professor who has disstinguished himself. As he stands at the head of the Course of Philosophy a sort of claim seems to result from thence & such a Claim is well supported by the Esteem of People of discernment, & by the Testimony of those who upon the occasion are his Rivals every one of whom I believe if he himself was out of the question woud name Professor Ferguson as the fittest man to be Principal. If being in orders was a necessary qualification which I believe it is not although the office has been generally possessed by Clergymen, Mr Ferguson has that qualification with this advantage that he retains the Character without being incumbered with any charge out of the University.

I shall be glad to know My Lord Butes opinion & yours in this matter. From the Papers which you sent me The Spanish War appears to be the Sequel of a haughty manner assumed & of unhappy Altercations which now begun by a former Minister, which his Successors could not Alter without Lowering the Character of the Nation. For ought appears to me both Nations may have been brought into a War which neither of them really intended shoud take place. And in this belief I woud willingly hope that from a proper Management we may still entertain the Prospect of no very distant peace.
