Hallyards near Peebles 8 Septr 1801

My Dear Carlyle

I am much Obliged for your letter; It opens one way to the Admiralty & which I shall certainly take when matters are ripe for it. I had not any Conversation nor did I mean to have any with Mr Dundas on the Subject untill I could say we were in Condition for his Interposition. As the Term of my Boys necessary Service as a Midshipman draws to a Close, I am desirous to know when & Where & by whom Midshipmens examinations to try their qualifications for a Commission is made. My natural recourse for Advice & direction in this matter should be to His present Captain Newman of the Loire: But there is something forbidding in that Quarter by whose fault I know not on that Quarter. The Boy from his entry into the Service had a succession of Captains partially kind to him & this perhaps had spoilt  him, or made him ill brook the treatment for which he should have been prepared of a mere Seaman. I have endeavoured all I can to make him think of his Duties on board only let others behave to him as they may think proper. He was very impatient to be on board a Frigate as being more Active than a line of Battleship And I was looking out for a Captain to whom I might recommend him, When he fell in with the Loire at Plymouth & chose of himself to be transferred to that Ship. Captain Newman is by every Account a brave man And soon after he took My son on board, by Admiral Homes Advice I wrote to thank him for that favour but had no Answer, which with some other Circumstances makes the unwilling to trouble him any more. As the Loire may be at Portsmouth before my Sons tryal can Come on, I should be glad, if it be not improper to trouble Captain Paton in Such a Matter, that without any thing like Complaint of Captain Newmans dissposition towards us, he would advise how  to proceed, and if he have any opportunity learn from Captain Newman what the Boys behaviour has been & the propriety of his proceeding to be examined at the end of this Term as [xxx] a midshipman. Captain Paton Can at the same time Answer the Questions I put, When Where & by whom such examinations are made. I should have endeavoured to see you in passing through Lothian [xxx] if I had not found out that the person I had entrusted with stopping my letters for me at Edinburgh had done with my newspaper but suffered every letter to be forwarded to this place in my Absence & I was impatient to receive Some packets which I had reason to believe were waiting for me & required Answers.

Here all is Safe and a general Concert of good Wishes for Mrs Carlyle & you in which no one joins more heartily than

your Affectionate humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
