Hallyards 3rd July 1798

My Dear Friend

My Silence is not negligence nor forgetfulness if I had ten thousand of the best letters that ever were written you should have them all: but what I can write from this post, at which my prime consolation is that I have nothing to do but to wait quietly till my time comes. The French I trust, altho they may tease, cannot subdue this Armed nation; and all Speculation on the Subject is at an end. I have in my view a most delightful Kirkyard retired & green on the bank of a running Water & faceing a Verdant hill which in your part of the World would pass for a tremendous mountain: but to me it gives the Idea of Silence & Solitude away from the noise of folly. And so I fancy myself laid there with a Stone to tell the Rustic Moralist what  he will not understand; because I sometimes project it should be in Greek as follows: ως εγω τον ϰοσμον εθαυμασα ϰαι συ θεασαμενος χαιϱε but then Again I wish to explain it. And so it should be. I have seen the Works of God, it is now your turn. Do you behold them and rejoice. I would speak my verve for Agriculture in Greek also Ανθϱωπος ιχνος γεοϱγια And you may judge of my willingness to write when I put all this on paper to you.

I have not stirred from home for many months past, till lately, when Admiral & Mrs Nugent being at Edinburgh, led me thither to gratify my sense of their kindness to my little Seaman. And I am Still the more Convinced that Nugent is the most amiable faultless Creature upon Earth. In that excursion I met our Friend Sr John Sinclair in the Street: this put it in his head to write to me since my return hither, an Account of works he is projecting to promote what he calls Statistical Philosophy. I hinted that his project is too vast: but he tells me that his mind  is made up, to draw it on a great Scale and on as perfect a plan as possible. And that he never Startled at any difficulty that could be Surmounted ever Since he collected as far back as the year 1780 One thousand & two hundred men & in one days time made a road of Six miles long over a mountain till then thought impassible . The fact is that he has got an instinct to be doing which other people ought to know how to employ without turning him out of place. Altho I have so many excuses for writing so seldom, I am not willing to Allow you any, so I pray when you are writing however let there be a Scrap for me even if you should not be able to tell me what is become of Buonaparte. By the by is that a genuine Prussian paper in answer to the French demands, which we have in the news paper. It is menacing and I do not see how the great Nation can give way to it without appearing to be cowed. They certainly meant to gall us & to secure the Co-operation of Prussia against us by transferring Hanover

&c &c your most Affectionately 
A. F.
