Hallyards 2d September 
1799



My Dear Friend

As the Summer is now passed I take courage to write in hopes we may pass through a winter and see a better one. Man is Surely a vegetable & will yield neither blossom nor Fruit when the season is backward. To this I hope you will impute my Silence & what is worse than Silence a listless indifference about every thing that is passing in world even about my own books Authors & Readers. I am nevertheless willing in the language of Lloyds Coffee House to under-write your Verses to the Arch-Duke if he will reinstate The Mentor where he found him. If you know any particulars I am very Anxious about him.

I hear very favourable accounts of Mr McIntoshs performances at Lincolns Inn. As I judge only from his pamphlet his Tone tho' perhaps more harmonious is in unison with mine. He had his reasons probably for not mentioning me & I am not Solicitous about them. He will probably procure the moral Philosophy that Popularity in England which I wished for but have been unable to Obtain. His taking  his ground in the Law is not so apt to allarm the Universities & the Church as if he had called his Object Moral Philosophy which those Authorities sometimes mention among the Corruptions of the Times. I need not Ask you about the Roman History; it would be very bad indeed if you did not commend it: but even if you should not I hope its faults are fewer than they were. I wish the same thing to befall my Other more recent Book, And have warned the Bookseller that if they think it will ever bear being reprinted now is their time; while I have faculties left to Curtail its faults. If not my amendments must go to my heirs & take their chance. By the By as we say upon the Tweed I am just now meditating a work of no great length or moment. It is to be dramatic and you with Some Others a Principal Actor. It is to tell what I would have done with my little effects after I am gone. I mean you to have a Duplicate & will place another with my Friend Sir William Nairne One of Our Honourable Judges if he accept as I doubt not he will. In the mean time My Land Lord is building for my Convenience an addition to my house as if I were to live on through the next century.

Your Magazines &c that talk of my Life have robbed me of a year for I was born in 1723 &  am of course 76 now past. So indulge me in a little prating about the times that were. If you should the times that are will not be offended; for I really think them better than any we have formerly had. The Madness of France has made us understand and relish the Sobriety of our own forms. The multitude & insolence of so near an Enemy has roused every Soul in Britain to Politics & War as well as Trade. Women & Children can listen to talk about matters of Consequence to Mankind. The Evils and follies of one quarter become lessons of Wisdom to another And so the world is guided. Storms & Tempests have produced Architecture And the Manufacture of Cloth. So much for moralizing & it is well the end of my paper is in sight otherwise you might have more. It is long since I heard from you, I am affraid by my own fault, however I hope to hear soon you are well & about reaping your harvest, if so late with you when may we look for it here. I am away from any means of knowing Fordyces Motions Otherwise should certainly endeavour to find him.

I am sensible of his kindness and always had a regard for him. Believe my Dear Friend yours &c

A. Ferguson
