Madam,

According to your desire I have read with attention Mr Alisons Essays on the Nature and Principles of Taste; and am happy to inform you that they have given me much entertainment & instruction. I consider them as a valuable addition to the Philosophy of the human mind. They are written with great elegance and purity of stile, and discover in their Author an uncommon share of sensibility to whatever is sublime or beautiful in the works both of Nature & Art.

At the same time they prove him to be possessed of a very considerable portion of philosophical acuteness in tracing the sources to which all our emotions of this kind ought to be referred.

The work now published, which consists of two Essays, is only part of what the author intends on the Subject of taste. In the first Essay he examines the effect which is produced on the Mind when the emotions of sublimity & beauty are felt: And, in the second, he investigates the qualities in material objects that are fitted to excite them.

The Theory which Mr Alison proposes on the first of these Subjects, as far as I know is entirely new. He ascribes the pleasures of taste, not to any  particular faculty implanted in us by Nature for receiving them; but to ‘the union of the pleasure of simple emotion with that pleasure which is annexed by the constitution of the human mind, to the exercise of imagination’. The effect therefore produced on the mind by a sublime or beautiful object is compounded, according to him, of the elevated or agreeable emotion which that object is fitted to excite independently of its sublimity or beauty, and of the agreeable exercise which it gives to the imagination by suggesting a train of associated emotions-He has conducted his investigation very like a Philosopher; in the course of it he has illustrated several important principles in the science of human nature; & in particular he has shewn more successfully than any preceding Author the extensive influence of the Principle of Association over all our pleasures & our pains-

The second Essay treats of the Sublimity and Beauty of the material World. The object of the Author here is to shew, that the qualities of Matter have not in themselves any natural & independent Sublimity or Beauty; but all their power to excite these emotions arises from their being associated in our imagination with  qualities that have a reference to Mind; or to use his own language, ‘from their being the signs or expressions of such qualities as are fitted by the constitution of our Nature to produce emotion’.

From this account you will easily discover that I have formed a very favourable Opinion of Mr Alison's present publication; and that his friends may safely refer to it as a full proof of his Abilities. I admire especially the graceful ease and perspicuity of his language.

I am Madam &c &c
