Edinburgh 2d Janry 1780

Dear Sir

As your name in The Title of Letters addressed to the Earl of Carlisle surprised me very Agreeably I proceeded to read them as you may believe with great Avidity: And should have troubled you with my first thoughts on the whole or particular Part if I had not been prevented by a kind of Epidemical Cold or Fever which disqualified me some time for my ordinary Bussiness & by a Relapse which has given me a Listlessness under which nothing but your express commands could make me venture to Write.

The Example which you with a few  Others have set, tending to rescue the Subject of Politics out of the Hands of Anonymous Party Writers who too often abuse their Concealment, may I hope have very good Effects & multiply Publications from which we may expect Instruction as well as Entertainment & every degree of Ardour on public Affairs without Inventive or the Misrepresentation of Persons.

On the Subject of your first Letter in which you referr to the State of our Partys & the multiplied Descriptions of Persons who presume to think & to prescribe for the State The Sum of my opinion is that our Constitution has Always engendered such Partys & Multiplyed such Descriptions. That they are in our State the Symptoms of Political Life, And under this Aspect to be cherished in Speculation even while we censure & condemn them in Particular Instances. While the Constitution is safe; Ambition & Faction will be Vigorous & Free, & we may owe to them very great & Material Favours. 

But I would not be carryed by this Consideration so far as to justify Faction in any Single Instance in which it made a Sacrifice of the Public Safety to Private Ambition or Interest. If such offences are necessary, in such a Constitution as ours, we may trust to this Necessity for Produceing them. Men need not be tutored to Faction, we may even try what we can do to reclaim them. & now will remain to show that the Constitution Subsists & presents the Unusual Baits to Strife & Contention.

We may Applaud Mr Dempster for boldly passing to the Side of Government in great & Momentous Questions of State, we may Condemn Others for Persisting in Opposition to the very Brink of National Destruction without any fear that such Notions of Right & Wrong will mar our Politics or deprive us for the Future of all opposition to government the Acknowledged Check to Abuses & Spur to Public Exertions. I have heard People talk as if it were understood that because Faction  is a Physically necessary Physical appendage of in our Constitution, that therefore every degree of Faction is to be morally Licensed, & that we are so far to forget the Distinction of Right and wrong as to hold, that to be streight in Politics, which we hold to be crooked in Private Life. I mean Evading & Dissfiguring the Truth of Serving the Ennemys of our Countrey in order to hurt our Rivals in Power. I do not know whether this may Suggest any thing to you to be either affirmed or denyed in the additional Miscellaneous Remarks you propose on the Subject of your Letters: but this is the way of thinking to which I endeavour to bring my own mind, tho I am not Sensible that in Political Argument I should take the Liberty to Suppose an Antagonist guilty of the Political Vices I have mentioned.

As to the Nature & Object of the War although I set out with a resolution not to make any  Panegyrics yet I cannot help saying that you have stated them with Truth & great Energy. We certainly have many difficulties but The Stake is likewise great, & we may lose it, but it would be as Absurd, in my opinion, to cease Contending for it, because we may lose it; as it would be for a man to cease endeavouring to preserve his Life, because it is in Danger. There never was a National Cause more just than ours is at Present against France & Spain and all their Abettors & tho I trust nothing to this yet I hold it to be a matter of great Importance in the minds of the Partys themselves & of the Bystanders. I am not fond of National Animositys but I feel & indulge the Indignation of the present Case with much Satisfaction. Every well meaning Clergyman ought to Stuff his  Sermon with it on the Approaching Fast Day. And to tell the Americans in Particular how they Were favoured Spared by Providence, while their wishes in Appearance Sincere for the Redress of Grievances, but how they & their Mighty Friends have been Scourged since they rejected the Redress of Grievances to become Traytors to their King. And their Fellow Citizens & Instruments in the Hands of Inveterate Ennemys for the Destruction of Both.

I am sensible that we must endeavour to take the Offensive in this War & make every Effort to Annoy the Ennemy in order to preserve ourselves. The mere Defensive is always Tardy & Feeble & ineffectual. It was the Constant maxim & Practice of Caesar, whom I have been Studying much, to occupy the whole Attention of the Ennemy, as soon as possible, in finding out what he was  to do; so as to leave them no time to think of any Project for themselves. And this I think we should do without giving it out as our Intention: for Talking of which we have already too much often marrs Bussiness. I admire as you do the Talents that appear in both Houses of Parliament but I wish with all my Heart we could lend the use of them to our Ennemys for a year or two.

The Object of our Ennemys last years was to have the Superiority in the west Indies & on the Coast of North America & to have acted Offensively from the one to The Other as the Season or Other Circumstances required & with the Remainder of their Forces Collected to Strike at this Island. For this object they neglected their own Commerce & they spared ours. But as they have Failed in their Principal Intention the Secondary  Losses they have had And the Advantages we have had in the Petite Guerre will be felt very Sensibly. I cannot guess what their Object will be for next year. But I think that our first concern is at Home to have this Island in a Military Posture far above Insult. A Numerous Army well appointed in the Field And Arms every where in the Hands of the People. Many are Averse to the last Circumstance from a Notion that it will make the People Idle & endanger the Peace. And I have been so long upon that Hobby Horse that I am perhaps blind to his Defects: But the only People in Europe who are regularly Armed are the most Industrious & the most Peaceable Citizens, and I believe that there is no Power in Europe that can Invade their Countrey without exposing himself to Disgrace & Ridicule. There are many Differences between them & us, I own:but none to make me Suppose that a  Land holder & Father of a Family will become Idle & Riotous upon having a Stand of Arms in his House, here, any more than there.

Highly as I rate the Force of our Present Army I should be sorry to risk the Fate of this Kingdom on a Single chance of the Die between them & any Army which an Ennemy Superior at Sea may Land here from France. A People with Arms in their Hands, contain many Arms & gall an Ennemy with Hostilitys wherever he goes. This Aid would be usefull upon every Supposition & may be Absolutely necessary if to Act offensively we Detach much of our Army & Fleet to a Distance.

To Effect this I apprehend that little more would be necessary besides some little Honorary Prize to be Annually shot for by persons of a certain condition to exclude the Rabble who have Arms of their own.

There are besides Ideas respecting the Army & the State which haunt me, & which as  I have no character to lose by uttering things out of my Sphere you shall have with my other Dreams. I wish therefore for some decided way of distinguishing Officers who perform Successful Service. I mean not only some Reward to them which may excite Others by their Example but likewise a way of hastening them up into Situations where such Services are of most Consequence. This can be done only by giving one or more Steps to the Officer who is greatly distinguished by Success, for I wish not for many reasons to admit of any Other Proof of Merit. This it will be said may be hard on Other Officers who are equally Capable but have wanted the opportunitys: If Officers feel it so, let them Court the oportunitys & Strive to improve them: This is one great Purpose of the Rule. And if it were Established I imagine that Officers would be as little mortifyed to see another over them for having beat the Ennemy as they now are in Seeing officers over  them for having a Commission of an Older Date. This Rule of Seneriority which we profess to follow can produce nothing in the Army but Purchasing of Commissions & Mediocrity of Character or Patient Service. As for the mere Reward of Service that may be any thing which the Party likes. In the case of Prevost for Instance who by repulsing Destaign at Savanna has done this Countrey a most Signal Service, let him have almost any thing he will as be made a Baronet & Peer & have an Estate or any thing. I was angry with him for what I thought a premature expedition and Attempt upon Charles Town; But it is to his Success at Savanna I wish to Annex this Reward that The King may be understood to Say to every Officer in his Service go & do thou likewise beat the Ennemy.

My other Wish is that some Arrangement were thought of to make our Statesmen Warriours & conversely. I see you make some Objection to things being done on the Spur of the Moment: but  alass if things calculated merely for General Good are not begun at least, upon the Spur of the occasion that calls for them they will never be done nor attempted at all. What would you think of a Party of Chess played by six of a Side of whom each professed to know only the moves of one Piece.

If ever we are set down again in Peace with any thing like our Old Connection with America I should certainly Venture a Croisade to Obtain an Association of some Leading & fashionable People to send their Sons the Tour of America & the West Indies instead of France & Italy & to Visit Camps instead of Conversatziones and Operas. There is one thing however I am sure of; that our will not to put a Single word of all this, in your Additional Remarks. Nor should I, if I had credit to bring any thing like these about in the Army or among Persons of high Rank ever Say a Word about the Matter untill I had done what I could. It will be well if you dont turn away from every Thought of this  Kind with disgust, as being Visionary & impracticable. This is common enough with men of Bussiness, who mistake the Purpose of General Reasonings, which is not to Ascertain what is practicable in any Particular Case, but what ought to be aimed at as far as it is Practicable, a measure which they only who know all the Circumstances of the Case can Assign. I am far from any Hopes that we shall see, as in the best Times of the Roman Republic, a Head or Heads on the same Shoulders equally qualifyed for the Council, or Senate, The Popular Assembly, The Bar, The Judgement Seat, The Camp & the Head of the Army, & indeed Admirably well Qualifyed for all of them: but I am Satisfied it would be a very easy Matter to Make Military as well as Political Consideration a necessary recommendation to the Council the Cabinet or higher Departments of State, And every man who is to decide in great national Questions perceive with his own Senses the weight of  every Circumstance he is to admit in the Scale.

On the Subject of our Resources any more than the loss I have mentioned I certainly cannot say any thing that is worth your Reading. Our Resources are certainly great & our manner of calling them forth is certainly Fraught with great Present Efficacy & Power what may be the End I know not. It is matter of Conjecture & the Data from which to Conjecture are far scattered & deeply hid among the Circumstances which are to Limit Check extend or promote the Future Progress of our Wealth. The Politicians who pronounced the downfall of this Countrey from the Pressure of its Debts: forgot that no measure of Debt will ruin a Party whose wealth encreases more than his Debts or who is a gainer by the whole adventure in the case of every Debt he contracts. To Effectuate our Ruin it is not necessary that our Debt should encrease; the Diminution of our Funds to Pay it will have the same Effect: Nor, to save us, is it necessary that our Debt should deminish the Increase of  our Funds will do as well, & both would certainly do best of all. We have, I imagine, great as our Debt is, been gainers upon the Whole Adventure, tho Losers by Particular Parts: by that which we laid out for Instance in preserving the Ballance of Power in Europe unless we suppose, that this has saved us from Destruction, an Article which must be left out of every Account because it is invaluable. What we gained in East Indies if it could be ensured, would Ballance a hundred Millions: but alass Riches in that Part of the world have Wings. And I most earnestly recommend Plucking them as fast as is consistent with Justice & Prudence. For I see no immediate Resource so great as that.

I perhaps do not differ from you materially on the degree of Reliance to be had on contributions raised within the year & in some measure Voluntary to meet the Exigencys of Government. The measure is attended with so many Difficulties as to prevent its being attempted in the ordinary Course of things: but I should be unwilling to have it understood either  by the Ennemys of this Countrey or by the Lenders of Money that is impossible; That they may Urge us indefinitely, that we are ruined when we are driven to this Expedient. The Fact is that great & Prosperous Nations have been driven to this Expedient & have risen from it as with a new Principle of Life & resumed their Career with Fresh Vigour. Our Ennemys will never have felt the whole Force of this Countrey till a fourth of its People are in Arms & every farthing that can be spared by individuals given to the immediate expence of the War. This I own is a state not to be wished for but in computing the Chances of Life we are by no means to neglect or despise this last one which in our case will not fail if the Spirit with which it ought to be taken does not fail first.

This Letter is already so long that it ought now certainly to come to an End. From the State of Health in which I began it you may  believe it has cost repeated attempts, And I would close it for good & all begging every possible indulgence for the Contents. If I were not earnest to know whether I have the Missfortune to differ from you materially on the Subject of a Possible or Eventual Union with Ireland which you mention with some degree of Reprobation. My predilection is in favour of Small States & Separate Legislatures but I would carry this no farther with respect to the States I love than is consistent with their Safety. It appears to me that as our Rivals in Europe have been advancing the Union of Great Britain First & next that of the British Islands will be necessary to consolidate the Strength with which we are to withstand them. I therefore consider the Union with Ireland as the first great Political Event which some well improved conjuncture may bring about, & which will give us all our Boats  aboard to make us tight for any Storm that may Assail us.

I honour the Irish Patriots of our time [xxx] they have shown that the Effort they have made is a virtuous one for the Relief & Prosperity of their Countrey in which I wish them every Possible Degree of Success. I rejoice greatly over this & all the Other Fortunate Events in the Catalogue. I earnestly Pray that every Nerve may be exerted & every Capable & Brave man encouraged that Since Fortune is disposed to be with us we may put ourselves in the Way of her Favours.

I beg my most Sincere Respects to Mrs Eden Miss Eden & My fellow Traveller. My whole Seal & two or three more super-numerary members who have no Room on the Seal would join me if they had the Honour of being known to Her. I am with the greatest Respect

Dear Sir 
your most Obedient 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
