Edinburgh Octr 4, 1757

Sir

I have just received your letter inclosed to Mr Home, & am sorry that my omission in not writing you sooner shoud have given you the trouble of a second letter, or occasioned any degree of suspence with respect to my inclinations. I would have written immediatly on having the honour of your former letter, If I had not thought it unnecessary to give you that trouble. As Mr Home had Signifyed my intire Submission to My Lord Butes directions, & my willingness to be employed on any terms His Lordship thought proper. The proposal at first found one great difficulty with me in breaking in upon my Inclination to Setlement after some years of Wandering & uncertainty, of which I confess I was become tired: But there were considerations enough to remove that difficulty, & the principal one which remained upon My Lord Bute's Letter, was a very Sincere Anxiety about my qualifications to fill a place of so much consequence & such tender concern to His Lordship, & in which every circumstance I had access to know, made me think with pain of any degree of dissappointment to him.

I am extremely sensible of the honour of this Confidence from a Person who is so well apprised of the Nature & importance of it & shall endeavour to profit all I can by the views he will no doubt continue to give me.

I am just now upon terms for disposing of My Chaplaincy which is but a precarious Possession to one who has tired of following a Regiment, & who in time of service can have little more than the name & the chance of being suddenly called upon from Abroad. If I can get My Colonel to concur in this Affair I shall have litle further connection with the Clergy of Scotland & be under no necessity of appearing in their Character & shall be very glad if that Circumstance is equally  [xxx] agreeable to My Lord Bute.

Home has left his quarters at Braid & lives in Town. He has finished the first Acts of Agis & they are now in the hands of a Copyer, & will I believe be sent to you when done. I dread the difficultys which remain in the Plan from the Mixture of two Objects & Passions, but I have avoided ever discouraging him upon a point which coud not possibly be altered. He wrote you by last Post & is now gone to the Countrey for a Day or two. I hope you will forgive the Length & the freedom of this letter & believe me to be

With the greatest Respects 
your Most Obliged 
& most Obedient humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
