Edinburgh July 4th 1777

My Lord

I have the honour of your Lordships letter with the Copys inclosed & am extremely sorry for the occasion to which they relate. I am even surprised to find that Lord Chesterfield should suppose my Claim to the Annuity in question precluded by expressions in a letter which was neither addressed nor communicated to me or shoud Suppose me fettered now by a condition which was never proposed to me. It is true that in deliberating on the terms that were offered me by The Earl of Chesterfields Guardians I considered both the risk I ran of  loseing my Professorship & the chance I had of being able to retain it but never once imagined that my Annuity, the sole lucrative consideration on which I agreed to the proposal, was to depend on either Event.

Your Lordship I observe had mentioned to Lord Chesterfield that I did lose my Professorship & that I enjoy it now through the favour of those who reelected me before I parted with his Lordship . If there were any doubt of the hazard I ran of loseing my Professorship that fact must certainly remove it. The Town Council of Edinburgh who are the Patrons of this University did by one act deprive me of my office: but on hearing my Plea against some irregularitys in their proceeding & my application for favour, they by a subsequent Resolution erased the former from their Records. And were even willing to indulge me with leave of Absence for another term, which woud have enabled me to remain with Lord Chesterfield untill he attained the Age of twenty one years: But the Act of His  Lordships last Guardians, made it unnecessary for me to avail myself of their Indulgence. This fact however has not been stated by me as any part in the foundation of my Claim to an Annuity from His Lordship nor has it before now been ever mentioned by me in the course of this bussiness: so that His Lordships expressions in chargeing me with meanness on that account are at least unguarded if not unjurious. It is sufficiently dissagreeable to have any disspute whatever with His Lordship without the addition of ungracious terms: And if I were writeing to His Lordship I shoud endeavour to make him sensible of this truth by some such conjunction of Epithets as he has made to me. That it is mean, for instance, in The Earl of Chesterfield to impute to me a part which I never acted, or to excuse himself from the performance of a bargain by alledgeing a condition which never was Stipulated.

Lord Chesterfield I perceive intends me no more than Justice, & it is indeed all I ever proposed to ask of His Lordship. I am only sorry that he makes it necessary to apply any where else for a determination of what that Justice is, but must Suppose that he has as little inclination as power to withhold it from me.

I have a very disstinct remembrance of the passage in Mr Lovel Stanhopes Conversation to which your Lordship alludes. Having mentioned with other things my Claim to this Annuity Mr Stanhope was pleased to say that although he believed it woud fall on Lord Chesterfield at last: yet he coud do nothing relating to it at present. And this I mentioned in the letters I then wrote to My Lord Stanhope to Sr George Savile & to Mr Hewett.

The Idea of a Lawsuit with persons to whom I owed every Duty & with whom I expected to Remain on terms of confidence and friendship, is extremely painful to me: but from the Papers which I have the honour to receive from your Lordship now appears unavoidable. My Suit I imagine must stand against The Earls of Chesterfield & Stanhope jointly: but I shall wait for My Lord Stanhopes commands, which may be sent to Mr Chalmer my Agent in St. Albans Street or to myself here before my Counsel or Solicitor proceeds. Mr Smith Arrived here yesterday & joins me in Respects. I have the honour to be with the greatest Respect

My Lord 
your Lordships most 
obliged & most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson







Lord Viscount Mahon
