Edinburgh 12th Octr 1782

Dear Sir

I wish with all my heart that the addition you mention were made & the time may come when I may endeavour to accomplish it. But you will please to consider that it is actually one of the most Interesting parts of the Imperial History, that I should be obliged instead of breaking off into general Reflections at the Accession of Caligula to continue the detail through his Reign that of Claudius & Nero, with the great Contest that Followed to the Victory of Vespasian. This Reign with that of Titus, Domitian, & so on to the Blessed Scene which opened with Nerva & which I should be happy to be able to represent Altho I am affraid the Materials are rather fit to furnish Characters of men & opinions of things rather than detail.  For the present at any Rate the attempt is impossible. My College Bussiness which begins next month, altho it admits of what may be done by Snatches, is altogether inconsistent with the pursuit of any continued & uninterrupted Series of Subjects. I am now engaged in a bussiness of years, but what may fall in with my labours in the College as they come, to put in writing what I used to give there in the form of Prelections.

I am forbid much writing with my own hand & therefore try a new method of dictating to a Clerk. I am much Obliged to Mr Gibbon for wishing to have my hand come So near his Work & if the Publick do me the Honour to bear with a Second Edition should think myself very well employed. However the Reception that may be given to past Labours will very much determine what is to be done with respect to any Continuance.  As to my diligence in forwarding the proofs, I should certainly be very earnest to have the work go on with the least possible interruption, if it were only to catch you so long as you are in the mind to give me your Attention and Assistance And since you have done so well & will very near have Swallowed the Cow by & by, I hope you will not worry on the Tail. As to the Period of my History as it stands if you have looked at the last part of the Manuscript you will see it is Completed to my Idea landing the Roman Republick to a compl[ete] Revolution in a confessed & hereditary Monarchy.

If the Publick call for more however I shall be very glad to be able to furnish it. I am

Dear Sir your most Obedient & most humble Servant

Adam Ferguson
