Hallyards near Peebles 
7th June 1806



My Dear Friend

It is long since I wrote but I trust you will not Suspect my Silence of unkindness or neglect. You have heard of Old Age & its numberless defects: but indi[f]ference is none of them; it magnifies every Care & every Anxiety: but has no Energy to relieve them. I believe it is the Intention of Nature to wean from this Scene of things & reconcile us to the end of it. And I would willingly be reconciled to its Continuance & take the consolation which Madam Roland one of Revolutionary Ladies of France had in her imprisonment viz. that she had nothing to do: but to be there. But to have nothing to do because we can do nothing is but indifferent Comfort. 

Who is this Mr Keene who attacks you? Some of those perhaps who disliked your Government in India. Are your affairs Still in Suspence & likely to remain so beyond the present Session of Parliament by mere Arts of Procrastination. If so my firm perswasion is that you cannot do better this Summer than make an excursion to this part of the World. Two or three weeks at Hallyards with your namesake the Seaman whom we expect to see every Moment would repell every attack of Ill health &c.

People should be cautious how they Speak of themselves: but when attacked the Publick may Sympathize with Defence. If you were here I think that you  and I could give such a Simple and unvarnished Accou[n]t of all that has befallen you as would choak the breath of Malice if it succeed so far as to delay your Affair to another Session. Think seriously of this. And be Assured that independently of every Other Consideration the very journey is an Object & may do more to your Health than even your Farm Airy as you may Suppose it to be. My He[alth] is wonderfully Good. I go into the Wa[rm] Bath every Day like an Old Rom[an]. It has banished Cramps Rheum[a]tism & does not Confine me for a moment but while I am undressed in any weather Summer or Winter. I have been free of Colds or other Complaints for two years. I bath every Day because I have nothing else to do. If you were here you should have the bath every Other Day & I am Sure it woud do you good. Most Affectionately

yours 
Adam Ferguson
