Edinburgh Novr 7th 
1769



My Dear Sir

I was made very happy last night by seeing your name on some covers directed to me & as I suppose you knew the Contents It is with great pleasure I hasten to give you my thoughts on the Subject. If Mr Wilkes had been contented to pass through Parliament inobserved I should have been averse to move his expulsion for the Prudential reasons with which This Speech concludes. But as he himself dared the house to enter on the consideration of his Subject, How was it possible for the house of commons to avoid declaring that he was or was not an infamous person unworthy of a share in the Legislature of his Countrey. On such occasions The Populace are to be told that The house of commons is not to be governed by the consideration of their disspleasure: but that they are to be Governed by the decisions of The House. 

The Whole Arguments of this Speech proceed upon false Suppositions a misstake of the Spirit of our Constitution and indeed of what is Possible in the Nature of things. The House of Commons is addressed as a Court of Justice & expulsion is treated as the Punishment of a Crime. In Our Constitution the Legislature & Judicature are carefully Separated, except in appeals to the House of Lords. But the several Branch[e]s of the Legislature must have the Power to Suspend all Jurisdiction and all execution of the Law whenever this Power is necessary for its own defence. It is in The Capacity of a Branch of the Legislature acting in its own defence that The House of Commons decides concerning the Priviledges Elections & Qualifications of its own members. When Acting in this Capacity the House of Commons has no Superior No Lawgiver no Equal. Its Duty requires that it should Effectually repell every attack and remove every Danger; that it should preserve every Priviledge & this with or Without Precedent, according as the case is new or otherwise  And according as the former proceedings of Parliament in such cases have been wise or Otherwise.

This I shall be told is supposing a Disscretionary Power in the House of Commons. I know how Odious the name of Disscretionary Power is. Our Constitution abhors it in the King or Courts of Justice except when acting in their own defence. It abhors it Likewise in either house of Parliament except where they concur with The King in some Act of Legislature or in the Defence of their own Priviledges and Separate Rights. But in all these Instances Disscretionary Powers are necessary in the Nature of things & no Government ever coud proceed without them. What is our Security against the abuse of such Powers in any branch of the Legislature. This abuse may be supposed to affect some other Branch of the Legislature. In this case the Security arises from the Collateral Power that is invaded & qualified to defend itself. But the Special abuse now apprehended is the encroachment of the house of commons on the general Rights of the People. Can any one imagine that  This Constitution coud have existed so long, if the security against this abuse had been derived solely from forms & Precedents. If forms and Precedents coud give this Security why are we at pains to send Representatives from all the different Parts of The Kingdom, why have we so carefully Specifyed their qualifications but in order that they might be men of Like Passions and Like Interests with ourselves. To continue the Language of Scripture our Security is that they are bone of our Bone & flesh of our flesh. That they cannot tear a bit of our flesh without tearing their own with it. This is what The Constitution means when it says that we are safe under the Protection of our own Representatives. If it be aledged that the Safety or the Authority of the Commons in any case [xxx] is in danger. This Alegation must be dissproved, or the necessary measures must be taken to remove the danger. How absurd woud it be to say that  these objects the safety or Authority of the commons must be given up because there is no Precedent according to which  they can be defended. With humble Submission therefore to the Able Speaker I must Insist that he ought to have shown that neither the Authority nor the Dignity of the Commons had been attacked in the case of Wilkes. Or if he confessed that they were attacked, his denial of former effectual precedents to guide the house; only proved the necessity of having Recourse to something new. He has reasoned with great Power and Elocution upon the same Supposition of a Judicial Tryal Against Punishing Mr Wilkes twice for the same offence &c. Does our Constitution then say that expulsion from the house of commons is a Punishment? What was it in those times of our Constitution when the Duties of Parliament were considered as a Burden? Is Mr Wilkes to be Punished only by putting him in the same Situation with every Gentleman in this Kingdom except a few hundreds that Sit in Parliament. The Courts of Justice have Punished Mr Wilkes And Our Constitution Says that he cannot  be tryed repeatedly nor by different courts for the same offence. He coud not therefore be tryed Judicially by the House of Commons: but it having appeared from his Tryal & Condemnation elsewhere & from the undenyed grounds assumed in the Motion; that he was an Infamous Person. The house expelled him. He was not Punished but declared unworthy of a share in the Legislature of this Kingdom, And this expulsion  [xxx] xxx of an Infamous person when moved or stirred by himself or any other I humbly think was necessary in order to Mantain The Authority and the Dignity of the Commons of Great Britain. I confess I am Surprised to hear any body alledge a dangerous precedent in this Case as if the House woud be led to do wrong hereafter by doing right now: An Unjust Action is always a bad precedent. Even a just Action performed by improper persons is a bad Precedent Likewise. But a Proper Action proceeding from the Proper Authority Cannot be a bad precedent merely because it is alledged there is no prior example to be followed  in the performance of it. This however is the Stress of this Speakers Argument. I do not conceive what he can gain by quoting the example of Mr Walpole: If the act of Corruption he mentions were true The House did right in expelling Mr Walpole And their the Successors did wrong in ever admitting him to sit in Parliament. If we consider the use which he afterwards made of his great Power I think we need not be affraid to say that this Nation coud have well disspensed with his Services. The first Resolution however with respect to him was held to be final & his Constituents did what the Constituents of Mr Wilkes must [xxx] apprehend for the Preservation of the Constitution be obliged to do: they must acquiesce in the Resolution of the Commons.

I allow that this Contest has brought on a dangerous Crisis & think it the more so perhaps for being at a distance from the Scene. But was this Crisis to be Avoided by giving way to the Pretensions of an Infamous Person Supported by a deluded Populace. I apprehend  for my own Part that if the Authority of Parliament and of the Government in all its Parts is not Properly Supported the State will be in the utmost danger. Our Constitution knows of no Authority but that of King Lords & Commons but we are now fostering a fourth Power in the State, That of the Populace of London, and at the time in which they are become most Corrupted we are inviting them to a share in the Government.

I know not the Present Ministers nor am qualifyed to Judge of the Rolls of Parliament but this I am sure of, that it is the Interest of Every Person Possessed of any Property or consideration in the Kingdom to Suspend their personal dissputes untill they have taught the mob of London not to Interpose. If the present Ministers were bad & the Present Parliament ill chosen I woud neither dissolve nor dissplace them, when such an Action must necessarily lay the foundation of Popular Pretensions ruinous to order & Government. I have heard with  some degree of Affliction that you had embarked with the opposition on the present occasion. I shoud not have regreted most assuredly your Opposing the Measures of a Minister on any Particular occasion. But if I understand the Term opposition, it is joining with a Party who are engaged in disstressing the Government in all Possible ways, who will allow no body to differ from them in any point whatever Nor to serve the Public in any office but in Conjunction with themselves. With this meaning in my head if I had been at London I shoud have prostrated myself at your feet to have hindered your forming any such Connections. But perhaps the Report is false. There are Views I am sure more worthy of your Understanding & of your heart. It is to try whether a Neutral Interest can be formed by men of Property & Family to Ward off the Evils with which the  Constitution is threatned in the Ishue of a Contest between Mobs & Military Power: for I tremble at the Thought of its coming to that without any body at hand to insist for the Constitution. Our Government is said by Mr Montesquieu and others to be perfect. They only think of the dangers to Liberty that come from The Crown. They do not consider the dangers to Liberty that come from the Populace. The Habeas Corpus & the Tryal by Juries bind up the hands of the King: but unless The Riot Laws are amended there are a thousand hands for one let loose. These reformations cannot be made untill our Present Gamblers for Power are made to feel that they cannot rise upon the shoulders of the Mob. I have written all this in great haste in hopes of Pardon for Inaccuracys & in confidence that one point will be well understood my meaning and Intention  towards yourself. If I had been at London & within reach of knowing your sentiments as they arose I make no doubt but you woud have carryed me along with you as you always did here. But I write in the Dark & without knowing Particulars. Believe me to be

My Dear Sr 
your most affectionate 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson







P.S. I cannot have done. The apprehension thrown out in this Speech that on the supposition that the House of Commons were to judge of the worthyness or unworthyness of persons to have a share in the Legislature of their Country: they woud become Electors is extremely groundless. In the first place the house of commons does not exist untill it is chosen by the People. In the next place persons so chosen act by their Majority. They may go wrong in Particular  Instances but never to any extent that is dangerous to the Rights of the People for they themselves are people & can have no rights when those of the people are given up. If it be said that they may sell their own rights and those of the People the Constitution on this supposition is undone & I am sure that the freeholders of Middlesex will not save it by chusing infamous persons to serve in Parliament, nor the Gamblers for Power by supporting them in that choice.
