Nidpath Castle 9th May 1796

My Dear Carlyle

I am happy to hear from you even when part of what you say is not so. I am not accommodated at Nidpath nor there to remain beyond Whitsunday. I have had a grievous time of Suspence but can neither greatly blame myself nor any Other person. I cannot blame other people because I came here so many months, more than a year, before much could be Settled: nor do I much blame myself because seeing the Situation desireable I saw also that to preserve the Castle in a State to be inhabited I must take charge of it in Autumn last. For another winter with open doors & windows would have put it past any moderate reparation. When the time of renewing Leases came I made my offers, as I thought very high, but there were higher, and at that moment Halyards a place within two Miles became open, & I secured it.

You know enough of the Country to have some notion of Halyards; if not let time and personal Inspection when at leisure inform Mrs Carlyle & you. I enter at once into possession of as much Ground as I wish for, and, what is to me an inconvenience, a furnished house. For the Room being Scrimp the addition of  our furniture will almost barricade it against us, but as the Offices are good we mean to Contend chearfully against all inconvenience. We can Scarcely begin to move before the terms altho the place is already empty. Our Man Servant has been a thief & would have been sent to the Galleys if we had any Galleys; but we can ill move till a new come in his place at the Term. So that from the whole My Dear Carlyle you see that your prospect of handing me over from the Goodness of a present Duke to the goodness of a future Lord has proved Abortive. Their Goodness when we do not much want it is ever Abundant & Pleasant but the Lord preserve me from depending upon it for any thing beyond a Day & a Dinner. I remember however in the mean time that I except your Duke & Dutchess who I believe

are a real blessing to themselves, & that, in my notion is the best thing that Can be Said of any human Creature. I shall be somewhat farther from Edinburgh than formerly & in all probability more Seldom there. We join in best wishes & Respects to Mrs Carlyle. I am D. Carlyle

most affectionately yours 
Adam Ferguson
