Edinburgh 23 March 
1795



My Dear Friend

I know very well the disinclination to write letters when one cannot trust the Post with whatever comes uppermost & have myself the folly to harp on publick affairs of which no part is entrusted to me; so wish I could let them alone; take my share of the profits when they go well & leave the Glory to whom it belongs. Go, as the Scripture says and do thou likewise . I have mentioned your Respects to those you mention & we are all happy in the thoughts of seeing you in Summer: But it is an ugly trick with you of the South to put off your Journeys north till July August or September when our rainy Season is come & little pleasure on the Roads. May & June tho less convenient in Some respects are Certainly preferable & so I think you should have as much of the Summer before you as possible at the outset. Poor Blair has lost his Wife within these few Weeks & I am sorry to say my case is so likely to follow. 

Mrs Ferguson is now so intirely worn out with Continued disstress to which a considerable degree of fever is now added that little hopes remain of her recovery. On seeing her just now my impression is that no one ever recovered whose Countenance & Aspect was so much altered. You will forgive me for troubling you with this particular I have reason enough to know that nothing Concerning me is indifferent to you. Doctor Black is also far gone in a Consumption & neither it is likely will long Survive the Other. But people who live long like me must be Content to be the last. Of my Books I would rather work on Philosophy than Roman History to which I have little heart in the present State of the world altho it is that to which the bookselling trade directs my attention.

In Philosophy I should be doing what I am more likely to continue when I quit this scene of things. But the truth is I do little of any thing & expect no Attention if I were to do more. Here we have been living in Nova Zembla & are yet travelling through Lapland: Many old people have died  but I am yet as well as you saw me. My thoughts are much set at present on retiring to the Country for the remainder of my Life. I have no bussiness and as little pleasure in Towns, And it is wonderful how little occasion I have for the bellows of Neighbourhood to flow up the little fire that is left in me. I cant yet cry and talk admire and blame by myself & so I did in my Sulky through all the Roads of Germany & Italy. When you Come here I shall not have the same liking to Solitude. I think with great pleasure that our friend at Florence has got the innocent people of Tuscany into some shelter from the Storm that threatens.

When you write be so good as mention the Respect & Affection with which he impressed me. My Blessing to the Grevils I hope Charles has forgiven that I claimed a 40 years acquaintance with him at my time of Life the difference of ten or twelve years goes for Nothing. If Robert be a favourite so much the better for the Court, I could Submit to be a King myself at that Rate. I am My Dear Friend your most Affectionate & humble Servant

Adam Ferguson

The Event apprehended has taken place. Mrs Ferguson died about an hour after the within was written.
