Edinburgh 24th Septr 1782

Dear Sir

I have received no Proofs since the 18th & was somewhat alarmed least any untoward accident had happened: but am now glad to see your Name on two packets received yesterday & today with Sheets of the Fair Copy. The Interruption is probably owing to some incidental Bussiness, & considering the kind attention you give me I must complain of Nothing: But you probably do not consider or know that my bussiness at College begins about the middle of November & that it would be of the greatest consequence to me to have as much of this work then over & as little to do after that time as possible. This makes me languish for every proof sheet that comes. In the mean time to be doing something I send you my Dedication with Copies of Lord Shelburnes Letters or  Messages to My Friend Mr Greville authorising me to prefix it. I send you likewise Copy of an Advertisement respecting the use I have made of Geographical names Antient or Modern. This likewise may be prefixed. I have now received all the sheets of the first Volume except one which was overlooked in making up the Packet I received yesterday. The Sheet 3M from page 448 to page 457 is missing be so so good as remind your People to send it. Now I have got the Whole to that Sheet stitched together & cut I can go over it more carefully & if there be any Errata which I suspect chiefly in the Quotations to which I gave least attention in the Proofs I will send you a Note of them & the whole together with the above Dedication & Advertisement may be printed on the same Sheet with the title page. As I suspect this first Vol. will be the thinnest, It may not be improper to annex the [xxx] Index of  each Separately. Each of the volumes as I now project will have a Map; the Second Volume will have four Maps or Plans. The sooner & the faster the press goes on the better. I am in the mean time with many thanks for your past attention & hopes of the future.

Dear Sir your most Obedient & most humble Servant

Adam Ferguson

Wm Strahan Esqr
