Edinburgh September 20th, 1766

My Dear Sir,

I have been in the country all day, have barely time to write what I wish you to know by this post, in answer to a letter with which you have made me so happy. I will think no more of doubts or difficulties of any kind. Kate is mine. You have a numerous family of children. I hope that she is among those that will need your assistance the least. I am averse to all solemnity, I would not even have you think of going to the expense of new cloths for her on this occasion. I make no change in my house till she comes, and then she may change it as she pleases. I spoke something about Interest in my last; my meaning was that you should consider of a paper in which I may secure all I die possessed of to Kate and her children in case she survives me. I am in too great a hurry to explain this at present, but will send you a memorandum of it by next post, and you may have the writing ready to be signed when I get to Aberdeen. Doctor Black is ready to attend me whenever I call for him. My situation requires the decency of some forms, such as being called in church, and married by a minister of the Established Church. If Doctor Campbell is at hand to perform this office, it will be very agreeable. I hope that the ceremony of proclamation can be got over at Aberdeen in less than three Sundays. I can at a day's warning get a certificate of my being proclaimed here, and I hope you can get through that affair so as to satisfy Dr Campbell in much the same manner. If this can be done, I think you may get this letter and write an answer naming a particular day, so as that Dr Black and I may be at Aberdeen by the end of the first week in October. My time will only allow me to get to Aberdeen the day before and leave it the day after our ceremony. Your own family is company enough for me on the occasion. If Mr A. Gordon from Hallhead could without inconvenience be there, it would be pleasant, or anybody else that Kate chooses. This letter is the longer for being written in a hurry; but I hope it is to be understood and that it will procure from you, by the first post, the nomination of a day in the first week of October, or at furthest in the second. Dr Black and I will be there the day before. I am, your most obliged and affectionate servant

Adam Ferguson
