Edinburgh 25 October 1779

My Dear Sir

if you were a bad Correspondent that is to say lazy in writing Letters I should not be uneasie at your long Silence, but I have taken it into my head that you are disstressed or at least much occupied with news from India & wish much to hear from you merely to know you are Well. Perhaps you are Affronted that I did not send you immediate accounts of our Invasion here by Paul Jones: but the truth is that living at the Back of the Wall Paul Jones was gone out of the Firith a whole Day before I knew he had been there. We are grown familiar now with the American War The French  War The Spanish War The Combined Fleets And a Fig for their Invasion. I begin really to feel bold & wish I knew what our Land Forces at home now begin to Amount to that I might indulge myself in the thought that our Fleets may next Season be employed offensively whenever it may be proper & the Ennemy find it as Ridiculous to attempt coming in Force here as we should to attempt going to them without some previous footing or Possession in their Countrey. What I have always wished is to see this Countrey safe without a Fleet that is while our Fleet is protecting our Trade & Annoying our Ennemy with a few Hulks to make a Part in the Defences of Portsmouth & Plymouth. The People here are wonderfully Alarmed about Ireland & so I confess I am likewise: but willing to believe that after near a twelve months Warning we have certainly made some Arrangement &  have not left ourselves to be driven by demands into Concessions for which we shall receive no thanks & which in reality will lead to Other Demands with which we Cannot comply & end in a Flame which we Cannot extinguish. The utmost precaution should be taken to prevent a Flame in that Countrey for if it once break out many years will not extinguish it nor relieve this Countrey of the Internal troubles that have already so Effectually served the Purpose of our forreign Ennemys.

When I began to write I had no mind to trouble you with Politics tho I am fool enough Scarcely to think of any thing Else. I wish to make you write to me & took in hand to Solicit a Cause in which I am not much Interested for many reasons, 1st My Connection with the Man is very Slight no more than a recommendation which makes me believe him a very Innocent Person. Next My Opinion that he is in a wrong Scent for what all men desire bettering himself or mending his Condition: but to do Short. A Modest well looking young man brought up to Letters & on  the Point of becoming a Probationer was brou[ght] to me this Morning & gave me to Understand his Ambition was to be Chaplin to some of these New Regiments. That he had Applyed to Ld In Murray & came too late for Coll. Reid. That he heard 5. 000 men were to be raised for the West Indies, that these probably must have Chaplins, that he was willing to raise ten Men if he were appointed Chaplin to all the Rest of the Regiment. And in short I took the Resolution to write to you. If any Friend or acquaintance of yours is getting a Corps, ten men, may be a Conveniency to him & with or without that Circumstance I beg your Assistance in behalf of Mr James Scobie who appears to be a good young Man wonderfully smit with the Desire of seeing the World. Since he was here he has given me to understand that he would be happy even in being Appointed Chaplin to a Man of War. And so I pray you write a short Line.

I am anxious to hear of G:Johnstone but shall not write to him least my Politicks should become too Particular for the Post. All is well here & most affectionately mindfull of you.

A. Ferguson
