Dear Sir

In this & two Other packets that go by this post I inclose a list of errata, on to the 321 page of the 3d Vol, so far only the fair copy has come to my hands, if any more should occur in the Subsequent parts I will endeavour to send them in time. Together with the errata I inclose The Table of Contents, the five books transcribed from the printed Copy & at every chapter referring to the page. The contents of the Sixth book are transcribed from a Manuscript & could not refer to the page: but this defect the Compositor I hope will Supply from the Printed [xxx] Copy which by the time he comes to this will have been in his hands. How far such a table as I send will be useful or acceptable to the reader you will please judge & determine accordingly; my health & engagements would not permit my attempting any thing more.

These particulars will find room enough in the first Vol. The Order as appears to me Should be the Dedication — The Table of Contents — The  Advertisment, which I sent you some time ago about the Geographical names.  And the Errata. In these last there are some, undoubtedly defects of the Manuscript rather than the Press.

You will find by a Letter from Mr Bell by this Post that the Plates with the Impressions he took of some of the maps are now sent off. I was willing to hasten the arrival of the Plates as much as possible & therefore have sent them by the Stage Coach paying the Carriage here. I have had them carefully packed in two Cases, to bear the violent motion to which they will be exposed in the Coach. If they should go safe there will be some danger in opening the Cases as every Vacuity is filled up with Slips of wood glued in. The Plates are wrapped up in Paper & this will help to distinguish them in forcing open the inner box which must be done very cautiously to avoid mischief be so good as caution the workman who opens them of all this. The Coach they go by, puts up at Mr Wilsons the Swan with two Necks Lad Lane London  You may expect them to arrive on Wednesday the 15th & I am promised they will be delivered to you on Thursday the 16th Inst. — Mr Bell will inform you that he has at the same time sent a packing Box with some of the impressions he had taken &c. This I am affraid you will not receive before the 30th. The waggon puts up in Basing hall Street.

I am Dear Sir 
your most Obedient 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson







Edinburgh 
 Janry 9th 1783
