[Groningen, October 1756] 

Dear Sir

as Mr Fletcher is a litle better within this day or two I have taken the resolution to set out on my return. I am sensible of the precarious Situation he is in but I think it more agreeable to his Fathers intentions to leave him here under the inspection of proper people than bring him back to Brittain where it woud be difficult to setle him so well as he now is with Le Moine. If it please God that he does Well it will give great Satisfaction to all his Friends. If any change to the Worse happens I hope he will not want for proper care. I have been With Dr Van Doeveren this morning he has promised to advise with you about Mr Fletcher & to take care of his health & as I have told him his whole case you may be free with him upon it.

Mr Le Moine will give you notice if he Observes any thing amiss about Mr Fletcher, in particular if he disscovers any intention of leaving this place, I should consider that as a symptom of his dissorder returning & woud think it necessary to detain him even by force & to hire a keeper for him, till further directions can be had from his Friends. It was his Fathers intention that he shoud have the laying out of his money,  & he has disscovered Nothing hitherto that shoud make one alter that circumstance for he seems at present no way dissposed to throw it away. I have desired the Favour of Le Moine to give great attention to his expence & in particular to bring to him regularly every week the demands of such people as furnish him any thing. If notwithstanding, you find that he does manage his Money matters well, pray take the trouble to give his Friends Notice of it, & use what methods you think most proper to keep his next quarters allowance from coming into his own hands. In that case some Friend here must have credit for, & the dissposal of what money may be necessary for him. I have not explained the whole case to Le Moine but he has promised me that upon seeing any thing amiss he will let Dr Vandoeveren & you know it immediatly, when you will be able to determine what to do. You see with what Freedom I trouble you & do not in the least doubt your Willingness to Oblige My Lord Milton & contribute to the Wellfare of a Very worthy young Gentleman.

I am &c
