Hallyards 1st August 1798

My Dear Friend

To begin where your letter ends. Amicus Amicissimus Indefatigabilis After having Splashed you before with bad Greek you are well off that there is nothing worse now than bad Latin. I do recollect hearing S. J. E. desire to have some land Property near his Native Spot but at present know nothing more nor do I know of any fit place at Peebles for your Ward: but shall inquire. There is no property in this Country you know without a Doer as Allan Ramsay used to call the Writers when he was Angry with them which he was indeed for the greatest part of every hour of his life. If there be any Subject on which to make us your Doer We shall not neglect to do what is proper, And for the Sequel if there be any Sequel it must Come as God will have it in the whims & inclinations of those Concerned. As to the World I am glad  you think Buonaparte is gone upon a mere trading or plundering Voyage. In that way he cannot ply long without having the Seas disputed with him. And I patiently wait for the Consequence without Supposing that every encounter of ours must be Veni Vidi Vici for even the great Julius was a Puppy at a time & more so than has yet appeared of Buonaparte.

A Combination of Europe including Russia if not properly directed would do us no good. You may possibly remember my Bull. That the proper way of Making War on the great Nation is to make peace with them. In this they are too wise to be caught. I mean their Directors but I think we may make a War as like peace as Possible especially if Europe Combine in it, by keeping them at Bay, leaving them no outlet from home nor goading them with any trifling attacks to keep their attention and Animosities directed abroad. There was an expedition to Ostend And there is one again now the newspapers say from Margate mere proofs that we have not yet learned the Character of our Ennemy or the nature of our Contest:  but of that no more. I am no oppositionist and this moment think the nation in a most prosperous State. That is to say we have Men Arms & Spirit, & if we should come to have less wealth we must consume the less either by having fewer mouths or putting less in them.

I was in Edinburgh for a day or two when your last letter came here to Hallyards. Or Otherwise having now three or four such favours to acknowledge shoud have done it sooner. The Roman History advances but Slowly. The Printers have much Other work when our Law Courts are sitting; Then much of the bussiness proceeds by a kind of paper War from the Press. Five Octavo Vols. are projected but little more than one is yet printed. I shall be Obliged to your German Author for his prolongation Scheme, tho having Annuities & Sellaries from Other People'tis like they think I have prolonged enough.

I went to Edr to see Our Friend G. Johnstone and was highly gratified. I am My Dear Friend

most affectionately yours 
Adam Ferguson
