Edinburgh 27 July 1779

My Dear Sir

I am arrived here about a week, found my little Flock in perfect good health & mindfull of you & your kind attentions.

I have delivered my very worthy young Friends safe at their Uncles as I hope by this time will have appeared from their own Letters. George fell in a Crying when my Children came about me, I was affraid he was ill, but upon my questioning him, as soon as he could Speak I understood it was the Memory of his Parting with his Father that moved him. I pray you to call next Door & mention the great Satisfaction I have had in their Company. I have likewise seen my Lands which I must confess, notwithstanding all the Mischief they have done me, in  this Bloom of the Season look gay & even pretend to be rich. I have seen but few of Our Friends. I have been with Smith & Black & Hutton. The Principal & Dr Blair called here when I was not at home. I am just now going to look for them & some Others but choose to write this Letter before I go abroad least I should be any way entangled for the Day & hindered as usual from writing at all. What is become of the War & the Politicks I have felt it very grievous to be moving away from the center of Intelligence & increasing The Distance from News by a week or a fortnight: but I hope you will not let me Starve outright, once it begins to drop we shall keep pace with you tho a few Days later: I have been thinking whether in case you are Conquered in the South we may not rebuild Grahams  Dyke or Severus' Wall & so set up for ourselves. If the Ennemy should land any where in this Island & attempt to keep a footing I am without any Joke of opinion that the Clans should be moved in a body against them, And think with as little Joke that the Posse Comitatus may be every where made of great Consequence against them. When you have got a good Post well manned with firm Troops that will keep the Ennemy at Bay what you want next is a great number of if possible a whole Countrey full of People firing & shooting at them from every Hedge & Bush & never Suffering them to move or to forrage or to halt undisturbed nor to be quiet in Front Flank or Rear. And never to hazard any Other Sort of Fighting with them except at a very great Advantage. And such is my Plan for the Invasion War if there should be Such a Bussiness  of which indeed I have no doubt unless it be prevented by our Vigilance & the imposing Aspect of our preparations.

But I pray you to send me News. You are the Person from whom I expect to hear What is. In return I can only tell you what ought to be; two things which I have generally found very different, & so there is some hopes that there may be some Commerce or exchange of Commoditys between us. When I was away from here I used to send my Blessing to those I liked best & not to change my Language at once pray God to Bless you all. Make up for any defect in my acknowledgements to those to whom you know I am Obliged And believe me to be most Affectionately yours

Adam Ferguson
