Edinburgh January 25th 
1767



My Dear Sir

I received your letter lately and am sorry to find that the Climat is still at War with your health. I hope you will have no more attacks before your leave is obtained. It has been applied for some time ago & your claim is now Supported by such reasons as are irresistable. The Necessity of coming to settle your Affairs over & above your health & your having served your turn in the West Indies. You will probably have heard of your Father's Death. His faculties were very much impaired if not intirely gone almost two years & death came at last by the Slowest degrees. He has settled the Whole of his Personal Estate on his younger Children by which you are now Rich & in condition to make any purchase in the Army that offers. He always reckoned you in his Debt for the money advanced to buy your majority & pay Other accounts he often said so to me & did not forget it in making his Settlements.  He has ordered that your Brother The Colonel & Miss Fletcher shall draw each of them two Thousand pounds to put them as he seems to have understood it on a footing with you And The remainders to be equally shared with you. Mr Alston informs me that you will probably receive after all about eight thousand pounds. This will enable you to purchase when occasion offers & in the meantime will give a considerable addition to your income without encroaching on your Capital, Which I earnestly entreat you most carefully to Avoid. There is no fortune can bear the want of Oeconomy without it the Mogul would be a Bankrupt in six Months. Your Father is thought by most People here to have paired the Elder Brothers Estate very closs¤. He has left to the younger Children not only Brunstane but some farms likewise that were purchased contiguous to Salton. He has even left to them the Furniture, Plate, and even the Library in Salton House. I confess that I was sorry for this last Article And was  very much pleased to hear that Miss Fletcher had immediatly given up all claim to the Library to your Elder Brother. I feel it like a piece of proper Respect to your Ancestors & promised her that I would mention it to you. I shoud be very sorry that Andrew Fletcher of Saltons books were Sold away from the Family or that the Possessor of his Estate which you yourself may one day be shoud be obliged to buy them over again: but you will impute my saying any thing at all on the Subject to the freedom with which my very sincere regard inspires me.

If you have not written to your Coll. for his leave and Assistance in Obtaining The Kings [permission] for your return I beg that you do it soon. I have heard nothing of Col: Mc Douall for some time. I believe he was glad to gain time: but in reality he coud not Obtain leave to sell out Otherwise he woud have had without hesitation all the money he Asked: but you can now act here & every where else for yourself. I am in hopes of seeing you Soon. Dr Sr your most

Affectionate & most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
