Edinr 24th August 1780

My Dear Sir

I received a Packet last night on the Cover of which there were a few Words from you.

As to the Bussiness of the Packet, I should write to our Friend: but the Principal Party & Jn H- being absent & their latest Intelligence from the Countrey being unknown to me I remain in Suspence. How matters Stood or Appeared by the Tuesdays Post I believe they wrote. When I hear farther I will write fully.

I saw the Lord Advocate soon after my last to you. He told me there had been a Mistake in the Warrant for a Land Waiter Vice Gifford . That he had returned the Warrant, probably to Mr Robinson through whose hands it  had come to him. That he wrote to Mr Robinson his wishes in filling up the Landwaiters Place were for Mr Ferguson for whom Mr McPherson has asked the Place in his Name: but as they are very much Intent in Plying every Engine to direct the next Elections here, if they would Send down a Blank warrant he would endeavour to make the best Political Use of it or if nothing material could be done in that way he would fill up with the Name of Mr Ferguson to whom he wished and originally intended to give it, The Blank Warrant being out of Rule. They probably deferr the Appointment untill it appear what use may be made of it.

The Lord Advocate is much occupied since the Court of Session broke up & has been in the Country. I have been confined some Days with a Cold that affected  my Eyes: but the Inflammation is much abated & I will endeavour to See him in a day or two. I have perfect Confidence that he means me kindly in this Bussiness & acquiesce very chearfully in the cause of Hesitation. I am well aware of your probable occupations at this Time. The News Papers set your Friends agog by sending you to the Supreme Council in Bengal. Whatever be the Truth I hope it will be what you like: but do not pretend to Judge. Can you procure me a copy of the Code of Indian Law which Mr Hastings had procured to be Compiled & Translated. Johnstone had sent me a Copy by Jn Home but he has lost it & it is not to be bought.

All the Congregation here join me in most affectionate Complts. And I am most

Sincerely yours &c 
Adam Ferguson
