Hallyards 2d October 
1797



My Dear Carlyle

If what you write from all the sources of information in Scotland be not worth postage, what are you to expect from Manor Water where we have talked of nothing for three or four months but bad weather. G. Hamilton I think has got his revenge of H. G. of M. I would rather lose 3 Professor ships than run away from B. once.

I have got professor Robertsons Robisons book & have read the Introduction but cannot yet conceive what he is to make of a Subject meaning free Masonry without being to tell us first of all what it is. I am in hopes the Militia Act will be amended; for the Circumstances you mention make it a sort of Press Act; & the mad people it seems felt it so. If a young man is to be pressed because he is 18 & not 24 the natural Consequence and Spirit of the Act should be that at 24 he falls off to make way for younger men in their turn. My son now about 20 had some pretence to exemption his name being enrolled in some one of the  Artillery Companies but I thought the best I could do was to set an Example to my neighbour Farmers in chearfully giving up his name to the Ballot. And if College call him away I trust that money will procure a Substitute.

The French Revolution it seems is still a Curiosity; many things certainly led to it and the french heads a stir after new things made bolder and wider steps than ever were made before by Mankind in any case whatever: but all this would have come to nothing if the French Army had Adhered to their noblesse officers & to the Crown: but they did not; & they made the Revolution. They made & will continue to make every change that is to happen in France to the end of time. They were struck with democracy as with a Spark of Electricity or a Stroke of Lightening & have continued charged even Since. They will follow no General that swerves from Democracy & will cut the throats of all the Representatives of the People of France if the Cry of Royalism is raised against them. What sort of Whim is this? You will say, for an Army? But it is better founded than perhaps you think. 

Of all the Plebeians in France who felt the galling distinction of Noblesse Connected with the Monarchy. The Rank & File of the French Army did so the most. With Noblesse a man might have genius Bravery merit of any Sort; yet no Power could affect the meanness of his Condition or give him any hopes of preferment. The moment that the Sky broke over his head & he saw a Possibility of advancement he felt all the meanness of his former condition & grasped at the Change. Some of the first movements of the Democracy raised multitudes of Private men into Officers, & continue to allow a man in the Ranks to look up to any station in the Army. Do you wonder that they are Democratical. If Buonaparte or any one else should swerve from democracy, so long as they think Such Swerving leads to the former disstinction of Noblesse he would Succeed as ill as Du Murier or any one else. The moment I saw the Army Adresses to the Directory & to one another it was Evident that no Power in France could make Peace: that till the Army is disposed of & Satisfied, no one in France who has any thing to lose will wish to have Peace: for Peace  must bring the Army home; give them leisure to form pretensions & Claims in return for their Services or in Other Words to seize every thing at discretion Must they not therefore be kept abroad and otherwise employed. And if the Directory continue, this will one day gall them as much as it will any one else. What are we then to do you will say? Nothing in my opinion but defend ourselves & this with proper conduct we are certainly in Condition to do untill thing take some turn in France. The Name & Disstinction of Noblesse may be effaced in France & the Army come under the Management of Leaders and Reasonable men without the terror of falling back into the condition of Soldiers for Life without the Possibility of Preferment. I am perswaded that there is no high Officer, Civil or Military in that country who would not gladly be a General Monk if he could; but no one dares attempt it. What the Directory calls a Royalist conspiracy is the very Stale trick of Faction imputing Plots to those they are to ruin by taking the measures agai[nst] them which the prevention of Plots are supposed to justify & to require.

yours &c &c

Adam Ferguson
