Hallyards near Peebles 29 Decr 1806

My Dear Friend

There is a Gaelic Proverb which I once had occasion to translate VIZ. He who will not Sow in cold weather will not reap in Warm Weather. And I can match it now in the correspondence betwixt you & me. He who [w]ill not write Letters will not have any to read. For ought I have to write the Silence might still continue: but how am to bear your Silence on every Good or bad that befalls you & in which I have to partake. My Son The Man of War wrote me how much your looks were improved from the time he had seen you. And I hope that you are put on Some Moderate  Regimen neither Starvation nor repletion that may Support you in the State to which Cheltenham has brought you.

Man has been called a Microcosm but you are rather a Macrocosm & must have aliment for feet and Inches. The Rate must be fixed by Experience & dont decide hastily. The result of two or three Mo[nt]hs at least is Necessary to determine. I never felt any inconvenience from the lowest diet to which I have ever been reduced but this may not be the case with you. Have you any Leisure or Stomach for Politics now? You used to be a Medicin tant mieux  but I doubt you much change your ton. Half the Kings & Emperors of Europe  were your Friends. Never was such a Contrast of Ability on one Side to Torpor or folly worse than torpor on the Other. The Austrians were tempted to Temporize with Bonaparte by the gift of Venice which he made them. The Prussians by the gift of Hanover neither cons[i]dering that he who would make such Gifts could give away their Capitals. Europe is still ignorant of what has happened to France. A Revolution which kindled a Fire in the heart of every drummer in the French Army & plucked up Leaders of Supreme Genius from the very Mud in which the common State of Things would have burried them. The Cocks are now pitted on the Frontiers of two great Empires in Poland: For I  think that the West from the mouth of the Elb, the Straits of Dover and the Pillars of Hercules is as much united under one Head as the East from the Vistula to Camshatka. And if the latter can do nothing to rouse their People to some degree of uncommon exert[ion] they will very soon tire of the War.

I do not see why the Emperor Alexr despising the charge of Plagiarism may not copy Napoleons Legion of Hono[ur]. All Europe must now see that the Choice every State is to make, is either a Sort of Existence by the permission of France or an exertion for Independence.

But I have said enough to condemn myself for being so tardy in writing on the excuse of blindness & old Age. I have written this letter but cannot read it. But am most Affectionately yours

Adam Ferguson
