Venice 19th Octr 1793

My Dear Friend

I write merely to let you know of what is become of me & the sum total is that I am well & have come on as prosperously as a Speculative Master and a dumb Servant could do without any Other Aid. I wrote a line also from Frankfurt or Munich  with an account of what I did with your Letter to Ct Lucchesini. I see from News Papers Since that if I had Stayed but a few days more at Frankfort I should have seen him there: but the Secrets of Kings who can know & I should have thought myself in a Scrape amidst the Scarcity of Horses caused by His Majestys Motions.

In the way I took by Nurenburgh & Munich I avoided that disstress, came prosperously through the Tyroll and at Verona began to reap the Fruits of my Labours. If you remember the Cimbri or Teutones are said to have performed wonders against Catulus the Roman General in that neighbourhood  And tho it be not of much consequence whether that Tale be exaggerated or not yet I was anxious to judge of its Credibility on the Spot & got on Horse back from Verona for that Purpose & reconnoitred the banks of the Adigé for Some little way.

neighbourhood

So far I had Come Post: but there I fell in a Florentine Vecturino who had brought Some Travellers from Florence. I rode his Horses at Verona & agreed with him to drive my [xxx] thing to Padua we agreed so well on the Road that I have I have lodged & boarded myself with him all the way to Rome. He Seems to be a good humoured Careful Creature & I am happy to escape the Blustering Postilions of the Ecclesiastical State. I told him I should be at Florence soon, tho at Present I go by Loretto, And if any Distress befal me my point of Rallyment will be Florence being under the Special Protection of Ct Manfredini so that Antonio Lapini this Veturino & I are already a Sort of Compatriots. I languish for news from England. I call for News Papers every where  but nothing has yet overtaken me more than I knew & in part witnessed in passing through Flanders. I sometimes flatter myself that you will not have waited for Accounts of my Arrival at Rome but will have written under Care of P. Moir or Jenkins the Banker, if you have not, pour l'amour de Dieu delay it no longer. I could not pass this place tho it is much too modern to be any Object to me: I wonder at it: but am not much delighted, Si je n'avais que Soixante & dix Ans as Voltair used to Say I would read its History with great Avidity: but that is for the world to come.

I went to the Opera last night & was truly entertained with the Audience.

I am My Dear Friend yours most Affectionately

Adam Ferguson
