My Dear Carlyle

Let us know what is become of you. Mrs Carlyles letter to Bell bears that you have Suffered much and been in danger, which is more than we knew of from the first reports of your illness, & we supposed it to be no more than one of these feverish colds which are frequent at this Season. I was vexed at missing you when last in Midlothian; & I was prevented from repeating my visit by a Cold which confined me some days & hurried me home. If you should be unable to attend to the little Johnston; the greatest loss will be his. I felt the whole force of what you wrote respecting him. He has been long kept under the Awe of a Master & by forcible means: for restraint was necessary. But the time must come at which he will either bear himself up on feelings of a Gentleman or be lost to his Friends. When this Ora should begin is a question: One inducement to begin it now, is that you are in the way to watch the Effects with Fortitude & Temper. By all means treat him like a Gentleman, & let it not be supposed that he is to be treated Otherwise: but without express declaration that he is at Liberty to be perverse if he please. Such a declaration while he lives with  those against whom he has the resentment of harsh usage & whom he can vex by misbehaviour because they are accountable for what he is permitted to do, is but an unfair tryal of what he mighta do if left to himself among people whose only concern is not to be troubled with any improper behaviour, andb who by merely turning their backs can make him feel the Scorn he deserves. If it were not necessary to continue his Attention yet some time to the bussiness of College I should think of nothing for him but the Company of those whose frowns would make him feel his mistakes. And if this should not have the proper effect with him, the dissappointment may draw tears from those who had the happiness of intimacy with his Family or who even are acquainted with himself in his more pleasant and better moments in which he has scarcely an equal among Boys. The Revolt against harsh measures of restraint however necessary, we may Still hope in his case to distinguish from mere frowardness unprovoked. I was dissappointed in not having him & the party you mentioned here & the more dissagreeably that it may have proceeded from my Mistake of your Letter,  in which I thought you wished me to write, if there was any Objection to their coming.

My Accommodation here needs the excuse of Surprise; and I have known people pleased with a Scramble when there was not time to do better & this was necessary to me whom time itself would not enable to do better that is than kill a Sheep for the Christians, & send the beasts to look for Provender where it best could be found. That is not a treatment for which to give formal invitations. The Cold I caught at Edinburgh is gone & my other infirmities are no more than this time has brought forth. I wish I could say as much for the Church and State now Contending with Antichrist himself in the form of Democracy & Atheism. Here we have got a most beautiful retired Kirkyard in which the Ashes of the faithful may have peace without praying for it. This would be security enough to me against impending Storms if I had nobody to think of but myself. But matters are seldom so good as we hope or so bad as we fear. I am

My Dear Carlyle most affectionately 
yours 
Adam Ferguson





Hallyards 23 Novr 
1796
