Edinburgh, 2d Decr 1782

Revd Sir

you have done me a great deal of honour, in making me the conveyance of a proposal from the Committee of Association in the County of York,for a reformation of Parliament, & for the extension and better regulation of the right of Election to Parliament throughout the Kingdom. I took the first opportunity my Health would allow to communicate the contents of your Packet to Mr Ilay Campbell a Gentleman of the first Character in this Country, who, I understood was employed in preparing the Draft of a Bill relating to the right of Election in Scotland. And am desired to return his thanks to you and the Other Gentlemen of the Yorkshire Committee. This matter is under consideration here, chiefly with a view to reform a Supposed abuse  which has recently crept into the manner of constituting qualifications to vote at County Elections. Persons having extensive Superiorities in this part of the Kingdom, parcel them out to their retainers & Friends in such manner as to multiply Votes without increasing the number of Voters. The person who confers these qualifications being understood to dispose of the Votes as he pleases. Of those concerned in this reform, many no doubt are willing to reduce the qualifications of voters so as to increase their number: but this like many other reformations, I am told, must be the work of time & some caution. My own earnest wish has long been, that we had the same Law of Parliament with you as far as relates to County Elections: but I confess that I do not hope ever to obtain it.

I am very happy that my writings make me be considered as a Sincere friend  of the Constitution: being so little able to serve it in practice the least I can do is to pay it all due respect in my Speculations. One of its beauties is that it can withstand many evils without being overthrown. I know nothing so likely to be fatal to it as the weakness & Cowardice of those on whom its preservation depends. And I sincerely believe that to preserve the rights of the people the Vigour of the Crown is not less necessary than their own. To make us as happy, as our Constitution woud admit of, requires indeed many other conditions, which I hope we shall long improve or retain.

I have the honour to be with 
great Respect 
Revd Sir 
your most Obedient 
humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
