Edinburgh 1st May 1786

Dear Sir

I am obliged to our friend Mr Gardner for the agreeable accounts with which he Sometimes favours me, of your Wellfare & of the kind remembrance with which you honour me. I believe he was Surprised, in communicating your last Letter & stating the Purport of your Remarks on the Intollerance of the Grecian & Roman Republicks, to hear me say I was of your opinion. A Passage from me had given occasion to your Researches, & I was Stated as an Antagonist. In that passage however I looked no farther than the Supposed  Law of the XII Tables of which I wished to point out Some remarkable Clauses, tending to convey Some notion of its Spirit.

But even with this restriction I am sensible that the expression to which you allude is not correct & endeavour to amend it in a blotted copy of the Book which is by me.

I had taken my impression hastily or been misled by unusual punctuation in the Copy from which I took it. Whatever Slips of this sort may have been made, I am conscious of very great care to avoid them & in my desire to state every part of the Subject fairly, lost every predilection I might originally have had for Persons or things. If I become more correct on the Subject of your Remarks I must thank you for it, as I had not yet attended to the matter & might have overlooked it. Examples of  Intollerance are frequent in the History both of Greeks & Romans. And men will ever be disposed to restrain by punishment and Severity whatever they conceive as Objects of Indignation and horror, even Slight deviations from what they conceive as holy in words or Actions.

The Vengeance of the Zealot is not a Safe Principle of Compulsory Law, but few nations I believe can boast that they never adopted or Abused it. So far as it operates in repressing overt Acts of Injurious or dissorderly tendency it may be justifyed on principles of necessity and sound Policy: but its abuses in one Nation certainly cannot be Sustained as precedent to justify its missapplications in another.

I should have acknowledged my Obligation to you in this matter sooner if a slight Indisposition from a Cold caught in these  easterly winds had not prevented me, & still disposed me to delay. I now hasten however least my letter should not overtake you at London as Mr Gardner tells you are to leave it about the middle of May. I am with great Respect

My Dear Sr your most Obedient & most humble Servant

Adam Ferguson
