Brunstain Aug.t 15. 1757

My Dear Sir

I am sorry to find from your Letter to my Lord Milton that the dislike you formerly expressd to stay at Groninguen continues to give you so much Uneasiness. My Lord desires me to assure you that when he considered of a place proper for your Studies the only Reasons he had to prefer Groninguen arose from Circumstances advantageous to you. He thought that Retirement would be more proper and even more agreeable to yourself, than being exposed to Company who might divert you from your business & hinder the design which both he & you had in going abroad: For this reason he preferrd Groninguen to Leyden which is more frequented by our Countrymen & where they frequently interrupt & seduce one another. The Truth is that Foreigners generally attach themselves to one Another abroad which is a great disadvantage because they can reap little advantage benefit from One another & are made to neglect the business for which they went. There was another reason which made my Lord's choice of Groninguen appear extremely desireable to me, that I knew some worthy people there to whom I could recommend the Care of your health & in whose Friendship I thought you might entirely confide Which I hope you have found confirmd by the behaviour of Mr Falkner & Vandoeveren.

However I hope it will be in your power to prevent any  disadvantage My Lord apprehends in leaving the place you are now in and as you are so desirous of going to Leyden he yelds to your Inclination in that particular although his Opinion is still the Same. As this Step is entirely our own he hopes you will be upon your Guard against any ill consequence it may have. He has not desired me to repeat any of the Remarks he formerly made upon your Plan of Study although he is still of the same Opinion & spoke from the Experience he has had in the Study you are now upon.

It distressed him greatly to find you still under some degree of Uneasiness, but he trusts to time for the Removing it & to the assurances you will always have of his Tenderness as well as Care & attention to whatever concerns you. Any thing from myself upon this occasion may be extremely improper, but I cannot help repeating the sincere concern which I & your friends here take in your welfare. We had no occasion for professor Rücker's Testimony to satisfy us as to your ability in your Studys and hope you will be able to make Leyden more agreeable to yourself as well as equally profitable in your business. I am My Dear Sir

your most affectionate & 
most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson





This Letter is wrote 
at my desire & 
with my Approbation 
signd And. Fletcher
