Hallyards near Peebles 25 October 1806

My Dear Sir

you have laid a difficult task upon me; to give way to my feelings & not to appear unworthy of your generous conduct towards me. I should indeed be unworthy if my feelings lay dormant untill this Occasion. You must it seems have heard of the difficulties I met with in trying to settle my Son in his Profession as a Writer at Edinburgh. There was a series of dissappointments & fruitless Attempts to Serve him, such as Obliged us at least to abandon the Project altogether, and has almost made me despond of any thing that can be proposed for him, to which his present inability to avail himself of your generous Intention contributes not a little. My Son had Friends who were kindly Occupied in his behalf. They projected a new line of Life for him connected with the Army but in respect to Bussiness rather Civil than Military. In this Line they hoped to assist him.  Of this I could not judge; but considering some of those who proposed it could not think it altogether Visionary.

The Scheme required in the outset that he should be a military man And that he should serve two years before any Such Appointment as that in View could be Obtained. In prosecution of this Plan Sir James Pulteney obtained a Commission of Second Lieu't in the 21st Regiment from the Goodness of H. R. H. The Commander in Chief. And My Son from his Experience as a Volunteer Office[r] made no indifferent Battalion Man. Soon after he had joined his Regiment the Earl of Selkirk proposed to take him as Private Secretary on his mission to America. This after some months expectation Misgave & he returned to Quarters. Soon after another Friend General Don commanding at Jersey invited him to be military Secretary at his Post: but the Establishment of Such an Office it seems was to be Obtained at Head Quarters & I doubt is not thought expedient as he has been detained many Months in Suspence at London. But I beg pardon for troubling you  with so long a Story, much less might have sufficed to Show that your Generous proposals tho so well devised for his benefit when in the Profession of a Writer at Edinburgh is now only matter of Gratitude on us.

He is now Military & whatever is thought of for him must be in that Line or not inconsistent with it. And I hope you have not proceeded any inconvenient length in the transaction you Allude to.

It will be Some Consolation to embrace you once before I go hence and in this hope I shall Still remain for a Little.

My Dear Sir 
your most obliged 
And Affectionate 
Humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
