Hallyards 8th Septr 1796

My Dear Carlyle

I Observe in the mercantile Style that you have Surmounted the quicksands of Holy Island & the Feasts of Newcastle; if you could with equal Success encounter the Pot luck of Hallyards I should think you invincible.

This Post was taken, as the saying is, upon the Spur of the occasion because another appeared not to be tenable. It is in many respects what I should wish: but if I had been free to chuse, would certainly have preferred one with a little more lodging. In order to have a Spare Room for whomever Chance may send on a Stormy night we ly Some of us, three in a Room & others occupy what in the case of a less numerous Family was destined for Servants. In our Chamber of Dine are mounted two Beds so that we can lodge while they agree any two persons of  the same Sex & even two persons of different Sexes even if they should not agree provided they are legally Connected: but as for an Inn to which you look for relief there is not within any practicable distance so much as an ale house at which to lodge a Servant; So that if Mrs Carlyle & you or J. Johnstone & his Tutor honour & bless us with a Visit, you must march like the Army of Wurmser at last in two Columns; And warn us of the time of your Arrival that we may have a Sheep from the Hills to meet you & give you a Warm reception with Batteries of Mutton and advanced Corps of Sheeps Head Haggish And Puddings such as may keep you alive for better fare at another place: I have now given you my Manifesto, And if you decline the encounter from mere Cowardice or say upon tryal that matters were worse than you expected you must not blame me. The Hurry of Hay sow making is over; tho so late, my Hay being all meadow Grass; And I have no Corn; what I  may have another year, I know not: but should be glad to have your Agricultural Advice from an experience which you probably have bought as well as myself.

Our Pasture was good in its Season: but is now I doubt on its Wayne. The best I can say is that all concerned Women Men and Slots are in a thriving Condition as to Health &c. The Girls send their most affectionate Complimts and I have reason to bless them for the Chearfulness with which they accommodate themselves to my retiring or sequestered Humour. The Neighbourhood is Sociable & we visit one another in Cartloads. The way is, I am told, for I have not yet seen, to you at one end of the Country & gathering like a snow ball as they roll aloft leave no house unvis[i]ted & no Soul at home in any house to receive a Visit till the following Season when the Snow Ball returns again to take them up. If I knew when it is to Roll, I should wish to have you in the way of being picked up & carryed to the next house. In the mean time it would give the People of this House great Pleasure to see Mrs Carlyle & you wherever the fates may order.

I am Dr C. yours most affectionately 
Adam Ferguson
