Edinburgh 5th Decr 1786

Dear Sir

I wrote to you yesterday, that I am required by a Circular Letter from the Auditors Office & signed by Sir John Dick & Others to exhibit my Account of money received and Disbursed in my office of Secretary to his Majesties Commissioners &c &c in America. The Account is to be attested on Oath before a Baron of his Majesties Court of Exchequer & exhibited at the Auditors office on or before Wednesday the 13th Decr at two OClock. Finding from this experience that such requisitions may be repeated I am very unwilling to risk any material Paper, which I cannot restore in case it should be lost, by any uncertain Conveyance. And therefore hope that the Inclosed Copy of My Account and of the Commissioners Certificate attested on Oath before a Baron of Exchequer here may for the present at least be Sufficient. If not. Please refer to the Attested Copy taken at the War office when it was there presented by you. For the same reason that I am unwilling to risk by any uncertain Conveyance the original Account and Docket signed by the Commissioners I am unwilling also to risk the vouchers of Particular Articles exhibited to the Commissioners when they passed my Account at New York. All these Papers however if necessary shall be sent to you when required. Most of the disbursements  were made upon mere verbal instructions from the Commissioners and as some of them were naturally to be made without any exaction of Receit or Voucher whatever: — it was the more necessary for me to present the Account to the Commissioners for their Approbation while the occasions were recent in their memory. Thus having given this Approbation I hope will be thought to exhonerate me so far as I was bound to Obey their commands. In case however Particular Articles should be questioned I must trouble you with the following comment.

Article 1st The Commander in Chiefs 
 warrant endorsed to Governor Johnstone 
 The Governors Name on the Warrant 
 is my Voucher. — Mr Holland — found a person to convey 
 Papers to New England & the two Separate 
 Articles of 20 Guineas each refer to that 
 Service. Mr Cooper was Clerk to Governour Johnstone 
 & being employed by the Commissioners rece[ived] 
 a Gratuity of £50 at his departure for England 
 Mr Upham & Allen Loyalists in Disstress. 
 The Several Articles paid to the Clerk Mr 
 Derbage. & to the Printers Gaine Robertson 
 & Rivington Vouched by their Receipts. 
 Mr Paterson Do.



























If such explanations should be called for please to make use of them Otherwise the names of persons in Question need not be mentioned. As to the Receipts and Vouchers in my hands I will take the first safe opportunity of sending them to you if they should be necessary.

I have deferred concluding my Letter untill  I should have taken the Oath required to the truth of the within Acct & Docket. But I have now little to add: further than that I wish very much the Auditors would Satisfy themselves now of the Truth & give me Such a Clearance as may save me from farther trouble. I shall be glad to hear from you as soon as convenient what passes on your Exhibiting the Inclosed or what farther may be required from & me. The time limited for my Appearance is on or before Wednesday the 13th of this December which I make no Doubt you will attend. I am

Dear Sir 
your most obedient & most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson





James Chalmer Esqr
