Edinburgh Jan.ry 4th 
1770



My Dear Sir

I wish I coud write any thing that merited your desire of hearing from me before the meeting of Parliament. A few hours conversation might do what I see that letters cannot effect, & I might be made Sensible that The Present opposition is innocent in respect to its means and its end & woud be innocent in its Success & that therefore any Gentleman may Lend his name on the present occasion as opposed to Government. At Present my opinions on all these points are extremely different. They The oppositions have acted very unwarrantably & their Success woud be a Ruinous encouragement to many Crimes. They have endeavoured to delude the People by representing an Innocent and even weak Reign as Violent & oppressive.

I speak not now of the particular point in disspute between you us but of Other Grievances and apprehensions with which they have dissgraced human Reason. Such falsehoods must disscredit even truth hereafter. They have employed the Populace of London to Intimidate the King and his adherents A Practice which if continued must in my opinion end in Military Government. Whoever attempts to Govern by force attempts to Establish Military Government. There is a great difference between a Mob of weavers or Taylors led by some folly of their own & having the whole Authority of Government and of all the Superior orders in the State against them. And a Mob that is raised by one half the leading men in the Kingdom against the Other. Townshend & Sawbridge Restrained the Weavers without Military force. And we may Always keep the lowest of the People in tolerable humour if we take  their Demagogues into office. But it is a question whether this be governing the Mob or being Governed by them. Tho I were fully of the opinion that The house of Commons exceeded its Powers in excluding Mr Wilkes from the Present Parliament: yet I woud think it my Duty to join Government in every measure the most effectual to keep the peace of the Countrey & repelling every Motion made to give Effect to Petitions that tend by raising Animosytis to promote the Interest of mere faction. I am sure that if people are to be judged from their motives as well as from Actions few in the present opposition woud have merit ever where the Action was right.

I am however extremely sorry to differ from you: Still in the main question between us. It appears to me as clear as day Light That the House of Commons is the supreme Judge of its own members. That it Judged right in the case of Mr Wilkes. That  Expulsion in the Nature of things must imply not merely the Trouble of Reelection but an exclusion from that Parliament. If there be any Instance from which it woud appear that ever the matter was Understood Otherwise I shoud think it an Instance of Mistake but I know not of any. If there be any Instance quoted in Pamphlets I beg the favour you will send me a Copy. I have the Journals of the Commons by me but we scarcely see any Pamphlets here. But this Power of the Commons whether inherent or usurped may be abused & one Point in controversy between us is how to Prevent this Abuse. The way you propose is by a Law to define or restrain it: That I mentioned was, by Laws to exclude those who may make a Majority in the house inclined or Interested to Abuse it. I give way to your Argument that Rules or Laws have effect even where there is no Authority to enforce them. And yet as far as I coud Observe,  former Laws had very little weight in determining the right of Elections where The House of Commons Judged. And I never coud Observe without regret the Indifference of many members Otherwise very independent and honourable on questions relating to Elections. The sneer with which the merits &c were treated, & the event in general of most Petitions. A Law directing the house of commons can have no Superior to enforce it unless the sense of the People at a Reelection is considered as such & to have this security short Parliaments are wanting. But a Law excluding or dissqualifying Particular Persons may have Penaltys Annexed of Which the Courts of Law may Judge, and Candidates may be Sufficiently deterred, as I believe all officers of the Revenue are, from ever coming before the House of Commons with Illegal Pretensions. When I dropt that any statute restraining the House of Commons in matters relating to their own Dignity & Priviledge  might have bad Effects. I meant that such Laws might if observed hinder their defending themselves against the Intrusion of very Improper persons. The Courts below as well as above may be corrupted or if they be not Will the Lawyers of the Crown Prosecute to conviction a Member of Parliament whom the Crown wishes to retain in the house. But I meant farther that the Proposing of such a Law might have a bad Effect by Missleading the attention from better & more effectual Preventives of the same Evil.

Reduce the Duration of Parliament again to three years at the utmost. Give us more Countrey Gentlemen that have a natural Interest & fewer buyers of Burroughs &c but I beg Pardon for repeating all this. If we can but confine the Authority of Government to persons interested to preserve the Constitution they will not need the Direction of many  Laws. And if restrictions on many occasions woud hinder them from doing wrong they will likewise on many occasions hinder them from doing right, for no Rule whatever can comprehend the specialtys of every Particular case And the Power of Every Judge in spite of what we can do, will be, in a high degree disscretionary. I mantain that Laws, in any controvertible Point do not inform the Partys what Judgement they are to expect. In this Countrey at least I should like as well the Throw of dice. But yet Laws here relating to Life & Property &c have this good Effect that they make it difficult to disspossess. This is not always Just but it is in general expedient. I say so much to show you that possibly when we meet we may differ about the Effect or Value even of Laws. My Object if I had influence in Government woud be to raise up men that might be trusted, not merely to make Laws to restrain knaves, which  I shoud consider as a hopeless attempt or not likely to serve the Purpose long. But while we are agreed about the means and we need not to disspute about the means, we may agree to take as much of every sort of means as we can get. But I enter my Caution against not only the means that tend to a Dissolution of Parliament but even a change of Ministers, Untill this contest between Mobbing & Government has ceased & untill that designing & Dangerous Demagogue L-Chatham has again taken the Gout.

But to return to the Contest with that honourable Gentleman Mr Wilkes. If the Populace of England Espoused his Cause for his Virulence to Scotland I think the Populace of Scotland do right in wishing to have him dissgraced. And I will mantain in behalf of my Countreymen that the Censorial Power of Parliament which has been frequently exercised was never  more Justly than in his case. I by no means think that even a single disgraceful member in Parliament is of little consequence. He may one day upon a chance equality of Partys give the Law to his Countrey. And What is worse he may render the Legislature itself contemptible.

The Romans were so sensible of the Ignominy of having dissgraceful persons on the Rolls of the Senate or the People that they empowered the Censors to Garble those Rolls & leave out whom they pleased. And I believe that in their case the exclusion of six unexceptionable members woud not do so much harm as suffering one exceptionable one to remain. If the Censorial Power is unsafe with the House of Commons so is the Legislative, and they may give up the Rights of their Constituents to the King & Lords or to Ministers in the form of Statute as well as of Resolution. If  they be dissposed to give them up in any form I think that the grounds of the present alarm do not imply that we are to expect Protection from The King or his Ministers. The fact is that the Safety of Popular Rights arises from the great Power of the Commons in our constitution. The Persons of Members are Priviledged as those of the Roman Tribunes were sacred & their resolutions in certain matters are Supreme that they may be irresistible in defending the People. The Separate Powers of the Lords are & must be somewhat analogous in defence of their own Order. The Case of Lord Banbury which you mention is for me. Lord Chief Justice Holt  Sustained his Peerage But he never sat in the House of Peers. Another chief Justice might now grant the Priviledge of Parliament to Mr Wilkes on the Credit of his Returne from Middlesex: but he woud not therefore  sit in the house of Commons. The House of Lords may for ought I know expell every Peer that has been Created since the Union And I know Nothing to hinder them only that they are not mad And this is likewise the only reason that hinders them from expelling Sr George Saville & you: Whose name I beg you will pardon my Coupling with yours for I am far from being Satisfied with his conduct, A Man who lends his name or his Purse to Support other Gamblers is as bad as if he were a Gambler himself. I care not whether Sr George Saville aims at Power in his own name or in that of The Marquis of Rockingham. I must likewise beg your pardon [xxx] for troubling you with so much loose & incoherent talk in the midst of Bussiness Private & Public which you must have. The Dissposition from which I write is my Security  that I can have said nothing Offensive to you. God Bless you & enable you to take a firm Clear & decisive part for yourself & your Countrey whomsoever it may please or offend. I never thought to see a time when a firm & resolute adherence to the measures of Government was to be as honourable as the most free and Independent Part that coud be taken in Parliament even in the worst of times. You say that all this dust which some people have endeavoured to raise has not distressed Government. I am glad of it: but I am sure its Authors then will be dissappointed. And so be it, for I am very Angry with them & expect no good from any of them, not even from their fine writer Junius. If my paper were not done I shoud run on idly enough: My only purpose is to please myself by writing to you and your taking so much notice of what I have written I consider as a mark of that Friendship which I have long valued above most circumstances of my Life.

Adam Ferguson
