Edinr 15 July 1782

Dear Sir

I returned the proof sheets which I received on the 12th by the same post & then likewise gave my immediate determination on the question which you proposed relating to the delay of our publication for another year: you will possibly still expect my more deliberate Judgement upon it. The Gentlemen you mentioned & most of my literary Friends are in the Country or away in excursions to a distance And indeed if they were here, I could not in this state of a Bussiness so interesting to me be governed by any Other than the decided feelings of my own mind. From my Friends I have already had the most unequivocal encouragement to think as I do in forming the Resolution I have taken. I have been about twelve years employed on this Subject, my Efforts indeed have been directed chiefly to the matter: but the Stile I trust is plain & manly, if it does not abound in the ornaments of Composition it is probably not the less worthy of a Subject which is far above such ornaments. The want of them is an effect not of my failure but of my  Choice. I wished even where the grounds of Applause or Censure are evident to leave the application of them to the Reader Content to relate, to state the transaction, & to specify Characters without intruding with my Judgement. This sort of retention which I think proper to History I have not been always able to Observe even when perhaps most proper & the performance must come forth with this & other defects on its head. If it come with reports & prejudices against it: it may not meet with a fair reading but it will sometimes or Other meet with what it deserves & this is all I am entitled to wish.

Simplicity & plainness of Stile I confess do not imply negligence or want of Care. The Stile of Xenophon I believe was studied as much as that of Isocrates tho to a different & a better purpose.

I pant after propriety & purity more than I ever can reach. I have great confidence in your Ear accustomed to a better Dialect than my own & in your Eye accustomed to the minute inspection of the best writings. I have seized your Amendments greedily for I felt the propriety of them  for the most part, & even where I should not myself have felt the necessity of a change, gave way to your better discernment. It was sufficient that I did not perceive my meaning Suffer by it, I took it for granted the expression was bettered. But if the changes I myself have proposed be too much I pray you will admonish me: for I am willing to risk the Publication with such corrections as the press may require or such as are practicable & easy.

I do take very kindly your Solicitude on the question of delay. You promised that I should be Obliged to you & you have kept your Word. The 12th proof sheet is this moment Arrived with the King's Speech for which thank you and am glad to see an End of Such a Session. The post has been late of coming & I wish I may be able to return the Proof with this. In the mean time I finish my Letter

And am Dear Sir 
your most Obedient 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
