Hallyards near Peebles 21 Febry 1799

My Dear Friend

I have been in Edinburgh hunting a Militia Substitute for one of my young Men & we have had such falls of Snow & such storms of drifting wind, Since, as threatened to carry away our roofs and bury us alive so that I have literally forgotten at what point our last Correspondence ended. But I still retain my faculty of troubling you when any thing pinches. You see my young Seeman has made another Admiral & therefore has a new Captain perhaps another Ship to look for. It has run in his own head for some time probably at the Instigation of some of his Ship mates that it would be best for him to be on board a Frigate, and it may be so: but I have no will in the matter. Admiral Nugent has always expressed a Sort of Paternal good will to him And I  trouble you now merely that I may put you upon considering his Case with Admirable Nugent that if a proper berth occur to you for him it may be looked after. And since I am upon family matters I must recall to your memory what you Once questioned me about before I. E. The future Profession of another Son who is Still at College. He is a good figure & has not a fault: but I am sett against the Law or any profession more learned than a Soldier: besides that this is likely to be the Staple trade of this Country as long as we can defend ourselves against the devouring Volcano of France, and when that is no more we may be indifferent about every profession, but the Grave diggers.

I have hesitated too long & I believe must think seriously of concerting the matter with himself & so push for a first Commission in his Majesties Professional Forces by Purchase or Otherwise only wishing to  make the matter as Speedy and as easy as I can & I mention it to you that if you should have an Opinion on the Subject I may know it. Our Roads are so blocked up that I have no prospect of getting to Edr soon where my first Steps are to be taken.

I have not heard your Lamentations over the most Innocent King of Naples but have no doubt they are loud enough to be heard at Canterbury. I was blockhead enough to conclude from the Neapolitan March that all Germany was to be in motion at the same time: but I shall for the future as long as I live, think that an Italian Court may play the fool more readily than the torpor of Germany should rouse into Seasonable Action. It is said that the Neapolitans advanced because if they had not the Enemy was coming upon them: but is there no difference in Europe betwixt a Ruin which it will be said the King brought upon himself & therefore deserved And an act of unprovoked injustice & Rapin committed by the general Enemie of  all nations. After this I have for the present no more politicks Short of the Union with Ireland, in which I have no vote. If your Government have no controul over that publisher of the Sun newspaper let them say so. If they have for Gods sake Silence him that he may not continue fomenting bad humour by his impertinent Remarks & absurd Zeal for a cause which he is no way qualifyed to promote, non tali Auxilio nec defensoribus istis tempus egit. I am provoked at every turn of a leaf to see news mongers instead Of telling what has happened continually giving their opinion as if it were of any Consequence what they thought. And when I have said so much am sensible of idleness in thinking to controul news papers.

I am My Dear Friend 
most Affectionately 
yours &c &c 
A. F.
