Nidpath Castle 25 Febry 
1796



My Dear Friend

Here are no Events, no approach to Negotiation with France, no termination even to the treaty of Nidpath which tho least is not the last in Care. If any body think me a Philosopher he is grievously Mistaken. I have done nothing but Peste  and Scold inwardly for three or four weeks not to say Months. I do not mean to molest you with these fruits of my Philosophy: but if I do not write something there will be nothing from you. And from me it can be only what I have. The Dukes orders to finish with the Terms have been here about a Month And my Assent was not withheld a moment: but the Conclusion is Still unaccountably delayed. This I mention not in the way of Complaint. The Duke you say is already disspleased with this and other delays, let us do nothing to irritate: Mr Taits manner to me had every appearance of Candour & Obliging disposition. And tho I cannot explain the present delay but: am Anxious least  by any accident or interference of Interests here it should prove fatal to the Scheme of retreat I had formed & which I am now almost too old to look for any where else. Without molesting the Duke with more applications you may perhaps Observe what is passing & prevent any imputation of the delay from to any hesitation of mine in accepting the Terms. You do not tell me in what quarter of the map I am to look for your Country retreat. The extreme of Midlesex is too near. Hertfordshire is too Cold a Soil; Essex is too low. Kent or Surry must be the ground: but wherever it is I hope it will prove some break in the Eternal repletion of the London eating & drinking As for chearful festivity; from this I doubt you will find no retreat post Equitem sedet atra Cura: And so be as chearful as you please provided you keep a good clear Active meagre habit of Body. I have little correspondence with Edinburgh & feel nothing but the vexation of little troubles in my Situation here. But believe me most Affectionately yours

Adam Ferguson
