Hallyards near Peebles 26 October 1806

My Dear Sir

I write now to account if possible for a Strange dreaming Epistle which I wrote to you yesterday. With such Eyes as mine are become I have often to guess at what I read. With no better information upon the first glance, I set about answering your kind letter. The words MrJohn Home Officer & at your Command struck me with a Fancy that you had bargained with Mr John Home for his Office to be at my Command. For whom? But for my Son lately a Writer in Edinburgh. Hence my long Account of his case. My esteem of your proposal as being well devisd for him in his former Situation: but not being applicable now; my hope that you had not proceeded any inconvenient length in the transaction. In Short it is scarcely Credible that a Head so Old as mine could run away so fast with a mere fancy, when the real matter was open for inspection. But so it was. I wrote seald and dispatched  my letter without looking a Second time at yours. Soon after however I did what I shoud have done before I wrote & finding how my head had run wild have been Anxious enough for its Reputation with you. Your kind offer to Strengthen my hands in the present possible Exigence of my Family is matter of grateful feeling which I shall not attempt to express. And I trust that you will not Suppose me to be actuated by any Saucy Conceit of Independence When I say that whatever may become of the Subject at last, it is now better placed in your hands than it would be in mine. The Publick and the World have been more propitious to me in point of Provision than I deserved.

It is true that I neither eat nor drank like a Prodigal: but a restless Spirit of Activity engaged me in what was no less improvident, a Contest with the Surface of the Earth itself, when it had nothing to Offer but Cold & hunger. And that I have not been abandoned to these at last, is more owing to the Providence of my friends than to my own. I am now far from being indigent or even much Straightened. I am out of Debt, or nearly clear of that in which my  Sons Affairs engaged me. And it is not fit that I should be encouraged to spend now, even on my children what had better be spared for future occasions. Your Proposal is matter of Obligation which I neither do nor wish to decline. Nor do I fear that the effects of any kindness on your Part would engage me in any thing that I should not do from long confirmed Inclination. If any occasions called for Aid I shoud be proud to receive it on the Quarter from which it is now Offered. With the Hope I expressed yesterday of being yet once more able to embrace you & yours. I am

My Dear Sir with the most 
Sincere Respect & Affection 
your most Obliged & 
most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
