Edinburgh 26 June 1796

My Dear Friend

I just now receive yours of the 23d about half an hour after the departure of your little Friend & Namesake for London, so that the Die is in some measure thrown for him. I had written to his Brother here to make inquiry about a proper conveyance for him, And yesterday between 4 & 5 in the morning at Hallyards received an Express informing me that my Friend Sir James Stirling Provost of Edr was to set out for London with a young Son of his own whom he is to enter an Officer in the Guards & that on hearing of my occasion desired to inform me that he would take Charge of my Boy & see him safely to any place I should direct in London. This was so favourable an opportunity that I could not hesitate for a moment in seizing it, accordingly, as fast as sleeping persons could be awakened and dressed, set out for Edinburgh, took my Boy in passing through Peebles who then heard for the first time of his immediate destination, & carried him through among his Companions waving with his hand in a transport of Joy. And he is set out this Morning with Sir Ja's  Stirling who will be a Father to him, till he is Consigned to his Uncle Samuel Burnett of Iron Monger Lane Nº 26 Cheapside or to your Order. He has letters written at Hallyards one to you & another to his foresaid Uncle given him more to serve as a direction where he is to be delivered than to carry any inside Contents.

He was taken up at Peebles & forwarded from Edinburgh in the very State of a Peebles Schoolboy, in which this Sudden order to March Surprised him, & it is perhaps better that he should be fitted out at London with Particulars suited to his destination than that we should attempt any equipment here & I write to His Uncle Samuel Burnett Nº 26 Iron Monger Lane Cheapside to find him in Necessarys at my expence. Be so good as let the your servant carry the inclosed to the penny Post for that purpose. You will decide for me what is farther to be done. I mentioned what Passed between Mrs Nugent & me on the Subject & wished you to disscuss the matter with her. She said Captn Nugent wished to take charge of a Boy of mine & offered to carry this Boy to London with her. I took the matter into Consideration but she departed without Saying any thing more of the matter; Least she should be affronted or affect to make a Quarrel of our taking to any Other protection at Sea; I pray you to take the choice whatever  it be on yourself & recollect what was my wish that Captn Nugents mind should be known before we recurred to any one else. There is indeed no one I should prefer to Captn Nugent & should think My Boy Happy either with him or C. Payne whose handsome Remembrance gives me reason to augur well of the Project.

My heart is full, & if you were by, my Silence would express enough. We look for Major Burnett with some fond expectation, if he should overtake me here it will be pleasant to show him the Way to our Country retreat: but if I should be gone Adam will attend him thither. I too perceived what Sort of Ennemy we had to do with & would have directed My Politics to guard against the Precise thing that has happened: but this world is a Series of Progress & Decline of Flood & Ebb. Of Volution & Revolution but the State of Europe &c before the year Ninety was such that I saw nothing but the too near approach of a Comet that could occasion any general Reverse. I am glad you see things in a more favourable light, And whatever is to be the event endeavour to perswade myself that it is more fortunate to have our Lot amidst great Events than in times of undisturbed tranquillity. I only wish if I am to live & see much that I were forty years younger.

yours most affectionately 
Adam Ferguson
