Edinburgh, 30th May 1793

My Dear Sir,

I am glad you are decided on the form in which Ossian is to be recorded. You may expect to hear different opinions on the subject; but if any one thinks he can do better in a more portable form, or in Roman character, this he can easily accomplish from your standard copy; and I shall cease to reason on the subject. Being but a bastard Gaelic man, my ear is a very uncertain rule for pronunciation or orthography. I will, however, mention what occurs under correction of your better judgment. Will it not be proper to prefix an alphabet, with notice of the power of each letter? If so, I think the two sigmas should be distinguished, the one s the other sh. I think the alpha is sufficiently full and broad in the sound without any additional vowel, as (u), for instance; and I think the upsilon should have the power of the English (v), uniformly given to it. The modern Greeks always pronounce it so. The (ɣ), falsely numbered with the diphthongs, should always stand for the Italian (u), or English double (oo), as in moon or boon, &c. To illustrate these remarks, I have ventured to mark the changes they would make in the specimen. Aɣous I see, you spell with a kappa, to my ear it is rather a (γ), gamma; however you know much better. Query, also whether the nasal sound, when the article precedes a word beginning with gamma or kappa, may not be marked with the double gamma, as in the tale of Pharaoh's daughter (αγγ ϰοϕαν); so much for remarks which you will not make any use of, as you see cause. I have conformed to your former injunction exactly in consulting no more persons. There are few persons of any education in the Highlands, whether clergy or laity, that do not know the Greek alphabet; and perhaps will have easier access to your Ossian in that alphabet than they would in the barbarous orthography which few, and I among the rest, never learned to read. I know that this would make many a learned man stare. For there is no persuading people south of Tay, that all the works of the bards are not to be found in booksellers' shops in Lochaber or Morven the capital of the country at least. I tryed your experiment on J. Home, and he made it much more intelligible from the Greek orthography than from the Roman. I showed him in confidence your flagellation of the Edinburgh critics, and he is much diverted. I admire the fair hand and current writing of Greek in your amanuensis. — And am, dear sir, your most obedient and most humble servant,

Adam Ferguson
