Hallyards 14th May 
1798



My Dear Friend

your writer at Edinburgh has a report that you are to be this way in May which I rather wish than believe. If it should be So you will find that I, tho a Warlike Philosopher, am far from being against your System of Property & National independence altho I do not know of any way to preserve it among Thieves high way men & conquering Nations but Force alone & to this we must look for Safety & even not rely on ordinary means of defence So long as there is Such an Army & Such a directory in France. As the Combina[tion] of Kings served the Jacobin cause in France The Threats of the Directory serve the National cause in this Island. They will teach & drive as I trust to assume a just Military Posture which no effort of theirs will reverse. And if they persist will I trust not be for a Moment or a Single generation but for Ages to  come. For this purpose I wish only in ad[d]ition to what is doing that the current of Estimation & honour should be turned as much as possible into this Channel. What is become of Trade? My Answer still is let so much of it as is inconsistent with National Safety go elsewhere. A Valiant People & independent State cannot want for Resources. My only difficulty is to hit the just mean between the danger of Subjugation & the danger of wishing to Subjugate Others for men are Such Idiots as to Think that conquests is prosperity & for themselves would sett no limits to either. We complain that the French would be a Conquering & the great Nation by Land: but our publick Scribblers at least are as Offensive in their turn by Sea. Is not rule Britania ov[e]r the Waves as bad as ça ira. The best of us should have a bridle in our mouth & a hook in our Nose or at least have our tongues pulled out.

There was a poor Idiot in my Country who used to call himself Rob machg an Duig: but Others called him Rob Gorrick. It is piteous to hear fools talk of the Sovere[i]gnty  of the Seas while they own that there should be no Sovereign of the Land beyond his own territory. If vainglory had effect to raise or preserve a just national Spirit it might be endured: but I distrust the effect it is provoking to Others & fraught with inefficient confidence in those who entertain it. So much for Moralization which if does not Correct the world may at least tell us what to think of it. I have seen some extract of a Work of Dumurier. It is strange that these Frenchmen should know human Nature & its affairs so much better than we do. We think that Law and Act of Parliament should do every thing they have more experience of the minds & humours of Men. What I liked most in the land tax Scheme was that it gave prospect of a more fair Assessment hereafter: but I think it seems to languish. If you be idle enough to come here you will find me at home for the printers are at work on the Roman History & tho they are far from sending me a proof to correct every part I am obliged to be in the Way &c. I am earnest to have it as right as I can make it.

&c &c yours 
A. F.
