Nidpath Castle 7th May 1796

My Dear Friend

I Join the writer to The Signet in most sincere thanks for your good Offices; he has forwarded the letter to Ruthven & will transact the Bussiness with Mr Charles Gordon when he goes to Edinburgh. The Bussines of Nidpath is well over as you have seen by the documents I sent to you. Thank the Duke for me. My new Situation will not be so Ducal & of course more Professorial. We shall move soon but the direction of Letters may continue the Same till farther notice. You cannot long be at a loss for Places about London & therefore Ryegate need not disstress much. Your publick Language is what I have wished from the beginning of the War: but my Doctrines are not fit for Publication that is not fit to be told to the Ennemy as well as a Friend.

I therefore wish I could hold my Tongue even in Company: for I can Conceive what is said upon the Tweed to be repeated at Paris. The Ennemy ought not to be told what we rely on for that is telling them to what point they should direct their Force. For this Reason Divernois's Pamphlet appeared to me a  very improper as well as mistaken publication.

The French account of the Battle of Montenotte if true is very Allarming: but my Faith is not fixed. They write in the Stile of Quack advertisement & carry the same Caveat to distrust. The Battle I take it is fought to prevent their getting Possession of Genoa. And whatever happened in the Field that day: if they do not get Possession of Genoa they have lost the Battle.

I shall apply to the Dukes man of Bussiness to know what I owe for the time I have occupied the Castle. I am

My Dear Friend 
yours most Affectionately 
Adam Ferguson





As I write in Some hurry I had almost forgot your Inquiries about the Dictionary of Italian Geography. It is here Safe, I have looked at the Article San Marino and see some short notes of yours Scarcely to be read by any one but yourself. I mean for the hand write. Shall I send the book to Edr to go by some conveyance from thence. There is another thing I should not forget. I have lately received a Letter dated at Turin & Signed the 5th of of July 1795 & Signed If I read it right Le Baron de Chambreis, together with two Copies of an Essay on the Law of Nations about which the Author wishes to Communicate with me & in which I am very desirous  to Comply. And if I knew how to forward a Packet would prepare one for him as soon as the plague of changin[g] Quarters will permit. In the meantime I would willin[gly] write a short Line to exculpate myself for the delay that has already taken place. If you have any Access to the Minister from Turin or any one who can tell us about the Baron de Chambreis & correct me if I read it wrong I beg that you will inquire. There is a great fault committed by People in writing names in the same Slurring manner that they write Sentences in these a Sentence The Sense helps to read: but in names there is no Help but the distinctness of the letters so as not be mistaken.

I will tell you next time what I hear about the Burroughs if any thing past worth attending to

yours Again & Again
