London Febry 9th 
1779



My dear Carlisle

Lazy as I am I must Answer your Letter:first as to Politics:it was understood here before I received it that the Aversion of the People in Scotland was not to be idly Crossed. Your letter put that Aversion in a much Stronger light to me than I had conceived & the Particulars I heard this Morning from Lord Linton make me think it a kind of Phrensy. My Opinion is that in all Criminal matters the Law shoud have its Course but how that is to be, in this matter I know not. The Law is terrible in the hands of People that do not appear to delight in its Severitys, & that never Shrinks; but as it is the Fashion here to say we have lost America so I expect to hear that we have lost Scotland but in that case I hope to be Reckoned not among the  losers but the lost.

I am in great hopes nothing will be lost not even the Continent of North America. We have 1200 Miles of Territory in Length occupied by about 3.000.000 [xxx] People of which there are about 1.500.000 with Johny Witherspoons at their head against us And the rest for us. I am not sure that if proper measures were taken but we shoud reduce Johny Witherspoons to the small Support of Franklin Adams & two or three more of the most Abandoned Villains in the world but I tremble at the thoughts of their Cunning & determination opposed to us.

But so much for Politics. I was very happy in hearing that you had got the Better of your Complaints and of that Mrs Carlisle was [xxx] Well. You may tell that I pant after Scotland as the Hart Panteth after the Water Brooks & I have always thought myself within ten days or a fortnight of it but there is always some little remains of Commission Bussiness which woud need an Act of Parliament if the Commissioners did not Act. I thought to have ended the last  thing of that Sort to Day but it has become a Question whether it will not need an Act of Parliament & If so I decamp. I shall make no Answer to your fond imaginations about me because I know the meaning of them fully in your mind & how little there is corresponding to them here. I do not despair of the Republic, but it is every Man for himself & God for us all. If the Last shoud keep his Post we may do very well whatever part the others may think proper to take. I write to [xxx xxx] the Bell-man with a full [xxx xxx] to [xxx xxx] [w]henever he Rings. John Home is g[one] to Bath with every Appearance of being well. J: Fletcher went with him & is come back. I hope that John will likewise soon follow for I am told that Bath is tiresome & this Place as far as I could Observe did not dissagree with him.

I am My Dear Carlisle 
your most Affectionately 
Adam Ferguson
