Edinburgh Aprile 14th 1766

My Dear Sr

If your other friends are as Slow in writing as I have been you will imagine that you are neglected. I have for some years taken the Liberty to abstain from writing where I do not hope to produce some Effect & even where I intend writing habit & lazyness frequently get the better of me. Your Brother has shown me your last letter, & I hope that the matters may turn out as you wish them. Sometime in January last Coll. Mc Dowal sent me a Message to meet him on the Subject of a Commission from you. He told me that he intended to quit the Regiment but not the Service having a view to Change into the Dragoons; that he promised you the first offer & that you had referred him to me; He demanded 4. 000 Guineas. And was at that time on his way to London where he now is. I carried his Proposal to Mr Fletcher & Mr Alston who after considering what was to be done in the particular State of Lord Miltons Affairs determined that the Money shoud be advanced on your Security & your Brother the Coll's. And Referred the terms & the Conduct of the whole Transaction to Colls Fletcher & Mc Dowal at London. I thought  the affair woud have been Speedily concluded between them: but it seems some Missunderstanding has arisen to delay it which I cannot thoroughly understand either from Coll. Fletchers or Coll. Mc Dowals letters. There is a regulation of the Price of Commissions been lately Made to Which I imagine Coll. Fletcher wants to have this Bargain restricted altho' he does not directly say so, And Coll. Mc Dowal seems to expect £4000. He mentions offers that are made to him. But we do not hear of any formed intention to put a Lieut. Coll. over your head. Mr Fletcher sent for me a few days ago to Communicate your Letter & to desire that I woud write to Coll. Mc Dowal Informing him that he woud not insist on the new Regulation in the Article of the Price & was willing to agree to the £4000 but that he must insist nobody shoud be put over you while you are in actual Service & willing to purchase that he had written to the Secretary at War upon the report of such an Intention from you. That he only meant to prevent your Receiving any Injustice that whenever the terms were Settled with Coll. Mc Dowal he woud immediately join him in applications to the War office to have the affair concluded. This is the State of the matter at this Present Moment, My letter is gone & I hope  will bring an Answer that will contain no Difficultys.

I waited for some Conclusion in order to write you upon it but it is of more consequence to tell you how matters are while they remain in Suspence than even after they are concluded for they will then discover themselves. Your Brother & Mr Alston considering circumstances have acted kindly and readily and are dissposed to continue to do so, & I am perswaded that no hinderance will arise from them. Tho I am a bad writer I am so unreasonable as to wish to receive letters. Your simplest commands in any matter or any account of your wellfare will be most agreeable to me. And whether you hear from one or no you may depend on my not neglecting any thing else. I am

My Dear SSr 
your most Affectionate 
& most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
