Hallyards 3d Febry 1800

My Dear Carlyle

If letters were of much use; you would have but a bad bargain in such a Correspondent as me. I am like other Sinners open to the checks of Conscience when I find the Consequence of my ommissions as I now do in your Silence when matters that interest me are passing in your neighbourhood. Mrs Carlyle to our Girls mentions Admirals Homes Illness & turn for the better. I hope it is a continued & effectual Recovery & that you will be disposed to tell me so without loss of time. I am myself at present under very Anxious Concern on Account of my Boy whom the Admiral left on Board the Caesar. I have a letter from Portsmouth telling me that he is sent there among the Sick & is in a state of great debility from a Fever & Diarhea. I endeavour  to be prepared for my loss: but it is his present State of probable dejection that affects me most.

The person, who writes to me, is a Mr Hunt employed it seems in the Care of the Sick & Hurt Seamen at Portsmouth. His letter is Obliging & Consolatory. He had engaged a proper Nurse for him & bids me rely on every attention being given to his Case and I have written to this Mr Hunt to thank him & request the Continuance of his good Offices: but we are all here in Anxious & Silent expectation. If Admiral Home is well enough to be troubled with questions of that Sort & has any Confident at Portsmouth it will be charity to send me his address & recommendation to his good Offices for me in this case; that I may enter into Correspondence with him not being at all acquainted with the above Mr Hunt, tho disposed to think well of him from the Stile of his letter. I am glad to hear that Mrs Carlyle & yourself hold out well. 

Our accounts from Edinburgh are of many Complaints there that make people envy us the sour exposure of our Tweedale hills on which it is most Certain that all of us keep health much better than is common in Softer Climats. Our Government I believe had good Reason for declining present overtures of Negotiation: Namely that our Cue for negotiating is to be taken [xxx] our Friends; not from our Ennemys who may possibly & even probably mean throw Squibs of Jealousy & distrust among us. This Answer I believe would have saved a great many Idle words in Ld Grenvilles Note & many more in his tiresome Speech which seems to imply that we are never to get out of a War till we have an Enemy who will make peace & war for Conscience Sake. With common Enemies it is enough that we beat them into the humour of making Peace or that we make it their interest to do so. On any other principle than this no treaties could be less secure than those with the Court of Versailes.

I am Dr Carlyle affectionately yours 
Adam Ferguson
