Hallyards near Peebles 28th June 1798

My Dear Sir

I received your most acceptable present by Dr Blacks conveyance & tho very little of a Genealogist or Antiquary have been highly gratifyed. Mere names of Father & Son with dates & Successions always vanish from my recollection And I need some adventure or trait of Character to give them Substance and to make an impression. You have supplied these requisites, And I am now convinced that your Family is the most Illustrious of any in Europe descending from remote Antiquity thro nobles Crowned Heads Great Warriours & Heroes noted abroad as well as at home and if the Popedome were not extinguished in a fair way to have the Keys of St. Peter & the triple Crown.

Their generations serve to Arrange and to illustrate the History & Antiquities of their own Country & in some measure of forreign Nations also. In reading Guicciardini formerly I was unable to guess who that Obiné Scotzese could be. And I am ashamed to say  that hitherto the History of Scotland has interested me less than almost any Other that is Commonly read. [xxx] This I should be sorry to account for [xxx] without owning the defect to be in myself.

I have many times attended Buchanan: but notwithstanding his Latin never could get through. I am well pleased with the knock you have given him. His fine genius and wonderful possession of a dead Language never can attone for malice or indifference to truth. His retention in a family who honoured him with an important trust might have excused some bias to hide defects or to heighten their lustre: but the Contrary disposition was at least extremely perverse. Your discoveries in the Vatican have met the progeny of Robert the Second beyond the possibility of misrepresentation or doubt. I have now only one difficulty left how you come at this moment not to take the Title of Sr A. Stuart of Castlemilk. As to the execution of your work: If you make a Gil Blas of me I can give every Sort of encouragement about the Homilies. There is the same compleat information the same fair Statement & fullness if not redundancy of Evidence as in former productions & perfection or Sublimity of Stile; because it is precisely what it ought to be. And I rejoice to think that checks  to Animal life do not always touch the Intellectual faculties. Along with the Genealogy I had your letter to Dr Black sent to me & have since received your letter to myself. I am not discouraged by the slowness of progress in recovering your strength. My own was so slow that except in the effects of Bath & my excursion to Italy I never could fix the time of any Sensible advance, Altho I am now certainly as well as could be expected at my time of life, & better probably than I should have been if the check I received about the age of 60 had not put me upon a safer course of life than formerly.

It is an old saying that at a certain Age every man is either a fool or a Physician of the two no doubt one had best be a Physician. Altho I suspect that the Skill of such Physycians is mostly limited to their own Case, Yet the causes of health are so much the same to every body that except in the case of opposite disseases what is good for one will be so likewise for Another. We are too apt to suppose that our peculiar Constitutions require what we have brought upon ourselves by habit &c. There may be for ought I know a very material difference betwixt your constitution and mine. One inclined to repletion or fullness of Blood, the other not so much. I know not what upon this account the Doctors may have recommended  to you: but to me the meagre diet and Water has been in a high degree Salutary & pleasant. Your own experience of what is attended with least inequality of sensation whether of want or repletion is certainly the best guide. I have seen a name in the bath list which I suppose to be yours. And hope that you may still reap some benefit from the Queens Bath. Your catching cold formerly makes me suspect that you used the private or covered baths. The difference is probably greater than people commonly imagine. Observe the appearance of boiling immediately over the hot Spring in the Kings Bath, it proceeds from a discharge of a Air together with the Water, And that Air is what Dr Black who first observed it in other instances, called fixed Air & Other Chymist[s] have since called Acid gas or Carbonic gas, the same with that which fills the bottom of the Grotto del Cane near Naples and which upon immersion extinguishes flame or kills an Animal as effectually & immediately as Water or drowning itself. This Air respired in too great a propor[tion] may give that check to animal life which we call a Cold. And if so it is certainly material when you approach a Spring of such Air that the Space should be uncovered for the free access of better respiration.

Your coming to this country will be a great  Pleasure to many. Mrs Stuart has a Sister within a few miles of us here & I hope to be early informed of your Arrival. And tho very much attached to my own Apparatus for sleeping &c will either go without them or transport them wherever I can have the Satisfaction of passing any time with you. Here is a pleasant enough Shealing with plenty of Chickens & Garden Stuff if you allow a Philosopher to think of his belly. I direct this Letter to London & trust it will find you wherever you Are. I am My Dear Sir with

the most Sincere respect and Affection 
your most Obedient and 
most humble Servant 
Adam Ferguson
