London June 4th 1798

My dear Sir

Not knowing your particular address and understanding that you seldom come to Edinburgh I sent a packet for you some weeks ago addressed to the care of our friend Dr Black, and I make no doubt that it has reached your hands here now.

That packet contained a book lately finished & published entitled Genealogical History of the Stewarts &c. It is the result of the labours of many years, employed first in collecting the materials and afterwards in arranging them and putting them together in the shape they now appear; fortunately I had collected all the materials before the Severe illness with which I was attacked in the month of May last year; but the greatest part of the Arrangament & Composition has been done since that Attack, and tho' it sometimes required an effort to set about it, yet in the whole I found to be an advantage to me to have some object of the kind to excite my attention, and to give me employment without anxiety.

I was happy to find by a Letter of yours to Dr Black in the month of August last year, which John Davidson forwarded to me while in the Isle of Thanet, that you particularly recommened my having something to do that would neither confine nor fatigue. Your sentiments encouraged me to persist in the plan I had adopted. There were in that same Letter some sentiments also on matters  of a deeper concern which to my mind afforded much Nourishment and Comfort, and in which I was particularly happy to find that my Notions coincided so much with yours — This is a subject on which I shall be extremely desirous to have some further instruction & discussion at meeting, and I look forward to that period with much earnest desire of its taking place this very season — . Nothing can prevent it but the State of my health; for if at all able to perform the journey it is fully my intention to be in Scotland this year before the Summer & autumn are over. Before making so long a Journey I am first to make the experiment of a Journey to Bath & Clifton, from the last of which places I received very great benefit two years ago. The air there is remarkably Salutary & I shall probably set out about 10 or twelve days hence, & will pay a visit to Bath at the same time. It was toolate in the Season when I went there last year, the consequence of which was that I soon caught a cold & cough which obliged me to desist from either bathing or drinking the waters.

I have many thanks to return you my dear Sir for all the trouble you took last Summer in acquainting me of the course you had followed yourself in a case similar to mine & in kindly communicating to me everyidea that you thought could be of use to me — be assured that I received with great gratitude  your suggestions and availed myself of them.

The Winter & Spring Season are unfavourable for Invalids such as I have been — I have fought them through tolerably well, but the progress towards recovering the use of my left hand & Left Leg is very slow — They tell me it could not be expected till the warm weather sets in, from which I am now encouraged to hope for much benefit.

When you have had time to peruse the Genealogical History which has occupied so much of my time & attention I shall be happy to have the benefit of your observations & sentiments. Tell me fairly, whether you perceive in this work any Symptoms of the Paralytick Stroke. I promise to you not to be offended, as tho Archbishop of Grenada was at honest Gil Blas for telling him his real opinion in his Homelies composed after an attack of the Apoplexy.

I congratulate you upon the good accounts we have lately had from Ireland, & the appearance of the Rebellion there being in a fair way of being crushed before the arrival of their French friends. Still I am of opinion that the French will certainly make the attempt & there seems to be no doubt that Buonaparte is embarked on board the fleet at Toulon.

An excellent Spirit prevails in most part of this Country at present. Let me have the satisfaction of hearing from you when at leisure. & believe me with

real esteem 
My D. Sir 
yours &c A.w Stuart
