Chevening, 24 June 1777

Sir,

I have the pleasure, or rather displeasure, to communicate to you, the Copy of some Letters which have passed lately concerning the annuity, which a very unpromising young Man, seems resolved to expose himself about, to say no more of it, as I have lately wrote to Ld C. my Father desires I would inform you of it.

The first paper inclosed is a Copy of a Letter from the Solicitor General to our Friend Dr Smith, which you have probably seen a Copy of, already; and of which I sent a Copy to the Earl in my Letter to him

The second is a Copy of a Letter from Mr Cory, L C-'s agent, to my Father's agent in London.

The third is a Copy of the Letter which I wrote to the young Noble Lord; — and the fourth, is his answer to my Letter.

You will see, Sir, that Ld C. in his Letter, alludes to a Letter which My Father wrote to Sir George Savile Oct 18th. 1773, and which Sir G. Savile quotes to My Father, in the following words, in a Letter he wrote to him, dated Apr. 4th. 1777

‘The only one (i.e. Letter) in which (as I mentioned above [sais Sir George] there seems a deviation from this Idea, is in a Letter from your Lordship to me (of Oct 18th. 1773) in which you say, after recommending Dr. Ferguson; But as it could not be expected that he should give up his Proffessorship without some indemnification perhaps an annuity for Life of £200 a year, to commence from the time of Ld. C-'s coming of age, would be esteemed a sufficient one.’

My Father has a notion that he was informed, either by you or by Dr Smith, very soon after your leaving Ld Chesterfield that Mr Lovel Stanhope had said, that he supposed the annuity promised you would fall on Ld Chesterfield at last; but as my Father cannot now find the Letters he then received, he would be glad to know whether you recollect any such saying of Mr Lovel Stanhope.

My Father desires his Comp[liment]s to you; and you will be so good as to remember me to Dr Smith, if he is with you at present.

Believe me with great Esteem 
Sir, your most faithl. humble Ser.



Chevening
