Fontainebleau 9 Nov., 1763

Dear Ferguson,

I have now passed four days at Paris, and about a fortnight in the Court at Fontainebleau, amidst a people who, from the Royal Family downwards, seem to have it much at heart to persuade me, by every expression of esteem, that they consider me as one of the greatest geniuses in the world. I am convinced that Louis XIV never, in any three weeks of his life, suffered so much flattery: I say suffered, for it really confounds and embarrasses me, and makes me look sheepish. Lord Hertford has told them, they will chase me out of France, à coup des complimens et des louanges. Our friend, General Clerk, came to this place after I had passed a week in it; and the first thing he said to me was, that he was sure I had never passed so many days with so little satisfaction. I asked him how he had happened to guess so well. He said, because he knew me, and knew the French. I really wish often for the plain roughness of the Poker, and particularly the sharpness of Dr Jardine, to correct and qualify so much lusciousness. However, I meet sometimes with incidents that please me, because they contain no mixture of French complaisance or exaggeration. Yesterday I dined at the Duc de Praslin's, the Secretary of State. After we had risen from dinner, I went into a corner to converse with somebody; when I saw enter the room a tall gentleman, a little elderly, with a riband and star, who immediately called out to the Duchesse de Praslin, 'Hé, Madame la Duchesse, que je suis content, j'ai vu Monsieur Hume à la cour aujourd'hui'. Upon inquiry, I was told he was a man of quality, esteemed one of the cleverest and most sensible about the Court.

In two or three days we return to Paris, where I hope to live more at my ease, and shall pass my time with really great men; for there are such at present amongst the literati of France. Certainly there is something perverse, either in the structure of our mind, or in the incidents of life. My present situation ought naturally to appear an object of envy; for besides those circumstances of an universal good reception from all ranks of people, nothing can be more amiable than the character of the family with whom I live, and nothing can be more friendly than their behaviour to me. My fortune has already received a considerable increase by a pension procured me by Lord Hertford, and settled, as they tell me, for life. Mr Bunbury has been told that he must not go to Paris, which my Lord considers as a sure prelude to my being soon Secretary to the Embassy; an office which will expose me to little expense, and bring me a thousand a year increase of revenue, and puts me in the road to all the great foreign employments. Yet I am sensible that I set out too late, and that I am misplaced; and I wish, twice or thrice a day, for my easy chair and my retreat in James's Court. Never think, dear Ferguson, that as long as you are master of your own fireside and your own time, you can be unhappy, or that any other circumstance can make an addition to your enjoyment.

When I think of my own house, you may believe I often reflect on Josey, who, I am afraid, will be more a loser by my absence than I shall ever be a gainer by it; I mean in point of his education. I beg of you to have some inspection over him, and as often as my sister shall send to you to ask your advice, that you will be sure to give it. I am afraid that there occurs a difficulty at present about entering him to the Greek. He is too far advanced by his learning for the class in the High School to which he is put, and yet he is too young to go to the College: for this reason I thought that he might learn something of the Greek before he finished his Latin course, as is the practice in England; and accordingly Murray in Musselburgh gave him some lessons in that language. I propose that he should continue on the same footing in Edinburgh; but I am at a loss how it may be done. A master to himself alone would not give him any emulation; and were he put to any other school for this purpose, the hours would interfere with those of the High School. Be so good as to speak to Mathison, and then give your opinion to my sister.

Please remember me to Mr and Mrs Adams. I saw Willy a moment at Fontainebleau: he had arrived a quarter of an hour after Jemmy left it, whom I did not see. These two brothers have been hunting one another in vain through all France; but I hope they have met at last in Paris.

When you favour me with a letter, put it under cover to the Earl of Hertford, and direct it to him at Northumberland House, in the Strand; letters so directed come to us with the greatest safety. Make my compliments to Baron Mure, and Mrs Mure, and all that family. I shall write to the Baron soon. Tell Dr Blair that I have conversed here twice or thrice with the Duchesse d'Aiguillon, who has been amusing herself with translating passages of Ossian; and I have assured her that the authenticity of those poems is to be proved soon beyond all contradiction. Andrew Stuart is here at present: I meet with nobody here that doubts of the justice of his cause. I hope your fine judges will at last be ashamed of their scandalous partiality. I should be glad to hear of all friends.

I am, dear Ferguson, with great sincerity and without flattery,

 Your affectionate friend and servant,

David Hume.

P.S.

I beg you to keep the follies of the above letter to yourself. I had a letter from Lord Marischal to-day, who tells me, that he is to pass the winter at Edinburgh. Wait often on him: you will like him extremely: carry all our friends to him, and endeavour to make him pass his time as agreeably as possible.
