Sir

I have this day paid your draft for the £200 which I received from Lord Chesterfield. It is so far well no doubt that his Lordship has become sensible of the justice of your demand & of the impropriety of allowing my Lord Stanhope to be burdend or troubled with it. But it still remains to settle the business in a more formal manner both for Lord Stanhopes Interest & yours [xxx]. That is to be done it is not perhaps for you or me to suggest-it seems to me to be entirely Lord Stanhopes affair for with regard to you, you are possessed of his Obligation to make good the Annuity till Lord Chesterfield charges his Estates with it & as that turns out to be an impossibility, my Lord Stanhopes Obligation must in strictness remain. But as I am confident that it is not your inclination to keep to the letter of such an Obligation so I am fully persuaded Lord Stanhope is too just & too honorable to desire you to accept of a precarious security or to let things rest upon the loose footing they stand at present. Lord Chesterfields personal Security I presume is very good while he lives but in case of his death it may be good for nothing & yet I dont see how you can ask him to give more or that the Suit in Chancery could have any greater effect than his late voluntary Act has. The Object of that suit was to relieve my Ld Stanhope & while Lord C denied the Obligation altogether it was very proper  but he now acknowledges it & promises to indemnify his Guardians as far as it is in his power. I speak with the utmost diffidence on English Law or the practice & powers of the Court of Chancery but I cannot help thinking the Answer would be admitted & all the Court could do would be to Decree Lord Chesterfield to pay the Annuity of that decree & apprehend would be no better than his Bond which he certainly will not scruple to give without compulsion. Lord Stanhope if I recollect right in one of his Letters to you speaks of Lord Cs buying an Annuity properly secured for you or purchasing your Annuity altogether. These are proposals which might be made out of Court but I presume his Lordship does not mean they could be made in Court or ever receive its sanction and I dare say too his Lordship must see that tho they might with the greatest propriety be addressed from him to Lord Chesterfield it would be otherwise if you were the proposer. If something of this Sort is not done I see nothing else for it but your taking my Lord Chesterfields Obligation with a Collateral one from Lord Stanhope. The last may be kept secret from Lord Chesterfield if my Lord Stanhope pleases & as he is a Young Man & has the character of being attentive to his affairs I would hope the Risk is not very great.

I am 
Sir 
your most Obedt most h. Sr. 
Ja: Chalmer







Leicesterfields Jan. 30/1778 Mr Ferguson
