London, May 21st, 1793

My Dear Sir

I wrote you a few lines some time ago, wherein, if I recollect aright, I promised to send you soon after an answer to your letter of the 8th of April, on the subject of the proposed printing the original of the Poems of Ossian in Greek character. Having been, at the time of receiving your letter, immersed in a hurry of business, from which I have not, as yet, wholly extricated myself, I desired a gentleman, who has for many years, in conjunction with myself, thought critically, of the Gaelic language, to throw our opinion upon paper, at his convenience, more for your satisfaction than from either a wish or expectation of making converts of others. This he has done accordingly, as you will find under another cover, which goes by to-morrow's post. As my friend has left little that is material for me to add, I shall not trouble you with a long letter.

Our friend, Dr Blair, I perceive, labours under much want of information on the subject; for there is not one of the points on which he states his objections founded in fact, and, that being the case, his arguments and reasons require no answer. I cannot conceive what interest, except it was a silly degree of vanity, to give themselves a consequence on account of their knowledge in the Gaelic, those persons who gave the information had in deceiving our friend.

Mr Davidson writes rationally, but he seems not to know that there is scarce any manuscript to be followed, except, indeed, a very few mutilated ones in a kind of Saxon characters, which is as utterly unknown to the Highlanders as either the Greek or Hebrew letters. With respect to the cheap copy he mentions, if there should arise a wish for having a small edition, there is scarce any common printer but can metamorphose the Greek character into something like it in the Roman. With respect to the splendid edition now intended, it was never my intention to put it up to sale, so that its grandeur will not keep it out of the hands of those who would enjoy it most. I believe it will appear, from the accompanying observations, that there are not many of those amateurs between Glotta and Tarvisium.

Mr Davidson should be informed, that neither the Irish nor the Scotch Highlanders had ever any alphabet of their own. When they wrote, or attempted to write, they made use of the Saxon characters, which are much more confined than even the Roman, from which they are derived.

As I have heard that Mr Davidson is an excellent Greek scholar, he may be induced perhaps to try the effect of the specimen now sent on the Highland porter or chairman, in the manner recommended in the accompanying observations. Our friend Mr Home, and even Dr Blair, who are both good Grecians, will be able, I trust, to read the original of Ossian, as it is to be printed in Greek, in a manner that will be intelligible to such Highlanders as understand their native tongue. But these, I apprehend, are much more circumscribed in number than is generally supposed.

The result of the whole is, that I have resolved to follow the example of the old Druids, in writing the Celtic language in Greek characters. I shall not, therefore, with Dr Blair, agree, ‘That it is the opinion of some of the learned in Earse that must determine the point, and that to them it must be submitted ’. Where those learned men are I have never been able to learn. With respect to the clergy, I would rather take their ghostly advice on matters of religion than accept of their opinion about the manner of printing profane poetry. I consequently request, that instead of submitting the decision to them you will be pleased to return to me the specimen, already in your hands, at your convenience. And after having weighed the observations at your full leisure, and at your own time, you will please to put them also under a cover to me. You will easily perceive, that this letter is meant only for your own eye; for few men wish to know that they have been so long deceived, on a point which the smallest attention might at once ascertain.

With my best respects to all friends, I am, with great esteem,

yours most faithfully

James MacPherson
