London, 4th August 1778

Dear Ferguson,

I was much obliged to you for your letter of the 19th June, which arrived a fortnight ago, and was delivered by Mr MacKenzie. I enter entirely into your sentiments, and those of my brother, concerning the unfortunate order of the 24th March. I have done all I can in consequence of the despatches I have received, and I have hopes that I have not laboured in vain. I have wrote a long letter to my brother, which will give you all the information that seems to me material. Firmness, wisdom and exertion were never more wanted for any country than now. I approve much of the letter to Government, and the letter to the Congress, and I believe they will meet with general approbation, though the ministers do not, I guess, relish the first, and neither have been given to the public.

I am, dear Ferguson, most affectionately yours

William Pulteney

I think it right to suggest to your private ear an observation or two. Though I am not surprised at the heat with which the commissioners took up the concealment of the order and the order itself, yet I have my doubts whether it was prudent to let it transpire in America that they disapproved of the measure, or that they were ignorant of it till they arrived. I can see many advantages which might have resulted from their appearing satisfied, but none from the contrary. It is true, the misery of the departed inhabitants and their complaints must have made it next to impossible for the commissioners not to vindicate themselves from having had any hand in the measure; but I think it right to make this observation with a view to the future.

I also think it would have been as well if the opinions of the commissioners had been communicated by letter to fewer persons here, because I think it was a piece of knowledge which it ought to have been withheld from the American Deputies at Paris, and the Court of France. By communicating only to a few proper persons, every good end of this communication might, I think, have been attained without the disadvantages. I make this observation with a view to the future.

I have some reasons to think that Dr Franklin has acted a double part. From some facts I have heard, I suspect, that notwithstanding his solemn promise to me that no use should be made of what passed between us, he did from the first make use of it to urge the French Court to a further immediate treaty, to be put over and to be ratified before the commissioners should arrive, from a fear that the Americans would certainly accept our terms. The date of the last treaty will throw light upon this, when compared with the dates of my conversation with him. He was told of my arrival in Paris, and my errand on Thursday the 11th March. I saw him first on Saturday the 13th, and again on Sunday the 14th. The declaration of the French ambassador here was made on Friday the 12th. I saw him again on Sunday the 29th, and Monday the 30th, and for the last time on Saturday the 5th April.

I am informed by Andrew Stewart, that Da. Hume told him the following remarkable fact:-Hume went to visit Mr Oswald of Dunnikier, then, I believe, a Lord of Trade, soon after Dr Franklin came to England, which was in 1758; and as he entered the room Dr Franklin was coming out. Hume took notice that Franklin, who was just gone, was a very ingenious man. Oswald said he had been with him on business relating to the Colonies, and added these remarkable words: ‘He is certainly a man of genius; but if I am not much mistaken in characters, that man has more of faction in his mind than is sufficient to embroil any country in the world’.
