[Madras] 12th January 1786

My Dear Friend,

When I was but a Company's writer in the Carnatic, I remember I sent you a small bill, which you told me you accepted with pleasure, as it came from me, and you bought French cloth with it, being then on a visit to Paris. I have been near a year Governor-General of India, and four years a Supreme Counsellor, and I have sent you nothing but a little madeira, yet you are the friend next to my heart, and your interests are dearer to me than my own, as they involve the concerns of a numerous family depending on the state of your health. If I have been thus inattentive to your situation, you are yourself the cause, for to you am I indebted for those rules of conduct in my public trusts, which have bound my generosity to your or to my own private interests within narrow limits. You have been occasionally informed of the line pursued by me since I left Europe, the situation in which I found affairs, my labours to retrieve them, and the disbursement of my own income in various attentions to those who were recommended to me, and whom I could not oblige at the public expense. If the line I have pursued was not necessary from its satisfaction to my own mind, the example of it was a sine qua non  to enable me, when affairs devolved upon me, to reduce the expenses of this colony about a million sterling per annum, and to silence the cries of thousands who might otherwise have just grounds for charging me with partiality and selfishness.

I have followed your maxims in the practice of affairs, — upon perhaps the greatest theatre of affairs, if the greatness of affairs is founded in the numbers of men, and the extent of their interests — the concerns to be extricated or forfeited, — the wealth that might have been acquired, and the consequences that might ensue to individuals, tribes, and nations.

The events that hinged upon my ideas and conduct four years ago were more important than those which I can now influence, though I stand at the head and in absolute charge of all our affairs in India.

It is, my friend, one-and-twenty years since I began under you the rudiments of these affairs; and as there is no period of my life that I look to with such conscious sensation of joy and pride, as that which I passed with you and our noble pupils, so to you is due the account which I can in truth give, and which I am bound to notice to you: It must be interesting to you, and it is for the benefit of our native school, and perhaps of society in general, that I should enable you to know the result, that you may hereafter be the more confirmed in your system.

I have amply experienced the truth of three of your favourite positions:

1st. That the pursuits of an active mind are its greatest happiness, when they are directed to good objects, which unite our own happiness with that of our friends and the general advantage of society. Hence the first success in the Carnatic; the subsequent efforts in London; the return to India; the visit to Europe in ‘77; the intercourse with men in business; the friendships of the ministers; Lord N.'s selection of me for my trust in 1778.

2d. I have likewise experienced, that he who has not been in contact with his fellow creatures knows but half of the human heart. But such are the necessary taxes of occupation, of business, and perhaps of life.

3d. That all that rests with us individually, is to act our own parts to the best of our ability, and to endeavour to do good for its own sake, independent of events, disappointments, or sufferings.

Under these impressions I have acted and I now act; and if the India Company, the ministers, and the Legislature extend their views to the necessity of affairs, and to the future prosperity of Britain and India, as they stand united; and if they will adopt the plans I have laid before them, I am steady in believing that the greatest benefits to Britain from Thule to the Land's End, and to Asia, from Cape Comorin to Tartary, may flow from the practical operation of the commercial and political systems I have opened for the adoption of the empire. The outlines are clear and strong, as well as the ground of the operations themselves. Look on the map and see the field of empire marked by the Thibet Hills from Tartary to Chitagong, by the Ganges from its source to its embrace of the ocean, and by opposite chains of hills and of wild tribes from Balasore to the Jumna.

This empire asks nothing from Britain but protection and some staples; and it sends to Europe every year about twenty fine Indiamen, loaded with the industry and the production of its extraordinary soil. Each ship is worth £100, 000, one with another. The improvements made in navigation, and the knowledge of climates, and the care of health, enable Britain to carry on this trade, if she adopted a liberal plan for it, on a footing to employ a fleet in going and returning, including China and the coasts of the great Peninsula, about seventy ships — now equal in size to 50 — gun Ships, why not to 64 and 74? Commerce would then create a navy for Britain, at least such as would command the Indian seas; and as in King William's days, the first great operations of our state began by converting our debts into funds or property by regular payments of the interest; so we may here employ the present interest of our debts to be a medium for remitting the whole to Britain in an additional investment of goods. Upon this system, which necessity forced us to begin here in 1782, by providing what was called a subscription investment, and drawing bills upon the proceeds of the goods, India was saved from the jaws of war and the chains of a little monopolist policy, which forced all remittances to Britain through the channels of foreign trade, and which paid the tribute of custom to Lisbon and Copenhagen at a rate that has turned the exchange from Copenhagen against England to about 18 per cent.

But my system does more; it pours in upon Britain more streams of friendship and of aid, which every officer, civil and military, in these colonies wishes to send partially to his relations, and which, in the general remittance and receipt, give the British heart on this and your side of the ocean its most delightful exercises, and which gladden every village and place, from the cottages of the Isle of Skye to the palaces of London.

I think a still greater scene opens by this commercial intercourse, if our rivals in Europe wished but for a proper share in it. I would embrace much of the repose of the universe, the happy communications of all the inhabitants of the globe from the sources of the Mississippi to those of the Ganges, and from west to east, till the east and the west are united.

I have at this moment at Calcutta ambassadors from Tidore, in the eastern seas, from Thibet, from all the states of India, and from Timur Shaw, who is crossing the Attock; and as Manilla is opening her trade, I hope to hear direct from Lima before I leave India, and to make the Incas of Peru acquainted with the Brahmin Rajas on the banks of the Ganges.

Curious are, besides, the treasures in literature and the oblivious history of nations that are drawing upon us from the researches of Sir William Jones and others, in Shanscrit, Arabic, and Persian. Even Anacreon and Euclid's best and happiest labours may have been long asleep in the translations of this country. And what seems to complete our prospect of elegant and useful information, is that the present Governor of Chinsura, who was for seven years in Japan, has brought in the wonders of that country. Their Encyclopaedia is in his hands, and in some of the arts of life and of government, those Islanders of Asia, those Anglo-Asiaticks, have left all other nations far behind.

While devoting all my moments that are my own to such general considerations, I have perused, and am perusing again, your story of the Roman State and their rule of India — Thanks! thanks! my dear friend, but one ambition remains — it is to converse with you at your town over these affairs. Has life in reserve for us this happiness? or is our expectation of it enough? May I be able to meet you there worthy in every respect of your esteem as of your affection, — and is it possible to go through the remaining acts of my service here with progressive dignity and success. Hitherto all is as you could wish. But all may not be at the farm as you wish. I know the feu-duty embarrasses you, and the dignitas without the otium  may be there. Receive, then, the inclosed bill upon my masters, the India Company. Let the amount of it be sunk to discharge the annual feu-duty of the farm during your life, Mrs Ferguson's, and the lives of all your children and their descendants. It will be a future business to buy off the feu-duty altogether; at present I can send you no more. And should fate have deprived me of the future happiness of knowing that you can be conscious of this little attention, those nearest and dearest to you I must consider as what remains to me of you. To them I address this letter; also, in such event, John Fletcher, Home, M'Pherson. Ferguson will keep a room for me, or any remembrance of the farm house. Tell him (for I will not admit the idea that you have left us) that he is my son. His father was more than the father of your ever affectionate,

John MacPherson

Mind me to Drs Blair, Home, Robertson, Carlyle, Black, &c &c
