London 2d Janry 1792

My Dear Sir

from Various circumstances I have not yet seen Mr Dundas, but [xxx xxx] to keep him in mind of what you wished? but I am sure he would not forget it . . . .

I trouble you at present concerning the case of a Custom House Officer, to whom I think you can be of Service. His name is Robert Carmichael & had the command of one of the Kings [xxx] on the Dumfries Station. I have no connection with him, except that I believe he obtained his Appointment upon My Brothers application . . . . he appeared to me to be a man of principle & integrity & remarkably active . . . . Mr Staig, who is Solicitor of the Customs at Dumfries, took a very active part in that contested Election, against My Brother & in favour of the Candidate who was Supported by the Duke of Queensberry . . . . [but] Carmichael wishes were strongly in favour of my Brother.

David Douglas Esqr, is the Surveyor Genl of the Customs in that District, & his connections also, lye with the Duke of Queensberry. David Douglas gave in accomplaint against Carmichael, to the Solicitor Mr Staig, charging him with neglect of Duty . . . . and Mr Staig laid the matter before the Board at Edinburgh.

Carmichael was dismissed from service. D. Williamson Advocate wished soon to apply to the Treasury, in order to have Carmichael be restored . . . . I believe that an application to the Treasury would be attended with Success, but I feel the delicacy of taking any Step, that Should seem to give a Sort of Victory to an inferior officer over so respectable a Board, tho in truth it could be only the triumph of innocence . . . . It has therefore seemed to me, that the most proper Step which I could take, would be to state the matter to you, & to request that you would wait upon Mr Edgar . . . . & entrust him to reconsider the Evidence in this case, & that he woud suggest some mode of bringing it again under the consideration of the Board, so as Carmichael may be restored . . . .

your affectionate 
 William Pulteney
