SERMONS,

B Y

HUGH BLAIR, D.D.
One of the MIN IST ER S of the HI GH CHUtRCH

AND
PROFESSOR of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTRE3

in the UNIVERSITY, of EDINBURGH,

VOLUME THE FIRST.
THE FOURTEENTH EDITION.

L ONDON:
Printed forA. STRAHAN; and T. CADELL, in the Strand ,

and W. CREECH, Edinburgh.

IlDCCLXXXVI.

# THE CONTENTS.

THE
CO N TE N T S.

S E R M N

On the Union of Piety and Morality.
ACTS, x. 4 Thy prayers and thine alms

are come lp for a memorial before
God. Page I

SERMON IL
On the Influence of Religion upon

Adversity.
PSALM xxvii. 5. In2 the time of trou'

ble, he Jhall hide me in his pavilion;
in the ,secret of his tabernacle Jhall
he hide me; he shall fit me u p upon a
·'ock, 25

A

SERM ON IIt.
On the Influence of Religion upon

Prosperity.
PSALM i. 3. He Jfall be like a tree

planted bh the rivers of water, that

i;ngetb forth his firuit in hi.s feifoil;

his lea, alno flall not wither, and
w!hadfcvcrc he doth Jalll prlo/-r. Page58

S E R I O N IV.
On our impelsed Knowledge of a

Future State.
I CoiNx'rIn. Xiil. 12. For now we

feJ throl'gh a glfs, darkly- 85

SERMON V.

On the Death of Christ.
JOHN, xvii. I. yefiss lift up his eyes

to heaven, and frid, Father ! the
hour is come !- x I

SERMON VI.

On Gentleness.
JAMES , iii. 17. The wifdome that is

from above, is-gentle-. Page I45

S E RM ON VII.

On the Disorders of the Pafions.
EsTHER, v. 13. let all this availeth

me nothing, so long, as Ifee Mordecai
the Jewfitting at the King's gate. 173

SER MO N. VIII.
On our Ignorance of Good and Evil

in this Life.
ECCLESIAST. vi. 12. Who lnioweth

what is good for man in this life, all
the days of his vain life, which he
fpendeth as a fiJadov ? 204

SERMON IX.

On Religious Retirement.
PSALM iv. 4. Communne with your own

heart, upon your bed, and bejiill. Page 234

SER MON X.

On Devotion.
ACTS, x. 2. Cornelius-a devout lman, 264

SERMON XI.

On the Duties of the Young.
TITUS, ii. 6. Toung men likewief ex-

hort, to be fober-minded. 306

SER MON XII.
On the Duties and Consolations of

the Aged.
PROV. xvi. 31. The hoary head is a

crown of glory, if it be found in the
way of righteolfliefi. 341

SERMON XIII.

On the Power of Conscience.
GENESIS, xlii. 21, 22. And theyfaid

one to another, We are verily guilty
concerning our brother, in that we
saw the anguiJJ of his foul, when
he besought us; and we would not
hear: Therefore is this dizfrefs come
upon us. And Reuben answered them
faying, Spake I not unto you, faying,
Do not fin againfl the child; and ye
would not hear? Therefore, behold
also his blood is required. Page 375

SERMON XIV.
On the Mixture of Joy and Fear in

Religion.
PSALM ii. II. Rejoicewith trembling. 412

S E R M ON XV.
On the Motives to Conltancy in

Virtue.
GAL, vi. 9. nud let us not be weary

in well-dOiig ; for il dte feafnon we
fiallreap5, if we faint not. Page 439

# SERMON I. On the Union of PIETY and MORALITY. ACTS, x. 4. Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God.

S E R M ON I,
On the Union.of PIETY and MORALI.TY;

ACTS, X. 40
71j' prayers and thine alms are come up for

a memorial before God.

. HE ighh anld L oft One who SE R M.

, > idhabiltethetteriity, dwve-lleth alo ,
.,kwAi with hjim that is of humble
and contrite heart. In the midst of
his glory, the Almighty is not inatten-
tive to the meanest of his fubjecs. Nei-
ther obscurity of fiation, nor imperfec-
tion of knowledge, finks those below his

VOL. I, B regards

kz

S E R M. regard, who worship and obey him. Every

_-,. prayer which they fend up from their fe-

cret retirements, is listened to by him;
and every work of charity which they per-
form, how unknown soever to the world,
attracts his notice. The text presents a
signal instance of this comfortable truth.
In the city of Cxfarea, there dwelt a
Roman centurion, a military officer of
inferiour rank, a Gentile, neither by
birth nor religion entitled to the privi-
leges of the Jewish nation. But he was a
devout and a benevolent man; who, ac-
cording to his measure of religious know-
ledge, studied to perform his duty, prayed
to God always, and gave muich alms to the
people. Such a characer passed not un-
observed by God. So highly was it ho-
noured, that to this good centurion an
Angel was sent from heaven, in order to
direct him to the means of full inftruaion
in the truth. The Angel accosts him
with this salutation, Cornelius, IThy prayers
and thine alms are come urp for a memorial
before God.

9 t
I

It is to the conjunction of prayeri and SEF,RM.
eilms, that I purpose now to diret your -. -
thoughts, as describing the refpeclable
and amiable charader of a man, as form-
ing the honour and the blessedness of a
true Christian; piety joined with charity,
faith with good works, devotion with mo-
rality. These are things which Godhath
conneced, and which it is impious in '
man to separate. It is only when they
remain united, that they can come up as
a grateful memorial before God. I Ihall first
endeavour to shew you, That alms with-
out prayers, or prayers without alms, mo-
rality without devotion, or devotion with-
out morality, are extremely defective; and
then fliall point out the happy effets of
their mutual union.

LET us begin with confidering the cafe

of alms without prayers; that is, of good
works without piety, or a proper sense
of God and religion. Examples of this
are not uncommon in the world. With
many, Virtue is, or at leaft.is pretended

B 2 to

SERM. to be, a refpedable and an honoured
i--Y-J name, while Piety founds meanly in their

ears. They are men of the world, and
they claim to be men of honour. They
reft upon their humanity, their public
spirit, their probity, and their truth.
They arrogate to themselves all the manly
and the afive virtues. But devout assec-
tions, and religious duties, they treat with
contempt, as founded on lhadowy fpc-
culations, and fit to employ the attention
only of weak and superstitious minds.
Now, in opposition to such persons, I
contend, That this neglet of piety ar-
gues depravity of heart; and that i in-
sers an irregular discharge of the duties of
morality.

FIRST, it argues internal depravity;

for it discovers a cold and a hard heart.
If there be any impreflion which man is
formed by nature to receive, it is a sense
of religion. As soon as his mind opens
to observation and reflecion, he discerns
innumerable marks of his dependent state.

He
4

HIe finds himself placed, by some fuperiour s E R M.
power, in a vast world, where the wisdom
and goodness of the Creator are confpicu-
ous on every fide. The magnificence, the
beauty and order of nature, excite him to
admire and adore. When he looks up
to that omnipotent hand which operates
throughout the universe, he is impressed
with reverence. When he receives bless-
ings which he cannot avoid ascribing to
divine goodness, he is prompted to grati-
tude. The expreflions of those affections,
under the various forms of religious wor-
ship, are no other than native effusions of
the human heart. Ignorance may mislead,
and superstition may corrupt them; but
their origin is derived from sentiments that
are essential to man.

Cast your eyes over the whole earth.

Explore the most remote quarters of the
east or the weft. You may discover tribes
of men, without policy, or laws, or cities,
or any of the arts of life: But no where
will you find them without some form of
religion. In every region you behold the

B 3 prostrate

S E R M. proltrate worshipper, the temple, the altar,
~...~ and the offering. Wherever men have

existed, they have been sensible that some
acknowledgment was due, on their part,
to the Sovereign of the world. If, in their
rudest and most ignorant state, this obli-
gation has been felt, what additional force
must it acquire by the improvements of
human knowlcdge, but especially by the
great discoveries of the Chrifian revcla,
tion ? \Whatever, either from reverence or
from gratitude, can excite men to the
,vorlhip of God, is by this revelation
placed in fulch a light, as one fliould
think were sufficient to over-awe the most
thoughtless, and to melt the most obdurate
mind.

.Canst thou, then, pretend to be a man

of reason, nay, a man of virtue, and yet
continue regardless of one of the first and
chief dilcates of human nature? Whcre
is thy sensibility to what is right and fit,
if that loud voice which calls all nations
throughout the earth to religious homage,
has never been heard by thee Or, if it

has

has been heard, by what fPrange and false s E R M.
refinements haft thou stifled those natural
ientiments which it tends to awaken?
Calling thyself a son, a citizen, a friend;
claiming to be faithful and affetionate
in these relations; haft thou no sense of
what thou oweft to thy first Parent, thy
highest Sovereign, thy greatest Benefac-
tor ? Can it be consistent with true virtue
or honour, to value thyself upon thy re-
gard to inferiour obligations, and yet to
violate that which is the most sacred and
the most ancient of all? When simple in-
flinc teaches the Tartar and the Indian,
together with his alms and good works to
join his prayers to that Power whom he
confiders as the source of good, shall it be
no reproach, in the most enlightened state
of human nature, and under the purest
dispensation of religion, to have extin-
guiflied the sense of gratitude to- Heaven,
and to flight all acknowledgment of the
great and the true God? What does such
condut imply, but either an entire want,
or a wilful fuppreflion, of some of the best

B 4 and

SE R a, and most generous affecions belonging to
~.~-
< human nature ?-Surely, there muff be

an efiential defect in that heart which re-
mains cold and insensible, where it ought
to be affected most warmly. Surely, such
a degree of depravity mufft be lodged there,
as is sufficient to taint all the other springs
of pretended virtuee

BUT besides this, I muff contend, in

the second place, That where religion is
neglected, there can be no regular nor
teady practice of the duties of morality.
The character will be often inconfitcnt;
and Virtue, placed on a basis too narrow
to support it, will be aclways loose and
tottering. For such is the propenlity of
our nature to vice, so numerous are the
temptations to a relaxed and immoral
conduct, that stronger restraints than
those of mere reason, are neceflary to be
imposed on man. The sense of right and
wrong, the principle of honour, or the
inftinrc of benevolence, are barriers too
feeble to wvithftand the strength of passion.

In

In the tranquil seasons of life, these natu- SE R M.
ral principles may, perhaps, carry on the v
ordinary course of social duties with some
regularity. But wait until some trying
emergence come. Let the confli& of pas-
sions arise. Let the heart be either wound-
ed by fore distress, or agitated by violent
emotions; and you shall presently fee, that
virtue without religion is inadequate to the
government of life. It is destitute of its
proper guard, of its firmest support, of its
chief encouragement. It will fink under
the weight of misfortune; or will yield to
the solicitation of guilt.

The great motives that produce con-

ftancy and firmness of ation, must be of
a palpable and firiking kind. A divine Le-
giflator, uttering his voice from heaven;
an omnifcierit Witness, beholding us in
all our retreats; an almighty Governour,
firetching forth his arm to punifli or re-
ward, disclosing the secrets of the invisible
world, informing us of perpetual reft pre-
pared hereafter for the righteous, and of
indignation and wrath awaiting the wicked:

These

SE R v. These are the considerations which over-

awe the world, which fiipport integrity,
and check guilt. They add to virtue that
solemnity which should ever characerize
it. To the admonitions of conscience they
give the authority of a law. Co-operating
with all the good dispositions of a pious
man, they firengthen and insure their in-
fluence. On his alms you can have no
certain dependence, who thinks not of
God, nor has joined prayer to his chari-
table deeds. But when humanity is fe-
conded by piety, the ipring from which
it flows is rendered, of course, more re-
gular and conftant.-In Ihort, withdraw
religion, and you shake all the pillars of
morality. In every heart you weaken the
influence of virtue: And among the mul-
titude, the bulk of mankind, you over-
throw its power.

HAVING thus flhewn that morality with-

out devotion is both defcive and unstable,
I proceed to confider the other extreme,
of prayers without alms, devotion without
morality.

In

In every age the pratice has prevailed, SE R M.

of substituting certain appearances of piety ,
in the place of the great duties of huma-
nity and mercy. Too many there have
always been, who flatter themselves with
the hope of obtaining the friendship of
their Creator, though they negleEt to do
justice to their fellow-creatures. But such
persons may be assured, that their supposed
piety is altogether of a spurious kind. It
is an invention of their own, unknown to
reason, unknown in the word of God. In
icripture we are ever directed to try our
faith by our works, our love of God by our
love of men. Wre are direted to confider
piety as a principle which regenerates the
heart, and forms it to goodness. We are
taught, that in vain we address any aAs of
homage to Chrifl, unless we do the tlhings
which he faith; and that love, peace, gen-
flenefs, goodiess, meekness, and temperance,
are not only the injunaions of his law, but
the native fruits of his Spirit'. If there-

' Luke, vi. 46. Gal. v. 22.

fore,

SERM. fore, while piety teems ardent, morality

llall decline, you have full reason to be-
lieve, that into that piety some corrupting
ingredients have entered. And if ever
your regard to morality ihall totally fail;
if, while you make many prayers, you
give no alms; if, while you appear to be
zealous for God, you are false or unjust to
men; if you are hard or contracted in
heart, revere in your censures, and oppref-
five in your condua; then conclude with
certainty, that what you had termed piety
was no more than an empty name. For
as soon, according to the scripture fimili-
tude, will bitter watters flow from a sweet
folntain, as such effects be produced by ge-
nuine piety.

What you have called by that name,

resolves itself into one or other of three
things. Either it is a hypocritical form
of godliness, assumed in order to impose
on the world; or, which is the most fa-
vourable supposition, it is a transient im-
preflion of seriousness, an accidental melt-
ing of the heart, which paoes away like

?, ?(^°

the nmorning cloud and the early dew; or, SE RM.
which I am afraid is too often the cafe, '-
it is the deliberate refuge of a deluded
and superstitious, but, at the fame time,
a corrupted mind. For all men, even the
most depraved, are subjer, more or less,
to compunctions of conscience. It has
never been in their power to withdraw
totally beyond the reach of that warning
voice, which tells them that something is
necessary to be done, in order to make
their peace with the Ruler of the world.
But, backward at the fame time to resign
the gains of diffonefty, or the pleasures
of vice; averse from fubminlion to that
sacred law which enjoins righteousness
in its whole extent, they have often at-
tempted to make a fort of composition
with Heaven ; a composition, which,
though they dare not avow it in words,
lurks in secret at the bottom of many a
heart. If God will only dispense with
some articles of obedience, they will re-
pay him with abundant homage. If they
fail in good practice, they will study to

be

SERM. be found in belief; and, by the number of

their prayers, will atone, in some measure,
for their deficiency in charitable deeds.

But the attempt is as vain as it is im-

pious. From the simplest and plainef
principles of reason it must appear, that
religious worfliip, disjoined from justice
and virtue, can upon no account what-
ever find acceptance with the Supreme
Being. To what pzu2ofe is the ?multitude
of 'o0uri crifices unto me ? faith the Lord.
Bring no more vain oblations. Iceifi is an
abominiation lnito mc. T'he new wmoolls and
sabbaths, the calling of aJfimbijes, I cannot
away with ; it is iniqiit,, even the folcm1
meetiogs '.- Cease, foolifn and impious
man! Cease to confider the Almighty as a
weak or vain-glorious being, who is to
be appeared by thy devout prostrations,
and thy humble words; or to be gratified
by the parade and ostentation of external
worflip. What is all thy worflip to him ?
Jill he eat the fleJf of thy /fcrifces, or
drinlk the blood of offred goats ? Was wore

· Ifa. i. si. 14.

fLip

ship required of thee, dost thou think, S E RM.
upon his account, that thou mighteft
bring an increase to his glory and feli-
city by thy weak and insignificant praises ?
Sooner mighteft thou increase the fplen-
dour of the fun by a lighted taper, or add
to the thunder by thy voice. No: It is
for the fake of man, not of God, that
worship and prayers are required; not that
God may be rendered more glorious, but
that man may be made better; that he may
be confirmed in a proper sense of his de-
pendent slate, and acquire those pious and
virtuous dispositions in which his highest
improvement consists.

Of all the principles in religion, one

ihould take this to be the most evident;
and yet frequent admonitions are needed,
ro renew the impreflion of it upon man-
kind. For what purpose did thy Creator
place thee in this world, in the midst of
human society, but that as a man among
men thou mighteft cultivate humanity
that each in his place might contribute to
the general welfare; that as a spouse, a

brother,.

SE R M. brother, a son, or a friend, thou mighteft

1.
--v--' aa thy part with an upright and a tender

heart; and thus aspire to resemble Him
who ever consults the good of his crea-
tures, and whole tender mlercies are over
allhis works ? And dareft thou, who haft
been sacrificing unfufpicious innocence to
thy loose pleasures; thou, who haft been
disturbing the repose of society by thine
ambition or craft; thou, who, to increase
thy treasures, hall been making the wi-
dow and the orphan weep; dareft thou
approach God with thy worihip and thy
prayers, and entertain the hope that he
will look down upon thee in peace ? Will
the God of order and juflice accept such
poor compensation for his violated laws?
Will the God of love regard the services
of one who is an enemy to his creatures ?
Shall a corrupter of the society of men
aspire to the habitations of pure and blef-
fcd spirits ?-Believe it, He that faith he
lovelh God msil love his brother alo. Cease
to do evil: learn to do well. Seek judg-
ment, relieve the opprefeld, judge the fa-

therlefs,

therlef, plead for the widow : And then, E R M.
Draw niigh to Go, and he will draw nigh
to thee; call upon him in the day of trouble,
and he will answer thee. Thy prayers and
thine alms shall then ascend, in joint memo-
rial, before the Most High.

I I-IAVE now flhewn the evil of maiming

and flitting religion; of dividing asunder
two things, which though in theory they
may be separated, yet in practice muff al-
ways co-exist, if either of them be real, De-
votion to God and Charity to men. Let
us confider next the happy effects of their
union.

Their union forms the consistent, the

graceful, the refpeceable characer of the
real Chrifian, the man of true worth.
If you leave either of them out of your
system, even though you excel in the
other, you can stand trial only in one
point of view. It is only on one fide
your character is fair; on the other, it
will always be open to much reproach.
And as you dishonour yourselves, so you

VOL. 1, C do

SE R M. do great injustice to religion. For, by
·c~ dividing its parts from one another, your

never fail to expose it to the censure of
the world: And perhaps, by this fort of
partial and divided goodness, religion has
suffered more in the esteem of mankind,
than by open profligacy. The unbeliever
will scoff at your piety, when he fees you
negligent of moral duties. The bigot will
decry all morality, when he fees you pre-
tending to be a follower of virtue, though
you be a defpiler of God. Whereas he
who fears God, and is at the fame time
just and beneficent to men, exhibits reli-
gion to the world with full propriety. It
Ihines in his conduct with its native fplen-
dour; and its rays throw a glory round
him. His character is above reproach.
It is at once amiable and venerable. Ma-
lice itself is afraid to attack him; and even
the worst men rcfpect and honour him in
their hearts.

This too is the man whoef life will be

most peaceful and happy. He who fails
materially either in piety or in virtue, is

always

always obnoxious to the anguish of re- SE M.
morse. His partial goodness may flatter him .-.
in the day of superficial observation; but
when solitude or distress awakens the powers
of refleaion, he flall be made to feel, that
one part of duty performed, atones not for
another which is negleded. In the midfl
of his prayers, the remembrance of injustice
will upbraid him with hypocrisy; and in
the difcribution of his alms, the prayers
which the poor put up for him, will make
him blufli for his negled of God. Con-
science will supply the place of the hand
coming forth to write over againit him on
the wall, T7hou art weighed in the balance,
and art found wanting . Whereas he who
holds both faith and a good coficience, who
attends equally to the discharge of his duty
towards God and towards man, enjoys, as
far as human imperfection allows, the sense
of fairness and consistency in conduct, of
integrity and soundness of heart.

The man of mere morality, is a stranger
to all the delicate and refined pleasures of

* Dan. v. 27.

C 2 devotion.

SERM. devotioni In works of beneficence and

_-\- mercy, he may enjoy fatisfation. But

his fatisfaCion is destitute of that glow or
affeEcion, which enlivens the feelings of
one who lifts his heart at the fame time
to the Father of the Universe, and confi-
ders himself as imitating God. The man
again who refts solely in devotion, if that
devotion open not his heart to humanity,
not only remains a Pfranger to the pleac
fures of beneficence, but must often un-
dergo the pain arising from bad paflions.
But when beneficence and devotion are
united, they pour upon the man in whom
they meet, the full pleasures of a good
and pure heart. His alms connected him
with men; his prayers with God. He
looks without dismay on both worlds.
All nature has to him a benign afpeoC.
If engaged in acive life, he is the
riend of men; and he is happy in the
exertions of that friend{hip. If left in
retirement, he walks among the works of
nAature, as with God. Every obje& is en-
!ivened to him by the sense of the Divine

presence,

presence. Every where he traces the be- SE R M
neficent hand of the Author of nature; -I
and every where, with glowing heart, he
hears and answers his secret voice. When
he looks up to heaven, he rejoices in the
thought that there dwells that God whom
he serves and honours; that Saviour in
whom he trusts; that Spirit of grace from
whose inspiration his piety and his charity
flow. When he looks around him on the
world, he is toothed with the pleating re-
membrance of good offices which he has
done, or at least has studied to do, to many
who dwell there. How comfortable the
refleCtion, that him no poor man can up-
braid for having with-held his due; him
no unfortunate man can reproach for hav-
ing seen and, despised his sorrows; but that
on his head are descending the prayers of
the needy and the aged; and that the hands
of those whom his protection has supported,
or his bounty has fed, are lifted up in secret
to bless him !

Life, pafled under the influence of such
dispositions, naturally leads to a happy

C 3 end.

SER M end. It is not enough to fay, that faith

and piety, joined with active virtue, con-
ftitute the requisite preparation for hea-
ven. They in truth begin the enjoyment
of heaven. In every state of our existence,
they form the chief ingredients of felicity.
Hence they are the great marks of Christ-
ian regeneration. They are the figna-
ture of that Holy Spirit, by which good
men are said to be fealed unto the day of
redenption.-The text affords a striking
proof of the estimation in which they are
held by God. Amidst that infinite va-
riety of human events which pass under
his eye, the prayers and the alms of Cor-
nelius attracted his particular notice. He
remarked the amiable dispositions which
rose in the heart of this good man. But
he saw that they were yet imperfect, while
he remained unenlightened by the prin-
ciples of the Christian religion. In order
to remove this obftrudion to his rising
graces, and to bring him to the full know-
ledge of that God whom he fought to
honour, he was favoured with a super.-

natural

natural meifage from heaven. While the SE R M.
princes of the earth were left to aat by the j
counsels of their own wisdom; while, with-
out interposition from above, Generals con-
quered or fell, according to the vicissitude
of human things; to this good Centurion
an angel was commiflioned from the throne
of God.

What can I fay more or higher in praise

of this blessed character, than that it is
what God delights to honour ? Men tingle
out as the objecs of diftindtion, the great,
the brave, or the renowned. But he who
feeth not as man ficth, passing by those
qualities which often fiine with false fplen-
dour to human observation, looks to the
inward principles of a&ion; to those prin-
ciples which form the eflence of a worthy
character; and which, if called forth, would
give birth to whatever is laudable or excel-
lent in conduc.-Is there one, though in
humble station or obscure life, whofearcetb
God and workcth righteoficfs; whose pray-
ers and alms, proceeding in regular unaf-
fecSted tenour, bespeak the upright, the ten-

C 4 der,

SERM. der, the devout heart ?-Those alms and

prayers come up in memorial before that
God who is no refpecer of persons. The
Almighty beholds him from his throne with
complacency. Divine illumination is ready
to inftruCe him. Angels minister to him.
They now mark him out on earth as their
future associate; and for him they make
ready in paradise, the white robes, the palms,
and thefccptres of the just.

To this honour, to this bleflednefs, let

our hearts continually aspire; and through-
out the whole of life, let those solemn and
sacred words, with which I conclude, found
in your ears, and be the great directory of
our conduct: He hathJbewed thee, 0 man,
what is good; and what doth the Lord thy
God require of thee, but-to dojtjtlly, and love
mercy-and to walk humbly with thy God?

e Micah, vi. 8.

# SERMON II. On the Influence of RELIGION upon ADVERSITY. PSALM xxvii. 5. In the time of trouble, he shall hide me in his pavilion; in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me upon ...

[ 25 3

SE MON IL
On the Influence of RELIGION upon

ADVERSITY.

PSALM xxviio 5.

'll the time of trouble, heJ j:all hide me in his
pavilion; in the secret of his tabernacle
fiall he hide me; he Jjall set me upon

a rock.
T HE life of man has always been a SERM.

IL

very mixed state, full of uncertain- _

ty and vicissitude, of anxieties and fears.
In every religious audience, there are many
who fall under the denomination of the
unfortunate; and the reft are ignorant how
soon they may be called to join them. For
the prosperity of no man on earth is stable
and assured. Dark clouds may soon gather

over

SE R M, over the heads of those whose sky is now
-v--' most bright. In the midst of the deceit-

ful calm which they enjoy, the storm that
is to overwhelm them has perhaps already
begun to ferment. If a man live many
years, and rejoice in them all; yet let him
remember the days of darkness, for the, jjall
be many i.

Hence, to a thoughtful mind, no study

can appear more important, than how to
be suitably prepared for the misfortunes of
life; so as to contemplate them in pro-
fpea without difinay, and, if they must
befa!, to bear them without dejedion.
Throughout every age, the wisdom of the
wife, the treasures of the rich, and the
power of the mighty, have been employ-
ed, either in guarding their state against
the approach of distress, or in rendering
themselves less vulncrable by its attacks.
Power has endeavoured to remove adver-
fity to a distance. Philosophy has studied,
when it drew nigh, to conquer it by pa-
tience; and Wealth has fought out every

E Eccles. xi. 3.

pleasure

pleasure that can compensate or alleviate SEIRM.
pain.

While the wisdom of the world is thus

occupied, religion has been no less atten-
tive to the fame important object. It in-
forms us in the text, of a pavilion which
God erects to shelter his Iervants in the
time of trouble, of a secret place in his taber-
nacle, into which he brings them, of a
rock on which he sets them zup; and else-
where he tells us, of a fiield and a buckler
which he spreads before them, to cover
them from the terrour by night, and the ar-
row that Jlieth by day. Now, of what
nature are those instruments of defence,
which God is represented as providing
with such solicitous care for those who
fear him? Has he reared up any bul-
warks, impregnable by misfortune, in
order to separate the pious and virtuous
from the reft of mankind, and to screen
them from the common disasters of life?
No: To those disasters we behold them
liable no less than others. The defence
.which religion provides, is altogether of

an

SERM. an internal kind. It is the heart, not the

outward state, which it profefles to guard.
When the ianc of t-rouble comes, as come it
muR to all, it places good men under the
pavil.j ,

of the Almighty, by affording

them that security and peace which arise
from the belief of divine protection. It
brings them into the feril of his tabernacle,
by opening to them sources of consolation
which are hidden from others. By that
firength of mind with which it endows
them, it Jcis them up i.pon a rock, against
which the tempest may violently beat, but
which it cannot shake.

How far the comforts proceeding from

religion merit those high titles under
which they are here figuratively described,
I shall in this discourse endeavour to
show. I lhall for this end compare toge-
ther the situation of bad men, and that of
the good, when both are suffering the
misfortunes of life; and then make such
improvement as the subject will naturally
fuggeRc:

I. RELI-

I. RELIGION prepares the mind for en- SERM.

countering, with fortitude, the most severe
Ihocks of adversity; whereas vice, by its
natural influence on the temper, tends to
produce dejecion under the slightest trials.
While worldly men enlarge their posses-
sions, and extend their connecions, they
imagine that they are {trcngthening them-
selves againf: all the possible vicissitudes of
life. They fay in their hearts, Myj moun-
tai.JlrandsJirong, anld IJfall never be mov-
ed. But so fatal is their delusion, that, in-
flead of firegengthening, they are weakening
that which only can support them when
those viciflitudes come. It is their mind
which must then support them; and their
mind, by their sensual attachments, is cor-
rupted and enfeebled. Addited with in-
temperate fondness to the pleasures of the
world, they incur two great and certain
evils; they both exclude themselves from
every resource except the world ; and they
increase their sensibility to every blow which
comes upon them from that quarter.

They

S ER M, They have neither principles nor tem-

per which can stand the aftault of trouble.
They have no principles which lead them
to look beyond the ordinary rotation of
events; and therefore, when misfortunes
involve them, the profpeQ: must be com-
fortlefs on every fide. Their crimes have
disqualified them from looking up to the
assistance of any higher power than their
own ability, or for relying on any better
guide than their own wisdom. And as
from principle they can derive no filp-
port, so in a temper corrupted by pro-
fperity they find no relief. They have
loft that moderation of mind which en-
ables a wife man to accommodate himself
to his situation. Long fed with false
hopes, they are exasperated and stung by
every disappointment. Luxurious and es-
feminate, they can bear no uneafinelfs.
Proud and presumptuous, they can brook
no opposition. By nourishing dispositions
which so little suit this uncertain state,
they have infused a double portion of bit-
ternefs into the cup of wnoe; they have

3 iharpened

sharpened the edge of that sword which is SE M.
lifted up to finite them. Strangers to all v
the temperate fatisfadions of a good and a
pure mind; firangers to every pleasure ex-
cept what was seasoned by vice or vanity,
their adversity is to the last degree difcon-
solate. Health and opulence were the two
pillars on which they refted. Shake either
of them ; and their whole edifice of hope
and comfort falls. Prostrate and forlorn,
they are left on the ground; obliged to
join with the man of Ephraim in his ab-
je& lamentation, They have taken away my
gods, which I have made, and what have I
1norCe' ?-Such are the causes to which we
mufft ascribe the broken spirits, the peevish
temper, and impatient paflions, that ib often
attend the declining age, or falling fortunes
of vicious men,

But how different is the condition of a

truly good man in those trying situations
of life! Religion had gradually prepared
his mind for all the events of this incon-
fiant fate. It had inftrulled him in the

: J::gec, xdii, 24.

nature

SPERM. nature of true happiness. It had early

weaned him from the undue love of the
world, by discovering to him its vanity,
and by setting higher profpeds in his
view. Afflictions do not attack him by
surprise, and therefore do not overwhelm
him. I-e was equipped for the storm, as
well as the calm, in this dubious naviga-
tion of life. Under those conditions he
knew himself to be brought hither, that
he was not to retain always the enjoy-
ment of what he loved: And therefore he
is not overcome by disappointment, when
that which is mortal, dies; when that
which is mutable, begins to change; and
when that which he knew to be transient^
passes away.

All the principles which religion teaches,

and all the habits which it forms, are fa-
vourable to flrength of mind. It will be
found, that whatever purifies, fortifies
also the heart. In the course of living
riglteotji,, fobeiry, and godly, a good man
acquires a steady and well-governed fpi-
rit. Trained, by Divine grace, to enjoy

with

with moderation the advantages of the SERM
world, neither lifted up by success, nor -v
enervated with sensuality, he ieets the
changes in his lot without unmanly de-
jedtion. He is inured to temperance and
restraint. He has learned firmness and
felf-command. He is accustomed to
look up to that Supreme Providence,
which disposes of human affairs, not
with reverence only, but with trust and
hope.

The time of prosperity was to him not

merely a season of barren joy, but pro-
ductive of much useful improvement;
He had cultivated his mind. He had
flored it wvith useful knowledge; with
good principles, and virtuous difpofi-
tions. These resources remain entire,
when the days of trouble come. They
remain with him in sickness, as in
health in poverty, as in the midst of
riches; in his dark and solitary hours,
no less than when surrounded with
friends and gay society. From the glare
of prosperity, he can, without dejecion,

VOL. I. D withdraw

S ERM. withdraw into the shade. Excluded from,

If.
.Y-a- several advantages of the world, he may

be obliged to retreat into a narrower
circle; but within that circle he will find
many comforts left. His chief pleasures
were always of the calm, innocent, and
temperate kind;, and over these, the
changes of the world have the least power.
His mind is a kingdom to him; and he
can still enjoy it. The world did not
bellow upon him all his enjoyments; and
therefore it is not in the power of the
world, by its mofi cruel attacks, to carry
them all away.

II. THE distresses of life are alleviated

to good men, by reflections on their past
condut; while, by such reflections, they
are highly aggravated to the bad. During
the gay and active periods of life, finners
elude, in some measure, the force of con-
science. Carried round in the whirl of
affairs and pleasures; intent on contriv-
ance, or eager in pursuit; amused by hope,
or elated by enjoyment; they are sheltered,

7 by

by that crowd of trifles which surrounds SE R M.

IH

them, from serious thought. But con-
science is too great a power to remain
always suppressed. There is in every
man's life, a period when he shall be
made to stand forth as a real objed to
his own view: And when that period
comes, Wo to him who is galled by the
fight! In the dark and solitary hour of
distress, with a mind hurt and fore from
some recent wound of fortune, how shall
he bear to have his character for the first
time disclosed to him, in that humiliating
light under which guilt will necessarily
present it? Then, the recolleaion of the
palt becomes dreadful. It exhibits to him
a life thrown away on vanities and follies,
or consumed in flagitiousness and fin; no
flation properly supported; ino material
duties fulfilled. Crimes which once had
been easily palliated, rife before him in
their native deformity. The sense of guilt
mixes itself with all that has befallen him.
He beholds, or thinks that he beholds,
the hand of the God whom he hath of-

D 2 fended,

s E R M. feided, openly stretched out against him;
..-w-- -At a season when a man stands most in

need of iupport, how intolerable is the
weight of this additional load, aggravat-
ing the deprefion of disease, dilappoint-
ment, or old age! How miserable his
ilate, who is condemned to endure at once
the pangs of guilt, and the vexations of
calamity ! The ffirit of a man mnay fifaii
his ifirmiti'es; but a wounded flirit, who
ran bear ?

Whereas, he who is blefled with a clear

conscience, enjoys, in the worst conjunc-
tures of human life, a peace, a dignity,
an elevation of mind peculiar to virtue.
The testimony of a good conscience is
indeed to be always diftinguiflied from
that presumptuous boast of innocence,
which every good Christian totally dif-
claims. The better he is, he will be the
more humble, and fenlible of his failings.
But though he acknowledge that he can
claim nothing from God upon the foot-
ing of desert, yet he can trust in his mer-
ciful acceptance through Jesus Christ, ac-

cording

cording to the terms of the gospel, He SE R M.
can hope that his prayers and hir alms _
have come up in memorial before God. The
piety and virtue of his former life were
as feeds sown in his prosperous state, of
which he reaps the fruits in the season of
adversity. The riches, the pleasures, and
the friends of the world, may have made
wings to /hc.li'lvcs, and Jlown arcway. But
the improvement which he made of those
advantages while they lalted, the tempe-
rate spirit with which he enjoyed them,
the beneficent adions which he perform-
ed, and the good example which he set to
others, remain behind. By the memory
of there, he enjoys his prosperity a fe-'
cond time in reflection; and perhaps this
second and refleted enjoyment is not in-
leriour to the first. It arrives at a more
critical and needful time. It affords him
the high fatisfadion of having extraded
lasting pleasure from that which is short;
and of having fixed that wvlich by its
nature was changing.-" If my race be

now about to end, I have this com-

D 3 6 fort:

SE RM; A fort, that it has not been run in vain.
.-..TA " I have fought the good fght ; I have kept

" the faith. My mind has no load. Fu-
" turity has no terrours. I have endea-

voured to do my duty, and to make

" my peace with God. I leave the reft
" to Heaven." These are the reflcelions
which to the upright make light ar!ie in
darkness; reflections which cheer the
lonely house of virtuous poverty, and at-
tend the conscientious sufferer into prison
or exile; which sooth the complaints of
grief, lighten the pressure of old age, and
furnifli to the bed of sickness,. a cordial
of more grateful relifl, and more fove-
reign virtue, than any which the world
can afford.

Look abroad into life, and you will

find the general sense of mankind bearing
witness to this important truth, that mind
is fuperiour to fortune; that what one
feels within, is of much greater importance
than all that befals him without. Let a
man be brought into some such severe
and trying situation, as fixes the attention

of

of the public on his behaviour. The first SERM.
*question which we put concerning him,
is not, What does he susser ? but, How
.does he bear it? Has he a quiet mind ?
or, Does he appear to be unhappy within ?
If we judge him to be composed and
firm, resigned to Providence, and sup-
ported by conscious integrity, his charac-
ter rifes, and his misery lessens in our
view. We esteem and admire, rather than
pity him. Recblle-t what holy men have
endured for the fake of conscience, and
with what cheerfulness they have suffered,
On the other hand, when conscience has
concurred with outward misfortunes in dif-
tressing the guilty, think of the dreadful
consequences which have ensued. How
often, upon a reverse of fortune, after
abused prosperity, have they madly hur-
ried themselves over that precipice from
which there is no return; and, in what
nature most abhors, the-voluntary extinc-
tion of life, have fought relief from that
torment of reflecion, which was become
too great for them to bear

D 4 Never

v.E R M. Never then allow yourselves to imagine,
.---' that misfortunes alone form the chief

misery of man. None but the guilty are
completely miserable. The misgiving and
difiruft, the accusations and approaches of
their minds, the feknfe of having drawn
down upon their heads the evils which
they susser, and the terrifying expecation
of more and worse evils to come; there
are the eflential ingredients of human
misery. They not only whet the edge,
but they envenom the darts of affliaion,
and add poison to the wound. Whereas,
when misfortunes aflail a good man, they
carry no such fatal auxiliaries in their train,
They may ruffle the surface of his foul;
but there is a firength within, which resists
their farther impreflion. The constitution
of his mind is found. The world can
infliL upon it no wounds, but what admit
of cure.

III. ILL men, in the time of trouble,

can look up to no protecor; while good
mieg commit themselves, with trust and

hope,

hope, to the care of Heaven. The hu- S ERM.
man mind, naturally feeble, is made to ..
feel all its weakness by the pressure of
adversity. Dejeded with evils which
overpower its strength, it relies no longer
on itself. It casts every where around, a
wishing, exploring eye, for some shelter to
screen, some power to uphold it; and if,
when abandoned by the world, it can
find nothing. to which it may fly in the
room of the world, its Rate is truly for-
lorn. Now, whither should the ungodly,
in this situation, turn for aid ? After hav-
ing contended with the storms of adverse
fortune till their spirits are exhausted,
gladly would they retreat at last to the
fanduary of religion. But that fanauary
is shut agairft them; nay, it is environed
with terrours. They behold there, not a
Protetor to whom they can fly, but a
Judge whom they dread; and in those
moments when they need his friendship
the most, they are reduced to deprecate
his wrath. If he once called when they
r efffed, and Jhretched out his hands when

4 they

SE R M. they would not regard, how much reason

have they to fear that he will leave them
now to eat the fruit of their ozwn ways,
and to be filed wiith their own devices;
that he will laugh at their calamity, and
mock whjen their fear cometh ?

But of all the thoughts which can enter

into the mind, in the season of distress,
the belief of an interest in his favour
who rules the world is the most toothing.
Every form of religion has afforded to
virtuous men some degree of this confola-
tion. But it was reserved for the Christ-
ian revelation, to carry it to its highefl
point. For it is the direc f:ope of that
revelation, to accommodate itself to the
circumstances of man, under two main
views; as guilty in the fight of Gods
and as struggling with the evils of the
world. Under the former, it discovers
to him a Mediator and an atonement;
under the latter, it promises him the
Spirit of grace and ccnfolation. It is a
fyflem of complete relief, extending from
our spiritual to our temporal distresses.

The

The fame hand which holds out forgive- SERM.
ness to the penitent, and affiifance to the
frail, dispenses comfort and hope to the
affliced.

It deserves your particular notice, in

this view, that there is no character
which God more frequently assumes to
himself in the sacred writings, than that
of the Patron of the difireffed. Compaf-
sion is that attribute of his nature which
he has chosen to place in the greatest va-
riety of lights, on purpose that he might
accommodate his majesty to our weak-
ness, and provide a cordial for human
griefs. He is the hearer of all prayers;
but with particular attention he is repre-
sented as likfening to the cry of the poor,
and regarding the prayer of the detiitute.
All his creatures he governs with justice
and wisdom; but he takes to himself, in
a special manner, the charge of executing
judgment for the opprejed, of protecting the
Jranger, of delivering him who hath no
helperfrom the hand of thefpoiler. For the
cppreffon of the poor, antd for the sighing of

the

SER M. the need,, will I arie, faith the Lord, to
*_c-.j jet him in safety from him that puffeth at

him. He is the Father of thefatherlefs, and
the Judge of the widow, in his holy habi-
tation. He raifeth them up that are bowed
down. He dwelleth with the contrite. He
beakeh the broken in heart. For he know-
.tb; o.r frame ; be remembe;rcth that we
Zre i --If the wisdom of his provi-
dence i.v it necessary to place so many
of his creatures in an affided slate, that
state, h3o.v.ever, he commiserates. He
disdains not to point out himself as the
efiuge of the virtuous and pious; and to
invite them, amida2 all their troubles, to
pour out their hearts before him. Those
circumfances vwhich efirange others from
them, int-eref him the more in their fitua-
tion. The negled or scorn of the world
exposes them not to any contempt in his
fight. No obscurity conceals them from
his notice; and though they should be
forgotten by every friend on earth, they

Pfal.ix. 8.-ci. 7.-cxlvi. 7,-Ixviii. 5.-cxlvii. 3,
-ciii. 14. sc.

are

are remembered by the God of heaven. sEIR M.
That sigh, heaved from the affliced bo- . -
fom, which is heard by no human ear, is
listened to by him; and that tear is re-
marked, which falls unnoticed or despised
by the world.

Such views of the Supreme Being im-

part the most sensible consolation to every
pious heart. They present his admini-
nitration under an aspect so mild and be-
nign, as in a great measure to disperse
the gloom which hangs over human life.
A good man ads with a vigour, and sus-
sers with a patience more than human,
when he believes himself countenanced
by the Almighty. Injured or oppressed
by the world, he looks up to a Judge
who will vindicate his cause; he appeals
to a Witness who knows his integrity;
he commits himself to a Friend who will
never forsake him. When tired with the.
vexations of life, devotion opens to him
its quiet retreat, where the tumults of the
world are hushed, and its cares are loft in
happy oblivion; where the wicked cease

from

SE RM. friom troubling, and the weary are at refld

.-.-. ' There his mind regains its serenity; the

agitation of passion is calmed; and a
softening balm is infused into the wounds
of the spirit. Disclosing to an invisible
Friend those secret griefs which he has
no encouragement to make known to the
world, his heart is lightened. He does
not feel himfclf solitary or forsaken. HIe
believes God to be present with him, and
the I-oly Ghost to be the inspirer of his
consolations. From that secret place of
the divine tabernacle, into which the Text
represents him as admitted, he hears this
voice iflue, Call upon me in the day of
trouble, and] will anfiwer thee. Fear not;
for I anm with thee. Be not difinayed; for
I am thy God. And as he hears a voice
which speaks to none but the pure in
heart, so he beholds a hand which finners
cannot fee. He beholds the hand of
Providence conduaing all the hidden
Iprings and movements of the universe;
and with a secret, but unerring operation,
direting every event towards the happi-

ness

ness of the righteous. Those affliaions SER M.
which appear to others the messengers of .
the wrath of Heaven, appear to him the
ministers of sanCtification and wisdom.
Where they difeern nothing but the hor-
rours of the tenpeft which surrounds.
them, his more enlightened eye beholds
the angel who rides in the whirlwind,
and directs the storm. Hence a peace
keeping the mind and heart, which is no
where to be found but under thepavilion of
the Almighty.

IV. GooD men are comforted under

their troubles by the hope of Heaven;
while bad men are not only deprived of
this hope, but distressed with fears arising
from a future tate. The foul of man
can never divest itlelf wholly of anxiety
about its fate hereafter. There are hours
when even to the prosperous, in the midst
of their pleasures, eternity is an awful
thought. But much more when those
pleasures, one after another, begin to
withdraw ; when life alters its forms, and

becomes

S E R M. becomes dark and cheerless; when its
h^- changes warn the most inconsiderate, that

what is so mutable will soon pass entirely
away; then with pungent earnestness
comes home that question to the heart,
Into what world are we next to go ?-
How miserable the man, who, under the
diftradions of calamity, hangs doubtful
about an event which so nearly concerns
him; VWho, in the midit of doubts and
anxieties, approaching to that awful
boundary which separates this world from
the next, shudders at the dark profpe&
before him; wishing to exist after death,
and yet afraid of that existence; catching
at every feeble hope which superstition
can afford him, and trembling, in the
fame moment, from reflection upon his
crimes !

But blessed be God who hath brought

life and immortality to light; who hath not
only brought them to light, but secured
them to good men; and by the death and
refurreQtion of Jesus Christ, hath begotten
them unto the lively hope of an inheritance

incorruptible,

incorruptible, undleflcd, and that fadeth not S E R M.
away. Justly is this hope flyled in scrip-
ture, the anchor of the foul, both Jfire and
jledfaft. For what an anchor is to a ship
in a dark night, on an unknown coast,
and amidit a boisterous ocean, that is
this hope to the foul when distracted by
the confusions of the world. In danger,
it gives security; amidst general flutua-
tion, it affords one fixed point of reft. It
is indeed the most eminent of all the ad-
vantages which religion now confers. For,
confider the mighty power of hope over
the human mind. It is the universal com-
forter. It is the spring of all human ac-
tivity. Upon futurity, men are constantly
suspended. Animated by the profpefl of
some distant good, they toil and susser
through the whole course of life; and it is
not so much what they are at present, as
what they hope to be in tome after-time,
that enlivens their motions, fixes attention,
and stimulates indufiry. Now, if, in the
common affairs of life, such is the energy
of hope, even when its objeLc is neither

VOL. I. l very

E R TM. very considerable, nor very ccrtain; what

effects may it not be expeted to produce,
when it rcfis upon an objec tio splendid as
a life of immortal felicity ? Were this hope
entertained with that full persuasion which
Chriflian faith demands, it would, in truth,
not merely alleviate, but totally annihilate,
all huuman mifries. It would banilh dif-
contcnt, extinguiilh grief, and filleid the-
very feeling of pain.

But allowing for the mixture of human

frailty; admitting those abatements which
our imperfeQion makes upon the effet of
every religious principle, still you will find,.
that, in proportion to the degree in which
the hope of I-eaven operates upon good
men, they will lbe tranquil under susser-
ings; nay, they will be happy, in com-
parison of those who enjoy no such relief.
'What indeed, in the course of human
affairs, is sufficient to difrefs, far less to
overwhelm, the mind of that man who
can look down on all human things fiom
an elevation to much above them ? He is
only a passenger through this world. He

is travelling to a happier country. How S iiERi
disagreeable soever the occurrences of his >,-
journey may be, yet at every stage of that
journey, he receives the afiurance that he
is drawing nearer and nearer to the period of
reft and felicity.-Endure, and thou fialt
overcome. Persevere, and thou fihalt be
successful. The time of trial haflens to a
close. Thy mansion is prepared above;
thy reft remaineth among the people of
God. The disorders which vice has intro-
duced into the works of God, are about to
terminate; and all tears are soon to be
wiped away from the eyes of the jul..-
The firm assurance of this happy conclusion
to the vexations and the vanities of life,
works a greater effeCt on the sincere illi-
terate Christian, than all the refinements of
philosophy can work on the motr learned
Infidel. These may gratify the mind that
is at ease; may tooth the heart when flight-
ly discomposed; but when it is fore and
deeply torn, when bereaved of its best
and most beloved comforts, the only con-
folations that can then find access, arise

E 2 fromi

SE R M. from the hope of a better world; where

' those comforts shall be again restored; and

all the virtuous shall be assembled, in the
presence of him who made them. Such
hopes banish that despair which over-
whelms, and leave only that tender melan-
choly which softens the heart, and often
renders the whole character more gentle
and amiable.

OF this nature are the resources which

religion provides for good men. By its
previous discipline, it trains them to for-
titude; by the refletions of a good con-
science it sooths, by the sense of Divine
favour it supports them; and when every
comfort fails them on earth, it cheers
them with the hope of heaven. Diftin-
guifhing his servants with such advantages,
God is jufily said to ered his pavilion over
them in the evil time. He not onlyfpreads
a tent for them in the wilderness, but he
transforms in some measure the state of
nature around them. To use the beautiful
language of ancient prophecy ; In the de-

:: fart

fart, the thifiy land, where no water is, SERM.
he oPenrth fprimgs. Intlead of the thorn, a -
be mlaketh thefr-tree to come lip; iljead of
the briar, the myrtle to spring. In midji of
the habitation of dragons, he maketh green
pjiZIres -ife, andl fill watcrs flow around
his people,

THE improvement to be made of these

truths is as obvious as it is important.
Let us study so to conduc our lives, that
we may be qualified for deriving such con-
folations from religion. To their reality,
and tl- : importance, all mankind bear
witnei'. For no sooner are they overtaken
by distress, than to religion they fly.
This, throughout every age, has been the
universal shelter which the young and the
old, the high and the low, the giddy and
the serious, have fought to gain, as soon
as they found that reft could be no where
else procured for the weary head, or the
aching heart. But amidst those multitudes
that crowd to religion for relief, how few
,ire entitled to approach that sacred source

]E3 iof

S E I' M. of comfort ? On what feeble props do their

.o-.. hopes and pretensions reft ? How much

superstition mingles with that religion to
which men are driven by diitrefs and fear?
-You must iirft apply to it as the guide of
life, before you can have recourse to it as
the refuge of sorrow. You mufft fbmit
to its legislative authority, and experience
its renewing influence, before you can look
for its consolatory crfeCt. You muff secure
the testimony of a good conscience, and
peace with God through Jesus Christ;
otherwie, , wen the Jflods Jfall come, and
the raiins dejfcnd, aid the wild s blow, the
house which you had proposed for your
retreat, snall prove the hoiif founded on the
fend, not on th e rock.

There are two plans, and there are but

two, on which any man can propose to
conduct himself through the dangers and
diftrefies of human life. The one is the
plan of worldly wisdom ; the other, that
cf determined adherence to conscience.
Hie who aEts upon the former, lays prin-
ciple aside, and trusts his defence to his art

9* and

and ability. He avails himself of every SERM.
advantage which his knowledge ofthe world
suggests ? He attends to nothing but what
he confiders as his interest; and, uncon-
lined by conscience, pursues it by every
course which promises him success. This
plan, though too often adopted, will be
found, on trial, ineffechual and deceitful
For human ability is an unequal match for
the violent and unforeseen vicisitudes of the
world. When these torrents rife in their
might, they sweep away in a moment the
banks which worldly wisdom had reared
for defence, and overwhelm alike the crafty
and the artless. In the mean time, per-
sons of this character condemn themielves
to live a most unquiet life. They pass their
days in perpetual anxiety, listening to every
mlotion; startled by every alarm ; changing
:teir measures on every new occurrence.;
and when distress breaks in over all their
defences, they are left under it, hopeiefs
,and disconsolate.

The plan which, in opposition to this,
,.e!igion recommends, as both more honour-

E 4 able

ER M able in itself, and more effectual for fecu-
.-.v-- rity, is, at all hazards, to do your duty, and

to leave the confequcnces to God. Let
him who would act upon this plan, adopt
for the rule of his condut that maxim of
the Psalmist's, TrY2l in the Lord, and do
good'. To firm integrity, let him join a
humble reliance on God. Let his adherence
to duty encourage his religious truti. Let
his religious trust inipire him with forti-
tude in the performance of his duty. Let
him know no path but the straight and
lire& one. In the most critical moments
of action, let him ask no further queltions,
than, What is the right, the fit, the worthy
part? How as a man, and as a Christian,
it becomes him to aa ? Having received the
decision of conscience, let him commit his
way unto the Lord. Let him, without
trepidation or wavering, proceed in dif-
charging his duty; resolved, that though
the world may make him unfortunate, it
Ihall never make him base; and confiding,
that in what God and his conscience re-

Psalm ,xxxvii. 3.

quire

quire him to adE or susser, God and a good s ERM.
conscience will support him.- Such prin --
ciples as these, are the best preparation for
the viciflitudes of the human lot. They
are the shield of inward peace. He who
thinks and ads thus, fihall be exposed to
no wounds but what religion can cure.
He may feel the blows of adversity; but
he shall not know the wounds of the
heart,

# SERMON III. On the Influence of RELIGION upon PROSPERITY. PSALM i. 3. He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not ...

S E R M 0 N III.
On the Influence of RELIGION upon

PROSPERITY.

PSALM i. 3.

He F.Ia'i be like a tree piei
tled Il9 the rivers

oJ wa/er, that bri.gcth forth his fiuit in
his fenfo i; bis lea7' oso Jall ,not wither,.
7ild ia btioeveri he doth J7J7ll projper.

SERM. TmHE happy influence of religion
t_-y 11 upon human life, in the time of

adversity, has been confidered in the pre-
ceding dcifourfe. Concerning this the fen"
timents of men are more generally agreed,
than with refpet to some other preroga-
tives which religion claims, They very
readily assign to it the office of a Comforter.
But as long as their state is prosperous,
they are apt to account it an tunneceffary

guepiR

guest, perhaps an unwelcome intruder. SEI RM.
Let us not be thus unjust to religion, nor -,
confine its importance to one period only
in the life of man. It was never intended
to be merely the nurse of sickness, and the
staff of old age. I purpose now to show
you, That it is no less essential to the en-
joyment of prosperity, than to the comfort
of adversity: That prosperity is prosperous,
if we may be allowed the expression, to a
good man only; and that to every other
person, it will prove, notwithstanding its fair
appearance, a barren and joyless state.

The Psalmist, in the Text, by an image

taken from one of the most beautiful ob-
jeds in nature, describes a man who flou-
rifles in full prosperity. But to whom is
the description limited ? To him, as the
preceding verses inform us, that walketb
not in the council of the ungodly, nor Jland-
eth in the way of fimnnrs, nor fitteth in the
feat of the fcornfil, but hath his delight in
the law of God. He only is like the tree
planted by the rivers of water; whilst the
ungodly, as he adds, are not so; but how

prosperous

SE RM. prosperous soever they may appear to the

world, are in truth but like the chaf which
the weiind Adriveth awa. In confirmation
of this doctrine, I lhall lay before you
some of those circumflances which diftin-
guifh the prosperity of the good man be-
yond that of the iinner; and shall conclude,
with pointing out the dangers and miseries
into which the latter is apt to be betrayed,
by his favourable situation in the world.

I. PITETY, and gratitude to God, con-

tribute in a high degree to enliven pro-
iperity. Gratitude is a pleasing emotion.
The sense of being diflinguifiled by the
kindncfs of another, gladdens the heart,
warms it with reciprocal affeaion, and
gives to any pofefiion, which is agreeable
in itself, a double relish, from its being
the gift of a friend. Favours conferred
by men, I acknowledge, may prove bur-
denfome. For human virtue is never per-
sect; and sometimes unreasonable expeda-
tions on the one fide, sometimes a morti-
fying sense of dependence on the otler,

corrode

corrode in secret the pleasure of benefits, SER M.
and convert the obligations of friendship o_
into grounds of jealousy. But nothing of
this kind can affe& the intercourse of gra-
titude with heaven. Its favours are wholly
disinterested; and with a gratitude the
most cordial and unfufpicious, a good man
looks up to that Almighty Benefacaor, who
aims at no end but the happiness of those
whom he blesses, and who desires no re-
turn from them but a devout and thankful
heart. While others can trace their pro-
fperity to no higher source than a concur-
rence of worldly causes, and, often, of
mean or trifling incidents, which occasion-
ally favoured their designs; with what
fuperiour fatisfaaion does the servant of
God remark the hand of that gracious
Power which hath raised him up; which
hath happily conduced him through the
various steps of life, and crowned him with
the must favourable diftination beyond his
equals ?

Let us farther confider, that not only
gratitude for the past, but a cheering sense

of

S E M. of God's favour at the present, enter into
s\^d tthe pious emotion. They are only the

virtuous, who in their prosperous days
hear this voice addressed to them, Go thy
way, cat thy bread with joy, and drink thy
3wile wcith a m7erry heart; for God now
acceptcth tiJ wo? rks '. He who is the
Author of their prosperity, gives them a
title to enjoy, with complacency, his own
gift. While bad men fiatch the pleasures
of the world as by fcealth, without counte-
nance from God the proprietor of the
world; the righteous fit openly down to
the feast of life, under the finile of ap-
proving Heaven. No guilty fears damp
their joys. The blefling of God refts upon
all that they poflefs ; his protecion fur-
rounds them; and hence, in the habita-
tions of the irighteos, is found the voice of
sejoicing and ftlvatioi. A luflre unknown
to others, invests, in their fight, the whole
face of nature. Their piety reflets a fun-
shine from heaven upon the prosperity of
the world; unites in one point of view,

* Eccles. ix. 7.

the

the smiling aspea, both of the powers S ERIM.
above, and of the objcts below. Not
only have they as full a relih. as others, of
the innocent pleasures of life, but, more-
over, in these they hold communion withl
God. In all that is good or fair, they trace
his hand. From the beauties of nature,
firom the improvements of art, from the
enjoyments of social life, they raise their
affection to the source of all the happiness
which surrounds them; and thus widen
the sphere of their pleasures, by adding in-
telleaual, and spiritual, to earthly joys.

For illustration of what I have said on

this head, remark that cheerful enjoyment
of a prosperous rfate which King David
had, when he wrote the twenty-th;rd
Psalm ; and compare the highest pleasures
of the riotous finner, with the happy and
satisfied spirit which breathes throughout
that Pfalm.-In the midst of the splendour
of royalty, with what amiable simplicity
of gratitude does he look up to the Lord as
his Shepjherd; happier in ascribing all his
fccefs to divine favour, than to the policy

of

SER M. of his councils, or to the force of hls
t-v- aarms? How many instances of divine

goodness arose before him in pleasing re-
membrance, when with such relish he
speaks of the green pqJt/res andJ ill waters
betide which God had led him; of his cup
which he hath made to overfow; and of
the table which he hath prepared for him
in presence of his enemies ! With what per-
sec tranquillity does he look forward to
the time of his pafling through the valley
of the Jhadow of death; unappalled by
that SpeEre, whose most diflant appear-
ance blasts the prosperity of finners! He
fears no evil, as long as the rod and the
./ass of his Divine Shepherd are with him ;
and, through all the unknown periods of
this and of future existence, commits
himself to his guidance with secure and
triumphant hope. Surely goodness and
mercy Jfall follow me all the dlays of my
life; and I will dwell in the hofge of the
Lord for ever.-What a purified, senti-
mental enjoyment of prosperity is here
exhibited! How different from that groft

relish

relish of worldly pleasures, which belongs S E R M.

IFI.

to those who behold only the terreitrial -
fide of things; who raise their views to
no higher objects than the succession of
human contingencies, and the weak efforts
of human ability; who have no protecor
or patron in the heavens, to enliven their
prosperity, or to warm their hearts with
gratitude and trust!

II. RELIGION affords to good men pe-

culiar security in the enjoyment of their
prosperity. One of the firit reflections
which muff firike every thinking man, as-
ter his situation in the world has become
agreeable, is, That the continuance of such
a situation is most uncertain. From a va-
riety of causes, he lies open to change. On
many fides he fees that he may be pierced;
and the wider his comforts extend, the
broader is the mark which he ipreads to
the arrows of misfortune. Hence many a
secret alarm to the reflecting mind; and to
those who reject all such alarms, the real
danger increases, in proportion to their im-
provident security.

VOL. I. F By

S R rM. By worlily afiftance it is vain to think

Ill.
L-ci of providing any effectual defence, feeing

the world's mutability is the very cause o-
our terrour. It is from a higher principle,
orom a power' fperiour to the world, that
relief must be fought, amiult such. difquie-
tudes of the heart. Ie who in his pro-
iperity can look up to One who is witness.
to his moderation, humanity, and charity;
he who can appeal to Heaven, that he haG-
not been: elated by pride, nor overcome
by pleaflre, but has iudied to employ its
oifts to the honour of the Giver; this
man, if there be any truth in religion, if
fthere be any benignity or goodness in the
adminifiration of the universe, has jufi
eaufe for encour:agement and hope. Not
that an interef in the Divine grace will
perpetuate to a good man, more than to-
others, a life of unruffled prosperity,
Change and alteration form the very es-
fence of the world. But let the world
change around him at pleasure, he has
ground to hope that it liall not be able to
make him :nh?.ppy. Whatever may vary,

God's

God's providence is still the fame; and his s E R M.
love to the righteous remains unaltered.
If it shall be the Divine will to remove one
comfort, he trusts that some other shall be
given. Whatever is given, whatever is
taken away, he confides, that in the last
result all fJall workfor his good.

Hence he is not disturbed, like bad

men, by the instability of the world.
Dangers, which overcome others, shake
not his more steady mind. He enjoys the
pleasures of life pure and unallayed, be-
cause he enjoys them, as long as they last,
without anxious terrours. They are not
his all, his only good. He welcomes
them when they arrive; and when they
pass away, he can eye them, as they de-
part, without agony or despair. His pro-
fperity strikes a deeper and firmer root
than that of the ungodly. And for this
reason he is compared, in the Text, to a
tree planted by the rivers of water; a tree,
whose branches the tempest may indeed
bend, but whose roots it cannot touch;
a tree, which may occasionally be stripped

F 2 of

SE R M. of its leaves and bloifoms, but which ftiI
t-y_ maintains its place, and in due season flou-

rifhes anew. Whereas the finner in his
prosperity, according to the allusion in the
book of Job, resembles the rzah that grow-
eth up in the mire A; a slender reed, that
may flourish green for a while by the fide
of the brook, as long as it is cherished by
the fun, and fanned by the breeze; till the
fiirf bitter blast breaks its feeble ftem,
roots it out from its bed, and lays it in the
dust. Lo! such is the prosperity of them
that fbrget God; and thus their hope shall
peri J.

III. RELIGION forms good men to the

most proper temper for the enjoyment of
prosperity. A little reflection may satisfy
us, that mere pofleffion, even granting it
to be secure, does not constitute enjoyment.
Give a man all that is in the power of the
world to bestow; surround him with riches;
crown him with honours; invest him, if
you will, with absolute dominion; but

Job, viii. II.
7 leave

leave him at the fame time under some fe- S E R M.
cret oppression or heaviness of heart; you o-_
bestow indeed the materials of enjoyment,
but you deprive him of ability to extrac
it. You set a feast before him, but he wants
the power of tafting it. Hence prosperity
is so often an equivocal word, denoting
merely affluence of possession, but unjustly
applied to the miserable possessor.

We all know the effets which any in-

difiofition of the body, even though flight,
produces on external prosperity. Visit the
gayest and most fortunate man on earth,
only with sleepless nights; disorder any
single organ of the senses; corrode but one
of his finalleft nerves; and you lhall pre-
fently fee all his gaiety vanilh; and you
flall hear him complain, that he is a mi-
ferable creature, and express his envy of
the peasant and the cottager.-And can
you believe, that a disease in the foul is
less fatal to enjoyment than a disease in
the animal frame; or that a found mind-
is not as essential as a found body, to the
prosperity of man ?-Let us rate sensual

F 3 gratifications

S E R M. gratifications as high as we please, we shall

be made to feel that the feat of enjoyment
is in the foul. The corrupted temper, and
the guilty passions of the bad, frustrate the
effec of every advantage which the world
confers on them. The world may call
them men ofpleafure; but of all men they
are the greatest foes to pleasure. From
their eagerness to grasp, they strangle and
destroy it. None but the temperate, the
regular, and the virtuous, know how to
enjoy prosperity. They bring to its corm
forts the manly relish of a found uncorrupt-
ed mind. They flop at the proper point,
before enjoyment degenerates into disgust,
and pleasure is converted into pain. They
are firangers to those complaints which flow
from spleen, caprice, and all the fantafiical
distresses of a vitiated mind. While riot-
ous indulgence enervates both the body
and the mind, purity and virtue heighten
all the powers of human fruition, Mode-
rate and simple pleasures relish high with
the temperate; in the midst of his studied
refinements, the voluptuary languishes.

Wherever

Wherever guilt mingles with prosperity, s E R M.

a certain gloom and heaviness enter along .
with it. Vicious intrigues never fail to
entangle and embarrass those who engage
in them. But innocenceonfers ease and
freedom on the mind; leaves it open to
-every pleasing sensation ; gives a lightness
to the spirits, similar to the native gaiety of
youth and health; ill imitated, and ill sup-
plied, by that forced levity of the vicious,
vwhich atries not from the health, but from
the drunkenness of the mind.

Feeble are all pleasures in which the

*heart has no part. The felfifl gratifica-
*tions of the bad, are both narrow in their
.circle, and fhlo't in their duration. But
prosperity is redoubled to a good man, by
his generous use of it. It is refleted back
upon him from every one whom he makes
happy. Ill the intercourse of domeflick
affection, in the attachment of friends,
the gratitude of dependants, the efteeem
and good-will of all who know him, he
*fees bleflings multiplied round him, on
,,ver',' ide. W/hAen the ear becad me, then

F 4, it

S E R M. it bleed me; and when the eye efw ime, it

gave witieJ' to me : Bccai I delivered the
poor that cried, the fatherlces, and him that
had none to help him. The blefing of hini
that was ready to periJh came upon sime, and
I caifed the widow's heart to sing with joy.
I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to
the lame: I was a father to the poor; and
the caufc which I knew iot, Ifearched out !'
-Thus, while the righteous jlonrijteth like
a tree planted by the rivers of water, he
bringeth forth also his fruit in his eafon :
And that fruit, to pursue the allusion of
the Text, he brings forth, not for himifelf
alone. He flourishes, not like a tree in
some solitary defart, which scatters its blof-
ibms to the wind, and communicates nei-
ther fruit nor shade to any living thing;
but like a tree in the midst of an inhabited
country, which to some affords friendly
shelter, to others, fruit; which is not only
ada ired by all for its beauty, but blessed
by the traveller for the shade, and by the
hungry for the fuflenance it hath given.

: Job, xxix. 1 -17.

IV. R-E

IV. RELIGION heightens the profpe- SE RM.

rity of good men, by the profped which
it affords them of greater happiness to
come in another world. I showed, in the
foregoing discourse, the mighty effect of
the hope of Heaven, in relieving the mind
under the troubles of life. And sure, if
this hope be able to support the falling, it
cannot but improve the flourilhing state
of man; if it can dispel the thickest gloom
of adversity, it must needs enliven profpe-
rity, by the additional lustre which it
throws upon it. What is present, is never
sufficient to give us full fatisfadion. To
the present we must always join some
agreeable anticipations of futurity, in or-
der to complete our pleasure. What an
accession then must the prosperity of the
righteous man receive, when, borne with a
smooth and gentle gale along the current
of life, and looking round on all the
blessings of his Rfate, he can confider there
as no more than an introduction to bigher
scenes which are hereafter to open; he
can view his present life, as only the

porch

s ER M. porch through which he is to pass into the
-.-i . palace of bliss; and his present joys, as

but a feeble stream, dispensed for his occa-
fional refreshment, until he arrive at that
river of life, which flows at God's right
hand!-Such profpefts purify the mind,
at the fame time that they gladden it.
They prevent the good man from setting
too high a value on his present poflelfions;
and thereby aflift him in maintaining,
amidst the temptations of worldly pleasure,
that command of himself which is so effen-.
tial to the wife and temperate enjoyment of
prosperity.

It is the fate of all human pleasures, by

continuance, to fade; of most of them,
ro cloy. Hence, in the most prosperous
fiate, there are frequent intervals of lan-
guor, and even of dejedion. There are
vacuities in the happiest life, which it is
not in the power of the world to fill up.
'What relief so adapted to those vacant or
dejeted periods, as the pleating hopes
which arise from immortality ? How bar-
ren and imperfect that prosperity, which

can
4

can have recourse to no such subsidiary SE1RM.
comfort, in order to animate the flagnation HY
of vulgar life, and to supply the infuffici-
ency of worldly pleasures!

Worldly prosperity declines with de-

clining life. In youth its relish was
brisk and poignant. It becomes more
fober as life advances; and flattens as
life descends. He who lately overflowed
with cheerful spirits and high hopes, be-
gins to look back with heaviness on the
days of former years. He thinks of his
old companions who are gone; and re-
views past scenes, more agreeable than any
which are likely to return. The acivity
of pursuit is weakened. The gaiety of
amusement is fled. The gratifications
of sense languish. When his accustomed
pleasures, one after another, thus fleal
treacherously away, what can he, who is
an utter stranger to religion, and to the
hope of Heaven, substitute in their place
-But even in that drooping period, the
promises and hopes of religion support
*he spirits of a good man till the latest

- hour,

S E R M. hour. His leaf, it is siid in the Text,jflnll

s-r- ot wither. It fllall not be in the power
of time to blast his prosperity: But old age
shall receive him into a quiet retreat, where,
if lively sensations fail, gentle pleasures
remain to sooth him. That hope of im-
mortality, which formerly improved his
other enjoyments, now in a great measure
supplies their absence. Its importance rites,
in proportion as its obje& draws near. He
is not forsaken by the world, but retires
fiom it with dignity; reviewing with a
calm mind the part which lie has aded,
and trusting to the promise of God for an
approaching reward. Such sentiments and
expecations shed a pleating tranquillity
over the old age of the righteous man.
They make the evening of his days go
down unclouded; and allow the stream of
life, though fallen low, to run clear to the
last drop.

THUS I have flown, I hope, with full

evidence, what material ingredients reli-
gion and a good conscience are in the pro-

fperity

fperity of life. Separated from them, pro- s E R M.
fperity, how fair soever it may seem to the _
world, is insipid, nay frequently noxious
to the possessor: United with them, it rifes
into a real blefling bestowed by God upon
man. God giveth to a man that is good in
his fight, wifdorm, and knowledge, and joy ;
but to the fnnler he giveth fore travail, to
gather, and to heap p, that he may give to
hin that is good before God'.

ALLOW me now to conclude the sub-

jea, with representing to the prosperous
men of the world, those crimes and mise-
ries into which the abuse of their condition
is likely to betray them, and calling upon
them to beware of the dangers with which
they are threatened.

It is unfortunate for mankind, that

those situations which favour pleasure, are
too generally adverse to virtue. Virtue re-
quires internal government and discipline;
prosperity relaxes the mind, and inflames
the paflions. Virtue is supported by a

* Eccles, ii. 26.

regard

SERM. regard to what is future; prosperity at-

Il.
i.-.. taches us wholly to what is present. The

charaderiflicks of virtue, are modefly and
humility; the most common attendants of
prosperity, are pride and presumption.
One Should think, that prosperity would
prove the strongest incitement to remember
and to honour that God who beflows it.
Yet such is the perverseness of human na-
ture, that it proves much oftener the mo-
tive to impiety, The changes of the
world call the attention of men to an Invi-
fible Power. But a train of events pro-
ceeding according to their wifhl, leads
them to nothing beyond what they fee.
The Supreme Giver is concealed from view
by his own gifts. This instance of success
they ascribe to a fortunate concurrence of
worldly causes; that acquisition, to their
own skill and industry; unmindful of
Him, who from the beginning arranged
that series of causes, and who placed them
in circumstances where their industry could
operate with success. From forgetting God,
they too often proceed to despise him.

All

All that is light or giddy in their minds S E RM.
is set in motion by the gale of prosperity,
Arrogance and felf-fufficiency are lifted
up; and their fiate is confidered, as fe-
cured by their own firength. Hence that
pride of countenance, through which the
wicked, in their prosperity, as David ob-
serves, refife to seek after God. They are
described as speaking loftily, and setting
their mouth agaiiJl the Heavens. 'they
take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at
the found of the organ; and they fay unto
God, Depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. lTWhat is the Al-
mighty that we JhoulZd erve him ? Or,
what profit Jhould we have, f we pray
unto him ?

They fay unto God, Depart from us.-

What an impious voice! Could we have
believed it possible, that worldly plea-
fures should so far intoxicate any human
heart? Wretched and infatuated men!
Have you ever examined on what your
confidence refts ?-You have said in your
hearts, lou rhall never be moved; you

fancy

S ER M. fancy yourselves placed on a m7itomta;l

Il.

whichJilandth Jtrong. Awake from thoie
flattering dreams, and behold how every
thing totters around you! You fland on
the edge of a precipice; and the ground
is sliding away below your feet. In your
health, life, possessions, connecions, plea-
fures, principles of deftruaion work. The
mine advances in secret, which saps the
foundations, while you revel on the fiir-
face. No mighty effort, no long prepara-
tion of events, is needed to overturn your
prosperity. By flow degrees it rose. Long
time, much labour, and the concurrence
of many assisting causes, were necessary
to rear it up; but one flight incident can
entirely overthrow it. Sutpicions are in-
fused into the patron or the prince on
whom you depend; and your disgrace
ensues. Exercise, or amusement, kindles
a fever in the veins of those whom you
loved; and you are robbed of your com-
forts and hopes. A few grains of sand
lodge themselves within you; and the
reft of your life is disease and misery.

Ten

Ten thousand contingencies ever float on SE RM.
the current of. life, the finalleft of which, _
if it meet your frail bark in the pafling, is
fuficient to dash it in pieces.-Is this a
place, is this a time, to swell with fancied
security, to riot in unlawful pleasure, and,
by your disregard of moral and religious
duties, to brave the government of the
Almighty ? He hath stamped every pof-
session of man with this inscription, Re-
joice with trembling. Throughout every
age, he hath pointed his peculiar difplea-
sure against the confidence of presumption,
and the arrogance of prosperity. He hath
pronounced, that whosoever exalteth him-
felfjhall be abased. And shall neither the
admonitions which you receive from the
visible inconstancy of the world, nor the
declarations of the Divine displeasure, be
sufficient to check your thoughtless ca-
reer? Know that, by your impiety, you
multiply the dangers which already threat-
en you on every fide; you accelerate the
speed with which the changes of the world
advance to your deftrudion. The Al-

VOL. IL G mighty

s E R M. mighty touches with his rod that edifice of
-*-'" dduft, on which you fland, and boast of your

strength ; and, at that instant, it crumbles
to nothing.

As men, then, bethink yourselves of

human instability. As Christians, reve-
rence the awful government of God. In-
sure your prosperity, by consecrating it to
religion and virtue. Be humble in your
elevation; be moderate in your views; be
submissive to him who hath raised and dif-
tinguifhed you. Forget not, that on his
providence you are as dependent, and to
the obedience of his laws as much bound,
as the meanest of your fcllow-creatures.
Disgrace not your station, by that grofliefs
of fenfuiality, that levity of dissipation, or
that insolence of rank, which bespeak a lit-
tle mind. Let the affability of your beha-
viour Ihow that you remember the natural
equality of men. Let your moderation in
pleasure, your command of passion, and
your steady regard to the great duties of
life, flow that you possess a mind worthy
of your fortune. Eftablifl your characer

on

on the basis of esteem; not on the flattery s E I M.
of dependents, or the praise of sycophants, A-
but on the refped of the wife and the
good. Let innocence preside over your
enjoyments. Let usefulness and benefi-
cence, not ostentation and vanity, direct
the train of your pursuits. Let yoiu alms,
together wiith yor prayers, come up in me-
moridal before God. So flhall your profpe-
rity, under the blessing of Heaven, be
as the fJhininiig light, which J.ineth more and
lore unto the perfE't a. So fihall it refem-
blc those celestial fires which glow above,
with beneficent, with regular and perma-
nent lustre; and not prove that nirth of
oiols, which by Solomon is compared to the
ciackligs of thorns under a pot, a glittering
and fervent blaze, but speedily extin&.

On the whole, let this be our conclusion,

that both in prosperity and in adversity,
religion is the safest guide of human life.
Conducted by its light, we reap the plea-.
fures, and at the fame time escape the dan-
gers, ofa profpercus f ate. Sheltered under
its protedion, we frand the fiock of adver-

C 2 it

SE R M. fity with mors intrepidity, and susser least

from the violence of the storm. He that
defireth ife, and loveth many days that he
7ay fee good, let him keep his tongue from
evil, and his lips from guile. Let him depart
from evil, and do good. Let him fceek peace
with God, and pufize it. Then, in his ad-
verfity, God Jhall hide him in his pavilion.
In his prosperity, he /hllJlozri/J like a tree
planted by the rivers u's water. The un-
godly are not /b; but are like the chaff, light
and vile, iwhich the wind driveth away.

# SERMON IV. On our Imperfect KNOWLEDGE of a FUTURE STATE. I COR. xiii. 12. For now we see through a glass, darkly. 

[ 8g ]

SERMON IV.
On our Imperfea KNOWLEDGE of a

FUTURE STATE,

I COR. xiii. 12.
For noiw we fe throiugh a glaf, darklj.-

H E Apostle here describes the im- S E R M.
T IV.

perfeEtion of our knowledge with

relation to spiritual and eternal objets.
He employs two metaphors to represent
more strongly the disadvantages under
which we lie: One, that we fee those ob-
jeCis throlugh a glass, that is, through the
intervention of a medium which obscures
their glory; the other, that we fee them
in a riddle or enigma, which our tranfla-
tors have rendered by feeing them darkly;
that is, the truth in part discovered, in

G 3 part

S E R M. part concealed, and placed beyond our comr

IV.
Lt _^ , prehension.

This description, however juit and true,

cannot fail to occasion fcme perplexity
to an enquiring mind. For it may seem
firangt,, that so niuci a.rknlefs ihould be
left upon those celeflial ol)jeas, towards
which we are at the fame time commanded
to aspire. We are strangers in the uni-
verse of God. Confined to that spot on
which we dwell, we arc permitted to
know ncthing of what is tranilE ting in
the resions above us and around us. By
much labour, we acquire a superficial
acquaintance with a few fc-niible objets
which we find in our prcbfet habitation;
but we enter, and we depart, under a
total ignorance of the nature and laws of
the spiritual worid. One fuilject in par-
ticular, 'when our thoughts proceed in this
train, must often recur ul;on the mind
with peculiar anxiety ; that is, the im-
mortality of the foul, and the future state
of man. Exposed as we are at present to
such variety of afflitions, and fubje, ed

to

to io much disappointment in all our pur- S ERM
Ihits of happiness, Why, it may be said, ,-
has our gracious Creator denied us the
confilation of a full discovery of our fu-
ture existence, if indeed such an existence
be prepared for us?-Reafon, it is true,
ilggefts many arguments in behalf of
immortality: Revelation gives full affu-
rance of it. Yet even that Gospel, which
is said to have brought lif, and immortality
to light, allows us to fee only through a
glfis, darkly. It dth not yet appear what
we shall be. Our knowledge of a future
world is very imperfct; our ideas of it
are faint and confuted. It is not displayed
in such a manner, as to make an impref-
sion frited to the importance of the objec,
The faith even of the best men is much
inferior, both in clearness and in force,
to the evidence of sense; and proves on
many occasions insufficient to counterba-
lance the temptations of the present world.
Happy moments indeed there Sometimes
are in the lives of pious men, when, fe-
questered from worldly cares, and borne up

G 4 on

S E R M. on the wings of divine contemplation, they

I_ rife to a near and transporting view of

immortal glory. But such efforts of the
mind are rare, and cannot be long sup-
ported. When the spirit of meditation
subsides, this lively sense of a future state
decays; and though the general belief of
it remain, yet even good men, when they
return to the ordinary business and cares of
life, seem to rejoin the multitude, and to
re-affume the fame hopes, and fears, and
interests, which influence the reft of the
world.

From such reflections, a considerable

difficulty refpeting this important fib-
ject, either arises, or seems to aiife, Was
such an obscure and imperfec discovery of
another life worthy to proceed from God ?
Does it not afford some ground, either to
tax his goodness, or to fufpeEt the evi-
dence of its coming fiom him ?-This is
the point which we are now to confider;
and let us confider it with that close atten-
tion which the fubjedt merits. Let us en-
quire, whether we have any reason, ei-

ther

ther to complain of Providence, or to ob- S E R M.
jet to the evidence of a future state, be- \_
cause that evidence is not of a more fenfi-
ble and striking nature. Let us attempt
humbly to trace the reasons, why, though
permitted to know and to fee somewhat of
the eternal world, we are nevertheless per-
mitted only to know in part, and to fee
through a glass, darkly.

IT plainly appears to be the plan of the

Deity, in all his dispensations, to mix
light with darkness, evidence with uncer-
tainty. Whatever the reasons of this pro-
cedure be, the fa& is undeniable. He is
described in the Old Testament as a God
that hideth hinfelf. Clouds and darkness
are said tofinrround him. His way is in the
sea, and his path in the great waters; his
footJteps are not known. Both the works
and the ways of God are full of mystery.
In the ordinary course of his government,
innumerable events occur which perplex
us to the utmost. There is a certain limit

e Ifa. xl. 15.

to

SER M. to all our enquiries of religion, beyond

Iv.
c_^- which if we attempt to proceed, we are

loft in a maze of inextricable difficulties.
Even that revclation which afflrds such
material intiruCion to man, concerning his
duty and his happiness, leaves many doubts
unresolved. -Vhy it was not given sooner;
why not to all men; ;why there should be
bo many things in it 5ard to be uldcrfiood,
:.re dlicultieis not inconsiderable, in the
ulidlr of that incontcelible evidence by
which it is fi!pported. If, then, the future
itate of man be not placed in so full and
clear a light as we delire, this is no more
than what the analogy of all religion,
both natural and revealed, gave us reason
to expec.

But such a solution of the difliculty will

be thought imperfec. It may, perhaps,
not give much fatisfadtion, to show, that
all religion abounds with difficulties of a
like nature. Our situation, it will be said,
is so much the more to be lamented, that
not on one fide only we are confined in our
enquiries, but on all hands environed with

mysterious

mysterious obfcurity.-Let us then, if so SE R M

IV.

much dissatisfied with our condition, give A,_
scope for once to Fancy, and confider how
the plan of Providence might be rectified
to our wifih. Let us call upon the Scep-
tick, and desire him to fay, what measure
of information would afford him entire fa-
tisfafion.

This, he will tell us, requires not any

long or deep deliberation. He desires only
to have his view enlarged beyond the li-
mits of this corporeal state. Instead of
refling upon evidence which requires dif-
cuffion, which muff be supported by much
reasoning, and which, after all, he alleges
yields very imperfect information, he de-
mands the everlasting mansions to be so
lifplayed, if in truth such mansions there
be, as to place faith on a level with the
evidence of sense. What noble and happy
cffec&s, he exclaims, would instantly fol-
low, if man thus beheld his present and
his future existence at once before him!
He would then become worthy of his rank
in the creation. Instead of being the sport,

as

S ER M. as now, of degrading passions and childish
t.-v. attachments, he would acd solely on the

principles of immortality. His pursuit of
virtue would be steady; his life would be
undisturbed and happy. Superiour to the
attacks of distress, and to the solicitations
of pleafirue, he would advance, by a regu-
lar procels, towards those divine rewards
and honours which were continually pre-
Lent to his view.- Thus Fancy, with
as much ease and confidence as if it were
a perfet judge of creation, erecds a new
world to itself, and exults with admira-
tion of its own work. But let us pause,
and fifpend this admiration, till we coolly
examine the consequences that would fol-
low from this supposed reformation of the
universe.

CONSIDER the nature and circumstances

of man. Introduced into the world in
an indigent condition, he is supported at
,irf' by the care of others; and, as soon
.as he begins to ac for himfclf, finds la.
bour and industry to be necessary for sus-

taining

taining his life, and supplying his wants. SE R M.

IV.

Mutual defence and interest give rife to v-
society; and society, when formed, re-
quires diftinc1ions of property, diversity
of conditions, Subordination of ranks,
and a multiplicity of occupations, in or-
der to advance the general good. The
services of the poor, and the protection
of the rich, become reciprocally necessary.
The governours, and the governed, muff
co-operate for general safety. Various
arts muff be studied; some refpeating the
cultivation of the mind, others the care
of the body ; some to ward off the evils,
and some to provide the conveniences of
life. In a word, by the destination of
his Creator, and the necessities of his
nature, man commences, at once, an
acive, not merely a contemplative being.
Religion assumes him as such. It sup-
poses him employed in this world, as on
a bury stage. It regulates, but does not
abolilh, the enterprizes and cares of or-
dinary life. It addresses itself to the va-
rious ranks in society; to the rich and

7 the

S E R M. the poor, to the magistrate and the fubjecd
_____ JIt rebukes the slothful; directs the diligent

how to labour; and requires every man to
do bis own bliflefi.

Suppose, now, that veil to be with-

drawn which conceals another world from
our view. Let all obscurity vanilh; let
us no longer fee darkl, , as throgh a glass;
but let every man enjoy that intuitive
perception of divine and eternal objets,
which the Sceptick was fuippofed to desire.
The immediate effet of such a discovery
would be, to annihilate in our eye all
human objeds, and to produce a total
stagnation in the affairs of the world.
Were the celcftial glory exposed to our
admiring view; did the angelic har-
mony found in our cnraptured ears; what
earthly concerns could have the power
of engaging our attention for a single mo-
ment ? All the studies and pursuits, the
arts and labours, which now employ the
adivity of man, which 'ipport the or-
der, or promlote ll halppinefs of society,
would lie neglecced and abandoned. Those

7;3~~~ decfircs

desires and fears, those hopes and intei'efs, s E R M.
by which we are at present fRimulated,
would cease to operate. Human life would
present no objects fuficient to route the
mind; to kindle the spirit of enterprizej
or to urge the hand of industry. If the
mere sense of duty engaged a good man to
take some part in the business of the world,
the talk, when submitted to, would prove
distasteful. Even the preservation of life
would be flighted, if he were not bound
to it by the authority of God. Impatient
of his confinement within this tabernacle
ofduft, languishing for the happy day of
his translation to those glorious regions
which were displayed to his fight, he
would sojourn on earth as a melancholy
exile. \Vhatever Providence has prepared
for the entertainment of man, would be
viewed with contempt. Whatever is now
attractive in society, would appear insipid.
In a word, he would be no longer a fit
inhabitant of this world, nor be qualified
for those exertions which are allotted to

him

S E R M. him in his present sphere of being. But, all

IV.
(Acy his faculties being sublimated above the mea-

sure of humanity, he would be in the con-
dition of a being of filperiour order, who,
obliged to reside among men, would regard
their pursuits with scorn, as dreams, trifles,
and puerile amusements of a day.

But to this reasoning it may perhaps

be replied, That such consequences as I
have now stated, fiuppofing them to fol-
low, delerve not much regard.-For what
though the present arrangement of human
affairs were entirely changed, by a clearer
view, and a firon-er impreflion of our fu-
ture itate ? Would not such a change prove
the highefi bleifng to man? Is not his
attachment to worldly objels the great
source both of his misery and his guilt ?
Employed in perpetual contemplation of
heavenly objecs, and in preparation for
the enjoyment of them, would he not be-
come more virtuous, and of course more
happy, than the nature of his present
employments and attachments permits him

to

to be-Allowing for a moment, the con- SE RM-
sequence to be such, this much is yielded, ~
that, upon the supposition which was made,
man would not be the creature which he
now is, nor human life the state which
we now behold. How far the change
would contribute to his welfare, comes'to
be confidered.

If there be any principle fully afcer-

tained by religion, it is, That this life was
intended for a Rtate of trial and improve-
ment to man. His preparation for a bet-
ter world required a gradual purification,
carried on by steps of progressive difci-
pline. The situation, therefore, here as-
signed him, was such as to answer this
design, by calling forth all his acive
powers, by giving full scope to his moral
dispositions, and bringing to light his
whole character. Hence it became pro-
per, that difficulty and temptation should
arise in the course of his duty. Ample re-
wards were promised to virtue; but these
rewards were left, as yet, in obscurity
and distant profped. The impressions of

VOL. I. H sense

S E R M. sense were so balanced against the disco-

IV.
'-v--- veries of immortality, as to allow a con-

fliEt between faith and sense, between con-
science and desire, between present plea-
sure and future good. In this conflia, the
fouls of good men are tried, improved, and
strengthened. In this field, their honours
are reaped. Here are formed the capital
virtues of fortitude, temperance, and lelf-
denial; moderation in prosperity, patience
in adversity, submission to the will of God,
and charity and forgiveness to men, amidst
the various competitions of worldly in-
terest.

Such is the plan of Divine wisdom for

man's improvement. But put the cafe,
that the plan devised by human wifdomi
were to take place, and that the rewards
of the just were to be more fully displayed
to view; the exercise of all those graces
which I have mentioned, would be en-
tirely superseded. Their very names would
be unknown. Every temptation being
withdrawn, every worldly attachment
being subdued by the overpowering dif-

9 goveries

cdveries of eternity, no trial of sincerity, S ER M.
no discrimination of characers, would re- -,
main; no opportunity would be afforded
for those aaive exertions, which are the
means of purifying and perfeaing the
good. On the competition between time
and eternity, depends the chief exercise
of human virtue. The obscurity which
at present hangs over eternal objels, pre-
serves the competition. Remove that ob-
fcurity, and you remove human virtue from
its place. You overthrow that whole sys-
tem of discipline, by which imperfect crea-
tures are, in this life, gradually trained up
for a more perfec slate,

This, then, is the conclusion to which

at last we arrive: That the full display
which was demanded, of the heavenly
glory, would be so far from improving
the human foul, that it would abolish
those virtues and duties which are the
great initruments of its improvement. It
would be unsuitable to the character of
man in every view, either as an adive
being, or a moral agent. It would dif-

H 2 qualify

s E R V. qualify him for taking part in the affairs

of the world; for relifiing the pleasures,
or for discharging the duties of life: In
a word, it would entirely defeat the pur-
pose of his being placed on this earth.
And the queflion, Wh ythe Almighty has
been pleased to' leave a spiritual world,
and the future existence of man, under so
much obscurity, resolves in the end into
this, Why there lmould be such a creature
as man in the universe of God?-Such is
the ifiue of tle improvements proposed to
be made on the plans of Providence. They
add to the difeoveries of the fuperiour wis-
dom of God, and of the presumption and
folly of man.

FROMI what has been said, it now ap-

pears, That no reasonable objecion to the
belief of a future slate arises, from the
imp,.rfe.t discoveries of it which we en-
joy; from the difficulties that are mingled
with its evidence; from our feeing as
through a glfis, darkjy, and being left to
walk by faith and not by fight. It cannot

4 . be

be otherwise, it ought not to be other- SE R M.

IV.

wife in our present state. The evidence e ,
which is afforded, is sufficient for the
convition of a candid mind, sufficient
for a rational ground of conduct; though
not so striking as to withdraw our atten-
tion from the present world, or altoge-
ther to overcome the impreflion of fen-
fible objets. In such evidence it becomes
us to acquiesce, without indulging either
doubts or complaints, on account of our
not receiving all the fatisfadtion which
we fondly desire, but which our present
immaturity of being excludes. For, upon
the supposition of immortality, this life is
no other than the childhood of exiflence;
and the measures of our knowledge must
be proportioned to such a slate. To the
successive stages of human life, from in-
fancy to old age, belong certain peculiar
attachments, certain cares, desires, and
interests; which open not abruptly, but
by gradual advances on the mind, as it
becomes fit to receive them, and is pre-
pared for ading the part to winch, in

H , hcii

S ERM. their order, they pertain. Hence, in the

IV,

education of a child, no one thinks of in-
spiring him all at once with the knowledge,
the sentiments, and views of a man, and
with contempt for the exerciles and amuse-
rents of childhood. On the contrary,
cmployments suited to his age are allowed
to occupy him. By thefc his powers are
gradually unfolded; and advantage is taken
of his youthful pursuits, to improve and
strengthen his mind; till, ftep by ftep,
he is led on to higher profpe&s, and pre-
pared for a larger and more impcrtant scene
of acion.

This analogy, which so happily illus-

trates the present condu& of the Deity
towards man, deserves attention the more,
as it is the very illustration used by the
Apostle, when treating of this subjec in
the context. Nlow, fays he, wee know in
part -but when that which is pe;sec7 is
come, that which is in part JJnall be done
awayj. /lhen[ I was a child, Ifpoke as a
child, I unziderood as a child, I thought as
a child; but when I became a man,, Iput

aslq

awoay cbildi/b things. For now we fee S EI M.

IV.

through a glass, darkly; but then, face to Ly
face: Now I know in part; but then, I
J77all know even as I am klnown. Under
the care of the Almighty, our education
is now going on, from a mortal to an
immortal state. As much light is let in
upon us, as we can hear without injury.
When the objeds become too splendid
and dazzling for our fight, the curtain
is drawn. Exercised in such a field of
acion, as suits the firength of our un-
ripened powers, we are, at the fame time,
by proper profpeas and hopes, prompted
to aspire towards the manhood of our
nature, the time when childi/h things Jhall
be put away. hBt still, betwixt those
future profpets, and the impreflion of
present ol)jets, such an accurate propor-
tion is eftabliflied, as on the one hand
Ihall not produce a total contempt of
earthly things, while we aspire to those
that are heavenly; and on the other,
fliall not encourage such a degree of at-
taclment to our present state, as would

H 4 render

SE R M. render us unworthy of future advancement.

.-..J In a word, the whole course of things is

so ordered, that we neither, by an ir-
regular and precipitate education, become
men too soon; nor by a fond and trifling
indulgence, be suffered to continue children
for ever.

LET there refleaions not only remove

the doubts which may arise from our
obscure knowledge of immortality, but
likewise produce the highet admiration
of the wisdom of our Creator. The ftruc-
ture of the natural world affords innume-
rable instances of profound design, which
no attentive fpeLtator can survey without
wonder. In the moral world, where the
workmanship is of much finer and more
delicate contexture, fubjeds of still greater
admiration open to view. But admi-
ration mutf rife to its highef point,
when those parts of the moral conftitu-
tion, which at sirs were reputed ble-
milhes, which carried the appearance of
objedions, either to the wisdom or the

goodness

goodness of Providence, are discovered, on SEIRM.
more accurate infpeaion, to be adjusted -J
with the most exquisite propriety. We
have now seen that the darkness of man's
condition is no less essential to his well-
being, than the light which he enjoys.
His internal powers, and his external fitua-
tion, appear to be exactly fitted to each
other. Those complaints which we are
apt to make, of our limited capacity and
narrow views, of our inability to penetrate
farther into the future destination of man,
are found, from tl-e foregoing observations,
to be just as unreasonable, as the childish
complaints of our not being formed with a
microscopic eye, nor furnified with an
eagle's wing; that is, of not being endowed
with powers which would subvert the na-
ture, and counteract the laws, of our present
state.

In order to do justice to the fuljec:, I

must observe, that the fame reasoning
which has been now employed with refpec
to our knowledge of immortality, is
equally applicable to many other branches

of

SE R M. of intellectual knowledge. Thus, why we

IV.
-Y-iv. are permitted to know so little of the na-

ture of that Eternal Being who rules the
universe; why the manner in which he
operates on the natural and moral world, is
wholly concealed; why we are kept in such
ignorance, with relped to the extent of his
works, to the nature and agency of fpiri-
tual beings, and even with refpef to the
union between our own Ibul and body:
To all these, and several other enquiries
of the fame kind, which often employ the
solicitous researches of ipeculative men, the
answer is the fame that was given to the
interesting question which makes the subject
of our discourse. The degree of know-
ledge desired, would prove incompatible
with the design, and with the proper bufi-
ness of this life. It would raise us to a
sphere too exalted; would reveal objeats
too great and firiking for opr present facul-
ties; would excite feelings too strong for
us to bear; in a word, would unfit us for
thinking or ading like human creatures.
It is therefore reserved for a m,oe ad-

vanced

vanced period of our nature; and the hand S R M.
of Infinite wisdom hath in mercy drawn a --
veil over scenes which would overpower the
fight of mortals.

One instance, in particular, of Divine

wisdom, is so illustrious, and corresponds
so remarkably with our present subje&t,
that I cannot pass it over without notice;
that is, the concealment under which Pro-
vidence has placed the future events of
our life on earth. The desire of penetrat-
ing into this unknown region, has ever
been one of the most anxious passions of
men. It has often seized the wife as well
as the credulous, and given rife to many
vain and impious superstitions throughout
the whole earth. Burning with curiosity
at the approach of some critical event, and
impatient under the perplexity of conjec-
ture and doubt, How cruel is Providence,
we are apt to exclaim, in denying to man
the power of foresight, and in limiting
him to the knowledge of the present mo-
ment ? Were he permitted to look forward
into the course of destiny, how much more

suitably

S E R A, fuiitably would he be prepared for the various

1V.
»-w~=, turns and changes in his life ? With what

moderation would he enjoy his prosperity
under the fore-knowledge of an approach-
ing reverse ? And with what eagerness be
prompted to improve the fying hours, by
feeing the inevitable term draw nigh which
was to finish his course ?

But while Fancy indulges such vain de-

fires and criminal complaints, this coveted
fore-knowledge mull clearly appear to the
eye of Reason, to be the most fatal gift
which the Almighty could bestow. If, in
this present mixed state, all the successive
icenes of diflrefs through which we are
to pass, were laid before us in one view,
perpetual fad ness would overcast our life,
Hardly would any transient gleams of in-
tervening joy be able to force their way
through the cloud. Faint would be the
relish of pleasures of which we foresaw
the close: Inlilpportabie the burden of as-
fli&ions, under which we were oppressed
by a load not only of present, but of an-
ticipated sorrows, Friends would begin

their

their union, with lamenting the day which s ERM.
was to dissolve it; and, with weeping eye, -
the parent would every moment behold
the child whom he knew that he was to
lose. In short, as soon as that mysterious
veil, which now covers futurity, was
lifted up, all the gaiety of life would dif-
appear, its flattering hopes, its pleasing
illusions, would vanifhl; and nothing but
its vanity and sadness remain. The fore-
fight of the hour of death would conti-
nually interrupt the course of human as-
fairs; and the overwhelming profpe& of
the future, instead of exciting men to pro-
per ativity, would render them immove-
able with consternation and difinay.-
How much more friendly to man is that
mixture of knowledge and ignorance which
is allotted him in this state! Ignorant of
the events which are to befal us, and of
the precise term which is to conclude our
life, by this ignorance our enjoyment of
present objeas is favoured; and knowing
that death is certain, and that human as-
fairs are full of change, by this know-

ledge

SE R M. ledge our attachment to those objects is incr,

Iv.
- derated. Precisely in the fame manner, as.,

by the mixture of evidence and obscurity
which remains on the profped of a future
state, a proper balance is preserved betwixt
our love of this life, and our desire of a
better.

The longer that our thoughts dwell on

this fuibjet, the more we must be con-
vinced, that in nothing the Divine wisdom
is more admirable, than in proportioning
knowledge to the neceiities of man. In-
flead of lamenting our condition, that we
are permitted only tofee as th-roi'gh a glas,
darkly, we have reason to bless our Crea-
tor, no less for what he hath concealed, than
for what he hath allowed us to know. He
is wonderfll in colufel, as he is excellent
in working. He is wife in heart, and his
thoughts are deep. llow ilfearchable are
the riches of the wlfdoin of the knowledge of
God !

FROM the whole view which we have
taken of the subjet, this important in-

ftrution

fru(tion arises, That the great design of all sE M

IV.

the knowledge, and in particular of the
religious knowledge which God hath as-
forded us, is, to fit us for discharging the
duties of life. No ufelels discoveries are
made to us in religion: No discoveries
even of useful truths, beyond the precise
degree of information, which is subservient
to right conduct. To this great end all our
information points. In this centre all the
lines of knowledge meet. Life and imlmor-
tality are brought to light in the go/pel; yet
not so displayed as to gratify the curiosity
of the world with an astonishing fpedacle;
but only so far made known, as to assist and
support us in the practice of our duty. If
the discovery were more imperfecl, it would
excite no desire of immortality; if it were
more full and striking, it would render us
careless of life. On the first supposition,
no sufficient motive to virtue would ap-
pear; on the second, no proper trial of it
would remain. In the one cafe, we should
think and a& like men who have their por-
tion only in this world; in the other cafe,

like

E R M. like men who have no concern with this
IV.
--ri,, world at all. Whereas now, by the wife

conflitution of Heaven, we are placed in the
most favourable situation for ating, with
propriety, our allotted part here; and for
rising, in due course, to higher honour and
happiness hereafter.

Let us then second the kind intentions of

Providence, and ad upon the plan which
it hath pointed out. Checking our inqui-
fitive bolicitude about what the Almighty
hath concealed, let us diligently improve
what he hath made known. Inhabitants of
the earth, we are at the fame time candi-
dates for Heaven. Looking upon there as
only different views of one confifent cha-
rader, let us carry on our preparation for
Heaven, not by abftracing ourlelves from
the concernis of this world, but by ful-
filling the duties and offices of every fia-
tion in life. Living fobcrly, rightcoitly
and godllj i the pricfcnt world, let us look
for that blejfed hope, and the glorious appear-
ing of thic great Go, and our Saviour Befus

riefore

Before

Before I conclude, it may be proper to SERM.

observe, That the reasonings in this dif- Lg
course give no ground to apprehend any
danger of our being too much influtenced
by the belief of a future state. I have
shown the hurtful effeas which would fol-
low from too bright and full a discovery of
the glory of that itate; and in showing this,
I have justified the decree of Providence,
which permits no such discovery. But as
our nature is at present conitituted, at-
tached by so many strong connections to
the world of sense, and enjoying a comr
munication so feeble and distant with the
world of spirits, we need fear no danger
from cultivating intercourse with the latter
as much as poflible. On the contrary,
from that intercourse the chief security of
our virtue is to be fought. The bias of
our nature leans so much towards sense,
that froim this fide the peril is to be dread-
ed, and on this fide the defence is to be
provided.

Let us then wvalk by faith. Let us
Sraengthen this principle of aaion to the

VOL. I. I ytmoft

SER M. utmost of our power. Let us implore the

IV.
L_.yi Divine grace, to strengthen it within us

more and more: That we may thence de-
rive an antidote againfl: that subtile poison,
which incerfant commerce with the objecs
of sense diffuses through our fouls; that we
may hence acquire purity and dignity of
manners, suited to our divine hopes; and,
undefiled by the pleasures of the world,
unshaken by its terrours, may preserve to
the end one conflant tenour of integrity.
Till at last, having, under the condut of
Christian faith, happily finished the period
ofdifcipline, we enter on that tRate, where
a far nobler scene fiall open ; where eter-
nal objecs shall flline in their native fplen-
dour; where, this twilight of mortal life
being past, the Sni of rig.f/cof,/n f ilall
rife; and ihat lwhich is perfiC bei;g- ccme,
that which is in part /Jjall be doe a' iC'i',

# SERMON V. On the DEATH of CHRIST. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. JOHN, xvii. 1. Jesus lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father! The hour is come; 

[ "Is I

SER MON V.

On the DEATH of CIRIST.
Pleached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.

Jo l N, Xvii. I.
.JS lift if p his eyes to heaven, and said,

Father ! T'he howu is come;-
/-THESE were the words of our bless-

§R i~i '

*n r S E R M.

A ed Lord on a memorable occasion. s,.
The feast of the pafbover drew nigh, at '-"-
which he knew that he was to susser. The
night was arrived wherein he was to be
delivered into the hands of his enemies.
IHe had spent the evenlg in conferelice
with his disciples; like a dying father ii.
the midst of his family, mingling confola-
tions with his Iait initruaions. ,When he

1 . had

SE R M. had ended his discourse to them, he lifted
L a liup his eyes to heaven, and, with the words

which I have now read, began that so-
lemn prayer of interceflion for the church,
which closed his ministry. Immediately
after, he went forth with his diiciples into
the garden of Gethsemane, and furren-
'ered himself to those who came to appre-
hend him.

Such was the situation of our Lord at

the time of his pronouncing these words.
He saw his mission on the point of being
accompliflled. He had the profpe& full
before him, of all that he was about to
fuffer.-Father! the hour is comle.-What
hour? An hour the most critical, the
most pregnant with great events, since
hours had begun to be numbered, since.
time had begun to run. It was the hour
in which the Son of God was to termi-
nate the labours of his important life, by
a death fsill more important and illuftri-
ous; the hour of aroling, by his susser-
ings, for the guilt of mankind; the hour
of accompliflong prophecies, types, and

symbols,.

symbols, which had been carried on SERM.
'through a series of ages; the hour of con-
eluding the old, and of introducing to the
world the new dispensation of religion;
the hour of his triumphing over the
world, and death, and hell; the hour of
his erecing that spiritual kingdom which
-s to last for ever. Such is the hour, such
are the events, which you are to comme-
morate in the sacrament of our Lord's
Supper. I shall attempt to set them be-
fore you as proper fubjeas, at this time,
of your devout meditation. To display
them in their genuine majesty, is beyond
the ability of man.

I. THIS was the hour in which Christ

was glorified by his sufferings. The
whole of his life had discovered much
real greatness, under a mean appearance.
Through the cloud of his humiliation,
his native lustre often broke forth; but
never did it shine so bright, as in this last,
this trying hour. It was indeed the hour
of distress, and of blood. '-1e knew it to

I 3 be

S E R M. be such ; and when he uttered the words

V.
ty, of the Text, he had before his eyes, the

executioner and the cross, the scourge, the
nails, and the spear. But by profplcis of
this nature hi'; foul was not to be over-
come. It is dilfrcls which ennobles every
great charater ; and diPlrefs was to glo-
rify the Son of God. He was now to
teach all mankind, by his example, how
to susser and to die. He was to fland forth
before his enemies, as the filthful witneis
of the truth; justifying by his beha-
viour the charadter which he atumed, and
fealing with his blood the doctrine which
he taught.

IWhat magnanimity in all his words

and acdions on this great occasion! The
court of Herod, the judgment-hall of
Pilate, the hill of Calvary, were so many
theatres prepared for his displaying all the
virtues of a confiant and patient mind.
'When led forth to susser, the first voice
which we hear from him, is a generous
lamentation over the fate of his unfortu-
nate, though guilty, country; and, to the

last

last moment of his life, we behold him in s ER M.

V.

possession of the fame gentle and benevolent a-_-j
ipirit. No upbraiding, no complaining
expression escaped from his lips, during
the long and painful approaches of a cruel
death. He betrayed no symptom of a
weak or a vulgar, of a discomposed or im-
patient mind. With the utmost attention
of filial tenderness, he committed his aged
mother to the care of his beloved disciple '.
With all the dignity of a Sovereign, he
conferred pardon on a penitent fellow-fuf-
serer. With a greatness of mind beyond
example, he spent his last moments in apo-
logies and prayers, for those who were
ihedding his blood.

By wonders in heaven, and wonders on

earth, was this hour distinguished. All
nature seemed to feel it; and the dead and
the living bore witness to its importance.
The veil of the temple was rent in twain.
The earth shook. There was darkness
over all the land. The graves were open-
ed, and many whloJ7ept, arose and went into

l See John, xix. 26, 27,

I 4 ihe

S ER VM the roly City. Nor were these the only
·. -yt/ prodigies of this awful hour. The most

hardened hearts were subdued and chan-
ged. The judge, who in order to gratify
the multitude, pated sentence against him,
publickly attefled his innocence. The
Roman centurion, who preiided at the exe-
cution, glorified God, and acknowledged
the sufferer to be more than man. After
beh w e the thizns which had pased, he
ahid, Certainly this was a righteous per-
foil; truly, this was the Son of God. The
Jewiflh malefacor who was crucified with
him, addressed him as a King, and im-
plored his favour. Even the crowd of in-
sensible fpefaators, who had come forth as
to a common spectacle, and who began
with clamours and intults, returncd homc,
filiting their breafts.-Look back on the
heroes, the philosophers, the legislators of
old. View them in their last moments.
Recal every circumfiance which diflin-
guifhed their departure from the world.
Where can you find such an aflemblage of
high virtues, and of great events, as con-

7 curred

curred at the death of Christ? Where, so SEM.
many testimonies given to the dignity of
the dying person, by earth, and by hea-
ven ?

II. THIs was the hour in which Christ

atoned for the fins of mankind, and ac-
com-lifhced our eternal redemption. It was
the hour when that great sacrifice was of-
sered up, the efficacy of which reaches back
to the first transgression of man, and extends
forward to the end of time; the hour when,
from the cross, as from an high altar, the
blood was flowing, which waihed away the
guilt of the nations.

This awful dispensation of the Al-

mighty contains mysteries which are be-
yond the discovery of man. It is one of
those things into which the a;,gels def.r to
look. What has been revealed to us, is,
That the death of Christ was the interpo-
fition of Heaven for preventing the ruin
of human kind. We know, that under
the government of God, misery is the na-
tural consequence of guilt. After rational

creatures

SE.RM. creatures had, by their criminal conduc,
L-j introduced disorder into the Divine king-

don, there was no ground to believe, that
by their penitence and prayers alone,
they coulld revent the deftruCdion which
threatened them. The prevalence of pro-
pitiatory lacrilices thlroughout the earth,
proclaims it to be the general fenle of
mankind, that mere repentance was not
of sufficient avail to cxpiate fin, or to
flop its penal effeBs. By the constant
aliufions which are carried on in the
New Telrament to the facrifces under
the Law, as; p;e-rgnilying a great atone-
mentci madel by Clhrift; and by the firong
cxp.rcflions which are ulcd in dcfcribiing
the efccrs of his death, the sacred writers
i1how, as plainly as language allows, that
there vas an efficacy in his fuTerings, far
beyoad tilat of mecre example and in-
fihru(ion. The nature and extent of that
efficacy we are unable, as yet, fully to
trace. Part we are capable of behold-
ing ; and the wisdom of what we beholl,
we have realln to adore. W \e difern in

tlhis
9

this plan of redemption, the evil of fin SE RM.

V.

firongly exhibited; and the justice of the -
Divine government awfully exemplified, in
Christ fiffering for finners. 'But let us not
imagine, that our present discoveries unfold
the whole influence of the death of Christ.
It is connected with causes into which we
cannot penetrate. It produces consequences
too extensive for us to explore. God's
thoughts are not as 0or tholughts. In all
things we fee only in part; and here, if
any where, we fee also as through a glass,
ai

This, however, is fully manifest, that

redemption is one of the most glorious
works of the Almighty. If the hour of
the creation of the world was great and
illustrious; that hour, when, from the
dark and formless mass, this fair system
of nature arose at the Divine command;
when the mornizg iJars fang together, and
all the sons of God Jhouted for joy; no less
illuifrious is the hour of the restoration
of the world; the hour when, from con-
demnation and misery, it emerged into

happiness

SE R M. happiness and peace. With less external

V.
c majefly it was attended, but is, on that

account, the more wonderful, that under
an appearance so simple, such great events
wele covered.

III. IN this hour the long series of

prophecies, visions, types, and figures,
was accomplished, This was the center
in which they all met: This the point
towards which they had tended and ver-
.ged, throughout the course of so many
generations. You behold the Law and
the Prophets standing, if we may speak
so, at the foot of the cross, and doing
homage. You behold Moles and Aaron
bearing the ark of the covenant; David
and Elijah presenting the oracle of tefti-
mony. You behold all the priests and
sacrifices, all the rites and ordinances,
all the types and symbols, assembled
together to receive their consummation.
Without the death of Christ, the worship
and ceremonies of the Law would have
remained a pompous, but unmeaning in-

fn.. ti.o

ftitution. In the hour when he was cru- S E R M.
cified, the book with the seven feals was V.-
opened. Every rite assumed its fignifi-
cancy; every prediction met its event;
every symbol displayed its correspond-
ence.

The dark, and seemingly ambiguous

method of conveying important difcove-
ries under figures and emblems, was not
peculiar to the sacred books. The Spirit
of God, in pre-signifying the death of
Christ, adopted that plan, according to
which the whole knowledge of those
early ages was propagated through the
world. Under the veil of mysterious al-
lusion, all wisdom was then concealed.
From the sensible world, images were
every-where borrowed, to describe things
unfcen. More was understood to be
meant, than was openly expressed. By
enigmatical rites, the Priest communi-
cated his doflrines; by parables and al-
legories, the Philosopher instruCted his
disciples; even the Legiflhtor, by figu-
rative sayings, commanded the reverence

of

SE R M. of the people. Agreeably to this prevail-

V. r ing mode of infrudion, the whole dif-

penfation of the Old Teflament was so
conduded, as to be the lhadow and the
figure of a spiritual system. Every re-
markable event, every diftinguifled per-
fonage, under the Law, is interpreted in
the New Testament, as bearing fomc re-
ference to the hour of which we treat. If
Isaac was laid upon the altar as an inno-
cent viEim ; if David was driven from his
throne by the wicked, and restored by the
hand of God; if the brazen serpent was
lifted up, to heal the people; if the rock
was smitten by Moses, to furnifi drink in
the wilderness; all were types of Chrifl,
and alluded to his death.

In prediting the fame event, the lan-

guage of ancient prophecy was magnifi-
cent, but seemingly contradilory: For it
foretold a Messiah, who was to be at once
a sufferer and a conqueror. T7he Star was
to come out of Jacob, and the Branch to
fJring from7 theJ iem of yes'. 5the Angel of
the Covenant, the Desire of all N\ations, wcas

to

to come fidndenly to his temple; and to hiiiim E R M
was to be the gathering of the people. Yet
at the fame time, he was to be despised and
r.jec7cd of men; he was to be taken from
prison and from judgment, and to be led as
a lamb to tbeJiaughter. Though he was a
man of sorrows and acquaited with grief,
yet the Gentiles were to come to his light,
and Kings to the brightncgs of his riing. In
the hour when Chrilf died, those prophe-
tical riddles were solved; those seeming
contradiEtions were reconciled. The ob-
fcurity of oracles, and the ambiguity of
types vanished. The fnl of righteouf/cefs
role; and, together vith the dawn of re-
ligion, those fladows pawTed away.

IV. THi-s was the hour of the abolition

of the Law, and the introduction of the
Gospel; the hour of terminating the old,
and of beginning the new dispensation of
religious knowledge and worflip, through-
out the earth. Viewed in this light, it
forms the most august a'ra which is to be
found in the history of mankind. When

ChriRc

SERM. Christ was suffering on the cross, we ate

V.
- informed by one of the Evangelifis, that he

said, IthirfJ; and that they filled a fpunge
with vinegar, and put it to his mouth. After
he had talecd the vinegar, knowing that all
things were now accompliscd, and the scrip-
t'uresflfilled, heaaid, It isfinfhIed "; that is,
This offered draught of vinegar was the last
circumstance predited by an ancient Pro-
phet --, that remained to be fulfilled. The
vision and the prophecy are now fealed:
The Mosaic dispensation is closed. Anzld he
bowed his head, and gave up the ghoJt.

It is finiJjed.-When he uttered these

words, he changed the slate of the uni-
verse. At that moment, the Law ceased,
and the Gospel commenced. This was the
ever-memorable point of time, which fepa-
rated the old and the new world from
each other. On one fide of the point of
separation, you behold the Law, with its
priests, its sacrifices, and its rites, retiring
from fight. On the other fide, you be-

* John, xix. Z, 29, 30. . Psalm Ixiv, z..

hold

iiold the Gospel; with its simple and venei- SE M.
rable institutions, coming forward into v
view. Significantly was the veil of thi
temple rant in this hour; for the glory-
then departed from between the cherubims.
The legal High Priest delivered up his
Urim and Thummim, his breast-plate,
his robes, and his incense: And CHRIST
flood forth as the great High Priest of all
ifcceeding generations. By that one fa-
crifice, which he now offered, he abolished
sacrifices for ever. Altars on which the
fire had blazed for ages, were now to smoke
no more. ViAims were no moie to bleed.
Not with the blood of bulls and goats; but

hwith his own blood, he o7ow entered into the

Jioly Place, there to appear in the prefnace of
Godfor uis.

This was tie hour of association and

union to all the worfippers of God.
When Christ said, It is fyiljied, he threw
down the wall of partition Which had so
long divided the Gentile from the Jew.
IIe gathered into one, all the faithful, out
of every kindred and people. He pro-

VOL, I. K claimed

s E RM. claimed the hour to be come, when the
t --J- knowledge of the true God should be no

longer confined to one nation, nor his wor-
Ihip to one temple; but over all the earth,
the wornfippers of the Father li'ould feJrv
hiii i/ p/iril mid in iruthb. From that hour,
they who dwelt in the lzi'crmof cids f /bhe
earthJ, J-nigr:s io t ,e covenant of prwomite,
tiegan to be birooigh1t iiig. In that hour, the
light of the Gospel dawned from afar on the
British islands.

During a long courfc of ages, Provi-

dence seemcd to be occupied in preparing
the world for this revolution. The whole
Jewish ceconomy was intended to uflier it
in. The knowledge of God was preserved
unextinguiflhd in one corner of the world,
that thence, in due time, might issue forth
the light which was to overspread the
earth. Successive revelations gradually en-
larged the views of men beyond the nar-
row bounds of Judoea, to a more extenlive
kingdom of Godi Signs and miracles
awakened their expestation, and direc&ed
their evrc t y-ards this great event. 'Whe-

tanle

ther God descended on the flaming moin- SE R M.
tain, or spoke by the Prophet's voice; whe-
ther he scattered his chosen people into
captivity, or re-aflembled them in their own
land; he was fill carrying or a progressive
plan, which was accomplished at the death
of Christ.

Not only in the territories of Israel, but

over all the earth, the great dispensations
of Providence respected the approach of
this important hour. If empires rose or
fell; if war divided, or peace united the
nations; if learning civilized their man-
ners, or philosophy enlarged their views;
all was, by the secret decree of Heaven,
made to ripen the world for that fuilnefs
of time, when Christ was to publish the
whole counsel of God. The Persian, the
Macedonian, the Roman Conqueror, en-
tered upon the stage each at his predicted
period; and, though he meant notfo, neither
did bis heart think so, ministered to this
hour. The revolutions of power, and
the succession of monarchies, were so ar-
ranged by Providence, as to facilitate the

K. 2 progress

ER M. progress of the Gospel through the habit-
_-~-, able world, after the day had arrived, when

the flone

J which 'was cut out of the moun71

tain without hands, Jhlould becone a great
mountain, and fll the earth '. This was
the day which Abraham zfaw afar of, anid
was glad. This was the day, which many
Prophets and Kings, and righteous m7en dc-
fired to fee, but could not; the day for
which the earnef expectation of the creature,
long oppressed with ignorance, and bewil-
dered in superstition, might be jutly said to
.wait.

V. TiIS was the hour of Christ's trl-

umph over all the powers of darkness; the
hour in which he overthrew dominions and
thrones, led captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men. The contest which the kingdom
of darkness had long maintained againfi the
kingdom of light, was now brought to its
crisis. The period was come, when the feed
of the zwomaln JJould bruf tlhe head of the
serpent. For many ages, the most gross fu-

* Dan. ii. 34, 35

perftitiort

;serftition had filled the earth. The glory of s E R M.
the uncorruptible God was every-where, ex- .-
capt in the land of Judaxa,changed into images
made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and
beals, and creeping things. The world, which
the Almighty created for himself, seemed to
have become a temple of idols. Even to
vices and palons altars were raised; and,
what was entitled Religion, was in effect a
discipline of impurity. In the midst of this
universal darkness, Satan had erected his
throne; and the learned and polished, as
well as the savage nations, bowed down
before him. But at the hour when Christ
appeared on the cross, the signal of his de-
feat was given. His kingdom suddenly
departed from him; the reign of idolatry
passed away: He was beheld to fall like
lightning from Heaven. In that hour, the
foundation of every Pagan temple ihook.
The statue of every false God tottered on
its base. The Priest fled from his falling
shrine; and the Heathen oracles became
dumb for ever.

K.3 'As

SE R M. As on the cross Christ triumphed over

V. ...-y- Satan, so lie overcame his auxiliary the

world. Long had it aflailed him with its
teimptations and discouragements. In this
hour of revere trial, he surmounted them
all. Formerly he had despised the pleasures
of the world. He now baffled its terrours,
-lence he is justly said to have crucified the
·world. By his fulferings, he ennobled dif-
treils; and lie darkened the lufire of the
pomp and vanities of life. He dilcovered
to his followers the path which leads,
through affliiion, to glory and to vidory;
and he imparted to them the fame spirit
which enabled him to overcome. My_ king-
dom is not of this world. I this wor-ld ye
/Dall have tribulation; but be of good cheer s
I have overcome the world :'.

Death also, the last foe of man, was

the victim of this hour. The formidable
appearance of the fpedre remained; but
his dart was taken away. For, in the
hourt when Chrifl expiated guilt, he dii:

· Joln, xvi. 33.

armed

armed death, by securing the refurre&ion S E M.

V.

of the just. lWhen he said to his penitent
fellowr-fufferer, To-day thovtJajlt be wiitb me
i paradise, he announced to all his fol-
lowers tlie certainty of heavenly bliss. He
declared the cheruzbims to be dififfed, and
the Jfaming 5sword to be sheathed, which
had been appointed at the fall, to kcep from
m71a the way of the Tree of life F. aint,
before this period, had been the hope, in-
diftiucL the profpe-:, which even good men
enjoyed of the heavenly kingdom. Life
and immortality were nowi bro'tght to light.
From the hill of Calvary, the first clear and
certain view was given to the world of
the everlasting mansions. Since that hour,
they have been the perpetual consolation of
believers in Christ. Under trouble, they
sooth their minds; amidst temptation, they
support their virtue; and, in their dying
moments, enable them to fay, 0 death !

Jwhere is thy finig ? 0 grave!

. /.e0re is t]y
vif/ory .?

Gen. iii. 24.
TK 4, Y TH1

SERM. VI. THIS was the hour when our Lord

ereted that spiritual kingdom which is
never to end. How vain are the coun-
fels and defiglps of men! How shallow is
the policy of the wicked ! How short their
triumphing The enemies of Christ ima-
gined, that in this hour they had success-
fully accomplished their plan for his de-
iruntion. They believed, that they had
entirely scattered the small party of his
followers, and had extinguished his name
and his honour for ever. In derision, they
addressed him as a King. They clothed
him with purple robes; they crowned hinl
with a crown of thorns ; they put a reed
i.nto his hand; and, with insulting mock-
ery, bowed the knee before him. Blind
and impious men! How little did they
know, that the Almighty was at that mo-
ment f/lling him as a King on the hill of
Sion ; giving him the e'athen for his in-
heritance, and the nttermnot parts of the
earth for is pofefon ! How little did they
know, that their badges of mock royalty
*wcre at that moment converted into the

signals

signals of absolute dominion, and the In- S ER M.

V.

firuments of hrrefiftible power! The reed A-
which they put into his hands became a
rod of iron, with which he was to break in
pieces his enetiies; a sceptre, with which
he was to rule the universe in righteouss
ness. The cross, which they thought was
to stigmatize him with infamy, became the
ensign of his renown. Instead of being
the reproach ps his followers, it was to be
their boast and their glory, The cross was
to ihine on palaces and churches, through,
out the earth. It was to be affuumed as
the diftinEtion of the most powerful mo-
narchs, and tp wave in the banner of
victorious armies, when the memory of
Herod and Pilate should be accursed;
when Jerusalem ihould be reduced to ashes,
and the Jews be vagabonds over all the
wvorld.

These were the triumphs which comr

menced at this hour. Our Lord saw them
already in their birth; he saw of the tra-
vail of his foul, and was fatisfed. He
beheld the wvrd of God going forth, con-

quering,

S E R M. quering, and to conquer; subduing to the

V. ,-.-v. obedience of his laws, the subduers of the

wvorld; carrying light into the regions of
darkneos, and mildne's into tle habitations
of cruel'y. He beheld the Gentiles wait-
ing below the cross, to receive the Gospel.
Hle beheld E.thiopia and the j7es Jl;echitcig
out their hands to God; the desert begin-
ning to rejoice, aind to blojom as the rofc;
and the knleowelcdge of the Lords iliig tce
earth, as the w aters cover the fean, W'll
pleased, he said, It is fjijlc As a con-
queror, lie reti:-ed friom the field, reviewing
his triumphs: Hie bowed his ead, and.(gave
iup the gof,--. From that hour, Christ
vwas no longer a mortal man, but HIead
over all things to the Churck; the glorious
King of men and angels, of whose domi-
nion there shall be no end. His triumphs
ihall perpetually increase. Hiis name fil/l
enLdurel for ever; itj shall lIqjl as loig as the
JN'l ; *,:i ,/1!l be bef'/d in him, and all na.
t'iolls.Jall c:ll h.'i bleq2d.

SUC1H

SucH were the tranfadions, such the es- s ER M,

seas of this ever memorable hour. With 7
all those great events was the mind of our
Lord filled, when he lifted up his eyes to
heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come.

From this view which we have taken

of this fubje&, permit me to huggeft, what
ground it affords to confide in the mercy
of God, for the pardon of fin; to trust to
his faithfulness, for the accolnpliifllent of
all his promises; and to approach to him,
with gratitude and devotion, in ads of
worship.

IN the fira place, The death of Christ

affords us ground to confide in the Divine
mercy, for the pardon of fin. All the fleps
of that high dispensation of Providence,
which we have confidered, lead directly to
this conclusion, IHe that Jfared not his
own1 Son, but delivered him uip for us all,
how /hall he not with him alo freely give
ns all things * ? This is the final result
of the discoveries of the Gospel. On this

Rom. viii. 3z,

refts

S.E R M. refts that great system of consolation, which
tr_. it hath reared up for men. We are not

left to dubious and intricate reasonings,
concerning the conduct which God may
be expeced to hold towards .his offending
creatures. But we are led to the view of
important and illustrious fads, which strike
the mind with evidence irresistible. For,
is it possible to believe, that such great
operations, as I have endeavoured to de-
icribe, were carried on by the Almighty in
vain! Did he excite in the hearts of his
creatures, such encouraging hopes, with-
out any intention to fulfil them ? After so
long a preparation of goodness, could he
mean to deny forgiveness to the penitent
and the humble? When, overcome by the
sense of guilt, man looks up with an afto-
nifhed eye to the justice of his Creator, let
Iim recollect that hour of which the Text
speaks, and be comforted. The signals of
Divine mercy, ereted in his view, are
too conspicuous to be either distrusted or
.pift4ken,

in~u

IN the next place, The discoveries of SE RM.

this hour afford the highest reason to trust _
in the Divine faithfulness, for the accom-
pliihment of every promise which remains
yet unfulfilled. For this was the hour of
the completion of God's ancient covenant.
It was the performnance of the mercy pro-
nifed to the fathers. We behold the con-
lummation of a great plan, which, through-
out a course of ages, had been uniformly
pursued; and which, against every human
appearance, was, at the appointed moment,
exaEtly fulfilled. Nlo iword that is gone out
(f the mouth of the Lorld, fiall fail. No
length of time alters his purpose. No ob-
flacles can retard it. Towards the ends
accomplished in this hour, the most repug-
nant instruments were made to operate.
We discern God bending to his purpose,
the jarring pafions, the opposite interests,
and even the vices of men; uniting seem-
ing contrarieties in his scheme; making the
wratl of man to p;rale him; obliging the
ambition of Princes, the prejudices of the
Jews, the malice of Satan, all to concur,

either

SE RM. either in bringing forward this hour, of

V. .--'- in completing its destined effeds. With

what entire confidence ought we to wait
for the fulfilment of all his other promises
in their due time; even when events are
moos embroiled, and the prospeCt is moal
discouraging? I AlJthouh houi si.c J, thou
cna nol; / him; ,et juiient is efore hi7m;
thl'q'efore tiji thou in him. Be attentive
only to perform thy duty; leave the event
to God ; and be atlired, that under the di-
resion of his Providence, all things Ihall
·wovrk together for a happy itTue.

LASLY, The confidcration of this whole

fubje tends to excite gratitude and devo-
tion, when we approach to God in ads of
worship, The hour of which I have dif-
coursed, presents him to us in the amiable
light of the Deliverer of mankind, the Re-
ltorer of our forfeited hopes. 'We behold
the greatness of the Almibhty, softened by
the mild radiance of condescension and
mercy. We behold him diminishing the
awful distance at which we stand from his

presence,
4

presence, by appointing for us a Mediator s E R M.
and Interceflbr, through whom the humble
may, without difinay, approach to Him
who made them. By such views of the
Divine nature, Christian faith lays the
foundation for a worfllip which Ilall be at
once rational and affectionate; aworfhip, in
which the light of the understanding flall
concur with the devotion of the heart, and
the most profound reverence be united with
the most cordial love. Christian faith is
not a system of speculative truths. It is
not a leflbn of noral inftrution only. By
a train of high discoveries which it reveals,
i)y a succession of intereting objecs which
it places in our view, it is calculated to ele-
vate the mind, to purify the affedions, and,
by the afliftance of devotion, to confirm
and encourage virtue. Such, in particular,
is the scope of that divine institution, the
Sacrament of our Lord's Supper. To this
happy purpose let it conduce, by concen-
tering, in one striking point of light, all that
the Gospel has displayed of what is mofL im-
portant to man, Touched with just contri-

tion

SE RM. sion for past offences, and filled with a
i;- Jgrateful sense of Divine goodness, let us

come to the altar of God; and with S
humble faith in his infinite mercies devote
ourselves to his service for evers

# SERMON VI. On GENTLENESS. JAMES, iii. 17. The wisdom that is from above, is  gentle 

l 145 ]
S E R M O N VI,

On GENTLENESS.

JAMES, iii. 17.

The ifi2om that is fiom above, is-gentle-
P~-ir0 be wife in our own eyes, to be SEVRM

.J

, VI.

wife in the opinion of the world, ---

and to be wife in the fight of God, are
three things so very different, as rarely to
coincide. One may often be wife in his
own eyes, who is far from being so in
the judgment of the world; and to be re-
puted a prudent man by the world, is no
security for being accounted wife by God&
As there is a worldly happincfs, which
God perceives to be no other than dif-
guised misery; as there are worldly ho-
nours, which in his estimation are re-

VOL. I. L proach;

SE R M. proach; so there is a worldly wifdomn,

VI.
i-y which, ill his fiht, is foolSJlcfxs. Of this

worldly wisdom the characters are given
in the context, and placed in contrast with
those of the wiftdom which is from above.
The one is the wisdom of the crafty;
the other, that of the upright. The one
terminates in felfifhnefs; the other, in
charity. The one is fill ofj rfif and bit-
ter cilvzti/gs; the other (f mercy and of
good ifrits. One of the chief charaters
by which the wisdom from above is dif-
tinguifhed, is gctlenefs, of which I am
now to discourse. Of this there is the
greater occasion to discourse, because it is
too seldom viewed in a religious light;
and is more readily confidered by the
bulk of men, as a mere felicity of nature,
or an exterior accompliflhment of man-
ners, than as a Christian virtue, which
they are bound to cultivate. I shall first
explain the nature of this virtue ; and shall
then oifer some arguments to recommend,
and feomCe ire ions to facilitate, the prac-
tice of it,

I BEGIN

I BEGIN with diflinguiflling true gen- SERM.

Vi.

tlenefs from passive tameness of spirit, _w
and from unlimited compliance with the
manners of others. That passive tame-
ness, which submits, without struggle, to
every encroachment of the violent and as-
fuming, forms no part of Christian duty;
but, on the contrary, is defirudive of
general happiness and order. That unli-
mited complaisance, which, on every oc-
cafion, falls in with the opinions and
manners of others, is so far from being a
virtue, that it is itself a vice, and the pa-
rent of many vices. It overthrows all
iteadinefs of principle; and produces that
sinful conformity with the world which
taints the whole characer. In the pre-
fcnt corrupted state of human manners,
always to assent and to comply, is the
very worst maxim we can adopt. It is
impossible to support the purity and dig-
nity of Christian morals, without oppo-
sing the world on various occasions, even
though we should stand alone. That
gentleness, therefore, which belongs to vir-

L 2 tue,

SER RM. tue, is to be carefully diftinguifled from
i^- the mean spirit of cowards, and the fawn-

ing alflent of sycophants. It renounces no
juir right from iear. It gives up no
important truth from flattery. It is indeed
not only consistent with a firm mind, but
it nccelarily requires a manly spirit, and a
fixed principle, in order to give it any real
value. Upon this solid ground only, the
polifl of gentleness can with advantage be
fuperinduced.

It stands opposed, not to the molt de-

termined regard for virtue and truth, but
to harshness and severity, to pride and
arrogance, to violence and oppreflion.
It is, properly, that part of the great
virtue of charity, which makes us un-
willing to give pain to any of our bre-
thren. Compassion prompts us to relieve
their wants. Forbearance prevents us from
retaliating their injuries. Meekness re-
'frains our angry paflions; candour, our
fevcere judgments. Gentleness corrects what-
ever is offensive in our manners; and, by
a conllant train of humane attentions,

studies

studies to alleviate the burden of common S E R M.

V!.

misery. Its office, therefore, is extensive. L--
It is not, like some other virtues, called
forth only on peculiar emergencies; but
it is continually in aftion, when we are
engaged in intercourse with men. It ought
to form our address, to regulate our speech,
and to diffuse itself over our whole beha-
viour.

I must warn you, however, not to

confound this gentle wif/(om which is-from
above, with that artificial courtesy, that
fludied finoothnefs of manners, which is
learned in the school of the world. Such
accomplishments, the most frivolous and
empty may possess. Too often they are
employed by the artful, as a snare; too
often affected by the hard and unfeel-
ing, as a cover to the baseness of their
minds. WVe cannot, at the fame time,
avoid observing the homage, which,
even in such instances, the world is con-
firained to pay to virtue. In order to
render society agreeable, it is found ne-
ceflary to afiume somewhat, that mav at

L 3 lea, .

S E R M. least carry its appearance. Virtue is the

Vi. _J_ e
universal charm. Even its shadow is

courted, when the substance is wanting.
The imitation of its form has been re-
duced into an art; and, in the commerce
of life, the first study of all who would
either gain the esteem, or win the hearts
of others, is to learn the speech, and to
adopt' the manners, of candour, gentle-
ness, and humanity. But that gentleness
which is the charaderiftick of a good
man, has, like every other virtue, its
feat in the heart: And, let me add, no-
thing except what flows from the heart,
can render even external manners truly
plealing. For no assumed behaviour can
at all times hide the real character. In
that unaffeaed civility which springs
from a gentle mind, there is a charm
infinitely more powerful than in all
the fludied manners of the most finished
courtier.

True gentleness is founded on a sense

of what we owe to him who made us,
and to the common nature of which we

all

all ihare. It arises from reflecion on our E R M.

VI.

own failings and wants; and from ju ft
views of the condition, and the duty of
man. It is native feeling, heightened and
improved by principle. It is the heart
which easily relents; which feels for every
thing that is human; and is backward
and flow to inflic the least wound. It is
affable in its address, and mild in its de-
meanour; ever ready to oblige, and will-
ing to be obliged by others; breathing
habitual kindness towards friends, cour-
tefy to itrangers, long-fuffering to ene-
mies. It exercises authority with modera-
tion; administers reproof with tender-
nes ; confers favours with ease and mo-
defty. It is unassuming in opinion, and
temperate in zeal. It contends not ea-
gerly about trifles; flow to contradic, and
still flower to blame; but prompt to
allay dissention, and to restore peace. It
neither intermeddles unneceflhrily with
the affairs, nor pries inquisitively into the
secrets of others. It delights above all
tlings to alleviate distress, and, if it can-

L 4 not

S E P M. not dry up the falling tear, to sooth at
L.-vca. least tie grieving heart. Where it has

not the power of being useful, it is never
burdensome. It seeks to please, rather
than to lhine and dazzle; and conceals
xith care that superiority, either of talents,
or of rank, 'which is oppressive to those

lwho are beneath it. In a word, it is that

.spirit, and that tenour of manners, whicl
the gospel of Christ enjoins, when it com-
mands us to bear one another's burdens ; to
rejoice c'itlh those ucbo rejoi-c, and to weep
with thofie ioo weep; /o please eveiy one his
neighbour for his good; to be kind and ten-
der-hearted; to be pitifil and courteous ; to
fipport the weak, and to be patient towards
'all men.

Having now sufficiently explained the

nature of this amiable virtue, I proceed to
recommend it to your pradice. Let me,
for this end, desire you to confider the duty
which you owe to God; to confider the
relation wllch you bear one to another ; to
confider your own intcrcft,

I, tCO.NS IDER

I. CONSIDER the duty which you owe SERM.
to God. When you survey his works,
nothing is so conspicuous, as his greatness
and majefly. When you consult his word,
nothing is more remarkable, than his atten-
tion to soften that greatness, and to place
it in the mildest and least oppressive light.
He not only charaderifes himself as the
Godofcoifolation, but, with condescending
gentleness, he particularly accommodates
himself to the situation of the unfortunate.
Hle dwelellclh with the bhumble and contrite.
Le hideth not his face wihen the af7iied cry.
1e healcfh the broken in heart, and bindeth
up their wcvouinds.-Wihen his Son came to
be the Saviolr of the world, he was emi-
nent for the fame attribute of mild and
gcntle goodness, Long before his birth, it
v.as prophesied of him that he Ihould not
/li/Ev, nori c1,, nor caz.fe his voice to be
h,.a-d i;n the i-reets ; that the bruiefd reed
.i: 3lol/d not brealk, nor quench the fioL'-
;/r fax'i:' And after his death, this

* Matth. xii. 19, zo.

diitin-

S E M. distinguishing feature in his charader was

Vi_ so universally remembered, that the Apostle

Paul, on occasion of a request which he
makes to the Corinthians, uses those re-
markable expreflions ', beseech you by the
,neek1neS and gcntlencfs of Chrjif. During
all his intercourse with men, no harshness,
or pride, or stately distance, appeared in
his demeanour. In his access, he was easy;
in his manners, simple; in his answers,
mild; in his whole behaviour, humble and
obliging. Learn of me, said he, for I am
meek and lowly in heart.-As the Son of
God is the pattern, so the Holy Ghost is
the inspirer of gentleness. His name is
the Consorter, the Spirit ofgrace and peace.
His fruits, or operations on the human
mind, are love, meekness, gentleness, and long-
Jifiienlg ?.-Thus, by every discovery of
the Godhead, honour is conferred upon
gentleness. It is held up to our view, as
peculiarly conneted with Celeflial Nature.
And suitable to such discoveries, is the whole
firain of the goifel It were unnecessary to

: 2 Cor. x. 1. ' Gal. v. 2z.

appeal

appeal to any single precept. You need SERM.
only open the New Teflament, to find this
virtue perpetually inculcated. Charity, or
love, is the capital figure ever presented
to our view; and gentleness, forbearance,
and forgiveness, are the founds ever recur-
ring on our ear.

So predominant, indeed, is this spirit

throughout the Christian dispensation,
that even the vices and corruptions of
men have not been able altogether to
defeat its tendency. Though that dif-
penfation is far from having hitherto
produced its full effeEt upon the world,
yet we can clearly trace its influence, in
humanizing the manners of men. Re-
markable, in this refpea, is the vicory
which it has gained over those powers of
violence and cruelty, which belong to the
infernal kingdom. Wherever Christian-
ity prevails, it has discouraged, and, in
some degree, abolished slavery. It has
rescued human nature from that ignomi-
nious yoke, under which, in former ages,
the one half of mankind groaned. It has

8 introduced

SE R M. introduced more equality between the two

VI.
t-V-. sexes, and rendered the conjugal union

more rational and happy. It has abated
the ferociousness of war. It has mitigated
the rigour of defpotifin, mitigated the
cruelty of punithment; in a word, has
reduced mankind from their ancient bar-
barity, into a more humane and gentle
slate.- Do we pretend refpea and zeal
for this religion, and at the fame time
allow ourselves in that harshness and feve-
rity, which are so contradictory to its ge-
nius ? Too plainly we show, that it has no
power over our hearts. We may retain
the Christian name; but we have aban-
doned the Christian spirit.

II. CONSIDER the relation which you

bear to one another. Man, as a solitary
individual, is a very wretched being,
As long as he stands detached from his
kind, he is possessed, neither of happiness,
nor of strength. We are formed by na-
ture to unite; we are impelled towards
each other, by the compafflonate instincts

I iln

in our frame; we are linked by a thou- SE R M.
sand connections, founded on common
wants. Gentleness, therefore, or, as it is
very properly termed, humanity, is what
man, as such, in every flation, owes to
man. To be inacceffble, contemptuous,
and hard of heart, is to revolt againfl
our own nature; is, in the language of
scripture, to hide onjfelves from our owZn
flij. Accordingly, as all feel the claim
which they have to mildness and huma-
nity, so all are sensibly hurt by the want
of it in others. On no fide are we more
vulncrable. No complaint is more feel-
ingly made, than that of the harsh and
rugged manners of persons with whom we
have intercourse. But how seldom do we
transfer the cause to ourselves, or examine
how far we are guilty of inflicing on
others, whose sensibility is the fame with
ours, those very wounds of which we so
loudly complain?

But, perhaps, it will be pleaded by

some, That this gentleness on which we
now insist, regards only those smaller

offices

SE RM. offices of life, which in their eye are

Vil

not essential to religion and goodness.
Negligent, they confess, on flight occa-
sions, of. the government of their temper,
or the regulation of their behaviour, they
are attentive, as they pretend, to the
great duties of beneficence; and ready,
whenever the opportunity presents, to
perform important services to their fel-
low-creatures. But let such persons re-
flec, that the occasions of performing
those important good deeds, very rarely
occur. Perhaps their situation in life, or
the nature of their conneicions, may in
a great measure exclude them from such
opportunities. Great events give scope
for great virtues; but the main tenour of
human life is composed of small occur-
rences. Within the round of these, lie
the materials of the happiness of most
men; the subjects of their duty, and
the trials of their virtue. Virtue must
be formed and supported, not by unfre-
quent acts, but by daily and repeated
exertions. In order to its becoming either

vigorous

vigorous or useful, it must be habitually S ERM.
aative; not breaking forth occasionally with -
a transient lustre, like the blaze of the
comet; but regular in its returns, like the
light of day: Not like the aromatic gale,
which sometimes feafis the sense; but like
the ordinary breeze, which purifies the air,
and renders it healthful.

Years may pass over our heads, with-

out affording any opportunity for adds
of high beneficence or extenlive utility.
Whereas not a day passes, but in the
common tranfadions of life, and efpe-
cially in the intercourse of domestic
society, gentleness finds place for pro-
moting the happiness of others, and for
strengthening in ourselves the habit of
virtue. Nay, by seasonable discoveries
of a humane spirit, we sometimes contri-
bute more materially to the advancement
of happiness, than by a&ions which are
seemingly more important. There are
situations, not a few, in human life,
where the encouraging reception, the
condescending behaviour, and the look

of

SER M. of sympathy, bring greater relief to the

VI.

heart than the mcet bountiful gift. While,
on the other fide, when the hand of libe-
rality is extended to befrow, the want of
gentleness is fuflicient to frufirate the in-
tention of the benefit. We four thofc
whom we mean to oblige; and, by con-
ferring favours with ostentation and harsh-
ness, we convert them into injuries. Can
any disposition then be held to poflefs a
low place in the scale of virtue, whose in-
fluence is so considerable on the happiness
of the world ?

Gentleness is, in truth, the great ave-

nue to mutual enjoyment. Amidst the
strife of interfering interests, it tempers
the violence of contention, and keeps
alive the feeds of harmony. It softens
animofities; renews endearments; and
renders the countenance of man a re-
frefhment to man. Banish gentleness
from the earth; suppose the world to be
filled with none but harffi and contentious
spirits; and what fort of society would
remain? the solitude of the desert were

preferable

prcferable to it. The conflit of jarring SEv RM.
elcment in chaos; the cave, where sub-
terraneous winds contend and roar; the
(en where serpents hiss, and beasts of the
fore)i how;l; would be the only proper
rcprele-ntations of such aflemblies of men.
-O that I had wiigs like a dove ! for then
I would fly away, and be at ref. Lo ! then
I wo.,ll wande r fir of, and remain in the
zeldcrni f ; I won/!n hasen mi y eclapc from
the .windC' f-ormii and tempefl: F or I have
f,'eei violence and ,,ri f. in the city. If-
chief andfiorro, arce it tce m.idst of it: De-
ceit and guile depart not -from the J/reet 'r
-Strange! that where men have all one
common interest, that they fllould so often,
absurdly, concur in defeating it! Has not
Nature already provided a sufficient quan-
tity of unavoidable evils for the state of
man ? As if we did not susser enough from
thle storm which beats upon us without,
must we conspire also, in those societies
where we assemble, in order to find a re-
treat from that fiorm, to harass one ano-

Pfal. Iv. 6, 7, S.
VTOLI. I. ther?

SE, R l. ther ?-Bnt if the sense of duty, and of

Vi.
L- ~-) common happiness, bIe inlufficient to re-

commend the virtue of which we treat, then
let me desire you,

III. To confider your own interepr,

Whatever ends a good man can be supposed
to purlile, gentleneis will be found to favour
them. It prepoffefles and wins every heart.
It persuades, when every other argument
fails ; often disarms the fierce, and melts
the stubborn. Whereas harshness confirms
the opposition it would subdue; and, of an
indifferent person, creates an enemy. He
who could overlook an injury committed
in the collision of interests, will long and
severely resent the flights of a contemptuous
behaviour.-To the man of gentienefs,. the
world is generally disposed to ascribe every
other good quality. The higher endow-
ments of the mind we admire at a distance;
and when any impropriety of behaviour
accompanies them, we admire without love.
They are like some of the distant stars, whose
beneficial influencereaches not to us, ,Where-

d as,

as, of the influence of gentleness, ail in S ERM.
some degree partake, and therefore all love
it. The man of this character rites in the
world without ftruggile and flourishes with-
out envy. His misfortunes are universally
lamented; and his failings are easily for-
given.

But whatever may be the effec of this
,irtue on our external condition, its influ-
ence on our internal enjoyment is certain
and powerful. That inward tranquillity
which it promotes, is the first requisite to
every pleasurable feeling. It is the calm
and clear atmosphere, the serenity and fun-
Ihine of the mind. When benignity and
gentleness reign within, we are always leait
in hazard of being ruffled from without;
every person, and every occurrence, are
beheld in the most favourable light. But
let some clouds of disgust and ill-humour
gather on the mind ; and immediately the
scene changes: Nature seems transformed;
and the appearance of all things is blackened
to our view. The gentle mind is like the
finooth fireanm which reflects every object

M in

sE R M. i iits jus proportion, and in its faireR co:

lours. The violent spirit, like troubled wa-
ters, renders back the images of things
distorted and broken ; and communicates to
them all that disordered motion which arises
solely from its own agitation.

Ojfi/'ct.s 1itl come. As soon may the

waves of the sea cease to roll, as provoca-
tions to ariie from human corruption and
frailty. Attacked by great injuries, the man
us mild and gentle spirit will feel what hu-
man nature feels; and will defend and re-
sent, as his duty allows him. But to those
flight provocations, and frivolous offences,
which are the most fiequent causes of dif-
quiet, he is happily fuperiour. Hence his
days flow in a far more placid tenour than
those of others ; exempted from the num-
berlefs discomposures which agitate vulgar
minds. Inspired with higher sentiments;
taught to regard, with indulgent eye, the
frailties of men, the omissions of the care-
leis, the follies of the imprudent, and the
levity of the fickle, he retreats into the calm-
nlefs of his spirit, as into an undisturbed

fanduary;

ianduary; and quietly allows the usual SE RM.
current of life to hold its course. vi-

This virtue has another, and still more

important connection with our interest, l)y
means of that relation which our present
behaviour bears to our eternal state. Hea-
ven is the region of gentleness and friend-
Ihip; I-Iell, offiercenefs and-animofity. If
then, as the scripture instructs us, according
to wbant 'we nlorJ fJwj we miJl hereafter
reap; it follows, that the cultivation of a
gentle temper is neceflary to prepare us for
heavenly felicity; and that the indulgence
of harsh dispositions, is the introduction to
future misery. Men, I am afraid, too often
separate those articles of their belief which
relate to eternity, from the ordinary affairs
of the world. They connect them with the
feabfns of seriousness and gravity. They
leave them with much refpeCl, as in a high
region, to which, only on great occasions,
they resort; and, when they descend into
common life, confider themselves as at li-
berty to give free scope to their humours
Acd pailions. Whereas, in faCt, it is their

M 3 behaviour
%,

E R M. behaviour in the daily train of social inter-.
VI.
_,1 ^ course, which, more than any other cause,

fixes and determines their spiritual charac-
ter; gradually instilling those dispositions,
and forming those habits, which affeet their
everlasting condition. With regard to trifles,
perhaps their malignant dispositions may
chiefly be indulged. But let them remem-
ber well, that those trifles, by encreafing the
growth of peevishness and passion, become
pregnant with the moit serious mischiefs;
and may fit them, before they are aware,
for being the future companions of none
but infernal spirits.

I mean not to fay, that, in order to our

preparation for heaven, it is enough to be
mild and gentle; or that this virtue alone
will cover all our fins. Through the feli-
city of natural constitution, a certain degree
of this benignity may be possessed by sone,
whose hearts are in other refpecs corrupt,
and their lives irregular. But what I mean
to assert, is, That where no attention is
given to the government of temper, meet-
ness for Heaven is not yet acquired, and the

regenerating

-egencrating power of religion is as yet un- SER M.
known. One of the first works of the spirit -
of God, is, to infuse into every heart which
it inhabits, that genttle wsidonm which is f'om
above. They who are Chrijfl's have crtcified
thefleJqi with its affeLions and lu1fs: but let
it not be forgotten, that among the works
of the fleJh, hantred, variance, emulaltions.r,
w;rath, Jfrif, and eznvilgs, are as exprefly
enumerated, as uncleanzfis, amlriders, dr-inlk-
ennefJ, and revellitng ". They who continue
either in the one or the other, fiaall not in-
berit, indeed cannot inherit, the ki'ngdiom of
God.

Having thus fhowa the importance of

gentleness, both as a moral virtue, and as
a Chri fian grace, I {hall conclude the sub-
je&, with briefly suggesting ome confidera-
tions which may be of use to facilitate the
pradice of it.

FOR this end, let me advise you to view

your charater with an impartial eye; and
to learn, from your own failings, to give

Gal. v. 19, zo, 2z.

Ml 4 that

SERIM. that indulgence which in your turn you
t--L.. claim. It is pride which fills the world

with so much harfnmiefs and feveCrtv In the
fulness of fclf-cllilmation, we forget what
we are. ¥We claim attentions, to whlich we
are not entitled. TWe are rigorous to of-
fences, as if wc had never otcnlded; un-
feeling to diftrels, as if we knew not what
it was to susser. From those airy regions
of pride and folly, let us descend to our
proper level. Let us frivey the natural
equality on which Providence lias placed
man with man, and reflec on the infirmi-
ties common to all. If the reaieoion on
natural equality and mutual offences be in-
fuflicient to prompt humanity, let us at
leafl remember lwhat we are in the figlt of
God. Have we none of that forbearance

to give to one another, which we all so ear-
nefaly intreat from Heaven ? Can we look-
for clemency or gentlenelss from our Judge,
when we are so bacvkward to ihow it to our
own brethren ?

Accuflom yourfelvcs, also, to reflect on
the finall moment of tho!e thlings w-iich are

the

tle usual incentives to violence and conten- SERM.

VI.

tion. In the ruffled and angry hour, we
view every appearance through a false me-
dium. The most inconliderable point of
interest, or honour, swells into a momentous
object; and the slightest attack seems to
threaten immediate ruin. But after passion
or pride has iubfided, we look round in
vain for the mighty mischiefs we dreaded.
The fabric, which our disturbed imagination
had reared, totally disappears. But though
the cause of contention has dwindled away,
its consequences remain. TWe have alienated
a friend; we have embittered an enemy;
we have sown the feeds of future flifpicion,
malevolence, or difguf.-Sutfpend your vio-
lence, I beseech you, for a moment, when
caulfe of discord occur. .Anticipate that
period of coolness, which, of itself, will
ifon arrive. Allow yourselves to think,
how little you have any profped of gaining
by fierce contention; but how much of the
true happiness of life you are certain of
throwing away. Easily, and from the
inalleft chink, the bitter waters of firife are

let

SERM. ,ct forth; but their course cannot be fore-

VI.
sy~ s£een; and he seldom fails of suffering most

frorn their poisonous effet, who first al-
lowed them to flow.

But gentleness will, most of all, be pro-

mnotcd by frequent views of those great
objets which cur holy religion presents.
Let the profpets of immortality fill your
minds. Look upon this world as a slate of
paflage. Confider yourfelvcs as engaged
in the purruit of higher interests; as acing
now, undr the eye of God, an introduc-
tory part to a more important scene. Ele-
-vated by such sentiments, your minds will
become calm and sedate. You will look
down, as from a fuperiour station, on the
petty disturbances of the world. They are
the felfilh, the sensual, and the vain, who
are most fui bje to the impotence of pas-
sion. They are linked so closely to the
world; by so many fides they touch every
objec, and every person around them, that
they are perpetually hurt, and perpetually
hurting others. But the spirit of true re-
igion remove us to a proper distance from

the

the grating objeas of worldly contention. SzERM
It leaves us sufficiently conneted with the .
world, for aaing our part in it with pro-
priety; but disengages us from it so far, as
to weaken its power of disturbing our tran-
quillity. It inspires magnanimity; and
magnanimity always breathes gentleness.
t leads us to view the follies of men with
pity, not with rancour; and to treat, with
the mildness of a fuperiour nature, what in
little minds would call forth all the bitter-
ness of passion.

Aided by such considerations, let us cul-

tivate that gentle wisdom which is, in so
many refpeas, important both to our duty
and our happiness. Let us assume it as the
ornament of every age, and of every station.
Let it temper the petulance of youth, and
soften the morpfenefs of old age. Let it
mitigate authority in those who rule, and
promote deference among those who obey.
1 conclude with repeating the caution, not
to mistake for true gentleness, that flimfey
imitation of it, called polished manners,
-vrch often, among men of the world,

under

s ERM. under a fnooth appearanlce, conceals mucl
vl asperity. Let yours be native gentleness of

heart, flowing fiom the love of God, and
the love of man. Unite this amiable spirit
with a proper zeal for all that is right, and
juR, and true. Let piety be combined
in your character with humanity. Let de-
termined integrity dwell in a mild and
gentle breaf. A charatlcr thus supported
will command more real reile&, than can
be procured by the mofi shining accom-
plifnmcnts, whlen ieparatcd from virtue.

# SERMON VII. On the DISORDERS of the PASSIONS. ESTHER, v. 13. Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the King's gate.

[ '73 ]

S E'R M O N VII.
On the DISORDERS of the PAssIONS.

ESTIIER, V. 13.

lct all this availeth me nothing, so long as 1

siee MordCcai the Jew fitting at the King's
gate.

t' H ESE are the words of one, who SERM.
.i though high in tation and power, VII
confefied himself to be miserable. They
relate to a micnorable occurrence in the
Per'in history, under the reign of Aha-
tlerus, wvho is flppoied to be the Prince
known among the Greek historians by the
name of Artaxerxes. Ahasuerus had ad-
vanced to the chief dignity in his king-
dom, H-aman, an Amalekite, who inhe-
rited all the ancient enmity of his race to

the

S E P M. the Jewish nation. He appears, frora

--v-- what is recorded of him, to have been a

very wicked minifler. Ralfed to greatness
without merit, he employed his power
solely for the gratification of his passions,
As the honours which he possessed were
next to royal, his pride was every day fed
with that servile homage which is pecu-
liar to Asiatic courts; and all the ser-
vants of the King prostrated themselves
before him. In the midt of this general
adulation, one person only stooped not to
H-aman. This was Mordecai the Jew;
who, knowing this Amalekite to be an
enemy to the people of God, and, with
virtuous indignation, despising that in-
folence of prosperity with which he saw
him lifted up, bowed not, nor did him re-
verence. On this appearance of difre-
ipe& from Mordecai, Hainan was full of
wrath : But he thought fcornl to lay, hands
on Mliordecai alone. Personal revenge was
not sufficient to satisfy him. So violent
and black were his paflions, that he re-
solved to exterminate the whole nation to

which

vllichl Mordecai belonged. Abusing, for SERM.
this cruel purpose, the favour of his cre-
dulous Sovereign, he obtained a decree to
be sent forth, that, against a certain day,
all the Jews throughout the Persian do-
minions fiould be put to the sword.
Mean while, confident of success, and
blind to approaching ruin, he continued
exulting in his prosperity. Invited by
Ahasuerus to a royal banquet, which
Esther the Queen had prepared, he went
brth that day joyful, and with a glad heart.
But behold how flight an incident was
sufficient to poison his joy! As he went
forth, he saw Mordecai in the King's
gate; and observed, that frill he refused
to do him homage: He flood not up, nor
was moved for him; although he well
knew the formidable designs which Ha-
man was preparing to execute. One pri-
vate man, who despised his greatness,
and disdained fubmiflion, while a whole
kingdom trembled before him; one spirit,
which the utmorf stretch of his power
:o:ild neither subdue nor humble, blast-

ed

S E R M. ed his triumphs. His whole foul wvs

VIT.
~--c,. fhakcn with a form of passion. VWrath,

pride, and desire of revenge, rose into
fury. With difficulty he restraincd him-
self in public; but as soon as he came
to his own house, he was forced to dif-
close the agony of his mind. H1e gather-
ed together his friends and family, with
Zerifl his wife. He told them of the gloy
of his riches, and the mnltlitlde of his chil-
dren, and all the thiglls wherein the Kingg
had promoted him, and how he bad ad-
vanced hin above the princes and servants
of the King. HIe fid oeov, moreove , a, Jher
the itneen did let no mnan come in with the
Kiing, unto the banquet that Jfe had pre-
pared, bnt mjfeilf; and to-morrow alTfo am I
invited unto her with the King. After all
this preamble, what is the concluiion?-
Yet all this availetl me nothing, so 0ong as
Ifee Mordecai the Yew fitting at the King's
gate.

The fequei of Haman's history I shall

not now pursue. It might afford matter
for much infiruclion, by the confpicu-

7 ous

oIusjuftice of God in his fall and punish- SE RM.

VII.

ment. But, contemplating only the fin-
gular situation in which the Text presents
him, and the violent agitation of his
mind which it displays, the following
reflecions naturally arise, which, together
with some pracical improvements, ihall
make the subjea of this discourse. I. How
miserable is vice, when one guilty pafflon
creates so much torment! II. How una-
vailing is prosperity, when in the height
of it, a tingle disappointment can destroy
the relish of all its pleasures! III. How
weak is human nature, which, in the ab-
fence of real, is thus prone to form to it-
telf imaginary woes!

I. How miserable is vice, when one

guilty paflion is capable of creating so
much torment! When we discourse to
you of the internal misery of finners;
when we represent the pangs which they
susser, from violent paflions,, and a cor-
rupted heart,; we are sometimes fufpe&ed
of chufing a theme for declamation, and

VOL. I. N of

S E RM.1 of heightening the piture which we
*- 2- draw, by colours borrowed from fancy.

They tliofe minds arc, by nature, hap-
pily tranquil, or whose situation in life
removes them from the disturbance and
tumult of pailion, can hardly conceive,
that as long as the body is at ease, and
the external condition prolperous, any
thing which pafles within the mind
ihould caulfe fich exquiiite woe. But,
for the truth, of our assertions, we appeal
to the history of mankind. We might
reason from the constitution of the ra-
tional frame; where the understanding is
appointed to be ftpreme, and the paflions
to be subordinate; and where, if this due
arrangement of its parts be overthrown,
misery as necessarily ensues, as pain is
consequent in the animal fiame, upon
the distortion of its members. But lay-
ing speculations of this kind aside, it is
sufficient to lead you to the view of fads,
the import of which can neither be con-
troverted, nor mistaken. This is, indeed,
the great advantage of history, that it is

a mirl

a mirrour which holds up mankind to their s E RM.

VII.

own view. For, in all ages, human na-
ture has been the fame. In the circle of
worldly affairs, the fame characters and
situations are perpetually returning; and
in the follies and passions, the vices and
crimes, of the generations that are past, we
read those of the present.

Attend, then, to the instance now be-

fore us; and conceive, if you can, a per-
son more thoroughly wretched, than one
reduced to make this humiliating consef-
sion, that though surrounded with power,
opulence, and pleasure, he was loft to all
happincs, through the fierceness of his
resentment; and was at that moment
stung by disappointment, and torn by
rage, beyond what he could bear. All
this availeth me notLing, so long as Ifee
Mordecai the 7ew fitting at the King's gate.
Had this been a soliloquy of Haman's
within himself, it would have been a fiffi-
cient discovery of his misery. But when
we confider it as a confession which he
makes to others, it is a proof that his

N 2 misery

SER M. misery was become insupportable. For

VII.
, j such agitations of the mind every man

strives to conceal, because he knows they
dishonour him. Other griefs and for-
rows, he can, with freedom, pour out to
a confident. What he suffers from the
injustice or malice of the world, he is not
ashamed to acknowledge. But when his
suffering arises from the bad dispositions
of his own heart; when, in the height
of prosperity, he is rendered miserable,
solely by disappointed pride, every ordi-
nary motive for communication ceases.
Nothing but the violence of anguish can
drive him to confess a passion which ren-
ders him odious, and a weakness which
renders him despicable. To what ex-
tremity, in particular, must he be re-
duced, before he can disclose to his own
family the infamous secret of his misery ?
In the eye of his family every man withes
to appear refpe&table, and to cover from
their knowledge whatever may vilify or
degrade him. Attacked or reproached
abroad, he consoles himself with his im-

portance

portance at home; and in domestic at- SERIM.
tachment and refpe&, seeks for some com-
penration for the injustice of the world.
judge then of the degree of torment
which Haman endured, by its breaking
through all these ieftraints, and forcing
him to publish his ihame before those
from whom all men seek most to hide it.
How revere must have been the conflict
which he underwent within himself, be-
fore he called together his wife and all
his friends for this purpose ! How dread-
ful the agony he suffered at the moment
of his confession, when, to the astonished
company, he laid open the cause of his
distress .

Assemble all the evils which poverty,

disease, or violence can inflit, and their
stings will be found by far less pungent,
than those which such guilty paflions dart
into the heart, Amidst the ordinary cala-
mities of the world, the mind can exert
its powers, and suggest relief: And the
mind is properly the man; the sufferer,
and his sufferings, can be distinguished.

N3 But

SE RL M. But those disorders of paion, by feiz-

ing direltly on the mind, attack hu-
man nature in its strong hold, and cut
off its last resource. They penetrate to the
very feat of fenlation; and convert all
the powers of thought into ivnftruments of
torture.

Let us remark, in the event that is now

before us, the awful hand of God; and
admire his juflice, in thus making the
finner's own wickcfdneJf to reprove himi, and
his backJlidiigs to corrct hiu. Scepticks
reason in vain against the reality of di-
vine government. It is not a fubjedc of
dispute. It is a fadt which carrics the
evidence of fcic, and displays itself be-
fore our eyes. We fee the Almighty ma-
lifeflly puifui:g the ainzer with Cvil. Wrc
fee him conneciing with every single de-
viation from duty, those wounds of the
spirit which occasion the most exquisite
torments. He hath not merely promul-
gated his laws now, and delayed the dif-
tribution of rewards and puniifhments
until a future period of being. But the

8 ianCtions

fantions of his laws already take place; S E R M.
their effedcs appear; and with such infi- .-
nite wisdom are they contrived, as to
require no other executioners of justice
against the finner, than his own guilty
passions. God needs not come forth from
his secret place, in order to bring him to
punishment. He need not call thunder
down from the heavens, nor raise any mi-
nilter of wrath from the abyss below. He
needs only fay, Ephraim is joined to his
idols; let hi alone : And, at that instant,
the finner becomes his own tormentor.
The infernal fire begins, of itself, to kindle
within him. The worm that never dies,
seizes on his heart.

Let us remark also, from this example,

how imperfecly we can judge from ex-
ternal appearances, concerning real hap-
piness or misery. All Persia, it is pro-
bable, envied Haman as the happiest
person in the empire; while yet, at the
moment of which we now treat, there
was not within its bounds, one more
thoroughly wretched. We are reduced,

N 4 and

SE R I. and deceived by that false glare which

prosperity sometimes throws around bad
men. 'We are tempted to imitate their
crimes, in order to partake of their ima-
gined felicity. But remember Haman,
and beware of the snare. Think not,
when you behold a pageant of grandeur
displayed to public view that you dif-
ccrn the ensign of certain happiness. In
order to form any just conclusion, you
must follow the great man into the re-
tired apartment, where he lays aside his
diiguife; you muff not only be able to
penetrate into the interiour of families,
but you mult have a faculty by which
you can look into the inside of hearts.
Were you endowed with fiuch a power,
you would most commonly behold good
men, in proportion to their goodness,
satisfied and easy; you would behold
atrocious finners always reflefs and un-
happy.

Unju f are our complaints, of the

promiscuous diflribution made by Provi-
dence, of its favours among men. From

fiperficial

superficial views such complaints arise. S ERM.
The distribution of the goods of fortune, v-
indeed, may often be promiscuous; that
is, disproportioned to the moral charac-
ters of men; but the allotment of real
happiness is never so. For to the wicked
there is no peace. They are like the troubled
sea when it cannot ref. They travel with
pain all their days. Trouble and anguiJs
prevail againfl then. Terrours make them
afraid on every fide. A dreadful found is
in their cars; and they are in great fear
where no fear is.- Hitherto we have
confidered Haman under the character of
a very wicked man, tormented by crimi-
nal passions. Let us now confider him,
merely as a child of fortune, a prosper-
ous man of the world; and proceed to
observe,

II. How unavailing worldly prosperity

is, since, in the midst of it, a single dif-
appointment is sufficient to embitter all
its pleasures. We might at first imagine,
that the natural effeCt of prosperity would

be,

SE R M. be, to diffuse over the mind a prevailing

fatisfadion, which the lesser evils of life
could not ruffle or disturb. We might
expect, that as one in the full glow of
health, deiifiics the inclemency of wea-
ther; lb one in pofleffion of all the ad-
vantages of high power and station,
fllould disregard flight injuries; and, at
perfee ease with himself, fllould view,
in the most favourable light, the behavi-
our of others around him. Such effects
would indeed follow, if worldly prosperity
contained in itself the true principles of
human felicity. But as it possesses them
not, the very reverse of those confequen-
ces generally obtains. Prosperity debili-
tates, instead of strengthening the mind.
Its most common effet is, to create an
extreme sensibility to the slightest wound.
It foments impatient desires; and raises
expectations which no success can satisfy.
It softers a faill delicacy, which sickens
in the midfi of indulgence. By repeat-
ed gratification, it blunts the feelings of
men to what is pleasing; and leaves them

unhappily

unhappily acute to whatever is uneasy. SERM.

VII.

Hence, the gale which another would ,_
scarcely feel, is, to the prosperous, a rude
tempet. Hence, the role-leaf doubled be-
Jow them on the couch, as it is told of
the effeminate Sybarite, breaks their reft.
Hence, the difrefpea shown by Mordecai,
preyed with such violence on tle heart of
Haman. Upon no principle of reason can
we assign a fuflicient cause for all the
distress which this incident occasioned to
him. The cause lay not in the external
incident. It lay within himself; it arose
from a mind distempered by prosperity.

Let this example correEt that blind

eagerness, with which we rush to the
chace of worldly greatness and honours.
I lay not, that it should altogether divert
us from pursuing them; since, when en-
joyed with temperance and wisdom, they
may doubtless both enlarge our utility,
and contribute to our comfort. But let it
teach us not to over-rate them. Let it
convince us, that unless we add to them

ihe necessary correfives of piety and vir-

tue,

SE R M tue, they are, by themselves, more likely
Ay to render us wretched, than to make us

happy.

Let the memorable fate of Haman

suggest to us also, how often, betides cor-
rupting the mind, and engendering inter-
nal misery, they lead us among precipices,
and betray us into ruin. At the moment
when fortune seemed to finile upon him
with the most serene and fettled aljpci,
she was digging in secret the pit for his
fall. Prosperity was weaving around his
head the web of deftrudion. Success in-
flamed his pride; pride increased his thirds
of revenge; the revenge which, for the
fake of one man, he fought to execute on
a whole nation, incensed the Queen; and
he is doomed to susser the fame death
which he had prepared for Mordecai.-
Had Haman remained in a private fla-
tion, he might have arrived at a peaceable
old age. He might have been, I shall not
fay, a good or a happy man, yet pro-
bably far less guilty, and less wretched,
than when placed at the head of the

greatest

greatest empire in the East. iWho nioweth S E RM.
what is good for nan in this life, all the
ldays of his vain lif, which hefpendeth as a
fladow.

An extensive contemplation of human

affairs will lead us to this conclusion,
That, among the different conditions and
ranks of men, the balance of happiness
is preserved in a great measure equal;
and that the high and the low, the rich
and the poor, approach, in point of real
enjoyment, much nearer to each other,
than is commonly imagined. In the lot
of man, mutual compensations, both of
pleasure and of pain, universally take
place. Providence never intended, that
any Ltate here fllould be either completely
happy, or entirely miserable. If the feel-
ings of pleafiure are more numerous, and
more lively, in the higher departments
of life, such also are those of pain. If
greatness flatters our vanity, it multiplies
our dangers. If opulence increases our
gratifications, it increases, in the fame
proportion, our desires and demands. If

7 the

SERM. the poor arc confined to a more narrow
Gv_- circle, yet within that circle lie most of

those natural fatisfadions, which, after
all the refinements of art, are found to
be the most genuine and true.-In a slate,
therefore, where there is neither so much
to be coveted on the one hand, nor to be
dreaded on the other, as at first appears,
how submissive ought we to be to the dif-
pofal of Providence! How temperate in
our desires and pursuits! How much more
attentive to preserve our virtue, and to
improve our minds, than to gain the doubt-
ful and equivocal advantages of worldly
prosperity !- But now, laying aside the
consideration of Haman's great crimes;
laying aside his high prosperity; viewing
him simply as a man, let us observe, from
his history,

III. How weak, human nature is,

which, in the absence of real, is thus
prone to create to itself imaginary woes.
All this availeth mne nothin7, so long as Ifee
Mordecai the ew fittning at fLe King's gate.

* -What

--What was it, 0 Haman! to thee, SERM.
though Mordecai had continued to lit
there, and neglected to do thee homage ?
Would the banquet have been on .that
account the less magnificent, thy palace
lels splendid, or thy retinue less nume-
rous? Could the difrefped of an obscure
franger dishonour the favourite of a
mighty King? In the midst of a thou-
sand fubmiflive courtiers, was one fullen
countenance an objet worthy of drawing
thy notice, or of troubling thy repose ?-
Alas! in Haman we behold too jurf a
piaure of what often passes within our-
lelves. We never know what it is to be
long at ease. Let the world cease from
changing around us. Let external things
keep that situation in which we most
wifli them to remain; yet somewhat
from within ihall soon arise, to disturb
our happiness. A M.rdccci appears, or
fecms to appear, fi'ti!g at tec gate. Some
vexation, which our fancy has either
entirely created, or at least has unreason-
ably aggravated, corrodes us in secret;

and

SE RM. and until that be removed, all that we

VII.
A_,1 enjoy availeth us nothing. Thus, while

we are incessantly complaining of the
vanity and the evils of human life, we
make that vanity, and we increase those
evils, Unskilled in the art of extracing
happiness from the objecs around us, our
ingenuity solely appears in converting them
into misery.

Let it not be thought, that troubles of

this kind are incident only to the great
and the mighty. Though they, perhaps,
from the intemperance of their passions,
are peculiarly exposed to them; yet the
disease itself belongs to human nature,
and spreads through all ranks. In the
humble, and seemingly quiet shade of
private life, discontent broods over its
imaginary sorrows; preys upon the citi-
zen, no less than upon the courtier; and
often nouriflies passions, equally malig-
nant in the cottage and in the palace.
Having once seized the mind, it spreads
its own gloom over every surrounding
object; it every where searches out ma-

terials

tcrials for itself; and in no direction more s IRM
frequently employs its unhappy a&tivi- --
ty, than in creating divisions amongst
mankind, and in magnifying flight, pro-
vocations into mortal injuries. Those
felf-creLated mifcries, imaginary in the
caute, but real in the furlering, will be
found to form a proportion of human
evils, not inferiour, either in severity or
in number, to all that we endure from
the unavoidable calamities of life. In
situations where much comfort might be
enjoyed, this man's superiority, and that
man's neglect, our jealousy of a friend,
our hatred of a rival, an imagined as-
fiont, or a mistaken point of honour,
allow us no repose. Hence, discords in
families, animofities among friends, and
wars among nations. Hence, Haman
miserable in the midst of all that great-
ness could bestow. Hence multitudes
in the most obscure flations, for whom
Providence seemed to have prepared a
quiet life, no less eager in their petty
broils, nor less tormented by their pas-

VOL. . 0 flions,

SERRM. sions, than if princely honours were the

VII.
,- __ prize for which they contended.

FRioM this train of obfcrvation, which

the Text has suggested, can we avoid re-
fleting upon the disorder in which hu-
man nature plainly appears at present to
lie? We have beheld, in Haman, the
pidure of that misery which arises from
evil paflions; of that unhappiness, which
is incident to the highest prosperity; of
that discontent, which is common to
every state. Whether we confider him
as a bad man, a prosperous man, or fim-
ply as a man, in every light we behold
reason too weak for pafflon. This is the
source of the reigning evil; this is the
root of the universal disease. The story
of Haman only lmows us, what human
nature has too generally appeared to
be in every age. Hence, when we read
the history of nations, what do we read
but the history of the follies and crimes
of men ? We may dignify those recorded
transactions, by calling them the intrigues

of

of iatefinen, and the exploits of conquer- SER M.

VII.

ours; but they are, in truth, no other than ey
the efforts of discontent to ecaape from
its misery, and the struggles of contending
paflions among unhappy men. The history
of mankind has ever been a continued
iragedy; the world, a great theatre exhi-
biting the fame repeated scene, of the follies
of men shooting forth into guilt, and of
their paflions fermenting, by a quick pro-
cess, into misery.

But can we believe, that the nature of

man came forth in this slate from the
hands of its gracious Creator? Did he
frame this world, and store it with inha-
bitants, solely that it might be replenished
with crimes and misfortunes ?-In the
moral, as well as in the natural world, we
may plainly difccrn the signs of orme
violent convulsion, which has shattered the
original workmanfliip of the Almighty.
Amiidf this wreck of human nature,
traces fiill remain which indicate its Au-
ther. Those high powers of conscience
and reason, that capacity for happiness,

0 2 that

SER M. that ardour of enterprize, that glow of
VII.

affe&ion, which often break through the
gloom of human vanity and guilt, are
like the cfattered columns, the broken
arches, and defaced sculptures of some
fallen temple, whose ancient splendour
appears amidst its ruins. So confiicuous
in human nature are those characers,
both of a high origin, and of a degrad-
ed state, that, by many religious sects
throughout the earth, they have been
seen and confessed. A tradition seems to
have pervaded almost all nations, that
the human race had either through some
offence forfeited, or through some mif-
fortune lofi, that fiation of primaeval
honour which they once possessed. But
while, from this doctrine, ill understood,
and involvcd in many fabulous tales, the
nations wandering in Pagan darkness
could draw no confccuences that were
julf; whiile totally ignorant of the na-
ture f the dieae, the fought in vain
for the remedy; the iame divine revela-
tion, which has informed us in what

.4 manner

manner our apoftacy arose, from the abuse s ER M.
of our rational powers, has inftruded us
also how we may be rcfiored to virtue and
to happiness.

LET us, therefore, study to improve

the afliftance which this revelation affords,
for the restoration of our nature, and the
recovery of our felicity. With humble
and grateful minds, let us apply to those
medicinal springs which it hath opened,
for curing the disorders of our heart and
passions. In this view, let us, with reve-
rence, look up to that Divine Personage,
who descended into this world, on pur-
pose to be the light and the ife of men;
who came in the fullness of grace and
truth, to repair the deflation of mani, ge-
neCrations, to restore order among the
works of God, and to raise up a new earth
and newi heavens, wherein, righteofitefs
/Iholld dwellfor ever. Under his tuition
let us put ourselves; and, amidst the
storms of paflion to which we are here
exposed, and the slippery paths which we

0 3 are

SERM. are left to tread, never trust prefumptu-

VII.

oufly to our own underfianding. Thank-
ful that a Heavenly ConduEtor vouchsafes
his aid, let us earncfily pray, that from
him may delcend divine light to guide our
steps, and divine strength to fortify our
minds. Let us pray, that his grace may
keep us from all intemperate passions, and
mistaken pursuits of pleasure; that whether
it fliall be his will to give or to deny us
earthly prosperity, he may bless us with a
calm, a found, and well-regulated mind;
may give us moderation in success, and
fortitude under disappointment; and may
enable us so to take warning from the
crimes and miseries of others, as to escape
the snares of guilt.

WHILE we thus maintain a due de-

pendence on God, let us also exert our-
selves with care in adting our own part.
From the whole of what has been said,
this important inftruaion arises, that the
happiness of every man depends more
upon the state of his own mind, than

upon

upon any one external circumstance; nay, s E R M.
more than upon all external things put '-
togcther. WVe have seen, that inordinate
passions are the great disturbers of life;
and that, unless we posiess a good confci-
ence, and a well-governcd mind, difcon-
tent will blast every enjoyment, and the
highest prosperity will prove only difguif-
ed misery. Fix then this conclusion in
your minds, that the deftruaion of your
virtue is the defirution of your peace.
KIep thy heart with all diligence; govern
it with the greatest care; for out of it are
1th i7ules of life. In no fRation, in no period,
think yourselves secure from the dangers
which spring from your pafiions. Every
age, and every station they beset; from
youth to grey hairs, and from the peasant
to the prince.

At your first setting out in life, efpe-

cially when yet unacquainted with the
world and its snares, when every plea-
sure enchants with its smile, and every
obje& shines with the gloss of novelty;
beware of the seducing appearances which

0 4 surround

S E R M. surround you, and recolled what others

VII.

have fuflered from the power of head-
strong desire. If you allow any passion,
even though it be esteemed innocent,
to acquire an absolute ascendant, your
inward peace will be impaired. But if
any, which has the taint of guilt, take
early possession of your mind, you may
date from that moment the ruin of your
tranquillity. Nor with the fcafon of
youth does the peril cnd. To the im-
petuofity of youthful desire, succeed
the more fober, but no less dangerous,
attachments of advancing years; when
the paflions which are connected with
intcreft and ambition begin their reign,
and too fiequently extend their malig-
nant influence, even over those periods
of life which ought to be moll tranquil.
From the first to the last of man's abode
on earth, the discipline mull never be
relaxed, of guarding the heart from the
dominion of pafiion. Eager paflions, and
-violent delires, were not made for man.
They exceed his sphere. They find no

adequate

adequate objieas on earth; and of course S .R M.
can be producive of nothing but misery. »-
The certain consequence of indulging them
is, that there shall come an evil day,
when the anguifli of difappointmecnt fnall
drive us to acknowledge, that all which we
enjoy availeth uis niclhiilg

You are not to imagine, that the warn-

ings which I have given in this discourse,
are applicable only to the cafe of such
signal offenders as he wag, of whom the
Text treats. Think not, as I am afraid
too many do, that because your paflions
have not hurried you into atrocious deeds,
they have therefore wrought no mischief,
and have left no fting behind them. By a
continued ferics of loose, though appa-
rently trivial, gratilications, the heart is
often as thoroughly corrupted, as by the
commifion of any one of those enormous
crimes which spring from great ambition,
or great revenge. Habit gives the paflions
strength, while the absence of glaring
guilt fcemingly juflifies them ; and, un-
awakened by remorse, the finner proceeds

in

s E R M. in his course, till he wax bold in guilt, and

VII.

become ripe for ruin. For, by gradual
and latent steps, the deftrudion of our
virtue advances. Did the evil unveil itself
at the beginning; did the storm which
is to overthrow our peace, discover as it
rose, all its horrours, precautions would
more frequently be taken against it. But
vwe are irm perceptibly betrayed; and from
one licentious attachment, one criminal
passion, are, by a train of consequences,
drawn on to another, till the government
of our minds is irrecoverably loft. The
enticing and the odious paflions are, in this
refipec, similar in their process; and,
though by different roads, condut at last
to the fame issue. David, when he frft
beheld Bathfleba, did not plan the death
of Uriah. Haman was not delivered up
all at once to the madness of revenge. His
passions rose with the rising tide of pro-
fperity; and pride completed what profpe-
rity began. What was originally no more
than difplleafure at Mordecai's difrefper,
increased with every invitation he received

I to

to the banquet of the Queen; till it im- SE R M.
pelled him to devise the slaughter of a whole _-I
nation, and ended in a degree of rage which
confounded his reason, and hurried him to
ruin. In this manner, every criminal pas-
sion, in its progress, swells and blackens;
and what was at first a small cloud, such as
the Prophet's servant saw, no bigger than a
man's hand, rifig fro, m the sea *, is soon
found to carry the tempest in its womb.

* i Kings, xviii. 44.

# SERMON VIII. On our IGNORANCE of GOOD and EVIL in this Life. ECCLES. vi. 12. Who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the days of his vain life, which he spendeth as a shadow?

[ 204 ]

S E R M 0 N VIII.
On our IGNORANCE of GOOD and EVIL

in this Life.

ECCLES. Vi. 12.
Who Knoweth what is good for man in this

lif, all the days of his vain life, which
hefpendleth as a jyazdow ?

SE·
;R .r H-i E measure according to which

-- knowledge is dispensed to man,
affords conipicuous proofs of divine wis-
dom. In many instances we clearly per-
ceive, that either more or less would have
proved detrimental to his state; that en-
tire ignorance would have deprived him
of proper motives to adion; and that
complete discovery would have raised
him to a sphere too high for his pre-

sent

sent powers. He is, therefore, permitted S E R M.

viII.

to know only in tart; and to fee through Jb J
a glass, darkly. He is left in that state
of conjecture, and partial information,
which though it may occasionally fubje&
him to distress, yet, on the whole, con-
duces most to his improvement; which as-
fords him knowledge fufficicnt for the pur-
poses of virtue, and of ative life, without
disturbing the operations of his mind,' by
a light too bright and dazzling. This
evidently holds with refpeEt to that de-
gree of obscurity which now covers the
great laws of Nature, the decrees of the
Supreme Being, the state of the invisible
world, the future events of our own life,
and the thoughts and dcfigns which pass
within the breasts of others :.

But there is an ignorance of another

kind, with refpe& to which the applica-
tion of this remark may appear more du-
bious; the ignorance under which men
labour concerning their happiness in the
present life, and the means of attaining it.

* Vide Serm. iv,

If

S ERM. If there be foundation for Solomon's

VIII.
okI complaint in the Text, who knowelh what

is good for man ;in this Vfe ? this confc-
quence may be thought inevitably to fol-
low, That the days of his life must be vain
in every sense; not only because they are
fleeting, but because they are empty too,
like the jhadlow. For, to what purpose
are all his labours in the purluit of an
objec, which it is not in his power to
discover or ascertain ?-Let us then feri-
oufly enquire, what account can be given
of our present ignorance, rcfpe&ling what
is good for us in this life; whether no-
thing be left, but only to wander in
uncertainty amidst this darkness, and to
lament it as the fad consequence of our
fallen state; or whether such infiruc-
tions may not be derived from it, as give
ground for acknowledging, that by this,
as by all its other appointments, the vitf-
dom of Providence brings real good out
of seeming evil. I flhall, in order to de-
termine this point, firfl, endeavour to il-
lustrate the doLtrine of the Text, That we

know

know not, or at most know imperfedly, SERM.
what is good for us in this ife: I shall
next explain the causes to which this de-
fed in our knowledge is owing: And
then shall show the purposes which it
was intended to serve, and the effeds
which it ought to produce on our con-
dudC.

THE whole history of mankind seems

a comment on the dodrine of the Text.
When we review the course of human
affairs, one of the first objeds which every
where attrats our notice, is, the mif-
taken judgment of men concerning their
own interest. Thefore evil, which Solo-
mon long ago remarked with refped to
riches, of their being kept by the owners
thereof to their hurt, takes place equally
with refped to dominion and power, and
all the splendid objets and high stations
of life. We every day behold men climb-
ing, by painful steps, to that dangerous
height, which, in the end, renders their
fall more severe, and their ruin more con-

fpicuous.

S E R M. fpicuous. But it is not to high fations

i that the dotrine of the Text is limited.
In the crimes by which too often tlefe are
gained, and in the misfortunes which they
afterwards bring forth, the greater part of
every audience may think themselves little
concerned. Leaving such themes, there-
fcre, to the poet and the hiltorian, let us
come nearer to ourfclves, and iirvey the
ordinary wall of life,

Around us, we every where behold a

busy multitude. RefRleis and uneasy in
their present situation, they are incessantly
employed in accomplihing a change of
it; and, as ioon as their wifli is fulfill-
ed, we discern, by their behaviour, that
they are as diflitisfied as they were be-
fore. Where they expected to have found
a paradiic, they find a desert. The man
of £bule nes nes or leiture. The leisure
for which he had longed, proves an irk-
some gloom ; and, through want of em-
ployment, lie languishes, sickens, and dies.
The man of retirement fancies no state to
be so happy, as that of active life. But

he

he has not engaged long in the tumults SERM.
and contests of the world, until he finds .
cause to look back with regret on the calm
hours of his former privacy and retreat.
Beauty, wit, eloquence; and fame, are
eagerly desired by persons in every rank
of life. They are the parent's fondest
wish for his child; the ambition of the
young, and the admiration of the old.
And, yeti in what numberless inflances
have they pioved, to those who possessed
them, no other than shining snares; fe-
dtliions to vice, instigations to folly1
and, in the end, sources of misery? Com-
fortably might their days have passed,
had they been less confpicuousa But the
liftinf:ions which brought them forth
to notice, conferred iplendour, and with-
drew happiness. Long life isj of all
others, the most general, and seemingly
the most innocent objet of desire. With
tefpea to this too, we so frequently err,
that it would have been a blefling to
many to have had their wish denied.
There was a period, when they might

VOL. I, P have

SERM. have quitted the stage with honour, and

VIII.
"-Y-_' in peace. But by living too long, they

outlived their reputation; outlived their
family, their friends, and comforts; and
reaped nothing from the continuance of
days, except to feel the pressure of age, to
tafle the dregs of life, and to behold a wider
compass of human misery.

Mazn walketh in a vainylow. His fears

are often as vain as his wiihes. As what
flattered him in expecation, frequently
wounds him in poffeflion; to the event
to which he looked forward with an
anxious and fearful eye, has often, when
it arrived, laid its terrours aside; nay,
has brought in its train unexpeced bless-
ings. Both good and evil are beheld at a
distance, through a perfpecive which
deceives. The colours of objets when
nigh, are entirely different from what
they appeared, when they were viewed in
futurity.

THE faCt then being undoubtedly cer-
tain, that it is common for men to be

deceived

deceived in their profpeats of happiness, s E RM.
let us next enquire into the causes of that L-
deception. Let us attend to those peculiar
circumstances in our state, which render
us such incompetent judges of future good
or evil in this life.

First, We are not sufficiently acquaint-

ed with ourselves, to foresee our future
feelings. We judge by the sensations of
the present moment; and, in the fervour
of desire, pronounce confidently concern-
ing the desired objec. But we reflect
not, that our minds, like our bodies, un-
dergo great alteration from the fituatiois
into which they are thrown, and the pro-
greffive stages of life through which they
pass. Hence, concerning any condition
ihich is yet untried, we conjecure with
much uncertainty. In imagination, ae
carry our present wants, inclinations, and
sentiments, into the fRate of life to which
we aspire. But no sooner have we en-
tered on it, than our sentiments and incli-
nations change. New wants and desires
arise; new objets are required to gratify

P 2 themn;

S E R M. them ; and by consequence our old dif.

fatisfadion returns, and the void, which
was to have been filled, remains as great
as it was before.

But, next, supposing our knowledge of

ourselves sufficient to dire& us in the
choice of happiness, yet still we are liable
to err, from our ignorance of the con-
neiflons which subsist between our own
condition and that of others. No indi-
vidual can be happy, unless the circum-
fiances of those around him be so ad-
justed as to conspire with his interest. For,
in human society, no happiness or mi-
fery flands unconneacd and independent.
Our fortunes are interwoven by threads
innumerable. We touch one another on
all fides. One man's misfortune or fuc-
cess, his wisdom or his folly, often, by
its consequences, reaches through multi-
tudes. Such a system is far too compli-
cated for our arrangement. It requi es
adjustments beyond our skill and power.
It is a chaos of events, into which our
eye cannot pierce; and is capable of re-

gulation,

gulation, only by him who perceives at one S E R M.
glance the relation of each to all.

Farther, As we are ignorant of the

events which will arise from the combi-
nation of our circumstances with those of
others, so we are equally ignorant of the
influence which the present tranfadions of
our life may have upon those which are
future. The important question is not,
What is good for a man one day; but
What is good for him all the days of his
life? Not, what will yield him a few
scattered pleasures; but what will render
his life happy on the whole amount?
And is he able to answer that question,
who knoweth not what one day may bring
forth; who cannot tell, whether the events
of it may not branch out into confe-
quences, which will assume a direction
quite opposite to that in which they set
forth, and spread themselves over all his
life to come? There is not any present
moment that is unconnected with some
future one. The life of every man is a
continued chain of incidents, each link

P3 of

SER M. of which hangs upon the former. The
VIII.

.--_- transition from cause to effect, from event

to event, is often carried on by secret
steps, which our foresight cannot divine,
and our sagacity is unable to trace. Evil
may, at some future period, bring forth
good; and good may bring forth evil,
both equally unexpeted. Had the Pa-
triarch, Joseph, continued to loiter under
his father's fond indulgence, he might
have lived an obscure and insignificant
life. From the pit and the prison, arose
the incidents which made him the ruler
of Egypt, and the saviour of his father's
house.

Lastly, Supposing every other incapa-

city to be removed, our ignorance of the
dangers to which our spiritual state is
exposed, would disqualify us for judging
soundly concerning our true happiness,
Higher interefis than those of the present
world are now depending. All that is
done or suffered by us here, ultimately
refers to that immortal world, for which
good men are trained up, under the care

or

of an Almighty Parent. We are as in- S EIM.

VIII;

competent judges of the measures necef- -
fary to be pursued for this end, as children
are, of the proper conduct to be held in
their education. We foresee the dangers
of our spiritual, fill less than we do those
of our natural state; because we are less
attentive to trace them. We are fill more
exposed to vice than to misery; because
the confidence which we place in our vir-
tue, is yet worse founded than that which
we place in our wisdom. Can you esteem
him prosperous, who is raised to a fitua-
tion which flatters his passions, but which
corrupts his principles, disorders his tem-
per, and, finally, oversets his virtue? In
the ardour of pursuit, how little are these
effects foreseen? And yet, how often are
they accomplifled, by a change of condi-
tion? Latent corruptions are called forth;
feeds of guilt are quickened into life; a
growth of crimes arises, which, had it not
been for the fatal culture of prosperity,
would never have seen the light. How
often is man, boastful as he is of reason,

P 4 merely

s E M. merely the creature of his fortune; forms

VIII.
sA-. - ed, and moulded, by the incidents of his

life!-Hazael, when yet a private man,
detersed the thoughts of cruelty. Thou
/Jalt J1ay the yolng men witb the sword,
said the Prophet: T5hou Jlalt daJlj the chil-
dren, and rip up the women wlitb child. Is
tby ferve:t a dog, replied Hazael, that he
Jhoild do these thiigs ? But no sooner was
he clothed with the coveted purple, than
it seemed to taint his nature, He com-
mitted the crimes of which, at a distance
he believed himself incapable ; and became
the bloody tyrant, *hose character his foul
once abhorred :,

Sucn then at present is man; thus

incapable of pronouncing with certainty
concerning his own good or evil. Of
futurity he discerns little; and even that
little he fees through a cloud. Ignorant
of the alteration which his sentiments
and desires will undergo from new fitua-
5ipns in life; ignorant of the consequences

z. Kings, viii. sz, 3. w

which

which will follow from the combina- s E R M

VIII.

tion of his circumstances with those of -j
others around him; ignorant of the in-
fluence which the present may have on the
future events of his life; ignorant of the
effect which a change of condition may
produce, on his moral character, and his
eternal interefls: How can he know wbha
is good for him all the days of his vain life,
which be fpendcth as a JJadow ?

Inflead of only lamenting. this ignorance,

let us, in the last place, confider how it
ought to be improved; what duties it
suggests, and what wife ends it was intend-
ed by Providence to promote.

I. LET this doctrine teach us to pro-

ceed with caution and circumfpeaion,
through a world where evil so frequently
lurks under the form of good. To be
humble and modeit in opinion, to be vigi-
lant and attentive in condua, to distrust
fair appearances, and to restrain rash de-
fires, are initructions which the darkness
ps our present slate should firongly in-

8 culcate.

SERM. culcate. God hath appointed our fitua.
Ly_,J tion to be so ambiguous, in order both

to call forth the exertion of those intelli-
gent powers which he hath given us, and
to enforce our dependence on his gracious
aid. It is not in man that walketh, to diret
his Jeps. Surrounded with so many be-
wildering paths, among which the wisest
are ready to firay, how earnestly should
we implore, and how thankfully should
we receive, that divine illumination which
is promised in scripture to the pious and
the humble.! Thefecret of the Lord is with
them that fear him. He will guide them2
with his counsel. He will teach thcm the
'way that they Jfould chaise. But what
mufi be the fate of him, who, amidif all
the dangers attending human condud,
neither looks up to Heaven for direcion,
nor properly exerts that reason which
God hath given him? If to the most
diligent enquirer, it proves so difficult a
talk to distinguish true good, from those
fallacious appearances with which it is
ever blended, how should he diScover it,

who

who brings neither patience nor attention s ER M.

VIII.

to the search; who applies to no other -v
counsellor than present pleasure, and, with
a rath and credulous mind, delivers himself
up to every suggestion of desire ?

This admonition I particularly direEt to

those, who are in a period of life too
often charaaerized by forward prefump-
tion, and headlong pursuit. The self-
conceit of the young, is the great source
of those dangers to which they are ex-
posed; and it is peculiarly unfortunate,
that the age which flands most in need of
the counsel of the wife, should be the
most prone to contemn it. Confident in
the opinions which they adopt, and in
the measures which they pursue, they
seem as if they understood Solomon to
fay, not, Who knoweth, but, Who is ig-
norant of what is goodfor man all the days
of his life? The bliss to be aimed at, is,
in their opinion, fully apparent. It is
not the danger of mistake, but the failure
of success, which they dread. Adivity
to seize, not sagacity to discern, is the

only

S E R M. only requisite which they value.- How
VIII.

. long shall it be, ere the fate of your pre-

deceffors in the fame course teach you
wisdom ? How long flall the experience
of all ages continue to lift its voice to
you in vain? Beholding the ocean on
which you are embarked, covered with
wrecks, are not those fatal signals fuffi-
cicnt to admonifli you of the hidden
rock? If, in Paradise itself, there was a
tree which bare fruit fair to the eye, but
mortal in its effeds, how much more, in
this fallen ltatc, may such deceiving ap-
pearances be expeted to abound! The
whole sLate of Nature is now become a
scene of delusion to the sensual mind.
Hardly any thing is what it appears to
be. And what flatters most, is always
farthest from reality. There are voices
which ting around you ; but whose firains
allure to ruin. There is a banquet spread,
where poison is in every dish. There is
a couch which invites you to repose; but
to slumber upon it, is death. In such a
situation, be not high-mintded, but fear. Let

sobriety

sobriety temper your unwary ardour. Let s E R M.

VIII.

modesty check your rash presumption. Let
wisdom be the offspring of reflection now,
rather than the fruit of bitter experience
hereafter.

II. LET our ignorance of what is good

or evil, correc anxiety about worldly fuc-
cess. As rashness is the vice of youth,
the opposite extreme of immoderate care is
the vice of advancing years. The docdrine
which I have illustrated, is equally adapted
for checking both. Since we are so often
betrayed into evil by the mistaken pursuit
of good, care and attention are requisite,
both in forming our choice, and in condut-
ing our pursuit; but since our attention
and care are liable to be so often fruftratedt
they hould never be allowed to deprive us
of tranquillity.

The ignorance in which we are left con-

cerning good and evil, is not such as to
supersede prudence in condu:: For wis-
dom is fill found to excel folly, as far as
light excelleth darkness. But it is that de-

gree

SERM. gree of uncertainty, which ought to renr
VIII.

der us temperate in pursuit; which ought
to calm the perturbation of hope and
fear, and to cure the pain of anxiety,
Anxiety is the poison of human life. It
is the parent of many fins, and of more
miseries. In a world where every thing
is so doubtful; where you may succeed
in your with, and be miserable; where
you may be disappointed, and be blest in
the disappointment; what means this
restless stir and commotion of mind ? Can
your solicitude alter the course, or un-
ravel the intricacy of human events ? Can
your curiosity pierce through the cloud
which the Supreme Being hath made im-
penetrable to mortal eye ?-To provide
against every apparent danger, by the em-
ployment of the most promising means,
is the office of wisdom. But at this point
wisdom stops. It commands you to re-
tire, after you have done all that was
incumbent on you, and to possess your
mind in peace. By going beyond this
point; by giving yourselves up to immo-

derate

derate concern about unknown events, sE R M.

VIII.

you can do nothing to advance your fuc- .J
cess, and you do much to ruin your
peace. You plant within your breast the
thorn which is long to gall you. To the
vanity of life, you add a vexation of
spirit, which is wholly of your own crea-
tion, not of Divine appointment. For
the dubious goods of this world were
never designed by God to raise such eager
attachment. They we ,-i.;ern to - an for
his occasional refreshment, not for his
chief felicity. By setting an exceflive
value upon objeds which were intended
only for ycur secondary regard, you change
their nature. Seeking more fatisfaaion
from them than they are able to afford,
you receive less than they might give.
From a mistaken care to secure your hap-
piness, you bring upon yourselves certain
misery.

iII. LET our ignorance of good and

evil determine us to follow Providence,
and to resign ourselves to God, One of

I the

SERM. the moll important lefobns which can bd
VIII.

given to man, is resignation to his Maker;
and nothing inculcates it more, than the
experience of his own inability to guide
himfelf.-You know not what is good for
you, in the future periods of life. But
God perfecly knows it; and if you faith-
fully serve himn you have reason to believe
that he will always consult it. Before him
lies the whole ficceffion of events, which
are to fill up your existence. It is in his
power to arrange and model them at his
pleasure; and lo to adapt one thing to
another, as to fulfil his pronmife of making
them all iork toge/er fr good to those who
love him. Here then, amidff the agitations
of desire, and the perplexities of doubt, is
one fixed point of reft. By this let us
abide; And dismiss. our anxiety about things
uncertain and un!known. ic quaint youtr;
selves with God, anid be at pceircc Secure the
one thing needil. Sttudy to acquire an in-
terest in the Divine favour; and you may
safely surrender yourselves to the Divine
ad minifration.

When

When tempted to repine at your condi- s E R M.

tion, reflect how Uncertain it is, whether i
you Ihould have been happier in any
other. Remembering the vanity of many
of your former wifles, and the fallacy
whlich you have so often experienced in
your schemes. of happiness, be thankful
that you are placed under a wiser direc-
tion than your own. Be not too particu-
iar in your petitions to Heaven, con-
cerning your temporal interest. Suffer
God to govern the world according to his
own plan; and only pray, that he would
beflow what his unerring wisdom fees to
be best for you on the whole. In a word,
C717mmit 0your way unto the Lord. Trzfti in
him, and do good. Follow wherever his
Providence leads; comply with whatever
his will requires; and leave all the reft to
him.

IV. LET our ignorance of what is good

'or us in this life, prevent our taking any
unlawful ftep, in order to compass our
most favourite designs. Were the finner

VOL. I, QO bribed

S E R M. bribed with any certain and unquef{ion-

VIII.
,__c- able advantage; could the means which

he employs ensure his success, and could
that ifccefs ensure his comfort; he might
have some apology to offer for deviating
from the path of virtue. But the doc-
trine which I have illustrated, deprives
him of all excuse, and places his folly in
the most striking light. He climbs the
sleep rock, and treads on the edge of a
precipice, in order to catch a shadow.
He has cause to dread, not only the un-
certainty of the event which he wishes to
accomplish, but the nature also of that
event when accomplished. He is not only
liable to that disappointment of success,
which so often frustrates all the designs of
men; but liable to a disappointment still
more cruel, that of being successful and
miserable at once. Riches and pleasures
are the chief temptations to criminal
deeds. Yet those riches, when obtained,
may very possibly overwhelm him with
unforeseen miseries. Those pleasures may
cut short his health and life. And is it

for

for such doubtful and fallacious rewards, SERM.
that the deceiver fills his mouth with lies, A
the friend betrays his benefactor, the apof-
tate renounces his faith, and the afiaffin
covers himself with blood ?

Whoever commits a crime, incurs a

certain evil for a most uncertain good.
What will turn to his advantage in the
course of this life, he cannot with any as-
furance know. But this he may know,
with full certainty, that by breaking the
Divine commandments, he will draw
upon his head that displeasure of the Al-
mighty, which shall crush him for ever.
The advantages of this world, even when
innocently gained, are uncertain bless-
ings; when obtained by criminal means,
they carry a curse in their bosom. To the
virtuous, they are often no more than
chaff. To the guilty, they are always
poison.

V. LET our imperfet knowledge of

what is good or evil, attach us the more
to those few things, concerning which

Q2 there

S , R M. tlere can be no doubt of their being
v,_. truly good. Of temporal things which

belong to this class, the catalogue, it must
be confeised, is finall. Perhaps; the chief
worldly good we fhlould wifl to enjoy, is
a found mind in a found body. -Iealth
and peace, a moderate fortune, and a few
friends, fim up all the undoubted articles
of temporal felicity. Wife was the man
who acdrefied this prayer to God ; Re-
;oveii/v' f;ron l :!?c vaizt; an;d lies. Give ime
;,'ci,'!:r jovw'rr no.,r riches. Fee, me withi
fjd co.nv/'ict for.' m Ie. f

i. I I e full ind

Lcy/, t,'eL) a 'i(r', w/7 o is ihJL Loerd. or Ifi
Ir b poo-r ir.,l/ea and tke tal e

If a mei, of m1,)

God in vaiin'. He vlwhofe wilhes, ref!ipc
itg' the poffeiTions of this world, are the
l!mo reasonable and bounded, is likely
to lead the safes:, and, for that reason,
the Imor desirable life. By aspiring too
hig:, we f-equclently mils the happineis,

-1:hii, -;,- a less ambitious aim, we might
hlave gaire0 Hiilglh hap1ineifs en carth; is
rather a picure vwhich the im ag:natio

e Prcv, :x::. . 2, 9.

folrmlS

forms, than a reality which man is allowed S F R M.

VIII.
to poflies.

But with regard to spiritual felicity, we

are not confined to such humble views.
Clear and determinate objets are pro-
posed to our pursuit; and full scope is
given to the most ardent desire. The for-
givenefs of our fins, and the assistance of
God's holy grace to guide our life; the
improvement of our minds in knowledge
and wifdorm, in piety and virtue; the
protecion and favour of the great Father
of all, of the blessed Redeemer of man-
kind, and of the Spirit of faniification
and comfort; these are obljecs, in the
pursuit of which there is no room for
hesitation and diflruft, nor any ground for
the question in my Text, T[ho ',iocc!c;l
vhat is gcod for mlan ? I-ad Providence
spread an equal obscurity over happineif
of every kind, we miighit ave iad fcme
reason to complain of the vanity of our
condition. But Vwe are not left to so
hard a fate. Tihe Son of God hath de-
'cended from heaven, to be the Likr t of

©., .4 the
· .'·

SER M. the world. He hath removed that veil
V11I. t-r^L which covered true bliss from the search of

wandering mortals, and hath taught them
the way which leads to life. Worldly en-
joyments are shown to be hollow and de-
ceitful, with an express intention to diret
their affections towards those which are
spiritual. The fame discoveries which di-
minifh the value of the one, serve to in-
crcafe that of the other. Finally,

VI. LET our ignorance of what is good

or evil here below, lead our thoughts and
desires to a better world. I have endea-
voured to vindicate the wifdorn of Provi-
dence, by showing the many useful pur-
poses which this ignorance at present pro-
motes. It serves to check presumption
and rashness, and to enforce a diligent
exertion of our rational powers, joined
with a humble dependence on Divine aid.
It moderates eager paflions refpefing
worldly success. It inculcates refigna-
tion to the disposal of a Providence which
is much wiser than man. It retrains us

from

from employing unlawful means in order S ER M.

VII{.

to compass our most favourite designs. It '
tends to attach us more closely to those
things which are unquestionably good. It
is therefore such a degree of ignorance as
fiuits the present circumfrances of man better
than more complete information concern-
ing good and evil.

At the fame time the causes which

render this obscurity necessary, too plainly
indicate a broken and corrupted state of
human nature. They show this life to be
a state of trial. They suggest the ideas of
a land of pilgrimage, not of the house of
reit. Low-minded and base is he, who
aspires to no higher portion; who could be
satisfied to fpendhis whole existence, in chaf-
ing those treacherous appearances of good,
which so often mock his pursuit. What
shadow can be more vain than the life of
the greatest part of mankind ? Of all that
eager and buffling crowd which we behold
on the earth, how few discover the path of
true happiness ? How fewcan we find, whose
activity has not been misemployed, and

Q4 whose

SE P R. whose course terminates not in confefions

of disappointments ? Is this the slate, are
these the habitations, to which a rational
Ifpirit, with all its high hopes, and great
capaciies, is to be limited for ever?-Lct
u!s bles .that God who hath set nobler pro-
iJeds before us; who by the death and
rcilurrcCion of his Son Jefls Cllrifr, hath
,bc3ltc. l us to the live.l hope of an inbhe-itnce
incorr!.ptible, nndfiled, rad that fiTdLth not
.ZLwan, reJfirvedin the heavens. Let us flow
ourielves worthy of such a hope, by jetilg
our affcions upon the things above, not upon
tbings on the cartb. Let us walk by faitb,
,and not bIyJight; and, amidst the obscurity
of this faint and dubious twilight, console
ourselves with the expectation of a brighter
day which is soon to open. This earth is
the land of shadows. But we hope to pafi
into the world of realities; where the pro.
per objets of human desire shall be dif¶
played; where the fubflance of that bliss
Ihall be found, whose image only we now
pursue; where no fallacious hopes shall any
longer allure, no finiling appearances ihall

betray,

betray, no insidious joys shall fting; but SERM.

VIII.

where truth shall be inseparably united with _-j
pleasure, and the miss which hang over
this preliminary slate being dissipated, the
perfect knowledge of good shall lead to the
fll enjoyment of it for ever,

# SERMON IX. On RELIGIOUS RETIREMENT. PSALM iv. 4. Commune with your own heart, upon your bed, and be still.

[ 234 ]

SERMON IX.
On RELIGIOUS RETIREMENT.

PSALM i. 4.
Commun1e 'wsith your own 1heart, ul/on your

bed, and beJ ill.
SERM. M U C H communing with therfelves

IX.

,__ 1 v there has always been among man-

kind; though fiequently, God knows, to
no purpose, or to a purpose worse than
none. Could we discover the employ-
ments of men in retirement, how often
ihould we find their thoughts occupied
with fubjeds which they would be
ashamed to own ? What a large share
have ambition and avarice, at some times
the grossest paflions, and at other times the
meanest trifles, in their solitary musings?

They

They carry the world, with all its vices, SE RM.
into their retreat; and may be said to dwell I ._
in the midst of the world, even when they
icem to be alone.

This, surely, is not that fort of comr

muning which the Psalmist recommends.
For this is not properly communing with
olr heart, but rather holding secret in-
tercourfe with the world. What the
Psalmist means to recommend, is religi-
ous recollection; that exercise of thought
which is connected with the precept given
in the preceding words, to Jland in awe,
andfidn not. It is to commune with our-
selves, under the character of spiritual
and immortal beings; and to ponder those
paths of our feet, which are leading us to
eternity. I ;hall, in the first place, show
the advantages of such serious retirement
and meditation; and shall, in the second
place, point out some of the principal
fuibjecs which ought to employ us in
our retreat.

The advantages of retiring from the
world, to conmmune with our heart, will be

3 found

SE R M. found to be great, whether we regard our
>_>
_ happiness in this world, or our preparation

for the world to come.

LET us confider them, first, with rc..

fpecr to our happiness in this world. ft
will readily occur to you, than an entire
rctreat from worldly affairs, is not what
religion requires; nor does it even enjoin
a great retreat from them, Some fiations
of life would not permit this; and there
arc few flations which render it necefiary.
The chief field, both of the duty and of
the improvement of man, lies in aQive
life. By the graces and virtues which he
exercises amidst his fellow-creatures, he is
trained up for heaven. A total retreat froml
the world, is lb far from being, as the Ro-
man Catholic Church holds, the perfc&ior
of religion, that, tome particular cafes ex-
ccpted, it is no other than the abuse of it.

But, though entire retreat would lay

us aside from the part for which Provi-
dence chiefly intended us, it is certain,

that,

that, without occasional retreat, we muff SE R IM.

Ix.

aCt that part very ill. There will be
neither consistency in the condua, nor
dignity in the charaler, of one who sets
apart no flare of his time for meditation
and refletion. In the heat and bustle of
life, while passion is every moment throw-
ing falife colours on the objeds around us,
nothing can be viewed in a just light. If
you wifih that reason fllould exert her
native power, you must ftep aside from
the crowd, into the cool and silent shade.
It is there that, with fober and steady eye.
flie examines what is good or ill, what is
wife or foolish, in human conductl; she
looks back: on the past, flie looks forward
to the future; and forms plans, not for
the present moment only, but for the
whole of life. How fiould that man dif-
charge any part of his duty aright, who
never suffers his pafions to cool? And
how flould his passions cool, who is en-
gaged, without interruption, in the tu-
mult of the world ? This incessant stir
may be called the perpetual drunken-

8 ness

sEI R M. ness of life. It raises that eager fermnent*

Ix.
{I_ ation of spirit, which will be ever Iend-

ing forth the dangerous fuincs of rafhncls
and folly. Whereas he who minglcs reli-
gious retreat with worldly affairs, remains
calm, and mailer of himself. He is not
whirled round, and rendered giddy, by
the agitation of the world; but, from that
sacred retirement, in which he has been
conversant among higher objecs, comes
forth into the world with manly tranquil-
lity, fortified by the principles which he
has formed, and prepared for whatever
may befal.

As he who is unacquainted with re-

treat, cannot sustain any characer with
propriety, so neither can he enjoy the
world with any advantage. Of the two
classes of men who are most apt to be
negligent of this duty, the men of plea-
sure, and the men of business, it is hard to
fay which susser most in point of enjoy-
ment, from that neglect. To the former,
every moment appears to be loft, which
partakes not of the vivacity of amusement.

To

To connet one plan of gaiety with ano- S E R M.

Ix.

ther, is their whole study; till, in a very
ihort time, nothing remains but to tread
the fame beaten round; to enjoy what
they have already enjoyed, and to fee
what they have often seen. Pleasures
thus drawn to the dregs, become vapid
and tasteless. What might have pleased
long, if enjoyed with temperance, and
mingled with retirement, being devoured
with such eager haste, speedily surfeits
and difguits, Hence, these are the per-
sons, who, after having run through a
rapid course of pleasure, after having
glittered for a few years in the foremost
line of public amusements, are the most
apt to fly at last to a melancholy retreat;
not led by religion or reason, but driven
by disappointed hopes, and exhausted fpi-
rits, to the pensive conclusion, that all is
vanily'.

If uninterrupted intercourse with the

world wears out the man of pleasure, it
no less oppresses the man of business and
ambition. The strongest spirits muff at

length

E R M. length fink under it. The happiest tem.n
IyiJ per must be foured by incessant returns

of the opposition, the inconstancy, and
treachery of men. For he who lives al-
ways in the buffle of the world, lives in
a perpetual warfare. Here an enemy en-
counters; there a rival supplants him,
The ingratitude of a friend flings him
this hour; and the pride of a superior
wounds him the next. In vain he flies
for relief to trifling amusements, Theie
may afford a temporary opiate to care; but
they communicate no ftrcngth to the mind;
On the contrary, they leave it more soft
and defenceless, when molestations and in-
juries renew their attack.

Let him who wiflles for an effectual

cure to all the wounds which the world
can inflict, retire from intercourse witl!
men to intercourse with God. When
he enters into his closet, and flints the
door, let him shut out, at the fame tilne,
all intrusion of worldly care; and dwell
among objcIts divine and immortal.--
Those fair profpeCs of order and peace

ihall

shall there open to his view, which form s E RM.

lx.

the most perfet contrast to the confusion L- i_
and misery of this earth, The celestial
inhabitants quarrel not; among them
there is neither ingratitude, nor envy,
nor tumult. Men may harass one ano-
ther; but in the kingdom of God con-
cord and tranquillity reign for ever.-
From such objecs there beams upon the
mind of the pious man, a pure and en-
livening light; there is diffused over his
heart, a holy calm. His agitated spirit
reatfumes its firmness, and regains its
peace. The world finks in its import-
ance; and the load of mortality and
misery lofcs almost all its weight. The
green paf/llres open, and the Jfill cwaters
flow around him, betide which the Shep-
herd of Jrael guides his flock. The dif-
turbances and alarms, so formidable to
thlofe who are engaged in the tumults of
the world, seem to him only like thunder
rolling afar off; like the noise of distant
waters, whose found he hears, whose
course he traces, but whose waves touch

VOL. I. R him

SE R I. him not.-As religious retirement is thus

lx.

evidently conducive to our happiness in
this life, so,

IN tllc fcond place, it is absolutely

neceflary in order to prepare us for the
life to come. He who lives always in
public, cannot live to his own foul.
The world licth in wicketldefs; and witl
good reason the Christian is exhorted, mit
o be colfoirmed to it, but tran.fo.rmed by the
renewing of his milnd. Our converlation
and intercourse with the world, is, in
several refpeds, an education for vice,
From our earliest youth, we are accuftonmed
to hear riches and honours extolled as
the chief poiffieons of man; and pro-
posed to us, as the principal aim of our
future pursuits. *We are trained up, to
look witl admiration on the flattering
marks of diftinfion vwhich they bestow.
In quet of those fancied blessings, we fee
the multitude around us eager and ser-
vent. Principles of duty, we may, per-
haps, hear sometimes inculcated; but

we seldom behold them brought into S R M.

IX

competition with worldly profit. The ...
soft names, and plausible colours, under
which deceit, sensuality, and revenge,
are presented to us in common discourse,
weaken, by degrees, our natural sense of
the diftintion between good and evil.
We often meet with crimes authorized
by high examples, and rewarded with
the caresses and finiles of the world. We
discover, perhaps, at last, that those
whom wn e are taught to reverence, and
to regard as our patterns of conducL,
ad upon principles no purer than those
of others. Thus breathing habitually a
contagious air, how certain is our ruin
unless we sometimes retreat from this
pestilential region, and seek for proper
correEtives of the disorders which are
contralced there ? Religious retirement
both abates the disease, and furniihes the
remedy. It leflens the corrupting influ-
ence of the world; and it gives oppor-
tunity for better principles to exert their
power, He who is accustomed to turn

R 2 aside,

Sj x'I aside, and commune with himself, will,
--r-- fometimcs at least, hcar the truths which

the multitude do not tell him. A more
found inflrumor wiil lift his voice, and
awaken within the heart those latent fug-
geflions, which the world had overpowered
and suppresSed.

The adts of prayer and devotion, the

exercises of faith and repentance, all the
great and peculiar duties of the religion
of Christ, neceflarily uppolfe retirement
from the world. This was one chief end
of their institution, that they might be
the means of occasionally sequestering us
from that great scene of vice and folly,
the continued pretence of which is so
hurtful. Solitude is the hallowed ground
which religion hath, in every age, chosen
for her own. There, her inspiration is
felt, and her secret mysteries elevate the
foul. There, falls the tear of contrition;
there, rifes towards heaven the sigh of the
heart; there, melts the foul with all the
tenderness of devotion, and pours itself
forth before him who made, and him

who

who redeemed it. How can any one SERM.

Ix.

who is unacquainted with such employ-
ments of mind, be fit for heaven ? If
heaven be the habitation of pure affections,
and of intelletual joy, can flch a Rtate be
relilhed by him who is always immeried
among cfnfible objeds, and has never ac-
quired any taste for the pleasures of the un-
lerfianding, and the heart ?

The great and the worthy, the pious

and the virtuous, have ever been addid-
ed to serious retirement. It is the cha-
raceriftic of little and frivolous minds,
to be wholly occupied with the vulgar
objects of life. These fill up their de-
fires, and supply all the entertainment
ewhich their coarse apprelenfions can re-
lili. But a more refined and enlarged
mind leaves the world behind it, feels a
call for higher pleasures, and seeks them
in retreat. The man of public spirit
has recourse to it, in order to form plans
for general good ; the man of genius, in
order to dwell on his favourite themes;
the philosopher, to pursue his discoveries;

* 3 the

SE R M. the faint, to improve himself in grace.

Ix.

- Ifac went out to meditate in the felds, at

the eveniSng tide. David, amidst all the
splendour of royalty, often bears witness
both to the pleasure which he receired,
and to the benefit which he reaped, from
devout meditation. I communed with nmy
own heart, and l, fipirit made diligent
fi'arch. I thought on iy ways, and turned
my feet unto God's tic.imoiiies. nl the
nmultitude of tboulghts within me, his. col-
forts delixht m1y fJt. Our blcfcd Sa-
viour himself, though of all who ever
lived on earth he needed lcaRf the a{lift-
ance of religious retreat, yet by his fre-
quent pradicc, has done it iignal honour.
Often were the garden, the mountain, and
the silence of the night, fought by himl, for
intercourse with heaven. heln he had flnt
the multitude awaj,, he went up iIto a 1mo0il-
taPi, apart, topray.

The advantages of religious retirement

will still more clearly appear, by confider-
ing, as was proposed, in the next place,
ibme of those great ol)jc:ts which fliould

there

there employ our thoughts. I shall mention s E R M.
only three, which are of the most plain and Ix_
acknowledged importance ; God, the world,
and our own character.

I. WTi-iN you retire from the world,

comml7tune with youlr hearts concerning God.
ImprcliTons of Deity, betides their being
the principle of what is ftridly termed
religion, are the great support of all moral
fcntiment, and virtuous condu&c, among
men. But with what difficulty are they
preserved in any due degree of force,
amidst the affairs and avocations of the
world? While the crowd of surrounding
objcas is ever ruflring on the imagina-
tion, and occupying the senses and the
heart, what is not only absent from view,
but, by its nature, invisible, is apt to
vanish like a fladow. Hence it is given
as the characer of wicked men, in scrip-
ture, that they are without God in the
world. They deny not, perhaps, that he
does exist; but it is the fame to them as
though he did not: For having loft him

R 4 from

S E R M. from their view, his cxiftence has no es.

lx.
a-_-- fe& on their conducl. If, at any time,

the idea of God rife in their mind, it
riles like a terrifying phantom which they
haften to expel; and which they gladly
fancy to be unreal, hecaufe they fee it
make so little impreflion on others around
them.

Let him who retires to fcrious medita-

tion, begin with impressing deeply on his
mind this important truth, that there is
undoubtedly a Supreme Governour, who
presides over the universe. But let him
not imagine, that to commune with his
heart concerning God, is to search into
the mysteries of the Divine nature, or to
attempt a discovery of the whole plan of
Providence. Long enough he may be-
wilder himself in this maze, without
making any proficiency in the pracicai
knowledge of God. Shall he who knows
so little of his own nature, or of the na-
sure of the objecs with which he is fur-
rounded, expect to comprehend the Being
who made him ? To commune with our-

felvcs,

selves, to any useful purpose, on this sub S E R M.
jcc, is to bring home to our fouls the in-
ternal, authoritative sense of God, as of a
Sovereign and a Father. It is not to fpecu-
late about what is mysterious in his eflence,
but to contemplate what is displayed of his
perfedions. It is to realize the presence
of the Supreme Being, so as to produce the
nmoft profound veneration; and to awaken
the earnest desire of as near an approach as
our nature will permit, to that great Foun-
tain of happiness and life,

After this manner was that holy man

afiieed, who uttered this ardent * wilh,
0 that I knew wheree I might find him, that
I mlight come evel to his feat !-If with
fich a frame of mind you seek after God,
lie afiured that he is not far from you;
,nd( that, though you are not permitted
as yet to come to his feat, you may, at
Icalt, reach the footstool of his throne, and
touch the robe that covers him. In the
midst of your solitary musings lift your
eyes, and behold all nature full of God.

s Job, xxiii. 3,

Look

SIE M. Looki up to the firmament, and admire

his glory. Look round on the earth, and
observe his pretcncc every where displayed.
if the gay landscape, or the fruitful
field, present themselves to your eye, be-
hold him fminiling upon his works. If the
mountain raise its lofty head, or the ex-
panfe of waters roll its tide before you,
contemplate, in those great and solemn
objeacs, his power and majefly. Nature,
in all its diversities, is a varied Imanifefta-
tion of the Deity. If you were to take tle
wiings of the mornbil, nnd dwell in the at-
termofl parts of tbe fca, even there you
would find him. For in him vyol live and
wIove. He fills and animates all Ipace. In
the barren wilderness, as in the peopled
region, you can trace his footteps; and
in the dcepeft Iblitude, you may hear a
voice which testifies of him.

Him, indeed, you are never to con-

found with the workmanfhlip of his
hands. Nature, in its most awful or most
plcafing fccnes, exhibits no more than
different forms of inanimate matter. But

on

on these dead forms is imprefed the glory s E R M.

IX.

of a living spirit. The beauty, or the \*
greatneis, which appears in themc, flows
fr, n the Fountain of all greatness and
bcauty; in him it centers; of his perfec-
tion it reflects an image; and towards
him ifould lead your view.-In converf-
ing with a fellow-creature on earth, it is
not with his body we converse, though it
is his body only which we fee. From his
words and adions we conceive his mind;
with his mind, though invisible, we hold
corrcfpondence, and diret towards this
Spiritual Essence our affetion and regard.
In like manner, though here we behold no
more of God than what his works display,
yet in those displays, we are capable of
perceiving the iniverfal Spirit, and of hold-
ing correspondence with this unseen Being,
in veneration, gratitude, and love.

It is thus that a pious man, in his re-

tired meditations, viewing natural objets
with a spiritual eye, communes with his
heart concerning God. He walks among
the various icenes of nature, as within

the

S E R M. the prccincts of a great temple, in the

x habitual exercise of devotion. To those

discoveries of the Supreme Being in his
works, let him apply the comment of
his word. From the world of Nature, let
him follow God into the world of Grace.
When conduaed from the outer courts,
into this inmost fatnduary of the temple,
lie ihall feel himself brought still more
nigh to the sacred Presence. In the great
plan of Divine Wisdom, for extirpating
the evils produced by fin, he thall receive
the interpretation of many of the hidden
Iyftcries of Nature. He shall discover in
Clrift, the Deity made, in some degree,
vifiblc to fenfc. In the beneficent works
wlhich he performed, and the gracious
undertaking which he accomplified, he
Ihall behold the brightnleJ of tbc Falter's
glo;i, and flall dilcern it to be fJll of
grace and truth.-From the sacred retreat,
wherein his thoughts have been thus
employed, he returns to the world like a
fuperiour being. He carries into aEtive
life those pure and elevating sentiments,

tP

to which the giddy crowd are strangers. s ER M.
A certain odour of fanaity remains upon ^-
his mind, which, for a while at least, will
repel the contagion of the world.

II. COMMIUNE with your heart, in

tlie season of retirement, concerning the
world. The world is the great deceiver,
whose fallacious arts it highly imports us
to detet. But in the midst of its pleasures
and pursuits, the detetion is impossible.
We tread, as within an enchanted circle,
where nothing appears as it truly is. It
is only in retreat, that the charm can be
broken. Did men employ that retreat,
not in carrying on the delulion which the
world has begun, not in forming plans
of imaginary bliss, but in fubjecling the
happiness which the world affords to a
ftrit discussion, the spell would dissolve;
and in the room of the unreal profpets,
which had long amused them, the naked-
ness of the world would appear.

Prepare yourselves, then, to encounter
the light of truth. Resolve rather to bear

the

SER M. the disappointment of some flattering
__ , hopes, than to wander for ever in the

paradise of fools. While others meditate
in secret on the means of attaining world-
ly success, let it be your employment to
scrutinize that success itself. Calculate
fairly to what it amounts; and whether
you are not losers on the whole, by your
apparent gain. Look back for this pur-
pose on your past life. Trace it from
your earliest youth; and put the queflion
to yourselves, What have been its hap-
pieft periods? Were they those of quiet
and innocence, or those of ambition and
intrigue? Has your real enjoyment uni-
formly kept pace with what the world
calls prosperity ? As you are advanced in
wealth or flation, did you proportionably
advance in happiness ? Has success, al-
mofi in any one inflance, fulfilled your
expeaation ? Where you reckoned upon
most enjoyment, have you not often found
least? Wherever guilt entered into your
pleasures, did not its fting long remain,
after the gratification was past ?-Such

9 queflions

queltions as these, candidly answered, SERM.
would in a great measure untmafk the -
world. They would expose the vanity of
its pretensions; and convince you, that
there are other springs than those whlich
the world affords, to which you must apply
for happiness.

While you commune with your heart
concerning what the world now is, con-
fider also what it will one day appear to
be. Anticipate the awful moment of your
bidding it an eternal farewell. Think,
what reflections shall molt probably arise,
when you are quitting the field, and look-
ing back on the scene of action. In what
light will your closing eyes contemplate
those vanities which now fihine so bright,
and those interefis which now swell into
filcl high importance? What part will
you then wifl to have acred ? What fliall
thlc! appear momentous, what trifling,
in human conducd?-Lc-t the fober senti-
ients which such anticipations fuitgefn,
temper now your mirplaced ardour. Let
the lafi conclusions whiclh yo lhall form,

enter

S E R M. enter into the present efimate which you

Ix.

--,. make of the world, and of life.

Moreover, in communing with your-

selves concerning the world, conteinplate
it as fubjeEt to the Divine dominion. The
greater part of men behold nothing more
than the rotation of human affairs. They
iee a great crowd ever in motion; the
fortunes of men alternately rising and
falling; virtue often diftrefled, and pro-
fperity appearing to be the purchase of
worldly wisdom. But this is only the
outside of things. Behind the curtain
there is a far greater scene, which is be-
held by none but the retired, religious
fpecator. Lift up that curtain, when
you are alone with God. Vicw the world
with the eye of a Christian; and you
shall fee, that while lan's heart icevitbh
his way, it is Ibe Lord whoo diiccclth his
fleps. You fliall fee, that however men
appear to move and ad after their own
pleafiure, they are, nevcrthelefs, retained
in secret bonds by the Almighty, and all
their operations rendered subservient to

4 the

the ends of his moral government. You s E R M,
shall behold him obliging the wrath of ,
mlan to praie h1in punithing the finner
by means of his own iniquities; from
the trials of the righteous, bringing forth
their reward; and to a Rate of seeming
universal confusion, preparing the wisest
and moit equitable issue. While the
fajslion of this world is passing fast away,
you shall discern the glory of another
rising to succeed it. You shall behold all
humah events, our griefs and our joys,
our love and our hatred, our charater and
memory, absorbed in the ocean of eternity;
and no trace of our present existence left,
except its being for ever well with the
righteous, and ill with the wicked.-
Such a view of the world, frequently pre-
sented to our minds, could not fail to en-
force those solemn conclusions; There is no
wifdozm, nor coiifel, agaijl the Lord. Fear
God, and keep his commandments; for this
is the whole of manl W4hat is a man pro-
fited, if he sJlall gain the w/hole world, and
lose his own foul?

VOL. 1. S III. COM-

SERM . III. COMMUNE Vwith your heart, c6n-

_. cerning yourselves, and your real charac-

ter. To acquire a thorough knowledge
of ourfeives, is an attainment no less dif-
ficult than important. For men are ge-
nerally unwilling to fee their own imper-
sections; and ,when they are willing to
enquire into them, their felf-love imposes
on their judgment. Their intercourse
with one another aflifts the delusion to
which, of themifelves, they are prone.
l;or the ordinary commerce of the world
is a commerce of flattery and falsehood;
where reciprocally they deceive and are
deceived, where every one appears under
an assumed form, professes esteem which
he does not feel, and beftlo: s praile in
order to receive it. It is only in retreat
vwhcr those false semblances disappear, and
those flattering voices are silent, that a man
can learn to tbji;ih Jbcl, j of hbificJ asnd
rs he ou.J, to t/blik.

It has been said, that there are three

characers which every man sustains;
and tlhef often extremely different from

one

one another: One, which -he pofiTfees in s E . M
il.h o\ n opinion ; another, which he car-
ries in tle efimation of the world; and
a third, vwhiclh he bears in the judgment of
God. It is only the las wvhich ascertains
what he really is.-Whether the charaLcr
which the world forms of you, be above or
below the truth, it imports you not much
to know. But it is of eternal consequence,
that the charai'er which you poflefs' in
your own eyes, be formed upon that which
you bear in the fight of God. In order
to try it by this great flandard, you muff
lay aside, as much as poflble, all partiality
to yourselves; and in the season of retire-
ment, explore your heart with such accurate
cr!utitny, as may bring your hidden defers
·o light.

Enquire, for this purpose, whether you

be not conscious, that the. fair opinion
which the world entertains of you, is
founded on their partial knowledge, both
of your abilities and your virtues ? Would
you be willing that all your actions should
be publickly canvafied ? Could you bear

S2 to

S E R M. to have your thoughts laid open ? Arc

m.2j there no parts of your life which you

would be uneasy if an enemy could dif-
cover? In what light, then, muff there
appear to God ? When you have kept
free of vice, has your innocence proceed-
ed from purity of principle, or from
worldly motives? Rife there no envy or
malignity within you, when you compare
your own condition with that of others!
Have you been as folicitious to regulate
your heart, as to preserve your manners
from reproach ? Professing yourselves to
be Chriffians, has the Spirit of Christ ap-
peared in your conduct? Declaring that
you hope for immortality, has that hope
surmounted undue attachments to. the pre-
lent life?

Such investigation as this, seriously pur-

filed, might produce to every man many
discoveries of himself; discoveries, not
pleasing, perhaps, to vanity, but ialutary
and useful. For he can be only a flat-
terer, but no true friend to himself, wh!o
aims not at knowing his own defeas, as

well

well as virtues. By imposing on the world, s E R M.
le may carry on some plan of fancied profit; ,X
but by imposing on his heart, what can he
propose to gain ? He feedeth of aJJhes: A
deceived heart hat/h turned him ofide, that he
cannot deliver hisfoul, norfay, Is there not
a lie in my right hand ' ?

Tilus I have set before you, some of
those great objects, which ought to em-
ploy your meditation in religious retire-
ment. I have endeavoured to introduce
you into a proper intercourse with your
heart, concerning God, the world, and
your own character. Let this intercourse
terminate in fixing the principles of your
future condut:. Let it serve to introduce
consistency into your life. Nothing can
be more wavering and disjointed, than
the behaviour of those who are wholly
men of the world, and have never been
inured to commune with themselves.
Dissipation is a more frequent cause of
their ruin, than determined impiety. It

S

I3a. .liv. 20.
S 3 is

S E R , is not so much becaul' they have adopted
---v-- bad principles, as because they have never

attended to principles of an.y k in, that iheir
lives are so full of incoherence and difob-
der.-You hover on the

l orders of fin aind

duty. Gne day, you read the !ciipture,
you hear religious difcourfces, and for.
good reollutions, Next day, you plunge
into the world, and forget the lerious im-.
presSion, as if it had never been made.
The imprefion is again renewed, and again
efraced; and in this circle your life revolves,
Is such condu&t worthy of creatures in-
dowed with intelligent powers? Shall the
close of life overtakCe you, before ou have
deterlmined-how to live? Shall lihe day Inc-
ver come, that is to find you steady in your
views, decided in your plans, and engaged
in a course of aclion which your mind ap-
proves ?--- f you vwif that day ever to ar-
rive, retircment and meditation must firfl
bring you home to yourselves, from the
diflipation in which you are now scattered;
mull teach you to fix such aims, and to lay
down such rules of conduc, as are suitable

to

to rational and immortal beings. Then SE R M.
will your characer become uniform and IX
respectable. Then you may hope that
your life will proceed in such a train as
fiall prepare you, when it is finilhed, for
joining the society of more exalted spirits.

S4

# SERMON X. On DEVOTION. ACTS, x. 2. Cornelius  A devout man 

[ 264 ]
SERMON X.

On DEVOTION.

ACT S, X. 2.

CorneliuJ -A devout nman-
R M. rT HAT religion is essential to the wel.

J fare of man, can be proved by the
mofi convincing arguments. But these,
how demonitrative soever, are insufficient
to support its authority over human con-
duet. For arguments may convince the
underfranding, when they cannot con-
quer the passions. Irresistible they seem
in the calm hours of retreat; but, in the
.season of adion, they often vanish into
smoke. There are other and more power-
fu springs, which influence the great

movements

movements of the human frame. In or- SERM.

X.

der to operate with success on the ative ,--
powers, the heart must be gained. Sen-
timent and affecdion must be brought to
the aid of reason. It is not enough that
men believe religion to be a wile and ra-
tional rule of conduc2, unless they relifi
it as agreeable, and find it to carry its
own reward. Happy is the man, who,
in the conflic of desire between God and
the world, can oppose, not only argu-
ment to argument, but pleasure to plea-
lure; who, to the external allurements of
ienfe, can oppose the internal joys of de-
votion; and to the uncertain promises of
a flattering world, the certain. experience
of that peace of God which pastlh nlder-
Jfldinsg, .keeping his mind and beart. - Such
is the temper and spirit of a devout man.
Such was the character of Cornelius, that
good centurion, whose prayers and alms
are said to have come up in memorial befo/re
God. Of this character I intend, through
Divine assistance, to discourse; and shall
ndegavour, I. To explain the nature of

devotion;

SERM. devotion; II. Tojuflify, and recommend
t, it; and, III. To rctify irome mifcales con-

ce-rnin' it.

I. "Er.VOi.IO.N is tile lively eyercifc of
hiolc afi'ions, lwhich .we owe to the
Supremi e iein . It compri;ce:eds fevcral
emCoions of the heart, which all termi-
nate o0l tlh fnilc gr: at objec. The chief
of thems' a e, vcp.cra.iion, gratitudc, dcfire,
a.d 'rcil'nntion,

it iinlie, rfir, profound veneration

of God. By veneration, I ullndcrrand an
a'i;cZion compoiunded of awe and love;
tile afe=Rion which, of all others, it be-:
becomes crettulres to bear towards their
infinitcly perftcQ Creator. Awe is the
iirf'c sentiment that rifes in the foul, at
the view of his greatness. But, in the
hleart of a devout man, it is a solemn and
elevating, not a dejefing, emotion; for,
le glows, rather than trembles, in the
Divine presence. It is not the fuperfti-
tious dread of unknown power, but the
homage yielded by the heart to him who

is, at once, the greatest and the best of Bc- s E R M,
Migs. Omnipotence, viewed alone, would -.
lbe a formidable objet. But, confid;red
in conjunlion with the moral perfcctions
cf the Divine nature, it frves to he;`ghten
ecvotion. Goodness ale&s the heart xirh
double energy, when relfiling in Cre lb

e-::lt'cd. The gocd!efs whlich we adore

in lin,i is not li.e that is ccn;inon
a.ilonl, men, a weak, mutable, undif-
cerning fondness, ill qualiied to be the
ground of aflured trufl It is the good-
inels of a pcrfcct Governour, ac:ing upon
a regular extensive plan; a etcady prin-
ciple of benevolence, conducted by wis-
dom; which, fuljed to no variab/IlefS or
,jaI/roiv of i//r/'g,free from all partiality
and caprice, incapable of being either
ioothed by flattery, or ruffled by refcent-
ment, resembles, in its calm and equal
lul:re, the eternal serenity of the highest
licavens. Thy mercy, 0 Lordi.' i in ft hc a-
vcin.r, and iiJy f7i'llfnificf rche/cts b zwilo tie
clouds. Thy rigseoslefis s is l'1 tike gtie r7at Iil-
:1i;r, ilnd y judogmctlls are a;
girat' aiCth.

Such

S ERM. Such are the conceptions of the great
.._. ^, God, which fill with veneration the heart

of a devout man. His veneration is not
confined to acs of immediate worihip.
It is the habitual temper of his foul.
Not only when engaged in prayer or
praise, but in the silence of retirement,
and even amidst the occupations of the
world, the Divine Being dwells upon his
thoughts. No place, and no objec, ap-
pear to him void of God. On the works
of Nature he views the impreflion of his
hand; and in the actions of men, he
traces the operation of his Providence.
Whatever he beholds on earth, that is
beautiful or fair, that is great or good,
he refers to God, as to the supreme ori-
gin of all the excellence which is scattered
throughout his works. From those effects
he riles to the first cause. From those
2reams, he ascends to the fountain whence
they flow-. By those rays, he is led to
that eternal source of light in which they
centre.

DEVOTIO N

DEVOTION implies, secondly, sincere SERM.

cratitude to God, for all his benefits. X.
This is a warmer emotion than simple
veneration. Veneration looks up to the
Deity, as he is in himself; Gratitude re-
gards what he is towards us. When a
devout man furvcys this vait universe,
where beauty and goodness are every
where predominant; when he refle&s on
those numberiefs multitudes of creatures
w-ho, in their different fations, enjoy the
blessings of existence; and when at the
fame time he looks up to an Iiniverfal.
Father, who hath thus filled creation witl
life and happiness, his heart glows within
him. He adores that disinterested good-
ness, which prompted the Almighty to
raise up so many orders of intelligent be-
ings, not that he might receive, but that
he might give and impart; that he might
pour forth himself, and communicate to
the spirits which he formed, some emana-
tions of his felicity.

The goodness of this Supreme Benefac-
tor he gratefully contemplates, as display-

ed

SE R I. ed in his ownl flatc. He reviews tie

X.

events of his life; and in every com-
fort which has sweetencd it, he difcerrns
the Divine hand. Does he remember
witlh al&ion, the parents under whose
care he grew up, and the companions
with whom hle passeld his youthful life?
Is he now happy, in his family rising
around ;him1; i1 the i'toufe Awho loves
him, or il the chlildren who give hiii
comfort and joy? Into every tender re.
membrance of the past, and every pleal-
ing enjoynment of the present, devotion
enters; for in all those beloved objecs,
it recognizes God. The communicationl
of love from heart to heart, is an eriunon
of his goodners. Firom his inspiration,
descends all the friendfihip which ever
glcwed on earth ; and therefore, to him
it jusily returns in gratitude, and termi-
nates on him.

But this life, wllth all its int.elrens, is

but a finail part cf human exifPLenc. A
devout man looks forward to immortia-
lity, and dliovcras fill higher fcu'beds of

Cratitude,

,-atitude. He views himself as a guilty s E M.

creatu!re, vhlom Divine benignity has re- .
ceived into grace; ihofe forfeited hopes
it has restored; and to whom it has cpcn-
ed the imof glorious profpe&s of future
felicity. Such gencroriy flt ewn to the
fallen and mifcrable, is yet more aflecing
to the heart, than avou:rs conferred on
the innocent. He conicrmpates, wvit afIo-
rliflment, the labours of the Son of Gcd,
in accomplishing redemption fsr men;
and his foul overflows wVth than.kulnc;s
to him, whbo loved us, and rwYc,7ed ?.s .from
our finls in bis own bloo d. -

- Jhct f,:ta l I

relder to she Lord for all bis beelfts. B/c/fs
the Lord0 , 0 myfoidl! ai:J a! tbhat s wisb-
ill mei, ble/i his holy rame; Vwho forceii'eth
all thine in.iuties, a:.d heb/lth all th.l d,:;3
c1Jes; who rcdecmeth thy lif Cfiom dcf:ric-
io11, aid crow'nCth theeJ tc 'ib lov.;,'g- kind :ns.
and witb tender mecies.

DEVOTION implies, thirdly, the de-

fire of the foul after the favour of the Su-
preme Being, as its chief good, and final

S reft,

S E RM. reft. To inferiour enjoyments, the devout

man allots inferiour and secondary attach-
ment. He disclaims not every eaithly
affe cion. He pretends not to renounce
all plealure in the comforts of his pre-
sent Rate. Such an unnatural renuncia-
tion humanity forbids, and religion can-
not require. But from these he expets
not his supreme bliss. He discerns the
vanity which belongs to them all; and
beyond the circle of mutable objeds
\vhich surround him, he aspires after
rome principles of more perfec felicity,
wvlich llhall not be fubje: to change or
decay. But where is this complete and
permianent good to be found ? Ambition
purfiies it in courts and palaces; and re-
turns from the pursuit, loaded with for-
rows. Pleasure fecks it among sensual
joys; and retires with the confCefion of
diflppointment, The deep faitb, it is not ill
me; a;d the fJca faith, it is not with me. It
cannot be gotten for gold; ncither fJall s/ier
be weighcld for the price thereof. ts place
is not in the land of the living. True hap-

piness

p)iness dwells with God; and from the S E R M.
light of his countenance, it beams upon the
devout man. His voice is, W;hom have I
il heaven but thee and there is none upon
earth that I dIfire beside thee. After ex-
ploring heaven and earth for happiness,
they seem to him a mighty void, a wil-
dernefs of shadows, where all would be
empty and unfublfantial without God.
But in his favour and love, he finds what
fi;pplies every defet of temporal objets;
and affilres tranquillity to his heart, amidst
all the changes of his existence. T'houJ3alt
guide me with thy colrfel; and thot f/ialt re
ceive me' to tly, glory. My filJh and my heart
jfaileth; but God is the Jftength of 19y heart,
and my poilion for ever.

FROM these sentiments and affetions,

Devotion advances, fourthly, to an entire
resignation of the foul to God. It is the
consummation of trust and hope. It ba-
nilhes anxious cares, and murmuring
thoughts. It reconciles us to every ap-
pointment of Divine Providence; and re-

VQL. I. T solves

E R M. solves every wish into the desire of pleas-
X. yJ ing him, whom our hearts adore. Its

genuine breathings are to this effect:
" Condut me, 0 God! in what path

Ioever feemeth good to thee. In no-
"thing flall I ever arraign thy sacred

will. Dost thou require me to part
" with any worldly advantages, for the

fake of virtue and a good conscience ? I
give them up. Dost thou command me
' to relinquish my friends, or my coun-
' try ? At thy call I cheerfully leave
" them. Doff thou summon me away
' from this world? Lo ! I am ready to
" depart. Thou haft made, thou haft re-
" deemed me, and I am thine. Myself,
" and all that belongs to me, I surrender
" to thy disposal. Let the men of the
i world have their portion in this lie. Be
" it mine, to behold thyface in rigbhteoiflnefs;
" and when I awake, to befaitisfcd with th)'
" likeness."

This, surely, is one of the noblest aats

of which the human mind is capable,
when thus, if we may be allowed the ex-

,reffion

prelion, it unites itself with God. Nor s E R.
can any devotion be genuine, which in- x.
spires not sentiments of this nature. For
devotion is not to be confidered as a tran-
fient glow of affedion, occasioned by some
casual impreflions of divine goodness,
which are suffered to remain unconnected
with the conduct of life. It is a power-
fil principle, which penetrates the foul;
which purifies the affclions from debaf-
ing attachments; and, by a fixed and
tteady regard to God, subdues every sinful
pafrion, and forms the inclinations to piety
and virtue.

SUCH in general are the dispositions

that constitute devotion. It is the union
of veneration, gratitude, desire, and re-
fignation. It expresses, not so much the
performance of any particular duty, as
the spirit which must animate all reli-
gious duties. It Rfands opposed, not mere-
ly to downright vice; but to a heart
which is cold, and insensible to sacred
things; which, from compulsion, perhaps,

T 2 and

S E R M. and a sense of interest, preserves some re-

X.
-y--' gard to the divine commands, but obeys

them without ardour, love, or joy. I
proceed,

II. To recommend this devout spirit

to your imitation. I begin with obferv-
ing, That it is of the utmost consequence
to guard against extremes of every kind
in religion. We must beware, left, by
seeking to avoid one rock, we split upon
another. It has been long the subjea of
remark, that superstition and enthufiafmn
are two capital fourccs of delusion; fu-
perfiition on the one hand, attaching
men, with immoderate zeal, to the ritual
and external part of religion; and enthu-
fiafm, on the other, directing their whole
attention to internal emotions, and myf-
tical communications with the spiritual
world; while neither the one, nor the
other, has paid sufficient regard to the
great moral duties of the Chrifrian life.
But, running with intemperate eagerness
fiom these two great abuses of religion,

men

men have neglected to observe, that there SE RM.

X.

are extremes opposite to each of them,
into which they are in hazard of precipi-
tating themselves. Thus the horrour of
superstition' has sometimes reached so far
as to produce contempt for all external
institutions; as if it were possible for
religion to subsist in the world, without
forms of worship, or public acknow-
ledgment of God. It has also happened
that some, who in the main are well as-
fecIed to the cause of goodness, observing
that persons of a devout turn have at
times been carried, by warm affections,
into unjustifiable excesses, have thence
haflily concluded that all devotion was
alin to enthusiasm; and separating reli-
gion totally from the heart and affecions,
have reduced it to a frigid observance of
what they call the rules of virtue. This
is the extreme which I purpose at present
to combat, by showing you, first, That
true devotion is rational, and well-found-
ed; next, That it is of the highest im-
portance to every other part of religion

T 3 and

SERM. and virtue; and, lastly, That it is most

X.^ conducive to our happiness.

IN the firif place, True devotion is ra-

tional, and well-founded. It takes its rife
from affections, which are essential to the
human frame. We are formed by Na-
ture, to admire what is great, and to love
what is amiable. Even inanimate objects
have power to excite those emotions.
The magnificent profpeds of the natural
world, fill the mind with reverential awe.
Its beautiful scenes create delight. When
we survey the actions and behaviour of our
fellow-creatures, the affecions glow with
greater ardour; and, if to be unmoved,
in the former cafe, argues a defect of fen-
fibility in our powers, it discovers, in the
latter, an odious hardness and depravity
in the heart. The tenderness of an assec-
tionate parent, the generosity of a for-
giving enemy, the public spirit of a patriot
or a hero, often fill the eyes with tears,
and swell the breast with emotions too big
for utterance. The object of those assec-

tions

tions is frequently raised above us, in con- s E R M.
dition and rank. Let us suppose him raised -
also above us, in nature. Let us imagine,
that an Angel, or any being of fuperiour
order, had condescended to be our friend,
our guide, and patron; no person, sure,
would hold the exaltation of his benefac-
tor's charader, to be an argument why he
should love and revere him lefs.-Strange!
that the attachment and veneration, the
warmth and overflowing of heart, which
excellence and goodness on every other oc-
cafion command, should begin to be ac-
counted irrational, as soon as the Supreme
Being becomes their objea. For what rea-
son muff human sensibility be extinct to-
wards him alone? Are all benefits entitled
to gratitude, except the highest and the best ?
Shall goodness cease to be amiable, only be.
cause it is perfea ?

It will, perhaps, be said, that an un-

known and invisible being is not quali-
sied to raise affecion in the human heart.
Wrapt up in the mysterious cbfcurity of
his nature, he escapes our search, and

T 4 affords

S E R M. affords no determinate object to our love

X.
L--y-j or desire. 'Ve go forvrward,, buit he is not

there; and backward, but we cannot per-
ceive him; on the left hand, where he
uorkedt, but we cannot behold him: He
hideth hinlff on the right hand, that we
cannot fie him . - Notwithflanding this
obscurity, is there any being in the uni-
verse more real and certain, than the Cre-
ator of the world, and the Supporter of
all existence ? Is he, in whom we live and
move, too diflant from us to excite de-
votion ? Iis form and eflence, indeed,
we cannot fee; but to be unseen, and
imperfecly known, in many other in-
stances, precludes neither gratitude nor
love. It is not the fight, so much as the
itrong conception, or deep imprefiion, of
an object, which assec: s the paflions. We
glow with admiration of personages, who
have lived in a distant age. Whole na-
tions have been transported with zeal and
affeCtion, for the generous hero, or pub-
lic deliverer, whom they knew only by

o Job, xxxiii. 8, 9.

falmc

fame. Nay, properly speaking, the direst SERM.

x.

object of our love, is, in every cafe, in-
visible. For that on which affection is
placed, is the mind, the foul, the internal
characer of our fellow-creatures; which,
surely, is no less concealed, than the Di-
vine Nature itself is, from the view of
sense. From actions, we can only infer
the dispositions of men; from what we
fee of their behaviour, we collect what is
invisible; but the conjecture which we
form, is, at best, imperfe&t; and when
their actions excite our love, much of
their heart remains still unknown. I afl,
then, in what respect God is less qualified
than any other being to be an object of as-
fe&ion ? Convinced that he exists; behold-
ing his goodness spread abroad in his works,
exerted in the government of the world,
displayed in some measure to sense, in the
actions of his Son Jesus Christ; are we not
furnished with every essential requisite
which the heart demands, in order to in-
dulge the most warm, and at the fame time
the most rational emotions ?

If

SER M. If these considerations juflify the rca-

X-_ , fonablenefs of devotion, as exprefred in

veneration, love, and gratitude, the fame
train of thought will equally justify it
when appearing in the forms of dcfire,
delight, or resignation. The latter are,
indeed, the consequence of the former.
For we cannot but desire some communi-
cation with what we love; and will na-
turally resign ourselves to one, on whom
we have placed the full confidence of
affection. The aspirations of a devout
man after the favour of God, are the
effeds of that earnest wish for happiness,
which glows in every breal. All men
have somewhat that may be called the
object of their devotion; reputation,
pleasure, learning, riches, or whatever
apparent good has strongly attached their
heart. This becomes the centre of at-
tradion, which draws them towards it;
which quickens and regulates all their
motions. While the men of the world
are thus influenced by the objects which
they severally worthip, shall he only who

directs

direcs allhis devotion towards the Supreme S ER M.

X.

Being, be excluded from a place in the _,
system of rational conduEt ? or be censured
for having pafions, whose sensibility corre-
lionds to the great cause which moves
them?-Having vindicated the reasonable-
ness of devotion, I come,

IN the second place, to show its im-
portance, and the high place which it
possesses in the system of religion. I ad-
dress myself now to those, who, though
they rejet not devotion as irrational, yet
confider it is an unneceflary refinement
an attainment which may be safely left to
recluse and sequestered persons, who aim
at uncommon fandity. The solid and
material duties of a good life, they hold
to be in a great measure independent of
devout affeaion; and think them fuffi-
ciently supported, by their necessary con-
nedion with our interest, both in this
and in a future world. They insist much
upon religion being a calm, a fober, and
rational principle of condut-- I admit

that

SE R M. that it is very laudable to have a rational

x.-- religion. But I muff admonifl you, that

it is both reproachful and criminal, to have
an insensible heart. If we reduce religion
into ob cool a state, as not to admit love,
afiection, and desire, we shall leave it in
poffefion of fiall influence over human
life. Look abroad into the world, and ob-
serve how few act upon deliberate and
rational views of their true interef.f The
bulk of mankind are impelled by their feel-
ings. They are attracled by appearances of
good. Taste and inclination rule their con-
dud-. To direct their inclination and tafe
towards the highcft obje&s; to form a relifn
within them, for virtuous and spiritual en-
joyment ; to introduce religion into the
heart, is the province of devotion; and
hence arises its importance to the interests
of goodneIs.

Agreeably to this dotrine, the great

Author of our religion, who well kilew9
what was in man, laid the foundation of
his whole fryftem in the regeneration of
the heart. The change which was to be

accom-

accomplifled on his followers, he did not SE R M.
purpose to effecE, merely by regulating --a
their external condut; but by forming
within them a new nature; by taking
away the heart of Ji^one, and giving them
a heart of fefla, that is, a heart relenting
and tender, yielding to the Divine im-
pulse, and readily fuCceptible of devout
impreflions. Thol J7Jalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and mind, and foul,
aild ( Jcircgth: This is the fijfl and great
commanll lent. 1My on, give me thy heart,
is the call of God to each of us: And,
indeed, if the heart be with-held, it is
not easy to conceive what other offering
we can present, that will be acceptable
to him.

Of what nature muff that man's reli-

gion be, who professes to worship God,
and to believe in Christ; and yet raises
his thoughts towards God, and his Savi-
our, without any warmth of gratitude or
love? I speak not of those occasional de-
cays of pious afreliicn, to which the best
are fubje2, but of a total insensibility to

this

SERM. this part of religion. Surely let the out.

_.-^ ward behaviour be ever so irreproachable,

there must be some essential defe&t in a
heart, which remains always unmoved at
the view of infinite goodness. The as-
fe&ions cannot, in this cafe, be deemed
to flow in their natural channel. Some
concealed malignity muff have tainted
the inward frame. This is not the man
whom you would chufe for your bosom-
friend; or whose heart you could expef
to answer, with reciprocal warmth, to
yours. His virtue, if it deserves that
name, is not of the most amiable fort;
and may, with reason, receive the appel-
lation (often injudiciously beflowed) of
cold and dry morality. Such a person
must, as yet, be far from the kingdom of
Heaven.

As devotion is thus essential to religion

in its principle, so it enters into the pro-
per discharge of all its duties. It diffuses
an auspicious influence over the whole
of virtue. The prevailing temper of the
mind is formed by its most frequent em-

ployments,

ployments. Intercourse with Supreme SERM.
perfedtion cannot, therefore, but ennoble
and improve it. The pure love of God
naturally connets itself with the love of
man. Hence, devotion has been often
found a powerful instrument in huma-
nizing the manners of men, and taming
their unruly passions. It finooths what
is rough, and softens what is fierce, in
our nature. It is the great purifier of the
affecions. It inspires contempt of the
low gratifications belonging to animal
life. It promotes a humble and cheerful
contentment with our lot; and subdues
that eager desire of riches and of power,
which has filled this unhappy world with
crimes and misery. Finally, it bestows
that enlargement of heart in the service
of God, which is the great principle,
both of perseverance, and of progress in
virtue. He who, unacquainted with de-
vout affeaions, sets himself to keep the
Divine commandments, will advance in
obedience with a flow and languid pace;
like one who, carrying a heavy burden,

9 toils

SERM. toils to mount the hill. But he whose

X.
(_y^ heart devotion has warmed, will proceed

on his way, cheerful and rejoicing. The
one performs his duty, only because it is
commanded; the other, because he loves
it. The one is inclined to do no more
than necessity requires; the other seeks
to excel. The one looks for his reward
in somewhat besides religion; the other
finds it in religion itself: It is his meat
and drink to do the will of that heavenly
Father, whom he loves and adores. Which
of these two are likely to make the greatest
improvement in goodness, is easily discerned.
Let us now confider,

IN the third place, the influence of de-

votion on the happiness of life. Whatever
promotes and strengthens virtue, what-
ever calms and regulates the temper, is a
source of happiness. Devotion, as I have
just now shown, produces those effecs in
a remarkable degree. It inspires compo-
sure of spirit, mildness, and benignity;
weakens the painful, and cherishes the

pleasing

pleafilg emotions; ahdj by these means, SERM.

X.

carries on the life of a pious man in a __
finooth and placid tenour.

Betides exerting this habitual influence

on the mind, devotion opens a field of
enjoyments, to which the vicious are en-
tire itrangers; enjoyments the more valu.
able, as they peculiarly belong to retite-
ment when the world leaves us, and to
adversity when it becomes our foe. These
are the two seasons, for which every wife
man wnuld most wish to provide some
hidden store of comfort. For let him be
placed in the most favourable situation
which the human state admits, the world
can neither always amuse him, nor al-
ways shield him from diitrefs. There
will be many hours of vacuity, and
many of dejeaion, in his life. If he be
a stranger to God, and to devotion, how
dreary will the gloom of solitude often
prove? With what oppreflive weight will
licknefs, disappointment, or old age, fall
upon his spirits? But, for those pensive
periods, the pious man has a relief pre-

VOL. I. U pared,

S ER M. pared. From the tiresome repetition of

X.
_..ye. the common vanities of life, or from the

painful corrosion of its cares and sorrows,
devotion transports him into a new region;
and surrounds him there with such objeQs,
as are the most fitted to cheer the dejeCtion,
to calm the tumults, and to heal the wounds
of his heart. If the world has been empty
and delusive, it gladdens him with the pro-
spect of a higher and better order of things,
about to arise. If men have been ungrate-
ful and base, it displays. before him the
faithfulness of that Supreme Being, who,
though every other friend fail, will never
forsake him. Coniflt your experience,
and you will find, that the two greateil
sources of inward joy, are, the exercise of
love dire&ed towards a deserving objea,
and the exercise of hope terminating on
some high and aflurcd happiness. Both
these are fipplied by devotion; and there-
fore we have no reason to be ihrprilcd,
if, on bome occasions, it fill the hearts of
good men with a faiisfaltion not to be
exprefled.

The

Tile refined pleafires of a pious mind SERM.

are, in many refpeEts, fuperiour to the X
coarse gratifications of sense. They are
pleasures which belong to the highest
powers, and best affecions of the foul;
whereas the gratifications of sense reside
in the lowest region of our nature. To
the one, the foul stoops below its native
dignity. The other, raise it above itself
The one, leaves always a comfortless, often
a mortifying, remembrance behind them.
The other, are reviewed with applause
and delight. The pleasures of sense re-
femble a foaming torrent, which after a
disorderly course, speedily runs out, and
leaves an empty and offensive channel.
But the plealures of devotion resemble
the equable current of a pure river,
which enlivens the fields through which
it pafles, and diffuses verdure and ferti-
lity along its banks. To thee, 0 Devo-.
tion! we owe the highest improvement of
our nature, and much of the enjoyment
of our life. Thou art the support of our
virtue, and the reft of our fouls, in this

U 2 turbulent

s E R M. turbulent world. Thou compofeft the

x. thoughts. Thou calmest the passions.

Thou exalteft the heart. Thy commu-
nications, and thine only, are imparted to
the low, no ]ess than to the high; to
the poor, as well as to the rich. In thy
presence, worldly diftindions cease; and
under thy influence, worldly sorrows are
forgotten. Thou art the balm of the
wounded mind. Thy fantuary is ever
open to the miserable; inaccessible only
to the unrighteous and impure. Thou
beginneft on earth, the temper of heaven,
In thee, the hosts of angels and blefled
spirits eternally rejoice. It now remains,

III. To endeavour to correct some

errors, into which men are apt to fall
concerning devotion. For it is but too
obvious, that errors are often committed
in this part of religion. These frequently
disfigure its appearance before the world,
and fubjc' it to unjust reproach. Let us
therefore attend deliberately to its nature,
so as to diflinguifh pure and rational de-

votion,

votion, of which I have hitherto treated, S ER M.
from that which is, in any degree, spurious
and adulterated.

In the first place, It is an error to

place devotion in the mere performance
of any external ad of worship. Prayer
and praise, together with the ordinances
peculiar to the Christian religion, are the
appointed means of rairing the heart to-
wards the Supreme Being. They are the
instituted signs of devotion; the language
in which it naturally expresses itself. But
let us remember, that they are signs and
expreflions only; and we all know, that
in various cafes, these may not correspond
to the thing signified. It is in the difpo-
fition of the heart, not in the motion of
the lips, or in the posture of the body,
that devotion consists. The heart may
pray or praise, when no words are ut-
tered. But if the heart be unconcerned or
ill affected, all the words we can utter, how
properly framed soever, are no other than
empty and unacceptable founds in the ear of
the Almighty.

U 3 IN

SE R M. IN the second place, It is an error to

X.
_T-v ' conceive the pleasures and advantages of

devotion, to be indiscriminately open to
all. Devotion, like many parts of reli-
gion, may in fomne lights be confidered
as a privilege, and in others as a duty.
It is the duty of all, to love God, and
to resign tlhemfelves to his will. But it is
the privilege of good men only, to re-
joice in God, and to confide in his
fiiendihip. Hence a certain preparation
is rcquifitc, for the enjoyment ofdevotion
in its whole cxtent. Not only muff the
life be reformed fiom gross enormities,
but the heart must have undergone that
change which the Gospel demands. A
competent knowledge of God muff be ac-
quired. A proper foundation mull be laid
in faith and repentance, for intercourse
with Heaven.

They who would rush all at once from

the arms of the world, into the sacred
retreat of devotion; they who imagine
that retreat to ffand always ready for the
reception of such as betake. themselves to

it,

it, for no reason, but because every other S E R M.
refuge excludes them, betray gross igno- ,.
rance of this part of religion. They bring
to it, faculties unqualified to taste its plea-
fures; and they grasp at hopes, to which
they are not entitled. By incorporating
with devotion the unnatural mixture of
their unfanCtified paflions, they defile and
corrupt it. Hence that gloom which has
often spread over it. Hence those super-
ftitious mortifications and aufterities, by
which the falsely devout hope to purchase
favour from God; haunted by the ter-
rours of a guilty conscience, and vainly
struggling to substitute a servile and
cringing homage, in the room of the pure
affe&ions of a renewed heart. On such
altars, the hallowed fire of true devotion
cannot burn; nor can any incense ascend
from them, that shall be grateful to Hea-.
ven. Bring no more vain oblations. MWaJl
j'e, make you clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before mine eyes, faith the
Lord. Ccafe to do evil; learn to do well.
Then draw nigh to God, and he will draw

U sigh

SE R M. nighi to you.- But though devotion re,
Lj, quires a pure heart, and a virtuous life,

and necessarily supposes the exercise of
frequent retirement, I must observe,

IN the third place, That it is an error

to conceive it as requiring an entire re-
treat from the world, Devotion, like
every other branch of religion, was in-
tended to fit us for discharging the duties
of life. We serve God, by being useful
to one another. It is evident from the
frame of our nature, and from our com-
mon necesSities and wants, that we were
designed by Providence for an a&ive part
on this earth. The Gospel of Christ, ac-
cordingly, confiders us as engaged in the
concerns of the world; and dire&s its
exhortations to men, in all the various re-
lations, charaders, and employments of
civil life, Abftracion from society, there-
fore, and total dedication of our time to
devout exercises, cannot be the mors pro-
per method of acquiring the favour of

a md,

ar melR

I mean not, however, to throw any SERM.

blame on those, who having loft all relish ,_.
for the ordinary pursuits of life, in con-
sequence of severe wounds which they
have received from affliaion; who, be-
ing left to stand alone, and discerning
their connections with the world to be
in some measure broken off, choose to
seek tranquillity in a religious retirement,
and to consecrate their days entirely to
God. Situations sometimes occur, which
both justify a great degree of retreat from
the world, and entitle it to refpea. But
with regard to the bulk of mankind,
Christian devotion neither requires nor
implies any such sequestration from the
affairs of men. Nay, for the most part,
it will be cultivated with greater success,
by those who mingle it with the aftive
employments of life. For the mind,
when entirely occupied by any one ob-
je&, is in hazard of viewing it at last
through a false medium. Objets, efpe-
cially, so great and sublime as those of
devotion, when we attempt to fix upon

*Ad3 ~ them

SER M. them unremitting attention, overftretch
..4-. -and diibrder our feeble powers. The

'mind, by being relaxed, returns to them
with more advantage. As none of our
organs can bear intcnfe fcnfaticns without
injury; as the eye, when dazzled with
overpowering light, beholds imaginary
colours, and loses the real diftinCdion of
objects; so the mind, when overheated by
perpetual contemplation of celestial things,
has been sometimes found to mistake the
:irong impreflions of fancy, for fupernatu-
ral communications from above. To the
employments of devotion as to all other
things, there are due limits. There is
a certain temperate sphere, within which it
preserves longest its proper exertion, and
most successfully promotes the purposes for
which it was deigned.

IN the fourth place, It is an error to

imagine, that devotion enjoins a total
contempt of all the pleasures and amuse-
ments of human society. It checks, in-
deed, that spirit of dissipation which is

too

too prevalent. It not only prohibits plea- s E R M.
fures which are unlawful, but likewise X.
that unlawful degree of attachment to
pleasures in themselves innocent, which
withdraws the attention of man fromt
what is serious and important. But it
brings amusement under due limitation,
without extirpating it. It forbids it as
the business, but permits it as the re-
laxation, of life. For there is nothing in
the spirit of true religion, which is hostile
to a cheerful enjoyment of our situation in
the world.

THEY who look with a revere and in-

dignant eye upon all the recreations by
which the cares of men are relieved, and
the union of society is cemented, are, in
two refpeds, injurious to religion. First,
they exhibit it to others under a forbid-
ding form, by clothing it with the garb
of so much unnecessary austerity. And
next, they deprive the world of the be-
nefit which their example might afford,
in drawing the line between innocent and

dangerous

SER M. dangerous pleasures. By a temperate

X. participation of those which are innocent,

they might successfully exert that autho-
rity, which a virtuous and refpeEtable cha-
racer always poflefles, in restraining un-
due excess. They would show the young
and unwary, at what point they ought
to stop. They would have it in their
power to regulate, in some degree, the
public manners; to check extravagance,
to humble presumption, and put vice to
the blush. But, through injudicious fe-
verity, they fall fiort of the good they
might perform. By an indilcriminate
censure of all amufcment, they detraa
from the weight of their reproof, when
amusement becomes undoubtedly sinful.
By totally withdrawing themselves from
the circle of cheerful life, they deliver
up the entertainments of society, into the
hands of the loose and the corrupted; and
permit the blind power of fashion, un-
controuled, to eflablifl its own standards,
and to exercise its dangerous sway over the
world,

IN the fifth place, It is an error to be- s E R M.

lieve, that devotion nourithes a ipirit of x.
I;verity, in judging of the manners and
characters of others. Under this re-
proach, indeed, it has so long suffered in
the world; that, with too many, the ap-
pellation of devout, suggests no other
characer, but that of a bour and recluse
bigot, who delights in censure. But the
reproach is unjust; for such a spirit is
entirely opposite to the nature of true de-
votion. The very first traces which it
imprints on the mind, are candour and
hunmilirv. Its principles are liberal. Its
genius is unafiiming and mild. Severe
only to itself, it makes every allowance
for others which humanity can suggest.
It claims no privilege of looking into
their hearts, or of deciding with refpea
to their eternal ftate.-If your supposed
devotion produce contrary effects; if it
infuse harlhnefs into your sentiments,
and acrimony into your fpecch; you may
conclude, that under a serious appear-
ance, carnal paflions lurk. And, if ever

it

SE RM. it flall so far lift you up with felf-con-

x.
--.- ceit as to make you establish your own

opinions as an infallible standard for the
whole Christian world, and lead you to
consign to perdition, all who differ from
you, either in some docrinal tenets, or
in the mode of exprefing them; you may
reft assured, that to much pride you have
joined much ignorance, both of the nature
of devotion, and of the Golpel of Christ.
Finally,

IN the sixth place, It is an error to

think, that perpetual rapture and fpiri.
tual joy belong to devotion. Devout
feelings admit very different degrees of
warmth and exaltation. Some persons,
by the frame of their minds, are much
more susceptible than others of the ten-
der emotions. They more readily relent at
the view of Divine goodness, glow with
a warmer ardour or love, and, by confe&
quence, rife to a higher elevation of joy
and hlope. But, in the rnidft of still and
calm affedions, devotion often dwells;

and,

and, though it produce no transports in SERM.
the mind, diffuses over it a fleady fe- X_
renity. Devout sensations not only vary
in their degree according to the frame of
different tempers; but, even among the
belt disposed, susser much interruption.
and decay. It were too much to expedl,
that, in the present slate of human frailty,
those happy feelings should be uniform
and conitant. Opprefflon of worldly
cares, languor of spirits, and infirmities
of health, frequently inclifpofe us for the
enjoyment of devout affLdions. Pious
men, on thcfe occasions, are in hazard of
passing judgment on their own state with
too much severity; as if, for some great
iniquity, they were condemned by God
to final hardness of heart. Hence arises
that melancholy, which has been seen to
overcloud them; and which has given
occasion to many contemptuous scoffs of
ungodly men. But it is a melancholy
which deserves to be treated with tender-
ness, not with contempt. It is the excess
of virtuous and pious sensibility. It is

3 the

S ER M. the overflowing of a heart affeEted; in an

X.
L-_i extreme degree, with the humble ienfe

of its own failings, and with ardent
concern to attain the favour of God. A
weakness, however, we admit it to be,
though not a crime; and hold it to be
perfectly separable from the efence of de-
votion. For contrition, though it may melt,
ought not to fink or overpower the heart
of a Christian. The tear of repentance
brings its own relief. Religion is a spring
of consolation, not of terrour, to every
well-informed mind, which, in a proper
manner, refts its hope on the infinite good-
ness of God, and the all-fufficient merit of
Christ,

To conclude, Let us remove from de-

votion all those mistakes, to which the
corruptions of men, or their ignorance
and prejudices, have given rife. With
us it be the worship of God, in pirit
c it-l'th; the elevation of the foul

hibal in iimplicity and love. Let
ue it as the principle of virtuous

condua,

condild, and of inward peace, by frequent s E R M,
and serious meditation on the great objecs X,
of religion, let us lay ourselves open to its
influence. By means of the institutions of
the Gofpei , let us cherish its imprefions.
And, above all, let us pray to God, that he
may establish its power in our heart; For
here, if any where, his affifPance is requisite.
The spirit of devotion is his gift. From his
inspiration it proceeds. Towards him it
tends; and in his pretence hereafter, it shall
attain its full perfection

VTOL. I

# SERMON XI. On the DUTIES of the YOUNG. TITUS, ii. 6. Young men likewise exhort, to be sober-minded.

[ 306 ]

SERMON XI.
On the DUTIES of the YOUNG.

TITUS, ii. 6.

Youl,;ng men /liCz-c',' CxJihort, to befobCr-i~indctd.
S E R I". O ) , TETY 1 of mind is one of those

X. o
1'~-'~ E y ris!wes which the present condition

of human life fRrongly inculcates. The
unccrtainty of its enjoyments checks
pref!mption; the multiplicity of its dan-
gers demands perpetual caution. Mo-
deration, vigilance, and feli-government,
are duties incumbenllt on all; but elpe-
cially on lfch as are beginning the journey
cf life. To them,n therefore, the admoni-
tion in the Text is, with great propriety,
direaed; though there is reason to fear,
that by them it is in hazard of being

least

leafl: regarded. Experience enforces the S E P M.

XI.

admoniition on the most giddy, after they X
have advanced in years. But the whole
fitte of youthful views an:d p-fions, is
advcrfe to !bbriety of mind. The scenes
which present thcmfclves, at our entering
upon the world, are commonly flattering.
Whatever lhey be in themselves, the lively
jpirits of the young gild every opening
profpIed. The field of hope appears to
!tretch wide before them. Pleaflre seems
to put forth its blofioms on every fide.
Impelled by delire, forward they rush.
with inconsiderate ardour: Prompt to
decide, and to choose; averse to hesitate,
cr to enquire; credulcus, because un-
taught by experience; raflh, because un-
acquainted with danger; headstrong,
because unfubdued by disappointment.
Hence arise the perils, of which it is my
design at present to warn them. I fiall
takefo7/riej, of ,i/nd, in its most comprc-
henfive sense, as including the whole of
that difeipline which religion and virtue
prescribe to youth. Though the words

X 2 of

S E R M. of the Text are direcly addreled to youaig

XI.J menl, yet, as the fame admonition is given

in a preceding verse to the other sex, the
inftruCions which arise from the Text arc
to be confidered as common to both. I
intend, first, to ihow them the importance
of beginning early to give serious attention
to their conduct; and, next, to point out
those virtues which they ought chiefly to
cultivate.

As soon as you are capable of reflec-

tion, you must perceive that there is a
right and a wrong in human ations,
You fee, that those who are born with
the fame advantages of fortune, are not
all equally prosperous in the course of life.
While some of them, by wife and steady
conduQ, attain diftin&ion in the world,
and pass their days with comfort and ho-
nour; others of the fame rank, by mean
and vicious behaviour, forfeit the advan-
tages of their birth, involve themselves in
much miferv, and end in being a dif-
grace to their friends, and a burden on

society,
6 ...

society. Early, then, you may learn, that SE R M.
it is not on the external condition in ,.J
which you find yourselves placed, but on
the part which you are to at, that your
welfare or unhappiness, your honour or
infamy, depend. Now, when beginning
to at that part, what can be of greater
moment, than to regulate your plan of
condut with the most serious attention,
before you have yet committed any fatal
or irretrievable errors? If, instead of
exerting reflecion for this valuable pur-
pose, you deliver yourselves up, at so cri-
tical a time, to sloth and pleasure; if you
refute to liften to any counsellor but hu-
mour, or to attend to any pursuit except
that of amusement; if you allow your-
selves to float loose and careless on the
tide of life, ready to receive any direc-
tion which the current of fashion may-
chance to give you, what can you expect
to follow from such beginnings ? While
so many around you are undergoing the
fad consequences of a like indifcre-
tion, for what reason fliall not those confe-

X 3 quences

SERM- quenccs c:tend to you? Shall you

c--- attain fucccfs without that preparation,

and escape dangers without that precau-
tion, which is required of others ? Shall
happlnefs ,grow up to v'ou, of its own ac-
cord, and lfoiict you;r acccptance, when,
to the reft of mankind, it is the fruit of
long c.livatio.n and the acquilition of
labotur and care ?-- Deceive not your-
iclies w'lh luich arrogant hopes. What-
cver b)e your rank, Providence will not,
ifor cur

t fake, rcverie its eflablinhed or-

der. The Author of your being hath en-
ioincd you to tidi' bc . to yc') wc''.r; to
sj oazdr' the p75i/hsr f J' yor /'et ; to ;remember,
your C-ceaor i! hc t. aj.r of your *ith. I-He
hath decreed, that they only whbo fc' as-
ter c,'f/,;W., i&a/ll 'n it; that foo//J i5a!1

, ctji .t be' azlfc of ibhir trc'.ii ,re.iosl ;

Odf ili.t wca.fo· , Lfith . jIrl.!l/ c;

'all

de/roy his ow;.r i .1,,l3 By listening to tllce
admonit'ion;, and tempering the vivacity
of youtih wiLn a proper mixture of fcrious
thought, you may enfiure chcerfulnefs for
the rel: of life; but by delivering your-

selves

Ielves up at present to giddiness and levity, s ER M.
you lay the foundation of lasting heaviness ,_
of heart.

When you look forward to those plans

of life, which cither your circumniances
have suggested, or your friends have pro-
posed, you will riot hesitate to acknow-
ledge, that in order to pursue them with
advantage, some previous discipline is re-
quifite. Be ailured, that whatever is to
be your profer'ion, no education is more
necessary to your rfccefs, than the ac-
quirement of virtuous dispositions and
habits. This is the universal preparation
for every charader, and every station in
life. Bad as the world is, refpe& is al-
ways paid to virtue. In the usual course
of human affairs, it will be found, that
a plain understanding joined with ac-
knowledged worth, contributes more to
prosperity, than the briglteft parts with-
out probity or honour. Whether science,
or business, or public life, be your aim,
virtue still enters, for a principal flare,
into all those great departments of society.

X 4 It

E R M. It is conneced with eminence, in every
XI.
<-r.-.aj liberal art; with reputation, in every branch

of fair and useful business; with diftinc-
tion, in every public station. The vigour
which it gives the mind, and the weight
which it adds to charater; the generous
sentiments which it breathes, the undaunted
spirit which it inspires, the ardour of dili-
gence which it quickens, the freedom which
it procures from pernicious and dishonour-
able avocations, are the foundations of all
that is high in fame, or great in success,
among men.

Whatever ornamental or engaging en-

dowments you now poflefs, virtue is a
necessary requisite, in order to their fiin-
ing with proper lustre. Feeble are the
attrations of the fairest form, if it be
fufpeded that nothing within corre-
fponds to the pleating appearance without.
Short are the triumphs of wit, when it is
supposed to be the vehicle of malice. By
whatever arts you may at first attract the
attention, you can hold the esteem, and
(ecure thl hearts of others, only by ami-

able

able dispositions, and the accomplishments SERM,
of the mind. These are the qualities whole _i.
influence will last, when the lustre of all
that once sparkled and dazzled has pafled
away.

Let not then the season of youth be

barren of improvements so essential to
your future felicity and honour, Now is
the seed-time of life; and according to
what you sow, you Jhall reap, Your cha-
rafter is now, under Divine assistance, of
your own forming; your fate is, in some
measure, put into your own hands, Your
nature is as yet pliant and soft. Habits
have not established their dominion, Pre-
judices have not pre-occupied your un-
derftanding. The world has not had time
to contract and debase your affections.
All your powers are more vigorous, dif-
embarrassed, and free, than they will be
at any future period. Whatever impulse
you now give to your desires and passions,
the direaion is likely to continue. It
will form the channel in which your life
is to run; nay, it may determine its ever-

lasting

S R M. lafflit ifiue. Confidcr then the employ"-

Al.
,..r. , ment of this important period, as the

highest trufll which fihall ever be com-
mitted to you ; as, in a great measure,
dccifive of your happiness, in time, and
in eternity. As in the fuccee!ion of the
seasons, each, by the invariable laws of
Nature, aifetis the producions of what is
next in course; so, in human life, every
period of our age, according as it is well
or ill spent, inSfuences the happiness of
that which is to follow. Virtuous youth
gradually brings forward accomplified
and flourishing manhood; and such man-
hood pases of itself, without uneafmefs,
into refpeftable and tranquil old age.
But wheln Nature is turned out of its re-
gular course, disorder takes place in the
moral, jus[ a in the vegetable world. If
the Spring put forth no blofibois, in
Summer there will be no beauty, and
in Autumn no fruit. So, if youth be
trifled away without improvement, man-
hood will be contcmptible, and old age
miserable. If the beginnings of life have

(9 been

been nvani/y, its latter end can be no other s E R M.

XL.
than vexalions of .fiiit. X

Having thus ihown the importance of

beginning early to give serious attention to
condu2, I come, next, to point out the
virtues which are most neceflary to be cul-
tivated in youth. What I Ihall,

I. RECOrMIMEND, is piety to God. With

this I begin, both as the foundation of
good morals, and as a dipofntion parti-
cularly graceful and becoming in youth.
To be void of it, argues a cold heart, defti-
tute of some of the bcfr affections which
belon to that age. Youth is the season
of warm and generous emotions. The
heart ihould then, spontaneously, rife
into the admiration of what is great,
glow with the love of wlhat is fair and
excellent, and melt at the discovery of
tenderness and goodness. W'here can
any obljec: be found, so proper to kindle
those affcaions, as the Father of the uni-
verse, and the Author of all felicity?
Unmoved by veneration, can you con-

template

SERMM. template that grandeur and majesty,

xI.

I which his works every where display?

Untouched by gratitude, can you view
that profusion of good, which, in this
pleasing season of life, his beneficent hand
pours around you? Happy in the love
and affeCEion of those with whom you
are connected, look up to the Supreme
Being, as the inspirer of all the friend-
Ihip which has ever been shown you by
others; himself, your belt and your first
friend; formerly, the supporter of your
infancy, and the gulde of your child-
hood; now, the guardian of your youth,
and the hope of your coming years.
View religious homage, as a natural ex-
pression of gratitude to him for all his
goodness. Confider it as the service of the
God ofyour fathers; of him, to whom your
parents devoted you; of him, whom in for-
mer ages your ancestors honoured; and by
whom they are now rewarded, and blessed
in heaven. Conneeed with so many ten-
der sensibilities of foul, let religion be with
you, not the cold and barren offspring of

speculation,

speculation, but the warm and vigorous ER M.
dictate of the heart.

But though piety chiefly belong to the

heart, yet the aid of the understanding is
requisite, to give a proper direcion to the
devout affecions. You must endeavour,
therefore, to acquire just views, both of
the great principles of natural religion, and
of the peculiar doctrines of the Gospel. For
this end study the sacred scriptures. Con-
fult the word of God, more than the systems
of men, if you would know the truth in its
native purity. When, upon rational and
fober enquiry, you have established your
principles, susser them not to be shaken by
the scoffs of the licentious, or the cavils of
the sceptical. Remember, that in the ex-
amination of every great and comprehen-
five plan, such as that of Christianity, dif-
ficulties may be expected to occur; and
that reasonable evidence is not to berejected,
because the nature of our present state al-
lows us only to know in part, and to feJ
throtgh a glass, darkly.

Impress

S E R M. Impress your minds with reverence forall
.--.' » that is sacred. Let no wantonness of youth-

ful spirits, no compliance with the intem-
perate mirth of others, ever betray you
into prophane sallies. Besides the guilt
which is thereby incurred, nothing gives a
more odious appearance of petulance and
prefumpton to youth, than the affeCation
of treating religion with levity. Inficad of
being an evidence of fuperiour underpcand-
ing, it discovers a pert and shallow mnind;
which, vain of the first smatterings of know-
ledge, presumes to make light of what the
ress of mankind revere.

At the fame time you are not to ima-

gine, that when exhorted to be religious,
you are called upon to become more for-
mal and solemn in your manners than
others of the fame years, or to ered your-
selves into supercilious reprovers of those
around you. The spirit of true religion
breathes gentleness and affability. It
gives a native, unaffed-ed ease to the be-
haviour. It is social, kind, and cheer-

fill

fil: far removed from that gloomy and SE RM.
illiberal superstition which clouds the i.
brow, sharpens the temper, dejects the
spirit, and teaches men to fit themselves
for another world, by neglecing the con-
cerns of this. Let your religion, on the
contrary, conned preparation for heaven,
with an honourable difchlrge of the du-
ties of active life. Let it be aficiated in
your imagination, with all that is manly
and useful; with w ,b7/jocver tliIgs are
truc, nare jf(,r are pr', are lovely, are of
good report, wherever there is any virtue,
and wherever there is any' prai7. Of such
religion discover, on every proper occasion,
that you are not aflained; but avoid mak-
ing any unneceffiry oitentation of it before
the world.

II. To piety, join modefiy and doci-

lity, reverence of your parents, and sub-
miflion to thole who are your fuperiours
in knowledge, in fiation, and in years.
Dependence and obedience belong to
youth. Modesty is one of its chief orna-

ments;

s E R M. erints; and has ever been esteemed a pre-

XL_^ sage of rising merit. When entering on

the areer of life, it is your part, not to
assume the reins as yet into your hands;
but to commit yourselves to the guidance of
the more experienced, and to become wife
by the wisdom of those who have gone
before you.

Of all the follies incident to youth,

there are none which either deform its
present appearance, or blast the profped
of its future prosperity, more than self-
conceit, presumption, and obstinacy. By
checking its natural progress in improve-
ment, they fix it in long immaturity;
and frequently produce mischiefs, which
can never be repaired. Yet these are vices
too commonly found among the young,
Big with enterprise, and elated by hope,
they resolve to trust for success to none
but themselves. Full of their own abili-
ties, they deride the admonitions which
are given them by their friends, as the
timorous fuggeflions of age. Too wife
to learn, too impatient to deliberate, too

forward

forward to be refrained, they plunge, SERM.
with precipitant indiscretion, into the xl
midst of all the dangers with which life
abounds. Scct athot a young man wife in
lis oown coniceit? T3/ere is more hope of a
soo!, than of bim.-Pofitive as you now are
in your opinions, and confident in your
afiertions, be assured, that the time ap-
proaches when both men and things will
appear to you in a different light. Many
charaaers which you now admire, will,
by and bye, fink in your efteein; and
many opinions, of which you are at pre-
sent most tenacious, will alter as you ad-
vance in years. Difiruft, therefore, that
glare of youthful presumption, which
dazzles your eyes. Abound not in your
own sense. Put not yourselves forward
with too much eagerness; nor imagine,
that by the impetuosity of juvenile ar-
dour, you can overturn systems which
have been long eftabliihed, and change
the face of the world. Learn not to think
more highly of yoturfelves than you ought to
think, bzut to think soberly. By patient and
VOL, I. Y gradual

SE R M. gradual progression in improvement, yoa

XI.
ttmI.. may, in due time, command lasting esteem.

But by assuming, at present, a tone of
superiority, to which you have no title,
you will disgust those whose approbation
it is most important to gain. Forward vi-
vacity may fit you to be the companions of-
an idle hour. More solid qualities must re-
commend you to the wife, and mark you
out for importance. and consideration in
subsequent life.

III. IT is necessary to recommend to

you, sincerity and truth, This is the
basis of every virtue. That darkness of
charaEer, where we can fee no heart;.
those foldings of art, through. which no
natfve affection is allowed to penetrate,.
present an object, unamiable in every
season of life, but particularly odious in
youth. If, at an age when the heart is
warm, when the emotions are firong,
and when. nature is expec-ed to chew it-
self free and open, you can already smile
and. deceive,,, what are we to look for

wher,

when you shall be longer h ackneyed in the s E R M.
ways of men; when intereRt shall have com-
pleted the obduration of your heart, and
experience hlall have improved you in all
the arts of guile? Dissimulation in youth,
is the fore-runner of perfidy in old age. Its
first appearance, is the fatal omen of grow-
ing depravity, and future shame. It de-
grades parts and learning; obscures the
lufire of every accomplishment; and finks
you into contempt with God and .man.

As you value, therefore, the appro-

bation of H-eaven, or the esteem of the
world, cultivate the love of truth. In all
your proceedings, be direct and consistent,
Ingenuity and candour possess the molf
powerful charm; they bespeak universal
favour, and carry an apology for almost
every failing. The lip of truth, flall be
callifl:{ed for ever; blit a lying tongue, is
butfor a moment ". The path of truth, is
a plain and a safe path; that of falsehood,
is a perplexing maze. After the first de-
parture from sincerity, it is not in your

* Prov. . 19x

Y 2 power

S R M. power to flop. One artifice unavoidably

XL

leads on to another; till, as the intricacy
of the labyrinth incrcalfs, you are left
entangled in your own Jiare. Deceit dif-
covers a little mind, which flops at tem-
porary expedients, without riling to com-
prehenfive views of condut. It betrays,
at the fame time, a dallardly spirit, It
is the resource of one who wants courage
to avow his detigns, or to reft upon him-
self. Whereas, openness of charater dif-
plays that generous boidnels which ought
to distinguish youth. To set out in the
world with no other principle than a
crafty attention to interest, betokens one
who is destined for creeping through the
inferiour walks of life. But to give
an early preference to honour above gain,
vwhen they stand in competition; to delpife
every advantage, which cannot be attained
without diflioneft arts; to brook no mean-
ness, and to stoop to no diflimulation; are
the indications of a great mind, the pre-
iatges of future eminence and diftinriion in
life.

At

At the fame time, this virtuous sincerity s E R M.

is perfe:ly conliftent with the most pru- '
dent vigilance and caution. It is opposcd
to cunning, not to true wisdom. It is not
the simplicity of a weak and improvident,
but the candour of an enlarged and noble
mind; of one who `corns deceit, because
lie accounts it both bale and unprofitable;
and who seeks no disguise, because he needs
none to hide him. Lord ! who J1hall abide
il tt, tabernazcle? Who fJall afcendr into thy
boly hill? He that walketh lurightlyt and
iworkclh righteofirefs, anldJpeakcth the t;ruth
inl bis heart.

IV. YOUTH is the proper season of

cultivating the benevolent and humane
affetions. As a great part of your hap-
piness is to depend on the connetions
which you form with others, it is of high
importance that you acquire, betimes, the
temper and the manners which will ren-
der such connetions comfortable. Let a
sense of justice be the foundation of all
your social qualities. In your most early

Y 3 intercourse

SE RM. intercourse with the world, and even in
I--, your youthful amusements, let no unfair-

ness be found, Engrave on your mind
that sacred rule, of doing all /tbhig
to others, accordt/ilg as you wifJ that thet
Jhouild do unto you. For this end, impress
yourselves with a deep sense of the origi-
nal, and natural equality of men. What-
ever advantages of birth or fortune you
possess, never display them with an ofen-
tatious superiority. Leave the fubordi-
nations of rank, to regulate the intercourse
of more advanced years. At present, it
becomes you to aa among your compa-
nions, as man with man. Remember how
unknown to you are the viciflitudes of the
world; and how often they, on whom ig-
norant and contemptuous young men once
looked down with scorn, have risen to be
iheir fuperiours in future years.

Compaftion is an emotion, of which

you ought never to be ashamed. Grace-
ful in youth is the tear of sympathy, and
the heart that melts at the tale of woe.
Let not cafe and indulgence contract your

za:?- Iffeqions,

affetions, and wrap you up in felfiih en- s ER LM

XI.

joyment. But go sometimes to the hotfe
of nmourning, as well as to the hotfe offeaJ -
.ing. Accustom yourselves to think of the
distresses of human life; of the solitary
cottage, the dying parent, and the weep-
ing orphan. Thou Jfalt .not -harden thy
heart, nor j7ilt thy hand fiom thy poorbro-
Aher; but thou Jfalt firely g;ve unto ;im
in the day of his need:. Ad thine 'eart Jhjall
not be grieved ,ehen thou gives itllto him;
becaife that for this thing, the Lord thy God
Jiall bless .thee in all :thby works !. Never
sport with pain and distress, in any of your
amusements; nor treat even the meanest
infe& with wanton cruelty.

In young minds, there is commonly a

frong propensity to particular intimacies
.and friendihips. Youth, indeed, is the
*season when friendihips are sometimes
formed, which not only continue through
succeeding life, but which glow to the
last, with a tenderness unknown to the
connetions begun in cooler years. The
propensity therefore is not to be difcou-

0 Deut, xv. 7. io,

Y 4 ragedg

s rMI raged; though at the fame time it must

be regulated with much circumfpedion
and care. Too many of the pretended
friiendlhips of youth, are mere combina-
tions in pleasure. They are often found-
ed oil capricious likings; Iuddenly con-
traded, and as suddenly dilTolved. Some-
times they are the effed of interefied com-
plaiiancc and flattery on the one iide, and
of credulous fondness on the other. Be-
ware of such raih and dangerous connec-
tions, wlicll may afterwards load you
with diihonour. Remember, that by the
chara:cer of thol whom you choose for
your fiieuds, your own is likely to be
formed, and will certainly be judged of
by the world. Be iiow, therefore, and
cautious in contracting intimacy; but
when a virtupus friendship is once efta-
blilhed, conider it as a sacred engagement.
Expose not yourselves to the reproach of
lightness and inconstancy, which always
helpeak, either a trifling, or a bal e mind.
Reveal none of the Iecrets of your fiiend.
Be faithful to his intereifs. Forfale him
not in danger. Abhor the thought of

acquiring

quiring any advantage by his prejudice or ER M.

XI.

hurt. There is a friend that loveth at all i
tines, and a brother that is born for adver-
ftly. Thine own .fr.-ind, and thy' fither'S
friedl, forfiake not

Finally, on this head; in order to ren-

der yourselves amiable in society, correc
every appearance of harshness in beha-
viour. Let that courtesy dlftinguish your
demeanour, which springs, not so much
from fludied politeneis, as from a mild
and gentle heart. Follow the customs of
the world in matters indifferent; but stop
when they become sinful. Let your man-
ners be simple and natural; and of course
they will be engaging. Affectation is cer-
tain deformity. By forming themselves
on fantastic models, and vying with one
another in every reigning folly, the young
begin with being ridiculous, and end in
being vicious and immoral.

V. LET me particularly exhort youth to
temperance in pleasure: Let me admcnish

Prov. xvii. 17.-xxvii. o0.

them,

S E R M. them, to beware - of that rock on which

XI. X^i. thousands, from race to race, continue to

split. The love of pleasure, natural to man
in every period of his life, glows at this age
with excelfive ardour. Novelty adds frefll
charms, as yet, to every gratification. The
world appears to spread a continual feast;
and health, vigour, and high i irits, in-
vite them to partake of it without re-
ftraint. In vain we warn them of latent
dangers. Religion is accused of infuffer-
able severity, in prohibiting enjoyment:
and the old, when they offer their admo-
nitions, are upbraided with having forgot
that they once were young.-And yet, my
friends, to what do the restraints of reli-
gion, and the counsels of age, with re-
fpeat to pleasure, amount? They may all
be comprized in few words, not to hurt
yourselves, and not to hurt others, by
your pursuit of pleasure. Within these
bounds, pleasure is lawful; beyond them,
it becomes criminal, because it is ruinous.
Are these restraints any other, than what
a wife man would choose to impose on

himself?

himself? We call you not to renounce plea- s E R M.
sure, but to enjoy it in safety. Instead of XI.
abridging it, we exhort you to pursue it on
an extensive plan. We propose measures
forfecuring its poffeflion, and for prolonging
its duration.

Consult your whole nature. Confider

yourselves not only as sensitive, but as ra-
tional beings; not only as rational, but
social; not only as social, but immortal.
Whatever violates your nature in any of
these refpeas, cannot afford true pleasure;
any more than that which undermines an
essential part of the vital system can pro-
mote health. For the truth of this conclu-
sion, we appeal, not merely to the autho-
rity of religion, nor to the testimony of the
aged, but to yourselves and your own ex-
perience. We afl, Whether you have not
found that in a course of criminal excess,
your pleasure was more than compensated
by succeeding pain? Whether, if not from
every particular instance, yet from every
habit, at least, of unlawful gratification,

there

S E R M. there did not spring Tome thorn to wound

xl__ you, there did not arise some consequence

to make yrou repent of it in the issue? Hlow
long then, j'e simple ones / will ye love fimpli-
cty? How long repeat the fame round of
pernicious folly, and tamely expose your-
selves to be caught in the fame fiare? If
you have any consideration, or any firmness
left, avoid temptations, for which you have
found yourselves unequal, with as much
care, as you would shun pestilential insec-
tion. Break off all connections with the
loose and profligate. TWhen lfimners entice
thee, coifent thou not. Look not on the wine
when it is red, when it giveth its colour in
the cuip; for at the laJt, it biteth like aser-
pent, and Jlingeth like an adder. Remove
thy way from the Jlrange woman, and come
not near the door of her ho/fie. Let not thine
heart decline to her ways; for her hofl is
the way to hell. Thou goes after her as
a bird habetl to thefinare, and knoweth not
that it is so his life

By

By there unhappy excesses of irregular s E R M.
pleasure in youth, how many amiable dif- XI
positions are corrupted or destroyed ! How
many rising capacities and powers are sup-
prefled ! How many flattering hopes of pa-
rents and friends are totally extinguished !
Who but must drop a tear over human na-
ture, when he beholds that morning which
arose so bright, overcast with such un-
timely darkness; that good humour which
once captivated all hearts, that vivacity
which sparkled in every company, those
abilities which were fitted for adorning
the hgheft station, all sacrificed at the lhrine
of low sensuality; and one who was formed
for running the fair career of life in the
midst of public esteem, cut off by his vices
at the beginning of his course, or funk,
for the whole of it, into insignificancy
and contempt!--Thefe, O sinful Plea-
sure ! are thy trophies. It is thus that,
co-operating with the foe of God and
man, thou degradeft human honour, and
blafteft the opening profpets of human fe-
licity.

VI. DILI.

SERM. VI. DILIGENCE, industry, and proper

XI.
__I~y improvement of time, are material duties

of the young. To no purpose are they
endowed with the belt abilities, if they
want ativity for exerting them. Un-
availing, in this cafe, will be every direc-
tion that can be given them, either for
their temporal or spiritual welfare. In
youth the habits of indufrry are molR
easily acquired. In youth, the incen-
tives to it are strongest, from ambition
and from duty, from emulation and hopes
from all the profpets which the begin.
ning of life affords. If, dead to there
calls, you already languish in slothful
inaction, what will be able to quicken
the more sluggish current of advancing
years?

Industry is not only the infirument of

improvement, but the foundation of plea-i
sure. Nothing is so opposite to the true
enjoyment of life, as the relaxed and
feeble state of an indolent mind. He
who is a stranger to indufrry, may pof-
.fess, but he cannot enjoy. For it is la-

bour

bour only which gives the relifl to plea- S E RM.
sure. It is the appointed vehicle of every ,X.
good to man. It is the indispensable
condition of our possessing a found mind
in a found body. Sloth is so incon-
finent with both, that it is hard to de-
termine whether it be a greater foe to
virtue, or to health and happiness. In-
acaive as it is in itself, its effeeds are
fatally powerful. Though it appear a
slowly flowing stream, yet it undermines
all that is stable and flourishing. It not
only saps the foundation of every virtue,
but pours upon you a deluge of crimes
and evils. It is like water which first pu-
trifies by stagnation, and then fends up
noxious vapours,. and fills the atmosphere
with death.

Fly, therefore, from idleness,. as the

certain. parent both of guilt and of ruin.
And under idleness I include, not mere
inadion only, but all that circle of tri.
fling occupations,, in which too many
saunter away their youth; perpetually
engaged in frivolous society, or public

amuse-

S E R M. amusements, in the labours of dress, or the

XI.
krYe_ ostentation of their perlons.-Is this the

foundation which you lay foc future use-
fulness and esteem ? Byr 'uch accomplifl-
ments, do you hope to recommend your-
selves to the thinking part of the world,
and to answer the expetations of your
friends, and your country?-- Amuse-
ments, youth requires. It were vain, it
were cruel to prohibit them. But though
allowable as the relaxation, they are moRt
culpable as the bulinefs, of the young.
For they then become the gulf of time,
and the poison of the mind. They so-
ment bad passions. They weaken the
manly powers. They fink the native vi-
gour of youth, into contemptible effemi-
nacy.

Redeeming your time from fuich dan-

gerous waste, feck to fill it with employ-
ments which you may review with satis-
faCtion. The acquisition of knowledge
is one of the molt honourable occupa-
tions of youth. The desire of it disco-
vers a liberal mind, and is connected with

many

many accomplishments, and many virtues. s E R M.
But though your train of life should not I
lead you to study, the course of education
always furnifies proper employments to a
well-diifpo'ed mind. Whatever you pur-
sue, be emulous to excel. Generous am-
bition, and sensibility to praise, are, efpe-
cially at your age, among the marks of vir-
tue. Think not, that any affluence of for-
tune, or any elevation of rank, exempts
you from the duties of application and in-
duftry. Industry is the law of our being;
it is the demand of Nature, of Reason, and
of God. Remember always, that the years
which now pass over your heads, leave per-
manent memorials behind them. From
your thoughtless minds they may escape;
but they remain in the remembrance of
God. They form an important part of the
register of your life. They will hereafter
bear testimony, either for or against you, at
that day, when, for all your a&ions, but
particularly for the employments of youth,
you muff give an account to God.

VOL. . Z Tiius

s E R M. THUS I have set before you some of the

^XI - chief qualifications which belong to that

fober mind, that virtuous and religious cha-
raaer, which the Apofle in my Text
recommends to youth; piety, modetly,
truth, benevolence, temperance, and in-
duftry. Whether your future course is
destined to be long or fllort, after this man-
ner it should commence; and, if it continue
to be thus conduced, its conclusion, at what
time soever it arrives, will not be inglo-
rious or unhappy. For honourable age is
not that which Jiandeth in lecgth of time, or
that which is mef/iired by number of years.
But wrifiom is the grey hair to man, and an
u!fpottcd lif is old age.

LET me finifll the subjed, with recalling

your attention to that dependence on the
blessing of Heaven, which, amidst all your
endeavours after improvement, you ought
continually to preserve. It is too common
with the young, even when they resolve to
tread the path of virtue and honour, to set

2 out

out with presumptuous confidence in them- E R M.
selves. Trusting to their own abilities for XI.
carrying them successfully through life,
they are careleis of applying to God, or of
deriving any assistance from what they are
apt to reckon the gloomy discipline of re-
ligion. Alas! how little do they know the
dangers which await them? Neither hu-
man wisdom, nor human virtue, unfup-
ported by religion, are equal for the trying
iituations which often occur in life. By
the shock of temptation, how frequently
have the most virtuous intentions been
overthrown ? Under the pressure of difaf-
ter, how often has the greatest constancy
funk ? Every good, and eve;ry pc;sed gift
is from above. Wisdom and virtue, as well
as riches and hono1ur, comSe frorm God. Defti-
tute of his favour, you are in no better
situation, with all your boaled abilities,
than orphans left to wander in a trackless
delert, without any guide to conduct them,
or any shelter to cover them from the ga-
thering storm. Correa, then, this ill-
founded arrogance. Expec not, that your

Z 2 happi-

S ER M. happiness can be independent of hiim who
XI. a__,j made youth. By faith and repentance, ap.

ply to the Redeemer of the world. By
piety and prayer, seek the protecion of the
God of heaven. I conclude with the solemn
words, in which a great Prince delivered
his dying charge to his son; words which
every young person ought to confider as
addressed to himself, and to engrave deeply
on his heart: Thou, Solomon, my Jon, know
thou the God of thyfathers-; and serve him
with a perfeti heart, and with a willing
mind. For the Lordfearcheth all hearts, and
inderJtandeth all the imnginations of the
thoughts. If thou seek him, he will befound
of thee; but if thou forsake hinm, he will
cafl thee offfor ever'

* I Chron. xxviii. 5.

# SERMON XII. On the DUTIES and CONSOLATIONS of the AGED. PROV. xvi. 31. The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.

[ 34I ]

S E R M ON XII.
On the DUTIES and CONSOLATIONS

of the AGED.

PROV. xvi. 31.
Ijhe hoary head is a crowen of glory, if it

be found in the wvay of rigbtcozfnefs.

fT Oscar God, and to keep his cormmand- E R M.
T me1ts, is the rule of our duty, in
every period of life. But, as the light
which guides our steps, varies with the
progress of the day, so the rule of reli-
gious condut is diversified in its appli-
cation, by the different flages of our pre-
sent existence. To every age, there be-
longs a diftina propriety of behaviour.
There arises from it, a series of duties pe-
culiar to itself.

3 Of

s E R M. Of those which are incumbent on

XIl. youth, I have treated in the preceding

discourse. As we advance from youth to
middle age, a new field of action opens,
and a different charater is required. The
flow of gay and impetuous spirits be-
gins to subside. Life gradually afiumes a
graver cast; the mind a more sedate and
thoughtful turn. The attention is now
transferred from pleasure to interefl:; that
is, to pleasure diffused over a wider extent,
and meiafi'ed by a larger scale. Former-
ly, the enjoyment of the present moment
qccupied the whole attention. Now, no
afion terminates ultimately in itself, but
refers to some more distant aim. Wealth
and power, the instruments of lafring
gratification, are now coveted more than
any tingle pleasure. Prudence and fore-
fight lay their plans. Indufiry carries on
its patient efforts. Acdivity pushes for-
ward; address winds around. Here, an
enemy is to be overcome; there, a rival
to be displaced. Competitions warm; and
the fkife of the world thickens on every

fide

fide. To guide men through this busy pe- E R M.
riod, without loss of integrity; to guard
them against the temptations which arise
from mistaken, or interfering interests; to
call them from worldly pursuits to serious
thoughts of their spiritual concerns, is the
great office of religion.

But as this includes, in a great mea-

sure, the whole compass of moral duty,
as the general firain of religious exhorta-
tion is addressed to those who are in this
season of life; a delineation of the vir-
tues properly belonging to middle age,
may appear unneceflary, and would 'lead
us into too wide a field. Let us therefore
turn our view to a bounded profpet;
and contemplate a period of life, the du-
ties of which are circumscribed within
narrower limits. Old age is a stage of
the human course, which every one hopes
to reach; and therefore the consideration
of it interefrs us all. It is a period justly
entitled to general refpec. Even its fail-
ings ought to be touched with a gentle
hand; and though the petulant and the

Z 4 vain,

S E P M. vain, may despise the hoary bead; yet the

wisest of men has aflerted in the Text, that
when found in the -Way of ri-ghteotifefs, it is
a crownl of glory. I fiall lirft offer some
counsels, concerning the errors which are
most incident to the aged. Secondly, I
mhall suggest the peculiar duties they ought
to pra&iie; and, thirdly, point out the con-
iolations they may enjoy.

I. As the follies and vices of youth,

are chiefly derived from inexperience and
presumption; so almost all the errors of
age, may be traced up to the feebleness
and diftrefies peculiar to that time of life.
Though, in every part of life, vexations
occur, yet, in former years, either bufi-
ness, or pleasure, served to obliterate their
impression, by supplying occupation to
the mind. Old age begins its advances,
with diftiualifying men for relishing the
one, and for taking an active part in the
other. While it withdraws their accuf-
tomed supports, it imposes, at the fame
time, the additional burden of growing

I infirmities,

infirmities. In the former flages of their s E R M.

XIr.

journey, hope continued to flatter them .-
with many a fair and enticing profpeC.
But in proportion as old age increases, those
pleasing illusions vanifli. Life is contraced
within a narrow and barren circle. Year
after year steals somewhat away from their
itore of comfort, deprives them of some of
their ancient friends, blunts some of their
powers of sensation, or incapacitates them
for some fundion of life.

Though, in the plan of Providence, it

is wifely ordered, that before we are
called away from the world, our attach-
ment to it ihould be gradually loosened;
though it be fit in itself, that as in the
day of human life, there is a morning and
a noon, so there should be an even-
ing also, when the lengthening shadows
shall admonish us of approaching night;
yet we have no reason to be surprised,
if they who are arrived at this dejeding
season, feel and lament the change which
they susser. The complaints, therefore,

of

SER M. of the aged, should meet with tcnderncfs,
Xi_. rather than censure. The burden under

which they labour, ought to be viewed
with sympathy, by those who muff bear it
in their turn, and who, perhaps, hereafter,
may complain of it as bitterly. At the fame
time, the old should confider, that all the
seasons of life have their several trials allot-
ted to them; and that to bear the infirmities
of age with becoming patience, is as much
their duty, as it is that of the young to resist
the temptations of youthful pleasure. By
calmly enduring, fur the short time that re-
mains, what Providence is pleased to inflic,
they both express a resignation most accept-
able to God, and recommend themselves to
the esteem and assistance of all who are
around them.

But though the querulous temper im-

puted to.old age, is to be confidered as a
natural infirmity, rather than as a vice;
the fame apology cannot be made for that
peevish disgust at the manners, and that
malignant censure of the enjoyments, of

the

the young, which is sometimes found to s E R M.
accompany declining years. Nothing can
be more unjust, than to take offence at
others, on account of their partaking of
pleasures, which it is palt your time to
enjoy. By indulging this fretful temper,
you both aggravate the uneasiness of age,
and you alienate those on whose affecion
much of your comfort depends. In order
to make the two extremes of life unite in
amicable society, it is greatly to be wished,
that the young would look forward, and
confider that they shall one day be old; and
that the old would look back, and remem-
bering that they once were young, make
proper allowances for the temper and the
manners of youth.

But instead of this, it is too common to

find the aged at declared enmity with the
whole system of present customs and man-
ners; perpetually complaining of the grow-
ing depravity of the world, and of the afto-
niflling vices and follies of the rising gene-
ration. All things, according to them, are

irflsing fast into ruin. Decency and good

order

S E R M. order have become extin&, ever since that

xli. ... happy discipline, under which they spent

their youth, has passed away.- Part, at
least, of this displeasure, you may fairly
impute to the infirmity of age, which
throws its own gloom on every surround-
ing objec. Similar lamentations were, in
the days of your youth, poured forth by
your fathers; and they who arc now young,
ihall, when it comes to their turn, inveigh,
in the like strain, against those who fuc-
ceed them. Great has been the corruption
of the world in every age. Sufficient
ground there is for the complaints made by
serious observers, at all times, of abound-
ing iniquity and folly. But though parti-
cular modes of vice prevail in one age, more
than in others, it does not follow, that
on that age all iniquity is accumulated.
It is the form, perhaps, more than the
quantity of corruption, which makes the
diftinacion. In the worst of times, God
has assured us, that there shall be always
a feed whoJhalll serve him;. Say not thou,

. Pfal. xii, 30.

WZha

Wlihat is the caife that the former days were S E R M.

XII.

better than tbefe ? for thou dos not enquire _
wifely concerning this. Be not righteous
over-mulch; neither mlake thjvfl over-wf*.
Former follies pass away, and are forgot-
tcn. Those which are present, strike ob-
servation, and fllarpen censure. Had the
depravation of the world continued to in-
crease in proportion to those gloomy calcu-
lations, which, for so many centuries past,
have estimated each race as worse than the
preceding; by this time, not one ray of
good sense, nor one spark of piety and vir-
tue, must have remained unextinguiflled
among mankind.

One of the vices of old age, which ap-

pears the most unaccountable, is that covet-
ous attachment to worldly interest, with
which it is often charged. But this, too,
can naturally be deduced from the sense of
its feebleness and decay. In proportion as
the vigour both of body and mind declines,
timidity may be expeced to increase. With
anxious and fearful eye, the aged look for-

Eccles. vii. io. 16.

ward

s R R M. ward to the evils which threaten theni,

XIL. and to the changes which may befal.

Hence, they are foietimes apt to over-
value riches, as the instrument of their
defence against these dangers, and as the
most certain means of securing them againf
solitude and difrelipee. But though their
apprehensions may justify a cautious fru-
gality, they can by no means excuse a
fordid avarice. It is no less abfird,
than it is culpable, in the old, from the
dread of uncertain futurity, to deny
themselves the enjoyment of the present;
and to increase in anxiety about their
journey, in proportion as it draws nearer
to its close. There are more effectual
methods of commanding refpec from the
world, than the mere pofleffion of wealth.
Let them be charitable, and do good.
Let them mix beneficence to their friends,
with a cheerful enjoyment of the com-
forts which befit their fRate. They will
then receive the returns of real refpet
and love. Whereas, by their riches,
they procure no more than pretended

demon-

demonfit ations of regard; while their ill- SERM.
judged parsimony occasions many secret XII
wiflies for their death.

As increasing years debilitate the body,

so they weaken the force, and diminish
the warmth of the affecions. Chilled by
the hand of time, the heart loses that ten-
der ienfibilit7, with which it once entered
into the concerns and sorrows of others.
It is, in 'ruth, a merciful appointment of
Providence, that as they who fee many
days, must behold many a fad scene, the
imprefflons of grief upon their heart should
be blunted by being often repeated; and
that, in proportion as their power of ad-
vancing the profijerity of others decreases,
their participation of the misfortunes of
others flioud also leffn. However, as, in
every period of life, humanity and friend-
flhip contribute to happine.s, it is both the
duty and the interest of the aged, to
cherifli the remiains of the kind assec-
tions; and, frora the days of former
years, to recal fich i!nprefions as may

tend

S E R M. tend to soften their hearts. Let them
_. .
_, not, from having suffered much in the

course of their long pilgrimage, become
callous to the sufferings of others. But,
remembering that they still are men, let
them study to keep their heart open to
the sense of human woe. Pralifed in
the ways of men, they are apt to be
suspicious of design and fraud; for the
knowledge, and the difirufl of mankind,
too often go together. Let not, how-
ever, that wary caution, which is the
fruit of their experience, degenerate into
craft. Experience ought also to have
taught them, that amidit all the falsehood
of men, integrity is the best defence ; and
that he who continueth to the end to walk
,iprightl,, shall continue to walk jirCel.
Having thus offered some admonitions
concerning the errors most incident to age,
I proceed,

II. To point out the duties which pecu-
liarly belong to it,

The

The sirs which I flall mention is, a SER.M.

timely retreat from the world. In every X'.
part cf life, we are in hazard of being too
deepiy immersed in its cares. But during
its vigorous periods, the impulse of alive
fihl., the necessary business of our station,
and the allowable endeavours to advance
our fortune by fair industry, render it dif-
ficult to observe due moderation. In old
age, all the motives of eager pursuit dimi-
nifh. The voice of Nature then calls you
to leave to others the bustle and contest of
the world; and gradually to disengage
yourselves from a burden, which begins to
exceed your strength. Having borne your
flhare of the heat and labour of the day, let
the evening of life be passed in the cool and
quiet shade. It is only in the shade, that
the virtues of old age can flouriih. There,
its duties are discharged with more success
and there, its comforts are enjoyed with
greatest fatisfacion.

By the retreat of old age, however, I
do not mean a total cessation from every

VQL. I. A wvorldly

E R M. worldly employment. There is an error

. , in this, as well as in the opposite extreme.

Persons who have been long harassed with
business and care, sometimes imagine, that
when life declines, they cannot make their
retirement from the world too complete.
But where they expeced a delicious enjoy-
ment of leisure and ease, they have often
found a melancholy solitude. Few are able,
in any period of their days, to bear a total
abftraation from the world. There remains
a vacancy which they cannot fill up.
Incapable of being always employed in
the exercises of religion, and often little
qualified for the entertainments of the
underflanding, they are in hazard of be-
coming a burden to themselves, and to all
with whom they are connctIed. It is,
therefore, the duty of the aged, not so
much to withdraw entirely from worldly
business, as to contrat its circle; not so
much to break off, as to loosen their
communication with active life. Conti-
nuing that train of occupation to which

they

they have been most accustomed, let them SE R M.

XII.

puifue it with less intenseness; relaxing i-v-
their efforts, as their powers decline; re-
tiring more and more from public obfer-
vationj to domeitic scenes, and serious
thoughts; tillj as the decays of life ad-
vance, the world shall of itself withdraw to
a greater distance from their view; its obi
jeeds fllall gradually yield their place to
others of more importance; and its tu-
mults flall found in their ears, only like a
noise which is heard from afar.

If it be the duty of the old, to retreat

betimes from the fatigue of worldly cares
it is frill more incumbent on them, to
quit the pursuit of such pleasures as are
unsuitable to their years, Cheerfulnefst
in old age, is graceful. It is the natural
concomitant of virtue. But the cheerful·
ness of age is widely different from the
levity of youth. Many things are allow-
able in that early period, which, in ma-
turer years, would deserve censure; but
which, in old age, become both ridiculous

A'a % and

S E R i. and criminal. By awkwardly afedting to
,Ii imitate the manners, and to mingle in the

vanities of the young, as the aged depart
from the dignity, so they forfeit the privi-
leges of grey hairs. But if, by follies of
this kind, they are degraded, they are ex-
posed to much deeper blame, by descend-
ing to vicious plealire, and continuing to
hover round those linful gratifications to
which they were once addited. Amuse-
ment and relaxation the aged require, and
may enjoy. But let them confider well,
that by every intemperate indulgence, they
accelerate decay; instead of enlivening,
they oppress, and precipitate thele' declin-
ing ltate. Ease, safety, and refped, tre
the proper enjoyments of age. Withiri
these bounds let it remain, and not vainly
attempt to break through that barrier, by
which nature has separated the pleasures of
youth, from the comforts left to the
concluding years of life.

A material part of the duty of the
aged, consists, in fludying to be useful

to

to the race who are to succeed them. S ER M.

XII.

Here opens to them an extensive field, _.
in which they may so employ themselves,
as considerably to advance the interest of
religion, and the happiness of mankind.
To them it belongs, to impart to the
young the fruit of their long experience;
to inftrua them in the proper condut,
and to warn them of the various dangers,
of life; by wife counsel, to temper their
precipitate ardour; and, both by precept
and example, to form them to piety and
virtue.

It is not by rigorous discipline, and

unrelaxing austerity, that they can main-
tain an ascendant over youthful minds.
The constraint which their pretence will
impose, and the aversion which .their
manners will create, if the one be con.
ftantly awful, and the other revere, tend
to frustrate the efifet of all their wisdom.
They rnut assume the spirit of the com-
panion, and the friend; and mix, with
the authority of age, a proper degree of
indulgence to the manners of the young.

A a 3 Instead

SERM. Instead of lessening the refped due to

icy their years by such condescension, they

take the surest method to encreafe it. Old
age never appears with greater dignity
than, when tempered with mildness, and
enlivened with good humour, it adcs as
the guide and the patron of youth. Reli-
gion, displayed in such a character, strikes
the beholders, as at once amiable and
venerable. They revere its power, when
they kfe it adding so much grace to the
decays of nature, and shedding so pleating
a lustre over the evening of life. The
young wish to tread in the fame steps,
and to arrive at the close of their days
with equal honour. They liften with at-
tention to counsels, which are mingled
with tenderness, and rendered refpedtable
by grey hairs. For, notwithstanding all
its presumption, youth naturally bends
before fuperiour knowledge and years.
Aged wisdom, when joined with acknow.
ledged virtue, exerts an authority over
the human mind, greater even than that
which arises from power and station. It

s*~~~~9

can check the most forward, abash the most S E R M.
profligate, and strike with awe the most
giddy and unthinking.

In the midst of their endeavours to be

useful to others, let not the aged forget
those religious employments, which their
own slate particularly requires. The first
of there, is, reflection on their palt beha-
viour, with a view to discover the errors
which they have committed; and as far
as remaining life allows, to apply them-
selves to repentance and amendment.-
Long has the world bewildered you in its
maze, and imposed upon you by its arts.
The time is now come, when this great
reducer should mislead you no more.
From the calm station at which you are
arrived, fequeflered from the crowd of
the deceiving and the deceived, review
your conduct, with the eye of Christians
and immortal beings. After all the tu-
mult of life is over, what now remains to
afford you solid fatisfadtion? Have you
served God with fidelity, and discharged
your part to your fellow-creatures with

A a 4 integrity

SERM. integrity and a good conscience? Can
.~,-, you look forward without terrour to

that day which is to diflblve your con-
nexion with this world, and to bring
you into the presence of him who made
you, in order to give account of your
actions ?-The retrofped of life is seldom
wholly unattended by uneasiness and
ihame. Thdugh, to the good and the
bad, it presents a very different scene;
yet, to all men, it recalls much guilt
incurred, and much time mit-fpelt. It
too much resembles the review which a
traveller takes from some eminence, of a
barren country, through which he has
pafled, where the heath and the defart
form the chief profpecd; diversified only
by a few scattered spots of imperfect cul-
tivation.

Turn then your thoughts to the proper

methods of making your peace with God
through Jesus Christ; and implore, from
Divine grace, that new heart and right
spirit, which will fit you for a better
vorld. Let devotion fill up many of

those

those hours, which are now vacant from ERM.
worldly business and care. Let your as- .,.i
fedions dwell among divine and immor-
tal objets. In silent and thoughtful me-
ditation, walk as on the fihore of that vast
ocean, upon which you are soon to em-
bark. Summon up all the confidera-
tions, which should reconcile you to your
departure from life; and which may
prepare you for going through its last
scene, with firmness and decency. Often
let your thanksgivings ascend to God,
for that watchful care with which he
hath hitherto conduced you, through
the long journey of life. Often let your
prayers be heard, that in what remains
of your pilgrimage, he may not forsake
you; and, that when you enter into the
valeyt of tbe lhadow of death, he may there
support you with his Jiaf, and defend you
with his rod.-Amidft such thoughts and
cares, let old age find you employed; be,
taking yourselves to a prudent and timely
retreat; disengaged both from the op-
orefiye load es business, and from the

1infeafon-

SE RM. unseasonable pursuit of pleasure; apply-

XII. t... ing yourselves to form the succeeding

race, by your counsels to virtue and wis-
dom; reviewing seriously your past life;
by repentance and devotion, preparing
yourselves for a better; and, with hum.
ble and manly composure, expeCting that
hour, which Nature cannot now long de-
lay. It remains)

III. To suggest the consolations which

belong to old age, when thus found in the

,way of r'i.gJteofilefr.

I muff introduce them with observing,

That nothing is more reasonable in itself,
than to submit patiently to those infirmi-
ties of Nature, which are brought on by
the increase of years. You knew before-
hand what you had to expect, when you
numbered the successive Summers and
Winters which were pasing over your
heads. Old age did not attack you by
surprise, nor was it forced upon you
against your choice. Often, and earnestly,
did you with to fee long life and many

dai SS

days. When arrived at the desired period, s ER M.
have you any just cause to complain, on - .
account of enduring what the constitution
of our being imposes on all ? Did you ex-
pec, that, for your fake, Providence was
to alter its established order? Throughout
the whole vegetable, sensible, and rational
world, whatever makes progress towards
maturity, as soon as it has pafled that
point, begins to verge towards decay. It
is as natural for old age to be frail, as for
the stalk to bend under the ripened ear,
or for the autumnal leaf to change its
hue. To this law, all who went before
you, have submitted; and all who shall
come after you, muff yield. After they
have flourished for a season, they shall
fade, like you, when the period of decline
arrives, and bow under the pressure of
years.

During the whole progress of the hu-

man course, the principal materials of
our comfort, or uneasiness, lie within our-
ielves. Every age will prove burdensome,
to those who have no fund of happiness

43

S E R M. in their own breast. Preserve them if you

x., could, from all infirmity of frame; bestow

upon them, if it were possible, perpetual
youth; flill they would be restless and
miserable, through the influence of ill-
governed pafions. It is not surprising, that
such persons are peevish, and querulous,
when old. Unjustly they impute to their
time of life, that misery with which their
vices and follies embitter every age.
Whereas, to good men, no period of life
is unsupportable, because they draw their
chief happiness from sources which are inl
dependent of age or time. Wisdom, piety,
and virtue, grow not old with our bodies,
They susser no decay from length of days,
To them only belongs unalterable and un-
fading youth. T7hose that be planted in the
hotric of the Lord, Jhall foul j/ih in the
courts of our God. They JsJall fill bring
forth fruit in old age; theyr Jsall befat and
four jhing *.

You can now, it is true, no longer re"
iifh many of those pleasures which once

Psalm xcii. 13, 14.

Amused

amused you. Your sensations are less SERM
quick than formerly; your days more
languishing. But if you have quitted the
region of pleasure, in return, you possess
that of tranquillity and repose. If you are
firangers to the vivacity of enjoyment,
you are free, at-the fame time, from the
pain of violent and often disappointed
desire. Much fatigue, much vexation, as
well as vanity, attend that turbulence of
life, in which the younger part of man-
kind are engaged. Amidit thole keen pur-
suits, and seeming pleasures, for which
you envy them, often they feel their own
misery, and look forward with a wifhfiul
eye to the season of calmness and retreat.
For, on all fides of human life, the ba-
Vance of happiness is adjusted with more
equality than at firfl appears; and if old
age throws some new distresses into the
scale, it lightens also the weight of others.
Many pafiions, which formerly disturb-
ed your tranquillity, have now subsided.
&lany competitions, which long filled
>o'ir datys with disquiet and firife, are now

at

SE R M. at an end. Many afflicions, which once
XII.

1 rent your hearts with violent anguish, are

now softened into a tender emotion, on
the remembrance of past woe. In the be-
ginnings of life, there was room for much
apprehension concerning what might be-
fal in its progress. Your security was
never untroubled. Your hopes were inter-
rupted by many anxieties and fears. Hav-
ing finished the career of labour and danger,
your anxiety ought of course to lelen,
Ready to enter into the harbour, you can
look back, as from a secure station, upon
the perils you have escaped, upon the tem-
pest by which you was toffed, and upon
the multitudes who are still engaged in
confliaing with the storm.

If you have acted your part with in-

tegrity and honour, you are justly entitled
to refped, and you will generally receive
it. For rarely, or never, is old age con-
temned, unless wlhel, by vice or follym
it renders itself contemptible. Thougli
length of time may have worn off super-
ficial ornaments, yet what old age loses

in grace, it often gains in dignity. The SERM.
veneration, as was before observed, which
grey hairs command, puts it in the power
of the aged, to maintain a very important
place in human society. They are so far
from being insignificant in the world, that
families long held together by their autho-
rity, and societies accustomed to be guided
by their counsels, have frequently had cause
to regret their loss, more than that of the
moit vigorous and young. To success of
every kind, the head which directs, is no
less essential than the hand which executes.
Vain, nay, often dangerous, were youthful
enterprise, if not conducted by aged pru-
dence. I falid, Days Jlould speak, and
7multitude of years flowuld teach wf/iiom :.

jherefore, thou fhJalt rife zf before the hoary
bead, and honour the face of the old man,
and fear thy God 1-

Though, in old age, the circle of your

pleafilres is more contraced than it has
formerly been; yet, within its limits,
miany of those enjoyments remain, which

sJ ob;, xiii. + Lev. xi.v 3z.

are

SERM. are. most grateful to human nature,
XII. _v_3 Temperate mirth, is not extinguished by

advanced years. The mild pleasures of
domestic life still cheer the heart. The
entertainments of conversation, and social
Intercourse, continue unimpaired. The
desire of knowledge, is not abated by the
frailty of the body; and the leisure of old
age, affords many opportunities for grati-
fying that defite. The sphere of your
observation and reflection, is so much en-
larged by long acquaintance with the world,
as to supply, within itself, a wide rangRe of
improving thought. To recall the variou3
revolutions which have occurred since you
began to ad your part in life; to compare
the characters of past and prelent times; to
trace the hand of Providence, in all the
incidents of your own lot; to contemplate
with thoughtful eye, the successive new ap-
pearances which the world has afilmed
around you, in government, education,
.opinions, customs, and modes of living;
these are employments, no less entertaining
than inftrucdive to the mind,

While
*6

While you are engaged in such eml- S RMi

ployments, you are, perhaps, surrounded
with your families, who treat you with
attention and refped you are honoured
by your friends; your character is efta-
blifhed; you are placed beyond the reach
of clamour, and the irife of tongues; and,
free from difcracting cares, you can ate
tend calmly to your eternal interefRs For
such comforts as these, have you not
cause moif thankfully to acknowledge
the goodness of heaven? Do they not
afford you ground to pass the remainder
of your days in resignation and peace
disposing yourselves to rife in due time,
like satisfied guests from the banquet
that has been set before you; and to
praise and bless, when you depart, the
great Master of the feast ? To a man that
is good in his fight, whether he be young
or old, God giveth wifoiom, and knowledge,
andjoy. For every season of life, the be.
nignity of his providence hath prepared
its own fatisfations, while his wisdom
hath appointed its peculiar trials. No

VOL. IIo b age

s E R M. age is doomed to total infelicity; provided

XII.
,x_. that we attempt not to do violence to Na-

ture, by seeking to extort from one age,
the pleasures of another ; and to gather, in
the Winter of life, those flowers which were
destined to blossom, only in its Summer,
or its Spring.

BUT perhaps it will be said, That I

have confidered old age, only in its firt
stages, and in its most favourable point
of light; before the faculties are as yet
much impaired, and when disease or as-
flition has laid no additional load on
the burden of years. Let us then view
it with all its aggravations of distress.
Let us suppose it arrived at its utmost
verge, worn out with infirmities, and
bowed down by sickness and sorrow.
Still there remains this consolation, that
it is not long ere the .weary J'all be at
reft. Having passed through so many of
the toils of life, you may now surely,
when your pilgrimage touches on its
close, bear, without extreme impatience,

the

the hardflips of its concluding stage. SE R M.
From. the inestimable promises of the ,__-
Gospel, and frcm the gracious presence
of God, the afflictions of old age cannot
seclude you. Though your heart Joould
begin to faint, and your fjlJJ to fail, there
is One, who can be the Jlrength of your
heart, and your portion for ever. Even to
your, old age, faithl the Lord, I am lIe; and
even to hoary hairs will I carry you. I
have made, and I will bear; even I wtill
carry, and will deliver you :. Leave thy
fatherless children; I will preserve thenm
alive; and let thy widows trilf in mne .

There is undoubtedly a period, when

there ought to be a satiety of life, as
there is of all other things; and when
death should be viewed, as your merci-
ful difiniffion from a long warfare. to
come to the grave in a full age, like as a
jlock of corn cometh in, in its feayfon :, is
the natural termination of the human
course. Amidfl multiplying infiriities,
to prolong life beyond its ufuai bounds,

'* Ira. xvi.. t Jer. xlix. i,. Job, v. 26.

B b and

S. ERM. and' to draw out your existence here to

- the last and foulest dregs, ought not to

be the wish of any wife man. Is it de-
firable, to continue lingering on the bor-
ders of the grave, after every tie which
eonnects you with life is broken; and to
be left a solitary individual, in the midst
of a new generation, whose faces you
hardly know? The shades of your de,
parted friends rife up before you, and
warn you,. that it is time to depart.
Nature and Providence summon you,,to
be gathered to youtr fathers. Reason ad-
monithes you, that as your predecessors
made way for you, it is just that you
should yield your place to those, who
have arisen to succeed you on this busy
sage; who, for a while, fiall fill it
with their aaions and their sufferings,
their virtues and their crimes; and then
shall, in. their turn, withdraw, and. be
joined to the forgotten multitudes of for-
mer ages..

Could death, indeed, be confidered in no
other view than as the close of life, it

would

would afford only a melancholy retreat. SERM M
The total extincion of being, is a thought,
which human nature, in its most distressed
circumstances, cannot bear without dejec-
tion. But, blessed be ,God'! far other
profpets revive the spirits of the.aged, who
have .pent their life in.piety and virtue. To
them, death is not the extinction, :but the
renovation of the living principle; its re-
moval from the earthly house of.this taber-
nacle, to the house not made with hands, eter-
nal in the heavens. Having fought the good
fght; having finhhed their cot/,nr and kept
the faith; there is laid up for them the crown
of righteozfiiefs. The Saviour of the world
hath not only Broitght immortality to light,
but placed it within the reach of their hope
and trust. By making atonement for their
guilt, he hath prepared their way within
the veil; and secured to ihem, the posses-
sion of an inheritance, incorruptible and un-
defiled, reserved in the heavens.- Such
are the hopes and profpeds, which cheer
£he sorrows of old age, and surmount the
fear of death. Faith and piety are the only

3B b 3 adequate

s E R M. adequate supports of human nature, in all
L-,-r its great emergencies. After they have

guided. us through the various trials of life,
they uphold us, at last, amidst the ruins of
this falling frame; and when thefilver cord
is jji ready to be loosed, and the golden bowl
to be broken; when the pitcher is broken at
the jbitoaiin, and the wheel broken at the
cifernl; they enable us to fay, 0 Death!
where is thi3 Jiing ? 0 Grave ' where is thy
vicL7ory ?

# SERMON XIII. On the POWER of CONSCIENCE. GENESIS, xlii. 21, 22. And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us; ...

[ 375 ]

SERMON XIII.
On the POWER of CONSCIENCE.

GENESIS, xlii, 2, 22.
And they said one to another, 'rVe are verily.

guilty concerning our brother, in that we
fiwi the anguliJu of his foul, when he
befgovght us; and we would not hear :
Therefore is this dtis refs come 2upon uts.
And Reuben answered them, fiying,
Spake I not unto you', faying, Do not fin
againf the child; and ye would not
hear? Therefore, behold also his blood
is required.
T HIS book of Genesis displays a more s E R M.

singular and interefling scene, than x.

was ever presented to the world, by any
other hlitorical record. It carries us back

13 b 4 to

ER M. to the beginning of time, and exhibits
XT. J mankind in their infant and rising Rate.

It shows us human manners in their pri-
mitive simplicity, before the arts of refine-
ment had polished the behaviour, or dif-
guised the characers of men; when they
gave vent to their passions without diflimu.
lation, and spoke their sentiments without
reserve. Few great societies were, as yet,
formed on the earth. Men lived in scat-
tered tribes. The tranfadions of families
made the chief materials of history; and
they are related in this book, with that
beautiful simplicity, which, in the highest
degree, both delights the imagination, and
affects the heart.

Of- all the patriarchal hiRories, that of

Joseph and his brethren is the most re-
markable, for the characers of the actors,
the inftrutive nature of the events, and
the furprizing revolutions of worldly for-
tune. As far as relates to the Text, and
is necessary for explaining it, the story is
to the following purpose:-- Joseph, the
ypungeft, except one, of the sons of

Jacob,

Jacob, was diftinguifled by his father s E R .
with such marks of peculiar affection, as XIII
excited the envy of his brethren. Having '.
related to them, in the openness of his
heart, certain dreams which portended
his future advancement above them, their
jealousy rose to such a height, that they
unnaturally conspired his deftrution.
Seizing the opportunity of his being at
a distance from home, they first threw
him into a pit, and afterwards fold him
for a slave; imposing on their father, by a
false relation of his death. When they had
thus gratified their resentment, they loft all
remembrance of their crime. The family
of Jacob was rich and powerful; and
several years passed away, during which
they lived in prosperity; without being
touched, as far as appears, with the least
remorse for the cruel deed which they had
committed.

Meanwhile, Joseph was safely con-

duted by the hand of Providence,
through a variety of dangers, until,
from the lowest condition, be rose at

last

SERM. last to be chief favourite of the King of

XiJL
k_~..j Egypt, the most powerful monarch at

that time in the world. While he pof-
sessed this high.dignity, a general famine
diffreffed all the neighbouring countries.
In Egypt alone, by means of his fore-
fight, and prudent administration, plenty
flill reigned. Compelled to have recourse
to that kingdom for supply of food, the
brethren of Joseph, upon this occasion,
appeared in his presence, and made their
humble application to him, for liberty to
purchase corn; little fufpeting the Go-
vernour of the land, before whom they
bowed down their faces to the earth, to
be him, whom, long ago, they had fold as
a slave to the Ishmaelites. But Joseph no
sooner saw, than he knew his brethren;
and, at this unexpeted meeting, his
heart melted within him. Fraternal ten-
dernefs arofc, in all its warmth; and
totally effaced from his generous breast,
the impreflion of their ancient cruelty.
Though, from that moment, he began to
prcpare for them a furprize of joy; yet

t4 l he

he so far conitrained himself, as to aflume S E R M.

XIIIL

an appearance of great severity. By this I_
he intended, both to oblige them to bring
into Egypt his youngest and most beloved
brother, whose pretence he instantly re-
quired; and also, to awaken within them
a due sense of the crime which they had
formerly perpetrated. Accordingly, his
behaviour produced the designed effec.
For, while they were in this situation,
strangers in a foreign land, where they
had fallen, as they conceived, into ex-
treme distress; where they were thrown
into prison by the Governour, and treated
with rigour, for which they could assign
no cause; the reflecion mentioned in
the Text arose in their minds. Con-
science brought to remembrance their
former fins. It recalled, in particular,
their long forgotten cruelty to Joseph;
and, without hesitation, they interpreted
their present distress to be a judgment,
for this crime, inflicted by Heaven. They
said one to another, Wee are verily guilty
concerning our brother, in that wefaaw the

S E R M. agulifJJ of his foul wbch he besought us,
XIII.

and we would not hear: Therefore is this
difdrefs come zupon us.-Behold also his blood
is required.

From this inftruaive passage of his-

tory, the following observations naturally
arise. I. That a sense of right and wrong
in condut, or of moral good and evil,
belongs to human nature. II. That it
produces an apprehension of merited pu-
nifllment, when we have committed evil.
III. That although this inward sentiment
be stifled during the season of prosperity,
yet, in adversity, it will revive. And,
IV. That, when it revives, it determines
us to confider every distress which we sis-
ser, from what cause soever it has arisen,
as an actual infliction of punishment by
Heaven. The consideration of there par-
ticulars, will lead us to a very serious view
of the nature of man, and of the govern-
ment of God.

I. THERE belongs to human nature, a
sense of moral good and evil, or a fa,

culty

culty which distinguishes right from SE R M.
wrong, in acion and conduct. They said XIM
one to another, We are verily guilty. - In
an age, when the law was not yet given,
when no external revelation of the Divine
will subsisted, except what had been
handed down among the Patriarchs, from
one generation to another; the brethren
of Joseph reasoned concerning their con-
dud, upon the fame moral principles,
and were affeced by the fame feelings,
of which we are conscious at this day.
Such sentiments are coeval with human
nature; for they are the remains of a
law, which was originally written in our
heart. In the darkest regions of the
earth, and among the rudest tribes of
men, a diftindion has ever been made,
between just and unjust, between a duty
and a crime. Throughout all the inter-
course of human beings, these diftintions
are supposed. They are the foundation
of the mutual trust, which the tranfac-
tions of life require; nay, the very enter-
tainments of society constantly appeal to

them,

SEI M. them. The Historian, who ftdies to

XIII.
L--4V magnify his hero, by representing him as

just and generous; the Poet, who seeks to
interest the world in his fitions, by en-
gaging the heart in behalf of distressed vir-
tue; are sufficient to confute the Sceptic,
who denies any natural perception of a dif-
tintion in actions.

But though a sense of moral good and

evll be deeply impressed on the heart of
man, yet it is not of sufficient power to
regulate his life. In his present corrupted
fate, it is both too general to afford him
full direction in conduct, and too feeble to
withstand the opposition of contrary prin-
ciples in his nature. It is often perverted,
by ignorance and superstition; it is too
easily overcome, by passion and desire.
Hence, the importance of that Divine re-
velation, which communicates both light
and strength; which, by the inifrudive
discoveries it makes, and by the powerful
assistance it supplies, raises man to a station,
infinitely fuperiour to that which he pof-
fesss under the mere light of Nature.

It

It is of consequence, however, to re- SERM.

mark, That this revelation necessarily - .i
supposes an antecedent sense of right and
wrong to take place in the human mind.
It addresses itself to men, as possessed of
such a faculty; and, when it commands
them, in general terms, to pursue what-
soever things are true, whatsoever things
are hone]t, whafobever things arejiji, pure,
lovely, o- of good report, if there be any vir-
tue, and if there be any praie, it plainly
appeals to the native diatates of their
heart. Nay, unless men were endowed
by Nature, with some sense of duty, or
of moral obligation, they could reap no
benefit from revelation; they would re-
main incapable of all religion whatever.
For, in vain were a system of duty pre-
fcribed to them by the word of God;
allegiance were in vain required towards
their Creator, or love and gratitude en-
joined towards their Redeemer; if, pre-
vioufly, there was no principle in their
nature, which made them feel the obli-
gations of duty, of allegiance, and of

gratitude.

S E R M. gratitude. They could have no ideas cor-
a_~ responding to such terms; nor any con-

vicion, that, independently of fear or
interest, they were bound to regard, either
him who made, or him who redeemed
them.-This, therefore, is to be held as a
principle fundamental to all religion, That
there is in human nature, an approving or
condemning sense of condudt; by means of
which, they who have not the law, are a
law unto thefielves :. They who, from
a mistaken zeal for the honour of Divine
revelation, either deny the existence, or
vilify the authority of natural religion,
are not aware, that by disallowing the
sense of obligation, they undermine the
foundation, on which revelation builds its
power of commanding the heart.

The Text leads us to observe, That one

of the cafes in which the natural sense of
good and evil operates most forcibly, is
when men have been guilty of injustice
or inhumanity. We saw the angtuih of
our brother's foul when he besought us, and

f Rom. ii. 14.

raó

we would not hear. An inward principle SE R M.

Xill.

prompts us to do good to others; but with
much greater authority, it checks and con-
demns us, when we have done them in-
juries. This part of the human confti-
tution deserves to be remarked as a signal
proof of the wisdom of its Author, and of
the gracious provision which he has made
for the welfare of mankind. WVe are all
committed, in some measure, to the care
and affilrance of one another. But our
mutual influence reaches much farther
with refpeOc to the evils, than with re-
fpe&t to the enjoyments, of those around
us. To advance their profperityj is often
beyond our ability; but to infliic inju-.
ries, is almost always within our power;
And, at the fame time, felf-intereft very
frequently tempts us to commit them;
With the utmofi propriety, therefore, we
are so framed, that the influence of the
moral principle should be most authori.
tative, in cafes where its aid is most
needed; that to promote the happiness
of others, should appear to us as praise.

VOL. I . c' worthyr

S E R M. worthy, indeed, and generous; but that,
XIII,

to abstain from injuring them, should be
felt as matter of the ftrideft duty.--
Amidst the distress which the patriarchs
suffered in Egypt, had only this futggeftion
occurred, " We saw our brother begin-
" ning to prosper, and we contributed
' not to his advancement," their minds
would have been more easily quieted.
But, when their refleeion was, lVe saw
hiJ' ang/lSfi 'zchcn he bcfoiwght its, and wue

lvc/d. not hear, then conmpundion turned
upon them its fliarpefl edge. I proceed to
observe,

1I, TI.A.T our natural fenle of right

and wrong, produces an apprehension of
merited punifllment when we have com-
mitted a crime. When it is employed in
finrveying the behaviour of others, it dil-
tinguifics some actions, as laudable and
excellent; and disapproves of others, as
evil and base. But when it is direced
'!pon our own conduc, it assumes a
higher oilice, and exercises the authority

of

of a judge. It is then properly teriled s ERM,
Conscience; and the sentiments which it
awakens, upon the perpetration of a crime,
are styled, Remorse. Thereflrec said the
brethren of Joseph, is this difrlef/ come upon
*us; behold anfo his blocd is required. They
acknowledged, not only that they had com-
mitted a wrong, but a wrong for which they
were justly doomed to susser.

Did not conscience suggest this natural

relation between guilt and punishment,
the mere principle of approbation, or dif-
approbation, with refpe to moral con-
duet, would prove of fmiall efficacy. For
disapprobation attends, in some degree,
every convidion of impropriety or folly.
When one has afted unsuitably to his in-
terest, or has trefpaf^ed against the rules of
prudence or decorum, he reflects upon his
conduct with pain, and acknowledges that
he deserves blame. But the difference be-
tween the sense of mifcondud, and the
sense of guilt, consists in this, that the
latter penetrates much deeper into the

Cc 2 heart,

S E RM. heart. It makes the criminal feel, that lhe
XIII. ,,_- is not only blameable, but jufily punish-

able, for the part which he has aded.
With reference to this office of confciencc,
the inspired writers frequently speak of it,
in terms borrowed from the awful folemni-
ties of judicial procedure; as, bearing wit-
i;cfs for or ngaiijl us; accifing or CXCa16,
judging and condemnwing. It will be found,
that in the language of most nations, terms
of the fame import are applied to the ope-
rations of conscience; cxprefling the sense,
which all mankind havc, of its passing fen-
tence upon them, and pronouncing rewards
or pun-ilhments to be due to their aftions.

The fenle of punifhlnent merited, you

are filrther to observe, can never be fepa-
rated from the dread, that, at fbome time or
other, punifinment fhallJ be aCtually inflicted
This dread is not confined to the ven-
geance of man. ior let the finner's evil
deeds be ever so thoroughly concealedt
from the knowledge of t'he world, his
inward a!ari,, are not quictcd by thai

coniidero

consideration. Now, puniflhment Is the SERM.
fandion of a law. Every law supposes a
rightful fuperiour.: And therefore, when
conscience threatens puniihmelnt to secret
crimes, it manifestly recognizes a fu-
preme Governour, from whom nothing is
hidden. The belief of our being account-
able to him, is what the most hardened
wickedness has never been able to eradi-
cate. It is a belief which arises, not
merely from reasoning, but from internal
:entiment. .Conscience is felt to act as the
delegate of an invisible Ruler; both anti-
cipating his sentence, and foreboding its
execution.

Hence arise the terrours, which so of-

-ten haunt guilt, and rife in proportion to
its atrocity. In the history of all na-
tions, 'the tyrant and the oppressor, the
bloody and the flagitious, have been ever
pointed out, as fearful, unquiet, and reft-
iefs; fubjelc to alarms and apprehensions
of an unaccountable kind. And surely,
to live under such disquietude, from the
dread of merited puniflment, is already

Cc 3 to

S E R M. to undergo one of the most severe punifli

_-y-j ments which human nature can susser.

When the world threatens us with any
of its evils, we know the extent, and dill
cern the limits of the danger. We fee the
quarter, on which we are exposed to its
attack. We measure our owln strength
with that of our adversary ; and can take
precautions, either for making refiflance,
or for contriving escape. But when an
awakened conscience places before the tin-
ner the just vengeance of the Almighty,
the profpec is confounding, because the
danger is l)oundlefs. It is a dark unknown
which threatens him. The arm that is
firetched over him, he can neither fee nor
refilt. On every fide he dreads it; and
on every objet which surrounds him, he
looks with terroul, because he is con-
fcious that every object can be employed
against him as an instrument of wrath.
No wonder that the 1onefcme solitude, or
the midnight hour, should strike him
with horrour. His troubled mind bcholds
forms, which other men. fee not; and

t |' hears

hears voices, which found only in the ear s E R M.
of guilt. A hand appears to come forth, x,
and to write upon the wall over against
him, as it did of old, in the fight of an
impious monarch, Hie J7all find no efe,
nor reft. For the Lord fiall give him a
trembling heart, and failing of ejes, and or-
row of mind: And his life flball hang in doubt
before him; and he J7allfcar day and nght,
and have e anoe afrance of his life. In the
morning he Jhall Ja,, 7Tould to God it qwere
even; and at even heJ7hall fJa, IWould to God
it were morning, for the fear of his heart
wberewith he flall fiar, and for th fight
cwhich his eyes J7jall fee. His life Jall be
grievous unto him *.-Adversity! how blunt
are all the arrows of thy quiver, in com-
parison with those of guilt !-But if such
be the pow er of conscience, whence, it may
be asked, comes it to pass, that its influence
is not more general, either in refraining
men from the commiflion of fin, or in lead-
ing them to a timely repentance? This
brings me to observe,

Deut, xxviii. 65, 66, 67. Ifa. xv. 4.

C c 4 III. THAT

E R M. III. T-AT', during a course of profpe-
t__., rity, the operations of confcicnce arc of-

ten suspen(dcd; and that advcrlity is the
season which rc(lores them to their proper
force. At the time when crimes are com-
mitted, the mind is too much heated
by palion, and engroflied by the objea: of
its purluit, to be capable of proper reflec-
tion. Aser this tumult of Ip;irits has fib-
fidecd, if a train of ncew pafoions be at
hand to employ its adlivity, or a lilcccf-
sion of picafurable objeds occur' to en-
gage its attention, it may for a while re-
main, though not entilrly free from in-
ward misgivings, yet ulconicious of the
degree of its guilt. Diiipated among the
amufcments of life, the finner escapes, ini
fomne meafurc, from his own view. If lie
reiefecs upon himself at all, the continu-
ance of proiperity i:ems to him a strong
justification of his conduc%. For it will
be found, that in the hearts of all men,
there is a natural propensity to judge of
the favour of the Supreme Being, from
she course of external events, When they

are

are borne with a smooth gale along the S E RM.

XIII.

fiream of life, and behold every thing
proceeding according to their wifl, hard-
ly can they be brought to believe, that
Providence is their enemy. Balking in
the fun-flhine of prosperity, they suppose
thcmfelves to enjoy the imile of indulgent
Heaven; and fondly conclude, that they
are on terms of friendship, with all above,
and with all below. Easy they find it,
then, to spread over the grossest crimes,
a covering, thin, indeed, and flight, yet
fuflicient to conceal them from a superficial
view.

Of this we have a very remarkable in-

stance, in those brethren of Joseph, whose
history we now confider. Not only from
the silence of the inspired writer, we have
ground to believe that their remorse was
tifled, while their prosperity remained;
but we are able to trace some of the pre-
tences, by which, during that period, they
quieted their minds. For when they
were contriving the deftruftion of Joseph,
'we find Judah faying to his brethren,

What

SERM. What prost is it, if we Jlay otrt brother,

and conceal his blood ? Let us fell him to the
Iifmaelites; and let not our band be upon
hint; for he is our brother, and our CleJ:
And his brethrcen were content . Here
you behold them justifying their crime,
by a fort of pretended humanity; and
making light of felling their brother for
a slave, because they did not take away
his life. How Strangely are the opinions
of men altered, by a change in their con-
dition ! How different is this sentiment of
the Patriarchs, from that which they after-
wards entertained of the fame action, when,
as you fee in the Text, the remembrance of
it wrung their hearts with anguish ?

But men, in truth, differ as much from

themselves, in prosperity, and in adver-
fity, as if they were different creatures.
In prosperity, every thing tends to flatter
and deceive. In adversity, the illusions of
life vanish. Its avocations, and its plea-
fures, no longer afford the finner that
lhelter he was wont to find from con-

e Gen. xxxvii, 26, 27.

science.

science. Formerly he made a part of the SERM.
crowd. He now feels himself a solitary XII
individual, left alone with God, and with
his own mind. His spirits are not support-
ed, as before, by fallacious views of the fa-
vour of Heaven. The candle of the Lord
ihines not on his head; his pride is humbled;
and his affeAions are softened for receiving
every serious impreflion. In this situation,
a man's iniquity' is fire to find him out.
Whatever has been notoriously criminal in
his former conduct, riles as a fpeaEre, and
places itielf before him. The increased
sensibility of his mind, renders him alive
to feelings which lately were faint; and
wounds which had been ill healed, bleed
afrefll. When men take the timbrel and the
zir.7p, and rejoice at the found of the organ,
/hij'fiO, Vlh7at is the A/lmighty lhat wceJjould
i'rvec him ? But when they are holden in the
cords of anfifiion, then h J7Jeweth them their
,cork, and their tralnf/.ejiol, that they have
exceeded. he' open eth7 alo their ears to dif-
ciline; and comman7deth, that they return
Jf.roz iliyzizty.

Hence,

SER M,. Hence, we may perceive the great
_Y.~ iufefulnefs and propriety of that inter.

change of conditions, which takes place
in human life. By prosperity, God gives
scope to our paflions, and makes trial of
our dispositions. By adversity, he revives
the serious principle within. Neither the
one, nor the other, could be borne entire
and unmixed. Man, always prosperous,
would be giddy and insolent; always as.
fliAed, would be fullen and despondent.
Hopes and fears, joy and sorrow, are,
therefore, so blended in his life, as both
to give room for worldly pursuits, and
to recall, from time to time, the admoni-
tions of conscience. Of the proportion
in which they should be mixed for this
purpose, we are very incompetent judges.
From our ignorance of the degree of dif-
cipline, which the spiritual fiate of others
requires, we often censure Providence
unjustly, for its severity towards them:
And, from the vanity and rashness of
our wishes, we complain, without rea-
son, of its rigour to ourselves, While

'we,

we consult nothing but our ease, God SERM.
attends to our spiritual improvement. X,.- .
When we seek what is pleasing, he fends
what is useful. When, by drinking too
deep of worldly prosperity, we draw in a
secret poison, he mercifully infuses a me-
dicine, at the time that he troubles and
embitters the waters. It remains now to
observe,

IV. TH AT when conscience is tho-

roughly awakened, it determines the
tinner to confider every calamity which
he suffers, as a positive infliion of pu-
nifhment by Heaven. As it had before
alarmed him with threatenings of Di-
vine difpleafire, it tells him, when he
falls under distress, that the threatened
day of account is come. AffliCtions, on
some occasions, rife directly out of our
.fins. Thus diseases are brought on by
intemperance ; poverty springs -from
idleness; and disgrace from prefump-
tion, In such cafes, the punifliment is
so closely connected with the crime, that

.SERM. it is impossible to avoid discerning the

[IL. relation which the one bears to the

other. But the appointment of Provi
dence, which we now confider, reaches
farther than this. God has framed us
so, that diftreiles, which have no per-
ceivable connection with our former
crimes, are nevcrthelefs interpreted by
conscience, to be inflided on their account.
They force themselves upon our apprehcn-
sion, under this view. They are made to
carry, not only that degree of pain which
properly belongs to themselves, but that
additional torment also, which arises fiom
the belief of their being the vengeance of
the Almighty.

Let a man fall unexpectedly into tome

deep calamity. Let that calamity be
brought upon him, either by means
which the world calls fortuitous; or by
a train of incidents, in which his own
misconduct, or guilt, las apparently had
no part; yet one of the first questions,
which, in such a situation, he puts to
himself, is, What have I done to de-

serve

serve this? His refle&ion is, almost in- SERM.
ftinaively, drawn back upon his former _
life; and if, in the course of that re-
trofped, any flagrant guilty deed occur
to finite his conscience, on this he can-
not avoid refting with anxiety and ter-
rour, and conneeting it in his imagina-
tion with what he now suffers. He fees,
or thinks that he fees, a Divine arm lifted
up; and what, in other circumstances,
he would have called a reverse of for-
tune, he now views as a judgment of
Heaven.

When the brethren of Joseph, confined

in the Egyptian prison, were bewailing
the distress into which they had fallen,
there was no circumstance which pointed
out any relation between their present
misfortune, and their former cruelty to
their brother. A long course of years had
intervened, during which they fiourifhed
in wealth and ease. They were now
far from the scene of their crime; in a
foreign land, where they believed them-
selves utterly unknown, and where they

had

SE RM. had done nothing to offend. But cone
XIII.

science formed a connetion between
events, which, according to the ordi-
nary apprehension of men, were entire-
ly independent of each other. It made
them recollea, that they, who once had
been deaf to the supplications of a bro-
ther, were now left friendless and for-
lorn, imploring pity in vain from an un-
relenting Governour; and that they who
had first conspired to kill their brother,
and afterwards fold him for a slave,
were themselves deprived of liberty, and
threatened with an ignominious death.
How undefervedly soever there evils be-
fell them on the part of men, they con-
sessed them to be just on the part of
Providence. They concluded the hour of
retribution to be arrived; and, in the
person of the Governour of Egypt, they
beheld the Ruler of the world calling
them to account for guilt. Therefore is
this dyi-jJ' comie iipcn us. Behcold a7Jo his
blood l' reqird:,' .

Sirnilar

Snmilar Centiments on like occasions, SERM.

~will be found not uncommon among i--v
mankind. Pious men, there is no doubt,
are at all times disposed to look up to
God, and to acknowledge his hand in
every event of life. But what I now
obftlve is, That where no habitual ac-
knowledgment of God takes place; nay
where a daring contempt of his autho-
rity has prevailed, conscience, neverthe-
less, constrains men, in the day of their
di0frefs, to recognize God, under the most
awful of all characters, The avenger of past
guilt.

Herein the vifdom of God appears

in such a light, as justly to claim our
highest admiration. The ordinary course
of his Providence is carried on by hu-
man means. He has fettled a train of
events, which proceed in a regular fiuc-
ceflion. of causes and effects, without his
appearing to interpose, or to aft. But
these, on proper occasions, are made to
affect the human mind, in the fame
manner as if he vere beheld descend-

VOL. I. D d ing

SE R M. ing from his throne, to punish the fin-
XII1.

X ner with his own hand. Were God to

suspend the laws of Nature, on occasion
of every great crime that was committed
on earth, and to govern the world by
frequent interpositions of a miraculous
kind, the whole order of human affairs
would be unhinged; no plans of acion
could be formed; and no scope would
be given for the probation and trial of
men. On the other hand, were the ope-
ration of second causes allowed to con-
ceal a Divine hand totally from view, all
sense of fuperiour government would be
loft; the world would seem to be void
of God; the finner would perceive no-
thing but chance and fortune in the
diftrefles which he suffered. Whereas,
by its being so ordered, that several in-
cidents of life shall carry the fame force,
and strike the mind with the fame im-
pression, as if they were fupernatura!
interpositions, the fear of God is kept
alive among men, and the order of lhu
man affairs is, at the fame time, pre-

served

ierved unbroken. The finner fees his SE R M.
distress to be the immediate effect of XII.
human violence or oppression; and is
obliged, at the fame moment, to confi-
der it as a Divine judgment. His con-
science gives to an ordinary misfortune,
all the edge and the fling of a visitation
from Heaven.

FROMI the train of thought which the

Text has suggested, several inferences
naturally follow. But I fiall confine my-
self to two, which claim your particular
attention.

The first is, the clear evidence which

the preceding observations afford, of a
Divine government now exercised over
mankind. This most important and aw-
ful of all truths, cannot be too often pre-
sented to our view, or too firongly im-
prefied on our mind. To the imperfec
conviCtion of it, which obtains in the
world, must be ascribed, in a great mea-
tfre, the prevalence of fin. Did men
firmly believe that the Almighty Being,

D d 2 who

SE Ri. who formed them, is carrying on a fyfi.
A,- tern of administration which will not

leave guilt unpunished, it is impossible
that they could remain so inattentive, as
we often behold them, to their moral
condua. But the bulk of mankind are
giddy and thoughtless. Struck by the
superficial appearances of pleasure, which
accompany licentiousness, they inquire
no farther; and deliver themselves up to
their ienfes and their paflions. Where-
as, were they to reflec, but for a mo-
ment, upon that view which has now
been given of human nature, they might
soon be satisfied, that the moral govern-
ment of God is no matter of doubtful
dilcufiion. It is a fat, no less obvious and
inconte'fable, than the government exercised
by those earthly rulers, whom we behold
with the ensigns of their office before our
eves.

To govern, is to require a certain

course of acion, or, to prescribe a law;
and to enforce that law by a suitable
distribution of rewards and punishments.

Now,

Now, God has not only invested con- SE R M.
science, as we have seen, with authority
to promulgate, but endowed it also with
power to enforce, his law. By placing
inward approbation and peace on the fide
of virtue, he gave it the fanCion of re-
ward. But this was not enough. Pain
is a more powerful principle than plea-
sure. To escape misery is a stronger
motive for ation, than to obtain good.
God, therefore, so framed human nature,
that the painful sense of ill-defert flould
attend the commiflion of crimes; that
this fenik of ill-defert should necessarily
produce the dread of punishment; and
that this dread should so operate on the
mind, in the time of distress, as to make
the finner conceive Providence to be en-
gaged against him, and to be concerned
in inflicing the punishment which he
itfFers. All these impreflions he hath
stamped upon the heart with his own
hand. He hath made them constituent
parts of our frame; on purpose, that by
-te union of so many firong and pungent

D d 3 senti-

S E R M. sentiments, he might enforce repentance
Ho-_~i and rcformation, and publish to the hu-

man race his detestation of fin. Were he
to speak to us from the clouds, his voice
could not be more decisive. What we
discern to be interwoven with the con-
texture of human nature, and to pervade
the whole course of human affairs, carries
an evidence not to be resifted. We might,
with as much reason, doubt whether the
fun was intended to enlighten the earth,
or the rain to fertilize it; as whether he
who has framed the human mind, in-
tended to announce righteousness to man-
kind, as his law.

TIHE second inference which I make

from the foregoing discourse, lefpeds the
intimate connection, which those ope-
rations of conscience have, with the pecu-
liar and distinguishing docrines of the
Gospel of Christ, They will be found to
accord with them so remarkably, as to
furnish an answer to some of those ob-
jedcions, which fuiperficial reasoners are

apt

apt to raise against the Christian revela- SERM.
tion. In particular, they coincide with
that awful view which the Gospel gives
us, of the future consequences of guilt.
If the finner is now constrained by con-
science, to view the Almighty as pur-
suing him with evil for long-forgotten
crimes, how naturally must he conclude
that, in a subsequent period of existence,
the Divine administration will proceed
upon the fame plan, and complete what
has been left imperfeLc here? If, during
this life, which is only the time of trial,
the displeasure of Providence at fin is
displayed by tokens so imanifeft, what
may be apprehended to follow, when
justice, which at present only begins to
be executed, flall be carried to its con-
summation? *What conscience forebodes,
revelation verifies; aPfuring us, that a
day is appointed, when God will render
to every man according to his works; to
them, who b, y patient continuance in well-
doinig, fek for glory,, honour, and immorta-
lity ; eternal life: But uato them , ait arc

D d 4 contentiouts,

S E R M. contentious, and obey not the htuth, but obey

t ,nrightcofleJfs; indignation anid wrat, tri-
bulation and anlguij, upoon every foull of malz
that doth evil, of the yewfirfl, anid aso of
the Gentile. For there is no rJcfpe7 of pefoiis
with God. For as mIanl as have finned
witho utt he law, Jlall also pe;ri/J without
the law; and as many as have funied in tCh
law, flall be jurdged by the law .

While the threatenings of confeicnce

thus strengthen the evidence of the icrip-
ture doctrine concerning future punifl-
ments, they likewise pave the way for
the belief of what is revealed concerning
the method of our deliverance by Christ.
They suggest to the linncr, some deep
and dark malignity contained in guilt,
which has drawn upon his head such
high difplcafure from Ileaven. They
call forth his most anxious efforts, to
avert the effects of that displeasure; and
to propitiate his offended judge. Some
atonement, he is conscious, must be
,pade; and the voice of Nature has, in

Rom. i. ii7--3.

every

every age, loudly demanded suffering, as SERM.
the proper atonement for guilt. Hence s
mankind have constantly fled for refuge
to ilch substitutions, as they could de-
vise to place in the room of the offender;
and, as by general content, vicims have
every were been slain, and expiatory fa-
crifices have been offered up on innume-
rable altars. FWherewith flall I come be-
fore the Lord, andl bow imyfelf before the 7zofJ
high God? Shall I come before him with
blurnt offerings, rand calves of a year old?
Wbill the Lord be plenafd with taozfizds of
rams, or with i ten toa' of

rivers ofri s oil ?

Or, JJall I give 1my fifri-bolr for m7y traf-
grcjioin; the fruit of nmy body, for the fin of
my foulu ? These perplexities and agita-
tions of a guilty conscience, may be
termed preludes, in some measure, to the
Gospel of Christ. They are the pointings
of unenlightened Nature, towards that
method of relief, which the grace of
God has provided. Nature felt its inabi-

t Micsal, rvi. 6 i7.

lity

S R M. lity to extricate itself from the confe-
XIII. _^^ quences of guilt: The Gospel reveals the

plan of Divine interposition and aid.
Nature confefild tome atonement to be
neceflary: The Gospel discovers, that the
neceaflry atonement is made. The re-
medy is no sooner presented, than its
suitableness to the disease appears; and
the great mystery of redemption, though
it reaches, in 'its full extent, beyond our
comprehension, yet, as far as it is re-
vealed, holds a visible congruity witlI
the sentiments of Confciehce, and of Na-
ture.

Natural and revealed religion proceed

from the fame Author; and, of course,
arc analogous and consistent. They are
part of the fame plan of Providence.
They are conneced measures of the fame
system of government. The serious be-
lief of the one, is the best preparation
for the reception of the other. Both
concur in impressing our mind with a
deep sense of one most important truth,

9 [which

which is the result of this whole dif- S ERM.
course, That as we sow now we mull XII.
reap; that under the government of
God, no one lhall be permitted, with
impunity, to gratify his criminal pas-
sions, and to make light of the great
duties of life.

# SERMON XIV. On the Mixture of JOY and FEAR in RELIGION. PSALM ii. 11. Rejoice with trembling.

-

412 ]

S E R M 0 N XIV.
On the Mixture of Jo and F E R in

REL IGIO N.

PSALM ii. 11.

Rejoice with trembling.
SE R M. OY and Fear, are two great springs

r' aj of human ation. The mixed con-

dition of this world, gives scope for
both; and, according as the one or the
other predominates, it influences the ge-
neral tenour of our conduct. Each of
them possesses a proper place in religion.
To serve t.e Lord with gladness, is the
cxhortation of the Plalmilt David *. To
serve hil wilth reverence and godly fear,
is the admonition of the Apostle Paul '.
But, under the present imperfection of

* P'alm c, 2. .t Heb. :ii, 28.

6 " lhuman

human nature, each of these principles SEIRM.
may be carried to a dangerous extreme.
When the whole of religion is placed in
joy, it is in hazard of rising into unwar-
rantable rapture. When it refts altoge-
ther on fear, it degenerates into fuperfli-
tious servility. The Text enjoins a due
mixture of both; and inculcates this im-
portant maxim, That joy, tempered with
fear, is the proper difpoiition of a good
man. In discoursing of this subjea, I
shall endeavour to show, first, That joy
is essential to religion; and next, That,
for various reasons, this joy ought to be
mixed with fear; whence we shall be
able to ascertain the nature of that fleady
and composed spirit, which is moit suit-
able to our present condition, and most
acceptable to God.

I. Joy is eflential to religion, in two

refpeds; as religion inspires joy, and as
it requires it. In other words; To rejoice
is both the privilege, and the duty, of good
men,

IN

S EXRM. IN the first place, Religion inspires joy.

xw.
A»-YI. It affords just ground of gladness, to all

who firmly believe its doErines, and fin-
cerely study to obey its laws. For it con-
sers on them the two most material re-
quifites of joy; a favourable situation of
things without, and a proper disposition
of mind within, to relifl that favourable
situation.

When they examine their situation

without, they behold themselves placed
in a world which is full of the influ-
ence of a gracious Providence; where
beauty and good are every where predo-
minant; where various comforts are be-
flowed; and where, if any be with-held,
they have reason to believe, that they are
with-held by parental wisdom. Among
the crowd that encompass them, they
may be at a loss to discern, who are
their friends, and who their enemies.
But it is sufficient to know, that they
are under the protecion of an invisible
Guardian, whose power can keep them
from every evil. All the steps of his

condut :

condut, they may be unable to trace. S E R .
Events may befal them, of which they E
can give no account. But as long as
they are satisfied, that the system of Di-
vine government is founded on mercy,
no present occurrences are able to destroy
their peace. For be who /spared not hih
own Son, but delivered him Iup for them,
how sJaall he not with. him freely give
them all things ? If their nature is frail,
Divine aififtance is promised to strengthen
it. It their virtue is imperfect, a difpen-
fation is opened, which gives them the
hope of pardon. If their external cir-
cumftances be in any refpet unfavour-
able, it is because a higher interest is
consulted. ill things, they are assured
Jhall work together for their good. On
their prosperity refs, the blessing; on
their adversity, the fanaifying Spirit of
the Almighty. Old age may advance,
and life decay; but beyond those boun-
daries of Nature, faith opens the pro-
fpeEt of their lasting felicity. Without
anxiety, they pass through the different

periods

SER M. periods of their present existence, becatuf
A,_ they know it to be no more than an intro-

duction to immortality.

As such a situation of things withouti

lays a solid foundation for joy; so the
disposition which religion forms within
promotes the relifn of it. It is indeed
from within, that the chief sources of
enjoyment or trouble rife. The minds
of bad men are always disorderly; and
hence their lives are so generally uneasy.
In vain they take the timbrel and the harp,
and endeavour to rejoice at thcfolmd of the
organ. Spleen and disgust pursue them,
through all the haunts of amusement.
Pride and ill humour torment them.
Oppressed with discontent, their spirits
flag; and their worn-out pleaftures afford
them entertainment no more. But reli-
gion fulxlues those malignant paflions,
which are the troublers of human repose;
which either overcall the mind with the
gloom of peeviflnefs, or disquiet it by
the violence of agitation. It infuses, in
their room, thofc mild and gentle difpo-

fitions

fitions, whose natural effet is to smooth SERM.

XIV

the tenour of the foul. Benevolence and _
candour, moderation and temperance,
wherever they reign, produce cheerful-
ness and serenity. The consciousness of
integrity gives ease and freedom to the
mind, It enables good men to extrac from
every objcct, the whole fatisfadion which
it is capable of yielding; and adds the fla-
vour of innocence, to all their external
pleasures.

IN the second place, As religion natu-

rally inspires joy; so, when it inspires, it
commands us to cherifl. As a neceflary
proof of our sincerity, it requires cheer-
fulness in the performance of our duty;be-
cause, if this be wanting, our religion dif-
covers itself not to be genuine in principle,
and in pracice it cannot be stable.

Religious obedience, destitute of joy, is

not genuine in its principle. For, did
either faith or hope, the love of God, or
the love of goodness, rule the heart,
they could not fail to produce satisfaction

VOL. I, Ee in

SE. RM. in piety and virtue. All those causes of

XIV.
x v joy which I have mentioned would then

operate; and their native effea on the
mind, would follow. The profpets
'which religion opens, would gladden,
and the affections which it inspires,
would Iboth the heart. We serve, with
plealure, the benefaaor whom we love.
We rejoice in every study and pursuit,
to which we are sincerely attached. If
wve serve not God with pleasure, it is
becauf! we know him not, or love him
not. If we rejoice not in virtue, it is
because our arecicon is alienated from it,
and our inclinations are depraved. We
give too evident proof, that either we
believe not the principles of religion, or
that we feel not their power. Exclude
joy from religion; and you leave no
other motives to it, except compulsion
and intcreft. But are these ifitable
grounds, on which to reft the whole of
our obedience to the Supreme Being?
.lM so, g'ivc e lo ty heart, is the call of
God. Surely if there be. no pleasure in

fulfilling

fulfilling his commands, the heart is not S E R ¢M;

XIV.

given him; and, in that cafe, the ?mu2tiiitdC
offfac;rfces and /b'rnt offe:rigs is brotght to
his altar in vain.

As religion, defitute of joy, is iinperfe&

in its principle; so, in pra&tice, it murf be
unfiable. In vain you endeavour to fix any
man to the rcgular performance of that, in
which he finds no pleasure. Bind him ever
so fafl by interest or fear, he will contrive
tome method of eluding the obligation;
Ingenuity is never so fertile of evasions, as
where pleasure is all on the one fide, and
mere precept on tlie other. He may ftud7
to save appearances. He may diifemble
and constrain himself. But his heart re-
volts in secret; and the weight of incli-
nation will, in the end, draw. the pralice
after it. If perleverance is r!ot to be ex-
peded, fiill less can zeal be looked for
from him, who, in his religious duties,
trembles without rejoicing. Every at-
tempt towards virtue whicll he forms will
be feeble and awkward. He applies to it
is a tafic; h!e dreads the tase-matlcr; but

E e a h

SER RM. he will labour no more than necessity

xiv.
*__-i enjoins. To escape from punishment, is

his sole aim. He bargains for immunity,
by every duty which he performs; and
all beyond, he esteems superfluous toil.
-Such religion as this, can neither pu-
rify the heart, nor prepare for heavenly
bliss. It is the refuge of an abjea mind.
It may form the ritual of the monk, or
prescribe the penance of the idolater;
but has no concern with the homage of
him, who wiorJf.)i's the Father i, Spirit and
in truth. His charater is, that the joy' of
the Lord is his Jrelngh ". It attaches his
heart to religion. It inspires his zeal. It
supports his constancy; and accelerates his
progress.

There is no man but has some objec

to which he cleaves for enjoyment; some-
what that flatters him with distant hope,
or affords him prcfent pleasure. Joy is
the end towards which all rational beings
tend. For the faike of it, they live; it
resembles the air they breathe, which is

' Neh, viii. 1o.

necessary

necessary for the motion of the heart' SE RM.
and all the vital functions. But as the _
breathing of infected air proves fatal to
life; in the fame manner joy, drawn
from a corrupted source, is deftrudive,
both of virtue and of true happiness.
When you have no pleasure in good-
ness, you may with certainty conclude the
reason to be, that your pleasure is all de-
rived from an opposite quarter. You have
exhausted your affetion upon the world.
You have drunk too much of its poi-
soncd waters, to have any reliil for a pure
spring.

Estimate, therefore, the genuineness of

your religious principles; estimate the de-
gree of your flability, in religious prac-
tice, by the degree of your fatisfacion in
piety and virtue. Be assured, that where
your treasure is, there will your delight
be also. The worldly man rejoices in his
possessions; the voluptuous in his plea-
fures ; the social in his friends and com-
panions. The truly good man rejoices
ill tloiing j1ifly, loving mierc, and waking

E e 3 cumbly

S E, R . bh;[ybl, iw!h the Lord his Gold. He is
_ 7happy, when employed in the regular clif-

charge of the great duties of life. Spon-:
tancous they flow fromi the aficlions of a
pure heart. Not only from tile keeping
of the divine commanldments he expe&s,

but li! ic J fiL */]: .( m, lie enjoys (I
greiei; rio,'',;J.- -:coidinlel . in the senti-
nments of hol)y mc: reco:red in icripture,
xve- find this spirit evcry-where plrevalent.
Their language was; Th1l' jlait/lc.r have
/tae(7, i O inl liCniigc f!Ci J;t. e,'i'r ; for they ar
t cii iLe?7 of ii C' . I'' hcy are l jiyfongs
*n i.'.'

h'e h. :::. of ;;,j' H ":Si^c. 'ey arJl'Is

/'I,:c, i:bc.,r t :hin he ,/ l/ e honey-co;;,'3.

;h;,ile JI..??S 5 .i i? i eii../
t J -oi1

ohiO, .ihve lv ii b1hevtCen b,:t 'ice ? nit lthci-i

iset it'li chot ree t:! I e'src [f Icdcs thcc.
'Tliey d(dl not receive te fpririt of bondagc,
but fthc ,w'i it of adopt.io. Thy vj ere s1 ile
wiith 1':: a;:d joy in believing. he ' rc'-
,3oiced in hope of the g/or, of God. As soon
as tlie /Ethiopian eunuch received from
Philip the light of the Gospel, that light
revived and cheered his heart. A new fun
seemed to arise; a new glory to shine

around

around him. Every objet brightened; and SE RM.

XIV.

he went oni his way rejoicilg . After the LXv
fame manner should every good man pro-
ceed in his journey through life, with a fe-
rene and cheerful spirit. Conflernation and
dejeaion let him leave to the slaves of guilt;
who have every thing to dread, both from
this world and the next. If he appear be-
fore others with a dispirited afpe, he dif-
honours religion; and affords ground for
fiifpicion, that he is either ignorant of its
nature, or a firanger to its power.

Thus I have shewn joy to be essential

to religion. It is the spirit which it in-
spires, and which it requires, in good men.
But in our present state, the best principles
may be carried to a dangerous excess; and
joy, like other things, has its due limits.
To serve God with unmixed delight, be-
longs to more advanced spirits in a happier
world. In this region ofimperfetion, some
infusions from a different cup, must of ne-
ceflity tincture our joy. Let us then,

* A&s, viii. 39,

E e 4 !I. TuRN

S R M. II. TURN to the other fide of the argu.

XIV.
,IV. ment, and confider the reasons which ren-

der it proper, that when we rejoice, we
Should rejoice with trembling.

In the first place, because all the ob-

jests of religion, which afford ground for
joy, tend to inspire, at the fame time, re-
verence and fear. WVe serve a Benefadtor,
it is true, in whom we have reason to de-
light; whose purpofcs are gracious ; wlofe
law is the plan of our happiness. But this
Benefator, i. thle 7 e.'.'j ctenal, immortanl
an/d ivf3ibic; at lwhofe preeincc the moun-
tains flake, and Nature trembles. Eve;r
good,, and cvi;jc;sr'Ct giftl come down from.
him. But the hand which confers them,
we cannot fee. Mysterious obscurity refts
upon his essence. He dwrelleth il the fe/'rzt
jice of th.ndcr ; and clouds and darkness
surround him. lHe is the lHearcr of prayer;
but we lift our voice to him from afar,
Into his immediate pretence no access is
permitted. Our warmest devotion admits
no familiarity with him. God is in heaven,
anad t;boi /Son coarth; therefore, let thy

6 '! ' wore4

ovords besew. If his omniscience adml- S E R M.
nifters comfort in our secret difLrefs, it like- xiv
wife fills with awe the heart that is conscious
of guilt. For, if he knows ourframet, and
remembers we are rc dlj; our iniquities, also,
are ever before hin ; 0our jcret fils, in the
light of his coluntenance.

Throughout all his dispensations, great-

ners, in coniunction with goodness, firikes
our view; and wherever we behold the
Parent, we behold the Legislator also. The
death of Christ, in behalf of a guilty
world, is the chief grould of religious
hope and joy. But'it is no less the ground
of reverence; when, in this high tranf-
adion, we contemplate God, as at once
firicL in juPlice, and great in mercy. I
the Lord keep 7merc fo.r ho7fiands of tbhen
that 'fear nme. Jfrgive their i;iquity, tran1f-
g;relfion, and ;si ; but 1 will l, no means
char the gu/ilt. When we open the book
of the Law, we find promises and threaten-
ings mingled in the fame page. On the
one fide, w e fee Heaven dilblayed il
All its glory: On the other, Hell opening

its

SE RI. its tcrrours. In fliort, in lwhatever iigth
a-- we view religion, it appears solemn and

venerable. It is a temple full of majesty,
to which tile worshippers may approach
with comfort, in the hope of obtaining
grace, anld fii dling iercgy; but where they
cannot enter, without being imprefied
with awe. If we may be permitted to
compare spiritual with natural things,
religion resembles not those Scenes of
natural beauty, where every object finiles.
it cannot be likened to the gay landscape,
or tle flowery field. It reflmbles more
the augutl and fiblime appearances of

>Nature; the lo.fty mountain, the expanded
ocean, and thle narry firmamcnt; at the
fight of vwhich, the mind is at once over-
awed and delighted; and, from the union
of grandeur with beauty, derives a pleasing,
but a serious, emotion.

IN the second place, As joy, tempered

by fear, suits the nature of religion, so
it is requisite for the proper regulation of
the conduit of man. Let his joy flow

from

from the befl and purest source; yet, if it SERM.

XIV.

remain long unmixed, it is apt to become . I
dangerous to virtue. As waters which
are never stirred, nor troubled, gather a
sediment, which putrifies them; so the
undisturbed continuance of placid sensa-
tions engenders dioirders in the human
foul. It is wifely ordered in our present
fate, that joy and fear, hope and grief,
flould adc alternately, as checks and ba-
lances upon each other, in order to pre-
vent an excess in any of them, which
our nature could' not bear. If we were
subjed to no alarms of danger, the
wisest would soon become improvident;
and the most humble, presumptuous.
Man is a pilgrim on earth. Were his
path to be always finooth and flowery,
he would be tempted to relinquish his
guide, and to forget the purpose of his
journey. Caution and fear are the
ihields of happiness. Unguarded joy
begets indolence; indolence produces fe-
curity; security leads to rafhners; and
rashness ends in ruin. In order to re-

joice

SERM, joice long, it is necessary that we rejoice
XIV. with trembling. Had our first parents

observed this rule, man might have been
still in paradise. Ie who faith in his
heart, My mointaini Jfands Jfrong ; I flall
never be moved; may be assured, that his
fate already begins to totter. Religion,
therefore, performs a kind office, in giv,
ing us the admonition of the Text. It
inspires cheerfulness in the service of
God. It proposes joy, as our chief spring
of ad;ion. But it supports joy, by guard-
ing it with fear; not suppressing, but re-
gulating its indulgence; requiring us to
rejoice, like persons who have obtained
a treasure, which, through want of vigi-
lance, they are exposed to lose. De-
pendent beings are formed for fubmif-
lion; and to lfbmit, is to stand in awe.
Becazif the Lord reigneth, let the earth be
glad. We are the lubjeds of God; and
therefore may jufily rejoice. But still we
are fubjeCds; and, therefore, trembling
must mix itself with our joy,

IN

IN the third place, The unstable condi- SE RM.

XIV,

tion of all human things, naturally in' In
spires fear in the midst of joy. The
spirit to which religion forms us, must
undoubtedly correspond to the state in
which we are placed, and to the part
which is afligned us to adc. Now, the
first view under which our present state
appears, is that of fallen creatures, who
are undergoing, in this world, probation
and trial for their recovery; and are
commanded to work cut their salvation
with. fear and trembling. This view of
our condition infers not habitual dejeaion
of mind. It requires not melancholy
abftracqion from the affairs, or total con-
tempt of the amusements of life. But it
inspires humility. It enforces dependence
on Divine aid; and calls forth the voice
of supplication to Heaven. In a situation
so critical, and where interests so important
are at stake, every reasonable person must
confels, that fcricufines ought to temper
rejoicing,

Were

SE R M. Were there in human life any fixed

XIV.
~-, point of flability and reft, attainable by

man; could we, at any one moment, as-
sure ourselves, that there remained no
latent source of danger, either to our tem-
poral, or our fliritual state; then I ad-
mit, we might lay trembling aside, and
rejoice in full security. But, alas! no
such fare station, no such moment of
confidence, is allowed to man during his
warfare on earth. Viciflitudes of good
and evil, of trials and consolations, fill
up his life. The best intentioned are
sometimes betrayed into crimes; the most
prudent, overwhelmed with misfortunes.
The world is like a wheel incesSantly re-
volving, on which human things alter-
nately rife and fall. What is pall of our
life, has been a chequered scene. On its
remaining periods, uncertainty and dark-
ness reft. Futurity is an unknown re-
gion, into which no man can look for-
ward without awe, becale lhe cannot tell
what forms of danger or trial may meet
him there. This we know well, that in

every
a ,

every period of our life, the path of hap- SERM.
piners flall be found sleep and arduous; a
but swift and easy the descent to ruin.
What, with much exertion of care and
vigilance, we had built up, one unwary
aaion may, in an evil hour, overthrow.
The props of human confidence are, in
general, insecure. The sphere of human
pleasures is narrow. While we form
schemes for strengthening the one, and
for enlarging the other, death, mean-while,
advances. Life, with a swift, though
insensible course, glides away; and, like
a river which undermines its banks, gra-
dually impairs our slate. Year after year
Iteals something from us; till the decaying
fabric totter of itself, and crumble at
length into durf. So that, whether we
confider life or death, time or eternity, all
things appear to concur in giving to man
the admonition of the Text, ,.joice with
tD'el2Alf1ig,

I I-IHVE now fhlown, in what refpe&s
religion both promotes joy, and inspires

ferioufaef-s,

SE R M. erioufnefs. It places us in the most fa-
i-_-y vourable situation, which human life as-

fords, for joy ; and it gives us every assist-
ance, for relifuing that joy. It renders
it our duty to cultivate th: fatisfacaion
which it yields. It demands a cheerful
spirit, in order to alcertain the finccrity
of our principles, and to confirm us in
good prancice. At the tame time the
joy which it infpircs, is tempered \vith
fear by the genius of religion itself;
by the danger to which unguarded joy
would expose us; and by the impropriety
of indulging it, in a situation so mixed as
the present. The rt-embling which is here
enjoined, is not to be underflood as fig-
nifying a pusillanimous dejecion. It im-
ports no more than that caution and so-
briety, which prudence diaates, as be-
longing to our fiate. By connecing such
trembling with our joy, religion means
to recommend to us, a cheerful, but a
composed, spirit, equally remote from
the humiliating depression of fear, and
the exulting levity of joy. 'Always to re-

joice,

joice is to be a fool. Always to tremble, is s E R M.
to be a slave. It is a modest cheerfulness, XIV
a chastened joy, a manly seriousness, which
becomes the servant of God.

BUT is this, it may perhaps be said,
the whole amount of that boafled satis-

\

facion which religion bestows ? Is this
all the compensation which it makes, for
thole sacrifices it exadts? Are not the
terms which vice holds out1 far more
enticing, when it permits us to gratify
every desire; and, in return for our fur-
mounting the timorous scruples of con-
science, promises us a life of gaiety, fef-
tivity, and unrestrained joy?- Such
promises, vice may indeed make; but,
how far it fulfils them, we may safely
refer to the determination of the greatest
sensualist, when he has finished his ca-
reer, and looks back on what he has en-
joyed. Ask him, Whether he would re-
commend to his children, and his friends,
to hold the fame course; and whether,
with his dying breath, he dare assure

VOL. I. F f them,

EI R M. them, that the gratifications of licentious-
XIV.

ness afford the greatest enjoyment of life?
Whatever hopes vice may at the beginning
inspire, yet, after the trial is made, it has
been always found, that criminal pleasures
are the bane of happiness, the poison, not
the cordial, of our present fate. ;They
are pleasures compensated by an infinite
overbalance of pain; moments of delight,
succeeded by years of regret; purchased at
the expence of injured reputation, broken
health, and ruined peace. Even abftrat-
ing from their pernicious consequences,
they are, for most part, in themselves
treacherous pleafuires; unsound and dif-
turbed in the moments of enjoyment. ///
the nzirft of f!ch laughter, the heart is
forroofidl. Often is the fiile of gaiety
afftumed, c whlile the heart akes within: And
though folly may laugh, guilt will fting.
CorreC&ing this pernicious phrenzy of plea-
sure, and reducing it to a more fober and
regulated fate, religion is, in truth, no
other than wisdom, iniroducing peace and
order into the life of man,

While

-While religion condemns such pleasure8 S E R M.

as are immoral, it is chargeable with no X
improper austerity, in refpe: of those which
are of an innocent kind. Think not, that
by the cautious discipline which it prescribes,
it excludes you from all gay enjoyment of
life. Within the compass of that sedate
spirit, to which it forms you, all that is
innocently pleasing will be found to lie. It
is a mistake to imagine, that in constant
effusions of giddy mirth, or in that flutter
of spirits which is excited by a round of di-
versions, the chief enjoyment of our state
consists. Were this the cafe, the vain and
the frivolous would be on better terms for
happiness, than the wife, the great, and the
good. To arrange the plans ofamufement,
or to preside in the haunts of jollity, would
be more desirable, than to exert the highest
effort of mental powers for the benefit of
nations. A consequence so absurd, is fufi-
cient to explode the principle from which
it flows. To the amusements and lesser
joys of the world, religion aflgns their
prcper place. It admits of them, as relax-

F f 2 aticns.

s ER M. ations from care, as instruments of promot-
XIV. .-.,. ing the union of men, and of enlivening

their social intercourse. But though, as
long as they are kept within due bounds, it
does not censure nor condemn them; nei-
ther does it propose them, as rewards to the
virtuous, or as the principal objects of their
pursuit. To such, it points out nobler ends
of adion. Their felicity it engages them to
seek, in the discharge of an useful, an up-
right, and honourable part in life; and, as
the habitual tenor of their mind, it promotes
cheerfulness, and discourages levity.

Between these two there is a wide diftinc-

tion; and the mind which is most open to
levity, is frequently a stranger to cheerful-
ness. It has been remarked, that transports
of intemperate mirth, are often no more
than flaffics from the dark cloud; and that
in proportion to the violence of the efful-
gence, is the succeeding gloom. Levity
may be the forced production of folly or
vice; cheerfulness is the natural offspring of
wisdom and virtue only. The one is an
occasional agitation; the other a permanent

habit,

habit. The one degrades the characer; the SE RM.

XIV.

other is perfecly coififtent with the dignity -
of reason, and the fReady and manly spirit
of religion. To aim at a constant succession
of high and vivid sensations of pleasure, is
an idea of happiness altogether chimerical.
Calm and temperate enjoyment, is the ut-
most that is allotted to man. Beyond this,
we Rtruggle in vain to raise our state; and,
in fadt, depress our joys, by endeavouring
to heighten them. Instead of those falla-
cious hopes of perpetual festivity, with
which the world would allure us, religion
confers upon us a cheerful tranquillity. In-
rfead of dazzling us with meteors of joy,
which sparkle and expire, it sheds around
us a calm and Ready light. By mixing
trembling with our joy, it renders that joy
more solid, more equal, and more lasting.

In this spirit, then, let us serve God,

and hold our course through life. Let us
approach to the Divine Being, as to a
sovereign of whom we Rand in awe, and
to a father in whom we trust. In our con-
dud, let us be cautious and humble, as

Fs 3 those

S E R M. those who have ground to fear; well pleated

XIV. xn;. and cheerful, as those who have cause to

rejoice. Let us ihow the world, that a re-
ligious temper, is a temper, sedate, not fad;
that a religious behaviour, is a behaviour
regulated, not stiff and formal. Thus we
shall fte the world, as not abifing it; we
shall pass through its various changes, with
the least discomposure; and we shall vindi-
cate religion, from the reproaches of those
who would attribute to it, either enthufiaf-
tic joys, or slavish terrours. We ihall ohow,
that it is a rational rule of life, worthy of
the perfeaion of God, and suited to the
nature and tate of man.

# SERMON XV. On the Motives to CONSTANCY in VIRTUE. GALAT. vi. 9. And let us not be weary in well-doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

[ 439 ]

S E R M ON XV.
On the Motives to CONSTANCY in

VIRTUE.

GALAT. Vi. 9.
And let us not be weary iz well-doing ; for

in dute season we Cfiall reap, if we faint
not.
'^ISCONTENT is the most general SERM.

XV.

DL)j of all the evils which trouble the -
life of mal. It is a disease, which every-
where finds materials to feed itself; for
if real distresses be wanting, it substitutes
such as are imaginary in their place. It
converts even the good things of the
world, when they have been long enjoy-
ed, into occasions of dilgufq. In the
midst of prosperity, it disposes us to
complain; and renders tranquillity tirc-

F f 4 some,

S E M. some, only bccaufe it is uniform. There is

xv. no wonder that this spirit of reftlefflefs

and diffatisfaEion, which corrupts every
terrestrial enjoyment, should have some-
times penetrated into the region of virtue.
Good men arc not without their frailties;
and the perverseness incident to human na-
ture, too readily leads us, who become
weary of all other things, to be wcary, also,
in well-doing.

Let me put a cafe, which, perhaps,

will be found not unfrequent in ordinary
life. Suppose a person, after much com-
merce with the world, to be convinced
of its vanity, He has seen its molt
flattering hopes to be fallacious. He has
felt its most boasted pleasures to be un-
fatisfacaory. He resolves, therefore, to
place his happiness in virtue; and, dif-
regarding all temptations from interest,
to adhere to what is right and honour-
able in condu&t. H-e cultivates acquaint-
ance with religion. He performs, with
ferioufneis, the ofices of devotion. He
lays down to himself, a rational and use-

ful

fill plan of life; and, with fatisfafion, holds s ERM.

xv.

on for a while in this reformed course. ,
But, by degrees, discouragements arise.
The peace which he hoped to enjoy, is
interrupted, either by his own frailties, or
by the vices of others. Passions, which had
not been thoroughly subdued, struggle for
their accustomed gratification. The plea-
sure which he expected to find in devotion,
sometimes fails him; and the injustice of the
world often fours and frets him. Friends
prove ungrateful; enemies misrepresent,
rivals supplant him : And part, at least, of
the mortifications which he suffers, he be-
gins to ascribe to Virtue.---Is this all
the reward of my serving God, and re-
nouncing the pleasures of fin? Verily, in
vain I have cleansed my heart, and waJhed
amy hands in innocency. Behold, the ungodly
prosper in the wVorld, and have more than
heart can wii7; while, all the day long, I
am plagned and chaficned every morning.-
To such persons as these, and to all who
are in hazard of being infected with their

t5 spirit,

S R M. spirit, I now address myself. In reply to

xv.
,y, their complaints, I purpose to show, That

in no tfate they can chufe on earth, by no
plan of conduct they can form, it is pof-
fible for them to escape uneasiness, and dif-
appointment; that in a life of virtue, they
will susser less uneasiness, and fewer dif-
appointments, than in a course of vice;
they will poflefs much higher resources and
advantages; and they will be aflured of
complete reward at the end. From these
considerations, I hope to make it appear,
that there is no sufficient reason for our be-
ing weary, in well-doing, and that, taking
human life upon the whole, Virtue is far
the most: eligible portion of man,

I. UN EA s I NESS and disappointment

are inseparable, in some degree, from every
state on earth. Were it in the power of
the world, to render those who attach
themfelvcs to it, satisfied and happy, you
might then, I admit, have some title to
complain, if you found yourselves placed

upon

upon worse terms in the service of God. SERM.

xv.

But this is so far from being the cafe, that t,--
among the multitudes who devote them-
selves to earthly pleasure, you will not find
a single person who has completely attained
his aim. Enquire into the condition of
the high and the low, of the gay and the
serious, of the men of bufimefs and the
men of pleasure, and you shall behold them
all occupied in supplying some want, or in
removing some distress. No man is pleated
with being precisely what he is. Every-
where there is a void; generally, even in
the most prosperous life, there is some cor-
ner possessed by sorrow. He who is engaged
in business, pines for leisure. He who
enjoys leisure, languifies for want of
employment. In a single fiate, we envy
the comforts of a family. In conjugal
life, we are chagrined with domertic
cares. In a safe fiation, we regret the
want of objets for entcrprife. In an
enterprising life, we lament the want of
safety. It is the doom of man, that his

$~t &~sky

SE R M. Iky Ihould never be free from all clouds.

XV.

i e is, at present, in an exiled and fallen
fate. The objects which surround him,
are beneath his native dignity. God has
tinged them all with vanity, on purpose to
make him feel, that this is not his reft; that
here he is not in his proper place, nor
arrived at his true home.

If, therefore, you aim at a condition

which ihall be exempted from every dif-
quiet, you pursue a phantom; you in-
crease the vanity and vexation of life, by
engaging in a chace so fruitless. If you
complain of virtue, because there is in-
cident to it a portion of that uneasiness
which is found in every other state, your
complaint is most unreasonable. You
claim an immunity from evil, which be-
longs not to the lot of man. Reconcile
yourselves, then, to your condition; and,
instead of looking for perfect happiness any
where on earth, gladly embrace that slate
which contains the fewest sorrows.

Ii. THOUGH

II. THOUGH no condition of human SERM.

life is free froin uneasiness, I- contend, Xv
That the uneasiness belonging to a sinful
course, is far greater than what attends
a course of well-doing. If you be weary
of the labours of virtue, be assured, that
the world, whenever you try the ex-
change, will lay upon you a much heavier
load. It is the outside, only, of a licentious
life, which is gay and fiiling. Within,
it conceals toil, and trouble, and deadly
sorrow. For vice poisons human happiness
in the spring, by introducing disorder into
the heart. Those paflions which it seems
to indulge, it only feeds with imperfec
gratifications; and thereby strengthens them
from preying, in the end, on their unhappy
victims.

It is a great mistake to imagine, that

the pain of felf-denial is confined to virtue.
He who follows the world as much
as he who follows Chrirf, must take zp
his cross; and to him, assuredly, it will
prove a more oppressive burden. Vice
allows all our paflions to range uncon-

trouled;

SERM. trouled; and where each claims to be

xv. -.- fuperiour, it is impossible to gratify all.

The predominant desire can only be in-
dulged at the expence of its rival. No
mortifications which virtue exaas, are
more ievere than those, which ambition
imposes upon the love of ease, pride upon
interest, and covetousness upon vanity.
Self-denial therefore belongs, hi com-
mon, to vice and virtue; but with this
remarkable difference, that the passions
which virtue requires us to mortify, it
tends to weaken; whereas, those which
vice obliges us to deny, it, at the fame
time, strengthens. The one diminishes
the pain of felf-denial, by moderating
the demand of passion; the other in-
creases it, by rendering those demands
imperious and violent. What distresses,
that occur in the calm life of virtue, can
be compared to those tortures, which re-
morse of conscience inflics on the wicked;
to those severe humiliations, arising from
guilt combined with misfortunes, which
link them to the dust; to tiofe violent

agitations

agitations of shame and disappointment, s E R M.

xv

which sometimes drive them to the most i_
fatal extremities, and make them abhor
their existence? How often, in the midst
of those disastrous situations, into which
their crimes have brought them, have
they cursed the fedutions of vice; and,
with bitter regret, looked back to the day
on which they firrf forsook the path of in-
nocence !

But, perhaps, you imagine, that to such

miseries as these, great criminals only are
exposed ; and that, by a wary and cautious
management, it is possible to avoid them.
Take vice and virtue, then, in the moif
general point of view. Compare God and
the world as two maPcers, the one or other
of whom vou must obey; and confider
1firly, in whoie fcrvice there vi!l be reason
for your being weary fooneRl and repenting
not. fr;equently. The world is both a hard,
and a capricious miler. To submit to a
long fer,:itude, in the view of a recompence
from which they are excluded in the end

Is

SE R M. is known to be often the fate of those, who
xv.

are devoted to the world. They sacrifice
their present ease to their future profpeas.
They court the great, and flatter the mul-
titude. They prostitute their conscience,
and dishonour their characer: And, after
all their efforts, how uncertain is their fuc-
cess! Competitorsjuftle, and outstrip them.
The more artful deceive, the more violent
overthrow them. Fair profpccs once
smiled; but clouds soon gather; the sky is
darkened; the scene changes; and that
fickle world, which, a moment before, had
flattered, the next moment forgets them.

God is never mistaken in the characer

of his servants; for he fceth their hearts,
and judgeth according to the truth. But
the world is often deceived in those who
court its favour; and, of course, is un-
just in the distribution of its rewards.
Flattery gains the ear of power. Fraud
supplants innocence; and the pretending
and afluming, occupy the place of the
worthy and the modest. In vain you

claim

claim any merit with the world, on ac- SERM.
count of your good intentions. The d
world knows them not; regaids them
not. It judges of you, solely by your
acions; and, what is worse, by the fuc-
cess of your ations, which often depends
not on yourselves. But, in the fight of
the Supreme Being, good intentions sup-
ply the place of good deeds, which you
had not the opportunity of performingb
The well-meant endeavours of the poor
find the fame acceptance with him, as
the generous actions of the rich, The
widow's mite is, in his eye, a costly of-
fering; and even he who giveth to a dif-
cible a clsp of cold water, when he can
give him no more, goeth not 'without his re-

As the world is unjust in its judgments,

so it is ungrateful in its requitals, Time
speedily effaces the memory of the greatest
services; and when we can repeat them no
more, we are negletedj and thrown aside.
It was the faying of a noted great man of
the world, on the fall of lis fortunes,

VOL. , G g " Had

SERM. H IId I served God as faithfully as 1

xV.
_-.r..-': have done my King, he would not have

<' cafi me off in my old age." Unfaithful-
-hcis, and ingratitude, are unknown to God.
With him no new favourites arise, to usurp
\lhe place, or to bear off the rewards, of his
ancient servants. ' Eve/i to your old age, I
am Lie; anl cven to hoary hairs, I wil
carl, yon. I have made, and I will bear;
ceven I zill carrtj,, and will deliver you, fiith
the Lordl Aighirt '.-- Since, then, in our
fcveral departments, we must labour, What
comparison is there, between labouring for
God, and for the world ? How unjust are
they, who become weary so much fooncr
in the service of God, than they do in that
of the most severe and imperious of all
maflers!

TII. TIE resou'rces of virtue are much

greater than tlofe of the world; the com-
penfations which it makes for our distresses,
far more valuable. Perpetual success be-
Jolngs neither to the one, nor the other.

Ifra, .x;Ii. 4'

Bu£.

sBut under disappointments, when they SER M.
occur, virtue bear s s up; the world al- ..
lows us to fink.. When the mind of a
good man is hurt by misfortunes, reli-
gion idmiinitcrs the cordial, and infuses
the balmn. Whereas the world inliPts
wounds, and then leaves them to seifer.
It brings sorrows, but it provides no con-
folationi Confolatibn is entirely the pro-
vince of religion. Supposing religion to
be inferiour to vice in external advan-
tages, it must be allowed to posse1s inter-
nal peace in a much higher degree. This
is so certain, that almost all mei, at some
period or other of their life, look for'ward
to it, as to a desirable retreat. When the
ends of their pieteiit pursuit shall he ac-
complifhed, they propose to themselves
much fatisfaaion, in an honiourable dii-
charge of the duties of their fiation,
amiidfe those moderate pafiions, and tem-
perate pleasures, which innocence allows.
That which all men agree in holding to
be second in importance- to the pursuit
vWhich they follow, may be safely esteemed

Gg 2:. to

SE RM. to be the first in real worth; and it may

XV.

be concluded, that if they were not blind-
ed by some prevailing paflion, they would
discern and adopt it as such.

It is the peculiar effe~t of virtue, to

make a man's chief happiness arise from
himself and his own condua. A bad
man is wholly the creature of the world.
lie hangs upon its favour, lives by its
smiles, and is happy or miserable, in pro-
portion to his success. But to a virtuous
man, success in worldly undertakings is
but a secondary objet. To discharge his
own part with integrity and honour, is
his chief aim. If he has done properly
what was incumbent on him to do, his
.mind is at reft; to Providence he leaves
the event. His witness is in heaven, and
his record is on high. Satisfied with the
approbation of God, and the testimony
of a good conscience, he enjoys himself,
and despises the triumphs of guilt. In
proportion as such manly principles rule
your heart, you will become independent
of the world; and will forbear complaino

ing

ing of its discouragements. It is the im- SEX RM.
perfetion of your virtue, which occasions
you to be weary in well-doing. It is be-
cause your hearts remain divided between
God and the world, that you are so often
discontented; partly wishing to discharge
your duty, and partly seeking your happi-
ness from somewhat that is repugnant to
your duty. Study to be more consistent in
principle, and more uniform in practice,
and your peace will be more unbroken.

Though virtue may appear at first fight

to contrat the bounds of enjoyment, you
will find, upon refletion, that, in truth,
it enlarges them. If it restrains the excess
of some pleasures, it favours and encreafes
others. It precludes you from none, but
such as are either fantastic and imaginary,
or pernicious and destructive. Whatever
is truly valuable in human enjoyment, it
allows to a good man, no less than to
others. It not only allows him such plea-
fures, but heightens them, by that grateful
reliih which a good conscience gives to
every pleasure. It not only heightens

G g 3 them,

SE R

x them, but adds to them, also, the pecu-
-.s liar fatisfaiions which flow from virtuous

sentiments, from devout affedions, and
religious hopes. On how much worse
terms is the finner placed, in the midst of
his boafred grrtifications? 1His portion is
confined to this world. His good things
are all of one fort only; he has neitlhe
knowledge, nor relifli, of any thing be-
yond them. His cnjoyment, therefore,
refts on a much nar'oo er basis, than tha'.
of the servants of God. Enlarge, as much
as you ple:laf, the circle of worldly grati--
ficatio:s ; yet, if nothing of the mind and
the heai,, nothing of a rcfi'ncd and moral
nature, enter into that circie, and vary tht:
enjoyment, languor and weariness soon
succeed. Among whiom do you hear more
?eevifn expreslions of discontent, or more
frequent complaints of low Tpirits, than
among the pro.e.red votaries of worldly
pleasure ?

Vice and virtue, in thcir progrcfs, as

in every other refpel,, hold an oppolte
course. The bcginnings of vice are el-

..~~~~~~~~~~u~
. ,b

uiclng. The first feps of worldly advance- s E RM.
ment, are flattering and pleasing. But the xv.
continuance of success blunts enjoyment,
and flattens desire. Whereas the begin-
nings of virtue are laborious. But, by
perleverance, its labours diminish, and
its pleasures increase. As it ripens into
confirmed habit, it becomes both smoother
in practice, and more complete in its re-
ward. In a worldly life, the termination
of our hopes always meets our view. TWe
fee a boundary before us, beyond which
we cannot reach. But the profpeas of
virtue are growing and endless. 'he righ-
teolus Jall hold on in his way; and he
that atth clean halds, J73all wanx Jfronger
and Jlrolnge. The path of the jij is as the
JPininlg light, that Jhineth more and more

luto the se,,feyL dlu'. This brings me to
confider,

IV. THE assured hope, which good

nen enjoy, of a full reward at last. I
have endeavoured, by several confidera-
tions, to correct your impatience under

Gg4 the

SER . the present discouragements of virtue. I

- have Pnown many high advantages, which

it already pofliffes. But now, laying
all thcfe aside; supposing virtue to havc
brought you no advantage, but to have
only engaged you in perpetual struggles
with an evil world; the Text suggests
what is fuficient to aner every ob-
jecqion, and to silence every complaint;
In due feafonl yolu Jaill rcL7e if jeu1' flint
not. It is not a loose encouragement, or
a dubious hope, which is held forth to
us. A direcr and explicit declaration is
made by the Spirit of God, that piety
and virtue, how discouraged bfever, or
oppressed, they may be for a while, shall
not be frustrated of their reward; but
that in duze afiefz, when the period which
is fixed by the Divine decree shall come,
all who have not been wcary in well-
doing, though they may have sown in
tears, 7iall reap il jol. As this great prin-
ciple of faith is so essential to our present
argument, and is indeed the foundation
of all religion, it will be proper that we

now

now take a view of the grounds on which s E R M.
it refis. By fixing our attention, both oin XV.
the proofs which reason suggests, and on
the discoveries which revelation has made,
of a fate of future retribution, we shall
take an effectual method of confirming our
adherence to religion, and of baffling those
temptations which might lead us to be weary
iln well-doilg.

THE first, and most obvious prefump-

tion, which reason affords in behalf of
future rewards to the righteous, arises
from the imperfect distribution of good
and evil in our present state. Notwith-
flanding what I have advanced concern-
ing the pleasures and advantages of vir-
tue, it cannot be denied, that the happi-
ness of good men is often left incomplete.
The vicious possess advantages, to which
they have no right; while the confcien-
tious susser for the fake of virtue, and
groan under distresses which they have
not merited from the world. Indeed,
were the distribution of good and evil, in

this

SE R M. this life, altogether promiscuous; could

XV .
XVm,* it be said, with truth, that the moral

condition of men had no influence what-
ever upon their happiness or misery; I
admit, that from such a state of things,
no presumption would arise of any fu-
ture retribution being intended. They
who delight to aggravate the miseries of
life, and the diftrefies of virtue, do no
service to the argument in behalf of Pro-
vidence. For, if total disorder be found
to prevail now, suspicions may, too juftr
ly, arise, of its prevailing for ever. If
he who rules the universe, entirely ne-
gleds virtue here, the probability muff
be small, of his rewarding it hereafter.
But this is far from being the true slate
of the fad. What human life presents to
the view of an impartial observer, is by
no means a scene of entire confusion;
but a slate of order, begun and carried
on a certain length. Virtue is so far
from being neglected by the Governour
of the world, that from many evident
marks it appears to be a chief obje&t cf

hisv

Iis care. In the constitution of human SER M.

xv.

nature, a foundation is laid, for comfort .-
to the righteous, and for 'internal punifhl
ment to the wicked. Throughout the
course of Divine government, tendencies
towards the happinefsof the one, and the.
misery of the other, confrantly appear.
They are so conspicuous, as not to have
cfcapcd the notice of the rudest nations.
Over the whole earth, they have diffused'
the belief, that Providence is propitious to
virtue, and averse to guilt. Yet these
tendencies are, sometimes, disappointed of
their effet; and that which Providence
vilibly favours, is left, at preient, without an
adequate reward.

From such an imperife distribution of

happiness, what are we to conclude, but
that this system is the beginning, not the
whole of things; the opening only of a
more extensive plan, whose confumrnation
reaches into a future world ? If God has
;areadyfi't bis throne for ;jdgment; if he has
visibly beglun to reward and to punilf, ini

some.
,- ,5,

S ERM. some degree on earth, he cannot mean to
t- -.leave the exercise of government incom-

plete. Having laid a foundation of a
great and noble firucture, he will in due
time rear it up to perfecion. The unfi-
niihed parts of the fabric evidently show,
that a future building is intended. All his
other works are conflruded according to
the most full and exa& proportion. In the
natural world, nothing is deficient, nothing
redundant. It is in the moral world, only,
that we discover irregularity and dcfec.
It falls fiort of that order and perfection
which appear in the reft of the creation. It
exhibits not, in its present slate, the fame
features of complete wisdom, justice, or
goodness. But can we believe, that, under
the government of the Supreme Being, those
apparent disorders shall not be rectified at
the last? Or, that from his condu&, towards
his rational creatures, the chief of his works,
the ible objection against his perfetion shall
be allowed to rife, and shall continue unre-
moved for ever ?

9 On

On the supposition of future rewards SEXRIM.

and punishments, a fatifying account -
can be given, of all the disorders which
at present take place on earth. Chriftia-
nity explains their origin, and traces
them to their issue. Man, fallen from
his primeval felicity, is now undergoing
probation and discipline for his final
state. Divine justice remains, for a sea-
son, concealed; and allows men to act
their parts with freedom on this theatre,
that their charaaers may be formed and
ascertained. Amidst discouragements and
afflictions, the righteous give proof of
their fidelity, and acquire the habits of
virtue. But, if you suppose the events
of this life to have no reference to an-
other, the whole state of man becomes
not only inexplicable, but contradictory
and inconsistent. The powers of the in-
feriour animals are perfectly suited to
their station. They know nothing higher
than their present condition. In gratify-
ing their appetites, they fulfil their defli-
ny, and pass away. Aan, alone, comes

forth

S E R M. forth to aa a part, which carries no

XV.
*1-y meaning, and tends to no end. Endowed

with capacities, which extend far beyond
his present sphere; fitted by his rational
nature, for running the race of immorta-
lity, he is flopped short in the very en-
trance of his course. He squanders his
aacivity on pursuits, which he discerns to
be vain. He languifies for knowledge,
which is placed beyond his reach. He
thirsts after a happiness, which he is
doomed never to enjoy. He fees, and
laments the difafiers of his state; and
yet, upon this supposition, can find no-
thing to remedy them.-Has the eteinal
God any pleasure in sporting himself
with such a scene of misery and folly, as
this life, if it had no connexion with an-
other, muff exhibit to his eye ? Did he
call into existence this magnificent uni-
verse, adorn it with so much beauty and
lilendour, and surround it with those
glorious luminaries which we behold in
the heavens, only that some generations
of mortal men might arise to behold these

wonders.:

wonders, and then disappear for ever? SEXRM
How unsuitable, in this cafe, were the i
habitation to the wretched inhabitant!
How inconsistent the commencement of
his being, and the mighty preparation cf
his powers and faculties, with his deft)i-
cable end ! How contraditory, in fine,
were every thing which concerns the state
-of man, to the wisdom and perfeEion of his
Maker!

Throughout all ages, and among all

nations, the persuasion of a future life
has prevailed. It sprung not from the
refinements of science, or the fpecuiations
oi philosophy ; but from a deeper and
fironger root, the natural sentiments of
the human heart. Hence it is common
to the philosopher and the savage; and
is found in the most barbarous, as well
as in the most civilized regions. Even
the belief of the being of a God, is not
more general on the earth, than the be-
lief of immortality. Dark, indeed, and
confused, were the notions which men
entertained concerning a future Rate.

Yet

SERM. Yet still, in that. fate, they looked for

XV.
,_, retribution, both to the good and the

bad; and in the perfecion of such plea-
fures, as they knew best and valued most
highly, they placed the rewards of the vir-
tuous. So universal a consent seems plain-
ly to indicate, an original determination
given to the foul by its Creator. It flows
this great truth to be native and congenial
to man.

When we look into our own brcafts,

we find various anticipations and pre-
fages of future existence. Most of our
great and high passions extend beyond
the limits of this life. The ambitious
and the iJlf-denied, the great, the good,
and the vicked, all take interest, in what
is to happen after they shall have left the
earth. That paflion for fame, which in-
spires so much of the aaivity of man-
kind, plainly is animated by the perfua-
sion, that consciousness is to survive the
dissolution of the body. The virtuous
are supported by the hope, the guilty
tormented with the dread, of what is to

take

take place after death. As death approaches, s ER M.

XV.

the hopes of the one, and the fears of the
other, are found to redouble. The oiul,
when issuing hence, seems more clearly to
discern its future abode. All the operations
of conscience, proceed upon the belief of
immortality. The whole moral conduct of
men refers to it. All legislators have sup-
posed it. All religions are built upon it.
It is so essential to the order of focicty, that
were it erased, human laws would prove
ineffectual restraints from evil, and a de-
iuge of crimes and miseries would overflow
the earth. To suppose this universal and
powerful belief to be without foundation
*In truth, is to suppose, that a principle of
delusion was interwoven with the nature of
man; is to suppose, that his Creator was
reduced to the necessity of impresSing his
heart with a falsehood, in order to make
him answer the purposes of his being.

BUT though these arguments be strong,

yet all arguments are liable to objection.
Perhaps this general belief, of which I have

VOL. I. Hi spoken,

S E R M. poken, has been owing to inclination and
- ---' desire, more than to evidence. Perhaps, in

our reaibnings on this subjet: from the Di-
vine perfections, we flatter ourselves with
being of more consequence, than we truly
are, in the system of the universe. Hence
the great importance of a discovery proceed-
ing from God himself, which gives full
authority to all that reason had suggested,
and places this capital truth beyond the
reach of suspicion or distrust.

The method which Christianity has ta-

ken, to convey to us the evidence of a future
Riate, highly deserves our attention. Had
the Gospel been addressed, like a system of
philosophy, solely to the understanding of
men; had it aimed only at enlightening the
studious and reflecting, it would have con-
fined itself to abftrat truth; it would
have simply informed us, that the righteous
are hereafter to be rewarded, and finners to
be puniflled. Such a declaration as that
contained in the Text, would have been
sufficient: Be not weary in well-doing, for
in dte Jcffon you f3all reap, f you faint not.

But

But the Gospel has not stopped, at barely s E R M.
announcing life and immortality to man- XV,
kind. It was calculated for popular edifi-
cation. It was intended to be the religion
not merely of the few, whose understanding
was to be informed; but of the many, also,
whose imagination was to be imprefled, and
whose passions were to be awakened, in or-
der to give the truth its due influence over
them. Upon this account it not only re-
veals the certainty of a future state, but, in
the person of the great Founder of our re-
ligion, exhibits a series of facts relating to
it; by means of which, our senses, our
imagination, and passions, all become in-
terested in this great objeL.

The refurretion of Christ from the grave

was designed to be a sensible evidence, that
death infers not a final extinction of the
living principle. He rose, in order to fllew,
that, in our name, he had conquered death,
and was become the fiJl-frliits of them that
fJeep. Nor did he only rife fiom the grave,
but, by ascending to heaven in a visible
form, before many witiciTes, gave an ocu-

H
I 2 lar

S E Ri M.. Ilr fpccilncn of the transition from this world

Xv.
,_ _, iinto the region of the blefled. The employ-

meilts which now occupy him there, arc
fully declared. As our Jre.runner' , he Iath
entered w'i/.L,; the veil. Iet, apipJears in the
prefJIIce rs God fir us. He miiilketlh peipet(al
interctcij/foiJr his teop/l. Igo, faith he, to
11,' Fahler and your Fth'., to my God and
iour God. In m Iathcr I )s hou./ are inmany
ma,/tions.r. I go to p)crepare a p/ace for jyou.
I w/ill come nagain, and receive you to myself,
that cwhere I llm, ther e j ae m be aso. The
circumstances of his coming again, are difp
tindly foretold. The founding of the lafl
trumpet, the refiurre'Eion of the dead, the
appearance of the Judge, and the solemnity
with whic hle fl'all discriminate the good
from the bad, are all lelfcribed. The very
words in whichl he fall pronounce the final
sentence, are recited in our hearing: CoGme,
ye bl/.,d oJ1 my ];ther .' inherits .ihKingdom
prep'ared f'jOr o} 'rem the fu/~ndattio of thc
worldl't. Then niall the lholy and the just be
catli .hl z , ii ,e clouds to imc the Lord' i,.i
the air. They fhail enter with him iinto

8 tthe

iae city of the living God. They ihall possess s E R t
the new earth and new heavens, wherein Xav
dwvlleth righteofiefs. GodJhpall wipe away
all tears from their eyes. They Jall behold
his face in rhigbteoziiefs, and befatfied with
his lieevfs far ever.-By recording such a
train of ftrilking circumstances and faas, the
Gospel fimniliarizes us in some measure with
a future state. By accommodating this great
discovery, in so useful a manner, to the
conceptions of men, it furniihes a strong
intrin!ic evidence of its divine origin.

TiTus, upon the whole, whether you

colnfult your reaon, or liften to the dif-
coveries of revelarion, you behold our argu-
ment confirmed; you behold a life of piety
and virtue ifluing in immortal felicity. Of
wlhat worldly pursuit can it be pronounced,
that its reward is certain ? Look every where
around you, and you fiall fee, that the race
is far from being always to the fiwft, or the
batle to the Jfrog. The most diligent, the
mos{ wife, the most accompliffed, may,
after all their labours, be disappointed in the

end

SE R M, end; and be left to fuflifr the regret, of

xv. -yJ havingfpcnt theirJ rength for nought. But

for the righteous is laid up the crown of lfe.
Their final happiness is prepared in the
eternal plan of Providence, and fccured by
the labours and filfferings of the Saviour of
the world.

Cease then, from your unjufi complaints

against virtue and religion. Leave difcon-
tent, and peevifllnefs, to worldly men. In
no period of distress, in no moment of dif-
appointment, allow yourselves to fufpe&,
that piety and integrity are fruitless. In
every state of being, they lead to happiness.
If you enjoy not at present their full rewards,
it is because the season ofrecompence is not
yet come. For, in due feJfon yolzJnll re ap.
There is a time which is proper for reward;
and there is a period which belongs to trial.
How long the one should last, and when
the other should arrive, belongs not to you
to determine. It is fixed by the wife,
though unknown, decree of the Almighty.
But, be assured, that iHe that comleth, Jlall
omec, and will not tar.;y. He filall come in

9 due

due season, to restore perfect order among S E R.
his works; to bring reft to the weary, com- '
fort to the affliaed, and just retribution to
all men. Behold, faith the faithful and true
Witness, I come quickly, and my reward is
with me. To him that overcometh, will I
give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the
1midj of t3e paradie of

e od. I will give

him the morning Jtar. I will make him a
pillar in nm tenqple. Ile fiall be clothed iin
white raiment ; and J7iall fit down with 1e,

on 7 thron0e
t :ri.

Rer. xxii. 12.--ii. 7. S,-iii. 12 5. 21.
END OF THIE FIRST \VOLvI.! E,
