/7~~~~~~~~~~~~

K/i': Q-<(J~~~

SERMONS,

HUGH BLAIR, D.D. F.R.S. Ed.
One of the MINISTERS of the HIGH CHURCH,

AND
PROFESSOR of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTRES

in the UNIVERSITY, of EDINBURGH.

VOLUME THE SECOND.
THE FIFTEENTH EDITION.

LONDON:
Printed for A. STRAHA N ; and T. CA D E L L in the Strand;

and W. CREECH, Edinburgh.

MI DCC XCII.

# THE CONTENTS.

THE
C 0 N T E N T S.

SERMO N I.
On the Importance of Order' in

Condut.
i CORINTH. xiv. 40. Let all things be

done-in order. Page I

SERMON II.

On the Government of the Heart.
PROVERBS, iv. 23. Keep thy heart with

all diligence: for out of it are the
i/ues of life. 29

S E RM ON III.

The fame Subjea continued.
PROVERBS, iv. 23. Keep thy heart with

all diligence: for out of it are the
ues of life. 54

A 2

SERMON IV.
On the Unchangeablenefs of the

Divine Nature.
JAMES, i. 17. Every good and every

perfect gft is from above, and com-
eth down from the Father of Lights,
with whom is no variableness, nei-
therJhadow of turning. Page eS

SERMON V.

On the Compaflon of Christ.
HEBREWS, iv. IS. - We haJve not an

high prieJI which cannot be torched
with the feeling of our infirmities;
but was in allpoints tempted like as
we are, yet withot fili. '17

SERMON V1.

On the Love of Praise.
JOHNi xii. 43, -For they loved the

prase of men more than the praise of
Sod. I48

SERMON VII.
On the proper Ettimate of Human

Life.
ECCLESIASTES, xii. 8. Vanity of va-

nities, faith the preacher, all is va-
nity! Page 178

SERMON VIII.

On Death.
PSALM xxiii. 4. ' Tea, thozh Iwanl

through the valley of the shadow of
death, I willfear no evil; for thou
art with me; thy rod and thy Jlaf
they colfort me. 213

SERMON IX.

On the Happiness of a Future State.
REVELAT. vii. 9. After this 1 beheld,

and, lo ! a great multitude, which no
man could nusmber, of all nations, and
1indreds, and people, and tongues,

food before the throne, and before
the Lamb, clothed with white robes,
and palms in their hands. Page 246

SERMON X.

On Candour.
1 CORlNTH .Xiii.5. Charity-thini '

eth no evil. 277

SERMON XI.

On the Charafter of Joseph.
GENESIS, xlv. 5.8. Now therefore be -

notgrieved nor angry with yourselves
that ye fold me hither; for God did
fend me before you to preserve life.-
So now it was not you that sent me
hither, but God. 309

SERMON XII.

On the Charader of Hazael.
2 KINGS, viii. 12, 13. And Hazael

said, Why weepeth my Lord? And

be answered, Because I know the evil
that thou wilt do unto the children of
Israel. 1Their lrong holds l/ thou
set on fre, and their young men wiilt
thou flay with the sword, and wilt
daJh their children, and rip up their
women with child. .nd Hazael
said, But what, is thy Jrvant a dog,
that he Jhould do this great thing ?
A4nd El/ha answered, The Lord
hath fiewed me that thou Jbalt be
king over Syria. Page 335

SERMON XIII.
On the Benefits to be derived from

the House of Mourning.
ECCLESIASTES,Vii. 2, 3,4. I is et

ter to go to the hoite of mourning,
than to go to theou of feaJling;
for that is the end of all men, and the
living will lay it to his heart. Sor-
row is better than laughter; for by
thefadnef of the countenance the heart
is made better. The heart o the wife
is in the house of mourning; but the
heart offools ix in the houie of mirth. 366

SERMON XIV.
On the divine Government of the

Passions of Men.
PSALM Ixxvi. Io. Surely the wrath

of manJhallpraife thee; the remain-
der of wrathJhalt thou refrain. Page 396

SERMON XV.
On the Importance of Religious Know-

ledge to Mankind.
ISAIAH, xi. 9. TheyJJall not hurt nor

deJfroy in all my holy mountain; for
the earth Jhall be full of the know-
ledge of the Lord, as the waters
cover thefea. 427

S E R.

# SERMON I. On the IMPORTANCE of ORDER in CONDUCT. 1 CORINTH. xiv. 40. Let all things be done — in order.

SERMON I.
On the IMPORTANCE of ORDER in

CONDUCT.

I CORINTH. xiv. 40.

Let all things be done-in order.

T% E LI G ION, like every regular and S E R M.
R well-connected system, is com- I

kLR~. posed of a variety of parts; each of
which poffefles its separate importance, and
contributes to the perfecion of the whole.
Some graces are essential to it; such as faith
and repentance, the love of God, and the
love of our neighbour; which, for that rea-

VOL. IT. B son,

SER M. son, muff be often inculcated on men.

_cf - There are other dispositions and habits,

which, though they hold not so high a rank,
yet are neceflary to the introducion and
support of the former; and therefore, in
religious exhortations, thfie also jutfly claim
a place. Of this nature is that regard to
order, method, and regularity, which the
apofl'e enjoins us in the text to carry through
the whole of life. Whether you confider
it as, in it!elf, a moral duty, or not, yet I
hope Toon to convince you that it is essential
to the proper discharge of almost all duties,
and merits, upon that account, a greater de-
gree of attention than is commonly paid to
it in a religious view.

If you look abroad into the world, you

may be satisfied at the firi't glance, that a
vicious and libertine life is always a life of
confusion. Thence it is natural to infer,
that order is friendly to religion. As the
neglea of it coincides with vice, so the
preservation of it muff affit virtue. By the
appointment of Providence, it is indifpen-
fably requisite to worldly prosperity. Thence

arises

arlfes a presumption, that it is conne°ied S E R M.
allb with 1tiiritual improvement. WhVIen . _--
you behold a man's aftairs, through ne-
gligence and miiloniuc 2, involved ill dif
order, you naturally conclude tlat his ruin
approaches. You may at the fame time
justly fuflpet, that the cainfs which aiffcr
his temporal welfare, operate also to the
prejudice of his moral interests. The apo-
file teaches us in this chapter, that Gc' is
not the author of confion z . lie is a lover
of order ; and all his works are full of order.
But where co.f/fion is, there is, its close
attendant, every evil wcor! -!-. In the fe-
quel of this discourse I ihall point out some
of those parts of conduct xvherein it is molf
material to virtue thlat order take place ; and
then fllall conclude with llev;ir, the i;:,!1
advantages which atten(l i. Allow 'me to
recommend to you, order in the condult
of your afiairs; order in the distribution of
your tilme; order in the managementc o
your fortune; order in the regulation of

' " er. ;3,. + James, iui. 16.

B 2 o.':r

SERM. your amusements; order in the arrange-

_ ment of your society. Thus let all things

be donc in order.

I. MAINTAIN order in the conduEt of

your worldly affairs, Every man, in every
tation of life, has some concerns, private,
domestic, or public, which require fuccef-
five attention; he is placed in some sphere
of aaive duty. Let the employments
which belong to that sphere be so arranged,
that each may keep its place, without just-
ling another; and that which regards the
world may not interfere with what is due
to God. In proportion to the multiplicity
of affairs, the observance of order becomes
more indispensable. But scarcely is there
any train of life so simple and uniform but
what will susser through the neglect of it.
I speak not now of suffering in point
of worldly interest. I call upon you to
attend to higher interests; to remember
that the orderly conduct of your temporal
affairs forms a great part of your duty as
Christians,

Many,

Many, indeed, can hardly be persuaded s E R M.

of this truth. A strong propensity has, in _
every age, appeared among men, to fequef-
trate religion from the commerce of the
world. Seasons of retreat and devotion
they are willing to appropriate to God.
But the world they confider as their own
province. They carry on a fort of fepa-
rate interest there. Nay, by the refpec
which, on particular occasions, they pay to
religion, they too often imagine that they
have acquired the liberty of aCing in
worldly matters, according to what plan
they chufe. How entirely do such persons
miitake the design of Christianity !-In this
world you are placed by Providence as on
a great field of trial. By the neceflities of
your nature you are called forth to differ-
ent employments. By many ties you are
conneaed with human society. From fu-
periours and inferiours, from neighbours
and equals, from friends and enemies,
demands arise, and obligations circulate
through all the ranks of life. This active
scene was contrived by the wildom of Hea-

B3 vyn,

SER M. ven, on purpose that it might bring into

I.__ exercise all the virtues of the Christian cha-

racer; your justice, candour, and veracity,
in dealing with one another; your fidelity
to every tral2, and your conscientious diif
charge of cvery office, which is committed
to you; your affieion for your friends;
your forgiveness of enemies; your charity
to the diltrelfed; your attention to the
interests of your family. It is by fulfillling
all these obligations, in proper fucceflion,
that you flev your coivesrfitio t o befitch as
becometh the gospel of ChrIt. It is thus you
make your ligbtfo to JIline bfore men, that
tz:\' mljfi'.c yvour good! 'works, aid glor'rifour
l;lats'er h'ich is in heaven. It is thus you
a.'e rendered meet Jfr t ih heriltance of the

/'iits in liigt.-But how can those various

duties be discharged by persons who are
ever in that hurry and perplexity which
disorder creates? You vwifh, perhaps, to
perform what your charateer and Rfation
require. But from the coufuiion in which
you have allowed yourselves to be involved,
you find it to have become impoflible.

MW1h at

What was neglectd to be done in its pro- s E R M.
per place, thruils itfelfforward at an incon-
venient season. A multitude of affairs
crowd upon you together. Different obli-
gations diftraFt you; and this diftraaion
is sometimes the caufc, sometimes the pre-
tence, of equally neglecaing them all, or,
at least, of sacrificing the greater to the
lesser.

Hence arise so many inconfitent charac-

ters, and such frequent inflances of partial
and divided goodness, as we find in the
world; appearances of generosity without
justice, honour without truth, probity to
men without reverence of God. He who
conducs his affairs with method and regu-
larity, meets every duty in its proper place,
and assigns it its due rank. But where there
is no order in conduc, there can be no uni-
formity in character. The natural connec-
tion and arrangement of duties are loft. If
virtue appear at all, it will only be in fits
and fiarts. The authority of conscience
may occasionally operate, when our fitua-
tion affords it room for exertion, But in

B 4 other

SERM. other circumitances of equal importance,
,,__. every moral sentiment will be overpowered

by the tumultuous bustle of worldly affairs.
Fretfulness of temper, too, will generally
charafcerize those who are negligent of or-
der. The hurry in which they live, and
the embarraffinents with which they are
surrounded, keep their spirits in perpetual
ferment. ConfliEting with difficulties which
they are unable to overcome, conscious of
their own mifconduc, but ashamed to con-
fess it, they are engaged in many a secret
firuggle; and the uneasiness which they
susser within, recoils in bad humour on all
who are around them. Hence the wretched
resources to which, at last, they are obliged
to fly, in order to quiet their cares. In
despair of being able to unravel what they
have suffered to become so perplexed, they
sometimes fink into supine indolence, some-
times throw themselves into the arms of
intemperance and loose pleasure ; by either
of which they aggravate their guilt, and ac-
celerate their ruin. To the end that order
may be maintained in your affairs, it is ne-
ceffary,

II. THAT

II. THAT you attend to order in the dif- s ER M.

tribution of your time. Time you ought to -~~
confider as a sacred trust committed to you
by God, of which you are now the depo-
fitaries, and are to render account at the
last. That portion of it which he has
allotted you, is intended partly for the con-
cerns of this world, partly for those of the
next. Let each of these occupy, in the dif-
tribution of your time, that space which
properly belongs to it. Let not the hours
of hospitality and pleasure interfere with
the discharge of your necessary affairs; and
let not what you call necessary affairs, en-
croach upon the time which is due to devo-
tion. To every thing there is afeafon, and
a time for every purpose under the heaven *.
If you delay till to-morrow what ought to
be done to-day, you over-charge the mor-
row with a burden which belongs not to it.
You load the wheels of time, and prevent
it from carrying you along smoothly. He
who every morning plans the tranfadions

Eccles, iii. I.

of

s nE R M. of the day, and follows out that plan, carries

on a thread which will guide him through
the labyrinth of the lmot busy life. The or-
derly arrangement of his time is like a ray of
light which darts itself through all his affalirs.
But where no plan is laid, where the difpo-
fal of time is surrendered merely to the
chance of incidents, all things lie huddled
together in one chaos, which admits neither
of dillribution nor review.

The firfi requisite for introducing order

into the management of time, i3 to be im-
prefied with a just sense of its value. Con-
fider well how much depends upon it, and
how fall it flies away. The bulk of men
are in nothing more capricious and incon-
iiftent than in their appretiation of time.
When they think of it as the measure of
their continuance on earth, they highly
prize it, and with the greatest anxiety seek
to lengthen it out. But when they view
it in fcparate parcels, they appear to hold it
in contempt, and squander it with incon-
fiderate profuiion. While they complain
that life is fiort, they are often wishing its

different

different periods at an end. Covetous of ER M.
every other pofleffion, of time only they are
prodigal. They allow every idle man to be
master of this property, and make every
frivolous occupation welcome that can help
them to conifume it. Among those who are
oi careless of time, it is not to be cxpected
that order mould be observed in its dlifti-
bution. But, by this fatal neglect, how
many materials of severe and lasting regret
are they laying up in store for themselves!
The time which they susser to pass away in
the midst of confilion, bitter repentance
seeks afterwards in vain to recal. What
was omitted to be done at its proper mo-
ment, arilEs to be the torment of Iome fu-
ture season. Manhood is disgraced by the
consequences of negleded youth. Old age,
opprefied by cares that belonged to a former
period, labours under a burden not its own.
At the clole of life, the dying man be-
holds with anguish that his days are iinill-
ing, when his preparation for eternity is
hardly commenced. Such are the effedts
of a disorderly waste of time, through not

attending

SERM. attending to its value. Every thing in the
v-y_^ life of such persons is misplaced. Nothing

is performed aright, from not being per-
formed in due fealbn.

But he who is orderly in the distribution

of his time, takes the proper method of
escaping those manifold evils. He is justly
said to redeem the time. By proper manage-
ment he prolongs it. He lives much in
little space; more in a few years than
others do in many. He can live to God
and his own foul, and at the fame time at-
tend to all the lawful interests of the present
world. He looks back on the past, and
provides for the future. He catches and
arrests the hours as they fly. They are
marked down for useful purposes, and their
memory remains. Whereas those hours
fleet by the man of confusion like a shadow.
His days and years are either blanks of
which he has no resemblance, or they are
filled up with such a confused and irregular
succession of unfinished tranfadions, that
though he remembers he has been busy,
yet he can give no account of the business

which

which has employed him. Of him, more s ERI A
than of any other, it may with justice be i_
pronounced, that he walketh in a vainltew;
he is diJquietcd in vain.

III. INTRODUCE order into the manage-

ment of your fortune. Whatever it be, let
the administration of it proceed with me-
thod and economy. From time to time
examine your situation; and proportion
your expence to your growing or diminiih-
ing revenue. Provide what is necessary,
before you indulge in what is superfluous.
Study to do justice to all with whom you
deal, before you affect the praise of libera-
lity. In a word, fix such a plan of living
as you find that your circumstances will
fairly admit, and adhere to it invariably
against every temptation to improper ex-
cess.

No admonition refpeding morals is more

necessary than this to the age in which we
live; an age manifestly distinguished by a
propensity to thoughtless profusion; where-
in all the different ranks of men are obferv-

ed

S E R M. ed to press with forward vanity on those

who are above them ; to vie with their fu-
periours in every mode of luxury and often-
tation ; and to fceek no farther argument for
justifying extravagance, thal the fifhlon of
the times, and the iUppolCd neceflity of
living like others around them. This turn
of mind beects contempt for ibber and or-
derly plans of life. It overthrows all re-
gard to domestic concerns and duties. It
puflhes men on to hazardous and visionary
schemes of gain ; and unfortunately unites
the two extremes, of grasping with rapaci-
oufnefs, and of squandering with profusion.
In the midst of such disorder, no prosperity
can be of long continuance. While con-
fusion grows upon men's affairs, and pro-
digality at the fame time waftes their sub-
fiance, poverty makes its advances like an
arnmed man. They tremble at the view of
the approaching evil; but have loft the
force of mind to make provision against it.
Accustomed to move in a round of society
and pleasures disproportioned to their con-
dition, they are unable to break through

6 the

the enclhantments of habit; and with their S ER M.
eyes open fink into the gulph which is be-
fore them. Poverty enforces dependlance;
and dependance increafcs corruption. Ne-
cefity first betrays them into mean com-
pliances; next, impels them to open crimes;
and beginning with ostentation and extra-
vagance, they end in infamy and guilt.
Such are the confcquences of negleaing
order in our woridly circumnfanccs. Such
is the circle in which the pfnt:ic and the
liffolute daily run.- To what cause, so
much as to the want of order, can we attri-
bute those scenes of diftre!is which ib fre-
quently excite our pity; famnilies that once
were flouriflhing reduced to ruin ; and the
melancholy widow and negleced orphan
thrown forth, friendlels, upon the world ?
What cause has been more fruitful in en-
gendering those atrocious crimes iwhich fill
society with disquiet aud terrour; in training
the gamester to fraud,the robber to violence,
and even the affailin to blood ?

Be assured, then, that order, fiugality,
and oconomy, are the necessary supports of

every

SERM. every personal and private virtue. Hoow
I.- _- humble soever these qualities may appear to

some, they are, nevertheless, the basis on
which liberty, independence, and true ho-
nour, mufc rife. He who has the steadiness
to arrange his affairs with method and re-
gularity, and to conduct his train of life
agreeably to his circumstances, can be maf-
ter of himself in every situation into which
he may be thrown. He is under no necef-
fity to flatter or to lie, to stoop to what is
mean, or to commit what is criminal. But
he who wants that firmness of mind which
the observance of order requires, is held in
bondage to the world; he can neither aC
his part with courage as a man, nor with
fidelity as a Christian. From the moment
you have allowed yourselves to pass the line
of oeconomy, and to live beyond your for-
tune, you have entered on the path of
danger. Precipices surround you on all
fides. Every ftep which you take may
lead to mischiefs, that, as yet, lie hidden;
and to crimes that will end in your ever-
lasting perdition.

Iz IV. Oi-

IV. OBSERVE order in your amusements; s R M.

that is, allow them no more than their pro-
per place; study to keep them within due
bounds; mingle them in a temperate fuc-
cession with serious duties, and the higher
business of life. Human life cannot pro-
ceed to advantage without iome measure of
relaxation and entertainment. We require
relief from care. We are not formed for a
perpetual stretch of serious thought. By
too intense and continued application, our
feeble powers would soon be worn out. At
the fame time, from our propentity to ease
and pleasure, amusement proves, among all
ranks of men, the most dangerous foe to
order. For it tends incessantly to usurp and
encroach, to widen its territories, to thrust
itself into the place of more important
concerns, and thereby to diflurb and coun-
terat the natural course of things. One
frivolous amusement indulged out ofleafon,
will often carry perplexity arid confusion
through a long succession of affairs.

Amusements, therefore, though they be
of an innocent kind, require steady go-

VoL. II. C vernment,

S E R M. vernment, to keep them within a due and

limited province. But such as are of an
irregular and vicious nature, are not to be
governed, but to be banished from every
orderly society. As soon as a man seeks
his happiness from the gaming-table, the
midnight revel, and the other haunts of li-
centioufnefs, confusion seizes upon him as
its own. There will no longer be order in
his family, nor order in his affairs, nor or-
der in his time. The most important con-
cerns of life are abandoned. Even the order
of nature is by such persons inverted; night
is changed into day, and day into night.
Character, honour, and interest itself, are
trampled under foot. You may with cer-
tainty prognosticate the ruin of these men
to be just at hand. Disorder, arisen to its
height, has nearly accompliihed its work.
The spots of death are upon them. Let
every one who would escape the peftilen-
tial contagion fly with haste from their
company.

V. Ppr.-

V. PRESERVE order in the arrangement s E R M.

of your society; that is, entangle not your- . .
selves in a perpetual and promiscuous crowd;
feleat with prudence and propriety those
with whom you chute to aflociate; let
company and retreat succeed each other
at measured intervals. There can be no or-
der in his life who allots not a due flhare of
his time to retirement and reflecion. He
can neither prudently arrange his temporal
affairs, nor properly attend to his spiritual
interefis. He lives not to himself, but to
the world. By continual dissipation, he is
rendered giddy and thoughtless. He un-
avoidably contracts from the world that
spirit of disorder and confusion which is so
prevalent in it.

It is not a fuflicient preservative againif

tlhis evil, that the circles of society in which
you are engaged are not of a libertine and
vicious kind. If they withdraw you from
that attention to yourselves, and your do-
meflic concerns, which becomes a good
man, they are subversive of order, and
inconfiletnt with duty. What is innocent

C2 il

S E R M. in itself, degenerates into guilt from being

, carried to excess; an idle, trifling society is

near a-kin to such as is corrupting: One
of the first principles of order is, to learn to
be happy at home. It is in domestic re-
treat that every wile and virtuous man finds
his chief fatisfation. It is there he forms
the plans which regulate his public conduct.
He who knows not how to enjoy himself
when alone, can never be long happy abroad.
To this vacant mind, company may afford
a temporary relief; but when forced to re-
turn to himself, he will be so much more
oppressed and languid. Whereas, by a due
mixture of public and private life, we keep
free from the snares of both, and enjoy each
to greater advantage.

W;iHlN .we reiecw those different parts of

behaviour to which I have shewn that order
is essential, it must necessarily occur to you,
that they are all mutually connected, and
h':ng upon each other. Throughout your
,ffiairs, your time, your expence, your
ainufcnments, your focietv, the principle of

order

order muff be equally carried, if you ex- s I R M.
pe& to reap any of its happy fruits. For
if into any one of those great departments
of life you susser disorder to enter, it will
spread through all the reft. In vain, for
instance, you purpose to be orderly in the
condua of your affairs, if you be irregular
in the distribution of your time. In vain
you attempt to regulate your expence, if
into your amusements, or your society, dif-
order has crept. You have admitted a
principle of confusion which will defeat all
your plans; and perplex and entangle what
you fought to arrange. Uniformity is above
all things necessary to order. If you desire
that any thing should proceed according to
method and rule, let all things, as the text
exhorts, be done in order.

I must also admonish you, that in finall

as well as in great affairs, a due regard to
order is requisite. I mean not that you
ought to look on those minute attentions
which are apt to occupy frivolous minds,
as conneced either with virtue or wisdom.
B.ut I exhort you to remember, that dif-

C 3 order,

SERM. order, like other immoralities, frequently

takes rife from inconsiderable beginnings.
They who, in the lesser tranfaaions of life,
are totally negligent of rule, will be in ha-
zard of extending that negligence, by de-
grees, to such affairs and duties as will ren-
der them criminal. Remissness grows on
all who study not to guard againft.it; and
it is only by frequent exercise that the ha-
bits of order and punCtuality can be
thoroughly confirmed.

FROMv what has been said, the great im-

portance of this principle to moral and reli-
gious condua must already be evident.
Let us, however, conclude, with taking a
summary view of the advantages which
attend it.

First, the observance of order serves to

correac that negligence which makes you
omit some duties, and that hurry and pre-
cipitancy which make you perform others
imperfealy. Your attention is thereby di-
reeted to its proper objeds. You follow the
straight path which Providence has pointed

3 out

out to man ; in the course of which all the s E R M.
different bulinefs of life presents itself regu- --
larly to him on every fide. God and man,
time and eternity, possess their proper fta-
tions, arise in fucceflion to his view, and
attract his care. Whereas he who runs on
in a disorderly course, speedily involves
himself in a labyrinth, where he is fur-
rounded with intricacy and darkness. The
crooked paths into which he strikes, turn
him aside from the proper line of human
pursuit; hide from his fight the objects
which he ought chiefly to regard, and bring
others under his view, which serve no pur-
pose but to ditraCt and mislead him.

Next, by attending to order, you avoid

idleness, that most fruitful source of crimes
and evils. Acting upon a plan, meeting
every thing in its own place, you constantly
find innocent and useful employment for
time. You are never at a loss how to dif-
pose of your hours, or to fill up life agree-
ably. In the course of human action, there
are two extremes equally dangerous to vir-
tue ; the multiplicity of affairs, and the

C 4- total

SERM. total want of them. The man of order

1.~ stands in the middle between these two

extremes, and suffers from neither. He is
occupied, but not oppreifed. Whereas the
disorderly, overloading one part of time,
and leaving another vacant, are at one
period overwhelmed with business, and at
another, either idle through want of em-
ployment, or indolent through perplexity.
Those seasons of indolence and idleness,
which recur so often in their life, are their
most dangerous moments. The mind, un-
happy in its situation, and clinging to every
object which can occupy or amuse it, is
then apteft to throw itself into the arms of
every vice and every folly.

Farther, by the preservation of order,

you check inconstancy and levity. Fickle
by nature is the human heart. It is fond
of change; and perpetually tends to start
aside from the straight line of condut.
Hence arifcs the propriety of bringing our-
ielves under fubjcction to method and
rule ; which, though at first it may prove
confraining, yet by degrees, and from the ex-

per;cnce

perience of its happy effects, becomes na- s E RM.
tural and agreeable. It rectifies those irre-
gularities of temper and manners to which
we give the name of caprice; and which
are distinguishing charaderiftics of a difor-
derly mind. It is the parent of steadiness
of condudt. It forms consistency of cha-
racer. It is the ground of all the con-
fidence we repose in one another. For, the
disorderly we know not where to find. In
him only can we place any trust who is
uniform and regular; who lives by prin-
ciple, not by humour; who ads upon a
plan, and not by desultory motions.

The advantages of order hitherto men-

tioned belong to reditude of conduCt.
Confider also how important it is to your
felf-enjoyment and felicity. Order is the
source of peace; and peace is the highest
of all temporal bleflings. Order is indeed
the only region in which tranquillity dwclls.
The very mention of confusion imports
diflurbance and vexation. Is it poflible
for that man to be happy, who cannolic look
into the state of his affairs, or the tenor of

10 his

SE R M. his conduct, without discerning all to be
*i- _j embroiled; who is either in the midst of

remorse for what he has negleetcd to do,
or in the midst of hurry to overtake what
he finds, too late, was necessary to have
been done ? Such as live according to or-
der may be compared to the celestial bodies
which move in regular courses, and by
fiated laws; whose influence is beneficent;
whose operations are quiet and tranquil.
The disorderly resemble those tumultuous
elements on earth, which, by sudden and
violent irruptions, disturb the course of
nature. By mifianagement of affairs, by
excess in expence, by irregularity in the
indulgence of company and amusement,
they are perpetually creating maleftation
both to thenfelves and others. They de-
part from their road to seek pleasure; and
inrfead of it, they every where raise up
sorrows. Being always found out of their
proper place, they of courle interfere and
jar with others. The disorders which they
raise never fail to spread beyond their own
line, and to involve many in confusion

and

and distress; whence they necessarily be- SER M.
come the authors of tumult and contention, ,
of discord and enmity. Wherlas order is
the foundation of union. It allows every
man to carry on his own affairs without
disturbing his neighbour. It is the golden
chain, which holds together the societies of
men in frienldflip and peace.

In fine, the man of order is conneted

with all the higher powers and principles
in the universe. He is the follower of God.
He walks with him, and aas upon his plan.
His characer is formed on the spirit which
religion breathes. For religion in general,
and the religion of Christ in particular, may
be called the great discipline of order. To
walk Jiafll, and to w/alk dijrderly, are
Iynonymous terms ifn Scripture. From
Jfich as walk dlIfrdcrly we are commanded,
in the name bof the Lord Jefi's Chrifl, to
withdraw ouef'lvcs 'i'. The kingdom of
Satan is the reign of disorder and darkneSs.
To restore order among the works of God,

* Thicif. iii. 6.

was

S E R M. was the end for which the Son of God de-

l. ffcended to the earth. He requires order to

be observed in his church. His undertak-
ing is to be consummated in that perfeC
order which he shall introduce at the last
day. In the new earth and the new heavens,
undilturbed order shall for ever prevail
among the f/irits of the jii made perfca ;
and whatever farther preparation may be
requisite for our being admitted to join their
society, it is certain that we {hall never {hare
in it, unless we make it now our study to
do all things decently, and in order.

# SERMON II. On the GOVERNMENT of the HEART. PROVERBS, iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out of it are the issues of life.

[ 29

SERMON II,
On the GOVERNMENT of the HEART.

PROVERBS, iv. 23.
Keep thy ceart with all diligence: for out of

it arc the #ies of life.
AMONG the many wife counsels given SE R M.

by this inspired writer, there is none

which deserves greater regard than that
contained in the text. Its importance,
however, is too seldom perceived by the
generality of men. They are apt to con-
fider the regulation of external conduc as
the chief object of religion. If they can
ac their part with decency, and maintain
a fair character, they conceive their duty to
be fulfilled. What passes in the mean time
within their mind, they suppose to be of no

great

S E R M. great consequence, either to themselves, or

to the world. In opposition to this dan-
gerous plan of morality, the wife man ex-
horts us to keep the heart; that is, to attend
not only to our acions, but to our thoughts
and desires; and keep the heart with all
diligence, that is, with sedulous and unre-
mitting care; for which he assigns this
reason, that, out of the heart are the jiies
of lic.-In difcourling on this subjed I
propose to confider, feparatcly, the govern-
ment of the thoughts, of the passions, and
of the temper. But before entering on any
of these, let us begin with enquiring, in
what sense the !ies of lfe are said to be out
of'the heart ; that we may discern the force
of the argument which the text suggests, to
recommend this great duty of keeping the
heart.

The iffes of lfe are justly said to be out

of the heart, because the state of the heart
is what determines our moral character,
and what forms our chief happiness or
misery.

First,

Firlt, It is the state of the heart which s F R M.

determines our moral character. The te-
nor of our acions will always correspond
to the dispositions that prevail within.
To dissemble, or to fupprefsthem, is a fruit-
less attempt. In spite of our efforts, they
will perpetually break forth in our beha-
viour. On whatever fide the weight of
inclination hangs, it will draw the pracice
after it. In vain therefore you study to
preserve your hands clean, unless you re-
iblve, at the fame time, to keep your heart
pure. Make the tree good, as our Saviour
directs, uand then its fruits will begood alo.
For out of the heartt proceed not only evil
thoulghts, but murders, adulteri.r, fornica-
tions, theft, fafei' witness, blqlahemics . If
that fountain be once poisoned, you can
never expect that salubrious fireams will
flow from it. Throughout the whole of
their course, they will carry the taint of the
parent spring.

But it is not merely from its influence on
external action that the importance of the

' Matth. xv. 18.

heart

SE RM. heart to our moral character arises. Inde.
'-w-..~ pcndent of all action, it is, in truth, the

slate of the heart itself which forms our
character in the fight of God. With our
.fellow-creatures, actions must ever hold the
chief rank; because, by these only we can
judge of one another; by these we effect
each other's welfare; and therefore to these
alone the regulation of human law extends.
But in the eye of that Supreme Being, to
whom our whole internal frame is uncover-
ed, dispositions hold the place of aCtions;
and it is not so much what we perform, as
the motive which moves us to perform-
ance, that constitutes us good or evil in
his fight. Even among men, the mora-
lity of aations is estimated by the principle
from which they are judged to proceed;
and such as the principle is, such is the
man accounted to be. One, for instance,
may spend much of his fortune in charita-
ble ations; and yet, if he is believed to be
.influenced by mere ostentation, he is deem-
-ed not charitable, but vain. He may la-
bour unweariedly to serve the public; but

if

if he is prompted by the desire of rising S E R M.
into power, he is held not public spirited, .
but ambitious: And if he bestows a bene-
fit, purely that he may receive a greater in
return, no man would reckon him gene-
rous, but felfilh and interested. If reason
thus clearly teaches us to estimate the value
of actions by the dispositions which give
them birth, it is an obvious conclusion, that,
according to those dispositions, we are all
ranked and classed by him who feeth into
every heart. The rectification of our prin-
ciples of action is the primary objet of
religious discipline ; and, in proportion as
this is more or less advanced, we are more
or less religious. Accordingly, the rege-
neration of the heart is every where repre-
sented in the Gospel as the molt essential
requisite in the character of a Chrifilan.

SECONDLY, The slate of the heart not

only determines our moral character, but
forms our principal happiness or misery.
External situations of fortune are no far-
ther of consequence, than as they operate on

VOL. II. D the

SE R M. the heart; and their operation there is far

'__, from correi)oonding to the degree of world-

ly prosperity or advcrlity. If, from any
internal cause, a man's peace of mind be
diflurbed, in vain you load him with all
the honours or riches which the world can
bellowy. They remain without, like things
at a difiance from him. They reach not
the bfurce of enjoyment. Dilcompofed
thoughts, agitated paflions, and a ruffled
temper, poilbr evcry ingredient of plea-
sure which the world holds out; and over-
cafl every objea which presents itself, with
a melancholy olcom. In order to acquire
a capacity of happiness, it muff be our first
fludy to reLify such inward disorders.
WVhatever dilifipline tends to accomplifil
this purpose, is of greater importance to
man, than the acquisition of the advantages
cf fortune. Thlcre are precarious, and
doubtful in their cf.cct; internal tranquil-
lity is a ce;tain good. Thele are only
rsmeans; but that is the end. These are no
more than iiflrumellts of satisfaCtion; that,
is satisfaction itfcif.

Justly

Justly it is said by the Wife Man, that be s E R M.

who hath no rule over hisJ pirit, is like a city .
that is broken down and without wal/ls. All
is wafle ; all is in disorder and ruins within
him. He poffefles no defence againfl dan-
gers of any fort. He lies open to every
infurredion of ill-humour, and every
invasion of distress. Whereas he who is
employed in regulating his mind, is making
provision against all the accidents of life.
He is erecting a fortress into -which, in the
day of danger, he can retreat with safety.
And hence, amidst those endeavours to fe-
cure happiness which incessantly employ
the life of man, the careful regulation, or
the improvident neglect of the inward
frame, forms the chief diftindion between
wisdom and folly.

THUS it appears with how much pro-

priety the ijfues of life are said to be out of
the heart. Here rife those great springs of
human conduc whence the main currents

* PrV. .
xxv. 28.

D1 flow

S E R M. flow of our virtue, or our vice; of our hlip

_
- piness, or our misery. Besides this power-,

ful argument for keeping the heart Scith all
diligence, I must mention another import-
ant consideration taken from the present
state of human nature. Think what your
heart now is, and what tmuf be the confe-
quence of remitting your vigilance in watch-
ing over it. With too much jutice it is
said in scripture, to be deceitful above all
things, .lnd'dfperately weicked. Its bias of
innate corruption gives it a perpetual ten-
dency downwards into vice and disorder.
To direl and impel it upwards, requires a
conPfant effort. Experience may convince
you, that almost every desire has a propen-
fity to wander into an improper direcion;
that every pairon tends to excess; and that
around your imagination there perpetually
crowds a whole swarm of vain and cor-
rupting thoughts. After all the care that
can be bestowed by the best men on the
regulation of the heart, it frequently bas-
fles their efforts to keep it under proper
discipline. Into what universal tumult

then

then must it rife, if no vigilance be em- SE R M.
ployed, and no government be exercised
over it ? Inattention and remiflhefs is all
that the great adversary of mankind de-
fires, in order to gain ful advantage.
While you Jeep, he Jows his tares in the
field. The house which he finds vacant
and unguarded, he prclently garnl/jes zw'itb
evilfpirits.

Add to this, that the human temper is

to be confidered as a system, the parts of
which have a mutual dependence on each
other. Introduce disorder into any one
part, and you derange the whole. Suffer
but one paflion to go out of its place, or
to acquire an unnatural force, and presently
the balance of the foul will be broken; its
powers will jar among themselves, and their
operations become difcordant.-Keep thy
heart, therefore, with all diligence; for all
thy diligence is here required. And though
thine own keeping alone will not avail,
unless the assistance of a higher power con-
cur, yet of this be well assured, that no
aid from heaven is to be expected, if thou

D 3 ihalt

s E R M. flalt negleet to exert thyself in performing

the part afligned thee.

HAVING now shewn the importance of

exercising government over the heart, I
proceed to confider more particularly in
what the government consists, as it re-
fpets the thoughts, the passions, and the
temper.

I begin with the thoughts, which are the

prime movers of the whole human conduat.
All that makes a figure on the great theatre
of the world, the employments of the busy,
the enterprises of the ambitious, and the
exploits of the warlike, the virtues which
form the happiness, and the crimes which
occasion the misery of mankind, originate
in that silent and secret recess of thought
which is hidden from every human eye.
The secrecy and silence which reign there,
favour the prejudice entertained by too
many, that thought is exempted from all
controul. Passions, they perhaps admit,
require government and restraint, because
they are violent emotions, and disturb so-

12 ciety.

ciety. But with their thoughts, they plead, s E R Ivl.
no one is concerned. By thefc, as long as ,--
they remain in their bosom;, no offence can
be given, and no injury committed. To
enjoy unrestrained the full range of imagi-
nation, appears to them the native right
and privilege of man.

Had they to do with none but their

fellow-creatures, such reasoning might be
specious. But they ought to remember,
that in the fight of the Supreme Being,
thoughts bear the charater of good or evil,
as much as afions; and that they are, in
especial manner, the fubjeds of divine ju-
rifdidion, because they are cognizable at
no other tribunal. The moral regulation
of our thoughts, is the particular tcft of our
reverence for God. If we restrain our pas-
sions from breaking forth into open difor-
ders, while we abandon our imagination
in secret to corruption, we show that virtue
refts with us upon regard to men; and
that however we may act a part in public
with propriety, there is before our eyes
no fear of that God who fiearchctb the

D 4 heart.

SER M. heart, and requiretb truth in the inward

I'.
- ,_ parts.

But, even abftraaing from this awful

consideration, the government of our
thoughts must appear to be of high con-
sequence, from their direc influence on
condud. It is plain, that thought gives the
first impulse to every principle of acion.
Acions are, in truth, no other than thoughts
ripened into consistency and substance. So
certain is this, that to judge with precision
of the character of any man, and to foretell
with confidence what part he will ad, no
more were requisite, than to be rendered
capable of viewing the current of thought
which passes most frequently within him.
Though by such a method we have no ac-
cess to judge of one another, yet thus it is
always in our power to judge of ourselves.
Each of us, by impartially scrutinizing his
indulged and favourite thoughts, may dif-
cover the whole secret of his real character.
This consideration alone is sufficient to
show, of what importance the government
of thought is to the keeping of the heart.

BUT,

BUT, supposing us convinced of its im- SERM.

portance, a question may arise, How far it __
is within our power, and in what degree
thoughts are fubje& to the command of the
will ? It is plain that they are not always
the offspring of choice. Often they are in-
evitably imprefled upon the mind by fur-
rounding objets. Often they flart up, as
of themselves, without any principle of in-
trodution which we are able to trace. t's
the wind blowthb where it li/teth, and thou
canJt not tell whence it comretb, nor whlither
it goeth, equally rapid in its transitions, and
inscrutable in its progress, is the course of
thought. Moving along a train of connec-
tions which are too delicate for our ob-
servation, it defeats all endeavours either to
explore or to flop its path. Hence vain
and fantastic imaginations sometimes break
in upon the most fettled attention, and dil-
turb even the devout exercises of pious
minds. Instances of this fort mutt be placed
to the account of human fiailty. They are
misfortunes to be deplored, rather than
crimes to be condemned; and our gracious

Creator,

S E R M. Creator, who knows our frame, and remerm

b, ers we are duts, will not be severe in mark-
ing every such error and wandering of the
mind. But, after these allowances are made,
fill there remains much scope for the pro-
per government of thought; and a multi-
tude of cafes occur, in which we are no less
accountable for what we think, than for
what we do.

As, first, when the introduction of any

train of thought depends upon ourselves,
and is our voluntary act; by turning our
attention towards such objecs, awaken-
ing such pafilons, or engaging in such em,
ployments, as we know muff give a pecu-
liar determination to our thoughts. Next,
when thoughts, by whatever accident they
may have been originally fuggefled, are in-
dulged with deliberation and complacency.
Though the mind has been paflive in their
reception, and therefore free from blame;
yet, if it be ative in their continuance, the
guilt becomes its own. They may have
intruded at first, like unbidden guests; but
if, when entered, they are made welcome,

and

and kindly entertained, the cafe is the fame SE R M.
as if they had been invited from the begin- _-.
ning. If we be thus accountable to God
for thoughts either voluntarily introduuced,
or deliberately indulged, we are no lcfs so,
in the last place, for thcIeo whiclh ind ad-
mittance into our hearts fiom liupine negli-
gence, from total relaxation of attention,
from allowing our imagination to rove with
entire licence, li/ e te ,es jc' the /ool, to-
wards the endsCi oJ' the earth. Our minds
are, in this cafe, thrown open to folly and
vanity. They are proftitutcd to every evil
thing which pleases to take polTeflion. The
consequences mufft all be charged to our ac-
count; and in vain we plead excuse from
human infirmity. Hence it appears, that
the great objec at which we are to aim in
governing our thoughts, is, to take the most
effectual measures for preventing the intro-
ducion of such as are sinful, and for haftcn-
ing their expulsion, if they flall have intro-
duced themfelvcs without consent of the will.

But when we descend intp our breasts,
and examine how far we have studied to

keep

SERM. keep this object in view, who can tell how
,I_ oft he bath offended? In no article of reli-

gion or morals are men more culpably re-
miss than in the unrefiraincd indulgence
they give to fancy; and that too, for most
part, without remorse. Since the time that
Reason began to exert her powers, Thought,
during our waking hours, has been active
in every breast, without a moment's sus-
pension or pause. The current of ideas
has been always flowing. The wheels of
the spiritual engine have circulated with
perpetual motion. Let me ask, what has
been the fruit of this incessant adivity with
the greatest part of mankind ? Of the in-
numerable hours that have been employed
in thought, how few are marked with any
permanent or useful effet ? How many
have either passed away in idle dreams; or
have been abandoned to anxious difcon-
tented musings, to unsocial and malignant
passions, or to irregular and criminal de-
fires ? Had I power to lay open that store-
house of iniquity which the hearts of too
many conceal; could I draw out and read

t9

to them a lift of all the imaginations they E R M.
have devised, and all the passions they have _
indulged in secret; what a pidture of men
would I present to themselves! What crimes
would they appear to have perpetrated in
fancy, which to their most intimate com.
panions they durst not reveal !

Even when men imagine their thoughts

to be innocently employed, they too com-
monly susser them to run out into extrava-
gant imaginations, and chimerical plans of
what they would wish to attain, or chufe to
be, if they could frame the course of things
according to their desire. Though fucl
employments of fancy come not under the
fame description with those which are plainly
criminal, yet wholly unblamable they fel-
dom are. Besides the waste of time which
they occasion, and the misapplication which
they indicate of those intelletual powers
that were given to us for much nobler pur-
poses, such romantic speculations lead us
always into the neighbourhood of forbid-
den regions. They place us on dangerous
ground. They are for the most part con-

ne&ed

SERM. ne&ed with some one bad passion; and
L-_- they always nourish a giddy and frivolous

turn of thought. They unfit the mind for
applying with v' , ur to rational pursuits,
or for acquiefding in fober plans of conduct.
From that ideal world in which it allows
itself to dwell, it returns, to the commerce
of men, unbent and relaxed, iickly and
tainted, avcrle from dilcha!ging the duties,
and sometimes difqiualified even for relish-
ing the pleafircs of ordinary life. 0 Jerau
fal/em I toiy tliuc hben'rt f-roim w'ickednelZfs

olIow long Jthal

/ thy

vai/ l tihoughis lorge with-

in tIee ?--In order to guard against all
luch corruptions and abufcs of thought as I
have mentioned, it may be profitable to at-
tend to the following rules:

IN the firif place, fludy to acquire the

habit of attention to thought. No study is
more important; for in proportion to the
degree in which this habit is poffefied, such
commonly is the degree of intelletual ima

* Jeremn. i, 14.

provement.

provement. It is the power of attention SE R M.
which in a great measure distinguishes the
wife and the great from the vulgar and
trifling herd of men. The latter are ac-
cufiomed to think, or rather to dream, with-
out knowing the subjea of their thoughts.
In their unconneced rovings, they pursue
no end; they follow no track. Every thing
floats loose and disjointed on the surface of
their mind; like leaves scattered and blown
about on the face of the waters.

In order to lead your thoughts into any

useful direaion, your first care must be, to
acquire the power of fixing them, and of
reftrainingtheir irregular motions. Inure
yourselves to form a plan of proper medi-
tation; to purile it steadily; and with fe-
vere authority to keep the door shut againfl
intrusions of wandering fancy. Let your
mind, for this purpose, become a frequent
object to itself. Let your thoughts be made
the subject of thought and review.-" To
" what is my attention at present direced?
"Could I disclose it without a blush to the
"world ? Were God instantly to call me

" into

SE R M. " into judgment, what account could I give

i. " of it to him ? Shall I be the wiser or the

' better for dwelling on such thoughts as
" now fill my mind ? Are they entirely

consistent with my innocence, and with

"my present and future peace? If they
' are not, to what purpose do I indulge
" such unprofitable or dangerous musings?"
-By frequent exercise of this inward fcru-
tiny, we might gradually bring imagination
under discipline, and turn the power of
thought to their proper use as means of im-
provement, initead of suffering them to be
only the instruments of vanity and guilt.

IN the second place, in order to the go-

vernment of thought, it is necessary to guard
against idleness. Idleness is the great so-
mentor of all corruptions in the human
heart. In particular, it is the parent of
loose imaginations and inordinate desires.
The ever active and restless power of thought,
if not employed about what is good, will
naturally and unavoidably engender evil.
*\t ~ Imagine not that mere occupation, of what-

ever

ever kind it be, will exempt you from the s E R M.
blame and danger of an idle life. Perhaps
the worst species of idleness is a diflipated,
though seemingly bury life, spent in the
haunts of loose society, and in the chafe of
perpetual amusement. H-ence a giddy mind,
alternately elated and dejected with trifles,
occupied with no recollection of the past
but what is fruitless, and with no plans for
the future but what are either frivolous or
guilty.

As, therefore, you would govern your

thoughts, or indeed as you would have any
thoughts that are worthy of being governed,
provide honourable employment for the na-
tive activity of your minds. Keep know-
ledge, virtue, and ufefulnels, ever in view,
Let your life proceed in a train of such pur-
suits as are worthy of a Christian, of a ra-
tional and social being. \While these are
regularly carried on as the main lufincls of
life, let amusement poflcls no more than its
proper place in the difiribution of your time.
'rake particular care that your alnufmtlcnts
he of an irreproachable kind, and that all

Vol. 1I. E your

s E R M. your society be either improving or inno-

cent. So shall the stream of your thoughts
be made to run in a pure channel. Manly
occupations and virtuous principles will ex-
pel the taint, which idleness never fails to
communicate to the vacant mind.

IN the third place, when criminal thoughts

arise, attend to all the proper methods of
speedily fupprefing them. Take example
from the unhappy induttry which finners
diicover in 1)Inilhing good ones, when a
natural ilnfc of religion forces them on their
coniciece. How anxiously do they fly
from themselves ? how studiously do they
drownI the voice which upbraids them in
the noifc of company or diversion ? what
numerous artifices do they employ to evade
the uneasiness which returns of reflection
would produce ?--Were we to use equal
diligelece in preventing the entrance of vici-
ous fulggefdons, or in expelling them when
entered, -why fliould we not be equally fuc-
cefsfil in a much better cause ?-As soon as
you are sensible that any duangerous paflion

Tia~~ ~~begins

beginis to ferment, instantly call in other S E RM.
paflions, and other ideas, to your aid. ,'
Haften to turn your thoughts into a different
diretion. Summon up whatever you have
found to be of power for composing and
harinoniiing your mind. Fly for affllance
to ilrious fnd(ies, to prayer and devotion;
or even fly to business or innocent society,
if Iblitude be in hazard of favouring the fe-
ducion. By such means you may fRop the
progress of the growing evil. You may
apply an antidote, before the poison has had
time to work its full cffec.

IN the fourth place, it will be particularly

useful to imprcfs your minds with an habitual
sense of the presence of the Almighty. When
we reflet what a firong check the belief of
divine omniscience is calculated to give to
all criminal thoughts, we are tempted to
iffpect, that even by Christians this article
of faith is not received with sincere convic-
tion. For who but must confess, that if he
knew a parent, a friend, or a neighbour, to
have the power of looking into his heart,

F. lhe

S E R M. he durst not allow himself that unbounded
- ,- scope which he now gives to his imagination

and desire. Whence, then, comes it to pass,
that men, without fear or concern, bring into
the presence of the awful majesty of Heaven
that folly and licentiousness of thought which
would make them blufli and tremble, if one
of their own fellow-creatures could descry it?
At the fame time, no principle is supported
by clearer evidence than the omniscience of
God. All religious feds have admitted it,
all societies of men, in their oaths and cove-
nants, appeal to it. The Sovereign of the
universe cannot but know what paffcs
throughout his dominions. He who sup-
ports all nature muff needs pervade and fill
it. He who formed the heart is certainly
conscious to what passes within it.

Never let this great article of faith escape

from your view. In thinking, as well as
in aaing, accuflom yourselves to look up
with reverence to that piercing eye of di-
vine observation, which never J.zumbers no;
Jlecps. Behold a pen always writing over
your head, and making up that great re-

cord

cord of your thoughts, words, and actions, s E R M.
from which at last you are to be judged.
Think that you are never lets alone than
when by yourselves; for then is he still
with you, whose infpeaior is of greater
consequence than that of all mankind. Let
these awful considerations not only check
the dissipation of corrupt fancy, but infilfe
into your spirits that solemn composure
which is the parent of meditation and Vwif
dom. Let them not only expel what is
evil, but introduce in its stead what is pure
and holy; elevating your thoughts to divine
and eternal objects, and acting as the coun-
terpoife to those attractions of the world,
which would draw your whole attention
downwards to sense and vanity.

E3

# SERMON III. The same SUBJECT continued. PROVERBS, iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out of it are the issues of life.

SERM ON III.
The fame SUBJECT continued.

r-. VERBS, iv. 23.

Ieep thy heart with l., :iligenie : fr
f ol-

rs it are the iffies of life.

SS R . T. AV I N G treated, in the foregoing
,. ..,... discourse, of the government of the

thoughts, I proceed to confider the govern-
ment of the passions as the next great duty
incclled in the keebping of the ljlart.

Paflions are firong emotions of the mind,

occasioned by the view of apprehending
good or evil. They are original parts of
the conltitution of our nature; and there-
fore to extirpate them is a mistaken aim.
Religion rcquircs no more of us than to

moderate

moderate and rule them. When our blcfT- s

s E !I

, .

cd Lord affiimed the natture, 5without tlhe .--~j
corruption, of man, he was subjed to lilce
passions with us. On some occaiions hle felt
the risings of anger. He was often touched
with pity. He was grieverdii spirit; lie
sorrowed and he wept.

Passions, when properly direted, may

be subservient to very useful ends. They
route the dormant powers of the foul.
They are even found to exalt them. They
often raise a man above himself, and ren-
der him more penetrating, vigorous, and
masterly, than he is in his calmer hours.
Acuated by some high passion, he conceives
great designs, and surmounts all difficultics
in the execution. Heis inspired with more
lofty sentiments, and endowed with more
persuasive utterence, than he pofeflses at
any other time. Passions are the active
forces of the foul. They are its highcft
powers brought into movement and exer-
tion. But like all other great powers, they
are either useful or deftrudive, according to
their diredion and degree; as wind andt

E 4 i

SER M. fire are instrumental in carrying on many
_>1^ of the beneficent operations of nature; but

when they rife to undue violence, or de-
viate from their proper course, their path is
marked with ruin.

It is the present infelicity of human na-

ture, that those strong emotions of the mind
are become too powerful for the principle
which ought to regulate them. This is one
of the unhappy consequences of our apol-
tafy from God, that the influence of rea-
oIn is weakened, and that of passion
itrengthcncd within the heart. When
man revolted from his Maker, his passions
rcbelled against himself; and from being
original!y the iminifters of reason, have
become the tyrants of the foul. Hence, in
treating of this sitbjer, two things may be
ail'umed as principles: firfi, that through
ilhc prcfent weakncfs of the understanding,
our passions are often directed towards im-
proper ubjects; and next, that even when
itcir dirction is jut, and their objects are
innocent, they perpetually tend to run into
excels; they alwa)y hurry us towards their

gratti

gratification with a blind and dangerouo L RM.
impetuoity. On these two points thcrn
turns the whole government of our paiiions:
firfI, to ascertain the proper olbjcAs of their
pursuit; and next, to restrain them in that
pursuit, when they would carry us beyond
.the bounds of reason. If there be any pas-
sion which intrudes itself unseasonably into
our mind, which darkens and troubles our
judgment, or habitually discomposes our
temper; which unfits us for properly dif-
charging the duties, or disqualifies us for
cheerfully enjoying the comforts of life,
we may certainly conclude it to have gained
a dangerous ascendant. The great object
which we ought to propose to ourlelves is,
to acquire a firm and fiedfaft mind, which
the infuataton of pafilon fliall not seduce,
nor its violence shake; which, refting on
fixed principles, fliall, in the midll of con-
tending emotions, remain free, and malter
of itself; able to liften calmly to the voice
of conscience, and prepared to obey its dic-
tates without helitation.

-3 To

SE R M. To obtain, if poflible, such command of

,_ i paifion, is one of the highcli attainmncts

of the rational nature. Arguments to Ihow
its importance crowd upon us frci every
quarter. If there be any fertile lour-ce of
niifchief to human life, it is, beyonl doubt,
the misrule of paihion. It is this which
poisons the enjoyment of individuals, over-
turns the order of fociLtv, and itrcws the
path of life with io many mikcries, as to
render it indeed the vallcy of tears. All
those great scenes of public calamlity, which
we behold with afionifhmcat and horrour,
have originated from the source of violent
passions. These have overspread the earth
with bloodshed. The'f have pointed the
3afffin's dagger, and filled the poisoned
bowl. These, in every age, have furnish-
ed too copious materials for the orator's
pathetic declamation, and for the poet's
tragical song.

When from public life we dcfcend to

private conduc, though paficn operate not
there in such a wide and def'rulive fpherc,
e ihall find its influence to be no leIs bane-

ful. I need not mention the black and SE R M.
fierce paflions, ficlih as envy, jealoul'-, and l
revenge, whose efiects are obviously nox-
ious, and whose agitations arc immediate
milery. 1lut take any of the licentious and
fcnfiial kind(. Sunpolf it to have unlimited
Ifope; trace it throughout its courlc; and
you will find that gradually, as it rilcs, it
taints the soundness, and troubles the lpace
of his mind over whom it reigns; that in
its progress it engages him in pursuits which
are marked either with danger or with
flame; that in the end it waftes his for-
tune, detroys his health, or del-aes his
character; and aggravates all the miseries
in which it has involved hiim witli the con-
cluding pangs of bitter remorle. Through
all the flages of this fatal course, how many
have heretofore run? What multitudes do
wve daily behold pursuing it, with blind and
headlong steps ?

But, on the evils which flow from unre-

strained paflions, it is necdlefs to enlarge.
Hardly are there any so ignorant or incon-
fiderate as not to admit, that where paifion

is

S F,R M is allowed to reign, both happincfs and vir-

tue must be impaired. I proceed therefore
to what is of more consequence, to suggest
some direcions which may be useful in
assisting us to prcferve the government of
our passions.

IN the first place, we must fludy to ac-

quire just views of the comparative import-
ance of those objects that are most ready to
attraCt desire. The erroneous opinions
which we form concerning happiness and
misery, give rife to all the mirfaken and
dangerous passions which embroil our life.
'We fuffcr ourselves to be dazzled by unreal
appearances of pleasure. We follow, with
precipitancy, whithersoever the crowd
leads. We admire, without examination,
what our prcdeceficrs have admired. We
{!y from every fliadow at which we fee
cthers tremble. Thus, agitated by vain
fears and deceitful hopes, we are hurried
into eager ccntefts about objecs which are
in theinfelvcs of no value. By reifyi!ng
our opinions, we flould strike at the root

of

tf the evil. If our vain imaginations were s E R M.
chaltcned, the tumult of our passions would _j,
lubfide.

It is observed, that the young and the

ignorant are always the moit violent in
purfulit. The knowledge which is forced
upon them by longer acquaintance with the
world, moderatcs their impetuosity. Study
then to anticipate, by reflexion, that know-
ledge which experience often purchalfs at
too dear a price. Inure yourselves to fie-
quent consideration of the enptinefs of
those pleasures which excite ib much strife
and commotion among manlind. Think
how much more of true enjoyment is loft
by the violence of passion, than by the want
of those things which give occasion to that
paflion. Persuade yourselves, that the fa-
rour of God and the poflelion of virtue
form the chief happinels of the rational
nature. Let a contented mind, and a
peaceful life, hold the next place in your
estimation. These are the conclusions
which the wife and thinking part of man-
kind have always formed. To these con-

clufions,

S ER M. ci.iions after having run the race of pas-

l. , sion, you will probably come at the last.

By forming them betimes, you would make
a seasonable escape from that tempefluous
region; through which none can pals with-
out fulfering misery, contracting guilt, and
undergoing icvere remorse.

IN the second place, in order to attain

the command of paiflon, it is requisite to
acquire the p nwer of elf-denial. The self-
deniai of a Chlriftian consists not in perpe-
tual auicerity of life, and universal renun-
ciation of the innocent comforts of the
world. Religion requires no such unne-
ceffary sacrifices, nor is any such foe to
precent enjoyment. It consists in our being
ready, on proper occasions, to abfiain from
plcafure, or to submit to suffering, for the
fake of duty and conscience, or from a view
to some higher and nore extensive good.
If we posiess not this power, we shall be
the prey of every loose inclination that
chances to arise. Pampered by continual
indulgence, all our pafions will become

mutinous

mutinous and headfirong. Desire, not s E R M.
rcafon, will be the ruling principle of our .-.
coiidu
.

As, therfore, you would keep your pas-

sions within due bounds, you must betimcs
accuricm them to know the reins. You
;nuP: not walt till some critical occalion for
the exerciif of felf-denial occur. In vain
you will attempt to anC with authority, if
your first essay he made vwhen temptation
lias inflamed the mind. In cooler hours,
you muf formetimes abridge your enjoy-
ment even of what is innocent. In the
nidft of lawful pleafuirc, you muf.r main-
tain moderation, abfiemiioufnefs, and self-
command. The observance of this difcl-
pline is the only method of supporting rca-
iin in its proper aicendant. For if you
allow yourfclves always to ftrctch to the
utmost point of innocence and safety, be-
yond that point you will infallibly be hur-
ried, when pafion shall arise in its might to
lhake the heart.

IN the third place, impref your minds
deeply vith this persuasion, that nothing is

what

s E R M. what it appears to be when you are under

the power of pafiGoi. Be assured, that no
judgment which you then form can be in
the leait depended upon as found or true.
The fumes which ariic from a heart boiling
with violent passions, never fail to darken
and trouble the undcrfianding. When the
gourd withered, under the shade of which
the prophet Jonah reposed, his mind, al-
ready ruffled by the disappointment of his
preditions, loft, on occaiion of this flight
incident, all command of itself; and in the
midst of his impatience, he w/ijcd to die ra-
tber than to live. Instead of being calmed
by that expoftulating voice, DofJ thou well,
0 jonah ! to be angry becanif of the goulrd?
he replied with great emotion, I do well to
be angy even into ldeath. But did Jonah
think so when his paflion had abated ? Do
these sentiments bear the least resemblance
to that humble and devout prayer, which,
on another occasion, when in his calm mind,
he put up to God " ? No two persons can
differ more from each other, than the fame

* Sec Jonah, ii,

perfora

pcron differs from himself, when agitated SERM.
by passion, and when maftcr of his reason. ,
1 do well to be angry, is the language of
every man when his mind is inflamed.
Evcry paflion jufifies itself. It brings in a
thousand pretences to its aid. It borrows
many a false colour to hide its deformity.
It pofi'fens a fort of magic, by which it can
magnify or diminifl objects at pleasure, and
transform the appearance of every thing
vithin its sphere.

I,et the knowledge of this imposture which

pallion pradtiles, place you continually on
your guard. Let the rmecmbrance of it
be cver at hand, to check the extravagant
judgments which yon are apt to pass in
thole moments of dclufion. I,ften to no
filggcbfion which then ariles. Form no
conclusions on which you are to at. As-
fire yourlelves that every thing is beheld
through a falfc medium. Have patience
for a little, and the illusion will vanifi;
the atmoflphlee will clear up around you,
aind objecs return to be viewed in their na-
tive colours and jutft dimentions.

VoL,. 1. IN

S E R M. IN the fourth place, oppose early the be"

ii- ginnings of paflion. Avoid particularly all

such objets as are apt to excite passions
which you know to predominate within
you. As soon as you find the tempest rising,
have recourse to every proper method, ei-
ther of allaying its violence, or of escaping
to a calmer shore. Haften to call up emo-
tions of an opposite nature. Study to con-
quer one passion by means of some other
which is of less dangeroustendency% Never
account any thing finall or trivial which is
in hazard of introducing disorder into your
heart. Never make light of any desire
which you feel gaining fuich progrels as to
threaten entire dominion. Blandifling it
will appear at the first. As a gentle and
innocent emotion, it may steal into the
heart ; but as it advances, it is likely topicrce
you through with mlanyij rrows. TWhlat you
indulged as a favourite amusement, will
flortly become a serious business; and in
the end may prove the burden of your life,
Most of our pafions flatter us in their rife.
But their begiing are tracerus; their

growvth

growth is imperceptible; and the evils which s E R M.
they carry in their train lie concealed, until ,-
their dominion is eftablifled. What Solo-
mon fays of one of them, holds true of them
all, that their beginning is as when one Iktteth
out water :. It iflues from a finall chink,
which once might have been easily flopped;
but being neglected, it is soon widened by
the stream; till the bank is at last totally
thrown down, and the flood is at liberty to
deluge the whole plain.

IN the fifth place, the excess of every

paflion will be moderated by frequent me-
ditation on the vanity of the world, the
flort continuance of life, the approach of
death, judgment, and eternity. The ima-
ginary degree of importance which the ne-
gleEt of such meditation suffers us to betlow
on temporal things, is one great cause of
our vehemence in desire, and our eagerness
in pursuit. We attach ourselves to the ob-
jets around us, as if we could enjoy them
for ever. Higher and more enlarged pro-

*Prov. xvii. 14.

F 2 specs

S E R I. fpeas of the destination of man wouli

Ill.

naturally cool his mil laced ardour. Fcr
what can appear so considerable in human
affairs, as to dilcompofe or agitate the mind
of him to whole view eternity lies open, and
all the greatness of the universe of God ?
How contemptible will seem to him this
hurry of spirits, this turmoil of paflion,
about things whicl are so soon to end ?-
Wlherc are they who once disturbed the
world with the violence of their contclfs,
and filled it with the renown- of their ex-
ploits ? What now remains of their designs
and enterpriles, of their pafilons and pur-
suits, of their triumphs and their glory?
The flood of time has pafred over thelm,
and swept them away, as if they had never
been. The f;ljoiz of the world changes
continually around us. We succeed one
another in the human course, like troops
of pilgrims on theirjourney. Absurdly we
ilend our time in contending about the
trifles of a day, while we ought to be pre-
paring for a higher existence. Eternity is
iuft at hand to close this introdutory scene.

3 It

t is sift rolling towards us, lile the tide S E R M.

111.

of a van: ocean, ready to l\vallow up all

2

huannl concerns, and to leave no trace be-
hind it, except the consequences of our good
or bad deeds, which fliall lafl: for cver.-
Let fuclh rcledtions allay the heat of pafion.
Let them reduce all human things to tlhir
proper llandard. From frivolous puriuits
let thecn recal our attention to objcLts of
real importance ; to the proper butincls of
man; to the improvement of our nature,
the discharge of our duty, the ratiornal and
religious condut of human life.

IN thc l1aR place, to our own endeavours

for rcgulating our paflions, let us join ear-
ncll prayer to God. Here, if any where,
divine atiiuance is requilite. For 5ich is
the prelent biindnefs and imperfec&ion of
human nature, that even to discover all the
diborders of our heart is become difficult;
much more, to reC.ify them, is beyoud our
power. To that iuperior aid, then, which
is promiied to the pious and upright, let us
luok up v.'kh humble minds; bc:'ceching

VS
, the

s E R M. the Father of mercies, that while we fiudy

to act our own part with resolution and
vigilance, he would forgive our returning
weakness; would firengthen our conflancy
in refitling the assaults of passion; and
enable us by his grace so to govern our
minds, that without considerable interrup-
tions we may proceed in a course of piety
and virtue.

IT now remains to treat of the govern-

ment of temper, as included in the kccling,
ofthe heart. Paflions are quick and strong
emotions, which by degrees subside. Tem-
per is the disposition which remains after
these emotions are past, and which forms
the habitual propensity of the foul. The pas-
lions are like the fiream when it is fioln by
the torrent, and ruffled by the winds. The
temper refiembles it when running within
its bed, with its natural velocity and force.
The influence of temper is more silent and
imperceptible than that of paflion. It ope-
rates with less violence ; but as its operation
is conflant, it produces cfedCs no less con-

fiderable.

fiderable. It is evident, therefore, that it SERM.
highly deserves to be confidercd in a reli-
gious view.

Many, indeed, are averse to behold it in

this light. They place a good temper upon
the fame footing with a healthy conftitu-
tion of body. They confider it as a natural
felicity which some enjoy; but for the want
of which, others are not morally culpable,
nor accountable to God; and hence the
opinion has sometimes prevailed, that a bad
temper might be confident with a state of
grace. If this were true, it would overturn
that whole doctrine, of which the gospel is
so full, that regeneration, or change of na-
ture, is the essential characerlflic of a Chrilt.
ian. It would suppose that grace might
dwell amidPi malevolence and rancour, and
that heaven might be enjoyed by such as
are firangers to charity and love.-It will
readily be admitted, that some, by the ori-
ginal frame of their mind, are more favour-
ably inclined than others towards certain
good dilpofitions and habits. But this as-
fords no justification to those who neglec
to oppose the corruptions to which they are

F 4 prone.

S E R M. prone. Let no man imagine that the Ihu

Ill.

man heart is a foil altogether unfufceptible
of culture; or that the worst temper may
not, through the afliffance of grace, be rc-
formed by attention and discipline. Settled
depravity of temper is always owing to our
own indulgence. If, in place of checking,
we nourifl that malignity of disposition to
which we are inclined, all the conlequenccs
v1ill be placed to our account, and every
cxcufe from natural conflitution be rejcded
at the tribunal of Heaven.

The proper regulation of temper affecls

the character of man in evcry relation which
he bears; and includes the whole circle of
religious and moral duties. This, therefore,
s a subject of too great extent to be com-
prehended in one diliourle. But it nmay be
l'ctful to i^te a general v iew of it; and bc-
:brec e conclude the dotrine los keeping the
*'',';!, to ficw xwhat the habitual temper of
* good man ought to bi, with reli)el to
;od, to his ciho , and to himntif.

i::!s'', wvith relpciC' to God, what lie
.ilt '( i:luiti'.'atc i a eL'vouti tcmper. Tlis

iinanouts

hnports more than the care of pcrform- SL ' M,
ing the offices of religious worship. It
denotes that sensibility of heart to'wards
the Supreme Being, which springs from
a deep impreflion of his perfccions on
the obul. It stands opposed, not only
to that disregard of God which forms
the description of the impious, but to that
n)fcncc of religious affejions which some-
timcs prevails among those who are im-
pcrfecdly good. They acknowledge, per-
haps, the obligations of duty. They feel
some concern to vwork olt tbhir filvation.
But they apply to their duty through mere
constraint; and fcrve God without ali'ecion
or complacelncy. More liberal and gene-
rous sentiments animate the man who is of
a devout temper. God dwells upon his
thoughts as a benefacltor and a father, to
whole voice he lhca:-! ns with joy. Amidst
the occurrences of life, his mind naturally
opens to the admiration of his wifdon, the
reverence cf his power, the love of his
tra lfcenclent goodness. All nature appears
to his view :as aumple with the impress of

there

S E R M. these perfeaions. Habitual gratitude to his

II.
_-' Maker for mercies past, and cheerful refig-

nation to his will in all time to come, are
the native effusions of-his heart.

Such a temper as this deserves to be cul-

tivated with the utmost attention; for it
contributes, in a high degree, both to our
improvement and our happiness. It refines,
and it exalts human nature. It softens that
hardness which our hearts are ready to con-
traCt from frequent intercourse with this
rugged world. It facilitates the discharge
of every duty towards God and man. At
the fame time it is a temper peaceful and
serene, elevated and rejoicing. It forms
the current of our affeCions to flow in a
placid tenour. It opens pleating profpeas
to the mind. It banilhes harflh and bitter
paflions; and places us above the reach of
many of the annoyances of worldly life.
When the temper is truly devout, the pcace
of God which pajnfth uzlndejland'i g kecbcih
the heart anldfodul. I proceed,

SECONDLY, to point out the proper state
of our temper with respeCt to one another.

7 It

It is evident, in the general, that if we S E RM.
consult either public welfare or private hap- ,'.
piness, Christian charity ought to regulate
our disposition in mutual intcrcourfe. But
as this great principle admits of several di-
verfified appearanccs, let us confider some
of the chicf forms under which it ought to
show itself in the ufilal tenour of life. Uni-
versal benevolence to mankind, when it
refts in the abftraO, is a loose indeterminate
idea, rather than a principle of real effie:;
and too often floats as an useless speculation
in the head, instead of affeding the temper
and the heart.

What first presents itielf to be recom-,

mended, is a peaceable temper; a difpofi-
tion averse to give offence, and desirous of
cultivating harmony, and amicable inter-
course in society. This luppofes yielding
and condescending manners, unwillingness
to contend with others about trifles, and,
in contests that are unavoidable, proper mo-
deration of spirit. Such a temper is the
first principle of fclf-enjoyment. It is the
basis of all order and happiness among

mankind,

SERM. mankind. The pofit;ve and contentious,

-J. the rude and quarrelsome, are the bane of

society. They seem destined to blast the
ifmall thare of comfort which nature has
here allotted to man. But they cannot dif-
turb the peace of others, more than they
break their own. The hurricane rages first
in their own bosom, before it is let forth
upon the world. In the tempests which
they raite, they are always toft ; and fie-
quently it is thcir lot to perilh.

A peacble temper mu be fpported by

a candid one, or a di!po{ition to view the
conduac of others with fairncfs and impar-
tialitv. This tlands opposed to a jealous
and fufilicious temper, which afiribes every
aCtion to the worst motive, and throws a
black finae over e:ecry chlar:aicr. As you
would be happy in ycur elvcs, or in your
connecions v'ith others, guard againit this
Inalignant fuirit. Study that charitv JbiLh
,'.1ikb ,7io evil; that temper which, with-
ot degnera.tig into credulity, will dii)olc
VRou to , c jui ; and which can allow you
to obsr;;-'; an Ceror.; withoult him auting it ac

a crime.

crime. IThus you will be kept free from sE R M.

. , . , . . [II

tl.hat contmlual irritation whlch niaginairy
inijurics raise in a fulpicious breaflt; and will
walk among men as your brethren, not your
cnemier.

But to be peaceable, and to be candid,

is not all that is required of a good man.
HIe Iuft cultivate a kind, generous, and
ivmpathizing temper, which feels for dif-
trefs, wherever it is beheld ; which enters
into the concerns of his fiiends with ar-
dour ; and to all with whom he has inter-
course is gentle, obliging, and humane.
How amiable appears iulch a dilpofition,
when contrasted with a malicious or envi-
ous temper, which wraps itself up in its
own narrow intcreft, looks with an evil eve
on the success of others, and \'with an unna-
tural fatisfaECion feeds on their diiappoint-
inents or miiries ! I-Ioe v little does he know
of the true happincis of lif, who is a
itranger to that intcrcourfe of good offices
and kind affecions, which, by a pleaiing
charm, attach men to one another, and cir-
culate joy firom heart to heart!

You

E R M. You are not to imagine, that a benevc-
111.
A_- lent temper finds no exercise, unless when

opportunities offer of performing actions of
high generosity, or of extensive utility,
These may seldom occur. The condition
of the greater part of mankind, in a good
meafuire, precludes them. But in the or-
dinary round of human affairs, a thousand
occasions daily present themselves, of miti-
gating the vexations which others susser,
of soothing their minds, of aiding their in-
terest, of promoting their cheerfulness or
ease. Such occalions may relate to the
smaller incidents of life. But let us re-
member, that of finall incidents the fiyftei
of human life is chiefly composed. The
attentions which rcfpect there, when fug-
getsed by real benignity of temper, arc often
more material to the happiness of those
around us, than aaions which carry the ap-
pearance of greater dignity and splendour.
No wife or good man ought to account
any rules of behaviour as below his regard,
which tend to cement the great brother-
hood of mankind in comlfortable union.

Parti-

Particularly amidst that familiar inter- s E R 4.

course which belongs to domcflic life, all
the virtues of temper find an ample range.
It is very unfortunate, that within that
circle, men too often think themselves at
liberty to give unrestrained vent to the
caprice of passion and humour. Whereas
there, on the contrary, more than any
where, it concerns them to attend to the
government of their heart; to check what
is violent in their tempers, and to soften
what is harfli in their manners. For there
the temper is formed. There the real cha-
rader diiplays itfclf. The forms of the
world disguise men when abroad. But
within his own family, every man is
known to be what he truly is.-In all our
intcrcourfe, then, with others, particularly
in that which is clofcft and molt intimate,
let us cultivate a peaceable, a candid, a
gentle and friendly temper. This is the
temper to whicl, by repeated injunctions,
our holy religion seeks to form us. This
was the temper of Christ. This is the
temper of Heaven,

WE

S EIR M WE are now to confider, thirdly, the

pioper state of temper, as it refpets the
individual himelf. The basis of all the
good dispositions which belong to this head,
is humility. By this I understand, not that
meannels of spirit which leads a man to
undervalue himisi, and to fink below his
rank and chuarawer;' bu t hathe scripture
expreflcs with great propriety, when it ex-
horts ever' aa,.w, ;!ot to think of hin'i'f morc
hJighlyr than be ought to think, but to thilk
soberly'. He who adopts all the flattering
suggestions of felf-love, and forms claims
upon the world proportioncd to the ima-
ginary opinion which he has conceived of
his merit, is preparing for himself a thou-
sand mortifications. Whereas, by checking
the risings of ill-founded vanity, and re-
treating within theGe bounds which a mo-
derate eflimation of our characder pre-
scribes, we escape the mifecies which al-
ways pursue an arrogant mind, and rcco;i-
mend ourselves to the favour both of God
and man.

: Rcn.. xii. 3.

T--Ienc:

H-ence will naturally arise a contented S E R M.

iteirpce, which is one of the greatest blef-
ings that can be enjoyed by man, and one
of the most material requisites to the pro-
pel dilclarge of the duties of every station.
For a frictil and dliifontented temper ren-
ders one incapable of performing aright any
part in life. It is unthankful and impious
towards God; and towards men, provok-
ing and unjust. It is a gangrene which
preys on the vitals, and infcts the whole
constitution with dileafe and putrefation.
Subdue pride and vanity, and you will
take the most effecual method of eradicat-
ing this distemper. You will no longer
behold the objects around you with jaun-
diced eyes. You will take in good part
the bleflings which Providence is pleated to
bestow, and the degree of favour which
your fellow-creatures are disposcd to grant
you. Viewing yourlelves, with all your
i!lperfeciions and failings, in a just light,
you will rather be surprised at your enjoy-
ing so many good things, than discontented,
bccaufe there are any which you want.

VOL. II. G From

SE R M. From a humble and contented temper

will spring a cheerful one. This, if not
in itself a virtue, is at least the garb in
which virtue mhould be always arrayed,
Piety and g-codnefs ought never to be mark-
ed with that dejetion which sometimes
takes rife from superstition, but which is
the proper portion only of guilt. At the
lame time, the cheerfulness belonging to
virtue is to be carefully distinguished from
that light and giddy temper which charac-
terizes folly, and is so often found among
the diflipated and vicious part of mankind.
Their gaiety is owing to a total vwant of
reflexion; and brings with it the usual con-
sequences of an unthinking habit, flhame,
remorfc, and heavinels of heart, in the end.
The cheerfulness of a well-regulated mind
springs from a good conscience and the fa-
vour of Heaven, and is bounded by tem-
perance and realon. It makes a man
happy in himself, and promotes the hap-
piness of all around him. It is the clear
and calm sunshine of a mind illuminated by
piety and virtue. It crowns all other good

dilio-

dispositions, and comprehends the general S rfR M.
effect which they ought to produce on the
heart.

SucIH, on the whole, is the temper, or

habitual frame of mind, in a good man:
Devout towards God ; towards men, peace-
able, candid, affecionate, and humane;
vithin himself, humble, contented, and
cheerful. To the eftabliflhment of this
happy temper all the direcions which I
before suggested for the due regulation of
the thoughts, and for the government of
the palfions, naturally conduce; in this they
ought to issue; and when this temper is
thoroughly formed within us, then may
the heart he esteemed to have been Leps
with all diligencc. That we may be thus
enabled to keep it, for the fake both of
present enjoyment, and of preparation for
greater happiness, let us earnestly pray to
Heaven. A greater blessing we cannot
implore of the Almighty, than that he
wvho made the human heart, 2'nd who
tknows ics frailties, would ai°lii" to ub-

G 2 jed

SE R M. jeat it to that discipline which religion r.c

III.
<_y quires, which reason approves, but which

his grace alone can enable us to main-
tain.

# SERMON IV. On the UNCHANGEABLENESS of the DIVINE NATURE. JAMES, i. 17. Every good and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither...

[ ds ]

SERMON IV.
On the UNCHIANcGEALENESS of the

DIVINE NATURE.

JAMIES, i. 17.
Every good and every perfce gifst is from

above, and cometh dow from ihc Father
of Lights, with 'whom is no vriabl/;cfS,
nei/her Jhiadow of tlrning.
THI E divine nature, in some views, s E R M.

IV.

attrads our love; in others, corn- --

mands our reverence; in all, is entitled to
the highest attention from the human mind.
Wire never elevate our thoughts, in a pro-
per manner, towards the Supreme Being,
without returning to our own Ifphere with
sentiments more improved ; and if, at any
.'.ia, his greatness opprcUes our thoughts,

G 3 his

S E R M. his moral perfeaions always afford us re-

,V. lief. His almighty power, his infinite

wisdom and supreme goodness, are founds
familiar to our ears. In his immutability
we are less accustomed to confider him;
and yet it is this perfection which, perhaps,
more than any other, distinguishes the di-
vine nature from the human; gives com-
plete energy to all its other attributes, and
entitles it to the highest adoration. For,
hence are derived the regular order of na-
ture, and the ftedfaftnefs of the universe.
Hence flows the unchanging tenour of those
laws which, from age to age, regulate the
conduac of mankind. Hence the uniform-
ity of that government, and the certainty
of those promises, which are the ground of
our trust and security. Goodness could
produce no more than feeble and wavering
hopes, and power would command very
imperfect reverence, if we were left to
fufpeE that the plans which goodness had
framed might alter, or that the power of
carrying them into execution might de-
create. The contemplation of God, there-

fore,

fore, as unchangeable in his nature and in s ER M.

IV.

all his perfections, mufft undoubtedly be .--.
fruitful both of instruction and of confola.
tion to man. I fllall, sirs{, endeavour to
illustrate, in some degree, the nature of the
divine immutability; and then make ap-
plication of it to our own conduct.

EFVER } good and evcery per feRt gift

cciiecth down from the Father of Lights.
The title which in the Text is given to the
Deity, carries an elegant allusion to the Sun,
the source of light, the most universal be-
ncfadtor of nature, the most regular and
confsant of all the great bodies with which
we are acquainted in the univcife. Yet
even with the Sun there are certain degrees
of variablcnfs. IHe apparently rites and
sets; he seems to approach nearer to us in
finumer, and to retire farther off in win-
ter ; his influence his varied by the seasons,
and his lufRre is affelted by the clouds.
Whereas with him who is the Fathcr of
Liqhts, of whose everlafling brightness the
glory of the Sun is but a faint image,

G 4 there

S E R M. there is no fl:adowi of turnilg, not the mos-
_-y. i diflant approach to change. In his being

or essence it is plain that alteration can ne-
ver take place. For as his exiflence is de-
rived from no prior cause, nor dependent
on any thing without himielf, his nature
can be influenced by no power, can be
affeetcd by no accident, can be impaired
by no time. From everlafilng to evcrlaii-
ing, he continues the fame. Hence it is
said, that he only bath iImmortality; that is,
he possesses it in a manner incommunicable
to all other beings. Eternity is described as
the high and holy place in which he dswelleth ;
it is a habitation in which none but the Fa-
ther of Lights can enter. The name which
he taketh to himself is, I an. Of other
things, some have been and others shall be;
but this is he, which is, which was, and
which is to come. All time is his; it is mca-
fured out by him in limited portions to the
various orders of created beings; but his own
.esiftence fills equally every point of duration;
.the fir and the lat, the beginning and the end,
theJfae yejerday, to-day, and for ever.

As

As in his effcnce, so in his attributes and SE RIM.

IV.

perfetions, it is impofilble thcrc can be any \--
change. To imperfect natures only it be-
longs to improve and to decay. Every al-
teration which they undergo in their abili-
ties or dispositions, flows either from inter-
nal defetCt, or from the influence of afuperior
cauCe. But as no higher caulk can bring
fiom without any acccflion to the divine
nature, ic within itfclf it contains no prin.
ciple of decay. For the fane reaibn that
the Iclf-exiffcnt Being was from the begin-
ning powerful and wile, just and good, he
mult continue unalterably lb for ever. Hience,
wvith much propriety, the divine perfctions
are dclfribed in scripture by al!uiions to
ihofe objecs to which we afciibe the most
permanent stability. His rigcLioififs is
lile the Jfiong mountailns. His mercy ,is in
?ac henaves; ani his faithfitllnJ ' rachcth
alut' the clouds. These perfeCtions of the
divine nature differ widely from the human
virtucs, which are their faint fladows. The
justice of men is at one time fcvere, at an-
noter time relenting; their goodnclk is iomc-

times

SERM. times confined to a partial fondness for a

1_V_ few, sometimes runs out into a blind in-

dulgence towards all. But goodness and
justice are in the Supreme Being calm and
steady principles of ation, which, enlight-
ened by perfect wisdom, and never either
warped by partiality, or disturbed by paflion,
persevere in one regularand constant tenour.
Among men, they nay sometimes break
forth with transient fplcndour, like those
wandering fires which illuminate for a little
tle darkness of the night. But in God, they
shine with that uniform brightness, which
we can liken to nothing so much as to the
untroubled, eternal lustre of the highert
heavens.

From this follows, what is chiefly mate-

rial for us to attend to, that in the courlL
of his operations towards mankind, in his
counsels and decrees, in his laws, his pro-
mises, and inhis threatenings, there isno va-
riablcefs nor /fiadow es turning with the
Almighty. Known to him firom the begin-
ning were all his works. In the divine idea
the whole fyltcm of nature exiiPcd, long

before

before the foundations of the earth were laid. s E R M.
When he iaid, Let there be light, he only ,_
realized the great plan which, from everlaft-
ing, he had formed in his own mind. Fore-
fcen by him was every revolution which
the course of ages was to produce. What-
ever the counsels of men can effect was
comprehelnd(e in his decree. No new emer-
gency can i:c to surprise him. No agita-
tions o' inger or of sorrow, of fear or of
hope, can ihake his mind or influence his
conduc2. He refts in the eternal poeffefion
of that supreme beatitude, which neither
the virtues nor the crimes of men can in the
least aficd. From a motive of overflowing
goodness, he reared up the universe. As
the eternal lover of righteoufniefs, he rules it.
The whole system of his government is
fixed; his laws are irrevocable; and, what
he once loveth, he loveth to the end. In
feripture, indeed, he is sometimes said to
be grieved, and to repcnt. But such expref-
sions, it is obvious, are employed from ac-
commodation to common conception; in
the fame manner as when bodily organs are,

4 in

SE I M. in other passages, ascribed to God. The

IV.
*.-y- scripture, as a rule of life addressed to the

multitude, must make use of the language
of men. The divine nature, represented in
its native sublimity, would have transcended
all human conception. When upon the
reformation of finners, God is said to repent
of the evil which he hath threatened against
them; this intimates no more, than that he
suits his dispensations tothe alterations which
take place in the charaters of men. His
difpoition towards good and evil continues
the fame, but varies in its application as its
objecs vary; just as the laws themselves,
which are capable of no change of affection,
bring rewards or punishments at different
times to the fame person, according as his
behaviour alters. Immutability is indeed so
clofelyconneced with the notion of supreme
perfection, that wherever any rational con-
ceptions of a Deity have taken place, this
attribute has been ascribed to him. Reason
taught the wife and reflecting in every age
to believe, that, as what is eternal cannot
die, so what is perfeit can never vary, and

6 that

that the great Governour of the universe SERM.
could be no other than an unchangeable 1V.
Being.

FROM the contemplation oftlhis obvious,

but fundamental truth, let us proceed to
the practical improvement of it. Let us
conlder what effecT the serious confidera-
tion of it ought to produce on our mind
and behaviour.

It will be proper to begin this head of dif-

course by removing an objeCtion which the
doctrine I have illuflrated may appear to
form againf: religious services, and in par-
ticular against the duty of prayer. To what
purpole, it may be urged, is homage ad-
drefied to a Being whose purpose is unal-
terably fixed; to whom our righteofinef
e.rte/iill/hCl no; whom by no arguments we
can perluade, and by no supplications we
can mollify ? The objection would have
weight, if our rc!igious addrcffcs were de-
signcd to work any alteration on God; ei-
ther by giving him information of what he
did not know; or by exciting affeCtions

which

S E RM. which he did not possess; or by inducing

.-' _ him to change measures which he had pre-

vioufly formed. But they are only crude
and imperfeQt notions of religion which can
suggest such ideas. The change which our
devotions are intended to make, is upon our-
selves, not upon the Almighty. Their chief
efficacy is derived from the good dispositions
which they raise and cherish in the human
foul. By pouring out pious sentiments and
desires before God, by adoring his perfec-
tion, and confessing our own unworthiness,
by expressing our dependence on his aid,
our gratitude for his past favours, our sub-
mission to his present will, our trust in his
future mercy, we cultivate such affeclions
as suit our place and station in the universe,
and are thereby prepared for becoming ob-
jeats of the divine grace. Accordingly, fre-
quent aflurances are given us in Scripture,
that the prayers of sincere worihippers, pre-
ferred through the great Mediator, shall be
productive of the happiest effects. WilTJ;:
they ajk, theljc' all receive; whenl thec'y f'el,
thilr Jhall find; when they knock, it ifall l,'

jCj;t'l'.

iV.

the channel for conveying the divine grace <-v
to mankind, because the wifdorm of Heaven
iaw it to be one of the most powerful means
of improving the human heart.

When religious homage is confidered in

tlis light, as a great instrument of spiritual
and moral improvement, all the objeCtions
which fcepticilin can form from the divine
immutability, conclude with no more force
againfi prayer, than against every other
mean of improvement which reason has
iiggefted to man. If prayer be superfluous,
because God is unchangeable, we might
upon similar grounds conclude, that it is
needless to labour the earth, to nourish our
bodies, or to cultivate our minds, becaulf
the fertility of the ground, the continuance
of dur life, and the degree of our under-
standing, depend upon an immutable So-
vcreigl, and were from all eternity fore-
ieen by him. Such absurd conclulions rea-
ion has ever repudiated. To every plain
and iound undcrflanding it has clearly dic-
tatcd, that to explore the unknown purposes

of

s E R I, of Hca-vcn belongs not to us; but that rle

IV. I_-_ iwho decrees the end, certainly rcquires tilc

means; and that, in the diligent cmploymcnt
of all the means which can advance cither
our temporal or spiritual felicity, the chiii
exertions of human wisdom and human
duty conlift. Assuming it then for an u::-
doubted principle, tlat religion is a realin-
able fervicc, and that, though with tlic
Fat/eri of L'ts there be no variabllcic/,
the homage of his crcatures is neverthllef!,
for the wisei' reasons, required by him, I
proceed to flew what sentiments the con-
tenplation of divine immutability should
raise in our minds, and what duties it should
ciiefly enforce.

I. LET it excite us to admire and adore.

Filled with profound reverence, let us look
up to that Supreme Being who fits from
everlasting on the throne of the univerfc;
moving all things, but remaining immove-
able hin elf; direEting every revolution of
the creation, but afcc!ed by no revoluticls
ofevcunt or ocf tiime. H-e ellolds the hcavc!s.

rnd the earth wax old as a garment^, anld E R M.
,eca), li'c a vflure. At their appointcd pe- -
riods he raises up, or he dif'olvcs worlds.
But amidst all the convulsions of changing
and perifling nature, his glory and felicity
remain unaltered.-The view of great and
stupendous objects in the natural world
strikes the mind with solemn awe. What
veneration, then, ought to be inspired by
tlhe contemplation of an oljecd so sublime
.s the eternal and unchangeable Ruler of the
universe! The composure and stillness cf
thoughtintroduced by fucl a meditation, has
a powerful tendency both to purify and to
cleate the healt. It effaces, for a time,
tlioe trivial ideas, and extinguishes thole
low pafFlons, which arise fiom the circle of
v:in and palling objec&s around us. It opens
the mind to all the fcntimenrts of dcvotion;
.and accompanies devotion with that pro-
fulnd reverence, whicl guar;ds it from every
inpiroper exccls. 'When we confider the
Suprreme Being as emplloyed in works of
love; when we think of lis condecfccnlio
to the human race in iending his Son to

V or, I. H dwIe.ll

S E R M. dwell on the earth; encouraged by favours,

IV.. and warmed by gratitude, we are sometimes

in danger of presuming too much on his
goodness, and of indulging a certain fond-
ness of affection, which is unsuitable to our
humble and dependent state. It is necef-
fary that he should frequently appear to
our minds in all that majesty with which
the immutability of his nature clothes him;
in order that reverence may be combined
with love, and that a mixture of sacrcd awe
may chasten the rapturous effusions of warm
devotion. Servile fear, indeed, would cruflh
the spirit of ingenuous and affectionate ho-
mage. But that reverence which springs
from elevated conceptions of the divine na-
ture, has a happy effet in checking the
forwardness of imagination, restraining our
affections within due bounds, and compo-
sing our thoughts at the fame time that it
exalts them.

When, from the adoration of the un-

changeable perfection of the Almighty, we
return to the view of our own state, the first
sentiment which-ought naturally to arise, is

that

that of felf-abafement. We are too apt to S E R M.

IV

be lifted up by any little diftintions which -
we possess; and to fancy ourselves great,
only because there are others whom we con-
fider as less. But what is man, with all his
advantages and boafled powers, before the
eternal Father of Lights? With God there
is no variablencls; with man there is no
flability. Virtue and vice divide the em-
pire of his mind; and wifdoni and folly
alternately rule him. Hence he is change-
able in his designs, fickle in his fiiendfhips,
fluCtuating in his whole characer. His
life is a series of contradiations. IIe is one
thing to-day, and another to-morrow;
sometimes obliged by experience to alter his
purpose, and often led to change it through
levity. Variable and unequal himself, he
is surrounded with fleeting objecs. -He is
placed as in the midit of a torrent, where all
things are rolling by, and nothing keeps its
place. He has hardly time to contemplate
this scene of vicissitude, before he too is
swept away. Thus circulnltanced in him-
self, and in all the oljeets with which he is

H 2 con-

SE RM. conneEted, let him be admonished to be

humble and modest. Let the cQntempla-
tion of the unchanging glory of his Creator
inspire him with sentiments of due fubmif-
sion. Let it teach him to know his proper
place; and check that vanity which is so
ready to betray him into guilt.

Let the fame meditation asset him with

a deep sense of what he owes to the good-
ness of the Deity. His goodness never ap-
pears in so Rfriking a light, as when viewcd
in connexion with his greatness. The de-
scription which is given of him in the text,
calls, in this view, for our particular atten-
tion. It presents to us the most amiable
union of condescension with majesty, of the
moral with the natural perfeations of God,
which can poflibly be exhibited to the ima-
gination of man. lrom the Fatheri of Ligbhts,
·iitb whlowihl t,1're is 1:o vrinablcnis, nciCthe
jaadov/ of ti';.ii;/g, comlith (lowl evey good
and pife'/ s,3J'. The most independent of
all Beings is represented as the most bene-
licent. He wvlio is eternal and immutable,
exalted above all, and incapable of receiving

returns

returns from any, is the liberal and un- S F R M.

Iv.

wearied Giver of every thing that is good. l .
-Let luch views of the divine nature not
only call forth gratitude and prailc, but
prompt us to imitate what we adore. Let
them flhew us that benevolence is divine;
that to stoop fi-om our fancied grandeur in
order to aftlif and relieve one another, is so
far fiom being any degradation of chalrader,
that it is our trucft honour, and our nearest
rcfemblance to t/e Farther of L'bts.

II. LET the consideration of the divine

immutability convince us, that the method
of attaining the favour of Heaven is one
and invariable. Wcre the Almighty a ca-
pricious and inconstant Being, like man,
we should be at a lols what tenour of con-
du(i to hold. In order to conciliate his
grace, we might think of applying fiome-
times to one supposed principle of his incli-
nation, fometimec to another; and, bewil-
dered amidll various attempts, would be
overwhelmed with dimiay. The guilty
would essay to flatter him. The timid,

1- 3 !ume-

SE R M sometimes by austere mortifications, some-

1V.' times by costly gifts, sometimes by obfe-

quious rites, would try to appease him.
Hence, in fa, have arisen all the corrup-
tions of religious worship among men;
from their forming the divine charad:er
upon their own, and ascribing to the Sove-
reign of the Universe the mutability of hu-
man passions. God is represented by the
psalmist David as faying to the wicked, Thou
tboughtefi that I was altogether fiuch an one
as thbyff. This continues to be the de-
scription of all the superstitious and cnthu-
fiaftic feds, which, since the days of David,
have sprung up in the world.

It is our peculiar happiness, under the go-

fpel, to have God revealed to us in his ge-
nuine character; as without variablnefs or
Jhiadow of turning. We know that at no
time there is any change, either in his as-
sections, or in the plan of his adminiftra.
tion. One light always flines upon us
from above. One clear and direa path is
always pointed out to man. The Supreme

* Psalm 1. Zl.

Being

Being is, and was, and ever will be, the SE R M.

1V.

supporter of order and virtue; the righteous i
Lord loving rigihtertcef/ . The external
forms of religion may vary; but under all
dispensations which proceed from God, its
fubifance is the fame. It tends continualiy
to one point, the purification of man's heart
and life. This was the object of the origi-
nal law of nature. This was the scope of
the M\osaic institution amidst all its sacrifices
and rites; and this is unquestionably the
end of the gospel. So invariably constant
is God to this purpose, that the dilpenfation
of mercy in Christ Jefis, which admits of
the vicarious atonement and righteoufneis
of a Redeemer, makes no change in our
obligation to fulfil the duties of a good life.
The Redeemer himself hath taught us, that
to the end of time the moral law continues
in its full force; and that till heaven and
earth pafi alway, one jot or tittle Jall in no
wife pafsfrnom it :. This is the only infli-
tution known to men, whose authority is un-
changing and constant. Human laws rife

* Matt. v. 18.

H 4 and

S ER M. and fall with the empires that gave then

birth. Syflems of philosophy vary with the
progress of knowledge and light. lanner,
sentiments, and opinions, alter with the
course of time. But throughout all age: ,
and amidst all revolutions, the rule of
moral and religious conduc is the fame.
It partakes of that immutability of the
divine nature, on which it is founded.
Such as it was delivered to the first wor-
ihippers of God, it continues to be, at this
day, to us; and such it shall remain to
our posterity for ever.

HI. LET the contemplation of this per-

fecion of the divine nature teach us to
imitate, as far as our frailty will permit,
that conflancy and ftedfaftnefs which we
adore. All the moral attributes of the Su-
preme Being, are standards of character
towards which we ought to aspire. But
as in all these perfetions there are proper-
ties peculiar to the divine nature, our endea-
vours to rdfemble them are laid under great
'e. riclions by the difiiiilarity bctween our

T i.. - ....

nature and the divine. With refpcct to s E R M.

1%.

that attribute which we now confider, the -,
circumstances are evident which preclude
improper imitation. To man it is frcC
quently necefiary to correct his errours, and
to change his conduct. An attempt, there-
fore, to continue wholly invariable, would,
in our situation, be no other than impru-
dent and criminal obllinacy. But withal,
the immutable rectitude of the Deity lhouid
lead us to afl)ire after fixcdncfs of principle,
and uniformity in conduct, as the glory of
the rational nature. Imprcfled witl the
sense of that ifupreme excellence which
reiults from unchanging goodnef, , faith-
fnlncis, and truth, let us become aihamcd
of that levity which degrades the human
charalcer. Let us ploi/er o-.;' p;,7Js, a2d
upon a well-regulated plan, and remain
conlifent witlh ourl'lves. Contemplating
the glory of the Father of Lights, let us
aim at being transformed, in some degree,
ijlfo the fJaii i7mane fJ;io glorJ to glo)y. Si-
nally,

IV. LET

s E R M. IV. LET the divine immutability become

Iv.

the ground of confidence and trust to good
men, amidfl all the revolutions of this un-
certain world. This is one of the chief im-
provements to be made of the subject, ani
therefore requires full illustration. There
are three lights in which we may view the
benefit redounding to us from that attribute
of God which we now confider. It anfliies
us of the constancy of Nature ; of the regu-
lar adminifiration of Providence; of the
certain accompliihment of all the divine
promires.

Fiilft, it gives us ground to depend on the

constant and uniform course of Nature. On
the unchangeablcnefs of God refts the fla-
bility of the universe. What we call the
laws of nature are no other than the decrees
of the Supreme Being. It is because He is
vithout variablci;c'J or Jhladow of turning,
that those laws have continued the fame
since the beginning of the world ; that the
Sun ib confiantly observes his time of rising
and going down; that the seasons annually
return; the tides periodically ebb and flow;

the

the earth yields its fruits at tfated intervals; s E R M.

1V.

and the human body and mental powers a_
advance to maturity by a regular progress.
In all those motions and operations which
are incessantly going on throughout nature,
there is no flop nor interruption; no change
nor innovation; no defleCtion from their
main scope. The fame powerful and steady
hand which gave the first impulse to the
powers of nature, refirains them from ever
exceeding their prescribed line. Hence
arises the chief comfort of our present life.
We find ourselves in a regular and orderly
world. We look forward to a known fuc-
ceflion of events. We are enabled to form
plans of action. From the cause we calcu-
late the effect; and from the past, we rea-
son with confidence concerning the future.

Accustomed from our infancy to this con-

ftancy in Nature, we are hardly sensible of
the blessing. Familiarity has the fame es-
seCt here, as in many other enjoyments, to
efface gratitude. But let us, for a moment,
take an opposite view of things. Let us
suppose, that we had any cause to dread

capri-

S E R M. capriciousness or change in the power who

IV. rules the course of Nature; any ground to

fuipeLt that, but for one day, the Sun
might not rife, nor the current of the wa-
ters hold their usual course, nor the laws of
motion and vegetation proceed as we have
been accustomed to behold them. What
diinay would instantly fill all hearts!
what horror would seem to overspread the
whole face of Nature! What part could we
as, or whither could we run, in the midst
of convulsions, which overturned all the
measures we had formed for happiness, or
for safety ? The present abode of man
would then become, as Job defcribcs the
region of the grave, a land of darkLcfs, as
dankiietf it/t, and the Jfl:daow of ile(lth;
without any orer ; and where the light is as
darknics f". With what joy ought we then
to recognise an unvarying and stedfast Ruler,
undcr whose dominion we have no Iuch
difaftcrs to dread ; but can dcpcnd on the
course of Nature continuing to proceed as

* Job, x, 22,

0s'

i has ever gone on, until the period fliall S E M.
arrive of its final diflolution ! -

BUT though the great laws of Nature be

constant like their Author, yet in the
affairs of men there is much variety and
change. All that regards our' present pof-
fcfiions and enjoymenlts was, for wire a

rea-

sons, left, in a great meafuire, uncertain
and from this uncertainty ariies the distress
of human life. Scnfible of the changes to
which we lie open, we look round with
anxious eyes, and eagerly graip at every
objec: which appears to prolniie us iecu-
rity. But in vain is the whole circle of
human things explored wviIl this lview.
There is nothing on earth! io flable as to
auire us of undisturbed reft, nor so power-
ful as to afford us conflant protection.
Time, death, and change, t:iumph over all
the labours of men. \V' at we build up,
they incessantly deitroy. The public con-
dition of nations, and the pi ivate fortunes of
individuals, are alike ffubje& to reverse.
Life never retains long the iame form. Its

whole

S E R M. whole scenery is continually shifting around

IV.
_... us.- Amidst those endless viciflitudes,

what can give any firm consolation, any
satisfying reft to the heart, except the do-
minion of a wife and righteous Sovereign,
with whom there is no variableness, nor fiJa
dow of turning ? Though all things change,
and we ourselves be involved in the general
mutability, yet as long as there is fixed and
permanent goodnels at the head of the uni-
verse, we are assured that the great interests
of all good men shall be safe. That river
perpetually flows, the ftrcams whereof make
glad the city of God. We know that the
Supreme Being loved righteousness from
the beginning of days, and that he will
continue to love it to the last. Under his
government none of those revolutions hap-
pen which have place among the kingdoms
of the earth; where princes die, and new
sovereigns ascend the throne; new mini-
fters and new counsels succeed; the whole
face of affairs is changed; and former plans
fall into oblivion. But the throne of the Lord
is eflablif.edfor ever; and the thoughts of his

heart

heart endure to all generations. We serve F R M.
the fame God whom our fathers worflip- .
ped, and whom our posterity flall adore.
His unchanging dominion comprehends all
events and all ages; efiablillhes a connec-
ing principle which holds together the past,
the present, and the future; gives flability
to things which in themselves are fluatuat-
ing, and extracts order from those which
appear most confuted. Well may the earth
rejoice, and the minltitzde of iqes be glad, be-
cause there reigneth over the universe such
an immutable Lord.

Were you to unhinge this great article

of faith; were you either to fay tltth the
fool, that there is no God, or to suppose with
the luperftitious, that the God who rules
is variable and capricious; you would in-
deed lay the axe to the root of the tree, and
cut down, with one blow, the hope and
security of mankind. For you would then
leave nothing in the whole compass of na-
ture, but a round of casual and transitory
being; no foundation of truPt, no protec-
tion to the righteous, no fledfaft principle

II to

SER M. to uphold and to rcgulate the fucccffion of

IV. '
-_-w_- existence. Inlead of that magnificent fpcc-

tacle which the world now exhibits, when
beheld in connexion with the divine go-
vernment, it would then only present to
view a multitude of fllort-lived creatures
springing out oF (he dult, wandering on
the face of the earth without guide or pro-
teQor, firuggling for a few years againfl
the torrent of uncertainty and clange;
and then linking into utter oblivion, and
vaniflhing like vilions of the night. il-vI-
terious obscurity would involve the begin-
ning of things; diorder would mark theii
progress; and the blackness of darkneis
would cover their final rcfult. lWhereas,
when Faith enables us to discover an uni-
versal Sovereign, whose power never fails,
and whose wilUom and goodness never
change, the profpc& clcars up on every
fide. A rav from the great iource of light
seems to illuminate the whole creation.
Good men diiover a parent and a friend.
They attain a fortrcls in every danger; a
refuge amid2i all florms; a dwc.'tig-placc

3 * ln

i;j all generations. They are no longer SER M.
bfraid of evil tidings. 'Their heart is fixed, I
trfling in the Lord.

THIOUGH there r eafonings, from the un-

changing tenour of divine government,
cannot but afford much comfort to good
men, their fatisfadion, however, becomes
still more complete, when they confider
the explicit promises which are given them
in the word of God. The immutability of
the divine purpose assures them molt per-
feltly of those promises being fulfilled in
due time, how adverse soever circumstances
may at present appear to their accomplifl-
ment. The Strength of jIranc is not a man
that heJfiould lie, nor the son of man that he
fJhold repent.- ' Hath he fitid it, and fiall
he not do it ? Hath hefpokein, andJ7Iall he
not make it good? Men have the cQmmand
only of the prclent time. When that is
suffered to pass, changes may befall, either
in their own state, or in the situation of
things around them, which flall defeat their
heft intentions in our behalf, and render all

VoiL. 11. T thet

S E RM. their promises fruitless. Hence, even set-
r.J ting aside the danger of human inconflancv,

the confidence which we can repose on any
earthly protetor is extremely imperfect.
Man, in his highest glory, is but a reed
floating on the fream of time, and forced
to follow every new direcion of the cur-
rent. But God is the rock of ages. All
time is equally in his hands. Intervening
accidents cannot embarrass him; nor any
unforeseen obstacle retard the performance
of his mofl distant promise. One day is with
the Lord as a thoufandyears, and a thou-
Jand years are as one day. There is no vi-
ciffitude of the human state in which good
men cannot take fanftuary with him as a
sure and abiding friend the safe condutor
of their pilgrimage here, as well as the eter-
nal reft of their fouls hereafter. All their
patrons may desert them; and all their
friends may die; but the Lord Jill lives,
-who is their rock; and the mofJ high God,
who is their redeemer. He hath promised
that he v'ill not leave them when they are
lrd,' nor forfa.e thezm 'when their Jlrcngth

2 failet ;

faileth; and that even when theirheartsflall s E R M.

Iv.

faint, andtheir fiLe fail, he willbe thejlrength 1-
of their heart, ad their portionfor ever. His
immutability is not only the ground of trust
in him during their own abode on earth,
but gives them the fatisfadion of looking
forward to the fame wife and good admini-
firation as continued to the end of time.
When departing hence, and bidding adieu to
life, with all its changeful scenes, they can
with comfort and peace leave their family,
their friends, and their dearest concerns, in
the hands of that God who reigneth for
ever; and whose countenancej7hall always
behold the upright with the fame compla-
cency. My days are like aJhadow that de-
clineth, and I am withered like the grass.
But thou, OLord, Jfalt endure for ever;
and thy remembrance to all generations. The
children of thy servants Jhall continue; and
their feedJ all be efJablifded before thee *.

SUCH are the benefits which good men
may derive from meditation on God as

Psalm cii. II, 12. 23.

I 2 ,;ithort

SE R M. witbout variableness or fiadow of turnitg.

,v. It inspires them with fentitnents of devour,

humble, and grateful adoration. It points
out to them the unvarying tenour of con-
dud which they ought to hold; checks their
ficklcnefs and inconfancy ; and, amidst all
diitreffes and fears, affords them comfort.
The immutabiiity of God is :he surest basis
on which their hopes can be built. It is
indeed the pillar on which the whole uni-
verse rets.-On such icrious and solemn
meditations let our thoughts often dwell, in
order to correc that folly and levity which
arc so apt to take pofiffion of the human
heart. And if our minds be overawed, and
even deprefied, with so high a view of the
divine nature, let them be relieved by the
rcfccicnn, that to this unchangeable God
we are permitted to look up through a gra-
cious Mediator, who, though possesSed of
divine perfedion, is not unconscious of hu-
man diftrcls and frailty.

# SERMON V. On the COMPASSION of CHRIST. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. HEBREWS, iv. 15. We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feelings of our ...

I 117 ]

SERMON V.

On the COMPASSION of CHRIST.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.

HEBREWS, iv. 15.
I We have not an high pricl which cannot be

touched with the feelings of our infirmities;
but was in all points ternpted liLe as we
are, yet without fit.

HEN we compare the counsels of sERM.
Providence with the plans of men, v_

we find a like difference obtain, as in the
works of nature compared with those of art.
The works of art may, at sirs view, appear
the most finished and beautiful; but when

I 3 the

S E R M. the eye is assisted to pry into their contex-
-V. ture, the nicest workmanafhip is discerned to

be rough and blemifled. Whereas the works
of nature gain by the most accurate exami-
nation; and those which on a superficial
survey appear defeaive or rude, the more
intimately they are infpcaed, discover the
more exaa conftrudion and confulnmate
beauty. In the fame manner, the fyflems
of worldly policy, though at first they seem
plausible and profound, soon betray in their
progress the narrowness of the human un-
derftanding; while those dispensations of
Providence, which appeared to furnish ob-
jedtions either against the goodness or the
wisdom of Heaven, have, upon a more
extensive view of their consequences, fre-
quently afforded the most striking proofs
of both.

God manifelted in the fleh was to the Jews

a lumbling-block, and to the Greeks fooli/h-
nefi. It contradicted every prepoffeflion
which their confined ideas of religion and
philosophy led them to entertain. If a fupe-
riour Being was to interpose for the refto-

ration

ration of a degenerate world, they concluded s E R M.
that he would certainly appear in celestial En
majesty. But the thoughts of God are not
as the thoughts of men. The divine wisdom
saw it to be fit that the Saviour of mankind
should in all things be made like unto those
whom he came to save. By living as a man
among men, he dispensed inftrudion in the
most winning manner. He added to in-
flrution the grace and the force of his own
example. He accommodated that example
to the most trying and difficult situations of
human life; and, by suffering a painful
death, he both taught men how to susser
and die; and in that nature which had of-
fended, he offered a solemn expiation to
God for human guilt.

Betides these ends, so worthy of God,

which were accomplished by the incarna-
tion of Christ, another, of high importance,
is suggested in the text. Human life is to
good men, as well as to others, a state of
suffering and distress. To supply them
with proper consolation and encouragement
during such a state, was one great purpose

14 of

SE RM. of the undertaking of Christ. With this

V.
,_,c-^ view he assumed the office of their high

priest, or mediator with God; and the en-
couragement which this office affords them,
will be proportioned to their assured belief,
first of his power, and next of his com-
passion. His power is set forth in the verse
preceding the text, and the proper argu-
ment is founded upon it. Seeing that we
have a great high priest who is paqlld intto
the heavens, Jefiis the Son of God, let us hold
fiAt our prcfc/fion. But though it be en-
couraging to know that our high pricft
is the Son of God, and that he is paj/d into
the heavens, yet there sacs alone are not
fuifcient to render him the full object of
our confidence. For, as the apostle after-
wards obfcrves, it belongs to the character
of a high priest to be taken from among men,
that he may have comnpnaion on the ignorant,
and them that are out of the way,feeing that
he hinfef is compared with ifirmity. In
order then to satisfy us of our high priest's
possessing also the qualifications of mercy
and compassion, we are told that he is

touched

touched with theJeeling of our infirmities, and s E R M.
,was in all points tempted like as we are.
The force of this consideration I purpose
now to illufirate. I shall first explain the
fads which are siated in the text, and then
show how from there out Saviour's com-
passion is to be inferred, and in what man-
ner it may be accommodated to the confo-
lation and hope of good.men amidit various
cxigencies of life.

TIHE assertion in the text of Christ's be-

ing touched with the feeling of our ifirrmities,
plainly implies that he had full experience
both of the external distresses, and of the
internal sorrows of human nature. Affum-
ing a body such as ours, he fubjedcd him.
self to all the natural ccnfcquences of cor-
poreal frailty. Hfe did not chufe for him-
self an easy and opulent condition, in order
to glide through the world with the least
molestation. He did not suit his mifflon to
the upper ranks of mankind chiefly, by
assimilating his state to theirs: but, born
in meanness, and bred up to labour, he

submitted

SE RM. submitted to the inconveniencies of that

V. i-^j poor and toilsome life which falls to the

ihare of the most numerous part of the5 hu-
man race. Whatever is revere in the dif-
regard of relations or the ingratitude of
friends, in the scorn of the proud or the
insults of the mean, in the virulence of re-
proach or the sharpness of pain, was un-
dergone by Christ. Though his life was
short, he familiarized himself in it with a
wide compass of human woe; and there is
almost no diftrefsfil situation to which we
can be reduced, but what he has expe-
rienced before us. There is not the least
reason to imagine that the eminence of his
nature raised him above the sensations of
trouble and grief. Had this been the cafe,
he would have been a sufferer in appear-
ance only, not in reality; there would have
been no merit, in his patience, or in the re-
fignation which he expressed. On the con-
trary, it appears, from many circumstances,
that the sensibility of his nature was tender
and exquisite. He affected none of that
hard indifference in which some ancient

philo-

philosophers vainly gloried. He felt as a SE R M.

V.

man, and he sympathized with the feelings I
of others. On different occasions we are
informed that he was troubled inspirit, that
he groaned, and that he wept. The relation
of his agony in the garden of Gethsemane
exhibits a itriking picure of the sensations
of innocent nature oppressed with anguish.
It discovers all the conflia between the
dread of suffering on the one hand, and the
sense of duty on the other; the man ftrug-
gling for a while with human weakness,
and in the end recollected in virtue, and
riling fuperiour to the objects of dismay
which were then in his view. Father ! if
it be pofible, let this cup apfs from me. Ne-
vcrthelefs, not as I will, but as thou wilt.
Thy will be done. Thus was our Saviour
touched with the feeling of our infirmities.
He was a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with grief

It is added in the text, that he was in all

points tempted like as we are. To be tempt-
ed is, in the language of Scripture, to un-
dergo such trials of virtue as are accompa-

nied

S E R M. nied with difficulty and conflit. Though

V-, our Lord was not liable to any temptations

from depravity of nature, yet he was per-
petually exposed to such as arise from fitua-
tions the most advcrfe to virtue. His whole
life was in this refpecq a course of tempta-
tion ; that is, a severe trial of his constancy
by every discouragement. He suffered
repeated provocations both from friends
and foes. His endeavours to do good were
requited with the most obstinate and per-
verse opposition. Sometimes by the folici-
tations of ignorant multitudes he was tempt-
ed to accept the proffers of worldly greatness.
Oftener, by the insults of multitudes, more
blind and brutal, he was tempted to desert
an office which exposed him to so much
minery. 'Together with the world, the
powers of darkness also combined their
efforts against him. We are informed that
he was led into the wilderneJ/, and, amidff
the horrbrs of a wild and dreary solitude,
was tempted of the devil. The great adver-
fary of mankind seems to have been per-
mitted to exert unusual proofs of his power

and

and malice, on purpose that the trial of our S E R M.
Saviour's constancy might be more com-
plete, and his victory over him more illus-
trious and diflinguifhed.

From all there circumstances, the conclu-

sion is obvious, that our Lord knows, fiom
personal experience, all the discouragements
and temptations which virtue can fuffcr.
Though he participated not of the corrup-
tion, yet he felt the weakness of human
nature. He felt the ftlength of paflion.
He is no firanger to tl'e diflurbance and
commotion, which either the attacks of the
world, or the powers of darkncfs, are able
to raise within the breast of man. One re-
markable difference, indeed, takes place be-
tween our temptations and those of Chrifr.
Though he was teptced like as we are, )yet
he was without fin. Though the conlli&
was the fame, the issue was different. We
are often foiled; He always overcame. But
his disconformity to us in this refpe2, is far
from weakening the strength of our present
argument. For tin contrascs and hardens
the heart. Every degree of guilt incurred

l by

S ER M. by yielding to temptation, tends to debate
1.-yj_ the mind, and to weaken the generous and

benevolent principles of human nature. If
from our Lord's being tempted like as we are,
wae have any ground to expea his fympa-
thy, from his being tempted, yet without Jlu,
we are entitled to hope that his sympathy,
unallayed and perfeCt, will operate with
more complete energy.

FROM this view of the fats which are

stated in the text, I procecd to shew how
justly we may infer our Saviour's compaf-
sion, and in what manner it is to be ac-
commodated to the consolation of good men
amidst various exigencies of life.

It has been the univcrfal opinion of man-

kind, that personal experience of suffering
humanizes the heart. In the school of as-
fliAion, compaflion is always supposed to
be most thoroughly learned ; and hence, in
the laws of Moses, when the Israelites are
commanded not to oppress the stranger, this
reason is given, for yout know the heart of a
Irlanger, sicing ye were f. ragcr;s yourselves

in the land of Egjyt `. The distressed, ac- SE R M.
cordingly, fly for consolation to those who V
have been their companions in woe. They
decline the prosperous, and look up to
them with a suspicious eye. They confi-
der them as ignorant of their feelings, and
therefore regardless of their complaints.
Amidst the manifold sorrows of life, then,
how soothing is the thought that our great
Intercessor with God was a fellow-fufferer
with ourselves, while he passed through
this valley of tears.

But was it necessary for Christ, it may

be said, to assume our nature in order to
acquire the knowledge of its infirmity and
distress ? As a divine person, was he not
perfetly acquainted with our frame before
he descended to the earth ? Did he stand
in need of being prompted to compassion
by the experience of our sorrows ? Could
his experimental knowledge of human weak.
ness increase the benevolence of a nature
which before was perfect ?- No: he sub-

* Exod. xxiii. 9.

mitted

SE R M. mitted to be touched with the feeling of our

V.
_._ ifirmlities, and to be tempted like as we are;

not in order to become acquainted with our
nature, but to satisfy us that he knew it per-
fetly ; not in order to acquire any new de-
gree of goodness, hut to give us the firmer
confidence in the goodness which he pof-
fefled, and to convey the sense of it to our
hearts with greater force and effect.

Distrust is a weakness peculiarly incident

to the miserable. They are apt to reject
hope, to indulge fear, and to tinge, with the
dark colour of their own minds, every ob-
jet which is offered for their encourage-
ment. The representations given us of the
Deity in Scripture, afibrd undoubtedly much
ground for trust in his goodness. But the
perfection of an Almighty Being, who
dwelieth in the secret place of eternity,
whomnz no ma1n ,batbf Yen or can ficC is over-
whelming to a timid apprehension. The
goodness which it promises is a new and
unknown form of. goodness. Whatever
proceeds fromn a na':u-e lb far fuperiour to
our own, is beheld with a degree of awe,

which

which is ready to ovcrpower hope. 'Upon S E RaM.
this account, under the Old Tc'tameint di- 'J
pcnfation, the iuprcme Being is oiten de-
Itriljcd with the attributes of a man. in order
to give a fiade and flftcning to his great-
ness, and to accommodate his goodnecs
more to our capacity. The relentings of a
friend, the pity of a parent, and the iglls
of a mourner, are ascribed to the Almighty.
But we cafily perceive ficlh attributes to be
no more than figures and allusions. The
comfort which they afford is not deiinite
nor precise. They leave the mind, under
an anxious uncertainty, left it err in its
interpretation of those allegories of mlercy.
In the person of Jcfus Christ the olbjeQ of
our trult is brought nearer to ourfelvcs;
and of course adapted more eclitiually to
our encouragement. T'holi well-known
tender affcctions, which are only iigul;a-
tively ascribed to the Divinity, are in o'!1'
great Mediator thoroughly realized. His
goodness is the goodnels of hum:an nature
exalted and rendered perfect. It is thnt
species of goodness with which we are hbe:
acquainted, compaflion to the unh;:ply;

VOL. II. KI a:Jd

SE RM. and compassion cultivated by that difclplinc

V.

which we know to be the most powerful,
the experience of sorrows.

For such reasons as these, becaife the chil-

dren are partakers of fjeJI and blood, Cljbrj
hifelf'likcwife took part of thefiame. In all
things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren, that he night be a mercfiul as well
as afaithfal high priL;f. When we confider
his assumption of our nature in this light,
what a mild and amiable afpedt does it give
to the government of heaven ! What at-
tentive solicitude of goodness is flewn in
carrying on the dispensation of our re-
demption upon a plan so perfectly calcu-
lated to banish all distrust, and to. revive
the mool timid and dejeEted heart! How
naturally does that inference follow which
the Apostle makes in the verse immediately
succeeding the text; let us therlforie c2m
boldly to the throne of grace, that zes mna,
obiain mll 'C!' and find grace to help in time
of aced! More particularly, in confq(lucuce
of the doLcrine which I have illustratcd, we
are taught to hope,

4

I. THAT

I, THiAT under all our infirmities and SERM.

errors, regard will be had to human im- .--.
perfedfion; that a merciful dif{indion will
be made between what is weak and what is
wilfully criminal in our condud ; and that
such measures of obedience only will be ex-
afted as are proportioned to our circum-
flances and powers. What can more en-
courage our religious ferviccs, than to be
assured that the God whom we worlhip
1lno ws ourfiname, a.diL remembers ce are fi;jl
and that the Mediator, through whom we
worlhip him, is touched with lhe fjclig of
ar igy'irmllies ? The most virtuous are the
most apt to be dejcced with the sense of
their frailty. While vain and flpe!flicial
men are easily flattered with favourable
views of themselves, and fond hopes of
divine acceptance, the slightest apprellen-
sion of guilt is ready to alarm the humble
and delicate mind; jult as on coarle bodies
an impreflion is not ealily made, while those
of liner contexture are soon hurt; and as
on an exquisite polish the leatl fpcck is vi-
fible. But though religion promotes grcat

K 2 timuli-

SER M. fcnfeiility to all feelings of a moral nature,
,, yet it gives no countenance to exccfsive and

superstitious fears. That humility w!hch
checks presumption, and thatjealoufy whici
infpircs vigilance, are favourable to piety;
while thofefufpicions which lead to dcfpond-
ency are injurious to God, hurtful to our-
selves, and repugnant to that whole lyfteem
of mercy which I have been illufirating.

You complain, that when you engage in

the solemn exercises of devotion, your fpi-
rits are deprefled by a load of cares and
sorrows; that in your thoughts there is no
composure, and in your afcfteions no ele-
vation; that after your utmost essays, you
are incapable of fixing your attention ftea-
dily on God, or of fending up your prayers
to him with becoming warmth and fulness
of heart. This debility and wandering of
mind you are apt to impute to some uncom-
mon degree of guilt. You confider it as
the symptom of incurable hardness of heart,
and as a melancholy proof of your being
abandoned by God.-Such fears as these in
a great measure refute themselves. If you

6 were

were really obdurate, you would be insen- s E P, M.
fible of guilt. Your complaints of hard-
ness of heart are an evidence of your heart
being at that moment contrite and actually
relenting.-Are there any circumstances of
inward discomposure and perplexity of
which he is unconscious, who at a critical pe-
riod of his life was heavy andsore amazed :;
who was obliged to complain that his foul
was troubled within him; and to acknow-
ledge, that though the spirit was willing, yet
the fJeh was weak P To a fuperiour nature,
untouched with human frailty, you might
in such situations look up with some degree
of terrour. But He who remembers the
struggles of his own foul, will not, surely,
judge yours like a hard and unfeeling
master. Acquainted with the inmost recesses
of human nature, he perceives the sincerity
of your intentions; he fees the combat you
maintain; he knows how much of your
present confusion and disorder is to be im-
puted, not to your inclination and will, but
to an infirm, an aged or diseased body, or

* Mirk, xiv. 33.

K 3 to

SS, RM. to a weak and wounded spirit; and there-

V.__ fore will be far from rejeding your attempts

to serve him, on account of the infirmities
which you lament. He hears the voice of
those secret al'irations which you are unable
to express in words, or to form into prayer.
Every penitential tear which your contrition
fleds, pleads your cause more powerfully
with him, than all the arguments with which
you could fill your mouth.

II. FROM our Saviour's experience of

human misery, we may justly hope that he
will to compafflonately regard our difireffed
estate, as to prevent us from being loaded
with unnecessary troubles. He will not
wantonly add afflicion to the afflited; nor
willingly crush what he fees to be already
broken. In the course of that high admi-
niftration which he now exercises, he may
indeed judge certain intermixtures of ad-
verfity to be proper for our improvement.
Thele are trials of virtue through which all,
without exception, muff pass. Rugged was
the road by which our divine Mediator him-

self

self went before us to glory; and by be- s ER M.

V.

coming our companion in distress, he meant ,
to reconcile us to our lot. He ennobled
adversity, by sharing it with us. He raised
poverty from contempt, by afluming it for
his own condition. The severity of his
trials tends to lighten ours. When the ge-
neral of an army lies on the fame hard
ground, drinks of the f:ame cold fiream,
carries the fame weight of armour with the
lowetl centinel, can any of his soldiers re-
pine at what they endure ?

Whatever afllictions our Lord may judge

to be necessary for us, of this we may reft
afiured, that he will deal them forth, not
with harfi and imperious authority, but
with the tenderness of one, who knows from
experience how deeply the human heart is
wounded by every firokc of adversity. IIe
will not lay more upon us than he fees we
are able to bear. ThLouzh he c Cife glrif; yet
will he haveC co0paSion nccodIf.ing tho tlc m1l-
tlit!de of his tender mercies. le w'i/l J y his
roi,~'h wind inI the Jt7 of the caJt wilnd':

* Ifiah, x:xvii. S.

K 4 I;or

S E R M. For it is his fiate, but not his nature, which

0^^ is now changed. Notv: ithfanding his high

exaltation, he still retains the compaflionate
sentiments of the man off rowcs. Still, we
are affiured by anl inlpired writer, he is jIct
7 17:jaiicd I'o cill is his brethren i. And with
the heart of a brother lie regards thole few
and troubled days, such as his oWvxn once
were, which good men are doomed to pals
in this evil world.

From his compassion, indeed, we are not

to exped that fond indulgence or unlafolu-
able relief by which the weak pity of men
frequently injures its objecs. It is to the
material interefis, more than to the present
ease, of good men, that he attends. WVhen
under the impatience of ibrrow we exclaim,
Jbll/ ..Z,: hf7§/hm lo be g;racious'? bha:h lb
i;/ t?:.'"r'? /.'! up h.:,; /L'.'/'./'- imerVcies ? we rc-
col!ic: nct inl whc,!b l:ands we are. Iis
com;paliio: is inet dcinilisincd whlen its opc-
rations are mos colicealed. It continues
equally'to flow, though the channels bIy
which it is co:dusced towards us lie too

' iLS. i :'id. !;.i

dcep

deep for our observation. Amidf: ourpre- S ER M.
iellt ignorance of what is good or ill for us -
in this life, it is sufficient for us to know,
tlat the immcdiate administration of uni-
versal governmentis placed in the hands of
tlhe molt attentive and compaflrnate friend
of mankind. iow greatly docs this confi-
deration alleviate the hurden of lut.man
woe! How haippily doe, it connedt with the
·aw'u! dliacilcnitions of religion the mildcft
ideas of tendcrncfs and humanity!

III Ti'E text leads us to hope, that

amiK'ft all the infirmities of our fiate, both
under the temptations and under the dif-
trel'es of life, our blelfed Lord will afford
us a proper measure of aflltance and flip-
port. In that be hathl filcrd being tmlpted,
he is rble to fiwccoiri them who either fuffcr,
or arrc tempted ; that is, he is perfedlly
qualilied for discharging this beneiccnt ofi
fice; he !,nows exaAdily where the wound
bleeds, where the burden pretfcs, what re-
lief will prove mioft lialbnlab!c, and how it

* HIb. ii. S.

C.;:

S E R M. can be most successfully applied. The man-

V. h, ner in which it is conveyed by him to the

heart we may be at a loss to explain; but
no argument can be thence drawn against
the credibility of the fa&. The operations
which the power of God carries on in the
natural world, are no less mysterious than
those which we are taught to believe that
his spirit performs in the moral world. If
we can give no account of what is every day
before our eyes, how a feed becomes a tree,
or how the child rites into a man, is it any
wonder that we should be unable to explain
how virtue is supported, and contfancy
strengthencd, by God within the heart ? If
men by their counsels and suggestions can
influence the minds of one another, muL.
not divine suggestion and counsel produce
a much greater effe&t? Surely, the Father of
Spirits, must, by a thousand ways, have ac-
cess to the spirits which he has made, bo as
to give them what determination, or impart
to them what afliftance he thinks proper,
without injuring their frame, or disturbing
their rational powers.

Accord-

Accordingly, whenever any notions of SERM.

V.

religion have taken place among mankind, -
this belief has in some mealure prevailed,
that, to the virtuous under distress, aid was
communicated from above. This senti-
ment is so congruous to our natural im-
pressions of the divine benignity, that both
among poets and philo!bphers of ancient
times it was a favourite idea, and often
occurs in their writings. But what among
them was no more than loose conjecture or
feeble hope, has received full confirmation
from the gospel of Christ. Not only is the
promise of divine afflifance expressly given
to Christians, but their faith in that promise
is strengthened by an argument which muff
carry conviction to every heart. If Christ
had full experience of the insufficiency of
human nature to overcome the diflicultics
wherewith it is now surrounded, will he
withhold from his followers that grace
without which he secs they must perifi in
the evil day ? If in the season of his tempt-
ation and distress, an angcl was sent from

lheaven

S E r M. Leaven tofirev.ibhcn him-, flnall no celefial

_ el ncingier be cmlployed by him on the like

kind errand to those whom he styles his
brethren Can we believe that le who once
b'rc o,.i .

: ,ii;I c o.reid t Gfi.jriouws wxill,

in'om that hcight of glory to which lie is
now exliteJ, look dcown upon us here con-
tending withl the storm of adversity, la-
oouritng to follow lis steps through the steep

;.d difficult paths of virtue, exposed on
every iide to arrows aimed againfl us by
the powers of darkness; and that, feieing
our distress and hearing our supplications,
he will remain an unconcerned fpeaator,
without vouchlafnig us either afliftance to
1hpport our frailty, or protecion to screen
t:s amidst surrounding dangers ? Where
were then the benevolence of a divine Na-
ture ? Where, the compassion of that Medi-
ator who was trained to mercy in the cllool
of sorrow ? Far froim us be such ungratefil
!Ulpicions of the generous friend of human;
kind !-Let us exert ourfelvcs as we ca:i,

* Luke, xxii. . 3.

and

and we shall be affined. Let us pray, and s ER M.
we flall be heard; for thc:'c is one to pre- V.
fcnt our prayers, whom the FIatlher heLmith
a,/ways. Thefc, will lhe i:y, are my fol-
lowers on earth, pafling through that thorny
path of temptation and sorro-w which I once
t:ode. 2rOw I am no more ii /he icrld:

1/1t thtfc are i;z the world. Hly Satier !

thiine they werc, and thou gavel thezm ne.
]etp ihem throulgh thi;e c:zn l, name. SaNC-
tiJf thc: l thron! h thy truth. Kc, them fzro
the evil one ; that the may

l e where l aml,

anld oayj behold the glor ' which tlhoi, hanJ
given ,e me.

Such is the comfort which arises to us

from our Saviour's participation of the in-
firmities of human nature; and thus it may,
be applied to various iituations of anxiety
and diRfrefs.

WHnIEN we review what has been said,

it is necessary that, in the firfi place, I
guard you against a certain misimprove-
ment which may be made of this doCtrine.

* John, xvii.

The

SER M. The amiable view which it gives of our

V.
vi * Lord's clemency may flatter some men

with unwarrantable hopes, and lead them
to imagine, that in his experience of human
weakness an apology is to be found for
every crime. Persons of this character
must be taught, that his compassion differs
widely from that undiftinguifhing and ca-
pricious indulgence which is sometimes
found among men. It is the compassion
of an impartial mind, enlightened by wis-
dom, and guided by justice, extending to
the frailties of the sincere, but not to the
fins of the presumptuous, and least of all to
the crimes of those who encourage them-
selves in evil from the hope that they shall
meet with companion.

A course of deliberate guilt admits of no

apology from the weakness of human na-
ture. For notwithstanding all the infirmi-
ties incident to it, no man is under a ne-
ceffity of being wicked. So far is our Sa-
viour's experience of our nature from
affording any ground of hope to prefump-
tuous offenders, that it ought to fill them

w'ith

with terrour. For it flews them how tho- s E RM
roughly qualified he is to discriminate .-
accurately the charaters of men, and to
mark the boundaries between frailty and
perverfencfs. He who from his own feel-
ings well knows all the workings of the hu-
man heart, clearly discerns how different
their temper is from what was once his
own. He perceives that vice, not virtue, is
their choice ; and that, instead of refifling
temptation, they resist conscience. He fees
that infirmity affords them no excuse; and
that the real cause of their acting a criminal
part, is not because they cannot do better,
but, in truth, because they will not. Hav-
ing forfeited every title to companion, they
are left in the hands ofjuftice; and accord-
ing as tlhey have fiwn, they muff expet to
reap.

BUT, in the next place, to such as are

sincere and upright, the doctrine which I
have illustrated affords high encouragement,
and powerfully recommends the Chriian
religion. It places that religion in its pro-

per

s ER M. per point of view, as a medicinal plan, in-

rV. tended both for the recovery of mankind

from guilt, and for thcir consolation under
trouble. 7Jhe' law C'ts given bjy M1IlS; btll
grace. c.id tr;th came7 by /fijfs CbriJl. The
Law was a difpcnfation of mere authority.
The Gospel is a dilpenfation, not of autho-
rity only, but of relief. If it discovers new
duties and imposes new obligations, it opens
also sources of comfort which were )cforc
runknown to the world.

A Mediator between God and his crea-

tures was an objcEt after which men in all
nations, and under all forms of religion,
had long and anxiously fought. The follies
of superstition have served to disclose to us,
in this instance, the sentiments of nature.
The whole region of Paganism was a sys
tem of mediation and intercession. De-
pressed by a conscious sense of guilt, nature
shrunk at the thought of adventuring on a
direct approach to the Sovereign of the uni-
verse; and laboured to find out some aufpi-
cious introdudor to that awful presence.
With blind and trembling eagerness, the

nations

nations fled to subordinate deities, to tute- S E R M.
lar gods, and to departed spirits, as their v
patrons and advocates above. Them they
studied to sooth with such costly gifts, such
pompous rites, or such humble fupplica-
tions, as they thought might incline them
to favour their cause, and to support their
interest with the Supreme Divinity. While
mankind were bewildered in this darkness,
the Gospel not only revealed the true Me-
diator, who in this view may be justly
called the dfire of all nations, but placed his
charater and office in a light most admi-
rably fitted, as has been flewn in this Dif-
course, to support the interest of virtue in
the world; and to encourage the humble,
without flattering the presumptuous. What
plan of religion could be more suited to the
circumstances of man, or more worthy
of the goodness of his Creator ? What
more animating to the pious worflipper
in performing those solemn ads of de-
votion to which we are called by the
service of this day?

VOL. II. L I CAN-

E R M. I CANNOT conclude without taking no.
V_ tice how remarkably this dispensation of

religion is calculated to promote a spirit of
humanity and compassion among men, by
those very means which it employs for in.
spiring devotion towards God. We are
now drawing nigh to the Supreme Being
through a Mediator, for whose compassion
we pray on account of the experience which
he has had of our frailty. We trust, that
having been acquainted with distress, he
will not despise nor abhor the affliion of the
afflited. The argument by which we plead
for his compassion, concludes still more
strongly for mutual charity, and sympathy
with one another. He who, in the midst
of the common sufferings of life, feels not
for the distressed; he who relents not at his
neighbour's griefs, nor scans his failings
with the eye of a brother, must be sensible
that he excludes himself from the commi-
feration of Christ. He makes void the ar-
gument by which he pleads for his mercy;
nay, he ef:ablifles a precedent against him-
seif. Thus the Christian religion approves

4 itfclf

itself as worthy of God, by conneting de- S ERM.
votion in firiQ union with charity. As in I
its precepts the love of God and the love of
man are joined, so in its institutions the
exercise of both is called forth; and to wor-
ship God through the mediation of a com-
paflionate High Priefi, necessarily supposes
in the worshippers a spirit of compassion to.
wards their own brethren.

# SERMON VI. On the LOVE of PRAISE. JOHN, xii. 43. For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.

[ 148 I

SERMON VI.
On the LOVE of PRAISE.

J O 1 N, Xii. 43.
For they loved the praise of men more than

the praise of God.
ERM. T H E state of man on earth is mani-

.---. . feflly designed for the trial of his

virtue. Temptations every where occur;
and perpetual vigilance and attention arc
required. There is no passion, or principle
of action in his nature, which may not, if
left to itself, betray him into some criminal
excess. Corruption gains entrance, not only
by those pailions which are apparently of
dangerous tendency, such as covetousness,
and love of pleasure ; but by means of those

also

also which are seemingly the most fair and s ER M.
innocent, such as the desire of esteem and V.
praise. Of this the text suggests a remark-
able instance. When our Lord appeared
in the land of Judea, the purity of his doc-
trine, and the evidence of his miracles,
procured him a considerable number of fol-
lowers, chiefly among the lower classes of
men. But the Pharisees, who were the
leading and fafllionable fee, galled with
the freedom of his reproofs, decried him as
an impostor. Hence it came to pass, that
though oT/me of the rulers believed in himt, yet
because of the Pbarfecs, they did not confcfs
him. Rulers, persons who, by their rank and
education, ought to have been fuperiour to
any popular prejudice, were so far overawed
by the opinions of others, as to stifle their
convicion, to dissemble their faith, and to
join with the prevailing party in condemn-
ing one whom in their hearts they revered:
for which this reason is given, that they
loved the prase of men more n than the praise
of God. Since, then, the love of praise can
mislead men into such culpable and difho-

I[ 3 nest

S E R M. nefl condut, let us, with some attention,

VI.

examine the nature of this passion. Let us
confider how far it is an allowable principle
of action ; when it begins to be criminal;
and upon what accounts we ought to guard
against its acquiring the entire ascendant.

WE are intended by Providence to be con-

nected with one another in society. Single
unaffirted individuals could make small ad-
vances towards any valuable improvement.
By means of society our wants are supplied,
and our lives rendered comfortable; our
capacities are enlarged, and our virtuous
affections called forth into proper exercise,
In order to confirm our mutual connection,
it was necessary that some attracting power,
which had the effeEt of drawing men toge-
ther, and strengthening the social ties, Lhould
pervade the human system. Nothing could
more happily fulfil this purpose, than our
being so formed as to desire the esteem, and
to delight in the good opinion, of each other.
Had such a propensity been wanting, and
felfiflb principles left to occupy its place, so-

ciety

ciety must have proved an unharmonious s ERM.
and discordant state. Inflead of mutual at- VI.
tration, a repulsive power would have pre-
vailed. Among men who had no regard to
the approbation of one another, all inter-
course would have been jarring and offen-
five. For the wisest ends, therefore, the de-
fire of praise was made an original and
powerful principle in the human breast.

To a variety of good purposes it is sub-

servient, and on many occasions co-operates
with the principle of virtue. It awakens
us from sloth, invigorates acaivity, and fli-
mulates our efforts to excel. It has given
rife to most of the splendid, and to many of
the useful enterprises of men. It has ani-
mated the patriot, and fired the hero. Mag-
nanimity, generosity, and fortitude are what
all mankind admire. Hence such as were
actuated by the desire of extensive fame,
have been prompted to deeds which either
participated of the spirit, or, at least, car-
ried the appearance of diftinguifled virtue.
The desire of praise is generally connected
with all the finer sensibilities of human na-

L 4 ture.

S ER M. ture. It affords a ground on which exhort.

V-I. ation, counsel, and reproof can work a pro-

per effet. Whereas to be entirely destitute
of this pafiion, betokens an ignoble mind,
on which no moral impression is easily
made. Where there is no desire of praise,
there will be also no sense of reproach;
and if that be extinguished, one of the
principal guards of virtue is removed, and
the path opened to many opprobrious
pursuits. He whose countenance never
glowed with flame, and whose heart never
beat at the found of praise, is not destined
for any honourable diftination; is likely to
grovel in the fordid quest of gain, or to
slumber life away in the indolence of selfish
pleasures.

Abftraaing from the sentiments which

are connected with the love of praise as a
principle' of action, the esteem of our fel-
low-creatures is an objec which, on ac-
count of the advantages it brings, may be
lawfully pursued. It is necessary to our
success in every fair and honest undertak-
ing. Not only our private interest, but our

public

public usefulness, depends in a great mcafure S E R M.

Vt.

upon it. The sphere of our influence is
contracted or enlarged in proportion to the
degree in which we enjoy the good opinion
of the public. Men liften with an unwil-
ling ear to one whom they do not honour;
while a refpeded character adds weight to
example, and authority to counsel. To
desire the efleem of others for the fake of
its effecs, is not only allowable, but in many
cafes is our duty; and to be totally indif-
ferent to praise or censure, is so far from
being a virtue, that it is a real defet in
characer.

BUT while the love of praise is admitted

to be a natural, and, in so many refpeds,
an useful principle of action, we are to
observe, that it is entitled to no more than
our secondary regard. It has its boun-
dary set; by tranlgrefling which, it is at
once transformed from an innocent into a
moit dangerous paflion. More sacrcd and
venerable principles claim the chief direc-
tion of human conduct. All the good es-

fedts

S E R M. fes which we have ascribed to the desire

VIs., of praise, are produced by it when remain-

ing in a subordinate station. But when
passing its natural line, it becomes the
ruling spring of conduct; when the regard
which we pay to the opinions of men, in-
croaches on that reverence which we owe
to the voice of conscience and the sense of
duty; the love of praise having then gone
out of its proper place, instead of improv-
ing, corrupts; and initead of elevating, de-
bases our nature. The proportion which this
passion holds to other principles of adion is
what renders it either innocent or criminal.
The crime with which the Jewish rulers are
charged in the text, was not that they loved
the praise of men; but that they loved it
more than the praise of God.

Even in cafes where there is no direL

competition between our duty and our
fancied honour, between the praise of men
and the praise of God, the passion for ap-
plause may become criminal by occupying
the place of a better principle. When vain.
glory usurps the throne of virtue; when

oilcntation

ostentation produces aaions which con- SERM.

VI.

science ought to have dictated; such actions, __
however specious, have no claim to moral
or religious praise. We know that good
deeds, done merely to befeen of men, lose
their reward with God. If, on occasion of
some trying conjuncture, which makes us
hesitate concerning our line of conduct, the
first question which occurs to us be, not
whether an action is right in itself, and such
as a good man ought to perform, but whe-
ther it is such as will find acceptance with
the world, and be favourable to our fame,
the conclusion is too evident, that the desire
ofapplaufe has obtained an undue ascendant.
What a wife and good man ought to ftudv,
is to preserve his mind siee from any such
solicitude concerning praise, as may be in
hazard of overcoming his sense of duty.
The approbation of men he may wifll to
obtain, as far as is confident with the ap-
probation of God. But when both cannot
be enjoyed together, there ought to be no
fulpence. He is to retire contented with
the testimony of a good conscience; and to

show,

s E R M. show, by the firmness of his behaviour, that,

V_. in the cause of truth and virtue, he is fupe-

riour to all opinion.-Let us now proceed to
confider the arguments which ihould sup-
port such a i'pirit, and guard us against the
improper influence of praise or censure in
the course of our duty.

IN the firt place, the praise of men is

not an objet of such value in itself as
to be entitled to become the leading prin-
ciple of condu&. We degrade our charac-
ter when we allow it more than subordinate
regard. Like other worldly goods, it is
apt to dazzle us with a false lustre; but if
we would afccrtain its true worth, let us
reflee both on whom it is beflowed, and
from whom it proceeds. Were the applause
of the world always the reward of merit;
were it appropriated to such alone as by real
abilities, or by worthy ations, are entitled
to rife above the crowd, we might juAly
be flattered by possessing a rare and valuable
diflindion. But how far is this from be-
ing the cafe in fad ? How often have the

despicable

despicable and the vile, by dexterously S E R M.
catching the favour of the multitude, roared
upon the wings of popular applause, while
the virtuous and the deserving have been
either buried in obscurity, or obliged to
encounter the attacks of unjust reproach?
The laurels which human praise confers, are
withered and blasted by the unworthiness
of those who wear them. Let the man
who is vain of public favour be humbled by
the reflection that, in the midst of his fuc-
cess, he is mingled with a crowd of impof-
tors and deceivers, of hypocrites and en-
thufiafts, of ignorant pretenders and super-
ficial reasoners, who, by various arts, have
attained as high a rank as himself in tem-
porary fame.

We may easily be satisfied that applause

will be often shared by the undeferving, if
we allow ourselves to confider from whom
it proceeds. When it is the approbation of
the wife only and the good which is pur-
sued, the love of praise may then be ac-
counted to contain itself within just bounds,
and to run in its proper channel. But the

12 tefimony

s E R M. testimony of the discerning few, modest and

VI. unassuming as they commonly are, forms

but a small part of the public voice. It fel.
dom amounts to more than a whisper, which
amidst the general clamour is drowned.
When the love of praise has taken possession
of the mind, it confines not itself to an ob-
jec so limited. It grows into an appetite
for indiscriminate praise. And who are
they that confer this praise ? A mixed mul-
titude of men, who in their whole conduc
are guided by humour and caprice, far more
than by reason; who admire false appear-
ances, and pursue false gods; who inquire
superficially, and judge raflily; whose senti-
ments are for the most part erroneous, always
changeable, and often inconsistent. Nor
let any one imagine, that by looking above
the crowd, and courting the praise of the
fashionable and the great, he makes sure of
true honour. There are a great vulgar, as
well as a small. Rank often makes no dif-
ference in the understandings of men, or in
theirjudicious distribution of praise. Luxury,
pride, and va-nity, have frequently as much

influence

influence in corrupting the sentiments of SE R M.

VI.

the great, as ignorance, bigotry, and pre-
judice, have in misleading the opinions of
the crowd.-And is it to such judges as
these that you submit the supreme direction
of your conduc ? Do you stoop to court
their favour as your chief diftintion, whlena
an object of so much juster and higher am-
bition is presented to you ii the prcife of
God? God is the only unerring Judge of
what is excellent. His approbation alone
is the substance, all other praise is but the
fhadov, of honour. The charader whicl
you bear in his fight is your only real one.
How contemptible does it render you to be
indifferent wittl refpec to this, and to be
fblicitous about a name alone, a fictitious,
imaginary character, which has no exist-
ence except in the opinions of a few weak
and credulous men around you ? They fee
no farther than the outside of things. They
can judge of you by a&ions only; and not
by the comprehenfivc view of all your ac-
tions, but by such merely as you have had
opportunity of bringing forth to public no-

tice.

SERM. tice. But the Sovereign of the world bck

VI.
- 4c holds you in every light in which you can

be placed. The silent virtues of a generous
purpose and a pious heart, attract his notice
equally with the most splendid deeds. From
him you may reap the praise of good aacions
which you had no opportunity of perform-
ing. For he fees them in their principle;
he judges of you by your intentions; he
knows what you would have done. You
may be in his eyes a hero or a martyr,
without undergoing the labours of the one,
or the sufferings of the other. His infpec-
tion, therefore, opens a much wider field
for praise, than what the world can afford
you; and for prailc, too, certainly far more
illuffrious in the eye of reason. Every real
artist studies to approve himielf to such as
are knowing in his art. To their judgment
he appeals. On their approbation, he reits
his character, and not on the praise of the
unskilled and rude. In the highest art of
all, that of life and condut, shall the opi-
nions of ignorant men come into the most
distant competition with his approbation

who

who is the searcher of all hearts, and the S ERM.
ilandard of all perfetion ?-The teflimony --
of his praise is not indeed, as yet, openly
bellowed. But though the voice of the Al-
mighty found not in your ears, yet by con-
science, his sacred vicegerent, it is capable
of being conveyed to your heart. The
softest whisper of divine approbation is
sweeter to the foul of a virtuous man, than
the loudest shouts of that tumultuary ap-
plause which proceeds from the world.

Confider, farther, how narrow and cir-

cumfcribed in its limits that fame is which
the vain-glorious man so eagerly pursues.
In order to flew him this, I shall not bid
him refleCt that it is confined to a small
diftriOt of the earth; and that when he looks
a little beyond the region which he inhabits,
he will find himself as much unknown as
the molt obscure person around him. I
shall not desire him to confider, that in the
gulph of oblivion, where all human me-
morials are swallowed up, his name and
fame must soon be inevitably loft. He may
imagine that ample honours remain to gra-

VOL. II. M tify

SE RM. tify ambition, though his reputation extend

. not over the whole globe, nor latt till the

end of time. But let him calmly reflet,
that within the narrow boundaries of that
country to which he belongs, and during
that small portion of time which his life fills
up, his reputation, great as he may fancy
it to be, occupies no more than an incon-
fiderable corner. Let him think what mul-
titudes of those among whom he dwells are
totally ignorant of his name and character;
how many imagine themselves too import-
ant to regard him; how many are too much
occupied with their own wants and pursuits
to pay him the least attention; and where
his reputation is in any degree spread, how
often it has been attacked, and how many
rivals are daily rising to abate it: Having
attended to there circumstances, he will find
sufficient materials for humiliation in the
midst of the highest applause.- From all
these considerations it clearly appears, that
though the esteem of our fellow-creatures
be pleating, and the pursuit of it, in a mo-
derate degree, be fair and lawful, yet that

it

t affords no such objea to desire, as entitles s E R M.
it to be a ruling principle, .

IN the second place, an exceflive love of

praise never fails to undermine the regard
due to conscience, and to corrupt the heart.
It turns off the eye of the mind from the
ends which it ought chiefly to keep in view;
and sets up a false light for its guide. Its
influence is the more dangerous, as the co-
lour which it assumes is often fair; and its
garb and appearance are nearly allied to
that of virtue. The love of glory, I before
admitted, may give birth to actions which
are both splendid and useful. At a distance
they itrike the eye with uncommon bright-
ness; but on a nearer and ftriEter firvey,
their lustre is often tarnished. They are
found to want that sacred and venerable dig-
nity which characterises true virtue. Little
passions and selfish interests entered iinto the
motives of those who performed them. They
were jealous of a competitor. They fought
to humble a rival. They looked round for
fpedators to admire them. All is magna-

M 2 nlimit-,

S ER M. nimity, generosity, and courage, to public

view. But the ignoble source whence these
seeming virtues take their rile is hidden.
WTithout, appears the hero ; within, is found
the man of dust and clay. Consult such as
have been intimately conneted with the
followers of renown ; and seldom or never
-will you find that they held them in the
fame esteem with thofel who viewed them
from afar. There is nothing, except iim-
plicity of intention, and purity of principle,
that can stand the test of near approach and
frid examination.

But supposing the virtue of vain-glorious

men not to be always false, it certainly can-
not be depended upon as firm or sure. Con-
Itancy and steadiness are to be looked for
from him only whose conduc is regulated
by a sense of what is right; whose praifl is
not of nme, but of' Cod; whose motive to dif-
chargehis duty is always the fame. Change,
as much as you please, the Situation of such
a man; let applause or let censure be his
lot; let the public voice, which this day has
extolled him, to-morrow as loudly decry

him;

him ; on the tenour of his behaviour these s E R AM.
changes produce no eifet. HIe moves in V_
a higher sphere. As the fun in his orbit is
not interrupted by the mists and fornns of
the atmosphere below ; so, regardless of the
opinions of men, throlh hon ouri and !if-
hIonolr, through good report and bad report,
he pursues the path which conscience has
marked out. Whereas the apparent virtues
of that man whose eye is fixed on the world,
are precarious and temporary. Supported
only by circumstances, occasions, and par-
ticular regards, they fluctuate and fall with
these. Excited by public admiration, they
disappear when it is withdrawn ; like thoie
exhalations which, raised by heat from the
earth, glitter in the air with momentary
fplcndour, and then fall back to the ground
from whence they sprung.

The intemperate love of praise not only

weakens the true principles of probity, by
substituting inferiour motives in their lfead,
but frequently also impels men to acaio&s
which are directly criminal. It obliges them
to follow the current of popular opinion

M 3 whither-

S E R M. whithersoever it may carry them; and hence

.' sjrzeiipwreck is often made both of fiith ana of

a good cojcience. According as circum,
stances lead them to court the acclamations
of the multitude, or to pursue the applause
of the great, vices of different kinds will
stain their character. In one situation they
will make hypocritical profeflions of reli-
gion. In another, they will be aihamed of
their Redeemer, and of his words. They
will be afraid to appear in their own form,
or to utter their genuine sentiments. Their
whole characer will become licitious, opi-
ni,)n; will be assumed, speech and behaviour
modelled, and even the countenance formed,
as prevailing tafPe exads. From one who
has submitted to such proffitution for the
fake of praise, you can no longer expec
fidelity or attachment on any trying occa-
sion. I:i private life, he will be a timorous
and treacherous friend. In public conduct,
he will be supple and versatile; ready to de-
fert the cause which he had espoused, and
to veer with every shifting wind of popular
favour. In fine, all becomes unsound and

hollow

hollow in that heart, where, instead of re- S E R M.
gard to the divine approbation, there reigns L
the Sovereign desire of pleasing men.

IN the third place, this paflion, when it

becomes predominant, most commonly de-
feats its own end, and deprives men of the
honour which they arc lb eager to gain.
Without preserving liberty and independ-
ence, we can never command refpet.
That servility of spirit which fubjeds us to
the opinion of others, and renders us tri-
butaries to the world for the fake of ap-
plause, is what all mankind defpile. They
look up with reverence to one who, un-
awed by their censures, ads according to
his own sense of things, and follows the free
impulse of an honourable mind. But him
who hangs totally on their judgment, they
confider as their vassal. They even enjoy
a malignant pleasure in humbling his vanity,
and withholding that praise which he is seen
to court. By artifice and show he may
shine for a time in the public eye; but it is
only as long as he can support the belief of

M . acting

SERM. aaing from principle. When the incon-

fiftencies into which he falls detec his cha-
rafter, his reputation passes away like the
pageant of a day. No man ever obtained
lasting fame who did not, on several occa-
sions, contradict the prejudices of popular
opinion.

There is no course of behaviour which

will at all times please all men. That which
pleases most generally, and which only
commands durable praise, is religion and
virtue. Sincere piety towards God, kind
affedion to men, and fidelity in the dif-
charge of all the duties of life; a conscience
pure and undefiled; a heart firm to justice
and to truth, fuperiour to all terrours that
would shake, and insensible of all pleasures
that would betray it; unconquerable by the
opposition of the world, and resigned to
God alone; these are the qualities which
render a man truly respeCtable and great.
Such a character may, in evil times, incur
unjust reproach. But the clouds which envy
or prejudice has gathered around it, will gra-
dually disperse; and its brightness will come

forth,

forth, in the end, as the noon day. As S ERM.
ioon as it is thoroughly known, it finds a _,
witness in every breast. It forces appro-
bation even from the most degenerate. The
human heart is so formed as to be attuned,
if we may use the expression, to its praise.
In fad, it is this firm and inflexible virtue,
this determined regard to principle beyond
all opinion, which has crowned the charac-
ters of fucl as now stand highet in the rolls
of lasting fame. The truly illustrious are
they who did not court the praise of the
world, but who performed the aClions which
dcferved it. They were perhaps traduced,
in their life-time, by those whom they op-
posed. But posterity has done them ample
justice; and they are the men whom the
voice of ages now concurs in celebrating.
The memorial of virtue is immortal; becaife
it is aplproved of God and! of men. W7hen it
is prefint, men take exanple at it; and when
it is gone, they dcfre it. It wcarcth a crown,
and triinmpctlh for ever; having gotten the
victory ; J riving for indef led rewards *.

Wisdom of Solomon, ivr. , z.

lr_

E R M. IN the fourth place, as an immoderate
r,. passion for human praise is dangerous to

virtue, and unfavourable to true honour, so
it is deftruaive of felf-enjoyment and in-
ward peace. Regard to the praise of God
prescribes a simple and consistent tenour of
condut, which in all situations is the fame;
which engages us in no perplexities, and
requires no artful refinement. Walking
uprightly, we walk firely, because we tread
an even and open path. But he who turns
aside firom the straight road of duty in order
to gain applause, involves himself in an in-
tricate labyrinth. He will he often embar-
rafted concerning the course which he ought
to hold. His mind will be always on the
stretch. He will be obliged to liften with
anxious attention to every whisper of the
popular voice, The demands of those maf-
ters whom he has submitted to serve, will
prove frequently contradictory and incon-
fiftent, He has prepared a yoke for his neck
which he muff resolve to bear, how much
soever it may gall him,

The

The toils of virtue are honourable. The S E RM.

mind is fuppo:ted under them by the con- V_
fcioufnefs of ading a right and becoming
part. But the labours to which he is doom-
ed who is enslaved to the desire of praise,
are aggravated by reflection both on the un-
certainty of the recompence which he pur-
fioes, and on the debasement to which he
submits. Conscience will, from time to
time, remind him of the improper sacrifices
which lhe has made, and of the forfeiture
which he has incurred, of the praise of God
for the fake of praise from men. Suppose
him to receive all the rcwards which the
miRfaken opinion of the world can bestow,
its loudest applause will often be unable to
drown the upbraidings of an inward voice
and if a man is reduced to be ashamed of
himself, what avails it him to be caressed by
others ?

But, in truth, the reward towards which

he looks who proposes human praise as his
ultimate objee, will be always flying, like
a shadow before him. So capricious and
uncertain, so fickle and mutable is the fa-

vour

SER M. vour of the multitude, that it proves the
,___. molf unfatisfaaory of all pursuits in which

men can be engaged. He who sets his
heart on it, is preparing for himself perpcc
tual mortifications. If the greatest and best
can seldom retain it long, we may easily
believe that from the vain and undeferving
it will suddenly escape. There is no cha-
ra&er but what on tome fide is vulnerable
by censure. He who lifts himself up to the
observation and notice of the world, is, of
all men, the least likely to avoid it. For
he draws upon himself a thousand eyes that
will narrowly inlipec him in every part.
Every opportunity will be watched of bring-
ing him down to the common level. HIis
errours will be more divulged, and his in-
firmities more magnified, than those of
others. In proportion to his eagernels for
praise will be his sensibility to reproach.
Nor is it reproach alone that will wound
him. He will be as - ch dejeaed by
silence and neglec. - .s himself under
the power Cos : ,nle to humble him,
by withholding expecded praise. Even

12 when

when praise is bestowed, he is mortified by s E R M.
its being either faint or trite. He pines k_
when his reputation stagnates. The degree
of applause to which he has been accustomed
grows insipid; and to be always praised
from the fame topics, becomes at last much
the fame with not being praised at all.

All these chagrins and disquietudes are

happily avoided by him who keeps so trou-
biefome a passion within its due bounds;
who is more desirous of being truly worthy
than of being thought to ; who purifes the
praise of the world with manly temperance,
and in subordination to the praise of God.
He is neither made giddy by the intoxicat-
ing vapour of applause, nor humbled and
cast down by the unmerited attacks of cen-
flre. Refting on a higher approbation, he
enjoys himielf in peace, whether human
praise flays with him, or flies away. With
Bme it is a /fnall thing to be judgde of you, or0
of man's judgment. He that jldgetb me is
the Lord. M1y e!itnefi is in heaven, and
my record is on high.

IN

SERM. tN the fifth and last place, the advan.

VH ., tages which redound from the praise of men.

are not such as can bear to be put in com-
petition with those which flow from the
praise of God. The former are necessarily
confined within the verge of our present
existence. The latter follow us beyond
the grave, and extend through all eternity.
Not only is the praise of men limited in its
effects to this life, but also to particular fitua-
tions of it. In the days of health and ease
it may brighten the fun-thiln of prolperity.
It may then sooth the car with pleasing ac-
cents, and gratify the imagination with fan-
cied triumphs. But when the distressful
ieafons of life arrive, it will be found alto-
gether hollow and unfubfiantial: And sure-
ly, the value of any poffelion is to be chiefly
estimated by the relief which it can bring
us, in the time of our greatest need. When
the mind is cafl down with sorrow and
grief, when sickness spreads its gloom
around us, or death rifes in awful profpec
to our view, the opinions and the dif-
.oiurfes of the world will appear trifling and

infig'

insignificant. To one who is occupied SE R M.
with nearer and more affeOcing intercis, V.
the praise or the censure of the world will
seem like the noise of distant voices, in
which he has fiall concern. But then is
the season when the praise of God supports
and upholds the labouring foul. Brought
home to the heart by the testimony of a
good conscience, and by the divine Spirit
bearing witness with oulr pirits, it inspires
fortitude, and produces apeace which pa.feth
tndc;flanding.

At present we behold an irregular and

disordered slate of things. Virtue is often
deprived of its proper honours, and vice
ulurps them in its stead. The characters of
men are mistaken; and ignorance and folly
dispose of human applause. But the day
hastens apace which fiall close this fcenc of
errours, and vindicate the rights of jufice
and truth. ThenJaA/! l be r;lzdcred to every
man according to his zc'orks. Envy llall no
longer Ihve the power of oblcuring merit,
nor popular prejudices be able to support
the undeferving. Hidden worth fliall be

13 brought

SE R M. brought to light, and secret crimes revealed,

Many who passed through the world in the
silent obscurity of humble but feady good-
ness, flall be diflinguiflhed as the iavourites
of Heaven ; while the proud, the ambitious,
and the vain, are left to everlafling difho-
nour. The great Judge hath declared, that
uwlofocecr has been ajihamncd of lhimi and of his
'words, of that manJihall hebe a/lhamed wheJLiCl
he cometh5 in the gloi' of h'j;. FIlther, wCiil/h ll
the holy angels. Every departure from duty
shall, at the period of final retribution, ter-
minate in ignominy. True honour and true
virtue fiall be seen to coincide; and when
all human fame has passed away like finoke,
the only praise which shall be for ever re-
membered is that divine teftinony, Well
doec, thou good and

a fitfdill Jfervant; enler
thou into the joy of thy Lord.

TIESE arguments clearly flow the im-

portance of preserving the love of praile
under proper subordination to the principle
of duty. In itself, it is an uleful motive to
ation; but when allowed to extend its

influencc

influence too far, it corrupts the whole s E R M.
charaCter, and produces guilt, dilgrace, and I-
misery. To be entirely destitute of it, is a
defed. To be governed by it, is depravity.
The proper adjuftmcnt of the several prin-
ciples of adion in human nature, is a matter
that deserves our highest attention. For
when any one of them becomes either too
weak or too strong, it endangers both our
virtue and our happinels. Keep thy heart
therefore with all diligence; pray that God
would enable thee to keep it with success;
for out of the heart are the iJfes of lfe.

VOL,. I N

# SERMON VII. On the proper ESTIMATE of HUMAN LIFE. ECCLESIASTES, xii. 8. Vanity of vanities, faith the preacher, all is vanity.

C 78 3

SERMON VII.
On the proper ESTIMATE of HUMAN LIFE,

ECCLESIASTES, Xii. 8.
Vainly of vanitier, faith the preacher, allis

vanity.
S F R M. N 0 serious maxim has been more ge-

N nerally adopted than that of the text.
In every age, the vanity of human life has
been the theme of declamation, and the sub-
jet of complaint. It is a conclusion in which
men of all charaaters and ranks, the high
and the low, the young and the old, the
religious and the worldly, have more fre-
quently concurred than in any other. But
how just fcever the conclusion may be, the
premiles which lead to it are often false.

For

For it is prompted by various motives, and s E R M,
derived from very different views of things. . It
Sometimes the language of the text is as-
fumed by a sceptic who cavils at Providence,
and censures the constitution of the world.
Sometimes it is the complaint of a peevish
man, who is discontented with his station,
and ruffled by the disappointment of unrea-
fonable hopes. Sometimes it is the style of
the licentious, when groaning under miseries
in which their vices have involved them.
Invctives againit the vanity of the world
which come from any of these quarters de-
serve no regard; as they are the dictates of
impiety, of spleen, or of folly. The only
cafe in which the sentiment of the text
claims our attention, is, when uttered, not
as an aspersion on Providence, or a reflec-
tion on human affairs in general; not as the
language of private diicontent, or the refiill
of guilty fIhferings; but as the fober con-
clufion of a wife and good man, conccrning
the imperfection of that happiness which
refts solely on worldlypleafures. These, in
their fairet form, are not what they Iecm to

N ,,, b,:.

s . Mi. be. They never bestow that complete 1fa
V_.,. tisfation which they promise; and therefore

lie who looks to nothing beyond them fliall
h.ave frequent cause to deplore their vanity.

Nothing is of higher importance to us, an

men and as Christians, than to form a proper
effimate of human life, without either load-
ing it with imaginary evils, or expecting
from it greater advantages than it is able to
yield. It fliall be my business, therefore,
in this Difcourfc, to distinguish a just and
religious sense of the vanity of the world,
firom the unreasonable complaints of it which
we often hear. I flhall endeavour, I. To
ihev in what sense it is true that all earthly
pleasures are vanity. II. To inquire, how
this vanity of the world can be reconciled
with the perfecions of its great Author.
lII. To examine, whether there are not
lome real and solid enjoyments in human
life which fall not under this general charge
of vanity. And, IV. To point out the pro-
per improvement to be made of such a state
as the life of man shall appear on the whole
to be.

I. IAM

I. I ABI to shew in what sense it is true s E R M.

that all human pleasures are vanity. This s a
is a topic which might be embellified with
the pomp of much delcriptlon. But I lahll
lludioufly avoid exaggeration, and only
point out a threefold vanity in human life,
which every impartial oblerverel c:nnlt but
admit; dilappointment in puruiiit, diilattii-
faltion in enjoyment, uncertainty in po1-
feflion.

Firfr, disappointment in pirflit. When

we look around us on the world, we every
where behold a busy multitude, intent on
the prosecution of various designs whicli
their wants or desires have lilggeled. We
behold them employing every method which
ingenuity can dcvife, iome the patience of
indufiry, ibme the 1)oldncis of enterprise,
others the dexterity of stratagem, in order
to compass their ends. Of this inceflant fir
and activity, what is the fiuit ? In compa-
rifon of the crowd who have toiled in vain,
how fmnll is thec number of the fuccelsfll ?
Or rather, where is the man who will de-
clare, that in every point he has completedt

N 3 his

S E R M. his plan, and attained his utmost wifl ? No
VII.

extent of human abilities has been able to
discover a path which, in any line of life,
leads unerringly to success. T'he race is not
always tothe i, nor

thefftno t battle to theJtroig,

nor riches to men of undejfanding. We may
form our plans with the most profound fa-
gacity, and with the most vigilant caution
may guard against dangers on every fide.
But some unforeseen occurrence comes
across, which baffles our wisdom, and lays
our labours in the dull.

Were such disappointments confined to

those who aspire at engrossing the higher
departments of life, the misfortune would be
less. The humiliation of the mighty, and
the fall of ambition from its towering height,
little concern the bulk of mankind, These
are objecs on which, as on distant meteors,
they gaze from afar, without drawing per-
fonal instruction from events so much above
them. But, alas! when we descend into
the regions of private life, we find difap-
pointment and blasted hope equally preva-
lent there, Neither the moderation of our

vienws,

views, nor the justice of our pretensions, can s E R M.
ensure success. But time and chance happen
to all. Against the stream of events both
the worthy and the undeferving are obliged
to struggle; and both are frequently over-
born alike by the current.

BESIDES disappointment in pursuit, dif-

fatisfaftion in enjoyment is a farther vanity
to which the human fiate is fubjeet. This
is the severest of all mortifications, after
having been successful in the purlhit, to be
baffled in the enjoyment itself. Yet this is
found to be an evil still more general than
the former. Some may be so fortunate as
to attain what they have pursued; but none
are rendered completely happy by what they
have attained. Disappointed hope is mi-
fery; and yet fiiccefsful hope is only im-
perfect blils. Look through all the ranks of
mankind. Examine the condition of those
who appear molt prosperous; and you
will find that they are never jufl what they
desire to be. If retired, they languish for
action; if busy, they complain of fatigue.

N 4 If

SE R M. If in middle life, they are impatient for dif.

-_, s tinafion; if in high stations, they sigh after

freedom and ease. Something is still want-
ing to that plenitude of fatisfatlion which
they cxpeaed to acquire. Together with
every wish that is gratified, a new demand
arises. One void opens in the heart, as
another is filled. On wifles, wishes grow;
and to the end, it is rather the expeCtation
of what they have not, than the enjoyment
of what they have, which occupies and in-
terests the most successful.

This diffatisfacion, in the midst of hu-

man pleasure, springs partly from the nature
of our enjoyments themselves, and partly
from circumstances which corrupt them.
No worldly enjoyments are adequate to the
high desires and powers of an immortal
spirit. Fancy paints them at a distance with
splendid colours; but possession unveils the
fallacy. The eagerness of pafon bestows
upon them at firit a brisk and lively relish.
But it is their fate always to pall by fami-
liarity, and sometimes to pals from satiety
into disgust. Happy would the poor man

5 think

think himself if he could cnter on all the SE RM.
treasures of the rich ; and happy for a flort
while he might be; but beforc he had long
contemplated and admired his state, his pof-
sessions would seem to lessen, and his cares
would grow.

Add to the unsatisfying nature of our

pleasures, the attending circumitances which
never fail to corrupt them. For, such as
they are, they are at no time pofelifed un-
mixed. To human lips it is not given to
taste the cup of pure joy. When external
circumstances show fiilefi to the world, the
envied man groans in private under his own
burden. Some vexation disquiets, some pas-
sion corrodes him ; some distress, either felt
or feared, gnaws, like a worm, the root of
his felicity. When there is nothing fiom
without to disturb the prosperous, a secret
poison operates within. For worldly hap-
piness ever tends to destroy itself, by cor-
rupting the heart. It softers the loose and the
'iolent passions. Itengenders noxious habits;
and taints the mind with a falle delicacy,
which makes it feel a thousand unreal evils,

BUT

SE R M BUT put the cafe in the molt favourable
;_1I light. Lay aside from human plea'ures

both disappointment in pursuit, and deceit-
fulness in enjoyment; suppose them to be
fully attainable, and completely fatisfadory;
still there remains to be confidered the va-
nity of uncertain possession and short dura-
tion. Were there in worldly things any
fixed point of security which we could gain,
the mind would then have some basis on
which to reft. But our condition is such,
that every thing wavers and totters around
us. Boaqf not thyself of to-morrow; for
thou knowefJ not what a day may bring forth.
It is much if, during its course, thou hearest
not of somewhat to disquiet or-alarm thee.
For life never proceeds long in an uniform
train. It is continually varied by unex-
peaed events. The feeds of alteration
are every where sown; and the funfline
of prosperity commonly accelerates their
growth. If your enjoyments be numerous,
you lie more open on different fides to be
wounded. If you have poffefled them long,
you have greater caule to dread an ap-

proaching

proaching change. By flow degrees pro- S E RM.
fperity rifes; but rapid is the progress of L
evil. It requires no preparation to bring
it forward. The edifice which it cost much
time and labour to erea, one inauspicious
event, one sudden blow, can level with the
dust. Even supposing the accidents of life
to leave us untouched, human bli's mufft
ftiil be transitory ; for man changes of him-
self. No course of enjoyment can delight
us long. What amused our youth loses its
charm in maturer age. As years advance,
our powers are blunted, and our pleasurable
feelings decline. The silent lapse of time
is ever carrying somewhat from us, till at
length the period comes when all muff be
swept away. The prospect of this termina-
tion of our labours and pursuits is fifficient
to mark our state with vanity. Our dayn
are a hand-breadth, and our age is as no-
thing. Within that little space is all our
enterprise bounded. We crowd it with
toils and cares, with contention and firife,
We project great designs, entertain high
hopes, and then leave our plans unfinilhed,
and fink into oblivion.

4 This

F ER M. This much let it fufice to have said con-
VII.

cerning the vanity of the world. That too
much has not been said, muff appear to
every one who confiders how generally
mankind lean to the oppolite fide; and how
often, by undue altnLhment to the prcicnil
fiate, they both ifee t!,c most ilnful
palhions, and p'cr' t,:'i.V',/'s ihuI 3<Li
With mazny f3 r'ows. Let us proceed to
enquire,

II. How this vanity of the world can be

reconciled with the perfelions of its divine
Author. This enquiry involves that great
difliculty which has perplexed the thought-
fill and serious in every age: If God be
good, whence the evil that fills the earth ?
In anfwcr to this intercfting qucflion, let
us observe,

In the first place, that the present con-

dition of man was not his original or primary
slate. We are informed by divine revelation,
that it is tle consequence of his voluntary
apostasy from God and a state of inno-
cence. By this, his nature was corrupted;
his powers were enfeebled ; and vanity and

vexation

vexation introduced into his life. All na- SERI
ture became involved in the condemnation
of man. The earth was curled upon his
account, and the whole creation made to
giroat an'd lravail il pain.

Howv mysterious flever the account of

this fall may appear to us, many circum-
flances concur to authenticate the fal:, and
to show that human nature and the human
tate have undergone an unhappy change.
The belief of this has obtained in alnoft all
nations and religions. It can be traced
through all the fables of antiquity. An ob-
fcure tradition appears to have pervaded
the whole earth, that man is not now what
he was at firfl; but that, in confsquence of
Ibme transgression againit his great Lord,
a fate of degradation and exile succeeded
to a condition that was more flourifling and
happy. As our nature carries plain marks
of perversion and disorder, bt the world
which we inhabit bears the symptoms of
having been convulsed in all its frame.
Naturalists point out to us every where the
traces of tome violent change which it has

iuffered.

S E R M. suffered. Islands torn from the continent,

VII,
DoI L burningmountains, (hattered precipices, un-

inhabitable waftes, give it all the appearance
of a mighty ruin. The physical and moral
state of man in this world mutually fympa-
thize and correspond. They indicate not
a regular and orderly ftrudure either of
matter or of mind, but the remains of some-
what that once was more fair and magnifi-
cent. Let us observe,

IN the second place, that as this was not

the original, so it is not intended to be the
final state of man. Though in confe-
quence of the abuse of the human powers,
fin and vanity were introduced into this re-
gion of the universe, it was not the purpose
of the Creator that they should be permitted
to reign for ever. He hath made ample
provision for the recovery of the penitent
and faithful part of his fubjeds, by the
merciful undertaking of that great restorer
of the world, our Lord Jesus Christ. By
him life and immortality were both pur-
chased and brought to light. The new hea-

veis and the new earth are discovered, where- S E RM
int dwelleth righteoifnfis; where, through -
the divine grace, human nature fllall regain
its original honours, and man thall return to
be what once he was in Paradise. Through
those high discoveries of the Gospel, this
life appears to good men only in the light
of an intermediate and preparatory state.
Its vanity and misery, in a manner, difap-
pear. They have every reason to submit
without complaint to its laws, and to wait
in patience till the appointed time come
for the rcflittion of all things. Let us take
notice,

IN the third place, that a future slate

being made known, we can account in a
satisfying manner for the present distress of
human life, without the smallest impeach-
ment of divine goodness. The sufferings
we here undergo are converted into difci-
pline and improvement. Through the
blefling of Heaven, good is extrated from
apparent evil; and the very mii.:ry which
originatel from fin, is rendered the means

of

SE R M. of corre&ing sinful passions, and prepariin
vi'.

us for felicity. There is much reaobn to
believe that creatures as imperfect as we
are, require some such preliminary state of
experience before the) can recover the per-
fedion of their nature. It is in the mnidft
of disappointments and trials that we icarn
the insufficiency of temporal things to hap-
piness, and are taught to seek it from God
and Virtue. By these the violence of our
pafitons is tamed, and our minds are form-
ed to sobriety and refleaion. In the varie-
ties of life, occasioned by the vicissitude of
worldly fortune, we are inured to habits
both of the aAive and the fuiffring virtues.
How much soever we complain of the va-
nity of the world, fadts plainly show, that
if its vanity were lcfs, it could not anftwer
the purpose of salutary discipline. Unfa-
tisfadory as it is, its pleasures arc ftiil too
apt to corrupt our hearts. How fatal then
must the confcquences have been, had it
yielded us more complete enjoyment ? If,
with all its troubles, we are in danger of
being too much attached to it, how entirely

would

would it have seduced our affections, if no s E R M.
troubles had been mingled with its plea- d .
fures ?

Thele observations serve in a great mea-

sure to obviate the difficulties which arise
from the apparent vanity of the human
state, by shewing how, upon the Christian
system, that vanity may be reconciled with.
the infinite goodness of the Sovereign of the
universe. The prcfent condition of man
is not that for which he was originally de-
signed; it is not to be his final fsate; and
during his paflage through the world, the
distresses which he undergoes are rendered
medicinal and improving. After having
taken this view of things, the cloud which,
in the preceding part of the discourse, ap-
peared to fit so thick upon human life, be-
gins to be diflipated. We now perceive that
man is not abandoned by his Creator. We
discern great and good designs going on in
his behalf. We are allowed to entertain
better hopes; and are encouraged to enquire,
as was proposed for the

VOL. IL 0 IIId

s ERM. IIId HEAD of discourse, Whether there

' be not, in the present condition of human

life, some real and solid enjoyments which
come not under the general charge of vanity
of vanities. The dotrine of the text is to
be confidered as chiefly addressed to worldly
men. Them Solomon means to teach, that
all expecations of bliss, which reft solely on
earthly possessions and pleasures, lhall end
in disappointment. But surely he did not
intend to assert, that there is no material
difference in the pursuits of men, or that
no real happiness of any kind could now be
attained by the virtuous. For, besides the
unanswerable objecion which this would
form against the divine administration, it
would diretly contradic what he elsewhere
asserts, that while God giveth fore travail to
thefinner, he giveth to the man that is good
in his fight, wisdom, and knowledge, dndjoy *.
It may, it must indeed be admitted, that
unmixed and complete happiness is un-
known on earth. No regulation of con-
dua can altogether prevent passions from

' Eccles. ii. 26.
£i~~~ ~disturbing

dilturbing our peace, and misfortunes from S E R M.

VII.

wounding our heart. But after this con- _
ceffior is made, will it follow that there is
no objec on earth which deserves our
pursuit, or that all enjoyment becomes
contemptible which is not perfect? Let
us survey our state with an impartial
eye, and be just to the various gifts of
Heaven. How vain soever this life, con-
fidered in itself, may be, the comforts
and hopes of religion are sufficient to give
solidity to the enjoyments of the right-
eous. In the exercise of good affections,
and the testimony of an approving con-
science; in the sense of peace and recon-
ciliation with God through the great Re-
deemer of mankind; in the firm confidence
of being conducted through all the trials of
life by infinite wisdom and goodness; and
in thejoyful profpet of arriving in the end
at immortal felicity, they possess a happincfs
which, descending from a purer and more
perfect region than this world, partakes not
of its vanity.

Besides the enjoyments peculiar to reli-
gion, there are other pleasures of our pre-

0 2 sent

S E R M. sent ftatc, which, though of an inferiour
,_ _ oorder, must not be overlooked in the efli-

mate of human life. It is necefary to call
attention to these, in order to check that
repining and unthankful spirit to which
man is always too prone. Some degree of
importance mufft be allowed to the com-
forts of health, to the innocent gratifications
of sense, and to the entertainment afforded
us by all the beautiful fccncs of nature;
some to the pursuits and amusements of
social life; and more to the internal enjoy.
ments of thought and refletion, and to the
pleasures of affectionate intercourse with
those whom we love. These comforts arc
ofcn held in too low estimation, merely
1)bcaule they are ordinary and common;
although that be the circumstance which
ought, in reason, to enhance their value,
They lie open, in some degree, to all; ex-
tend through every rank of life, and fill up
agreeably many of tliofe spaces in our pre-
sent e:iicn ce, which are not occupied with
higher objeds, or with serious cares.

YiTe are in several rciipes uinjuft to Pro-
vidence in the computation of our pleasures

and

and our pains. We number the hours S ERM.
which are spent in distress or lorrow ; but _,
we forget those which have passed away, if
not in high enjoyment, yet in the midst of
tholfe gentle fatisfadions and placid emo-
tions which make life glide finoothly along.
We complain of the fiequcnt disappoint-
ments which we susser in our pursuits. But
we recollect not, that it is in pursuit, more
than in attainment, that our pleasure now
consists. In the present slate of human na-
ture, man derives more enjoyment from the
exertion of his ative powers in the midflt of
toils and efforts, than he could receive fiom
a fill and uniform poffeflion of the object
which he strives to gain. The solace of the
mind under all its labours, is hope; and
there are few situations which entirely ex-
clude it. Forms of expected blils are often
gleaming upon us through a cloud, to re-
vive and exhilarate the most ditreffed. If
pains be scattered through all the conditions
of life, so also are pleaulres. Happine's, as
far as life affords it, can be engrofli(l by no
rank of aIcn to the exclusion of the reft; on

0 3 the

SERM. the contrary, it is often found where, at
VII. ,V__ firit view, it would have been least expeted.

When the human condition appears most
depressed, the feelings of men, through
the gracious appointment of Providence,
adjut themselves wonderfully to their state,
and enable them to extract fatisfation from
sources that are totally unknown to others,
Were the great body of men fairly to com-
pute the hours which they pass in ease, an4
even with some degree of pleasure, they
would be found far to exceed the number
of those which are spent in abfollte pain
either of body or mind.-But in order to
make a still more accurate estimation of the
degree of fatisfation which, in the midst
of earthly vanity, man is permitted to enjoy,
the three following observations claim our
attention:

THE first is, that many of the evils which

occasion our complaints of the world are
wholly imaginary. They derive their ex-
iftence from fancy and humour, and child-
ih fubjetion to the opinion of others.

The

The diitrefs which they produce, I admit, s E R M.
is real; but its reality arises not from the V1.
nature of things, but from that disorder of
imagination which a small measure of re-
fletion might rectify. In proof of this we
may observe, that the persons who live mot
simply, and follow the dictates of plain un-
adulterated nature, are most exempted from
this class of evils. It is among the higher
ranks of mankind that they chiefly abound;
where fantastic refinements, sickly delicacy,
and eager emulation, open a thousand
sources of vexation peculiar to themselves.
Life cannot but prove vain to them who
asse.t a disrelish of every pleasure that is
not both exquisite and new; who measure
enjoyment, not by their own feelings, but
by the flandard of fashion; who think
themselves miserable if others do not ad-
mire their state. It is not from wants or
sorrows that their complaints arise; but,
though it may appear a paradox, from too
much freedom from sorrow and want; from
the languor of vacant life, and the irritation
occasioned by those stagnating humours

0 4 which

S E R M. which ease and indulgence have bred within

VII. _v-J 'them. In their cafe, therefore, it is not the

vanity of the world, but the vanity of their
minds, which is to be accused. Fancy has
raised up the fpetres which haunt them.
Fancy has formed the cloud which hangs
over their life. Did they allow the light
of reason to break forth, the fpedres would
vanish, and the cloud be dispelled.

THE second observation on this head is,

that, ofthofe evils which may be called real,
because they owe not their existence to
fancy, nor can be removed by reatifying
opinion, a great proportion is brought upon
us by our own mifconducd. Diseases, po-
verty, disappointment, and shame, are far
from being, in every instance, the unavoid-
able doom of men. They are much more
frequently the offspring of their own mif-
guided choice. Intemperance engenders
disease, sloth produces poverty, pride cre-
ates disappointments, and dishonesty exposes
to shame. The ungoverned passions of men
betray them into a thousand follies; their

x 1 follies

follies into crimes; and their crimes into SE R M.

VII.

misfortunes. Yet nothing is more com-
mon than for such as have been the authors
of their own misery, to make loud com-
plaints of the hard fate of man, and to take
revenge upon the human condition by ar-
raigning its supposed vanity. Thc fooliJ7-
nefJ of manfirf pcrverteth his way, and then
his heartfretteth aganilf the Lord.

I do not, however, maintain, that it is

within our power to be altogether free of
those felf-procured evils. For perfection of
any kind is beyond the reach of man.
Where is the wlifdom that never errs?
Where the just man that offendeth not?
Nevertheless, much is here left to our-
selves; and, imperfect as we are, the con-
sequences of right or of wrong conduct
make a wide difference in the happiness of
men. Experience every day shows, that a
found, a well-governed, and virtuous mind
contributes greatly to fnooth the path of
life; and that wisdom excelleth folly as far
as light excclleth darkness. The way of the
wicked is as darkiefs; thcy know not at what

they

ER M. they iJtuble. But the righteorfiefs of the
>^T > _perse7 fihall direst his way; and he that

'walketh upightly, walketh. Jurely. The
tendency of the one is towards a plain and
safe region. The course of the other leads
him amidst snares and precipices. The
one occasionally may, the other unavoid-
ably must, incur much trouble. Let us not
then confound, under one general charge,
those evils of the world which belong to the
lot of humanity, and those which, through
divine assistance, a wife and good man may,
in a great measure, escape.

THE third observation which I make re-

speds those evils which are both real and
unavoidable; from which neither wisdom
nor goodness can procure our exemption.
Under these this comfort remains, that if
they cannot be prevented, there are means,
however, by which they may be much al-
leviated. Religion is the great principle
which a&s, under such circumstances, as the
correcive of human vanity. It inspires
fortitude, supports patience, and',,by its

profpe(a

profpefs and promises darts a cheering ray s ER M.
into the darkefl shade of human life. If it V_
eannot secure the virtuous from disappoint-
ment in their pursuits, it forms them to such
a termper, as renders their disappointments
more light and easy than those of other men.
If it does not banish diffatisfadtion from
their worldly pleasures, it confers spiritual
pleasures in their stead. If it ensures them
not the poffeflion of what they love, it fur-
nifhes comfort under the loss. As far as it
eftablilhes a contented frame of mind, it
supplies the want of all that worldly men
covet to possess. Compare the behaviour
of the sensual and corrupted with that of the
upright and holy, when both are feeling the
effects of human vanity, and the difference
of their situation will be manifest. Among
the former, you are likely to find a querulous
and dejeted; among the latter, a composed
and manly spirit. The lamentations of the
one excite a mixture of pity and contempt
while the dignity which the other maintain
in distress, commands refpedt. The susser-
ings of the former fettle into a peevish and

firetful

S E R ?!. frctful difpofliton; those of the latter softel

, the temper, and improve thc heart. Tlefe

consequences extend so far as to give ground
for asserting, that a good man enjoys more
happiness in the course of a seemingly un-
prosperous life, than a bad man does in tile
midst of affluence and luxury. 'What a
conspicuous proof of this is afforded by the
Apolle Paul, who from the very depth of
affliion cculd fend forth such a triumphant
voice as proclaims the complete vicory
vwhich he had gained over the evils of life
Troubled on evely fide, yct not d/irfetd;

erplexed, bu, t ;zt ,ni'defanir ; perfietel, bil'
not fcifkcn ; c:

iz down, but not d/crji'el/.

For though J r. outward man piri:, our' ii-
wjrard man is rnchcwd, day bj dnay'. Such,
though perhaps in an inferiour degree, will
be the influence of a genuine religious prin-
ciple upon all true Chriflians. It begins to
perform that ofice to them here, which here-
after it will more completely discharge, of
wcipiig away, , the tea;s firom their- ,es.

2 Corinth, iv. 8, 9. i6,

SuCIi,

SUCI, upon the whole, is the eflimate SERM.

which we are to form of human life. Much _,
vanity will always belong to it; though the
degree of its vanity will depend, in a great
ineafure, on our own charadcr and con-
dul. To the vicious, it prcfents nothing
but a continued c;:ene ofdifappointmcit and
diflatisfaction. To the good, it is a mi:icd
ftatc of things; where many real comforts
may e enjoy'ed; where many refourccs
under trouble may be obtained; but where
trouble, in one form or other, is to be ex-
peeted as the lot of man. From this viewV
of human life,

TIIE firnt pracaical conclusion which we

arc to draw is, that it highly concerns us
not to be unreasonable in our expecations
of worldly fclicity. Let us always remem-
ber where we arc; fiom what caufls the
human state has become subjec to depref-
sion; and upon what accounts it must rc-
main under its present law. Such is the
infatuation of felf-love, that though, in the
general doftrine of the vanitv of the world

all

s E R M. all men agree, yet almost every one flatters

VII. himself that his own cafe is to be an excep-

tion from the common rule. He refts on
expeCations which he thinks cannot fail
him; and though the present be not altoge.
ther according to his wish, yet with the
confidence of certain hope he anticipates
futurity. Hence the anguifl of disappoint-
ments fills the world; and evils, which are
ofthemfelves sufficiently severe, oppress with
double force the unprepared and unfufped-
ing mind. Nothing therefore is of greater
consequence to our peace, than to have
always before our eyes such views of the
world as shall prevent our expecting more
from it than it is destined to afford. We
destroy our joys by'devouring them before-
hand with too eager expetation. We ruin
the happiness of life when we attempt to
raise it too high. A tolerable and comfort-
able state is all that we can propose to our-
selves on earth. Peace and contentment,
not bliss nor transport, is the full portion of
man. Perfeft joy is reserved for heaven.

BUT

BUT while we repress too sanguine hopes s E R M.

VII.

formed upon human life, let us, in the fe- .
cond place, guard against the other extreme,
of repining and discontent. Enough has
been already said to shew that, notwith-
flanding the vanity of the world, a confi-
derable degree of comfort is attainable in the
present state. Let the recolletion of this
serve to reconcile us to our condition, and
to check the arrogance of complaints and
murmurs,-What art thou, 0 son of man!
who having sprung but yesterday out of the
dust, dareft to lift up thy voice against thy
Maker, and to arraign his providence, be-
cause all things are not ordered according
to thy with ? What title halt thou to find
fault with the order of the universe, whose
lot is so much beyond what thy virtue or
merit gave thee ground to claim ? Is it no-
thing to thee to have been introduced into
this magnificent world; to have been ad-
mitted as a fpecator of the divine wisdom
and works; and to have had access to all
the comforts which nature, with a bountiful
hand, has poured forth around thee ? Are

all

SE R M. all the hoursforgotten which thou haft passed

VII.

- in ease, in complacency, or joy ? Is it a

small favour in thy eyes, that the hand of
divine mercy has been stretched forth to aid
thee, and if thou rejea not its proffered
assistance, is ready to condut thee into a
happier state of existence ? When thou com-
pareft thy condition with thy desert, blufli,
and be ashamed of thy complaints. Befilent,
be grateful, and adore. Receive with thank-
fulness the blessings which are allowed thee.
Revere that government which at present
refuses thee more. Reft in this conclusion,
that though there be evils in the world, its
Creator is wifl and good, and has been
bountiful to thee.

IN the third place, the view which we

have taken of human life should naturally
direct us to such pursuits as may have most
influence for corret'ing its vanity. There
are two great lines of conduct which offer
themselves to our choice. The one leads
towards the goods of the mind; the other
towards those of fortune. The former,

which

which is adopted only by the few, engages s E R M.
us chiefly in forming our principles, regu- -
lating our dilpofitions, improving all our
inward powers. The latter, which in every
age has been followed by the multitude,
points at no other end but attaining the
conveniencies and pleasures of external life.
It is obvious that, in this last pursuit, the
vanity of the world will encounter us at
every ftep. For this is the region in which
it reigns, and where it chiefly displays its
power. At the iame time, to lay the world
totally out of view, is a vain attempt. The
numberless ties by which we are connected
with external things, put it out of our power
to behold them with indifference. But
though we cannot wrap ourselves up en-
tirely in the care of the mind, yet the more
we make its welfare our chief objedt, the
nearer ihall we approach to that happy inde-
pendence on the world, which places us be-
yond the reach of fuflering from its vanity.

That discipline, therefore, which correds

the eagerness of worldly passions, which for-
tifies the heart with virtuous principles,which

VoL. 11. P enlightens

SERM. enlightens the mind with useful knowledge,

il and furnifhnes to it matter of enjoyment from

within itself, is of more consequence to real
felicity than all the provision which we can
make of the goods of fortune. To this let
us bend our chief attention. Let us eep
the ccart with all diligeence, sccing out of it
arc the iieLfs of life. Let us account our
mind the molt important province which is
committed to our care; and if we cannot rule
fortune, tfudy at Icaft to rule ourselves. Let
us propose for our objecQ, not worldly fuc-
cess, which it depends not on us to obtain;
but that upright and honourable discharge
of our duty in every conjuncture, which,
through the divine affliftance, is always
within our power. Let our happiness be
fought where our proper praise is found;
and that be accounted our only real evil,
which is the evil of our nature; not that,
"which is either the appointment of Provi-
dence, or which arises from the evil of others.

BUT in order to carry on with success
bhk rational and manly plan of conduet, it

is

is nece.flry, in the las- place, that to moral, sE R l.
ve join religious discipline. Under the ,._
present imperfetion of our minds, and
anmidli the frequent shocks which we receive
fiom human evils, much do we stand in
need of every affitlance for filpporting our
constancy. Of all aiillance to which we
can have recourse, none is so powerful as
what may be derived from the principles of
tlie Christian faith. He who builds on any
other foundation, will find in the day of
trial, that lie had built his house on the sand.
Man is formed by his nature to look up to a
fuperiour being, and to lean upon a Rrength
that is greater than his own. All the con-
fiderations which we can offer for confirm-
ing his mind, presuppose this resource, and
derive from it their principal efficacy.

Never then let us lose fight ofthofe great

objcEs which religion brings under ourview,
if we hope to Rfand firm and erect amidst the
dangers and diftreles of our present state.
Let us cultivate all that conneaion with the
great Father of Spirits which our condition
admits; by piety and prayer; by depend-

P 2 ence

S E R IM ence on his aid, and truil in his promies;
VII. '-C-j by a devout sense of his presence, and a

continual endeavour to acquire his grace and
favour. Let us, with humble faith and re-
verence, commit ourselves to the blessed Re-
deemer of the world; encouraged by the
discoveries which he has made to us of the
divine mercy, and by the hopes which he
has afforded us of being railed to a nobler
and happier station in the kingdom of God.
So flall virtue, grounded upon piety, attain
its full strength. Inspired with a religious
spirit, and guided by rational principles, we
flall be enabled to hold a feady courle
through this mixed region of pleasure and
pain, of hopes and fears; until the period
arrive, when that cloud, which the present
vanity of the world throws over human
affairs, flull entirely disappear, and eternal
light be diffused over all the works and
ways of God.

# SERMON VIII. On DEATH. PSALM xxiii. 4. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

[ 213 ]
SERMON VIII.

On DEATH.

PSALM xxiii. 4.

1ea, lhotugh I walk through the valley of the

J/fadowo of deatb, I willJ/far no evil; for
thou art with mc; thy rod and thy fJiaf
they consort me.
THIS Psalm exhibits the pleasing pic- SERM.

ture of a pious man rejoicing in the V1IT.

goodness of Heaven. He looks around him
on his state, and his heart ovcrflows with
gratitude. When he reviews the past part
of his life, he contemplates God as his
shepherd, who hath made him lie down in
green pfnJu7tes, and led him beside the fill
waters. When he confiders the present,

P 3 he

S F R M. he beholds his divine benefadorp ;lrl)i;l

a tfrl7e soir hi in the prefCcc of his elzncljrs,
anid mak;i g his cup rlu over. \Vhen he
looks forward to the future, he confides in
the fame goodlnefs, as continuing to j,/ti
him all the di7ys cf his life, and brinling J ,:/;
to dwell in the hose of tihe Lord for cvcr.
Amidii these images oftranquiliity and hap-
piness, one object presents itfcif, which is
sufficient to overcast the minds and to damln
the joy of the greatest part of men ; that is,
the approach of death. But on tle Plalmift
it produced no ilch effed. With perfeic
composure and serenity, he looks forward to
the time when he is to pass through tih val-
ley of the Jhadow of dedth. The profpe -,
instead of dejeding him, appears to heighten
his triumph, by that security which the pre-
fence of his almighty guardian afforded him.
I will scar no evil, for thou art withb i':;
and pursuing the allusion with which he
had begun, exults in the hope that the flcp-
herdwho had hitherto conduded him, would
support him with his Jaf, while he paflecl
through that dark and perilous region, and

with

with his rod, or pastoral crook, would guard s E R M.

VIII.
him from every danger. .--

Such is the happy diflincdion which

good men enjoy, in a situation the nioft
formidable to human nature. That threat-
ening fpcdre which appals others, carries
no terrour to them. While worldly men
are justly slid throbugh fear f' Death to be
all their life-tlmc fitbje to borndage, to the
righcous only it belongs to look on death,
and finile. Since then it is in the power of
religion to confer upon us io high a pri-
vilege, let us adventure to contemplate
feadily this last foe whom we must all en-
counter. Let us confider what death is in
itself, and by what means good men are
enabled to meet it with fortitude. Though
the subjed may be reckoned gloomy, it
muff be admitted to be interefring. The
close of life is a solemn and important
event, to which every wife man will have
regard in the general tenour of his conduct.
No one can aft his part with propriety,
who confiders not how it is to terminate;
and to exclude fiom our thoughts what we

P 4 cannot

sE R M. cannot prevent from atually taking place,
V[iI.

is the refuge of none but the timorous and
weak. W\e are more encouraged to enter
on this meditation, by reflecing on the
fuperiour advantages which, as Chrifl.ans,
we enjoy for overcoming the fear of death,
beyond that holy man whose sentiment is
now before us. Those great objecs, which
he beheld through the medium of types
and figures, are clearly revealed to us. That
dispensation of grace, which in his days
began to open, is now completed. That
life and immortality, which then only
dawned on the world, have now shone
forth with full light and splendour.

DEATH may he confidered in three

views; as the separation of the foul from
the body; as the conclusion of the present
life; as the entrance into a new state of
exiflence. In the first view, it is regarded
as painful and agonizing. In the second,
it is melancholy and dejeting. In the
third, it is awful and alarming. One of the
firt enquiries which occurs concerning it is,

for

for what purposes it was clothed with all S ER M.

VIII.

thefc tcrrours? Why, under the govern-
ment of a gracious Being, the termination
of life was loaded with io much sorrow and
distress ? We know that, in consequence of
the fall, death was inflieed as a punishment
upon thc human race. But no unneceflarv
iveriiies are ever exerciied by God ; and
the wisdom and goodnels of the divine plan
will he much illustrated, by oblerving that
all the formidable circumstances wlich at-
tend death are, in the prcfent situation of
mankind, absolutely requisite to the pro-
per government of the world. The ter-
rours of death are, in fact, the great guard-
ians of life. They excite in every indivi-
dual that desire of felf-prefervation, which
is nature's first law. They reconcile him
to bear the diftreffcs of life with patience.
They prompt him to undergo its useful
and necessary labours with alacrity; and
they restrain him from many of those evil
courses by which his iafety would be en-
dangered. While they are in lb many re-
fpcdts beneficial to the individual, they are,

at

s ERM. at the fame time, the safeguard of foclety.
A -_ If death were not dreaded and abhorred as

it is by men, no public order could be pre-
served in the world. The sword of autho-
rity were lifted up in vain. The faneCions
of law would lose their eff'e. The icaf-
fold and the executioner would be derided ;
and the violent left to trample unreflraincd
on the rights of the peaceful. If, notwith-
standing the rcftraints which felf-prelerva-
tion imposes, society is lo often dillurbed
by the crimes of the wicked, what a scene
of confusion would it become, if capital
punishments, which are the last resource of
government, were of no influence to deter
offenders !

For such important ends the conclusion

of life has, by the appointment of Provi-
dence, been made an awful bbjeCt. The
valley of death has been planted with ter-
rours to the apprehension of men. Here,
as in many other instances, what seemed
at first to arraign the goodness of the Deity,
is upon enquiry found to confirm it. But
though for the most salutary purposes, it

12 was

was requisite that the fear of death should s E R M.

VIIJ.

be a powerful principle in human nature, ,
yet, likc our other propensities, it is apt,
when left to itself, to run into excels. Over
many it usurps filch an ascendant as to
debate their character, and to defeat the
chief ends of living. To prcfcrve it within
such bounds that it shall not interrupt us in
performing the proper offices aud duties
of life, is the diftindion of the brave man
above the coward; and to surmount it in
iuch a degree that it shall not, even in near
profpe&, dejea our spirit, or trouble our
peace, is the great preference which virtue
enjoys above guilt. It has been the study
of the wife and rcflecing, in every age, to
attain this fteadincfs of mind. Philosophy
puri'lcd it as its chief ohjct ; and profefled
that the great end of its discipline was, to
enable its votaries to conquer the fear of
death. Let us then, before we have re-
course to the more powerful aid of religion,
hearken for a little to what reason has fug-
gceted on this fubjcc. HIer affifance may,
perhaps, be not entirely despicable; and

though

s E R M. though the armour which the offers, be not

VIII.
_ completely of proof, it may serve, how-

ever, to turn aside, or to blunt, some of
the shafts which are aimed against us by the
last foe.

ATTER this manner she may be supposed

to address mankind, in order to reconcile
them to their fate.- Children of men!
it is well known to you, that you are a
mortal race. Death is the law of your
nature, the tribute of your being, the debt
which all are bound to pay. On thcfie
terms you received life, that you flould be
ready to give it up, when Providence calls
you to make room for others, who, in like
manner, when their time is come, shall
follow you. He who is unwilling to filb-
mit to death when Heaven decrees it, de-
serves not to have lived. You might as
reasonably complain, that you did not live
before the time appointed for your coming
into the world, as lament that you are not
to live longer, when the period of your
quitting it is arrived. What divine Provi-

dence

dence hath made necessary, human pru- s ER M.
dence ought to comply with cheerfully. Vi-,
Submit at any rate you must ; and is it not
much better to follow of your own accord,
than to be dragged relucantly, and by
force? What privilege have you to plead,
or what reason to urge, why you should
poflefs an exemption from the common
doom? All things around you are mortal
and perishing. Cities, fiates, and empires
have their period set. The proudest monu-
ments of human art moulder into dufl.
Even the works of nature wax old and
decay. In the midst of this universal ten-
dency to change, could you expec that to
your frame alone a permanent duration
Ihould be given ? All who have gone be-
fore you, have submitted to the stroke of
death. All who are to come after you,
shall undergo the fame fate. The great
and the good, the prince and the peasant,
the renowned and the obscure, travel alike
the road which leads to the grave. At
the moment when you expire, thousands
throughout the world fliall, together with

you,

SE R M. you, be yielding up their breath. Can

__ that be held a great calamity which is com-

mon to you with every thing that lives on
earth; which is an event as much accord-
ing to the course of nature, as it is that
leaves should fall in autumn, or that fruit
flould drop from the tree when it is fully
ripe ?

The pain of death cannot be very long,

and is probably less severe than what you
have at other times experienced. The pomp
of death is more terrifying than death itself.
It is to the weakness of imagination that it
owes its chief power of dejecding your fpi-
rits; for when the force of the mind is
routed, there is almost no passion in our na-
ture but what has showed itself able to over-
come the fear of death. Honour has defied
death; love has defpiled it; shame has rush-
ed upon it; revenge has disregarded it; grief
a thousand times has wiflcd for its approach.
Is it not strange that reason and virtue can-
not give you strength to surmount that fear,
which, even in feeble minds, so many pas-
sions have conquered ? What inconsistency

is

is there in complaining so much of the evils s E R M.

VIII.

of life, and being at the fame time so afraid _
of what is to terminate them all ? Who can
tell whether his fiture life might not teem
with difalters and mireries, as yet unknown,
were it to be prolonged according to his
wvifl ? At any rate, is it dcfirable to draw
life out to the last dregs, and to wait till old
age pour upon you its whole flore of diseases
and sorrows? You lament that you are to
die; but did you view your situation pro-
perly, you would have much greater cause
to lament if you were chained to this life
for two or three hundred years, without
possibility of release. Expea therefore
calmly that which is natural in itself, and
which muff be fit, because it is the ap-
pointment of Heaven. Perform your duty
as a good subjea of the Deity, during the
time allotted you; and rejoice that a
period is fixed for your difinifiion from the
present warfare. Remember that the fla-
vifh dread of death destroys all the comfort
of that life which you seek to preserve.
Better to undergo the stroke of death at

once,

S E R M. once, than to live in perpetual misery firom
Vi, the fear of dying.

Sucl discourses as these are specious at

least, and plausible. The arguments are not
without ftreiigth, and ought to produce some
effect on a considerate reflecing mind. But
it is to be fufpeated that their effea will be
chiefly felt when the mind is calm and at
ease; rather when speculating upon death
at a distance, thann when beholding it at
hand. When the critical moment arrives
which places the anxious trembling foul on
the borders of an unknown world, reason-
ings drawn from necessity and propriety
will be of finall avail to quict its alarms. In
order to afford relief, you must give it hope;
you must promire it protection; you mullt
offer somewhat on which it can lay hold for
support amidst the struggles of labouring
nature. Hence the great importance of
those discoveries which revelation has made,
and of those principles with which it fortifies
the heart. To the consideration of these let
us next proceed, and observe their fuperiour

efficacy

efficacy for surmounting the fear of death. s E R M.
In order tojudge of their importance, it will A ,
be proper to take a view of death in each
of thole lights in which it appears most
formidable to mankind.

IT may be confidered, first, as the ter-

mination of our present existence; the final
period of all its joys and hopes. The con-
cluding scene of any course of ation in
which we have been engaged with pleasure,
even the last fight of objects which we have
been long accustomed to behold, seldom
fails of striking the mind with painful re-
gret. How nfany circumstances will concur
to heighten that regret, when the time comes
of our bidding an eternal adieu to the light
of day; to every pursuit which had occu-
pied our attention as citizens of the world;
and to every friend and relation who had
attached our hearts ? How dejeting is the
thought to the greatest part of men, that
the fin shall rife, and the seasons shall re-
turn to others, but no more to them; and
that, while their neighbours are engaged in

VOL. II. Q the

S.E R M. the usual affairs of life, they shall be Ihut

I-y- up in a dark lonesome mansion, for-

gotten and cut off from among men, as
though they had never been t Ifiad, in the
cutting off my days, IJhall go to the gates
of the grave. I am deprived of the rcfidT e of
my years. Ijhall not fee the Lord again in
the land of the living. IJhall behold man no
more with the inhabitants of the world .

Let us now observe, that the dejeaion

into which we are apt to fink at such a
juncture,. will bear proportion to the degree
of our attachment to the objets which we
leave, and to the importance of those re-
faurces which remain with us when they
are gone. He who is taking farewell of a
country through which he has travelled
with fatisfation, and he who is driven from
his native land, with which he had con-
neaed every idea of settlement and com-
fort,:will have very different feelings at the
time of departure. Such is the difference
which,.at the hour of death, takes place be-
tween the righteous and the ungodly. The

- - * Hafiah, xxxviii. 19, II,

latter

latter knows nothing higher or better than s E R M.
the present state of existence. His interefis, -S' .
his pleasures, his expectations, all centered
here. He lived solely for the enjoyments
of this world. Dreadful, therefore, and in-
supportable mutt be that event which fepa-
rates him from these for ever. Whereas the
culture of religion had previously formed
the mind of a Christian for a calm and easy
transition from this life. It had inftruded
him in the proper estimate of sublunary
happiness. It had set higher profpeds be-
fore him. It had formed him.to a more
refined taste of enjoyment, than what the
common round of worldly amusements
could gratify. It gave him. connections
and alliances with spiritual objects, which
are unknown to the men of the world.
H-ence, though he be attached to life by the
natural feelings of humanity, lie is raised
above the weak and unmanly regret of part-
ing with it. He knew that it was intended
as preparatory only to a succeeding hate.
As soon as the season of preparation should
be inilihed, he expeCed a removal; and

Q02 when

S E R M. when Providence gives the signal, he bids
VIII.

. adieu to the world with composed refolu-

tion and undisturbed heart. What though
death interrupt him in the middle of his
designs, and break off the plans which he
had formed, of being useful to his family
and the world ? All these he leaves with
tranquillity in the hands of that Providence
to which he has ever been accustomed to
look up with resignation; which governed
the world wifely and graciously before he
existed; and which he knows will continue
to govern it with equal wisdom and benig-
nity when he ihall be in it no more. The
time of his departure was not left to his
own choice; but he believes it to be the
most proper, because it is the time chofert
by Him who cannot err. lHonourable age
is not that wlhich iandeth in length of time,
nor that which is meafnred by number
of years. But wiofzom is the grey hair to
man ; and an nnfpotted lJe is old age .
When he beholds his friends and relations
mourning around him, his heart may melt,

Wifd. of Solomon, iv. 8, 9.

but

but will not be overpowered; for it is re- s E R M.
lieved by the thought that he is bidding .vil
them only a temporary, not an eternal fare-
wel, He commends them in the mean
time, to the blessing of that God whom he
has served; and while he is parting from
them, he hears a voice which sooths his
spirit with those comforting words, Leave
thy fatbcrltfs childrenl; I willjprefcrve tbem
alive ; and let thy widow truji in meg.

BUT death is more than the conclusion

of human life. It is the gate which, at the
fame time that it closes on this world, opens
into eternity. Under this view, it has often
been the subjea of tcrrour to the serious
and reflecting. The transition they were
about to make was awful. Before them lay
a vail undiscovered region, from whole
bourn no traveller ever returned to bring
information of the reception which he found,
or of the objets which he met with there.
The first conception which suggests itself is,
that the disembodied spirit is to appear be-

* Jerem. xlix. 1i.

Q.3 forc

S ER I. fore its Creator, who is then to aCt as its
VIII. .--.. Judge. The stria inquisition which it must

undergo, the impartial doom which it must
hear pronounced, and the unalterable ftatc
to which it shall be afligned, 'are awful
forms rising before the imagination. They
are ideas which conscience forces upon all.
Mankind can neither avoid confidering
tiemfelves as accountable creatures, nor
avoid viewing death as the season when
their account is to be given.. Such a senti-
ment is with molt men the source of dread,
with all men, of anxiety. To a certain de-
gree a good consdience will convey comfort.
The reflcdion on a well-fpent life makes a
wide difference between the last moments cf
the righteoua ,and the finner. But whofc
conscience is so clear as to strike him with
no remorse? Whcfe righteousness is so un--
blcmifhed as to abide the scrutiny of tlih
great fearche' of hearts ? Who dares reft his
cverlafting fate upon his pcrfec conformity.
to the rule of duty throughout the whole of
his life ?

We murf not'judge.of thbc fcntiments of.
men at the approach o. death by their or-

dinary

dinary train of thought in the days of health s E R M.

VIII.

and ease. Their views of moral conduct are
then, too generally, superficial; flight ex-
cufes satisfy their minds, and the avocatiori
of life prevent their attention from dwelling
long on disagreeable fubjeas. But when
altogether withdrawn from the affairs of the
world, they are left to their own refledions
on past conduc; with their spirits enfeebled
by disease, and their minds impressed with
the terrours of an invisible region; the most
resolute are apt to despond, and even the
virtuous are in danger of finking under'the
remembrance of their errours and frailties.
The trembling mind casts every where
around an anxious exploring eye after any
power that can uphold, any mercy that will
thield and save it. And accordingly we -ee
how eagerly every device has been embraced
which ftiperftitiotl could invent in various
countries, for quieting the alarms of the
departing spirit.

Here appears the great importance of

those discoveries which Christianity has made
concerning the government of the universe.

Q-4 It

SERM. It displays the ensigns of grace and cle-
,_1.L mency. It reveals the Almighty not as a

creator only and a judge, but as a compaf-
fionate parent, who knows our frame, who
remembers we are dusj, who pities us as a/ a-
therpitieth his children; andwith wi hom there
isforgivenefs, that he may be loved as well
as feared. These general views, however,
of the divine administration, would not
have been sufficient to give full relief, if
they had not been confirmed by certain de-
cifive fads to which the mind can appeal
amidst all its doubts and fears, Two such
faas the gospel holds forth to us, particu-
larly adapted to the situation of human na-
ture in its greatest extremity; the atone-
ment, and the intercefion of Christ. There
is no sentiment more natural to men than
this, that guilt must be expiated by susser-
ing. All government is founded on the
principle, that public justice requires com-
penfation for crimes; and all religions pro-
ceed upon the belief, that, in order to the
pardon of the finner, atonement mullt be
made to the justice of Heaven. Hence the

endless

endless variety of sacrifices, vidinms, and ex- s R M.
piations which have filled the earth. The
great sacrifice which our Redeemer offered
for guilt, coincides with these natural fen-
timents of mankind in giving ease to the
heart. It shows us the forfeit of guilt paid
by a divine personage in our behalf; and
allows us to look up to the Governor of
the world, as merciful to the guilty in con-
fiftency with juflice and order. But Rill
some anxiety might remain concerning the
extension of that mercy to our own cafe in
particular. An invisible sovereign is an
awful idea ; almighty, unknown power, is
always formidable, and would be ready to
overwhelm the spirit of the feeble, were not
an interccffor with that sovereign revealed.
This intercessor is one who lived and acted
in our own nature; who not only knows,
but who experienced our frailty; who has
all the feelings of a brother for human in-
firmity and distress; who himself patTed
through that valley of the Jadow of death
which is now opening on us; to whose
powerful mediation with his Father we have

every

SER M. every encouragement to commit the charge
VIII.

- of our departing fpirit.-Such is the provi.

sion which Christianity has made for com-
forting the last hours of man. The atone-
ment, and the intercession of Christ, are the
refuge of the penitent finner, and the confo.
lation of the faint. By their means the
throne of the universe is encircled with
mercy. The cloud which hung over the
invisible wvorld begins to be diiierfed; and
hope brightens through the gloom.

BUT what completes the triumph of good

men over death is, the prospeCt of eternal
felicity. This was the great objet after
which all nations have tighed, as the only
complete remedy both of the miserics of life
and the fears of death. On this, the learned
and the ignorant, the civilized and the fa-
vage tribes of mankind bent their longing
eyes; eagerly grasping at every argument,
and fondly indulging every hope, that could
promise them a propitious Deity, and the
prolongation of existence in a happier slate.
But beyond vwifies and feeble expectations,

the

the light of nature could hardly reach. S E R M.
Even the most cultivated, philosophical mind VIII.
was, at the hour of dissolution, left in pain-
ful suspense. Christianity has put an end
to all hesitation and doubt on this important
fubjeat. It has drawn aside the veil through
which reason essayed to penetrate; and has
displayed to full view the future dwellings
of the spirits of the just, the mansions of
everlasting reft, the city of the living God.
Not only has it informed us that a itate of
perfect felicity is prepared for the righteous,
but it has added to this information a variety
of circumstances vwhich render that slate
sensible to our imagination, and encouraging
to our hopes. It represents it as fully fe-
cured by the gracious undertaking of the
Saviour of the world. It describes it as an
incheritance, to which he has given his fol-
lowers a right and title. He is laid to have
taken pofleflion of it in their name. He
rose from the grave as thesis fruitts of tJhem
thatieep ; and under the characer of their
fore-runner, entered into the heavenly re-
gions. I am the ra2idrctSiRi and the l/e.

**1 "
He

S E R M. He that belicvebt on me, though he re dead,
VII_. yet shall he live. Igive unto my PfJjp ectr-

nal life. I afrend to my Father and ozur
Father, to my God and your God *.

Hence, to those who have lived a vir-

tuous life, and who die in the faith of
Chrid, the whole aspea of death is changed.
Death is to them no longer the tyrant who
approaches with his iron rod, but the mef-
fenger who brings the tidings of life and
liberty. The profpeCs which open to them
cheer their minds. Even in the valley of
death's shade, green pajiures appear to rife.
They view themselves as going forth, not
to lie silent and solitary in the darkness of
the grave, not to wander forsaken in the
wide deserts of the universe, not even to
pass into a region where they are altogether
firangers and unknown; but to enter on a
land, new indeed to fight, but by faith and
hope frequented long before; where they
shall continue to be under the charge of him
who hath hitherto been their guardian, be
re-united to many of their ancient and be-

* John, xi. 25. xx. 17.

loved

loved friends, and admitted to join the in- SERM.
numerable mnltitude, gathered out of all na- -
tions, and tongues, and people, who fland
before the throne of God. They leave be-
hind the dregs of their nature; and ex-
change this confined and gloomy apartment
of the universe, for the glorious manllions
of their Father's house. Blessed surely are
the dying in this hope, and blefcd the dead
in this fruition, reJiing from their lahours,
and followed by their works. Good men
are detained at present in the outer court of
the temple: Death admits them into the
holy place. As yet they sojourn in the
territories of pilgrimage and exile: Death
brings them home to the native land of
Spirits. In this world they are divided
from one another, and mingled with the
worthless and the vile: Death unites in one
assembly all the pure and the just. In the
fight of the universe they seemed to die, and
their departure was taken for utter deflruc-
tion. But they are in peace. Their reward
al/o is with the Lord, and the care of them
with the Moji High .-0 Death! where

' Wi;Jom of Solomon, iii. 2, 3.-v. 15.

ER M. is now thy fliwg ? 0 Grave ! where is thy
vII. vic7ory.? Where are the terrours with which

thou haft so long affrighted the nations?
Where are thy dreary and desolate domains,
the haunts of ipefres and hliades, the abhor-
red dwellings of darkness and corruption?
At the touch of the divine rod, thy vision-
ary horrours have fled. The spell is broken.
The dawn of the celestial morning has dif-
pelled thy dismal gloom; and, instead of
the habitations of dragons, appears the para.
dife of God.

BUT supposing both the regret of quit-

ting life, and the dread of entering into a
future state to be overcome, there is still
one circumstance which renders death for-
midable to many; that is, the ihock which
nature is apprehending to sustain at the
separation of the foul from the body,
Formidable, I admit, this may jufily ren-
der it to them whose languishing fiirits
have no inward fund whence they can then
draw relief. Firmness and ftreni;th of
mind are peculiarly requisite for the fuppor,
of nature in its last exremity; and that

firengthl

firength it supplied by religion. The tcfti- s E R M.
mony of a good conscience, and the re- V11.
membrance of a virtuous life, a well-
grounded trust in the divine acceptance, and
a firm hope of future felicity, are principles
sufficient to give composure and fortitude
to the heart, even in the midst of agony.
In what a high degree they can suspend' or
alleviate the feelings of pain, has been fully
demonstrated by the magnanimous beha-
viour of such as have suffered death in the
cause of conscience and religion. How
often has the world beheld them advancing
to meet that supposed king of terrours, not
with calmness only, but with joy; raised
by divine profpeas and hopes into an en-
tire neglec and contempt of bodily susser-
ing ?

It is not without reason that a peculiar

aflifance from Heaven is looked for by good
men at the hour of death. As they are
taught to believe, that in all the emergen-
cies of their life divine goodness has watched
over them, they have ground to conclude,
that at the laR it will not forsake them; but

that,

SE RIM. that, at the season when its aid is most

VII1.
<-t , needed, it ihall be most liberally commu-

nicated. Accordingly, a persuasion so con-
gruous to the benignity and compassion of
the Father of mercies, has been the comfort
of pious men in every age. MyfleJf and
my heart faileth; but God is theflrength of
my heart. In the valley of theJfladow of
death I will fear no evil, Jfr thou art with
me. When the rod andftqafof this Shepherd
of Israel are held forth to his expiring ser-
vants, declining nature needs no other sup-
port. The secret influence of his reviving
spirit is sufficient for their consolation and
firength, while the painful Rtruggle with
mortality lafis; till at length, when the
moment arrives that the filvet cord imtfl be
loosed, and the golden bowl be broken, their
Almighty Proteacor carries off the immortal
spirit unhurt by the fall of its earthly taber-
nacle, and places it in a better mansion.-
How refpedable and happy is such a con-
clufion of human life, when one in this
manner quits the stage of time, honoured
and supported with the pretence of his

T!r~~ ~ Creator,

Creator, and enjoying, till the last moment s E R M.
of refleaion, the pleasing thought, that he . -.
has not lived in vain! I havefought a ,ood
figSht; I hJav fJfiifd my cot/r ; I have kept
thejfith. IILcf rJb thelre is laid up for me
a crown cfrihtrcj.:;c,, which the Lordl the
righteous 'uaiget./ll givc me at that day *.

AFTER the view which we have taken

of the advantages poffefled by good men for
overcoming the fears of death, the first fen-
tinent which should arise in our minds, is
gratitude to Heaven for the hopes which
we enjoy by means of the Christian reli-
gion. How depressed and calamitous was
the human condition, as long as the terrour
of death hung, like a dark cloud, over the
inhabitants of the earth; when, after all the
toils of life, the melancholy silence of the
grave appeared finally to close the scene of
existence; or, if a future state opened be-
hind it, that slate teemed with all those
forms of horrour which conscious guilt
could suggest to a terrified imagination!

* 2 Tim. iv. 7, 8.
VOL. IL R The

S E R M. The happiest change which ever took place
<_^_, in the circumstances of the human race, is

that produced by the discoveries with which
we are blessed concerning the government
of the univcrfe, the redemption of the world,
and the future dcfiination of man. How
much dignity is thereby added to the hu-
man characer and slate ! What light and
cheerfulness is introduced into our abode !
What eternal praise is due to Him, who,
accordilng to his abundant mcery,, bath begot-
tnc ;s; a,.gai; into a livcl, hope, by the rgqur-
reIio1n of Jiis's CJhri fro6m the dead, io a!
inbhcritince iico;-rrltible, Iundcfled, and thai
Jfadcth no! awaJ', rf'iveCd in heaven ?

Turl next cffec which the subjec we

have confidercd flould produce, is an ear-
nefl desire to acquire those advantages which
good men enjoy at their death. The road
which leads to them is plain and obviois.
A peaceful and happy death is, by the ap-
poi!ntmen!t of Heaven, connected with a
holy and virtuous life. Let us renounce
criminal puriuits and- pleasures; let us fear

God

Cod and keep his commandmenets; let us E R M.
holdfaiith and a good colifiliCcc, if we hope I
for comfort at our last hour. To prepare
for this last hour, every wile man flould
confider as his most important concern.
Death may juflly be held the tcft of life.
Let a man have supported his character
with esteem and applause, as long as he
acted on the busy stage of the world, if at
the end he finks into dejection and tcrrour,
all his former honour is cfflced ; he departs
under the imputation of either a guilty con-
science, or a pulillanimous mind. In the
other parts of human conduct, disguise and
subtlety may impofc on the world ; but
seldom can artilice be fipported in the hour
of death. The nmafk molt commonly falls
off, and the genuine chara&er appears.
'When we behold the scene of life closed
with proper composure and dignity, we na-
turally infer integrity and fortitude. We
are led to believe that divine afifi-ance sup-
ports the foul, and we prefagc its transition
into a happier mansion. Iarf'k the perfiLc7

R 2 man,

S E R M. man, and behold the prighJt; for the end of
t , I rthat man is peace '.

THE last inftrudion which our subjea

points out, refpets the manner in which a
wife and good man ought to stand affected
towards life and death. He ought not to
be servilely attached to the one. He has
no reason abjecly to dread the other. Life
is the gift of God, which he may justly
cherish and hold dear. Nay, he is bound
by all fair means to guard and preserve it,
that he may continue to be useful in that
post of duty where Providence has placed
him. But there are higher principles to
which the love of life should remain sub-
ordinate. Wherever religion, virtue, or true
honour, call him forth to danger, life ought
to be hazarded without fear. There is a
generous contempt of death which should
distinguish those who live and walk by the
faith of immortality. This is the source
of courage in a Christian. His behaviour

' Psalm xxxvii. 37.

ough g

ought to shew the elevation of his foul above s E R M.
the present world; ought to discover the li- VI'
berty which he pofleffes of following the
native fentilncnts of his mind, without any
of those refiraints and fetters which the fear
of death imposes on vicious men.

At the fame time, this rational contempt

of death muff carefully be diffinguifhed from
that inconsiderate and thoughtless indiffer-
ence, with which some have affected to treat
it. This is what cannot be justified on any
principle of reason. Human life is no trifle,
which men may play away at their pleasure.
Death, in every view, is an important event.
It is the most solemn crisis of the human ex-
iftence. A good man has reason to meet it
with a calm and firm mind. But no man
is entitled to treat it with offentatious levity.
It calls for manly seriousness of thought. It
requires all the recollection of which we are
capable; that with the proper disposition of
dependent beings, when the dust is about
to return to its ditl, we may deliver up the
spirit to Him who gave it,

R3

# SERMON IX. On the HAPPINESS of a FUTURE STATE. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. REVELAT. vii. 9. After this I beheld, and, lo! a great multitude, which no man could ...

[ 246 ]

S E R M O N IX.

On the HAPPINESS of a FUTURE ST ATE,
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of th;;

Lord's Supper.

REVELA T. vii. 9.
After this I behcld, and, lo ! a great mllti-

tude, which no man could number, of all
nations, and kindreds, and people, and
tonguels,Jlood bcfore the throne, and beoire
the Lamb, clothedi with white robes, and
palms in their hands.
S E R Md. IN this mysterious book of Scripture many

revolutions are foretold, which were to

take place in the church of God. They
are not indeed so foretold as to afford clear
and precise information concerning the time

of

of their coming to pass. It would have SERM.
been, on many accounts, improper to have '-
lifted up too far that awful veil which co-
vers fiturity. The ijtecnisal of the Spirit
of God, was not to gratify the curiosity of
the learned, by ditflofing to them the fate of
monarchies and nations, but to iatisfy the
fcrious concerning the general plan, and final
ilile, of the divine government. Amidst
those difirefies which besel Chriflians during
the first ages, the discoveries made in this
book were peculiarly icafonable; as they
shewed that there was an Almighty Guard-
ian, who watched with particular attention
over the interests of the church which he
had formed; who foresaw all tle commo-
tions which were to happen among the
kingdoms of the earth, and would so over-
rule them as to promote in the end the
cause of truth. This is the chief scope of
those mystic visions with which the Apostle
John was favoured; of feals opened in
heaven; of trumpets founding; and vials
poured forth. The kingdom of darkness
was to maintain for a while a violent struggle

R 4 againit

SERM. againfl the kingdom of light. But at the

lx_ conclusion, a voice was to be heard, as the

voice of many' waters and of mighty thunder-
ings, j'ying, Alleljlab, for the Lord God
cmnipotent reigneth. The kingdoms of this
wcorld are become the kingdoms of our Lord
and of his ChrIs , and he Janll reign for ever .
Such is the prolpee with which the divine
Spirit at intervals enlightens, and with which
lie finally terminates, the many dark and
direful fcencs that are exhibited in this book.
In closing the canon of scripture, he, with
great propriety, leaves upon our mind deep
inprcffions of the triumphs of righteous-
ness, and of the bleflednefs of the redeemed.
4lfter this I beheld, and, lo ! a great tmultitude,
cwhich no man could number, of all nations,
and kindreds, and people, and tongues, flood
before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed
.with white robes, andpalms in their hands.

These words present a beautiful defcrip-

tlon of the happiness of faints in heaven;
a subjea on which it is, at all times, both

Rev. xix. 6.-xi. 15.

comi

of a Futurc State. 249

comfortable and improving to meditate. SERM.
On this day in particular, when we are to I,-
commemorate the dying love of our Sa-
viour, we cannot be better employed than in
contemplating what his love hath purchased;
in order both to awaken our gratitude, and
to confirm our attachment to hin. The
sacrament of the fupper.is the oath of our
fidelity. Let us dilpofe ourselves for cele-
brating it, by taking a view of the rewards
which await the faithful. I flall, for this
end, in several observations fiom the words
of the text, taken in conncdion with the
context, endeavour to illuftrare, in some
imperfec degree, the profpec which is
here afforded us of a itate of future felicity;
and then shall make practical improvement
of the subjea.

I. WHAT the words of the text most

obviously suggest is, that heaven is to be
confidered as a state of blessed society. A
multitude, a numerous assembly, are here
represented as iharing together the fame
felicity and honour. Without society, it is

impossible

S R MI. impoffiblc for man to be happy. Place

IX. him in a region where he was ilrrounded

with every plcaiure; yet there, if he found
himself a solitary indi;vidual, he would pine
and languifl. They are not mercly our
wants, and our mutual dependence, but
our native inftindts alio, which impcl us to
affociatc together. The intcrc(,ulle which
ve here maintain vith our fellows, is a
source of our chief enjoyments. But, alas!
how much are these allayed by a variety of
disagreeable circumitances that enter into
all our connexions ! Sometimes we si.ser
from the difirefies of tholfe whom we love;
and sometimes from their vices or frailtics.
Where friendflip is cordial, it is exposed
to the wounds of painful sympathy, and to
the anguifhl of violent separation. Where
it is so cool as not to occasion sympathetic
pains, it is never produdive of much plea-
iure. The ordinary commerce of the world
consists in a circulation of frivolous inter-
course, in which the heart has no concern.
It is generally insipid, and often foured by
the slightest difference iu humour, or op-

position

position of interest. We fly to company, in s E R M.
order to be relieved from wearisome corre- Ix.
fpondence with ourselves; and the vexations
which we meet with in society drive us
back again into solitude. Even among the
virtuous, dissensions arise; and disagree-
ment in opinion too often produces aliena-
tion of heart. We form few connexions
where fomevwhat does not occur to difap-
point our hopes. The beginnings are often
pleasing. We flatter ourfeives with having
found those who will never give us any
disgust. But weaknesses are too soon dif-
covered. Sulpicions arise; and love waxes
cold. We are jealous of one another, and
accustomed to live in difuife. A fludied
civility affulmes the name without the plea-
sure of friendflip; and secret animosity and
envy are often concealed under the caresses
of dissembled affection.

Hence the pleasure of earthly society,

like all our other pleasures, is extremely im-
perfect; and can give us a very faint con-
ception of the joy that must arise from the
society of perfect Ipirits in a happier world.

Here,

s E R M. Here, it is with difficulty that we can fe-

'X . lec from the corrupted crowd a few with

whom we wish to aflociate in firia union.
There, are assembled all the wife, the holy,
and the just, who ever existed in the uni-
verse of God; without any distress to trou-
ble their mutual bliss, or any source of dif-
agreement to interrupt their perpetual
harmony. Artifice and concealment are
unknown there. There, no competitors
struggle, no faaions contend; no rivals
supplant each other. The voice of discord
never rites, the whisper of suspicion never
circulates, among thole innocent and be-
nevolent spirits. Each, happy in himself,
participates in the happiness of all the reft;
and by reciprocal communications of love
and friendship, at once receives from and
adds to the fum of general felicity. Re-
new the memory of the most affectionate
friends with whom you were blest in any
period of your life. Divest them of all
those infirmities which adhere to the hu-
man character. Recal the most pleasing
and tender moments which you ever en-

joyed

joyed in their society; and the remem- S ER M.

Ix.

brance of those lenfations may affit you '--
in conceiving that felicity which is pof-
ieffed by the faints above. The happiness
of brethren dwelling together in unity, is,
with great juflice and beauty, compared by
the Psalmist to such things as are most re.
refreshing to the heart of man; to the fra-
grancy of the richest odours, and to the
reviving influence of soft etherial dews.
It is like the precious ointment poured on the
head of Aaron ; and like the dew of Hermon,
even the dew that defcendcth on the moun-
tains of Zion, where the Lord comnmandeth
the blefing, even lfrfor ev ore 'v

Besides the felicity which springs from

perfea love, there are two circumtiances
which particularly enhance the bleflednefs
of that milltitrinde wholJ and before the throne;
these are, access to the most exalted society,
and renewal of the most tender connexions.
The former is pointed out in the Scripture
byjoining the innumerable company of angel,
and the generazl afjcmbly and church of the

Pa I'lm cxx yii. I.

sTI'-

S E R M. frJt-born ; by fitting down with AlraiLant,

x., and Isaac, and yacob, in the kingdom of.

heave.1 *; a promise which opens the sub-
limeft profpeQs to the human mind. It
allows good men to entertain the hope, that
separated from all the dregs of the human
mass, from that mixed and polluted crowd
in midst of which they now dwell, they
shall be permitted to mingle with prophets,
patriarchs, and apofRles, with Icgiflators and
heroes, with all those great and illustrious
spirits, who have fihone in former ages as
the servants of God, or the benefactors of
men; who!s dccds we are accustomed to
celebrate; wholec fieps we now follow at a
distance; and whose names we pronounce
with veneration.

United to this high alTembly, the blessed

at the fame time renew those ancient con-
nexions with virtuous friends which had
been dissolved by death. The profped of
this awakens in the heart the most pleasing
and tender entirment which perhaps can fill
it, in this mortal fRate. For of all the for-

* IIcb. ii. zz, 23. Matth, viii. 1.

rows

rows which we are here doomed to endure, S E R M.

lx.

none is so bitter as that occifioncd by the _--
fatal firoke which separates us, in appear-
ance, for ever, from those to whom cither
nature or fricndfliip had intiiatly joined
our hearts. Memory, from time to time,
renews the anguifih; opens the woundc
which seemed once to have been closed;
and by recalling jo)ys that are pals and gone,
touches every inring of painful fclribility.
In these agonizing, moments, how relieving
the tlioulit, that the separation is only
temporary, not etcrnal; that thire is a time
to come, of re-union witl tl ofI: wlth wholo
our happiest days were spent; who!e joys
and ibrrows once were osrs; and fron-
whom, after we shall lavc landed on the
peaceful ihore where tlhey dwecl no revo-
lutions of nature shall ever be able to part
us more !-Such is the (ocicty of tlhe blciicdl
above. Of fich are the mulitude com-
pofid who flandl bjfJ;e t'ec /Li'r i,:. Let us
now obfervc,

II. THAT tlis is not only a bhlefld hut a
aumerous ficiety. It is called a Nlli/lte,

! I a) g rcat

s E R M. a great multitide, a great multitude which no

X . a man could number. These expressions con-

vey the most enlarged views of the kingdom
of glory. Difinay not yourselves with the
apprehension of heaven being a confined
and almost inaccessible region, into which
it is barely possible for a small handful to
gain admission, after making their escape
from the general wreck of the human
race. In my Father's horie, said our Sa-
viour, there are many nmafions. That city
of the living God towards which you profess
to bend your course, is prepared for the
reception of citizens innumerable. It al-
ready abounds with inhabitants; and more
and more {hall be added to it, until the end
of time. Whatever difficulties there are in
the way which leads to it, they have been
often surmounted. The path, though nar-
row, is neither impassable, nor untrodden.
Though the gate stands not so wide as that
which opens into hell, yet through the nar-
row gate multitudes have entered, and been
crowned.

It is much to be lamented, that, among all
denominations of Christians, the unchari-

12 table

table spirit has prevailed of unwarrantably s E R M.
circumscribing the terms of divine grace ,
within a narrow circle of their own draw-
ing. The one half of the Christian world
has often doomed the other, without mercy,
to eternal perdition. Without the pale of
that church to which each fed belongs, they
seem to hold it impossible for salvation to be
attained. But is this the genuine spirit of
the Gospel ? Can a Chrilfian believe the
effects of the sufferings ol Christ to be no
greater than thler? For this did the Son of
God descend from the highef' heavens, and
pour out his foul unto the death, that only
a few, who adopt the fame modes of
expression, and join in the fame forms of
worship with us, might be brought to the
kingdom of heaven? Is this all the deli-
verance he has wrought ziJ on the earth ? IIe
was wsith child; he wa; in pain ; and llall
he not fe of the travail of thisJfol, and be
fatified? Surely, the Scripture has given
us full ground to conclude, that the trophies
of our Redeemer's grace illall correspond to
the greatness of his power. The Captain of

VOL. II. S our

S E R M. our salvation JJall bring many Jons ;with

^' h- binftlf to glory. The pleasure of the Lord

fiall prosper in his hand. He Jhallfee his
feed; He flall jfiiify many. Men J]all be
blefed in him, and all nations flall call him
ble['d. For our farther encouragement,
let us observe,

III. THAT the heavenly society is repre-

sented in the text, as gathered out of all the
varieties of the human race. This is inti-
mated by the remarkable expressions of a
multitude which no man could number, of all
nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues;
as if designed on purpose to corred our
narrow notions of the extent and power of
divine grace. They whom distant seas and
regions now divide, whose languages and
manners are at present strange to one an-
other, shall then mingle in the fame assem-
bly. No situation is so remote, and no
fiation so unfavourable, as to preclude access
to the heavenly felicity. A road is opened
by the Divine Spirit to those blissful habi-
tations, from all corners of the earth, and

from

fiom all conditions of human life; from SE R M.
the peopled city, and from the solitary de- Ix.
fert; from the cottages of the poor, and
from the palaces of kings; from the dwell-
ings of ignorance and simplicity, and from
the regions of science and improvement.
They Jiall come, fays our blessed Lord him-
self, from the eal and from the weft, frosm
the north and from thefoulth, andfit down in
the kingdom of God *.

Such discoveries serve both to enlarge our

conceptions of the extent of divine good-
ness, and to remove those fears which are
ready to arise from particular situations in
life. Were you permitted to draw aside the
veil, and to view that diversified assembly
of the blessed who surround the throne, you
would behold among them numbers who
have overcome the fame difficulties which
encounter you, and which you dread as
insuperable. You would behold there the
uninftruded, with whom an upright inten-
tion supplied the place of knowledge; the

' Luke, xiii. 29.

S 2 feeble,

SE R M. feeble, whom divine grace had strength-

I,_ ened; and the mislcd, whom it had brought

back into the right path. You would be-
hold the young who had surmounted the
allurements of youthful pleasure, and the
old who had borne the distress of age with
undecayed constancy ; many whom want
could not tempt to dishonesty, many whom
riches did not seduce into pride or impiety;
many who, in the most difficult and cnfnar-
ing circumstances, in the midst of camps
and armies and corrupted courts,' had pre-
served unfullied intcgrity. In a word,from
all kindreds and people, that is, from all
ranks of life, and all tribes of men, even
from among pitblictr.s aild /iners, you
would behold those whom divine assistance
had conduded to future glory.-And is
not the fame assistance, in its full extent,
offered also to us? Encompafled, while
we run the Chriflian race, with this cloud of
witnefes who have finished their course
with success; animated, while we fight the
goodfiiht, with the fiouts of those who
have overcome and are crowned, shall de-

fpair

fpair enervate or deject our minds ? From s E R M.

iX.

the happy multitude above, there issues a _-__
voice which ought to found perpetually in
the ear of faith. Be ye faithfiul unto the
death, and yeJhall receive the cr-own of life;
BeJirong in the Lord, and in the power of
his migiht; ]e followers of us who throutgh
Jfith and patience are now inheriting the
promifies. Conlider,

IV. TiE description given in the text

of the happiness and glory of the heavenly
society. They were belheld by the apoitle
Jianding before the throne, and before the
Lamb, clothed wcith white robes, and palms
in their hands. All that tliete palms and
we'hite robes import, it is not given us now
to understand. We know that among all
nations they have been used as eniigns of joy
and victory; and are undoubtedly employed
here to represent that diftinguifled felicity
and honour to which human nature shall be
then advanced. But we mull be endowed
with the faculties of the blessed, in order to
comprehend their employments and plea.

S 3 fures;

SE RM. fures; and therefore on this part of the

Ix .
__, subjef I shall not attempt to enlarge. The

silence of humble and refpelful hope bet-
ter becomes us, than the indulgence of those
excursions of fancy, which degrade the sub-
jed they endeavour to exalt.

One circumfiance only cannot fail to at-

traac particular attention; that the blessed
are here described as flanding before the
ihrone and Ibfore the Lamb; that is, en-
joying the immediate presence of the great
Creator, and of the merciful Redeemer of
the world. The unhappy distance at which
we are now removed from God, is the
source of all our woes. Those territories
which we inhabit, are not His abode. They
are regions of exile. They are the dwell-
ings of a fallen race; and are condemned
to be invested with clouds and darkness.
Here, God standeth afar off. In vain we
often pursue his presence through his works,
his ways, and his religious institutions. He
is said to be a God that hideth hinfelf. He
dwe!lcth, as to us, in the secret place of
thJuikr. le holdeth back the face of his

throne,

throne, and fpreadeth a thick cloud upon it. S ERM.
The manifestation of his presence fiall be O-
the signal for the renovation of all things.
When that Sun of righteon/izefs breaks forth
from the cloud which now conceals him,
sorrow and fin, and every evil thing, liall
fly away before the brightness of his face.
For neither guilt nor mifcry can remain
where God dwells. As the riling of the
fun transforms at once the face of nature,
and converts the whole extent of space,
over which his beams are Ilread, into a
region of light; so hall the divine presence,
as soon as it is revealed, diffuse universal
bliss over all who behold it. It imports
filnefi of joy, and pleafire for evermore.
The inspired writer of this book thus de-
scribes its effets: There fl.all be no more
death, neitherforrow, nor crying, norpain ;
for the former things are paitd away. He
thatfat upon the throne siid, Behold I make
all things new. They Jall hunger no more,
neither thirJt any more. Buit the Lamb
which is in the midj? of the throne fjall fed
them, and lhall lead them unto livingjfobn-

S 4 tains

SE RM. tains of water. God f.Iall wipe away all

i tears Jnr m their eyes. lut, descending from
this too sublime theme, let us,

V. TURN our attention to a circumftancc

in the state of future happiness, more com-
menfurate to our present conceptions, which
is fuggerted by the commentary upon the
words of the text given in the sequel of
the chapter. And one of the elders aifwered,
fijinsg unto me, JtVhat are thlei' hich e are ar-
rayed in white robes; and whence caime they?
And Ifaid unto bim, Sir, thou klnoz'eJf. And
hefiid unto me, Theqf are they which came
out of great tribulation *. This explanatory
circumstance may relate particularly to the
cafe of those primitive fuflerers who en-
dured revere perfccution in the cause of the
gospel. But, in general, it presents this na-
tural and beautiful view of the future feli-
city of good men, that it is their reft from
the troubles and toils of life. For, to all,
even to the happiest, human life is tribula-
tion and conflice. No man is thoroughly

Rev. viii. 13, 1L.

z. t

at ease in his condition. Pursuits succeed- S ERM.

IX.

ing to pursuits keep us in constant agitation; _
while frcquent returns of disappointment
break cur plans, and oppress our fjiirits.-
Fatigued by such a variety of toils, mankind
have ever looked forward to reft as their
favourite obje(t. Throughout all their
ranks, from the highest to the lowest, tlrey
are in perpetual chace of it; and it per-
petually flics before them. It is an object
which here they are doomed always to
seek, and never to enjoy.

The nature and laws of our present fate

admit not the gratiiication of this favourite
wilh. For, betides the neceslity of trouble in
order to fulfil the purpoles of discipline and
improvement, our very happinefl, such as it
is in this world, requires a circulation of la-
bours. Our enjoyment conlfifs in pursuit,
not in attainment. Attainment is with us,
for most part, the grave of pleasure. Had
we no object to excite frefli activity, and to
impel us to new toils, human life would
quickly stagnate in melancholy indolence.

At

S ERM. At the fame time the current of all our
.Ix-2 wishes tends to repose. Imaginary forms

float incessantly before our view, of the hap-
pineis which is to be enjoyed in reft: And
from this confliE between our wishes on the
one hand, and our acual situation on the
other, arise much of the disquiet, and much
of the infelicity, of human life. It is only
in heaven that the tranquil repose, which on
earth is no more than a pleasing phantom,
/hall be fully realized. There, remnaineth at
last a reJtfor thepeople of God; reft from the
disturbance of paflion, the vanity of pursuit,
and the vexation of disappointment; reft
from all the fins and the sorrows of this
miserable world; reft, which shall not be
merely an indolent cessation from labour,
but a full and satisfying enjoyment. Good
menJ all rlStfrom their labours, and their
works ~Jall follow them. They have come
out of great tribulation. They have fulfilled,
with honour, their appointed course of trial.
They have fat down in the feat of the Con-
queror; and of past labours nothing remains

I1 but

but the pleasing review, and the happy SERM.
fruits. There is Rfill to be confidered, Ix.

VI. ONE very material circumstance, de-

fcriptive both of the characer, and of the
happiness of those who enjoy the heavenly
bliss. Not only have they come out of great
tribulation, but, as the Spirit of God adds in
explaining the text, they have waflted their
robes, and made them white in the blood of
the Lamhb '. Two things are here fuggelted;
the fandity of the blessed, and the means by
which it is attained.

First, their fanaity or purity is emblema-

tically described, by their being clothed in
robes which are wahnJed and made white.
In order to qualify human nature for the
enjoyment of such happiness as I have en-
deavoured to describe, it must undergo a
change so great, as to receive in Scripture
the appellation of a new birth; a change to
which all the institutions of religion, and
all the operations of grace, contribute in this
life, but which is notcompleted till the next.

* Rev. viii. 14.

In

SERM. In this fancity, or regeneration, confilt not
t..--j only the neceflury preparations for future

felicity, but, whicil is not so commonly at-
tended to, confifes an efiential part of that
felicity itself. For whence arises the mi-
fery of this present world ? It is not owing
to our cloudy atmosphere, our changing sea-
sons, and inclement nfies. It is not owing
to the debility of our bodies, or to the un-
equal distribution of the goods of fortune.
AmidPt all disadvantages of this kind, a pure,
a fledfaft, and enlightened mind, poaefl'ed
of exalted virtue, could enjoy itself in peace,
and smile at the impotent assaults of fortune
and the elements. It is within ourselves
that misery has fixed its feat. Our difor-
dered hearts, our guilty passions, our vio-
lent prejudices, and misplaced desires, are
the infiruments of the torment which we
endure. These sharpen the darts which
adversity would otherwise point in vain
against us. These are the vials of =rath
which pour forth plagues on the inhabitants
of the earth; and make the dwellings of
nations become the abodes of woe. Thence

difcontelnt

discontent and remorse gnaw the hearts of s ER M.

bi - . ~lIX.

individuals. Thence society is tornby open .-^
violence, or undermined by secret treachery;
and man is transformed into a favagc to
man.

But suppose fin to be baniflied from the

world; suppose perfee purity and charity
to descend: from heaven, and to animate
every human breast ; and you would be-
hold the present habitation of men changed
into the paradise of God. The undisturbed
enjoyment of a holy mind, and of a blissful
union with one another, would scarcely al-
low us to feel thole external evils of which
we now so loudly complain. All nature
would assume a different appearance around
us. That golden age, which wvas so long
the subject of the philofophcr's dream, and
of the poet's song, would in fa& take place.
According to the beautiful language of an-
cient prophecy, fJrings wod:J t. hci rif ' in
the dejert, and rivers be openedl iil 1he thirfly
land. The wilder, ess nd the f/l,'i place
would be glad. The cos wo,:l! dcwell with
Ithe lamb, and the leopard lie doic'l i'ih the

7 kid,

S E R M. kid. Judgment would dwell in the wilder-

x . ness, and rightcoufnefs remain in the fruitfil

field. The desert would rejoice, and bloffinz
as the rofe.-If such, even in this world,
would be the effets of innocence and vir-
tue completely restored, how much greater
mufl theybe in that new earth, and those new
heavens, where reaitude of nature shall be
combined with every circumstance of ex-
ternal felicity ? It is the present imperfect
state of human virtue that hinders us from
conceiving fully the influence of righteous-
ness upon happiness. The robes in which
the best mren are now clothed, to ife the
language of the text, are sullied with so
many tains, as to convey no adequate idea
of the original beauty which belongs to the
garb of righteousness. But when these
slains shall be waffed away, when these
robes shall be made perfed.y white and
pure, a lustre will flow from them, of which
we can, as yet, form no conception.

But how are ne rooes of the blefled thus

washed? Whence is derived that spotless
purity in which they are arrayed? The

Spirit

Spirit of God hath answered us, froz the s E R M-

XI.

blood of the Lamb; leading our thoughts to
that high dispensation of mercy, to which
the faints above owe their eftabliihment,
first in grace, and then in glory. From
that blood which wasJedjfor the remifion
offins, flow both the atonement of human
guilt, and the regeneration cf human na-
ture. Human nature had fallen too low to
be capable of retrieving itself. It could not
regain its primitive innocence, and still less
was capable of raising itself so high in the
scale of existence as to mingle with angels.
We had neither sufficient knowledge to dif-
cover, nor virtue to merit, nor ability to
qualify ourselves for enjoying, celestial glory.
Heaven must have been either covered from
our view by perpetual darkness, or only
beheld from afar as an inacceflible region,
if Christ had not interposed to openfor us a
new and living way within the veil. The
obligations which his generous undertaking
has conferred upon the human race, will tend
highly to increase the felicity of the blessed.
The sense of being diltinguifhed by so il-

l!uftious

S ER M. Iulfrious a benefactor, and the correspond-

X__ ing returns of gratitude and love to him,

form some of the most pleating of those
emotions which shall continue to delight
them through all eternity.

FROM those views of a fate of future

happiness which the text has figgefted, va-
rious inftruaions relating to life and prac-
tice naturally arise. We are taught to redify
our notions of felicity; to look for it, not
in what is external, but in what relates to
the mind and heart; in good dispositions
and a purified foul; in unity and friendship
with one another, and in the divine pre-
fence and favour. If such things form the
principal articles of future bliss, they cannot
but be essential to our happiness in the more
early periods of existence; and he who
seeks his chief enjoyment from an opposite
quarter, errs widely from the path which
conducts to felicity.

We are farther taught whence to derive

constancy and perseverance, amidst the pre-
sent discouragements of a virtuous life. In

this

this world, we often behold good men de- s E R M.
pressed, and the wicked prospering around I
us. Our best deeds meet with unjust re-
turns from an ungrateful world. Sincerity
is over-reached by craft, and innocence falls
a vicEim to power. But let us not on such
occasions fay within ourselves, that in vain
we have cleaifed our hearts, and w yvJed ourt
hands in innocency. Let us reft on the as-
furance, that these disorders extend not far
in the kingdom of God. They affect only
the first flage of existence. They relate to
discipline and trial, which will loon be
finished. In that permanent state which is
about to open, a new and better order of
things shall arise. When dejecled with the
evils of life, let us look upward to that happy
multitude who have come out of great triblta-
tion, and izowJiand beCfre the tbhri'C. Un-
til the day arrive which fllall join us to that
blessed assembly, let us flew ourfclves wor-
thy of the hope that is before us, by fin-
porting, with a constant mind, the trials of
our fidelity. Bepaticnt ;jlab!ih ,;: r

,ii;s.
The coi0aiil of the Lojr dai .wl:lb i;,.

VOL. II. T flroi

SE R M. From the profpets which the text has
vy_ afforded, we may likewise learn what the

spirit is which Ihould regulate our life.
Sandity of condut, dignity of charader,
elevation of affeCions, become those who
expet to mingle with angels, and /pirits of
jil men made perfecT. I mean not that such
profpeds should carry away our whole at-
tention from the present world, where un-
doubtedly lies the chief scene of human ac-
tion, of human duty. But while we aa
as inhabitants of the earth, we ought at the
fame time so to remember our conneaion
with a better world, as not to debase our-
selves with what is mean, not to defile our-
selves with what is impure, not to entangle
ourselves among what is ensnaring, in the
present state. Let neither its advantages
elate, nor its disappointments dejc us;
but with an equal spirit, with a mind full
of immortality, let us pass through all the
changes of this mortal life.

Finally, let the discoveries of future hap-

piness inspire us with suitable gratitude to
God and Chri2; to the eternal Father, wvho

originally

originally decreed such rewards for the S E RM.
righteous; and to the Son, who acts in the ,,
high character of the Dispenser of the divine
mercies, and the g:'eat Restorer of the fallen
race of men. Particularly, when approach-
ing to God in solemn ats of devotion, such
as we are at this day to perform, let gratitude
be alive and ardent in our heart. The com-
memoration of our Saviour's death is in a
high degree suited to awaken every emotion
of tenderness and love. It brings before us,
under one view, all the obligations which
we lie under to this great benefador of man-
kind. When just ready to susser for our
fake, he instituted this holy sacrament, and
said, Do this in remembrance of me.-Whom,
0 blessed Jesus! shall we ever remember, if
we are capable of forgetting Thee ? Thee,
to whom we owe the forgivencfs of fin, and
the restoration of divine favour; our vitory
over death, and our hope of life eternal!
Thou haft enlarged our views beyond these
territories of disorders and darknifs. Thou
haft discovered to us the city of the living
God. Thou fetteft open the gates of that

T z new

S E R M. new yerufalem; and leadef us into the path

\_ of lI/e. Thou from age to age gathered out

of every nation, and kindred, andpeople, that
nultitude whichJland before the throne. Thou
bringeft them out ofgreat tribulation. Thine
are the white robes with which they are in-
vested; thine, the palms which they bear;
and by Thee they are placed under the light
of the divine countenance for ever,

# SERMON X. ON CANDOUR. 1 CORINTH. xiii. 5. Charity — thinketh no Evil.

[ 277 ]
SERMON X.

ON CANDOUR.

I CORINTH. xiii. 5.

Charity-t-tinketh no Evil.
n ELIGION and Government are the SERM.

two great foundations of order and X.

comfort among mankind. Government re-
strains the outrages and crimes which would
be subversive of society, secures the pro-
perty and defends the lives of its fubjeqs.
But the defect of government is, that hu-
man laws can extend no farther than to the
afions of men. Though they protec us
from external violence, they leave us open
on different fides to be wounded. By the
vices which prevail in society, our tran-

T 3 quillity

SERM. qullity may be disturbed, and our lives in

X.
^,..._ various ways embittered, while government

can give us no redress. Religion supplies
the insufficiency of law, by striking at the
root of those disorders which occasion so
much misery in the world. Its professed
scope is to regulate, not actions alone, but
the temper and inclinations. By this means
it ascends to the fcurces of conduct; and
very ineffecual would the wisest system of
legislation prove for the happiness of man-
kind, if it did not derive aid from religion,
in softening the difpofitious of men, and
checking many of those evil passions towhich
the influence of law cannot possibly reach.

We are led to this reflection by the de-

scription given in the context of charity,
that great principle in the Christian system.
The Apofile places it in a variety of lights,
and under each of them explains its opera-
tion by its internal effects; not by the actions
to which it gives rife, but by the dispositions
which it produces in the heart. He jufrly
supposes, that if the temper be duly regu-
lated, propriety of ation will follow, and

good

good order take place in external behaviour. s E R M.
Of those characters of charity I have chosen X.
one for the subjeC of this discourse, which
leads to the consideration of a virtue highly
important to us, both as Christians and as
members offociety. I shall endeavour, firfi,
to explain the temper here pointed out, by
{hewing what this description of charity im-
ports, that it thinketl no evil; and then to
recommend such a disposition, and to dif-
play the bad effects of an opposite turn of
mind.

I. LET us confider what this description

of charity imports. You will easily perceive
that the expreflion in the text is not to be
underflood in a sense altogether unlimited;
as if there were no occasion on which we
are to think unfavourably of others, To
view all the ations of men with the fame
degree of complacency, would be contrary
both to common understanding, and to
many cxprcfs precepts of religion. In a
world where so much depravity abounds,
were we to think and speak equally well of

T 4 all,

s E R M. all, we must either be insensible of the dif-
_,_. tinftion between right and wrong, or be

indifferent to that distinction when we per-
ceived it. Religion renders it our duty to
abhor that which is evil; and, on many oc-
cafions, to express our indignation openly
againlt it. But the Apostle, with great pro-
priety, describes the temper which he is re-
commending in such firong and general
terms, as might guard us against that ex-
treme to which we are naturally most prone,
of rafl and unjust suspicion. The virtue
which he means to inculcate is that which
is known by the name of Candour; a vir-
tue, which, as soon as it is mentioned,
every one will acknowledge to be essential
to the charaader of a worthy man; a virtue
which we seldom fail of ascribing to any
perlon whom we seek to recommend to the
eRteee of others ; but which, I am afraid,
when we examine our own conduEt in a
religious view, is feldomn the fubjca of in-
quiry.

It is ncccffary to obfcrve, that true Can-
dour is altogether different from that guard-

ed,

ed, inoffensive language, and that studied SE R M.
openness of behaviour, which we so fre- X
quently meet with among men of the world.
Smiling, very often, is the aspea, and
smooth are the words, of those who in-
wardly are the most ready to think evil of
others. That Candour which is a Chriflian
virtue, consists not in fairness of speech,
but in fairness of heart. It may want the
blandishment of external courtesy, but sup-
plies its place with humane and generous
liberality of sentiment. Its manners are
unaffected, and its professions cordial.
Exempt, on one hand, from the dark jea-
lousy of a suspicious mind; it is no less
removed, on the other, from that easy cre-
dulity which is imposed on by every fpe-
cious pretence. It is perfectly consistent
with extensive knowledge of the world,
and with due attention to our own safety.
In that various intercourse which we are
obliged to carry on with persons of every
different characer, suspicion, to a certain
degree, is a necefluary guard. It is only
when it exceeds the bounds of prudent cau-

tion,

S E R .1. tion, that it degenerates into vice. There

- i is a proper mean between undiftinguifhing

credulity, and universal jealousy, which a
found undcrfa;:ding discerns, and which the
man of candour studies to preserve.

He makes allowance for the mixture of

evil with good,which is to be found in every
human charadter. He expecs none to be
faultless; and he is unwilling to believe that
there is any without ibme commendable
quality. In the midst of many defects, he
can dilsover a virtue. Under the influence
of personal resentment, he can be just to the
merit of an enemy. He never lends an open
ear to those defamatory reports and dark
suggestions, which, among the tribes of
the censorious, circulate with so much ra-
pidity, and meet with such ready acceptance.
He is not hasty to judge, and he requires
full evidence before he will condemn. As
long as an action can be ascribed to different
motives, he holds it as no mark of Eagacity
to impute it always to the worst. Where
there is jult ground for doubt, he keeps his
judgment undecided ; and, during the pe-

riod

riod of suspense, leans to the most chari- S E : i.
table conftruEtion which an acion can bear. .
When he muff condemn, he condemns with
regret; and without tlofe aggravations
which the severity of others adds to the
crime. He listens calmly to the apclogy
of the offender, and readily admits every
extenuating circumstance which equity can
suggest. How much soever he may blame
the principles of any fed or party, he nc-
ver confounds, under one general censure,
all who belong to that party or fed. TIe
charges them not with filch consequences
of their tenets, as they refute and disavow.
From one wrong opinion, he does not infer
the subversion of all found principles; nor,
from one bad adion, conclude that all re-
gard to conscience is overthrown. When
he beholds the mote in his brother's eye, he
remembers the beam in his own. He com-
miferates human frailty; and judges of
others according to the principles by which
lie would think it reasonable that they
ihould judge of him. In a word, he views
men and actions in the clear funfluine of

charity

S E R M. charity and good-nature; and not in that

'. dark and fullen shade which jealousy and

party-fpirit throw over all characters.---
Such being in general the spirit of that
charity which thinketh no evil, I proceed,

II. To recommend by various argu-

ments, this important branch of Chriflian
virtue.

Let us begin with observing what a ne-

cefary requisite it is to the proper discharge
of all the social duties. I need not spend
time in Ihowing that these hold a very
high rank in the Christian system. The
encomium which the Apostle in this chap-
ter bestows upon charity is alone sufficient
to prove it. He places this grace at the
head of all the gifts and endowments which
can be possessed by man; and assures us,
that though we had all faith, jo that we
could remove mountains, yet if we be defti-
tute of charity, it will profit us nothing.
Accordingly, love, gentlenef, meekness, and
long-fijficring, are enumerated as diltin-
guifhilng/ suits of the pirit of Christ %. But

G lat, v. .22, 2.

it

it is impossible for such virtues as these to E R M.
find place in a breast, where the propensity X
to think evil of others is predominant.
Charitable and candid thoughts of men are
the necessary introduction to all good-will
and kindness. They form, if we may
speak so, the only climate in which love
can .grow up and flourish. A suspicious
temper checks in the bud every kind assec-
tion. It hardens the heart, and estranges
man from man. What friendflip or gra-
titude can you expect from him, who views
all your conduc with diftruftfill eyes, and
ascribes every benefit you confer to artifice
and stratagem? The utmost which you
can hope from one of this charaer, is
justice in his dealings; nor even that can
you be assured of; as the fulpicions to which
he is a prey will afford him frequent pre-
texts for departing from truth, and for de-
fending himself with the fame arms which
he conceives to be employed against him.
Unhappy will they be who are joined witl
him by any close connexion; exposed to
every malignant ufpiicion whrich ariics in

his

S E R . his own mind, and to every unjust fug-
.., gelion which the malice of others may in-

sinuate against them. That store of poison
whIich is colleced within him, frequently
thirows out its venom on all who are within
its reach. As a companion, he will be fe-
vere and satirical; as a friend, captious and
dangerous; in his domeftlc sphere, harsh,
jealous, and irascible; in his civil capacity,
'editious and turbulent, prone to impute
the conduct of his fuperiours to improper
motives, and upon locfe information to con-
demn their condut.

The contrary of all this may be expeced

from a candid temper. Whatever is ami-
able in manners, or useful in society, na-
turally and easily ingrafts itself upon it.
Gentleness, humanity, and compassion, flow
from it as their native spring. Open and
cheerful in itself, it diffuses cheerfulness and
good-humour over all who are under its
influence. It is the chief ground of mu-
tual confidence and union among men,
It prevents those animofities from arising
which are the offspring of groundless pre-

judice;

judice; or, by its benign interposition, al- s E p M.
lays them when arisen. In the magiXrate,
it tempers justice with lenity. Among
fubjeds it promotes good order and sub-
minffon. It connecs humanity with piety.
For he who is not given to think cvil of his
fellow-creatures, will not be ready to ccn-
sure the dilpeniations of his Creator. Where-
as the fame turn of mind which renders one
jealous and unjust towards men, will incline
him to be querulous and impious towards
God.

IN the second place, as a suspicious, un-

charitable spirit is inconsistent with all
social virtue and happincfs, so, in itself,
it is unreasonable and unjult. In order to
form found opinions concerning charatcrs
and ations, two things are efpecialiy rc-
quifite, information and impartiaility. Lut
iuch as are most forward to decide unfa-
vourably, are commonly dellitute of both.
Instead of poffenlng, or even requiring, fill
information, the grounds on which ticy
proceed are fre(qucntly the mcft iight and

22 hfivolous.

S ER M. frivolous. A tale, perhaps, which the idle

X.
,_1 have invented, the inquisitive have listened

to, and the credulous have propagated, or
a real incident which rumour, in carrying
it along, has exaggerated and disguised,
supplies them with materials of confident
assertion, and decisive judgment. From an
action they presently look into the heart,
and infer the motive. This supposed mo-
tive they conclude to be the ruling prin.
ciple; and pronounce at once concerning
the whole characer.

Nothing can be more contrary both to

equity and to found realon, than such pre-
cipitate judgments. Any man who attends
to what passes within himself, may easily
discern what a complicated system the hu-
man character is, and what a variety of
circumstances must be taken into the ac-
count, in order to efrimate it truly. No
sing!e instance of conduct whatever, is fils-
ficient to determine it. As from one wor-
thy action, it were credulity; not charity,
to conclude a person to be free from all
vice; so from one which is cenfirable, it

is

is perfectly unjust to infer that the author s E R M.

X.

of it is without conscience and without -~
merit. Did you know all the attending cir-
cumrfances, it might appear in an excusable
light; nay, perhaps, under a commendable
form. The motives of the ador may have
been entirely different from those which
you ascribe to him; and, where you suppose
him impelled by bad design, he may have
been prompted by conscience and mistaken
principle. Admitting the action to have
been in every view criminal, he may have
been hurried into it through inadvertency
and surprise. He may have sincerely re-
pented; and the virtuous principle may
have now regained its full vigour. Perhaps
this was the corner of frailty; the quarter
on which he lay open to the incursions of
temptation; while the other avenues of his
heart were firmly guarded by conscience.

No error is more palpable than to look

for uniformity from human nature; though
it is commonly on the supposition of it that
our general conclusions concerning charaaer
are formed. Mankind are confitent neither

VOL. II, U in

SE R M. in good, nor in evil. In the present state

r of frailty, all is mixed and blended. The

strongest contrarieties of piety and hypo-
crify, of generosity and avarice, of truth
and duplicity, often meet in one character.
The purest human virtue is confident with
some vice; and, in the midst of much vice
and disorder, amiable, nay refpeCable, qua-
lities may be found. There are few cafes
in which we have ground to conclude that
all goodness is loft. At the bottom of the
charader there may lie some sparks of piety
and virtue, suppressed, but not extinguish-
ed; which, kept alive by the breath of hea-
ven, and gathering strength in secret from
reflection, may, on the first favourable
opening which is afforded them, be ready
to break forth with splendour and force.-
Placed, then, in a situation of so much un-
certainty and darkness, where our know-
ledge of the hearts and characters of men is
so limited, and our judgments concerning
them are so apt to err, what a continual
call do we receive either to suspend our
judgment, or to give it on the favourable

fide ?

fide ? especially when we confider that, as s E R M.

X.

through imperfect information we are un-
qualified for deciding soundly, so through
want of impartiality we are often tempted
to decide wrong. How much this enforces
the argument for candour will appear by
confidering,

IN the third place, what the sources are

of those severe and uncharitable opinions
which we are so ready to form. Were the
mind altogether free from prepossession and
bias, it might avail itself to more advan-
tage of the scanty knowledge which it pof-
fesses. But this is so far from being the
cafe, that on every fide we are encumbered
with prejudices, and warped by pafllons,
which exert their influence in nothing more'
than in leading us to think evil of others.
At all times we are justly laid to fee thrcgtgh
a glass darkly; but passion and prejudice,
looking through a glass which distorts the
form of the objecs, make us also fee falsely.

It is one of the misfortunes of our present
situation, that some of the good dispositions

U 2 of

S ERM, of human nature are apt to betray us into

., frailties and vices. Thus it often happens,

that the laudable attachment which we
contraa to the country, or the church, to
which we belong, or to some political de-
nomination under which we class ourselves,
both confines our affections within too
narrow a sphere, and gives rife to violent
prejudices against such as come under an
opposite description. Not contented with
being in the right ourselves, we must find
all others in the wrong. We claim an ex-
clufive poffeflion of goodness and wisdom;
and, from approving warmly of those who
join us, we proceed to condemn, with much
acrimony, not only the principles, but the
characters of those from whom we differ.
Hence persons of well-difpofed minds are
too often, through the strength of partial
good affecion, involved in the crime of
uncharitable judgment. They rashly extend
to every individual the severe opinion
which they have unwarrantably conceived
of a whole body.-This man is of a party
whose principles we reckon slavish; and

there-

therefore his whole sentiments are corrupted. s ER M.
That man belongs to a religious sea which x
we are accultomed to deem bigotted; and
therefore he is incapable of any generous
or liberal thought. Another is connected
with a seQ which we have been taught to
account relaxed ; and therefore he can have
no fanaity.-Are these the judgments of
candour and charity ? Is true piety or
virtue so very limited in its nature, as to be
confined to such alone' as fee every thing
with our eyes, and follow exacly the train
of our ideas? Was there ever any great
community so corrupt as not to include
within it individuals of real worth ?

Besides prepossessions of this nature, which

sometimes mislead the honest mind, there
are other, and much more culpable, causes
of uncharitable judgment. Pride is hurt
and wounded by every excellence in which
it can claim no share; and, from eagerness
to discover a blemish, refts upon the slightest
appearance of one, as a satisfying proof.
When rivalry and competition concur with
pride, our desire to espy defets increases,

U 3 and,

S E R M. and, by consequence, the grounds ofcenfure

,L multiply. Where no opposition of interests

takes place, envy has too much influence
in warping the judgment of many. Even
when none of these causes operate, the in-
ward consciousness of depravity is sufficient
to fill the mind with evil thoughts of others.
Whence should a man so readily draw his
opinion of men as from that character with
which he is best acquainted, because it is
his own ? A person of low and base mind
naturally imputes to others the fentimcnts
which he finds congenial to himself; and is
incredulous of every excellency which to
him is totally unknown. He enjoys, be-
fides, consolation in the thought that others
are no better than himself; that his weak-
neffes and crimes are those of all men; and
that such as appear most diftinguithed for
virtue, possess no real superiority, except
greater dexterity in concealing their vices.
Soothing themselves with this docrine in
secret, too many softer and strengthen the
badopinion which they entertain of all
mankind. Rarely, if ever, have you ground

6 to

to think well of that man's heart who is SE R M.
on every occasion given to think the worst i .
of others. Let us observe,

IN the fourth place, that suitable to the

sources whence a jealous and suspicious tem-
per proceeds, are the effecs which it pro-
duces in the world, the crimes and mischiefs
with which it fills society. It possesses this
unhappy diftinaion beyond the other fail-
ings of the human heart, that while it im-
pels men to violent deeds, it juififies to their
own apprehension the excesses which they
commit. Amidif the uproar of other bad
passions, conscience acs as a restraining
power. As soon as the tumult subsides, re-
morse exerts its influence, and renders the
finner sensible of the evil which he has done.
But the uncharitable man is unfortunately
set loose from any such check or controul.
Through the infatuation of prejudice, his
judgment is perverted; conscience is miled;
the light within him is turned into darkness.
Viewing the objects of his displeasure as evil
men, he thinks himself entitled to give that

U 4 difplea-

SERM.

x. displeasure full vent; and in committing
'*yJ the most inhuman acions, may sometimes

imagine that he is doing good service to
God.

The first fruits of an evil-thinking spirit

are calumny and detraction, by which so-
ciety is so often embroiled, and men are set
at variance with oneanother. But, did it pro-
ceed no farther than censorious speech, the
mischief would be less. Much greater and
more serious evils frequently ensue. What
direful effects, for instance, have often flow-
ed from rash and ill-founded jealousy in
private life? No sooner has one allowed
that daemon to take possession of his mind,
than it perverts his understanding, and taints
all his faculties. Haunting him by night
and by day, bringing perpetually before
him the odious and disquieting forms which
it has raised up, it blackens every appear-
ance to his view; gives to trifles, which
are in themselves light as air, the weight of
full confirmation; till what was at firfi a
dubious surmise, or a flight displeasure, rifes
at length into full belief and implacable

12 fury.

fury. Hence families torn with the mot s E R M.
violent convulsions; the husband armed X.
againtf the wife, the father againlt the son,
the friend against the friend; the plan of
treachery and assassination contrived, and
the dagger plunged into the bosom of the
innocent.-In public life, how often have
kingdoms been fhlaken with all the violence
of war and rebellion, from the unjust ful-
picions which fubjees had conceived of
their rulers; or the rafi jealousy which
princes had entertained of their people ?-
But it is in religious dissensions chiefly, that
the mischievous power of uncharitable pre-
judice has displayed its full atrocity. Re-
ligion is always found to heighten every
passion on which it aIs, and to render
every contest into which it enters, uncom-
monly ardent; because the objects which it
presents are of such a nature, as firongly to
seize and engage the human mind. When
zeal for their own principles has prompted
men to view those of a different persuasion
in the odious lights which bigotry fuggeis,
every sentiment of humanity has too often

been

E rM. been extinguished. The mild influence of
.x. that religion which breathes nothing but

gentleness, has proved too feeble to restrain
the violent and bloody hand of persecution;
and the uncharitable spirit, raging among
contending parties, has filled the world with
such calamities and crimes, as have brought
disgrace on the Christian name.

Let us attend particularly to one awful

instance of the guilt which men may con-
trac, and of the ruin which they may bring
upon themselves, through the want of fair-
ness and candour. The nation of the Jews
were almost noted for a narrow and un-
charitable spirit. When John the Baptist,
and our blessed Lord, appeared among them,
because the former was austere in his tem-
per and retired in his life, they pronounced
of him that he had an evil spirit; and, be-
cause the latter was open and sociable in his
manners, they held him to be deptitute of
that fanaity which became a prophet. Their
prejudice against our Lord took its first rife
fiom a most frivolous and contemptible cause.
Is not this tefon of the carpenter ? Can any

good

good thing come out of Nazareth ? When his s E R M.
miracles repelled this reproach, and fuffi- V w
ciently proved the eminence of his character,
still they softered their prejudices by this
most futile reasoning, Have any of the rulers
believed on him ? Obstinate in their attach-
ment to a temporal Messiah, and continuing
to view all our Saviour's conduct with an
evil eye, when he converted with bad men
in order to reclaim them, they treated him
as a companion of publicans andinners. Be-
cause he disallowed their groundless tradi-
tions, they held him to be a breaker of the
Sabbath, and a contemner of religion. Be-
cause he prophesied the deftruaion of their
temple, they accused him of being an enemy
to his own nation. Till at last, through
their perpetual mifconftrudion of his ac-
tions, their passions became so inflamed as
to make them cry out with one voice, A4way
with this man to the death, and give us Ba-
rabbas the robber.- Viewing in this dread-
ful event the consequences of want of can-
dour, let every man tremble to think evil
rashly of his brother. No one can tell how

far

SE R M. far uncharitable prejudices may carry him

.,' in guilt, if he allow them to harbour and

gather strength within his breast. The
cloud which rofefromi the sea, no bi,,er than
a tman's hand, may soon swell and spread,
till it cover the whole horizon, and dif-
charge with most deftrutive violence the
gathered storm.

IN the fifth place, as a suspicious spirit

is the source of so many crimes and cala-
mities in the world, so it is the spring of
certain misery to the person who indulges
it. His friends will be few ; and finall will
be his comfort in those whom he poifeffes.
Believing others to be his enemies, he will
of course make them such. Let his caution
be ever so great, the asperity of his thoughts
will often break out in his behaviour; and,
in return for fufpeting and hating, he will
incur suspicion and hatred. Betides the
external evils which he draws upon himself,
arising from alienated friendship, broken
confidence, and open enmity; the suspicious
temper itself is one of the worst evils which

any

&ny man can susser. If in allfear there be s E R M.
torment, how miserable muff be his ifate who,
by living in perpetual jealousy, lives in per-
petual dread ? Looking upon himself to be
surrounded with spies, enemies, and design-
ing men, he is a firanger to reliance and
trust. He knows not to whom to open him-
self. He dresses his countenance in forced
finiles, while his heart throbs within from
apprehensions of fccret treachery. Hence
fretfulness and ill-humour, disgust at the
world, and all the painful sensations of an
irritated and embittered mind.

So numerous and great are the evils arising

from a suspicious disposition, that of the two
extremes it is more eligible to expose our-
selves to occasional disadvantage from think-
ing too well of others, than to susser con-
tinual misery by thinking always ill of them.
It is better to be sometimes imposed upon,
than never to trust. Safety is purchased at
too dear a rate, when, in order to secure it,
we are obliged to be always clad in armour,
and to live in perpetual hostility with our
fellows. This is, for the fake of living, to

deprive

S E R M. deprive ourselves of the comfort of life. Thc

X . man of candour enjoys his situation, what-

ever it is, with cheerfulness and peace. Pru-
dence direcs his intercourse with the world;
but no black fufpicionshaunthishours of reft.
Accustomed to view the characters of his
neighbours in the mol. favourable light, he
is like one who dwells amidit those beautiful
scenes of nature, on which the eye refts with
pleasure. Whereas the suspicious man, havy
ing his imagination filled with all the ihock-
ing forms of human falsehood, deceit, and
treachery, resembles the traveller in the wil-
dernefs, who discerns no objecs around him
but what are either dreary or terrible; ca-
verns that open, serpents that hiss, and beasts
of prey that howl. Hence in him are veri-
sied those descriptions which the Spirit of
God has given us of the misery of the wicked.
They shall have nopeace. Theyjiall be like the
troubledfea, when it cannot rejt. The Lord
Jhall give them a trembling heart, andfailing
of eyes, and sorrow of mind: And they Jhall
fear day and night, and have none ajurance
of heart.-I add,

IN

IN the sixth and last place, that there is S E R M.

X.

nothing which exposes men in a more mark- x
ed and direa manner to the displeasure of
the Almighty, than a malignant and cenfo-
rious spirit. I infifi not now on the general
denunciations of divine wrath against malice
and hatred. Let us onlyconfider under what
particular description the Spirit of God brings
this crime of uncharitable judgment. It is
declared to be an impious invasion of the
prerogative. of God, to whom alone it be-
longs to search all hearts, and to determine
concerning all characters. This privilege
He often appropriates expressly to Himself,
on purpose to restrain the rafhlefs of cen-
sure among men; requiring us to leave the
judging of others to Him, and to attend to
our own business and duty. JWho art thou
thatjtidgeJ another man'sfervant ? o his own
ajnler, heflandeth orfalleth. Jitdgc nothing
before the time; until the Lord come, whoJhall
make manitfef the colfels of the heart .

It deserves our most serious attention, that
in several passages of Scripture, the great

* Rom. xiv. 4. I Corinth. iv. 5S

Judge

SER M. Judge of the world is represented, at the
^ .- day of final retributicn, as proceeding upon

this principle, of rendering to men according
to the manner in which they have ated
towards their brethren. Wl'ith the mercifil,
thou wilt fljow tlhyjI/' mercifl ; and with
the firoward, thou wilt /hew tlhylfefroward.
With ,what jldgmeit ye judge, Je JJall be
jutaged; and with what meaf/ire ye

y e te, it

Jhall be meafiurcd to yolt again ". It is im-
possible to form an argument of more force
than this, to restrain all severity ofjudgment
among such as look forward to the tribunal
of God. The argument extends not in-
deed so far, as to represent cur acceptance
with the Deity as entirely fufpnded upon
the candour which we shew in forming our
fent.ments of others. We know that other
graces besides this are requisite in order to
fit us for heaven; and that without piety
towards God, and faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ, all our charity to men will be found
defeaive and vain. But this we know
also, that in the heart which is destitute of

* Psalm xviii. zS, z6. Matth. vii. z.

fairness

fairness and candour, the Spirit of God SERM.
certainly dwells not; and that whatever ap- ,
pearances of religion the uncharitable man
may aifume, on him the Sovereign of the
universe looks with no favour.-Thou
who art a man full of frailties, who ftandeft
in need, not merely of impartiality in thy
divine Judge, but of indulgence and mercy:
Thou who imploreft daily this mercy from
Him, and prayeft that He would remember
thou art dust, and not be stria to mark ini-
quity againl/ thee; dareft thou, with those
very prayers in thy mouth, proceed to judge
without candour of thy brethren, and upon
the fighteft grounds to reprobate and con-
demn them? 0 thou hypocrite! (for by
what other name can we call thee ?) vain
are all thy pretensions to piety. Ineffecual
is every plea which thou canst form for
mercy from Heaven. The precedent which
thou haft established against thyself is de-
cifive. Thou haft dictated the sentence of
thine own condemnation.

ON the whole, it clearly appears that no
part of the government of temper deserves

VoL. II. X attention

S E R M. attention more, than to keep our minds pure

X.
,_ .-' from uncharitable prejudices, and open to

candour and humanity in judging of others.
The worlt consequences, both to ourlelves
and to society, follow from the opposite
spirit. Let us beware of encouraging a ha-
bit of suspicion, by forming too severe and
harsh opinions concerning human nature in
general. A great proportion of infirmity
and corruption, doubtless, adheres to it; yet
tempered also it is with various mixtures of
virtue and good affetion. Darkened as the
Divine image now is among mankind, it is
not wholly effaced. Much piety and good-
ness may lie hidden in hearts that are un-
known to us. Vice is glaring and loud.
The crimes of the wicked make a noise in
the world, and alarm society. True worth
is retired and modest, and requires parti-
cular situations to bring it forth to public
notice. The prophet Elijah, in a time of
prevailing corruption, imagined that all true
religion had forsaken the land. I, even I
o;ilj, said he to the Lord, am lft to firve
thce. But the Almighty, who discerned
what was concealed from his imperfec view,

replied,

replied, 2'ct have I lfit ?me fiev'l tbhogl.ad i S ER I.

X.

men in Ifiacl who have not bowcd the kjec, to
Baal .

The aged, and the unfortunate, who have

toiled through an unsuccessful life with long
experience of the fallehood and fiaud of evil
men, are apt to be the moll fevcre in the
opinions which they entertain of others.
For such, their circumftanccs may be al-
lowed to fornm lotie degree of apology. But
if, in youth and prolperity, the fame hard
fiSpicious spirit prevail; if they who arc
beginnling the career of life fct out witll all
the feruples of dilIlrut ; if, before they have
had reaion to complain of the world, they
betray the diffidence of a jealous, and the
malignity of a cenlorious mind, fad is the
presage which may thence be drawn of their
future dinleo;loor. Fronl t;fch, you have
nothing to look for tlat fi1all be either en-
gaging in private life, or reilcdable i n pub-
lic charatler. To youth it particularly be-
longs to be generous in fentiincit, candlid
in opinion, ulldcliging in behavicur, opL!l

* i Kiigs, xix. 14. 18.

X 2 tC

S E R M. to the mot favourable construction of ac-

x.
-- tions and condut. Throughout all the

stages of life, candour is one of the mofl
honourable diftintions of the human cha-
raater; it is conne&ed with magnanimity;
it is juflified by wisdom; it is suitable to the
relation in which we stand to one another.
But if reason and humanity be insufficient
to restrain us from rash and uncharitable
judgments, let that awful denunciation fre-
quently resound in our ears, HeJfall have
judgment without mercy who hathbJewed no
m7leFrcy.

# SERMON XI. On the CHARACTER of JOSEPH. GENESIS, xlv. 5. 8. Now therefore be not grieved nor angry with yourselves that ye sold me hither; for God did send me before you to preserve life. — So now it ...

[ 309 ]

SERMON XI.
On the CHARACTER of JOSEPH.

GENESIS, xlv. 5. 8.
Now therefore be notgrieved nor angry with

yourselves that yefold me hither; for God
didjfend me before you to preserve life. -
So now it was not you thatfcnt me hither,
but God.
IN this generous manner, Joseph frames S E RM.

an apology for the unnatural behaviour XI.

of his brethren. He extenuates the atrocity '
of their crime, by representing the happy
effets which it had produced. He looks
beyond all second causes; and recognizes,
in the wonderful events of his life, the hand
of the Almighty.-- No human character

X 3 exhibited

S E R M. exhibited in the records of Scripture, is more

_ . remarkable or intruEtive than that of this

patriarch. He is one whom we behold
tried in all the vicifitudes of fortune ; from
the condition of a flavc, rising to he ruler of
the land of Egypt; and in every fation
acquiring, by his virtue and wisdom, favour
n ith God 'and man. When overfcer of
Potiphar's house, his fidelity was proved by
strong temptations, which he honourably
refiPted. When thrown into prison by the
artifice of a false woman, his integrity and
prudence soon rendered him conspicuous,
even in that dark manlion. When called
into the presence of Pharaoh, the wife and
extensive plan which lie formed for saving
the kingdom from the miseries of impend-
ing famine, jufily raised him to a high Ra-
tion, wherein his abilities were eminently
displayed in the public service. But in his
whole history there is no circumstance so
firiking and interetfing, as his behaviour to,
his brethren lwho had loiic him into slavery.
The moment in which he made hirnfelf
known to them, that molent at which we

are

are now to contemplate him, was the most S E RM.
critical one of his life, and the most decisive --.
of his characer. It is such as rarely occurs
in the course of human events; and is cal-
culated to draw the highest attention of all
who are endowed with any degree of fen-
fibility of heart. Let us confider the senti-
ment which Joseph utters in the text under
two views, each of which is very inflrualive
to all Christians. I. As a discovery of his
cordial forgiveness of his brethren; and,
IL. As an instance of his dutiful attention
to the Providence of God.

I. THE Imolft cordial forgiveness is here

displayed. I flall not recapitulate all the
preceding hillory rclpeeding Joseph and his
brethren; as it is well known by every one
who has the least acquaintance with the
sacred writings. From the whole tcnour of
the narration it appears, that though Jo-
ifph, upon the arrival of his brethren in
Egypt, made himlelf strange to them, yet
from the beginning he intended to discover
himself; and studied so to condua the dif-

X 4 covery

s E R M. covery as might render the surprise of joy

XI.
Ay-L complete. For this end, by affcted feve-

rity, he,took measures for bringing down
into Egypt all his father's children. They
were now arrived there; and Benjamin
among the reft, who was his younger bro-
ther by the fame mother, and was particu-
larly beloved by Joseph. Him he threat-
ened to detain; and seemed willing to al-
low the reft to depart. This incident re-
newed their distress. They all knew their
father's extreme anxiety about the safety of
Benjamin, and with what difficulty he had
yielded to his undertaking this journey.
Should he be prevented from returning,
they dreaded that grief would overpower
the old man's spirits, and prove fatal to his
life. Judah, therefore, who had particu-
larly urged the necessity of Benjamin's ac-
companying his brothers, and had solemnly
pledged himself to their father for his safe
return, craved, upon this occasion, an au-
dience of the governour; and gave him a
full account of the circumstances of Jacob's
family.

Nothing

Nothing can be more interesting and pa- s ER M.

thetic than this discourse of Judah, as it is j
recorded in the preceding chapter. Little
knowing to whom he spoke, he paints, in
all the colours of simple and natural elo-
quence, the distressed situation of the aged
patriarch, haitening to the close of life;
long affliced for the loss of a favourite son,
whom he supposed to have been torn in
pieces by a beast of prey; labouring now
under anxious concern about his youngest
son, the child of his old age, who alone
was left alive of his mother, and whom
nothing but the calamities of severe famine
could have moved a tender father to fend
from home, and expose to the dangers of a
foreign land. If we bring him not back
with us, weJhall bring down the grey hairs
of thlyfervant, ourfather, withforrow, to the
grave. 1 pray thee, therefore, let thyfervant
abide injlead of the young man, a bondman to
our lord. For how Jhall I go up to my fa-
ther, and Benjamin not with me ? les Ifee
the evil that Jsall come on my father.

Upon

s ER M. Upon this relation, Joseph could no
i_. . longer restrain himself. The tender ideas

ps his father and his father's house, of his
ancient home, his country and his kindred,
of the distress of his family, and his 'own
exaltation, all rumfled too strongly upon his
mind to bear any further concealment. He
cried, Cause every man to go out from nme
and he wept aloud. The tears which he
ihed.were not the tears of grief. They
were the burst of affition. They were the
effusions of a heart overflowing. with all the
tender sensibilities of nature. Formerly he
had been moved in the fame mnanner, when
he first saw his brethren before him. His
bowels yearned upon them; he fought oror a
place' where to weep. He went into his
chamber; -and then walfed his face and re-
turned to thenm. At that period, his gene-
rous plans were not completed. But now,
when there was no farther occasion for con-
straining himself, he gave free vent to the
strong emotions of his heart. The first
minister to the king cf Egypt was not

ta,~~4 ~ afihanmed

afliamcd to show, that he felt as a man, and E R M.

XI.

a brother. I1e wept alotd, and the Egp- _
fials, and the hoifie of Pharaoh heard him.

The first words which his stvelling heart

allowed him to pronounce, are the most
ihitable to I;lch an affedting situation which
were ever uttered;-I am

a Jofcpb; doth my

father yet liveC?-What could he, what
ought he, in that impassioned moment, to
have ifid more ? This is the voice of nature
herself speaking her own language; and
it penetrates the heart: No pomp of ex-
preflion; no parade of kindness ; but
strong affecdion hastening to utter what it
firongly felt. His brcthreL' could not aifoer
him; for thcy were troubled at his pre-
fence. Their silence is as cxpreffive of those
emotions of repentance and flame, which,
on this amazing dilcovery, filled their
breasts, and flopped their utterance, as the
few words which Jofph lijeaks are expref-
five of the generous agitations which firug-
gled for vent within him. No painter could
seize a more firiking moment for displaying
the charaderillical features of the human

heart,

SE R M. heart, than what is here presented. Never

_ was there a situation of more tender and

virtuous joy, on the one hand; nor, on
the other, of more overwhelming confusion
and conscious guilt. In the simple narra-
tion of the sacred historian, it is set before
us with greater energy and higher effet
than if it had been wrought up with all the
colouring of the most admired modern elo-
quence.

When Joseph had a little recovered him-

self from the first transports of emotion, he
proceeds to explain his situation to his
brethren, and to shew them the beneficent
purposes for which he conceived himself to
be raised by Providence into power. The
apology which he makes in the text for their
former cruelty is uncommon and remark-
able. Now therefore be not grieved nor an-
gry with yourselves that ye fold me hither;
for God did fend me before you to prefervc you
a pojierity in the earth, and tofavc your lives
by a great deliverance. So now it was not
you that sent me hither, but God; and he
hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord

9 of

of all his bhofle, anda ruler throughout all the s E R M.
land of Egypt. This apology was, in truth, _
no fatisfadory excuse for their crime. For
though the over-ruling Providence of Hea-
ven had so directed the course of events, as
to render their bad intentions subservient to
a happy issue; yet the badness of the inten-
tion originated entirely from themselves.
The envy and jealousy which they enter-
tained against their brother, led them to
the commiflion of an atrocious deed. The
deed was voluntary; the crime was all their
own; and the interposition of Providence,
in making unforeseen consequences follow
from that crime, did not, could not excul-
pate them from guilt. It were an impious
conclusion, that because God extraas good
from our evil, we are not answerable for
the evil which we perpetrate. God cannot
be tempted with the evil, neither tempteth he
any man -. But the fcntiment inthe text is to
be confidered, as a colour which the gene-
rous humanity of Joseph prompted him to
throw on the condut of his brethren. He

* James, i. 13.

saw

SERM. saw the confusion with which they wcre

XI. Xt,. overwhelmed in his pretence. He diverts

their attention fiom the remembrance of a
crime which was now wringing their hearts
with anguifl, by representing to them the
happy effeEts which that crime had pro-
duced. He sets them free from all uneafi-
ness on his account. He calls upon them
to rejoice in his prosperity; and, inftcad of
dwelling on a painful recollection of their
own conduct, to join with him in ac-
knowledging and adoring the hand of the
Almighty.

How different is this amiable spirit which

Joseph discovers, fronm that harsh and often-
tatious superiority which too often accom-
panies the pretended forgiveness of injuries
among thole who call themselves Christians!
They are ready to fay, that, for their part,
they pardon the wrongs which have been
done them ; they wihl that the persons xyho
have committed them may be able to for-
give themselves; they leave them to God
and to their own confcicnce. By the severe
fuggections which they throw out, they

disco ve:

discover the inward bitterness of their fpi- s E R M.

XI

rit; and artfully gratify resentment, at the XI
time when they profess to exercile forgive-
nels. Whereas the great and good man,
vhofe character we now confider, effaces
all memory of the crimes which he par-
dons. He fecks to alleviate the remorse
of his brethren by an extenuation of their
guilt and, while he is preparing to make
their circumstances comfortable, studies at
the fame time to render their minds easy
and tranquil.

This was not merely a transient emotion

with Joseph, owing to the firfl burfl of as-
fefEion on discovering himself to his bre-
thren. We hsave a clear proof, from a re-
markable tranfaclion which passed many
years after this period, of his dili)ofition
continuing the fame to the end of life. It
is recorded in the last chapter of this book,
that when Jacob died, his sons began to be
seized with fear concerning the treatment
which they might receive from their bro-
ther. The guilty are always fulpicious.
Conscious of their own bafencfs, they are

incapable

s EXR M. incapable of conceiving the magnanimity of

XI,
A-,Y) others. They saw the bond, which held

the family together, now broken by their
father's death. They dreaded that the re-
fentment of Joseph against them had hi-
therto been only fippreffed, or concealed.
Theyfaid among thbeanfves, peradv.enture he
will now hate u, and requite all the evil which
we did unto him. Under this apprehension,
they first sent a humble meflage to depre-
cate his displeasure by the memory of their
common father; and then appearing in his
presence, they fell down before his face,
professing themfclves to be his iervants, and
praying him to forgive the trespass which
they had committed against him. But no
such hidden refentmcnt as they dreaded had
ever lurked in the foul of Joseph. On the
contrary, when he beheld his brethren in
this affecting situation, bereaved of their
ancient protector, and reduced, as they
imagined, to the neceflity of holding up
their hands to him for mercy, he was over-
powered by a tide of tender emotions. Jo-
feph wept while his brethren spake zuto him.

These

These affectionate tears alone were sufficient s E R M.
to have assured themn of his forgiveness. But XI.
hastening also by words to dispel their alarms,
he presently added, Fear not; for though ye
thought evil againtf me, God meant it unto
good. Now therefore fear ye not; I will
norrigJ you and your little ones. And he coin-
forted them, and pake kindly unto them n.

Such was the last incident that is rccord-

ed in the life of this eminent personage,
than whom you will find few more diftin.
guifhed by an assemblage of illuflrious vir-
tues; in the lowelt adversity, patient and
faithful; in the highest prosperity, benefi-
cent and generous; dutiful and affetionate
as a son; kind and forgiving as a brother;
accomplished as a flatefman ; wife and pro-
vident as a ruler of the land. In such a
character you behold human nature posesS--
ing its highest honours. The sentiments
which it inspires tend to ennoble our minds;
and to prevent their imbibing the spirit of
those hard, interested, and felf-feeking men
with whom the world abounds.

" Genes. 1. 21.
VOL. II. Y TlE

S E R iM TIE firiking example of forgiveness
>__^__ which the text displays, ought frequently

to occur to our thoughts, amidt the various
occasions of provocation and offence which
arise in our intercourse with the world. If
one so worthy and amiable, in the days too
of his youth and innocence, suffered such
cruel treatment from his brothers, ought
we to be surprised if, even from our ncarefl
relations, we meet with injuflice or ingra-
titude ? Wrongs and injuries are, more or
lets, the portion of all. I.ike Death, they
are an evil unavoidable. No station is io
hligh, no power so great, no chara&er Ib
unblemished, as to exempt us from them.
In the world, ungrateful men, false friends,
and violent enemies, abound. Every wife
man ought to prepare himself for what he
is to encounter in pafling through this
thorny region. He is not to expec that
lie can gatlher grapes firom thiflcs; nor to
lose the government of his mind, because,
in the midst of evil men, he is not allowed
to remain, like a secret and inviolable per-
fen, untouched and uninjured.

3 As

As this view of our situation ought to SERM.

XI.

blunt the edge of paflion and impatience, l
so the alleviating circumfiances which rea-
ibn will suggest, ought to mollify resent-
ment. Think of the various confrhuCtions
which the aaions of men will bear. Con-
fider how different the motives of him wlho
hath given us olfence, may have been from
those which, in the heat of pailion, we ascribe
to him ; how apt all men are to be fEducced
by mistaken views of interell, and how
little ground we have to complain, if, upon
a fippofed interfering of interests, we fufler
by others preferring their own to ours.
Remember that no opinions which you form
under the power of resentment can be de-
pended upon as just; and that every one
loads the intentions of his enemy with ima-
ginary degrees of malice.

But admitting the injury you have re-

ceived to be ever Ib atrocious in its nature,
and aggravated in its circumflanccs; fiup-
poluig it to be even parallel to that which
Joleph suffered ; look up, like him, to that
divine government under which we are all

Y 2 p!:acd"

SE RlM. placed. If forgiveness be a duty which

XI.

we know God to have required under the
most awful fanftions, dare we draw upon
ourselves the merited vengeance of that Su-
perior to whose clemency we are obliged
daily to fly ? When, with hard and unre-
lenting dispositions towards our brethren,
we fend up to Heaven prayers for mercy to
ourselves, those prayers return like impre-
cations upon our heads; and our very devo-
tions feal our condemnation.

The most plain and natural sentiments of

equity concur with divine authority to
enforce the duty which I now recommend.
Let him who has never in his life done
wrong, be allowed the privilege of re-
maining inexorable. But let such as are
conscious of frailties and crimes, confider
forgiveness as a debt which they owe to
others. Common failings are the strongest
leflbn of mutual forbearance. Were this
virtue unknown among men, order and
comfort, peace and repose, would be ftran-
gers to human life. Injuries retaliated ac-
cording to the exorbitant measure which

passion

passion prescribes, would justify resentment s E R M.

XI.

in return. The injured person would be- I-_
come the injurer; and thus wrongs, reta-
liations, and frelh injuries, would circulate
in endless succession, till the world was
rendered a field of blood. Of all the pas-
sions which invade the human breast, re-
venge is the most direful. When allowed
to reign with full dominion, it is more than
fuflicient to poison the few pleasures which
remain to man in his present state. How
much soever a person may iufler from in-
justice, he is always in hazard of suffering
more from the prosecution of revenge.
The violence of an enemy cannot inflic
what is equal to the torment he creates to
himself, by means of the fierce and def-
perate padions which he allows to rage in
his foul.

Tlofe evil spirits who inhabit the regions

of milery, are represented as delighting in
revenge and cruelty. But all that is great
and good in the universe, is on the fide of
clemency and mercy. The Almighty Ruler
of the world, though for ages offended by

Y 3 the

S E R !. the unrighteoufinefs, and insulted by the
_ '' iimpiety of men, is ln71g-fiffriig andj ft w

to anger. His Son, when he appeared in
our nature, exhibited, both in his life and
his death, the most illustrious example of
forgiveness which the world ever beheld.
If you look into the history of mankind,
you will find that, in every age, those who
have been refpecaed as worthy, or admired
as great, have been distinguished for this
virtue. Revenge dwells in little minds.
A noble and magnanimous spirit is always
superior to it. It fiffers not from the inju-
ries of men those severe shocks which others
feel. Colleded within itself, it Rfands un-
moved by their impotent assaults; and with
generous pity, rather than with anger, looks
down on their unworthy conduct. It has
been truly said, that the greatest man on
earth can no sooner commit an injury, than
a good man can make himielf greater, by
forgiving it. Joseph, at the moment when
we now contemplate him, had entirely un-
der his power all those unnatural brethren
·awho had been guilty towards him of the

most

most cruel outrage which men could pcrpe- S E R M.

XI.

trate. He could have retained them for ever --
in that Egyptian bondage to which they had
once consigned him; and have gratified re-
venge by every accumulation of difgrnce
which delfpotic power enabled him to infli&l.
Had he aded this part, he might for a while
have been toothed by the pleasures of his
high station; but remorse, in the end,
would have stung his foul. Cruelty would
have rendered him unhappy within himself
as well as odious to others; and his name
would have perithed among the crowd of
thole contemptible flatefien whole actions
i{ain the annals of history. Whereas nowy,
his character flands among the foremost in
the ranks of spotless fame. HIis memory is
blefled to all generations. His example
continues to edify the world; and he him-
self shines in the celestial regions, as Ihe
briglrtnfs of the firimaimeizt, and as thcjqars,
jfr ever ami ever. Let us now,

II. CONSIDER the sentiment contained
in the text not only as a discovery of cor-

Y 4 dial

SE RMI. dial forgiveness, but as an expression of

xl.
L- i~- devout attention to the conduct of Provi-

dence. So now it was not you thatfent m
hither, but God. Remark how beautifully
piety and humanity are, in this initance,
connected together. As we are told of
Cornelius, the good Centurion, that his
prayers and his alms, his devotion and his
good works, came up together in memorial
before God; so here we perceive fraternal
affection and religious reverence, mingling
in one emotion within the patriarch's heart.
In a perlon of low and vulgar mind, the
sensations on such an occasion would have
been extremely different. Looking back
on the past events of his life, he would
have aflribed all the adversity which he had
suffered to the perverse treatment of his
brothers; and all the prosperity which he
afterwards attained, to his own good con-
duet and wisdom; and by consequence ould
have remained imbittered against the inftru.
ments of the one, and filled with pride and
felf-fuliciency on account of the other,
But the elevated and noble mind of Joseph

rejected

rejeced such unworthy sentiments. Con- S ER M.

XI.

templating the hand of God in all that had
befallen him, he effaced the remembrance
of those evil deeds which had produced his
adversity; and for his prosperity he affected
no praise to himself, but ascribed it en-
tirely to the will of Heaven. Let us take
notice, that this is not the reflecion of a
private, retired man, whose situation might
be supposed to favour such devout medita-
tions. It is the reflection of one, who was
leading a busy and a seducing life, in the
rnidft of a court; the favourite of the
greatest monarch who was then known in
the world. Yet him you behold, amidfl
the submission and adulation which was
paid to him, preserving the moderation and
simplicity of a virtuous mind i and, amidst
the idolatry and false philosophy of the
Egyptians, maintaining the principles of
true religion, and giving glory to the God
of Israel.

From this union of piety with humanity,

which is so conspicuous in the Sentiments of
Joseph, there arises one very important in-

firuCion;

s E R M, ftruaion; that a. devout regard to the hand

M._j of God in the various events of life, tends

to promote good dispositions and affetions
towards men. It will be found by those
who attend to the workings of human na-
ture, that a great proportion of those ma-
lignant paflions which break out in the in-
tercourfe of men, arises from confining their
attention wholly to second causes, and over-
looking the first cause of all. Hence, they
are insolent in prosperity, becauie they dif-
cern nothing higher than their own abili-
ties; and in advcrfity they are peevish and
unforgiving, because they have no object
on which to fix their view, but the conduc
of men who have acted as their enemies.
They behold no plan of wisdom or good-
ness carried on throughout nature, which
can allay the discomposure of their mind.
As soon as their temper is ruffled, the world
appears to them to be a continued scene of
disasters and injuries, of confused events,
and of unreasonable men. Whereas, to the
pious man, the contemplation of the uni-
verse exhibits a very different spectacle. In

the

the midst of seeming confuifion he traces a S E R M.
principle of order; and by attention to that XI
order, his mind is harmonized and calmed.
He beholds a wife and righteous G(overnour
presiding over all the commotions which
are raised by the tumult of conflicting pas-
sions and interests; guiding, with imper-
ceptible influence, the hand of the violent to
beneficent purposes ; accomplilhing unex-
peted ends by the most improbable means;
obliging the warath of man to prai' bimn;
sometimes humbling the mighty, sometimes
exalting the low ; often aia-i'g thle -wicked
in the deivices which their habis haveL rougblt.
Refpetful acknowledgment of this divine
government, controls the disorders of in-
feriour pafions. Reverence for the decrees
of Heaven inspires patience and modera-
tion. Trust in that perfece wisdom and
goodneis which directs all for the befl-, di-
miniihcs the shock which worldly disasters
pccalion. The irritation of passion and re-
fentment will always bear proportion to the
agitation which we susser from the changes
of fortune. One who connects himiclf

with

SER . with nothing but second causes, partakes of

Xi.
L-r->- the violence and irregularity of all the in-

feriour movements belonging to this great
machine. He who refers al} to God, dwells,
if we may speak so, in that higher sphere
where motion begins; he is subjea to fewer
fhoks and concufions, and is only carried
along by the motion of the universe.

How can mildness or forgiveness gain

place in the temper of that man, who, on
occasion of every calamity which he suffers
from the ill usage of others, has no fan&uary
within his own breast to which he can make
retreat from their vexations; who is pof-
sessed of no principle which is of sufficient
power to bear down the rising tide of pee-
vifh and angry paflions ? The violence of
an enemy or the ingratitude of a friend, the
injustice of one man, and the treachery of
another, perpetually dwell and rankle in
his thoughts. The part which they have
aced in bringing on his distress, s frequently
more grating to him than the distress itself.
Whereas he who in every event looks up to
God, has alwaysin his view a great and cle-

4 vating

vating object which inspires him with mag- s E R M.

XL

nanimity. His mind lies open to every
relieving thought, and is inclined to every
suggestion of generosity. He is disposed to
fay with Joseph, it &vas not youi that sint me
hither, but God; with David, it is tbe Lord;
let hitm do what f'eme7th good in his Lyes; and,
with a greater Personage than either of these,
the cup which my Father hath given me to
drink, flall I not drink it ? Hence arifcs
superiority to many of the ordinary provo-
cations of the world. For he looks upon
the whole of his present life as part of a
great plan which is carried on under the
direcion of Heaven. In this plan lie viewa
men as ading their several parts, and con-
tributing to his good or evil. lIut their
parts he confiders as fubordinatt: ones;
which, though they may juflly n.erit his
affedion, and may occasionally call forth
his resentment, yet afford no proper found-
ation to violent or malignant pallion. He
looks upon bad men as only the rod with
which the Almighty chatlc's ; like the
peflilencc, the earthquake, or the form.

In

SERM. In the midst of their injustice and violence

XI. he can pity their blindness; and imitate

our blessed Lord in praying, Father,forivc
l.'In ; 'for they know elt wbat they do.

# SERMON XII. On the CHARACTER of HAZAEL. 2 KINGS, viii. 12, 13. And Hazael said, Why weepeth my Lord? And he answered, Because I know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of Israel. Their ...

I 335 j

SERMON XII.
On the ClHARACTER of I-HAAEL.

e KINGS, viii. t2, 13.

lAnd Zlzanel said, W'Vhy Jwepctlh my Lord:

,Ibrd he anfwercdl, Becarfre know the evil
that thjil wilt do unto the children of Jfirel.
Their Jlrong holds ·wilt thousiet onjire, and
tbeir ?1iung me liwilt thou fJay with the
fizwor/, and wiilt dljh their children, and
rip lp their women with child. Ind
IInzaL fdll, But what, is tih firvant a
dog, that he flould do this great thing ?
Aztnd Elij/h anfwcred, 7'he Lord hath
/hierwd me that thou Jhalt be king over
Sylria.
IN the days of Joram, king of Israel, flou- s r R M.

riffled the prophet Elifia. I-is characlcr X

was so eminent, and his fame so widely
spread, that Bcnhadad the king of Syria,

though

E R M. though an idolator, sent to consult him con-
L-,i cerning the issue of a distemper which

threatened his life. The messenger em-
ployed on this occasion was Hazael, who
appears to have been one of the princes, or
chief men, of the Syrian court. Charged
with rich gifts from the king, he presents
himself before the prophet, and accosts him
in terms of the highest refpet. During the
conference which they held together, Elisha
fixed his eye ftedfaflly on the countenance
of Hazael; and discerning, by a prophetic
spirit, his future tyranny and cruelty, he
could not contain himself from burftifig into
a flood of tears. When Hazael, in surprise,
inquired into the cause of this sudden emo-
tion, the prophet plainly informs him of the
crimes and barbarities which he foresaw
that hereafter he should commit. The foul
of Hazael abhorred, at this time, the thoughts
of cruelty. Uncorrupted, as yet, by am-
bition or greatness, his indignation arose at
being thought capable of such savage ations
as the prophet had mentioned; and, with
much warmth, he replies, But what, is

t/hV

thyb Jrvant a dog, that he J7oitd do this great S E R M.
tbing ? Elisha makes no return but to point L-
out a remarkable change which was to take
place in his condition ; T'he Lird ha:h
f:ewed ein that tholu Jalt be L;I' o.zr ,.y'ria.
In course of time, all that had Ibeen pre-
diated came to pars. Hazael afccnded the
throne; and ambition took pofnellion of his
heart. Hefinote the chilil'ten of Jfrac in all
their coi

C s. Ie o bprcsjd them du'lg all the

days of kilng 7ehoahd(az -; and, from what
is left on record of his adions, plainly ap-
pears to have proved what the prophet fore-
saw him to be, a man of violence, cruclty,
and blood.

In this passage of history, an objeat is

presented which defcrvcs our serious atten-
tion. We behold a man who, in one fiate
of life, could not look upon certain crimes
without furprize and horrour; who knew
so little of himself, as to believe it impoflible
for him ever to be concerned in commit-
ting them; that fame man, by a change of
condition, transformed in all his sentiments,

* 2 Kings, xiii. 22,
VOL. II. 7, anz

s E R . and as he rose in greatness rising also ;n

guilt; till at last he completed that whole
character of iniquity which he once de-
tested. Hence the following observations
naturally arise. I. That to a mind not en-
tirely corrupted, sentiments of abhorrence at
guilt are natural. II. That, notwithfiand-
ing those sentiments, the mind may be
brought under the dominion of the vice;
which it had most abhorred. III. That
this unhappy revolution is frequently owing
to a change of men's external circumstances
and condition in the world. These obferva-
tions are to make the subjee of the pre-
sent discourse; and will lead us to fucl
a view of human nature, as, it is hoped,
may be of gederal use.

I. SENTIMENTS of abhorrence at guilt

are natural to the human mind. Hazael's
reply to the Prophet shews how strongly he
felt them. Is thy servant a dog, that he
[hould do this great thing ? Is he, or can he
ever be, so base and wretched, as to perpe-
trate crimes which would render him un-

worthy

Worthy of bearing the name of a man? S ERM.
This is the voice of human nature, while __
it is not as yet hardened in iniquity. Some
vices are indeed more odious to the mind
than others. Providence has wifely pointed
the sharpest edge of this natural aversion
against the crimes which are of most perni-
cious and deftrufive nature; such as trea-
chery, oppreflion, and cruelty. But, in ge-
neral, the diftindion between moral good
and evil is so strongly marked, as to stamp
almost every vice with the character of
turpitude. Present to any man, even the
most ignorant and untutored, an obvious
inflance of injustice, falsehood, or im-
piety; let him view it in a cool moment,
when no paflion blinds, and no interest
warps him; and you will find that his
mind immediately revolts against it, as
shameful and base, nay, as deserving pu-
niihment. Hence, in reasoning on the
charaders of others, however men may
mistake as to fads, yet they generally praise
and blame according to the principles of
found morality.

Z X With

S E R M. With refpec to their own charaacer, a

_^V- notorious partiality too generally misleads

their judgment. But it is remarkable, that
no linner ever avows directly to himself,
that he has been guilty of gross and down-
right iniquity. Even when engaged by his
paflions in ihe commission of the greatest
crimes, he always palliates them to his own
mind by some extenuation or apology, some
pretended nccellity, or some borrowed co-
lour of innocence. Such power the unde-
niable dignity of virtue, and the acknow-
ledged turpitude of vice, possess over every
human heart. These fentimcnts are the re-
maining impressions of that law, which was
originally written on the mind of man.
They are gleams of that light which once
flone clear and strong within us; and which,
though it be now greatly obscured, yet con-
tinue to shoot a feeble ray athwart the
darkneis of human nature.-But what-
ever sentiments of abhorrence at vice we
may at any time entertain, we have no
reabon to build upon these a presumptuous
confidence of our continuance in virtue.

For

For the next infruAioln which the text s ER M.

xII.
luggefts, is, -

II. TIHAT such is man's norance of his

own charaler, such the 'fiilty of his na-
ture, that he may one day become infamous
for those very crimes which at prefchi he
holds in detestation. This observation is
too well verified by the hifory of Hazacl;
and a thousand other inftaices might be
brought to confirm it. Though there is
nothing which every person ought to know
so thoroughly as his own heart, yet from
the conduCt of men it appears, that there is
nothing with which they arc less acqu(ainted.
Always more prone to flatter themselves'
than desirous to discover the truth, they
trust to their being possesscd of every virtue
which has not been put to the trial; and
reckon thelnfelves secure against every vice
to which they have not hitherto been
tempted; As long as their duty hangs in
speculation, it appears so plain, and so eli-
gible, that they cannot doubt of performing
it. The suspicion never enters their mind,

Z 3 that

S E R M. that in the hour of speculation, and in the
XI., hour of practice, their sentiments may differ

widely. Their present disposition they easily
persuade themselves will ever continue the
fame; and yet that disposition is changing
with circumitances every moment.

The man who glows with the warm feel-

ings of devotion, imagines it impoflible for
him to lose that sense of the divine good-
ness which at present melts his heart. He
whom his friend had lately saved from ruin,
is confident that, if some trying emergency
Shall put his gratitude to proof, he will ra-
ther die than abandon his benefactor, He
who lives happy and contented in frugal in-
duftry, wonders how any man can give him-
self up to dissolute pleasure. Were any of
those persons informed by a superior spirit,
that the time was shortly to come when the
one ihould prove an example of scandalous
impiety, the other of treachery to his friend,
and the third of all that extravagant luxury
which disgraces a growing fortune; each
of them would testify as much surprise and
abhorrence as Hazael did, upon hearing

the

the predicions of the prophet. Sincere SERM.
they might very possibly be in their ex- ^.,
preflions of indignation; for hypocrisy is
not always to be charged on men whose
conduct is inconsistent. Hazael was in
earnest, when he resented with such ardour
the imputation of cruelty. The Apotle
Peter was sincere when he made the zealous
profeflion, that though he should go to
prison and to death with his master, he
would never deny him. They were fin-
cere; that is, they spoke from the fulncfs
of their hearts and from the warmth of the
present moment; but they did not know
themselves, as the events which followed
plainly showed. So false to its principles,
too frequently, is the heart of man; so weak
is the foundation of human virtue; so much
reason there is for what the gospel perpe-
tually inculcates concerning the necefity of
distrusting ourselves, and depending on di-
vine aid. Mortifying, I confess, is this
view of human nature; yet proper to be
attended to by all, in order to eicape the
most fatal dangers. For, merely through un-

Z 4 guarded

S E R M. guarded conduCt, and from the want of thii
x __ prudent suspicion of their own weakness,

how many, after the mofi promising begin-
nings, have gradually apoflatized from every
principle of virtue; until, at lat, it has be-
come as difficult for one to believe, that they
ever had any love of goodness, as it would
have been once to have persuaded them-
selves that they were to advance to such a
height in wickedness ?

IN such cafes as I have described, what

has become, it may be enquired, of thole
sentiments of abhorrence at guilt which
were once felt tb firongly ? Are they to-
tally erased ? or, if in any degree they re-
main, how do such persons contrive to
satisfy themselves in ading a part which
their minds condemn ?-Here, there is a
mystery of iniquity which requires to be
unfolded. Latent and secret is the pro-
grefs of corruption within the foul; and
the more latent, the more dangerous is its
growth. No man becomes of a Iudden
completely wicked. Guilt never ihews its

whole

whole deformity at once; but by gradual S E R M.

XII.

acquaintance reconciles us to its appearance, ,
and imperceptibly diffuses its poison through
all the powers of the mind. Every man
has some darling pafiion, which generally
affords the first introduction to vice. The
irregular gratifications into which it occa-
fionally reduces him, appear under the formt
of venial weaknesses; and are indulged in
the beginning, with scrupulousness and re-
serve. But, by longer pracice, these re-
ftraints weaken, and the power of habit
grows, One vice brings in another to its
aid. By a fort of natural affinity they con-
net and entwine themeilves together; till
their roots come to be fprcead wide and deep
over all the foul. When guilt riles to be
glaring, conscience endeavours to remon-
firate. But conscience is a calm principle.
Paflion is loud and impetuous; and creates
a tumult which drowns the voice of rcafon.
It joins, besides, artifice to violence; and
seduces at the fame time that it impels.
For it employs the understanding to impose
upon the conscience. It devilcs reasons

and

s E R M. and arguments to justify the corruptions of

XIl.
_,xi the heart. The common pracice of the

world is appealed to. Nice diftincions are
made. Men are found to be circumstanced
in fb peculiar a manner, as to render cer-
tain ations excufablc, if not blameless,
which, in another Situation, it is confessed,
would have been criminal. By such a pro-
cess as this, there is reason to believe, that
a great part of mankind advance from ftep
to ftep in fin, partly hurried by passion,
and partly blinded by felf-deceit, without
any just sense of the degree of guilt which
they contract. By inveterate habits, their
judgment is, at length, perverted, and their
moral feelings are deadened. They fee now
with other eyes; and can look without pain
on evil actions which they formerly ab-
horred.

It is proper, however, to observe, that

though our native sentiments of abhorrence
at guilt may be so borne down, or so eluded,
as to lose their influence on condudt, yet
those sentiments belonging originally to our
frame, and being never totally eradicated

132 from

from the foul, will fill retain so much au- s E R M.

XII.

thority, as if not to reform, at least, on some
occasions, to chasten the finner. It is only
during a course of profpcrity, that vice is
able to carry on its deiufions without dif-
turbance. But amidst the dark and thought-
ful situations of life, conscience regains its
rights; and pours the whole bitterness of
remorse on his heart, who has apostatized
from his original principles. We may well
believe that, before the end of his days,
Hazael's first impreflions would be made
to return. In the hour of adversity, the
remembrance of his conference with the
venerable Prophet would fling his heart.
Comparing the sentiments which, in those
his better days, he felt, with the atrocious
cruelties which he had afterwards commit-
ted, all the honours of royalty would be
unable to save him from the inward sense
of baseness and infamy.

FROM this view which has been exhi-

bited of the progress of corruption, and of
the danger to which we are exposed, of

falling

S E R M, falling from principles which once appeared
x" firmly eflablifhcd, let us receive ufcful ad-

monition for our own condud. Let nlt
biJ, that girdethb Cn is ha'i'js, bo7 J l'ke bni1
tbat pucttht it of. Let no man place a rash
and dangerous confidence in his virtue.
But let bhin2 tfalt thiinkeibh bheJanctih, lae
heed ls? he fall. Never adventure on too
near an approach to what is evil. Fami-
liarize not yourselvcs with it, in the flighttef
instances, without fear. Liften with re-
verence to every reprehension of con-
science; and preserve the most quick and
accurate sensibility to right and wrong. If
ever your moral ilnpreffions begin to dc-
cay, and your natural abhorrence of guilt
to lessen, you have ground to dread that
the ruin of virtue is fast approaching.
While you employ all the circumfpeaion
and vigilance which reason can suggest, let
your prayers, at the fame time, continually
ascend to God for support and aid. Re-
member that from him defieiidelh cvcjgood
and perfeR gift; and that to him only it
belongs to kep yojoifrom falling, and to pre-

Jsld!

sent you faulilefs before the presence of his s E R M.
glory with exceeding joy. I proceed now ,_-
to the

IlId OBSERVATION fiom tih text, That

the power which corruption acquires to
pervert the original principles of man, is
frequently owing to a change of their cir-
cumftances and condition in the world.
How different was Hazael the messenger
of Benhadad, from I-Iazael the king; he,
who started at the mention of cruelty, fiom
him who waded in blood ! Of this iad
and i'urprifing revolution, the Prophet em-
phatically assigns the cause, in these few
words; The Lord bath Jchewid me/ tlt hihoi
fJalt be king over Syria. That crown, that
fatal crown, which is to be set upon thy
head, shall fled a malignant influcnce over
thy nature; and shall produce that change
in thy characdQer, which now thou canst
not believe.-- Whose experience of the
world is so narrow, as not to firnih him
with instances similar to this, in much
humbler conditions of life ? So great is

the.

S ERM. the influence of a new situation of external
xli. fortune; such a different turn it gives to

our temper and affections, to our views
and desires, that no man can foretel what
his charaCer would prove, should Provi-
dence either raise or depress his circum-
fiances in a remarkable degree, or throw
him into some sphere of aCtion widely dif-
ferent from that to which he has been ac-
customed in former life.

The feeds of various qualities, good and

bad, lie in all our hearts. But until pro-
per occasions ripen and bring them for-
ward, they lie there inaCtive and dead.
They are covered up and concealed within
the recesses of our nature; or, if they spring
up at all, it is under such an appearance as
is frequently mistaken, even by ourselves.
Pride, for instance, in certain ituations,
has no opportunity of displaying itself, but
as magnanimity, or sense of honour. Ava-
rice appears as necessary and laudable ceco-
nomy. What in one itation of life would
discover itself to be cowardice and baseness
of mind, passes in another for prudent cir-

cumfpestion!

c.umfpection. What in the fulness of power S F.R M.
would prove to be cruelty and oppreflion, ,-
is reputed, in a subordinate rank, no more
than the exerci'e of proper discipline. For
a while, the man is known neither by the
world nor by himself, to be what he truly
is. But bring him into a new situation of
life, which accords with his predominant
disposition; which strikes on certain latent
qualities of his foul, and awakens them into
action; and as the leaves of a flower gra-
dually unfold to the fun, so flall all his true
character open full to view.

This may, in one light, be accounted

not bo much an alteration of character pro-
duced by a change of circumstances, as a
discovery brought forth of the real character,
which formerly lay concealed. Yet, at the
fame time, it is true that the man himself un-
dergoes a change. For opportunity being
given for certain dispositions, which had
been dormant, to exert themselves without
restraint, they of course gather strength.
By means of the ascendancy which they
gain, other parts of the temper are borne

down;

SERM. down; and thus an alteration is made imi
,_I. the whole structure and fvftem of the foul.

He is a truly wife and good man, who,
through divine airftance, remains fuperiour
to this influence of fortune on his cha-
rater; who having once imbibed worthy
sentiments, and eflablifhed proper principles
of action; continues constant to these,
whatever his circumstances be; maintains,
throughout all the changes of his life, one
uniform and supported tenour of conduc;
and what he abhorred as evil and wicked in
the beginning of his days, continues to ab-
hor to the end. But how rare is it to meet
with this honourable consistency among
men, while they are paiSng through the
different itations and periods of life ! When
they are setting out i!n the world, before
their minds have been greatly milled or
debased, they glow vith generous emotions,
and look with contempt on what is fordid
and guilty. But advancing farther in life,
and inured byl degrees to the crooked ways
of men; pressing through the crowd, and
the buflie of the world; obliged to contend

t with

with this man's craft, and that man's scorn s ER Mr.

XI[.

accustomed, sometimes, to conceal their x.
sentiments, and often to stifle their feelings,
they became at last hardened in heart, and
familiar with corruption. Who would not
drop a tear over this fad, but frequent fall
of human probity and honour ? Who is not
humbled, when he beholds the refined fen-
timents and high principles on which we
are so ready to value ourfelvcs, brought to
such a ihameful issue; and man, with all
his boafled attainments of reason, discover-
ed so often to be the creature of his exter-
nal fortune, moulded and formed by the
incidents of his life ?

THE instance of Hazael's degeneracy

leads us to reflect, in particular, on the dan-
gers which arise from stations of power and
greatness; especially when the elevation of
men to these has been rapid and sudden.
Few have the strength of mind which is re-
quifite for bearing such a change with tem-
perance and felf-command. The refpea
which is paid to the great, and the scope

VOL. II. A a which

S E R M. which their condition affords for the indul-

XII.
X_ , gence ofpleafure, are perilous circumstances

to virtue. When men live among their
equals, and are accustomed to encounter the
hardships of life, they are ofcourfe remind-
ed of their mutual dependence on each
other, and of the dependence of all upon
God. But when they are highly exalted
above their fellows, they meet with few
objecs to awaken serious reflecion, but
with many to feed and inflame their pas-
sions. They are apt to separate their in-
terest from that of all around them; to
wrap themselves up in their vain grandeur;
and in the lap of indolence and selfish plea-
lure, to acquire a cold indifference to the
concerns even of those whom they call their
friends. The fancied independence into which
they are lifted up, is adverse to Sentiments
of piety, as well as of humanity, in their
heart. Taking the timbrel and the harp, and
rejoicing at thefound of the organ, theyfay
unto Go,, Depart from us, fir we desire noi
the kinotlcdge of thy ways. What is the
llmtighf, that weJ :oildfeerve him ? or what

II profit

pro ot Jiouldl we have, if we pray unto SERM.
him ? I _

But we are not to imagine, that elevated

stations in the world furnish the only formi-
dable trials to which our virtue is exposed.
It will be found, that we arc liable to no
fewer nor less dangerous temptations, from
the oppoiite extreme of poverty and depref-
sion. When men who have known better
days are thrown down into abjee situations
of fortune, their spirits are broken and their
temper foured. Envy rankles in their
breast at such as are more successful. The
providence of Heaven is accused in secret
murmurs; and the sense of misery is ready
to push them into atrocious crimes, in order
to better their state. Among the inferiour
classes of mankind, craft and diflonefty are
too often found to prevail. Low and pe-
nurious circumfiances dcprefs the human
powers. They deprive men of the proper
means of knowledge and improvement;
and where ignorance is gross, it is alway)s in
hazard of engendering profligacy.

A a 2 Hence

s E r M. Hence it has been, generally, the opi-
XII.

nion of wife men in all ages, that there is
a certain middle condition of life, equally
remote from either of those extremes of
fortune, which, though it want not allb its
own dangers, yet is, on the whole, the
state most favourable both to virtue and to
happiness. For there, luxury and pride on
the one hand, have not opportunity to ener-
vate or intoxicate the mind, nor want and
dependence on the other, to fink and de-
base it; there, all the native affections of
the foul have the freest and fairest exercise,
the equality of men is felt, friendships are
formed, and improvements of every fort are
pursued with most success; there, men are
prom:pted to induflty without being over-
come by toil, and their powers called forth
into .exertion, without being either super-
ic ed by too much abundance, or baffled
by insuperable difticuhics; there, a mixture
of comforts and of wants, at once awakens
their gra;itde to God, and reminds them
of their deppcndcnce on his aid; and there-
forc, in thiis iatc, lmen :cm
:i to cljoy life to

Imoft

mofl advantage, and to be Icati exposed to S E . ;l'I.
the snares of vice. Such a condition is re- . l,
corded in the book of Proverbs, to have
been the wifl and choice of one who was
eminent for Rwildom. Remove fir froim me
zaniity and lies. Give me neither poverty nor
ric/es. e;ecd me withJ food convenient for
me. LrJi I be fill and deny, TIhee, andfaSy,
IWho is the Lord ? or les/ I be poor andJeal,
and take t1 e name of my God in vain '.;

FROM the whole view which we have

now taken of the subjet, we may, in the
first place, learn the reafbns for which a
variety of conditions and ranks was fta.-
blifhed by Providence among mankind.
This life is obviously intended to be a slate
of probation and tri:l. No trial of charac-
ters is requisite with reipec to God, who
fees what is in every heart, a(nd perfcelyv
knows what part each man wouldl a;t. in nlU
the possible situations of fortune. But on
account of men themselves, and of the

* Prov. xxx 8, 9.

A a 3 w'or:!

SERM. world around them, it was necessary that
XII.

trial llould take place, and a discrimination
of characers be made; in order that true
virtue might be keparated from false appear-
ances of it, and the justice of Heaven be
displayed in its final retributions; in order
that the failings of men might be so dif-
covered to themselves, as to afford them
properinitruCion, and promote their amend-
ment ; and in order that their charaters
might be shown to the world in every
point of view, which could furniih either
examples for imitation, or admonitions of
danger. The accomplilhlment of these im-
portant purposes required, that human life
Should not always proceed in one tenour;
but that it Should both be chequered with
many revolutions, and diverlified by a va-
riety of employments and ranks; in pass-
ing through which, the touchstone might
be applied to the charaters of men, and
their hidden virtues or vices explored.
I-azael might have appeared in history with
a degree of reputation to which he was not
entitled, had he continued to ac in a sub-

ordinate

ordinate station. At bottom, he was false SERM.
and unsound. When raised higtler in life, XI.
the corruption of his heart difcovcred itself;
and he is now held forth with deferred in-
famy, as a warning to succeeding ages.

IN the second place we learn, from what

has been said, the importance of attending,
with the utmost care, to the choice which we
make of our employment and condition in
life. It has been shown, that our external
situation frequently operates powerfully on
our moral character; and by consequence
that it is ftricly connected, not only with
our temporal welfare, but with our ever-
lasting happiness or misery. He who might
have passed unblamed, and upright, through
certain walks of life, by unhappily choofing
a road where he meets with temptations too
firong for his virtue, precipitates himself
into flame here, and into endless ruin here-
after. Yet how often is the determination
of this most important article left to the
chance of accidental connections, or sub-
mitted to the option of youthful fancy and

A a L. humour ?

SERM. humour? When it is made the subjeC of
XI I. serious deliberation, how seldom have they,

on whom the decision of it depends, any
further view than so to dispose of one who
is coming out into life, as that he may the
soonest become rich, or, as it is expressed,
make his way to most advantage in the
world? Are there no other objecs than
this to be attended to, in fixing the plan of
life? Are there no more sacred and im-
portant interests which deserve to be con-
fulted ?- You would not willingly place
one whose welfare you fludied, in a fitua-
tion for which you were convinced that
his abilities were unequal. These, there-
fore, you examine with care; and on them
you reft the ground of your decision. Be
persuaded that not abilities merely, but the
turn of the temper and the heart, require
to be examined with equal attention, in
forming the plan of future eftablithment.
Every one has some peculiar weakness,
some predominant paflion, which exposes
him to temptations of one kind more than
of another. Early this may be discerned

S to

to ihoot; and from its sirs{ risings its fu- S ER M.
ture growth may be inferred. Anticipate .Xi[.
its progress. Coniider how it is likely to
be affeced by succeeding occurrences in
life. If you bring one whom you arc rcar-
ing up into a situation where all the fur-
rounding circumstances shall clierifh and
mature this fatal principle in his nature,
you become, in a great meailure, answer-
able for the conlequences that follow. In
vain you trluf to his abilities and powers.
Vice and corruption, wlhen they have taint-
ed the heart, are Iflficient to overset the
greatest abilities. Nay, too frcquently they
turn them against the poflcifor; and render
them the inftrumcuts of his more lfpecdy
ruin.

IN the third place, we Icarn from the

history which has been illutrated, never to
judge of true happiness, merely from the
degree of men's advancement in the world.
Always betrayed by appearances, the mul-
titude are caught by nothing so much as by
the flow and pomp of life. They think

every

S i. R,.r. every one blefl,who is raised far above others
XII. _,~ in rank. From their earliest years they are

taught to fix their views upon worldly ele-
vation, as the ultimate objct of their aims;
and of all the sources of errour in conduc,
this is the most general.-Hazael, on the
throne of Syria, would, doubtless, be more
envied, and esteemed by the multitude a
far happier man, than when yet a subjed,
he was employed by Benhadad to carry his
meflage to Elisha. Yet, 0 Hazael! how
much better had it been for thee never to
have known the name or honour of a king,
than to have purchaled it at the expence of
so much guilt; forfeiting thy first and best
charader; ruffling into crimes which were
cnce thine abhorrence; and becoming a
traitor to the native fentimcnts and ditates
of thy heart ! HIow fatal to thy repose
proved that coveted purple, which was
drenched by thee in so much innocent blood!
How much more cheerful were thy (days,
and how much calmer thy nights, in the
former periods of thy life, than when,

aiqad on a throne, thy ears were invaded

by

by day with the cries of the miserable whom s E R M.
thou hadst ruined; and thy slumbers broken X
by night with the shocking remembrance of
thy cruelties and crimes !- Never let us
judge by the outside of things; nor con-
clude a man to be happy, solely because he
is encompassed with wealth or grandeur.
Much misery often lurks where it is little
fufpeaed by the world. The material in-
quiries refpeding felicity are, not what a
man's external condition is, but with what
disposition of mind he bears it; whether he
be corrupted or improved by it; whether
he conduas himself so as to be aoceptable
to God, and approved of by good men.
For these are the circumstances which make
the real and important diftind.ions among
the conditions of men. The effedas of there
,are to last for ever, when all worldly dif-
tindions fhiall be forgotten.

IN the fourth place, fiom all that has

been said, we should learn never to be im-
moderately anxious about our external ftu-
ation, but to fiubmit our lot with cheerful-
ness to the disposal of -Heaven. To make

the

SERM. the bel and moss prudent arrangements
ax_ which we can, refpeding our condition in

life, is matter of high duty. But let us re-
member that all the plans that we form
are precarious and uncertain. After the
utmost precautions taken by human wit-
dom, no man can foresee the hidden dan-
gers which may await him in that path of
life on which he has pitched. Providence
chutes for us much more wifely than we
can chufe for ourselves; and, from circum-
flances that appeared at firfl most unpro-
mifing and adverse, often brings forth in
the issue both temporal and spiritual felicity.
l/hjo knowelh whbat is good fr a main il this
li/f, all the days of his vain Ife, which he
fpendetb as a fladow ? When we confider
the darkness of our prelent slate, the imbe-
cility of human nature, and the doubtful
and ambiguous value of all that we call
prosperity, the exhortation of the Psalmist
comes home with great force on every re-
fleaing mind, Commit thy way unto the
Lord*. Form thy measures with prudence;

* Psalm xxxvii. 5.

but

but divest thyself of anxiety about the issue. S E R M.

XII.

Infead of seeking to order thine own lot, ,__
acquiesce in the appointment of Heaven,
and follow without hesitation the call of
Providence, and of duty. In whatever
lituation of life God shall place thee, look
up devoutly to Him for grace and allill-
ance; and study to aL the part assigncd thee
with a faithful and upright heart. Thus
lhalt thou have peace within thyself, while
thy course is goinlg on; and when it draws
towards a clole, with lati.sfation thou flhalt
review thy conduEt. For, after all the toils
and labours of life, and all the vain ftrugglcs
which we maintain for pre- mrience and
diftinclion, we flhall find, at the conclusion
of the whole scene, that i/ fvor Coi and
keep his commandments is fh:, v,.hok (r
ifs,,':.

# SERMON XIII. On the BENEFITS to be derived from the HOUSE of MOURNING. ECCLESIASTES, vii. 2, 3, 4. It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting; for that is the end...

[ 366 ]

S E R M O N XIII.
On the BENEFITS to be derived from the

HOUSE of MOURNING.

1CCLESI ASTES, Vii. 2, 3,4.
It is better to go to the hos/e of mourninig,

tI;an to go to the hife o ffCfting; for that
is tbe end of all men, and the living will
L.,' it to his iLhert. Sorrow is better thlan
la:ghtcr; for bl tlhCSfiiifs of the counte-
nance theL heart is l.;!,ae better. The heart
of tlhc iC' i is i tAc hofic of mourninig;
b6:t tb hCeart of fools is in the hotffe of

E. R M M A N Y of the maxims contained in
XIII. this book of Ecclesiastes will appear

fitange sayings to the men of the world.
But when ihey refleI on the character of

him

him who delivers them, they cannot but SERIM.
admit that his tenets deserve a serious and -.
attentive examination. For they are not
the doctrines of a pedant, who, from an
obscure retirement, declaims againfl plea-
lures which he never knew. They are not
the invecives of a disappointed man, who
takes revenge upon the world, by satirising
those enjoyments which he fought in vain to
obtain. They are the conclusions of a great
and prosperous prince, who had once given
full scope to his desires; who was thoroughly
acquainted with life in its most flattering
scenes; and who now, reviewing all that
he had enjoyed, delivers to us the reiliik of
long experience, and tried wifdoin. None
of his principles seem, at sirs view, more
dubious and exceptionable than those which
the text presents. To aftert that sorrow is
preferable to mirth, and the boifCe f mour.-
big to the hotlf offeraJiug; to advise men
to chufe mortification and sadness' when it
is in their power to indulge in joy, may
appear harsh and unreasonable doctrines.
They may, perhaps, be accounted enemies

SE R M. to the innocent enjoyment of life who give
XI'.

countenance to so severe a system, and
thereby increase the gloom which already
fits sufficiently heavy on the condition of
man. But let this censure be suspended,
until we examine with care into the spirit
and meaning of the sentiments here de-
livered.

It is evident that the wile man does not

prefer sorrow, upon its own account, to
mirth; or represent sadness as a fate more
eligible than joy. He confiders it in the
light of discipline only. He views it with
reference to an end. He compares it with
certain improvements which he fipofes it
to produce ; wheln ti'e heart is made bettcr
by the sadness of the countenance, and the
living to lay to hea;t what is the end of all
men. Now, if great and lasting benefits
are found to result from occasional sadness,
these, sure, may be capable of giving it the
preference to ofme fleeting sensations of joy.
The means which he recommends in order
to our obtaining those benefits, are to be ex-
plained according to the principles of found

reason;

reason; and to be understood with those SER M.
limitations which the eastern style, in de- X
livering moral precepts, frequently requires.
He bids us go to the hozfe of mourning ; but
he does not command us to dwell there.
When he prefers sorrow to laughter, he is
not to be understood as prohibiting all mirth;
as requiring us to wear a perpetual cloud on
our brow, and to sequestrate ourselves from
every cheerful entertaiment of social life.
Such an interpretation would be inconsistent
with many other exhortations in his own
writings, which recommend temperate and
innocent joy. It would not suit with the
proper discharge of the duties which be-
long to us as members of society; and
would be mons opposite to the goodness and
benignity of our Creator. The true scope
of his doctrine in this passage is, that there
is a certain temper and state of heart, which
is of far greater consequence to real happi-
ness, than the habitual indulgence of giddy
and thoughtless mirth; that for the attain-
ment and cultivation of this temper, fre-
quent returns of grave refleXtion are necef-

VoL. H. B b fary;

S E R M. fary; that upon this account, it is profitablI

XII.
^X_1 to give admission to those views of human

distress which tend to awaken such reflec-
tion in the mind; and that thus, from the
vicissitudes of sorrow, which we either ex-
perience in our own lot, or sympathise with
in the lot of others, much wisdom and im-
provement may be derived. These are the
sentiments which I purpose at present to
justify and recommend, as most suitable to
the charater of men and of Christians; and
not in the least inconsistent with pleasure,
rightly undertfood.

Among the variety of dispositions which

are to be found in the world, tome indeed
require less of this discipline than others.
There are persons whose tender and deli-
cate sensibility, either derived from nature,
or brought on by repeated afflitions, ren-
ders them too deeply susceptible of every
mournful impression; whose spirits stand
more in need of being supported and cheer-
ed, than of being faddened by the dark
views of human life. In such cafes we are
commanded to lift vp the hlids whic hbang

3 downi

down, anod to confirm the feble knees :. But S E R M.

xm.

this is far from being the common difpofi- XII
tion cf men. Their minds are in general in-
clined to levity, much more than to thought-
ful melancholy; and their hearts more apt
to be contracted and hardened, than to relent
with too much facility. I flhall therefore
endeavour to shew them, what bad inclina-
tions their compliance with Solomon's ad-
vice would correQc; what good dispositions,
with refped to God, their neighbours, and
themselves, it would improve; and how,
upon the whole, his doctrine is verified,
that by the sadness of the countenance the
heart is made better.

I BEGIN by observing, that the temper

recommended in the text suits the present
constitution of things in this world. Had
man been destined for a course of undif-
(urbed enjoyment, perpetual gaiety would
then have corresponded to his tlate; and
pensive thought have been an unnatural
3ntrufion. But in a state where all is che-

I'aiah, xxxv. 3. Hob. xii. 2z.

B b 2 quered

S E R M. quered and mixed, where there is no profpe.
Xl. ritywithout a reverse, and nojoy without its

attending griefs; where from the house of
feasting all must, at one time or other, pass
into the house of mourning, it would be
equally unnatural if no admiflion were given
to grave reflecion. The mind of man must
be attempered to his condition. Providence,
whose wisdom is conspicuous in all its works,
has adjusted with exad proportion the in-
ward powers to the outward state of every
rational being. It has for this purpose im-
planted the serious and sympathetic feelings
in our nature, that they might correspond
with the vicissitudes of sorrow in our lot.
He who endeavours to repel their influence,
or to flifle them in unseasonable mirth, ats
a violent and unnatural part. He firives
with vain effort against the current of
things, contradicts the intentions of his
Maker, and counteracts the original im-
pulses of his own heart.

It is proper also to observe, that as tbe

sadness of the countenance has, in our present
situation, a proper and natural place; so it

is

is requisite to the true enjoyment of plea- s E RM.

XIII.

sure. Worldly and sensual men often re-
mark not, till it be too late, that, by the
studied efforts of conflant repetition, all their
pleasures fail. They draw them off so close
to the dregs, that they become insipid and
nauseous. Hence even in laughter their
heart is forrowfiul, and the end of their mirth
is heaviness *. It is only the interpofal of
serious and thoughtful hours, that can give
any lively sensation to the returns of joy.
I speak not of those thoughtful hours, too
well known to finners, which proceed from
guilty remorse; and which, instead of pre-
paring for future pleasure, damp and sicken
the moment of enjoyment; but of those
which take rife from the mind retreating
into itself, and opening to the sentiments of
religion and humanity. Such hours of
virtuous sadness brighten the gleams of fuc-
ceeding joy. They give, to the temperate
enjoyments of the pious and humane, a re-
fined and delicate relish, to which the hard-
ened and insensible are entire strangers,

* Prov. iv. 13.

B b 3 For

S ER M. For it will be found, that in proportion as.
XiiA. the tender affections of the foul are kept

awake, how much soever they may some-
times difirefs the heart, they preserve it open
likewise to the most agreeable sensations.
He who never knew the sorrows of friend-
Ship, never also knew its joys. He whole
heart cannot relent in the house of mourn-
ing, will, in the molt social hour of the
house of feasting, partake of no more than
the lowvet part of animal pleasure.-
Having premised thee observations, I pro-
ceed to point out the direca effecs of a pro-
per attention to the distresses of life upon
our moral and religious character.

IN the first place, the house of mourn-

ing is calculated to give a proper check to
our natural thoughtlessness and levity. The
indolence of mankind, and their love of
pleasure, spread through all charatcrs and
ranks some degree of aversion to what
is grave and serious. They grasp at any
object, either of business or amufemcnt,
which makes the present moment pass

fmioothly

finoothlyaway; which carries their thoughts s E R M.
abroad, and saves them from the trouble of XII,
reflecing on themselves. With too many,
this palles into a habit of conflant diffipa-
tion. If their fortune and rank allow them
to indulge their inclinations, they devote
themselves to the pursuit of amusement
through all its different forms. The skilful
arrangement of its successive scenes, and the
preparatory study for fLining in each, are
the only exertions on which their under-
standing is employed. Such a mode of life
may keep alive, for a while, a frivolous vi-
vacity. It may improve men in some of
those exteriour accomplishments, which
sparkle in the eyes of the giddy and the
vain; but it must fink them in the esteem
of all the wile. It renders them strangers
to themselves; and useless, if not perni-
cious, to the world. They lose every manly
principle. Their minds become relaxed and
effeminate. All that is great or refpeaable
in the human character is buried under a
mass of trifles and follies.

Bb 4 If

S F. R M. If some measures ought to be taken for
XL. rescuing the mind from this disgraceful le-

vity; if tome principles must be acquired,
which may give more dignity and fteadi-
ness to conduct; where, I pray you, are
there to be looked for ? Not iurely in the
house of feasting, where every object flat-
ters the senses, and strengthens the feduc-
tions to which we are already prone; where
the spirit of diflipation circulates from heart
to heart; and the children of folly mutually
admire and are admired. It is in the fober
and serious house of mourning that the tide
of vanity is made to turn, and a new di-
retion given to the current of thought.
When some affecting incident presents a
strong discovery of the deceitfulness of all
worldly joy, and routes our sensibility to
human woe; when we behold those with
whom we had lately mingled in the house
of feasting, funk by some of the sudden
viciflitudes of life into the vale of misery;
or when, in fad silence, we stand by the
friend whom we had loved as our own foul,
stretched on the bed of death ; then is the

season

season when the world begins to appear in a s E R M.
new light; when the heart opens to virtu- XIII.
ous sentiments, and is led into that train of
reflection which ought to direct life. He
who before knew not what it was to com-
mune with his heart on any serious fubjeet,
now puts the question to himself, for what
purpose he was sent forth into this mortal,
transitory state; what his fate is likely to
be when it concludes; and what judgment
he ought to form of those pleasures which
amuse for a little, but which, he now fees,
cannot save the heart from anguish in the
evil day ? Touched by the hand of thought-
ful melancholy, that airy edifice of bliss,
which fancy had raised up for him, vanishes
away. He beholds, in the place of it, the
lonely and barren desert, in which, fur-
rounded with many a disagreeable object,
he is left musing upon himielf. The time
which he has mif-fpent, and the faculties
which he has misemployed, his foolish le-
vity and his criminal pursuits, all rife in
painful profpeet before him. That un-
known state of existence into which, race

after

S E R M. after race, the children of men pass, strikes

his mind with solemn awe.- Is there no
courle by which he can retrieve his past
errours? Is there no fuperiour power to
which he can look up for aid ? Is there no
plan of condua which, if it exempt him
not from sorrow, can at least procure him
consolation amidst the distressful exigencies
of life.-Such meditations as these, fug..
gestcd by the house of mourning, fre-
quently produce a change on the whole
character. They revive those sparks of
goodness which were nigh being quite ex-
tinguiflicd in the dissipated mind; and give
rife to principles and conduct more rational
in themselves, and more suitable to the hu-
man state.

IN the second place, impressions of this

nature not only produce moral ierioufiefs,
but awaken sentiments of piety, and bring
men into the fanauary of religion. One
might, indeed, imagine that the bleflings
of a prosperous condition would prove the
most natural incitements to devotion; and

thai

that when men were happy in themielves, S E R M.

XIII.

and saw nothing but happiness around them, , _
they could not fail gratefully to acknow-
ledge that God who givcth them all things
richl' to enjoy. Yet such is their corruption,
that they are never more ready to forget
their benefactor, than when loaded with his
benefits. The giver is concealed from their
careless and inattentive view, by the cloud
of his own gifts. When their life conti-
nues to flow in one finooth current un-
ruffled by any griefs; when they neither
receive in their own circumstances, nor al-
low themselves to receive from the circum-
frances of others, any admonitions of hu-
man instability; they not only become
regardless of Providence, but arc in hazard
ofcontemning it. Glorying inthcir flreigtil,
and lifted up by the pride of life into iilp-
posed independence, that impious ienti-
ment, if not uttered by the mouth, yet too
often lurks in the hearts of many, during
their flourishing periods, What is the .l-
mnighty that we jouJdd f-rve him, and what
profit hotild we have if we pray unto him ?

If

s E R M. If such be the tendency of the house of

_ feasting, how necessary is it, that, by some

change in their situation, men should be
obliged to enter into the house of mourn-
ing, in order to recover a proper sense of
their dependent state? It is there, when
forsaken by the gaieties of the world, and
left alone with God, that we are made to
perceivehow awful his government is; how
easily human greatness bends before him;
and how quickly all our designs and mea-
fures, at his interpofal, vanish into no-
thing. There, when the countenance is
fad, and the affecions are softened by grief;
when we fit apart, involved in serious
thought, looking down as from some emi-
nence on those dark clouds that hang over
the life of man, the arrogance of prosperity
is humbled, and the heart melts under the
impreflions of religion. Formerly we were
taught, but now we fee, we feel, how
much we stand in need of an Almighty
Prote&or, amidst the changes of this vain
world. Our foul cleaves to him who de-
Js is not, ,,i l.hors. the aql7iiein of the

9 aZiaeed.,

afliCed. Prayer flows forth of its own ac- s E R M.
cord from the relenting heart, that he may ,
be our God, and the God of our friends in
distress; that he may never forsake us while
we are sojourning in this land of pilgrim-
age; may strengthen us under its cala-
mities, and bring us hereafter to those ha-
bitations of reft, where we, and they whom
we love, may be delivered from the trials
which all are now doomed to endure. The
discoveries of his mercy, which he has made
in the Gospel of Christ, are viewed with
joy, as so many rays of light sent down
from above to dispel, in some degree, the
surrounding gloom. A Mediator and In-
terceffor with the Sovereign of the uni-
verse, appear comfortable names; and the
refurreaion of the just becomes the power-
ful cordial of grief. In such moments as
these, which we may justly call happy mo-
ments, the foul participates of all the plea-
fures of devotion. It feels the power of
religion to support and relieve. It is soft-
ened, without being broken. It is full,
and it pours itself forth; pours itself forth,

if

SE R M. if we may be allowed to use the expression,
XIII.

into the bosom of its merciful Creator.

IN the third place, such serious senti-

ments produce the happiest effect upon our
disposition towards our fellow-creatures, as
well as towards God. It is a common and
just observation, that they who have lived
always in affluence and ease, firangers to
the miseries of life, are liable to contract
hardness of heart with respeCt to all the
concerns of others. Wrapped up in them-
selves, and their own pleasures, they be-
hold with indifference the most affecting
scenes of distress. Habituated to indulge
all their desires without control, they be-
come impatient of the leait provocation or
offence; and are ready to trample on their
inferiours, as if they were creatures of a
different species from themselves. Is this
an amiable temper, or luch as becomes a
man? When appearing in others, do we
not view it with much displeasure ? When
imputed to ourselves, can we avoid account-
ing it a fevcre reproach ?

By

By the experience of distress, this arro- SS ERM.

iant insensibility of temper is most effec- --
tually corrected; as the remembrance of
our own sufferings naturally prompts us to
fel for others when they susser. But if
Providence has been so kind as not to sub-
jed us to much of this discipline in our own
lot, let us draw improvement from the
harder lot of others. Let us sometimes Rtep
alide from the finooth and flowery paths
in which we are permitted to walk, in
order to view the toilsome march of our
fellows through the thorny desert. By vo-
luntarily going into the house of mourning;
by yielding to the sentiments which it ex-
cites, and mingling our tears with those of
the afflicEed, we shall acquire that humane
icnfibility which is one of the highest or-
naments of the nature of man. Perceiving
how much the common diftrefl'es of life
place us all on a level, and render the high
;,id the low, the rich and the poor, com-
panlions in misfortune and mortality, we
'hall learn to set no man at nought, and,
.eaf of any, our afflited brother. Preju-

dices

SE R M. dices will be extinguished, and benevoe
XIII.

lence opened and enlarged, when looking
around on the multitude of men, we con-
fider them as a band of fellow-travellers
in the valley of woe, where it ought to be
the office of every one to alleviate, as much
as possible, the common burden.-- While
the vain and the licentious are revelling in
the midst of extravagance and riot, how
little do they think of those scenes of fore
distress which are going on at that moment
throughout the world; multitudes ftrug-
gling for a poor subsistence to support the
wife and the children whom they love, and
who look up to them with eager eyes for
that bread which they can hardly procure;
multitudes groaning under sickness in de-
solate cottages, untended and unmourned;
many, apparently in a better situation of
life, pining away in secret with concealed
griefs; families weeping over the beloved
friends whom they have loft, or, in all the
bitterness of anguifl, bidding those who are
just expiring the last adieu 1

May

May we not appeal to the heart of every s E R M.

good man, nay almost to the heart of every
man who has not divested himself of his
natural feelings, whether the admission of
such views of human life might not, some-
times atleaft, furnish a more worthy employ-
ment to the mind, than that mirth of folj,
which Solomon compares to the crackling
of thorns utnder a pot*; the transient burst
of unmeaning joy; the empty explosion
of giddiness and levity? Those sallies of
jollity in the house of feafling are often
forced from a troubled mind; like flafles
from the black cloud, which, after a mo-
mentary effulgence, are ucceeded by thicker
darkness. Whereas compassionate assec-
tions, even at the time when they draw
tears from our eyes for human misery,
convey fatisfation to the heart. The gra-
cious appointment of Heaven has ordained
that sympathetic pains should always be
accompanied with a certain degree of plea-
fire; on purpose that we might be more

' Eccles. vii. 6.
VOL . IIC . nterefted

s ER M. interested in the cafe of the distressed, and

xlII.
k-yj~ that, by this mysterious bond, man might

be linked closer to man. The inward satis-
faaion which belongs to the compassionate
affections is, at the fame time, heightened
by the approbation which they receive from
our reason; and by the consciousness which
they afford us of feeling what men and
Christians ought to feel.

IN the fourth place, the disposition re-

commended in the text, not only improves
us in piety and humanity, but likewise
aflifts us in felf-governmcnt, and the due
moderation of our desires. The house of
mourning is the school of temperance and
sobriety. Every wife man will find it for
his interest to enter into it sometimes of his
own accord, left otherwise he be compelled
to take up his dwelling there. Seasonable
interruptions of our pleasures are neceffaryto
their prolongation. For, continued scenes
of luxury and indulgence haften to a me-
lancholy issue. The house of featsing too
often becomes an avenue to the honfe of

I mourning.

mourning. Short, to the licentious, is the s ERM.
interval between them; and speedy the r
transition from the one to the other.

But supposing that, by prudent manage-

ment, the men of pleasure could avoid the
pernicious effets which intemperance and
dissoluteness are likely to produce on their
health or their fortune, can they also pre-
vent those disorders which such habits will
introduce into their minds ? Can they
escape that wrath of the Almighty, which
will infallibly pursue them for their fins
both here and hereafter? For whence, so
much as from the unchecked pursuit of
pleasure, do all those crimes arifc which
stain the charaaers of men with the dcepeft
guilt, and expose them to the fevcreft judg-
ments of Heaven ? Whence, then, is the
corrective of thole mischiefs to be fought,
but from such discipline as shall moderate
that intemperate admiration of the world
which gave rife to the evil ? By repairing
sometimes to the house of mourning, you
would chasten the looseness of fancy, abate
the eagerness of passion, and afford scope to

C c 2 reason

S F It M. reason for exerting her restraining power3.
A_,l_. You would behold this world stripped of

its false colours, and reduced to its proper
level. Many an important inftrution you
would receive from the humiliation of the
proud, the mortification of the vain, and
the sufferings of the voluptuous, which you
would fee exemplified before you, in the
chambers of sorrow, of sickness, and of
death. You would then be taught to re-
joice as though yout rejoicel not, and to wealr
as tholugh yon1 wiccLd lt ; that is, neither
in joy, nor in grief, to run to excess; but
to zfe this 'world so as riot to abife it; con-
templating the faJlion thereof as passing

away.
tiWO}'.

Moreover, you would there learn the

important lesson of suiting your mind, be-
fore-hand, to what you had reason to ex-
pec from the world ; a leflbn too seldom
studied by mankind, and to the neglect of
which, much of their miie;ry, and much of
their guilt, is to be charged. By turning
away their eyes from the dark fide of life,
by looking at the world only in one light,

and

and that a flattering one, they form their s E R M.

XIII.

measures on a false plan, and are neccifa- _
rily deceived and betrayed. Hence, the
vexation of succeeding disappointment and
blasted hope. Hence, their criminal impa-
tience of life, and their bitter acculations of
God and man; when, in truth, they have
reason to accuse only their own folly.-
Thou who wouldfl as like a wife man, and
build thy house on the rock, and not on the
sand, contemplate human life not only in
the sunshine, but in the shade. Frequent
the house of mourn'ng, as well as the house
of mirth. Study the nature of that state in
which thou art placed; and balance its joys
with its sorrows. Thou feeft that the cup
which is held forth to the whole human
race, is mixed. Of its bitter ingredients,
expect that thou art to drink thy portion.
Thou leeft the storm hovering every where
in the clouds around thee. Be not surprised
if on thy head it fliall break. Lower, there-
fore, thy fails. Dismiss thy florid hopes;
and come forth prepared either to a's or to
susser, according as Heaven shall decree,

C c 3 Thus

S E R M. Thus {halt thou be excited to take the pro-

_ pereft measures for defence, by endeavour-

ing to secure an interest in his favour, who,
in the time of trouble, can hide thee in his
pavilion. Thy mind shall adjust itself to
follow the order of his providence. Thou
shalt be enabled, with equanimity and ftea-
diness, to hold thy course through life.

IN the fifth place, by accustoming our-

selves to such serious views of life, our ex-
ceffive fondness for life itself will be mo-
derated, and our minds gradually formed
to wish and to long for a better world. If
we know that our continuance here is to be
short, and that we are intended by our
Maker for a more lassing state, and for em-
ployments of a nature altogether different
from those which now occupy the busy, or
amuse the vain, we must surely be con-
vinced that it is of the highest consequence
to prepare ourselves for so important a
change. This view of our duty is fre-
quently held up to us in the sacred writings;
and hence religion becomes, though not a

morose,

morose, yet a grave and solemn principle, SERM.
calling off the attention of men from light XII
pursuits to those which are of eternal mo-
ment. What is a man profited if he f2all
gain the whole world, and lose his own foul ?
if he shall lead a life of thoughtless mirth
on earth, and exclude himself from eternal
felicity in heaven ? Wolldly affection and
sensual pleasure depress all our higher
powers. They form an unnatural union
between the human foul and this earth,
which was only designed for its temporary
abode. They attach it too flrongly to ob-
jets from which it muf shortly part. They
alienate its desires from God and heaven,
and dejea it with slavish and unmanly fears
of death. Whereas, by the discipline of
religious seriousness, it is gradually loosened
from the fetters of sense. Assisted to disco-
ver the vanity of this world, it rites above
it; and in the hours of fober thought, cul-
tivates connection with those divine and
immortal objects, among which it is de-
higned to dwell.

Cc 4 ENOtU II

S ER M. ENOUGH has now been said to convince
,_ .. any thinking person of the justice and rca-

fonablencfs of the maxims in the text; and
to show, that, on various occasions, fotrroiw
may be better than laughter. Wouldfl thou
acquire the habit of recollection, and fix the
principles of thy condut ; wouldst thou be
led up to thy Creator and Redeemer, and
be formed to sentiments of piety and devo-
tion; wouldst thou be acquainted with those
mild and tender affecions which delight the
compatfionate and humane; wouldfl thou
have the power of sensual appetites tamed
and corrected, and thy foul raited above the
ignoble love of life, and fear of death? Go,
my brother, go-not to seenes of pleasure
and riot, not to the house of feasting and
mirth-but to the silent house of mourn-
ing; and adventure to dwell for a while
among objcats that will soften thy heart.
Contemplate the lifeless remains of what
once was fair and flourilhing. Bring home
to thyself the vicissitudes of life. Recall the
remembrance of the friend, the parent, or
the child, whom thou tenderly lovedls. Look

7 back

back on the days of former years; and think s E R IM.
on the companions of thy youth, who now
sleep in the dust. Let the vanity, the muta-
bility, and the sorrows of the human estate,
rife in fuli prospeCt before thee; and though
sty countenance may be lmade fd, thy heart
/hall be made better. This fadncfs, though
for the present it dejecs, yet Ihall in the
end fortify thy spirit; inspiring thee with
filch fentinents, and prompting such refo-
lutions as shall enable thee to enjoy, with
more real advantage, the reft of life. Dif-
politions of this nature form one part of
the character of those molurners whom our
Saviour hath pronounced blefj'd; and of
those to whom it is promised, that sot'ing
in tears, they J7ail reap in joy . A great
difference there is between being serious
and melancholy; and a melancholy too
there is of that kind which deserves to be
sometimes indulged.

Religion hath on the whole provided

for every good man abundant materials of
consolation and relief. How dark soever

* Math. v. 4. Psalm cxxvi. 5.

the

SERM. the present face of nature may appear, it

n, dispels the darkness, when it brings into

view the entire system of things, and ex-
tends our survey to the whole kingdom of
God. It represents what we now behold
as only a part, and a small part, of the ge-
neral order. It assures us, that though here,
for wife ends, misery and sorrow are per-
mitted to have place, these temporary evils
shall, in the end, advance the happiness of
all who love God, and are faithful to their
duty. It shows them this mixed and con-
fused scene vanishing by degrees away, and
preparing the introduction of that state,
where the house of mourning shall be shut
up for ever; where no tears are seen, and
no groans heard; where no hopes are fruf-
trated, and no virtuous conneaions diffolv-
ed; but where, under the light of the divine
countenance, goodness shall flourish in per-
petual felicity. Thus, though religion may
occasionally chasten our mirth with sadness
of countenance, yet under that sadness it
allows not the heart of good men to fink,
It calls upon them to rejoice, because the

Lord

Lord reigneth who is their Rock, and the moloJ S ER M.
high God who is their Redeemer. Reason _____
likewise joins hervoice with that of religion;
forbidding us to make peevish and unrea-
fonable complaints of human life, or inju-
rioufly to ascribe to it more evil than it
contains. Mixed as the present state is, ihe
pronounces, that generally, if not always,
there is more happiness than misery, more
pleasure than pain, in the condition of
man.

# SERMON XIV. On the divine GOVERNMENT of the PASSIONS of MEN. PSALM lxxvi. 10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee; the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain.

[ 396 ]

SERMON XIV.
On the divine GOVERNMENT of the

PASSIONS of MEN.

PSALM Ixxvi. I0.

Surely the wrath of manll fJallpra thee;
the remainder of wrathJhJalt thou rcJfrain,

SE RM. T,'HIS Psalm appears to have been
XIV. I composed on occasion of tome re-

markable deliverance obtained by the Jewifl
nation. It is generally understood to have
been written in the reign of Hezekiah, and
to refer to the formidable invasion of Judea
by Sennacherib; when the angel of the
Lord, in one night, discomfited the whole
Assyrian host, and smote them with sudden
deftrufion. To this interposition of the

divine

divine arm, those expreflions in the context sE R M.
may naturally be applied; Tlhcn brake he XIV
the arrows of the bow, theJhield, thef-word,
and the battle. Thei flot-hearted arejkPoiced;
they have J7pt their J.eep; an.d none of the
men of night have funld their hands. At
thy rebulke, 0 God of 'facob, both the chariot
and the horse arc cAlz into a deadJleep. In
the text we have the wife and religious
reflection of the Psalmist upon the violent
designs which had been carried on by the
enemies of his country, and upon the ifiue
to which Providence had brought them.
Surely the wrath of man JJhall praise thee.
By the wrath of man, we are to understand
all that the impetuolity of human passions
can devise or execute; the projecs of am-
bition and resentment, the rage of perfccu-
tion, the fury of war ; the dilbrders which
violence produces in private life, and the
public commotions which it excites in the
world. All these ihall praise God, not wvith
their intention and design, nor by their na-
tive tendency; but by those wife and good
purposes, which his providence makes them

accomn-

s E R M. actompifhm; from their polfon extrading

XIV.
^--_ health, and converting things, which in

themselves are pernicious, into instruments
of his glory, and of public benefit: So that,
though the wrath of man worketh not the
righteousness of God, it is nevertheless forced
and compelled to minister to his praise.
The Psalmist adds, the remainder of wrath
Jhalt thou restrain; that is, God will allow
scope to the wrath of man as far as it an-
fwers his good purposes, and is subservient
to his praise; the reft of it shall be curbed
and bound up. When it would attempt to
go beyond its prescribed limit, he fays to it,
as to the waters of the ocean, HithertoJhalt
thou come, but nofarther ; and here fIall thy
proud waves beJ ayed.

All this shall be fully verified and de-

clared by the last issue of things; when we
shall be able more clearly to trace the di-
vine administration through its several fleps,
by feeing the consummation of the whole.
In some cafes, it may be reserved for this
period to unfold the mysterious wifdoin
of Heaven, But in general, as much of

the

the divine conduct is at present manifest, as S E R M.
gives just ground for the affertionin the text. xvj
In the sequel of this discourse, I flall endea-
vour to illustrate and confirm it. I flall
show in what manner the wrath of man is
made to praise the power, the wisdom, the
justice, and the goodness of God.

I BEGIN with this observation, That in

order to accomplish the great purposes car-
ried on by the Government of the Universe,
it is necessary that the divine perfetions be
displayed before mankind in a sensible and
striking manner. We are not to conceive
the Supreme Being as hereby seeking praise
to himself, from a principle of ostentation or
vain-glory. Independent and felf-fufficient,
he refts in the enjoyment of his own beati-
tude. His praise consists in the general
order and welfare of his creation. This
end cannot be attained, unless mankind be
made to feel the subjeCtion under which
they are placed. They must be taught to
admire and adore their Sovereign. They

must

s E R M. mufl be overawed by the view of a high
X'V, hand, which can at pleasure control their

acions, and render them subservient to pur-
poses which they neither foresaw nor intend-
ed. Hence the propriety of God's making
the wrath of man to prayfc hidm We easily
conceive in what manner the heavens and
the earth are said to praile God, as they are
flanding monuments of that supreme per-
fetion which is ditplayed in their creation.
The virtues of good men obviously praise
him, by exhibiting his image, and reflecing
back his glory. But when even the vices
and inordinate paflions of bad men are made
to praise him, in consequence of the useful
purposes which they are compelled to ac-
compliflh, this, in a particular manner, dif-
tinguifles and signalizes a divine hand; this
opens a more wonderful profpel of the ad-
ministration of Heaven, than if all its fulb-
jeEts had been loyal and willingly obedient,
and the course of human affairs had pro-
ceeded in a quiet and regular tcuour.

I. THiE

I. TnE wrath of man redounds to the S E RM.

xiv.

praise of divine power. It brings it forth X_
with full and awful lustre, to the vicw of
mankind. To reign with sovereign com-
mand anidft the most turbulent and difor-
dered ifate of things, both in the natural
and moral world, is the peculiar glory of
omnipotence. Hence God is described in
Scripture asfitting on the fIood, riding on the
wings of the wind, dwelling in the darknlcf
and the tempest; that is, making the most
violent powers in the universe minister to
his will, giving them scope, or rcftraining
them, according as Iuits the purposes of his
dominion. As he fills, at his pleasure, the
raging of the fcas, and the noif of their
waves, in like manner he Jlills the tumults
of the peoplc. When the passions of mnrt
are most inflamed, and their designs just
ripe for burning into execution, often, by
some unexpected interposition, he calls
upon the world to observe that there is one
higher than the highest on earth, who can
frustrate their devices in a moment, and
convmand the earth to be fill before hir.

VoL.. II. D d Proud

SERM. Proud fleets, deflined to carry destruction
xlv. to neighbouring kingdoms, may cover the

ocean. He blows with his wind, and they
are scattered. Mighty armies may go forth
to the field in all the glory of human
strength; but the iffles of battle are with
him. He suspends on high the invisible
balance which weighs the fate of nations.
According as the scale inclines, he gives to
tome flight event the power of deciding the
contefl. He clouds the {ky with darkness,
or opens the windows of heaven to let
forth their flood. He dejects the hearts of
the brave with sudden terrour, and renders
the hands of the firong weak and unper.
forming at the critical moment. A thou-
fiand unseen ministers fland ready to be the
instruments of his power, in humbling the
pride, and checking the efforts of the wrath
of man. Thus, in the inftancc of haughty
Sennacherib, 'and that boafled tempest of
wrath which he threatened to pour upon
all the Jcwifhi nation; I will put my hook,
fays the Almighty, in tby nc, and my bridle
in tS, lips, anld 1 will tlwn thee back by the

li'"j'

way by which thou cameJi '. In that night s E R MI.

XIV.

the destroying angel finote the host, and
he departed with Jlamic of face to his own1
land. TWhen the heathen rage, andi the peo-
ple imagine a vain thing; wheCJ the ki;ns cf
the earth Jft then 'flves, and its rulers take
council together, He that f ittetb il the hea-
vens Jfiall latgh; the Lord fJall holi them
in der.ifoon 1-.

II. THE wirath of man is made to praise
the wisdom as well as the power of God.
Nothing displays more remarkably the ad-
mirable counsel of Heaven, than its arrang-
ing the train of events in such a manner,
that the unruly passions of the wicked fliall
contribute to overthrow their own designs.
History abounds with examples of their
being rendered the unconscious ministers of
Providence, to accomplish purposes dircetly
opposite to those which they had in view.
Thus the cruelty of the sons of Jacob, in
pursuing the deftruaion of their brother

*z Kings, xix. 28. t Psalm ii. l, 2, 3.

D d 2 Josep,

S E R M. Joseph, became the means of effe&ing his

high advancement. Thus the wrath of
Pharaoh against the Israelites, and his un-
just attempts to detain them in bondage,
proved the occasion of bringing them forth
from the land of slavery, with signal marks
of the favour of Heaven. Thus the inhu.
man plan which Haman had formed for
ruining Mordecai, and extirpating the
whole Jewish nation, paved the way for
Mordecai's high promotion, and for the
triumph of the Jews over all their ene-
mies.

After this manner the Almighty fiaretl

the wicked in the works of their hands; and
erecs his own council upon the ruin of
theirs. Those events which, viewed apart,
appear as spots in the divine adminiiftratio,
when confidered in connexion with a!l
their consequences, are often found to give
it additional luktre. The beauty and mag-
nificence of the universe are much height-
ened, by its being an extensive and compli-
cated system; in which a variety of springs
are made to play, and a multitude of dif-

ferent

ferent movements are, with most admirable s E R M.

XIV.

art, regulated and kept in order. Inter- _y
fering interests, and jarring passions, are in
such manner balanced against one another;
such proper checks are placed on the vio-
lence of human pursuits; and the wrath of
man is made so to hold his course, that how
opposite soever the several motions seem to
be, yet they concur and meet at last in
one direction. While, among the multi-
tudes that dwell on the face of the earth,
some are submissive to the divine authority;
some rile up in rebellion against it; others,
absorbed in their pleasures and pursuits, are
totally inattentive to it; they are all so
moved by an imperceptible influence from
above, that the zeal of the dutiful, the
wrath of the rebellious, and the indifference
of the careless, contribute finally to the
glory of God. All are governed in such a
way as suits their powers, and is confident
with rational freedom, yet all are fubjeded
to the necessity of fulfilling the eternal
purposes of Heaven. This depth of di-
vine wisdom in the administration of the

D d 3 universe,

S ERM. univerfc, exceeds all human comprehein
,XIV, sion, and affords everlasting subjea of ado-

ration and praise.

III. TIIE wvralt of nan praises thejufiice

of God, by being employed as the inltru-
ment of inflicing punishment upon finners,
Did bad men trace the course of events in
their life with attentive eye, they might
easily discover the greatest part of the dif-
afters which they susser, to. be brought upon
them by their own ungoverned pafions.
The succession of causes and effedts is so
contrived by Providence, that the wrath
which they meant to pour forth on others,
frequently recoils, by its effets, upon them-
selves. But supposing them to escape those
external mischiefs which violent paflions na-
turally occasion, they cannot evade the in-
ternal misery which they produce. The
constitution of things is framed with such
profound wisdom, that the divine laws, in
every event, execute themselves against
the finner, and carry their sanction in their
own bosom. The Supreme Being has no

occafioi,

occasion to unlock the prisons of the deep, S E R l.
or to call down the thunder from heaven, ---
in order to punish the wrath of man. lie
carries on the adminifiration ofjuftice with
more simplicity and dignity. It is fufficicnt
that he allow those fierce passions which
render bad men the disturbers of others, to
operate on their own hearts. He delivers
them up to themselves, and they become
their own tormentors. Before the world
they may disguise their sufferings; but it is
well known, that to be inwardly torn with
dclpite, revenge, and wrathful paflions, is
the most intense of all milery. In thus
conneting the punifiment with the crime,
making their own wickfinefi to rcprove
them, and their baclqidinigs to correl thclm,
the avenging hand of a righteous Govern-
our is conspicuous; and thus the obfcrva-
tion of the Plalmift is fully verified ; the
wicked have drawn oz t their sword and
bent their bow, to cai doLwn thJe oor and
needy ; but their sword fiall enter into thlir
owin heart *.

. Psalm xxxvii. 1 , ,j.

D d 4 The

E R M. The wrath osman also praises the julice
aL,-_ of God in the punishment of other crimi-

nals, as well as of the wrathful themselves.
Ambitious and lawless men are let loose
upon each other, that, without any super-
natural interposition, they may fulfil the
just vengeance of Heaven in their mutual
deftruaion. They may occasionally be
cemented together by conspiracy against
the just; but as no firm nor laiting bond
can unite them, they become at last the
prey of mutual jealousy, strife, and fraud.
For a time they may go on, and seem to
prosper. The justice of Heaven may ap-
pear to slumber; but it is awake, and only
·waits till the measure of their iniquity be
full. God represents himself in Scripture
as sometimes permitting wickedness to arise
to an overgrown height, on purpose that
its ruin maybe the greater, and more exem-
plary. He fays to the tyrant of Egypt,
thatfor this cause he bad raied him ,t, that
is, had allowed him to prosper and be ex-
alted, that he might JJew il him his dopowcr;
find that his name might be declare d throtuh-

C9 ott

out all the earth B'. The divine adminiftra s E R M.

XIV.

tion is glorified in the punishment contrived ,_.
for the workers of iniquity, as well as in the
reward prepared for the righteous. This
is the purpojle which the Lord hath purposed
upon all the earth; and this is the hand that is
J retchedforth over all the nations J'.

IV. THE wrath of man is made to praise

the goodness of God. This is the most
unexpected of its effects; and therefore
requires to be the most fully illustrated.
All the operations of the government of the
Deity may be ultimately resolved into good-
ness. His power, and wisdom, and justice,
all conduce to general happiness and order.
Among the means which he uses for ac-
compliffing this end, it will be found, that
the wrath of man, through his over-ruling
diredion, possesses a considerable place.

Firfi, It is employed by God as an useful

instrument of discipline and correction to
the virtuous. The- storms which ambition
and pride raise among mankind, he permits

i Exod, ix. i6, - Isaiah, xiv. 26.

with

S E R M. with the fame intention that he fends forth

XIV.
_ ,ly tempests among the elements; to clear the

atmosphere of noxious vapours, and to pu-
rify it from that corruption w:hich all things
contraa by too much rcit. When wicked
men prevail in their designs, and exercifc
the power which they have gained with a
heavy and oppreflive hand, the virtuous are
apt to exclaim, in bitterness of foul, Where
is the Lord? and where the sceptre of
righteousness and truth? Hath God forgotten
to be gracious ? or doth he indeed fee, and
is there knowledge in the MoJt Hligh ?-
Their oppressors are, in truth, no more
than the ministers of God to them for good,
He fees that they fRand in need of corretion,
and therefore raises up enemies against them,
in order to cure the intemperance of pro-
fperity; and to produce, in the serious
hours of afflilion, proper reflecions upon
their duty, and their palt errours.

In this light the disturbers of the earth

are often represented in Scripture, as
scourges in the hand of God, employed to
inflict chastisement upon a degenerating

people.

people. They are commifioned for the s ER h.
execution of righteous and.wife purposes, ._J
concealed from themselves; and when their
commlifion is fulfilled, they are recalled, and
destroyed. Of this' we have a remarkable
example in the use which God made of the
king of Assyria with refpe& to the people
of Israel; I 'will fend him agaaili an hlpo-
critical nation, and againfl the people of my
wrath will I give him a cha;ge, to take the
.poil, and to take the prey. ]Iowbeit, he
mcleaeth notfo ; neither doth his heart think
jo; but it is in his heart to de/fro , and ctt
off nations not a few. ITherifore it jhall
come to pass, that when the Lord hath per-
formed his whole work zpon mnount Zion and
on Jerifalem, I cill puniJi the fruit of the
Jlout heart of the king of Ilj'ria, and the glory
of his high looks *. In vain, then, doth the
wrath of man lift itself up against God. He
faith, by the flrecgth of 2my hand I have done
it, and by mny wJidor , for I am prudent.
Shall the ax boaqf itself against him that hew-
tbh therewith ? orJ7jall tbhefaw magnif3i it-

* Isaiah, x. 6, 7. 1:.

Jfe

s E R M. felfagaSzi bhim thatfiJac!h it ? All things,
XIV, whether they will it or not, mizj work

together forgood to them that love God. The
wrath of man, among the reft, fills up the
place afligned to it by the ordination of
Heaven. The violent enemy, the proud
conqueror, and the oppreflive tyrant, possess
only the fame station with the famine, the
pestilence, and the flood. Their triumphs
are no more than the accomplishment of
God's corretion; and the remailder of their
wrath Jflall be restrain.

SECONDLY, God makes the wrath of

,man contribute to the benefit of the vir-
tuous, by rendering it the means of im-
proving and signalizing their graces; and of
raising them, thereby, to higher honour and
glory. Had human affairs proceeded in an
orderly train, and no opposition been made
to religion and virtue by the violence of the
wicked, what room would have been left
for some of the highelt and molt generous
exertions of the foul of man ? How many
Shining examples of fortitude, constancy,

and

and patience, would have been loft to the s xVM
world? What a field of virtues peculiar to U
a state of discipline had lain uncultivated ?
Spirits of a higher order possess a state of
established virtue, that stands in need of no
such trials and improvements. But to us,
who are only under education for such a
slate, it belongs to pass through the furnace,
that our fouls may be tried, refined, and
brightened. We muff stand the confli&,
that we may be graced and crowned as con-
querors. The wrath of man opens the field
to glory; calls us forth to the most diftin-
guifhed exercise of aaive virtue, and forms
us to all those fuifering graces which are
among the highest ornaments of the human
foul. It is thus, that the illustrious band of
true patriots and heroes, of confessors and
martyrs, have been set forth to the admira-
tion of all ages, as lights of the world;
while the rage and fury of enemies, instead
of bearing them down, have only served to
exalt and dignify them more.

THIRDLY, the wrath of man is often made
to advance the temporal prosperity of the

righteous.

SERM. righteous. The occasional distresses which
XV-, it brings upon them, frequently lay the

foundation of their future success. The vi-
olence with which wicked men pursue their
resentment, defeats its own purpose; and
engages the world on the fide of the vir-
tuous, whom they persecute. The attempts
of malice to blacken and defame them,
bring forth their characters with more ad-
vantage to the view of impartial beholders.
The extremities to which they are reduced
by injustice and oppression, rouse their cou-
rage and aCtivity; and often give occasion
to such vigorous efforts in their just defence,
as overcome all oppotition, and terminate
in prosperity and success. Even in cafes
where the wrath of mani appears to prevail
over the peaceable and the just, it is fre-
quently, in its ifiue, converted into a bless-
ing. How many have had reason to be
thankful, for being disappointed by their
enemies in designs which they earnefrly
pursued, but which, if filccefsfully accom-
plifhed, they have afterwards seen would
have occasioned their ruin? Whoso is wife,

5 and

and w ill obfirve thcJfr tlhings, even he Jhall S E R M.
undlafjiand the ioving-kind.efs of the Lord A. xv.

While the wrath of man thus praises God

by the advantages which it is made to bring
to good men as individuals, the divine hand
is equally apparent in the similar cffects
which it is appointed to produce to nations
and societies. When wars and commo-
tions shake the earth, when factions rage,
and intestine divisions embroil kingdoms
that before were flourishing, Providence
seems, at first view, to have abandoned
public affairs to the misrule of human pas-
lions. Yet from the midst of this confusion
order is often made to spring; and from
these mischiefs lafding advantages to arise.
By such convulsions, nations are routed
fiom that dangerous lethargy into which
flowing wealth, long peace, and growing
cifeminacy of manners had funk them.
They are awakened to discern their true
interests; and taught to take proper mea-
fiures for security and dc!fnce againfl all
their foes. Inveterate prejudices are cor-

* Pfhin cvii. 3e.ed

reeted;

S E R M. reded; and latent fourccs of danger are dif-

.-.--i covered. Public spirit is called forth; and

larger views of national happiness are form-
ed. The corruptions to which every go-
vernment is liable, are often rectified by
a ferment in the political body, as noxious
humours in the animal frame are carried off
by the shock of a difeale. Attempts made
against a wife and well-eftablifhed civil con.
ftitution tend in the iffiue to strengthen it;
and the disorders of licentiousness and sac-
tion, teach men more highly to prize the
blessings of tranquillity and legal protection.

FOURTIILY, the wrath of man, when it

breaks forth in the persecution of religion,
praises the divine goodness, by being ren-
dered conducive to the advancement of truth,
and propagation of religion in the world.
The church of God, since the days of its
infancy, hath never been entirely exempted
from the wrath of the world; and in those
ages, during which it was most exposed to
that wrath, it hath always flourilhed the
most. In vain the policy and the rage of

men

men united their efforts to extinguiflh thi sE RM.
divile light. Though all the four winds , XI
blew againfl it, it only hlone brighter,
and flamed higher. Many waters could
not quench it, nor all thc fJoods drown it.
The constancy and fortitude of thofc who
suffered for the truth, had a much greater
effea in increasing the number of converts,
than all the terrour and cruly of perfecu-
tors in diminifhng it. By this means the
wrath of man was made to turn against it-
self to the deftru&ion of its own purpose;
like waves, which, aflaulting a rock witl
impotent fury, difover its immoveable fia-
bility, while they daih themselves in pieces
at its feet.

I SHALL only add one other inflance of

the wrath of man praising God, by accom-
plifling ends of most extenive benefit to
mankind. Never did the rage and malice
of the wicked imagine that they had ob-
tained a more complete triumph, than in
the death of Jesus Christ. When they had
executed their purpose of making him susser

Vor. I. E e as

SER M. as a malefactor, they were confident tllat
i_,_ they had extinguiflied Iis name, and dil-

comfited his followers for ever. Behold
how feeble are the efforts of the wrath of
man against the dccree of I-eaven! All
that they intended to overthrow, they mos:
cffeCually cftab!iflhed. The death of Christ
was, in the councils of heaven, the firiln
of everlafing life to the faithful. The crols
on which he fufered with apparent igno-
miny, became the standard of eternal honour
to him; the ensign under which his fol-
lowers allembled, and triumphed. He who,
at lls plealure, re/irains the rcmainder of
'vralth, iuffered the rage of our Saviour's
enemies to suggest no other things to them
than what, long before, lie had deternined,
and his prophets had foretold. They all
confpire(l to render the whole fccne of
Chrilt's sufferings exadly conformable to
the original predited plan of divine mercy
.ndl goodness; and each of them contri-
buted his share to accomplish that great un-
dertaking, which none of them in the le;l't
underflood, or meant to promote.- So re-

markable

markable an instance as this, fully afcer- SER RM.

SIV.

tained in Scripture, of the wrath of man v
ministering to the designs of Heaven, ought
to be frequently in our eye; as an exem-
plification of the condu& of Providence in
many other cafes, where we have not so
much light afforded us for tracing its ways.

BY this indusion of particulars, tile
ldocrine contained in the text is plainly and
fully verified. Wec have seen, that tlhe dif-
orders which the pride and paflions of men
occalion in the world, though they take rife
from the corruption of human nature in
this fallen state, yet are so over-ruled by Pro-
vidence, as to redound to his honour and
glory who governs all. They illtftrate be-
fore the world the divine perfections in the
adminitration of the univerle. They serve
the purpoifs of moral and religious im-
provement to the fouls of men. BIY a secret
tendency, they advance the welfare ofthofe
wvhom they appear to threaten with evil.
..i'cly0, 0 Go.d !the C',rail oJffi j? /lan lpraifLi
.l; /R e r'cmai, d of wralth iablt thou re-

E c 2 Jfrain,

SE RM. ,frain.-In thy hand it is; and Thou neve

XIV.
ay- letteft it forth but in weight and meafurc.

It is wild and intractable in its nature; biut
Thou tamest it. It is blind and headlong
in its impulse; but Thou direceft it. 1i
struggles continually to break its chain; but
Thou confineft it; Thou retrcncheft all the
superfluity of its filry.-- Let us now con-
lider, what improvement is to be made oi
this meditation on the ways of Providence.

IN the first place, Let it lead us to a reli-

gious contemplation of the hand of God
in all the tranfadions of the world. In the
ordinary course of human affairs, we 1e-
hold a very mixed and busy scene; the
passions of men variously agitated, and new
changes daily taking place upon this stage
of time. We behold peace and war alter-
nately returning; the fortunes of private
men riling and falling; and states and na-
tions partaking of the fame vicissitude. In
all this, if we attend only to the operation
of external causes, and to the mere rotation
of events, we view no more than the ina-

nimate

nilatte part of nature; we flop at the fur- s E k M.
face of things; we contemplate the great ,
I ,pctacle which is presented to us, not with
the eyes of rational and intelligent beings.
The life and beauty of the universe arifcs
firom the view of that wisdom and goodness
which animates and conducs the whole,
and unites all the parts in one great dc-
sign. There is an eternal Mind who puts
all those wheels in motion; Himself remain-
ing for ever at reft. Nothing is void of
God. Even in the passions and ragings of
men, He is to be found; and where they
imagine they guide themselves, they are
guided and controlled by his hand. What
solemn thoughts and devout aflfEions ought
this meditation to inspire; when in view-
ing the affairs of the world, we attend not
merely to the adings of men, but to the
ways of God ; and confider ourselves, and
all our concerns, as included in his high
adminifiration.

IN hle second place, The dodrine which
has been illustrated should prevent us from

E e 3 censuring

SE R,.. censuring Providence, on account of any

xIv. n
e- - s£eeming disorders and evils which at present

take place in the world. The various in-
flances which have been pointed out in this
dilcourfe, of human passion and wickedness
rendered subservient to wife and useful ends,
,ive us the highcf reason to conclude, that
in all other cales of seeming evil, the like
ends are carried on. This ought to iatisfy
our mind, even when the prolpclt is most
dark and dilcouraging. The plans of di-
vine wisdom are too large and comprehen-
five to be difccrned by us in all their extent;
and where we fee only by parts, we iuft
frequently be at a loss in judging of thc
whole. Th'e wray of God is in the fca, ald
his path in the great waters; hisfootfcps arc
not kno'wn . But althongh thou fnayeJ t/oil
caif not fee him, yet judglent is before him;
thefore fre trift thou in him t. As in the
natural world no real deformity is found,
nothing but what has either some orna-
ment, or tome use; Io in the moral word,

*Psalm lxxvii. 19. t Job, xxxv. 14.

the

the most irregular and deformed appear- s L At M.
ances contribute in one way or other to the X-
order of the whole. The Supreme Being,
from the most opposite and dinagrceing
princiics, fornis univcrfal concord; and
adapts even the most harlh and difjlnant
notes to the harmony of his praiie. As lie
hathl reared the goodly frame of nature
from various and jarrii g elements, and
hath fettled it in peace; so he hath formed
fuchl an union by his providence of the
more various interetls, and more jarring
pafiorns of men, that they all conlpire to
his glory, and co-operate for general good.
--ow amazing is that witilom, which
comprehends such infinite diversitics, and
contrarieties, within its scheme ! Hlw pow-
erful that hand, wvhich bends to its own
purtpof the good and the bad, the busy
and the idle, the friends and tih foes of
truth; which obliges them all to hold on
their course to his glory, though divided
fron one another by a multiplicity of pur-
f;its, and difiering oiien from themselves;
and while they all move at their own frce-

E c 4 doln,

S ER M. dom, yet, by a secret influence, winds and
XIV.

turns them at his will! O the depth of the
riches, both of the wifi/om and knitwledge of
God ! low bearchable are his judgments,
and his wa)ys pqf fining out '!

IN the third place, we fee, from what

has been said, how much reason there is
for submission to the decrees of Ieaven.
Whatever distresses we susser from the

,rath of man, we have ground to believe

that they befal not in vain. In the midst
of human violence or oppression, we are
not left to be the sport of fortune. Higher
counsels are concerned. Wife and good
designs are going on. God is always car-
rying forward his own purposes; and if
there terminate in his glory, which is ever
the fame with the felicity of the righteous,
is not this a sufficient reason for our calm
and cheerful acquiescence ?

Hence also, to conclude, arises the most

powerful argument for fludying, with zeal-
ous afliduity, to gain the favour and pro-

* Rom. xi. 33.

tedion

tecifon of the Almighty. If his displeasure s E R M.
hang over our heads, all things around us . -v.
may bejuft objecs of terrour. For, against
him, there is no defence. The most vio-
lent powers in nature are ministers to him.
Formidable, indeed, may prove the wrath
of nan, if he be pleaied to let it forth
against us. To him, but not to us, it be-
longs to restrain it at pleasure. Whereas,
when we are placed under his protcdion,
all human wrath is divefled of its terrours.
If he be fr us, who, or what, can be againfl
us ? Let us pursue the measures which he
hath appointed for obtaining his grace by
faith, repentance, and a holy life, and we
fnall have no reason to be afrai'd of evil
tidings; our hearts will be fxcie, ti-zJling in
the Lord. When the religious fear of God
possesses the heart, it expels the ignoble
fear of man ; and becomes the principle of
courage and magnanimity. The Lord is
a buckler and a Jlield to them that serve
him. When he arifeth, his encmies Jall be
scattered, as J1okc is driven away, and as
chaff before the wind. Hie giveth Jirengti

and

S ER M. and vitiury to his people; he clothCeh irem
XIV.

with f/lvalion. The wrath of man flai.'
praise him ; and the remainer of wrath. Jall
hIe rolrainS.

# SERMON XV. On the IMPORTANCE of RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE to MANKIND. Preached before the Society in Scotland for propagating Christian Knowledge. ISAIAH, xi. 9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my ...

[ 427 ]

SERMON XV.
On the IMPORTANCE of RELIGIOUS

KNOWLEDGE to MIANKIND.
Preached before the Society in Scotland for propagating

Chrillian Knowledge.

ISAIAH, xi. 9.
They /hlall not hurt nor deJroy in all my holy

mountain; for the earth Jhall be full of
the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters
cover the sea.
T HIS passage of Scripture is under- SERM.

flood, by all Christian interpreters, to _o

refer to the days of the Gospel. The Pro-
phet describes, in the context, the aufpi-
cious influence of the Mefliah's reign, as

I extending

SERM. extending over all nature, and producing

. universal felicity. The full accomplish-

ment of this prediacion is yet future, and
refpeats some more advanced period of the
kingdom of God, when true religion shall
universally prevail, and, the native tendency
of the Gospel attain its entire effet. In
the profpea of this event, the Prophet
seems to rife above himself, and celebrates
that happy age in the most sublime strain
of eastern poetry. He opens a beautiful
view of the slate of the world, as a ltatc of
returning innocence. He repreifets all
nature flouriihing in peace; discord and
guile abolished; the nmof hostile natures
reconcilcd, and the most savage reformed
and tamed. The wolfj:all dwell with the
lamb, and the leopard lie down with the
kid; and the calf, and thLeyoung lion, and the
fatling together, and a little child jall lead
them. The lion fiall catjirNw like the ox;
and the fiickling childJhallplay on the hole o
the asp, and the wccancd chitd,. fall pllt his
hand on the cockatrice den. Thty Jhall not
burt nor dtflroy in all my holy mountain;

3 for

hor the earth liJall be full of the knowledge of s E RM.
the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

Upon reading thele words we must im-

mcdiately perceive the great encouragement
which they give to all good designs for pro-
rnoting religion in the world. When we
engage in these, we have the comfort of
being engaged, not only in a good cause,
but allo in one that shall undoubtedly be
successful. For we are here assured by the
divine promise, that truth and righteousness
shall at length prevail, and that the in-
creating influence of religion shall introduce
general happiness. It is a pleating and ani-
mating reflecion, that, in carrying on such
designs, we act upon the divine plan; and
co-operate with God for advancing the
kingdom of the Messiah. We have no rea-
ton to be discouraged by any unfavourable
circumstances which at present oppose our
pious endeavours. Though the ignorance,
ibperftition, and corruption, which now fill
lo great a part of the world, have a dark
and mysterious aspeE, it is not beyond the
power of that Supreme Being who brings

light

s ERM. light out of darkness, to clear up thole per-
.- plexing appearances, and gradually to ex-

tricate mankind from the labyrinth of ig-
norance and errour. Let us conlider how
improbable it seemed, when the Gospel was
first published, that it flould extend so far,
and overthrow so much establishcd fuperiti-
tion as it has already done. There is no-
thing in the present state of the world, to
render it more unlikely that it shall one day
be universally received, and prevail in its
full influence. At the rile of Chriflianity,
the disproportion was, at lean, as great
between the apparent human caufns, and
the effect which has acdually been produced,
as there is in our age, between the circuin-
stances of religion in the world, and the
effec which we farther expect. Th Sun
of righteozfnefs having already excued its
influence in breaking through the thickets
darkness, we may justly hope, that it is
powerful enough to dispel all remaining
obscurity; and that it will ascend by de-
grees to that perfect day, whcn hea:lin:G Jba
be under its wings to all the nations. A
\~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ l.l..

little oneji.all become a thoflan7d; and a fiall s E R M.

XV.

one ajiroln nation. . I the Lcord will b3lfLn ei-
it ill its tinLe .

BESIDES the prediilon which the text

contains of the future fuicceis of religion,
it points out allo a prccile conncdion be-
tween the incrcafe of religious klnowledge,
and the happinels of mankind. T/ih know-
edgc of' the Lordjil'ing the earth, is afligncd
as the cauie why thy) /ll lnut hl1'/rl nor de-
Jisrov in all tbhe holy mcI;tai of Grod. To
this I am now to lead yo:ur thoughts; as
a lul)jeSt both suited to the occaiion of the
prelent meeting, and proper to be illufirated
in times, wherein total indifference to reli-
gious principles appears to g:in ground.
' .Vhethcr Chrillianity Ihiall be propagated
farther or not, is treated as a matter ci no
great concern to mankiind. The opinion
prevails among many, tha! moral virtue
may fili)fil-, with equal advantage, inde-
pendent of religiom. For moral princi-
ples great regard is profefied; but articles

Ifiah, Ix. 22.

of

s E RM. of religious belief are held to be abftraQ:

tenets, remote from life; points of mere
speculation and debate, the influence of
which is very inconsiderable on the actions
of men. The general conduc, it is con-
tended, will always proceed upon views
and principles which have more relation to
the present fiate of things; and religious
knowledge can therefore stand in no necef-
fary connection with their happiness and
profperity.-How adverse such opinions
are both to the profession and pratice of
religion, is abundantly evident. How ad-
verse they are to the general welfare and
real interests of mankind, I hope to make
appear to candid minds.

By the ltknowedge of the Lord in the text,

is not to be understood the natural know-
ledge of God only. It is plain that the
Prophet speaks of the age of the Messiah,
when more enlarged discoveries should be
made to mankind of the divine perfections
and government, than unassisted reason
could attain. The knowledge of the Lord,
therefore, conprehends the principles of

Christianity,

Christianity, as well as of natural religion. S E R I.
In order to discern the importance of fich
knowledge to general happiness, we thall
confider man, I. as an individual; II. as a
member of society.

I. CONSIDERING man as an individual,

let us enquire how far the knowledge of
true religion is important, firfi, to his im-
provement; next, to his consolation.

FIRST, With refpea to the improvement

of man; the advancement of his nature in
what is valuable and useful, the acquisition
of such dispositions and habits as fit him for
ading his part with propriety on this stage,
and prepare him for a higher state of adlion
hereafter; what benefit does he receive, in
there refpecs, from religious knowledge and
belief? It is obvious, that all increase of
knowledge is improvement to the under-
standing. The more that its sphere is en-
larged, the greater number of objeds that
are submitted to its view, especially when
these objects are of intrinsic excellence, the

VOL. II. F f more

SER M. morle mute Lose rational powers, which are
XV._._ the gIlor7 f man, be in the course of at-

taining thcir proper strength and maturity.
But wve.;e tle knowlcdge of religion merely
fpeculativc, though the speculation must be
adcmitted to be noble, yet less could be said
of iis importance. We recommend it to
mankinl, as forming the heart, and diret-
ing the life. Thol pure and exaltcd con-
ccptions v.'ilich the Christian religion has
taught us to entertain of the Deity, as the
rniveiCfal Father and righteous Governour
of the 11unverle, the Standard of unf)ottcd
pe'fe'iion ; and tlhe iL u/hi' sis evCery oo/ oi;,t
cr/,'t7 i/lt ; conduading his whole admini-
ltration wii ll an eternal regard .o order,
virtue, and truth ; ever favouring the cause,
ancd i:ipporT;ing the intcercs, of righteous
men ; ain applying, in this direcion, the
vlhoie might of omni)otence, and the whole
c;ut;-.ci of unerring wviislom, from the be-
i;,i. in: .c the end of thillgs; Ithch conccp-
;.:'-t'. i't.t kindle devotioin, and fIrcngthcn
v -rtc1. 'iev

- ,ive fo:titude to thc minia,! i.
ihC: prI.'Icc of rihtcoull;efs, and cfla!iih'

the persuasion of its being our highest in- s E R M.
terest. xv

All the dotrines peculiar to the Gospel

are great improvements on what the light
of nature had imperfecly suggested. A
high dispensation of Providence is made
known, particularly suited to the exigencies
of man; calculated for recovering him from
that corrupted slate into which experience
bears witness that he is fallen, and for re-
storing him to integrity, and favour with his
Creator. The method of carrying on this
great plan is such as gives us the most ftrik-
ing views of the importance of righteous-
ness or virtue, and of the high account in
which it stands with God. The Son of
God appeared on the earth, and fufiered as
a propitiation for the fins of the world,
with this express intention, that he might
bring in everlafling righiteotfrefs; that lle
might puige our co7cienccs from dead works
to serve the living God; that he might re-
deem us from all iniquity, and puriij, unto
3infelf' a peculiar people zealous of good
works. Such a merciful interposition of

fs2 . the

S E R . the Creatot of the world, while it illuftri-

XV.
y.._, oufly displays his goodness, and signalizes

his concern for the moral interests of man-
kind, affords us, at the fame time, the molt
fitisfying ground of confidence and trust.
It offers an objec to the mind on which it
can lay hold for the security of its future
hopes; when, with a certainty far beyond
what any abftrad argument could yield, it
appeals to a diftinguifmed fad; and is
enabled to fay, He that spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all, hoi
]jhall he not wsith hinm aI/o freelJy give us all
thBings -.?

While the divine government is thus

placed in a light the most amiable, and mos
encouraging to every virtuous mind, there
is at the fame time something extremely
awful and solemn in the whole doctrine of
redemption. It is calculated to firike the
mind with reverence for the divine ad. nini-
ftration. It points at some deep malignity
in fin, at some dreadful consequences flow-
ing from guilt, unknown in their causes

' Rom. viii. 32.

and

and in their whole effects to us, which SERM.
moved the Sovereign of the world to de- ---
part from the ordinary course of Providence,
and to bring about the restoration of his
fallen creatures by a method so altonifhing.
Mankind are hereby awakened to the molt
serious reflections. Such views are opened
of the fanaity of the divine laws, of the
ftridnefs of the divine juitice, of the im-
portance of the part which is assigned them
to ac, as serve to prevent their trifling with
human life, and add dignity and bolemnity
to virtue. These great purposes arc farther
carried on, by the discovery which is made
of the fixed connection in which this life
fiands with a future eternal state. We are
represented as /zwinig noz;!, what wve are to
reap hereafter; undergoing a course of pro-
bation and trial, which, according as it ter-
minates in our improvement, or leaves us
unreformed and corrupted, will lifmifs us
to lasting abodes, either of punilhmcnt or
reward. Such a difcovcry riies far above
the dubious conjectures, and uncertain rea-
fonings, which mere natural light suggests

IS f 3 con-

SE R h. concerning the future condition of man-

XV
-t-J . kind. Here we find, what alone can pro-

duce any considerable influence on pra&ice,
explicit promise and threatening; an autho-
ritative fainion given to a law; the Gover-
nour and Judge revealed ; and all the mo-
tives which can operate on hope and fear,
brought home to the heart, with, 7This fi.ib
the Lorid los hsis. In a word, a great and
magnificent plan of divine adminiitration is
opened to us in the Gospel of Cililft; and
nothing is omittcd that can imprlefs mankind
with the perfialion of their being all, in
the firideft sense, subjeCts of the moral
government of God.

THOUG1i the bounds of this Discourse

allow us to take only an imperfe view of
the principles of Christian dcdrine, yet the
hints which have been givcn, lav a fifficicnt
foundation for appealing to every im-
partial mind, whether the knowledge and
belief of such principles be not intimately
conneced with the improvement, and, by
cornfcneicncc, with the hlappines of Lman

I rca:;n

I rcafon now withl such as admit, that virtue s E r MI.
is the great source both of improvement _
and happineis. Let them lay what firess
they pleale upon the authority (fconlcicece,
and upon the force and evidence of its dic-
tates; can they refute to allow that the
natural tendency of the principlc whlich I
have mentioned, is to fipport tiihofe dicates,
and to confirm that authority; to eccite,
on various occasions, the mol oi uliclll senti-
ments; to provide additional rcilr.tiits from
vice, aid additional motives to every virtue?
Who dares prolnounote, tlhat there is no calc
in which conlciince sand; in need of luicl
aiTiflance to d irct, where there is lb much
uncertainty and darilkuel ; andl to prompt,
where there is fb much fcnbleneti and irrc-
solution, and eluch a fatal pronciucis to vice
and folly ?

But how good soever the tendency of

rcligious principles may be, IoiIc will fsill
call in qucnfion their adtual liXni'.c.incv,
and inlhinence on life. 'I'his tendlency is
by, arious caults delated. IBtween rt!e
belief of religious principles aid a ccr:e-

F f4 io indent

SERM. fpondent praclice, it will be alleged that

Xv.
C _J. frequent experience shews there is no ne-

ceffary connection; and that therefore the
propagation of the one, cannot give us any
assurance of proportionable improvements
following in the other.-This, in part, is
granted to be true; as we admit that reli-
gious knowledge and belief are susceptible
of various degrees, before they arrive at that
real Christian faith which the Scripture re-
presents as purifing the heart. But though
the connection between principle and prac-
tice be not necessary and invariable, it will
not, I suppose, be denied, that there is tome
connection. Here then one avenue to the
heart is opened. If the tendency of reli-
gious knowledge be good, wisdom must
direCt, and duty oblige us to cultivate it.
For tendency will, at least in some cafes,
rife into effect; and, probably, in more
cafes than are known and observed by the
world. Besides the diftinguillied examples
of truc r eligion and virtue which have, more
or less, adorned every age of the Christian
vara; what numbers may there be, in the

more

more silent and private scenes of life, over- s E R M.
looked by superficial obfervcrs of mankind, XV
on whose hearts and lives religious prin-
ciples have the most happy influence ? Even
on loose and giddy minds, where they are
far from accomplishing their full effee, their
influence is, frequently, not altogether loft.
Impressions of religion often check vice in
its career. They prevent it from proceed-
ing its utmost length; and though they do
not entirely reform the offender, they serve
to maintain order in society. Persons who
are now bad, might probably have been
worse without them, and the world have
iuffered more from unrcelrained licentious-
ness. They often sow latent ieeds of good-
ness in the heart, which proper circum-
flances and occasions afterwards ripen;
though the reformation of the offender may
not be so conspicuous as his former enor-
mities have been. From the native ten-
dency of religious belief, there is reason to
conclude, that those good effects of it are
not so rare as some would represent them.
By its nature and tendency, we can better

judge

SE RM. judge of its effeds, than by obfcrvaiions
,V_, drawn from a supposed experience, whicll

often is narrow in its compass, and fallacious
in its conclusions.

The adual influence of principle and be-

lief on mankind, admits of clear illustration
from uncontefed matter of fad. They
who hold the good effeds of Christian prin-
ciples to be so inconsiderable, as to render
the propagation of them of finall import-
ancc, will be at no lols to give us instances
of corrupt principles of belief having had
the most powerful influence on the world.
Loud complaints we hear from this quarter
of the direful effects which fuperfititon and
enthusiasm have produced; of their having
poisoned the tempers, and transformed the
manners of men; of their haviing ovcr.
come the firongeft rctraints of law, of of rea-
son, and humanity. Is this then the cafe,
that all principles, except good ones, are of
such mighty cnergy? Strange that falfc
religion Iliould be able to (d so omuch, and
true religion so little; that belief, so povw-
erful in the one cafe, should be f;.) ilnpo

4i tent

tent in the other.-No impartial inquirer, SE R M.
surely, can entertain this opinion. The _V
whole history of mankind fhcews that their
religious tenets and principles, of whatever
nature they be, are of great influence in
forming thcir charader, and lirccling their
conducl. The michicf which falife prin-
ciples have done, ainords a good argument
to guard carefully againlf errour; but as it
is a proof of what belicf can do, it gives
ground to hope the more from it, when
rightly directed. The fame tcrrent which,
when it is put out of its natural course,
overflows and lays waste a country, adorns
and entriches it, when r -;nning in its pro-
per chalnecl. If it be alleged that filper-
flition is likely to be more powerLul in its
cff'cas than truth, because it agrees better
with the fllics and corruptions of the world,
we may oppole to this, on the other
hand, that truth has tile divine blefling and
the countcnance of Heaven on its fide.
Let us always hope well of a caule that is
good in itielf, and beneficial to mankind.
Truth is mighity, and will prevail. Let us

fiprcad

S E R M spread the incorruptible feed as widely as we
xv.

can, and truil in God that he will give the
increafe.-Having thus shewn the import-
ance of religious knowledge to mankind in
the way of improvement, let us,

IN the second place, confider it in the

light of consolation; as bringing aid and
relief to us amidst the diftrefles of life.
Here religion inconteflibly triumphs; and
its happy effects, in this refpeat, furnish a
strong argument to every benevolent mind
for wishing them to be farther diffused
throughout the world. For without the
belief and hope afforded by divine Reve-
lation, the circumstances of man are ex-
tremely forlorn. He finds himself placed
here as a firanger in a vast universe, where
the powers and operations of nature are
very imperfecly known; where both the
beginnings and the issues of things are in-
volved in mysterious darkness; where he
is unable to discover, with any certainty,
whence he sprung, or for what purpose he
was brought into this state of existence;

whether
1I

whether he be fubjeaed to the government s E R M.

XV.

of a mild, or of a wrathful ruler; what con-
ftrucqion he is to put on many of the dif-
penfations of his providence; and what his
fate is to be when he departs hence. What
a dilfonfolate situation to a serious inquir-
ing mind ! The greater degree of virtue it
pofieffes, its sensibility is likely to be the
more opprefed by this burden of labouring
thought, Even though it were in one's
power to banifl all uneasy thought, and to
fill up the hours of life with perpetual
amufemnent, life so filled up would, upon
reflection, appear poor and trivial. But
these are far from being the terms upon
which man is brought into this world. He
is conscious that his being is frail and
feeble; he fees hilfelf leset with various
dangers; and is exposed to many a me-
lancholy apprehension, from the evils
which he may have to encounter, before he
arrives at the close of life. In this distressed
condition, to reveal to him such discoveries
of the Supreme Being as the Christian reli-
gion affords, is to reveal to him a Father

7 and

S E R MI. and a Friend ; is to let in a ray of the mofi

WXV , cheering light upon the darkness of the hu-

man estate. He who was before a defti-
tute orphan, wandering in the inhospitable
desert, has now gained a flhelter from the
bitter and inclement blast. He now knows
to whom to pray, and in whom to trust;
where to unbosom his sorrows, and from
what hand to look for relief.

It is certain, that when the heart bleeds

from obme wound of recent mislortune,
nothing is of equal efficacy with religious
comfort. It is of power to enlighten the
darkeit hour, and to atlragc the fevcrcft
woe, by the belief of divine favour, and
the profpc& of a bleiTd immortality. In
such hopes the mind expatiates with joy;
and, when bereaved of its cartlly frie:ds,
solaces itself with the thoughts of one Friend,
who will never forliake it. Refined rca-
fonings concerning the nature of the hu-
man condition, and the improvement which
philoobphy teachles u to make cf every
event, may cntertain lhe mind when it is
at ease; may perhcaps contribute to tooth

it

it when lightly touched with sorrow. ER M.

XV.

But when it is torn with any fore distress,
they are cold and feeble, compared with a
direc promile from the word of God.
This is an anchor tho tcoul bothfire and
ftedrfll. This has given consolation and
refuge to many a virtuous heart, at a time
when the moll cogent reasonings would
have proved utterly unavailing.

Upon thec approach of death. efniccally

when, if a r :;il trhinks a3 .a!1 his al..' y
about his fiilure i.t,'.'-ls mic

n,;tI:r;] in-

crealf, the power c;f ;rligious confoladon is
feniltly felt. Thenl appeari, in the mIlft
irliking lighl, the lih, value of the chifco-
vcries made by the Gofel; not only life
and immortality revealed, but a Mediator
wvith God dilfoveredl; mercy proclaimed,
through him, to the fiailties of the penitent
and the humble; and his prefece pro-
mifed to be with thenm whn they are pass-
iib through /tc v,/,lit v of c

te .Jiz of

,ditib, in order to bring them late into un-
ieen habitations of reli and joy. T_-ere is
arollnd ir their leaving tlh wvorld with

comfort

S ER M comfort and peace. But in this severe and
xv. trying period, this labouring hour of na-

ture, how shall the unhappy man support
himself, who knows not, or believes not,
the discoveries of religion ? Secretly confci-
ous to himself that he has not aced his part
as he ought to have done, the fins of his
past life arise before him in fad remem-
brance. He wishes to exiif after death,
and yet dreads that existence. The Go-
vernour of the world is unknown. He can-
not tell whether every endeavour to obtain
his mercy may not be vain. All is aw-
ful obscurity around him; and in the midst
of endless doubts and perplexities, the trem-
bling, relucant foul is forced away from
the body. As the misfortunes of life must,
to such a man, have been molf oppressive,
so its end is bitter. His fun sets in a dark
cloud; and the night of death closes over
his head, full of mifery.-Having now
shewn how important the knowledge of the
Lord is, both to the improvement and the
consolation of man, confidered as an indi-
vidual, I am next to shew,

II. How

II. How important this knowledge is to S E R M.

XV.

him as a member of society. This branch m,
of the subjed is in part anticipated by what
has been said. For all the improvement
which man receives as an individual, re-
dounds to the benefit of the public. Society
reaps the fruit of the virtues of all the mem-
bers who compose it; and in proportion as
each, apart, is made better, the whole must
flourish.

But betides this effec, religious know-

ledge has a direc tendency to improve the
social intercourse of men, and to aflift them
in co-operating for common good. It is
the great instrument of civilizing the mul-
titude, and forming them to union. It
tames the fierceness of their passions, and
softens the rudeness of their manners.
There is much reason to doubt whether
any regular society ever subsisted, or could
subsist, in the world, destitute of all reli-
gious ideas and principles. They who, in
early times, attempted to bring the wan-
dering and scattered tribes of men from the
woods, and to unite them in cities and

VOL. 1I. G g com-

S F, R . communities, always found it neceftiry to
.X'v. bcgin with iome infiitution of religion.

The wisest legislators of old, through the
whole progrelf of their systems of govern-
ment, confidered religion as cffential to civil
polity. If even those imperfet forms of
it, loaded with so much fuperfition and
errour, were important to the w llfare of
bociety, how much more that rcafonable
worship of the true God, which is taught
by the Gospel? True religion introduces
the idea of regular fuibjedion, by accul-
toming mankind to the awe of fuprciour
power in the Deity, joined with the vene-
ration of fuperiour wisdom and goodncsl.
It is by its nature an afiociating principle;
and creates new and hfcred bonds of union
among men. Common aflemblies for reli-
gious worflhip, and joint homage offired
up to one God; the sense of being all de-
pendent on the fame protetion, and bound
to duty by the lame ties, filarers in the
fame benefits of heaven, and expedants of
the fame reward, tend to awaken the fen-
timents of friendly relation, and to confirmT

ani

and strengthen our mutual connexion. The s E R M.
docrine of Chrillianity is most adverse to x
all tyranny and oppreflion, but highly fa-
vourable to the interests of good government
among men. It repreflfs the yiirit of li-
centiouifefs and sedition. It inculcates the
duty of subordination to lawful fiperiours.
It requires us tofear Gld, to honour the kisg,
and not to mtlec wcith them. that are givel
i, change.

Religious knowledge forwards all useful

and ornamental improvements in ibciety.
Experience ihews, that, in proportion as it
difrlufes its light, learning flouriflcs, and
liberal arts are cultivated and advanced.
jufi conceptions of religion promote a free
and manly ipirit. They lead men to think
for theinfelves; to form their principles
upon fair enquiry, and not to rciign their
conckience to the dilates of men. Hence
t!hey initurally inspire averlion to ilavery of
cvery kind ; and promote a taste for liberty
and:l laws. Dclipotic governments have ge-
Jicrally tal:en the irmeilt root among nations
tliat wvcre blinded by Mahometan or Pagan

G g 2 dark-

E R M. darkness; where the throne of violence has
XV- been supported by ignorance and false reli-

gion. In the Christian world, during those
centuries in which gross liuperflition held
its reign undisturbed, oppreflion and slavery
were in its train. The cloud of ignorance
fat thick and deep over the nations; and
the world was threatened with a relapse into
ancient barbarity. As soon as the true
know/ledge of the Lord revived, at the aufpi-
cious ara of the Reformation, learning,
liberty, and arts, began to shine forth with
it, and to resume their lustre.

But the happy influence which religion

exerts on society, extends much farther than
to effeas of this kind. It is not only sub-
fidiary to the improvement, but necessary to
the preservation of society. It is the very
batis on which it refts. Religious prin-
ciple is what gives men the surest hold of
one another. That last and greatest pledge
of veracity, an oath, without which no so-
ciety could subsist, derives its whole autho-
rity from an established reverence of God,
to whom it is a solemn appeal. Banish re-

5 ligious

ligious principle, and you loosen all the S R M.
bonds which connecE mankind together; . V
you shake the fundamental pillar of mutual
confidence and trust; you render the fecu-
rity arising from laws, in a great measure,
void and ineffecual. For human laws, and
human fandions, cannot extend to number-
less cafes, in which the safety of mankind
is deeply concerned. They would prove
very feeble inilrumcnts of order and peace,
if there were no checks upon the conduc
of men from the sense of divine legislation;
if no belief of future rewards and punish-
ments were to overawe conscience, and to
supply the defeL, of human government.

Indeed, the belief of religion is of such

importance to public welfare, that the molt
expressive description we could give of a
society of men in the utmost disorder, would
be to fay, that there was no fear of God
left among them. Imagination would im-
mediately conceive of them as abandoned to
rapine and violence, to perfidy and treachery;
as deceiving and deceived, oppressing and
oppressed; consumed by intefRine broils,

g 3 and

S ER M, and ripe for becoming a prey to the firvt
LX,. invader. On the other hand, in order to

form the idea of a society flouriihing in its
highest glory, we need only conceive the
belief of Christian principle exerting its full
influence on the hearts and lives of all the
members. Instantly, the most amiable fcenc
would open to our view. We should fee
the causes of public disunion removed, when
men were animated with that noble ifirit of
love and charity which our religion breathes;
and formed to the purliiit of tlofe higher
interests, which give no occasion to compe-
tition and jealousy. We lhould sec famlilies,
neighbourhoods, and communities, living in
unbroken amity, and purfiing, with one
heart and mind, the common interest ; so-
bricty of manners, and simplicity of life,
restored; virtuous itduftry carrying on its
useful labours, and cheerful contentment
every where reigning. Politicians may lay
down what plans they please for advancing
public prosperity; but, in truth, it is the
prevalency of such principles of religion and
virtue, which forms the strength and glory

3 of

of a nation. When these are totally want- s E R M.

xv.

ing, no measures contrived by human wis- ,
dom can flpply the defet. In proportion
as they prcvail, they raifc the state of so-
ciety from that fad degeneracy into which
it is at present funk, and carry it forward,
under the blessing of Heaven, towards that
happy period, when natio flJall not lift up
their fiword aganifl nation, nor learn twar
any more.

In order to prove the importance of reli-

gious knowledge to the interest of society,
one consideration more, deserving particu-
lar attention, remains to be mentioned. It
is, that if good clfe be not town in the field,
aires will infallibly spring up. The pro-
pension towards religion is strong in the
human heart. There is a natural prepa-
ration in our minds for receiving rome
imprcffions of supernatural belief. Upon
these, among ignorant and uncultivated
men, fupcrflition or enthufiain never fail
to graft themselves. Into what monstrous
forms there have shot forth, and what va-
rious mischiefs they have produced to bo-

G g 4 ciety,
i

S ER M. ciety, is too well known. Nor is this the

XV.
,p -, vwhole of the danger. Designing men are

always ready to take advantage of this po-
pular weakness, and to direc the fuperfti-
tious bias of the multitude to their own am-
bitious and interested ends. Superstition,
in itself a formidable evil, threatens confe-
quences fill more formidable, when it is
rendered the tool of design and craft. Hence
arises one of the most powerful arguments
for propagating with zeal, as far as our in-
fluence can extend, the pure and undefiled
doctrines of the Gospel of Christ; in order
that just and rational principles of religion
may fill up that room in the minds of men,
which dangerous fanaticifin will otherwise
usurp.

This consideration alone is sufficient to

show the high utility of the design under-
taken by the Society for propagating Christ-
ian Knowledge. With great propriety,
they have bestowed their chief attention on
a remote quarter of our country, where,
from a variety of causes, ignorance and fu-
perfAition had gained more ground, than in

ay7

any other corner of the land; where the S E RM.
inhabitants, by their local situation, were
more imperfectly supplied by the means
of proper education and inftruetion; and at
the fame time exposed to the fcduQions of
such as fought to pervert them from the
truth. The laudable endeavours of this
Society, in diffusing religious and useful
knowledge through this part of the country,
have already been crowned with much fuc-
cess; and more is frill to be expeted from
the continuance of their pious and well-
direaed attention.

With such good designs, it becomes all

to co-operate, who are lovers of mankind.
Thus shall they show their just sense of the
value of that blessing which they enjoy, in
the knowledge of the Gospel of Christ;
and their gratitude to Heaven for confer-
ring it upon them. Thus shall they make
the bleflings of those who are now ready
to perih through lack of knowledge, descend
upon their heads. Thus fllall they contri-
bute their endeavours for bringing forward
that happy period, foretold by ancient pro-

phecy;

S E R M. phccy; when there Jhall be one Lord over
ixv. all the earth, and his name one; when that

name Jfall be great from the rising to theffit-
tingfin ; when there Jfall be nothing to hurt
nor dtflroy in all the holy mountain of God;
but judgment fJall dwell in the wilderness,
and righteotfiiefs remain in the fruitful field;
the desert fJlall rejoice, and blogom as the rof ;
and the earth J7all be fill of the Knowledge
of the Lord as the waters cover the fia ".

* Zechar. xiv.9. Malachi, i. Ii. Isaiah, xxxii. 16.
xxxv. i.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUMIE.

., :.

# Just Published,

7ug? Publihed,

The FirTH EnDITIo:,

A THIRD VOLUME. of
S E R M O N S,

BI Y

HUGH BLAIR, D.D.
One Cf the MINISTEiS of the HIlGI Ciiur.CI,

A N D
PROFESSOR of RiiEI ORIC nIl1 BELLES :TTiRES ill the

UNIVERSITY of EDINIIURG:1.

A L S 0,
A SIXTE'rENT EDITION of tChe F:R:T VOI.UME.

# The following BOOKS were lately published by T. CADELL, in the STRAND.

The following BOOKS were lately pul)-

lifhed by T. CAELL, in the STRAND,

. U A R TO.

E ECTURES on Rhetoric and Belles Ltttrcs.
By Hugh Blair, D. D. one of the Ministers of

the High Church, and Profefor of Rhetoric and Belles
Lettres in the University of Edinburgh. With a Head
of the Author. 2 Vols. 21. 2s.

*** A new Edition in 3 Vols. 8vo. I8s.

The Four Gospels translated from the Greek, with

Preliminary Diflertations, and Notes critical and ex-
planatory. By Dr. Campbell. 2 Vols. 2!. 2S.

The History of England, from the Invasion of utlius

Cafar to the Revolution. A new Edition, printed on
fine Paper, with many Corrections and Additions; and
a complete Index. 8 Vols. Royal Paper, with fine Im-
pressions of the Plates. 81. i8s. 6d.

*4* Another Edition on finall Paper. 41. los.
1-+t Another Edition in 8 Vols. Svo. with Plates.

21. 16s.

The History of Great Britain from the Restoration

to the Accession of the House of Hanover. By James
MacpheJon, Efq. the 2d Edition ; 2 Vols. with a Head
of the Author. 21. 5S.

Original Papers: Containing the Secret History of

Great Britain, from the Restoration to the Accefion of
the House of Hanover. To which are prefixed, Ex-
traas from the Life of James II. as written hy himself;
and published from the Originals. 2 Vols. 21. 55.

The Hiftorv of Scotland, during the Reignsof Queen

.ilary and of King James VI. till his Acceflion to the
Crown of England; with a Review of the Scottijh His-
tory previous to that Period ; and an Appendix,contain-
ing Original Papers; 2 Vols. By Jfilliam Robertfin,
D. D. the 12th Edition. 21. 2s.

g,. Another Edition, 2 Vols. 8vo. 145.

The

The History of the Reign of the Emperor Cbarles V.

with a View of the Progress of Society in Europe,
from the Subversion of the Roman Empire to the Begin-
ning of the Sixteenth Century. By f/illiamn Robert-
son, D. D. Embellished with 4 Plates, elegantly en-
graved; 3 Vols. 31. 3s.

** Another Edition in 4Vols. Svo. il. 4s.

The Hiltory of Aimerica, Vols I. and II. By the
fame Author. Illustrated with Maps. 21. 2s.

*,* Another Edition in 3 Vols. vvo. 18s.

An Historical Disquisition concerning the Know-

ledge which the Ancients had of India; and the Pro-
grefs of Trade with that Country prior to the Dif-
covery of the Paf:age to it by the Cape of Good Hope.
With an Appendix, containilng Observations on the
Civil Policy, the Laws, and judicial 'Proceedings, the
Arts, the Sciences, and religious Institutions of the
Indians. By William Robertson, D. ). 18s.

The History of the Reign of Philip the Second,

King of Spain. By Robert ;iatf1n, L L. D. Profeilor
of Philosophy and Rhetoric at the University of St.
Andrews. zd Edition ; 2 Vols. 21. 2s.

** Another Edition in 3 Vols. 8vo. i8s.

The History of the Decline and Fall of the Ronan

Empire. By Edward Gibbon, Efq. 6 Vols. which
complete the original Dcfign of the Author, and com-
prise the entire Series of Hillory from the Age of Trajan
and the Antonines, to the taking of Constantinople by
the Turks, and the Ellablifliment at Reme of the Do-
minion of the Popes. Adorned with the Head of the
Author, and Maps adapted to the Work. 61. 6s. Boards.

*** The 4th, 5th, and 6th Vols. may be had fepa-

rate, to complete Sets, 31. 3s. Boards.

Another Edition in 12 Vols, .

8 1. 1. 2s.

*,* The 7th, 8th, 9th, loth, 1Ith and .2th Vols.
may be had separate, to complete S-ts, il. sos. Boards.

Milfce'-

Miscellaneous State Papers, from 150I to 1726, ill

2 Vols. Coileded from the Mfeiumn, Hardwicke, and
other valuable Collecions. 21. 25.

Memoirs of Great Britain and Ireland, from the Dif-

solution of the lalt Parliament of CharlesII. till the Cap-
ture of the French and Spanijh Fleets at Vigo. By Sir
7ohn Dalyhmple, Bart. sd Edition. 3 Vols. 31. 3s.

** Another Edition in 3 large Volumes, 8vo.

ll. Ils. 6d. Boards.

The History of the Legrl Polity of the Roman State;

and of the Rife, Progrels, and Extent of the Rioman
Laws. By Thrmas Bevcr, LL.D. lI. is.

An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth

of Nations. By Adam Smlith, L L. D. F. R. S. formerly
Profeflbr of Moral Philofboihy in the University of
Glafgo7 ; 2 Vols. 2!. 2s. 2d'Edition.

-** Another Edition in 3 Vols. 8vo. Il. Is.
Tehe Theory of Moral Sentiments. By A/tam Smizti,

LL. D. F. R. S. 4th Edition. 2 Vols. Iqs.

An Account of the Voyages undertaken by Order

of his present Majefy, for making Discoveries in the
Southern Hemifpherc, and successively performed by
Commodore Byorn, Capt. IFallis, and Capt. Carteret,
in the Dolphin, Swails;w, and the Endeavour; drawn up
from the Journals which were kept by the several Com-
manders, and from the Papers of J77fph Banks, Efq;
and Dr. Solandler. By John Hawl:efivi:th, L L. D. II-
lustrated with Cuts, and a great Variiety of Charts and
Maps (in all 52 Plates), relative to the Countries nov
first discovered, or hitherto but imperfectiy known.
Price 31. i2S. bound.

An Account of a Voyage towards the South Pole

and round the World; performed in his IMiajelty's
Ships the Refijlltio; and Advetr;., in the Years 1772,
1773, 1774, and 1775. Written by Jamzes Cook,
Commander of the Reblution. In which is included,
Captain FIrneaux's Narrative of his Proceedings in the
Ad;enture during the Separation of the Ships. Ele-
gantly printed in 2 Vols, Royal. illustrated with

Maps

Maps and Charts, and a Variety of Portraits of Persons
and Views of Places, drawn during the Voyage by
Mr. Hodges, and engraved by the nioft eminent Maf-
ters. 21. 12s.

OCTVIIO and TWELVES.

The Hifloly of Antient Greece, its Colonies and

Conquefis; from the earliest Accounts till the division
of the Macedoinii; Empire in the Eat ; including the
llifRorv of Literature, Philosophy, and the Fine Arts.
Adornid with a Head of the Author, and lMaps adapted
to the Work. By 7ohn Gillies, L L. D. zd Edition.
4 Vols . . s.

View of the Reign of Frederick II. of Prussia, with

a Parallel between that Prince and Philip 11. of Mla-
ccildl. 7s.

A Philnfophical and Political I-fitory of the Settle-

ments and Trade of the Europeans in the Eafl and ilJ
Indies. Translated from the French of the Abbd
Raynall, by 7. J/tflamtiod, M. A. A new Edition
carefully reviledi, in 8 Vols. 8vo. and illufiratcd with
Maps. 21. l.

Sketches of the History of Man, by the Author of
the Elements of Criticism. 4 Vols. 2 Edition. 11. 4s.

Elements of General History, tranfl:te; from the

French of the Abbe ' Millot, Ancient and Modern His-
tory. 5 Vols. Svo. il. I55.

An Ecclcfiaflical Hiflory, Antient and Modern,

from the Birth of Christ to the leginning of the present
Century. In which the Rife, Progress, and Variations
of Church Power are confidered, in their Connectioi
with the State of Learning and Philoliphv, and the Po-
litical Hlltory of Eurspte, during that Pericd. B3v the
late le.rned Jed)l Lawrence Mil;n!, ,). D.. Tiranflated,
:tad accompaniedwith Notes andl Chronio!o}ical 'Tablec,
by Archibald Mldain, I). D. To the 'Whule is added
an accurate Index. The 2d Edition, correted and
:;ilprouvcd by .dditional Notec an:J :vcr.d! Appendixes.

\ Vol, xi.
l is.

Obl ervatiorns

Obrervatidns made in the Cnurfe of a Journey

through France, haly, and Gcrmany. By HjIer Lynch
PiOzzi. 2 Vols. i4s.

A Tour throu- h S.:;'' and AMalta. In a Series of

Letters to [.[illi., i i],c;frd, Eq. of Somcrly, in Sufolk,
from P. BiVii'n, F. R. S. 2 Vols. Illustrated with a
Map. 4th .Edition. 1s.

A Tour throu!lh si ne of the Nothern Parts of E;-

ripc,particularly Cpc nbia'cn, Stockhohlm, and Petlcrburgh,
in a Selies of Letters, by N. IJ.axall, Jun. 3d Edi-
tion. 6s.

A Journey to the Wefiern Isles of Scotland. By the

Author of the Rambler. 6s.

A View of Society and Manncrs in France, Switzer-

land, and Germany, with Anecdotes relating to some
eminent Charaders. y ychn Moore, M .. D. 2 Volst
5th Edition. 12s.

AView of Society and Manners in Italy, with Anec-

dotes relating to some eminent Characters. By the
fame Author. 2 Vols. 3d Edition. 14.s.

Zcluco. Various Views of Human Nature, taken

from Life and Manners, Foreign and Domestic. By
the fame Author. 2 Vols. 3d Edition. i4s.

Sermons by Ifilliam Lechcnma,, D. D. late Principal

of the College of GlTeczu. To which is prefixed, some
Account of the Authur's Life, and of his Lectures, by
yames Ioidroiw, D. D. Minister at Stevenfton. 2 Vols.
I4S.

Sermons preached before the University of Glafguw.

To which is addcd, a Sermon preached before the Pro-
vincial Synod of Aierfi and I'virtldal, in the Church of
Kelfo, on Tuesday the 27th of April 1790. Published
at their Desire in this Volume. By 7ames Bell, D. D.
Minifier of Cclddlream. 7s.

0^.4^O
