1

;-- 

'
' s

I- ",., c'

1
..I: 1

1

SERMONS,

B Y
HUGH BLAIR, D.D. F.R.S. Ed.

One of the MINISTERS of the HIGH CHURCH,

AND
PROFESSOR of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTRES

in the UNIVERSITY, of EDINBURGH.

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

VOL. IV.
THE THIRD EDITION.

, i,

,

LONDON:
PRINTED FOR A. STRAHAN, AND T. CADELL;

AND W. CREECH, EDINBURGH:
And Sold by T. CADELL Jun'. and W. DAVIES,

(Successors to Mr. CADELL,) in the Strand.

M DCC XCIV.

# THE CONTENTS.

THE
CONTENTS.

SERMON I.
On the Causes of Men's being weary

of Life.
JOB,X. I.-Myfoulis wearyof mylife. Page I

SERMON II.
On Charity as the End of the Com-

mandment.
I TIMOTHY, i. 5.-Now the end of the

commandment is charity out of a pure
heart, and of a good conscience, and of
faith unfeigned. - . 22

SERMON III.
On our Lives being in the Hand of God.

Preached at the beginning of a New Year.
PSALM xxxi. ix,-My times are in thy

hand.- - 43

A 2

SERMON IV.
On the Mixture of Bad Men with the

Good in Human Society.
MATTHEW, xiii. 30.-Let both grow

together until the harvest.- Page 66

SERMON V.
On the Relief which the Gospel as-

fords to the Distressed.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.
MATTHEW, xi. 28.--Come unto me, all

ye that labour and are heavy laden,
and I willgive you reft. - 8

SERMON VI.

On Luxury and Licentiousness.
ISAIAH, V. 2.-The harp and the viol,

the tabret and the pipe and wine are
in their featsl; but they regard not the
work of the Lord, neither confider the
operation of his hands. - 13

SERM ON VII.
On the Presence of God in a Future

State.
PSALM XVi. I .--Tou wilt fJew me

-the path of life; in thy presence is
fulness ofjoy; at thy right hand there
are pleafiresfor evermore. Page 135

S E R M O N VIII.
On Curiosity concerning the Affairs of

others.

JOHN, XXi. 21, 22.-Peter feeing him

faith to yeJr, Lord, and what Jhall
this man do? Jesus faith to him, If
I will that he tarry till I come, what
is that to thee? Follow thou me. 57

SERMON IX.
On our present Ignorance of the Ways

of God.
JOHN, xiii. 7.--Yefu anfioered andfaid

unto him, What I do thou knoweft not
now; but thou /halt know hereafter. 178

SERMON X.

On the Slavery of Vice.
2 PETER,ii. I 9.-Whhile the)promife them

liberty, they thenielves are theferv-
ants of corruption;for of whom a man
is overcome, of the fame is he brought
in bondage. - Page 201

SERMON XI.

On the Importance of Public Worship.
PSALM xxvi. 8.-Lord, I have loved the

habitation of thy hofie, and theplace
where thine honour dwelleth. 224

SERMON XII.
On the Fashion of the World palling

away.
I CORINTH. Vii. 3i.--'hefafhiion of

this worldpafeth away. - 250

SERMON XIII.

On Tranquillity of Mind.
PSALM xv. C.-He that doth these things

iHIdl nevcr be moved. - 272

IO0

SERMON XIV.
On the Misfortunes of Men being

chargeable on themselves.
PROVERBS, xix. 5.-lThe foolijefs/ of

man perverteth his way, and his heart
fretteth again/f the Lord, Page 293

SERMON XV.

On Integrity as the Guide of Life,
PROV. xi. 3.-The integrity of the up-

right Jhall guide them.- - 313

SERMON XVI.

On Submission to the Divine Will.
JOB, ii. Io.-Shall we receive good at

the hand of God, and fJall we not re-
ceive evil? - - 335

S E R M ON XVII.

On Friendlhip.
PROV. xxvii. Io.-Thine own friend,

and thy father's friend, forsake not. 358

SERMON XVIII.
On the Conduct to be held with regard

to Future Events.
PROV. xxvii. I.-BoqaJ not thylfe ofto-

morrow; for thou knowCef not what
a day may bring forth. - Page 379

SERMON XIX.

On following the Multitude to do Evil.
EXODUS, xxiii. 2.--Tou fl'alt notfol-

low a multitude to do evil.- 400

SERMON XX.
On the Wisdom of God.

I TIMOTHY,i. 17 .-Now unto the King
eternal, immortal, invisible, the only
wife God, be honour and glory Jor
ever and ever. Amen, - 422

! l
U 'J .

# SERMON I. On the CAUSES of MEN's being weary of LIFE. JOB, x. 1. My soul is weary of my life. —

S E R M ON I.
On the CAUSES of MEN'S being weary

of LIE.

JOB, X. I.

My foul is weary of my life.----

;SK H0 B, in the firit part of his days, S E R M.
H J T was the greate f of all the men _,.

K.}%-iA of the Eaqt. His pofleflions were
large; his family was numerous and flourish-
ing; his own charater was fair and blame-
less. Yet this man it pleased God to visit
with extraordinary reverses of fortune. He
was robbed of his whole substance. His
sons and daughters all perilhed; and he

VOL. IV. B himself,

SE R M. himself, fallen from his high estate, child-
>., less and reduced to poverty, was smitten

with fore disease. His friends came about
him, seemingly with the purpose of ad-
ministering comfort. But from a harfl
and ill-founded conftrudion of the in-
tention of Providence in his disasters,
they only added to his sorrows by un-
just upbraiding. Hence those many pa-
thetic lamentations with which this book
abounds, poured forth in the most beau-
tiful and touching strain of Oriental poe-
try. In one of those hours of lamenta-
tion, the sentiment in the text was utter-
ed; My foul is weary of Smy, life; a fen-
timent, which surely, if any situation
can justify it, was allowable in the cafe
of Job.

In fituaticns very different from that

of Job, under calamities far less severe,
it is not uncommon to find such a fen-
timent working in the heart, and some-
times breaking forth from the lips of
men. Many, very many there are, who,
on one occasion or other, have experienced

this

this weariness of life, and been tempt- SE R M.
ed to wish that it would come to a close.
Let us now examine in what circum-
flances: this feeling may be deemed excuse-
able; in what it is to be held sinful;
and under what reftriQions we may, on
any occasion, be permitted to fay, My
foul is weary of myn life.

I SHALL confider the words of the text

in three lights; as expressing, FiTs, The
sentiment of a discontented man; Second-
yI', The sentiment of an affliaed man;
t2hirdlj The sentiment of a devout man.

I. LET us confider the text as expressing

the sentiment of a discontented man;
with whom it is the effusion of spleen,
vexation, and diffatisfation with life, ari.
sing from causes neither laudable nor
justifiable. There are chiefly three classes
of men who are liable to this disease
of the mind: the idle; the luxurious; the
criminal.

B 2 Firfl,

SERM. FirJf, THIS weariness of life is often
,_i - found among the idle; persons common-

ly in easy circumstances of fortune, who
are not engaged in any of the laborious
occupations of the world, and who are,
at the fame time, without energy of mind
to call them forth into any other line of
active exertion. In this languid, or ra-
ther torpid state, they have ib many va-
cant hours, and are so much at a loss
how to fill up their time, that their fpi-
rits utterly fink; they become burden-
some to themselves, and to every one
around them; and drag with pain the
load of existence. What a convincing
proof is hereby afforded, that man was
designed by his Creator to be an ative
being, whose happiness is to be found
not merely in reft, but in occupation
and pursuit? The idle are doomed to
susser the natural punishment of their
inactivity and folly; and for their com-
plaints of the tiresomeness of life there
is no remedy but to awake from the
dream of sloth, and to fill up with pro-

per

per employment the miserable vacancies SE RM.
of their days. Let them ltudy to be- __
come useful to the world, and they shall
soon become less burdensome to them-
selves. They ihall begin to enjoy exist-
ence; they shall reap the rewards which
Providence has annexed to virtuous ac-
tivity; and have no more cause to fay,
My foul is weary of my life.

Next, THE luxurious and the dissipated

form another class of men, among whom
such complaints are still more frequent.
With them they are not the fruit of idle-
ness. These are men who have been
buffed enough; they have run the whole
race of pleasure; but they have run it
with such inconsiderate speed, that it ter-
minates in weariness and vexation of fpi-
rit. By the perpetual course of diffipa-
tion in which they are engaged; by the
excesses which they indulge; by the riot-
ous revel, and the midnight or rather
morning hours to which they prolong
their fellivity; they have debilitated their

B 3 bodies,

SERM. bodies, and worn out their spirits. Sa-

tiated with the repetition of their ac-
customed pleasures, and yet unable to
find any new ones in their place; wan-
dering round and round their former
haunts of joy, and ever returning dif-
appointed; weary of themselves, and of
all things about them, their spirits are
oppressed with a deadly gloom, and the
complaint buifts forth of odious life and
a miserable world. Never are these com-
plaints more frequent than at the close
of rounds of amusement, and after a long
repetition of festal pleasures; when the
spirits which had been forced up, as by
some intoxicating drug, to an unnatural
height, subside into profound dejecion,
What increases the evil is, that it is not
among the infirm and the aged, but
among the young, the gay, and the pro-
fperous, who ought to be reputed the hap-
pieft men, that this difafte of life most
frequently prevails.

When persons of this description, in
their peevish and splenetic hours, exclaim,

1My.

My foul is weary of my lfe, let them SE R M.

I.

know, let them be aflured, that this is v
no other than the judgment of God
overtaking them for their vices and fol-
lies. Their complaints of misery are en-
titled to no compaflion; nay, they are
sinful, because they arise from a sinful
cause; from a mind broken and debated
by luxury and corruption. They are the
authors of their own misery, by having
thrown away on the follies of the world
those powers which God had bestowed
on them for nobler ends.-Let them re-
turn to the duties of men and Chriflians.
Let them retreat from frivolity, and ab-
slain from excess. Let them study tem-
perance, moderation, and feif-command.
By entering on a virtuous and manly
course of aation, and applying to the ho-
nourabfe discharge of the funtions of
their tfationl they will acquire different
views. They will obtain more real enjoy-
ment of life, and become more willing to
prolong it.- But, after the warnings
which God has given tl'em of their miC-

B 4. behaviour

S E RM. behaviour by the inward misery they

I.
_, susser, if they still continue to run the

fame intemperate round, and to drain
pleasure to the last dregs, it shall come
to pass, that they who now contemn life,
and are impatient of its continuance,
shall be the persons most eager to pro-
long it. When they behold it in reality
drawing towards a close, and are obliged
to look forward to what is to come after
it, tley shall be rendered awfully fenfi-
ble of its value. They will then grasp
eagerly at the flying hours; anxious to
stop them if they could, and to employ
every moment that remains in repairing
their past errors, and in making their
peace, if possible, with God and heaven.
According as they have sown, they ' r
re7p. They are reduced to eat .: i
of their ow2 wa's, and to be .,d wi^h
theirj own advices.

Ti-ERE remains si!' n third claf of those

who from disc .r a: ' become weary
of life; such . iav embittcred it to

the:cSlves

themselves by the consciousness of cri- SER M.
minal deeds. They have been, perhaps, -,
unnatural to their parents, or treache-
rous to their friends; they have viola-
ted their fidelity; have enfilared and
ruined the innocent; or have occasioned
the death of others. There is no won-
der that fiuch persons should lole their
relith for life. To whatever ars they
may have recourse for procuring a de-
ceitful peace, conscience vill at times ex-
ert its native power, and flake over them
its terrific scourge. The internal misery
they endure has sometimes arisen to such
a height, as has made them terminate,
with their own hands, an existence which
they felt to be infupportable.-To the
complaints of such persons no remedy
can be furnished, except what arises from
the bitterness of sincere and deep repent-
ance. We can do no more than exhort
them to atone as much as is in their power
for the evils they have committed; and
to fly to the divine mercy through Jesus

Christ

SERM. Chris for pardon and forgiveness. Let

1.

, us now,

II. TURN to persons of another defcrip-

tion, and confider the sentiment in the
text as extorted by situations of distress.
These are so variously multiplied in the
world, and often so opprefive and heavy,
that assuredly it is not uncommon to hear
the afflited complain that they are weary
of life. Their complaints, if not always
allowable, yet certainly are more excusable
than those which flow from the sources
of diffatisfadion already mentioned. They
are sufferers, not so much through their
own mifcondu&, as through the appoint-
ment of Providence; and therefore to
persons in this situation it may seem more
needful to offer consolation, than to give
admonition. However, as the evils which
produce this impatience of life are of
different forts, a diflindion must be made
as to the situations which can most ex-
cufe it.

SOMETIMIES,

SOMETIMES, the exclamation in the SERM.

text may be occasioned by deep and over-
whelming grief. When they whom we
had most affectionately loved, and in
whom we had placed the felicity of our
days, are taken away, our connection
with life appears to be dissolved. " Why
" should we survive those to whom our
" fouls were tied? Would to God we
" had died before them! Now when they
" are gone, all pleasure and hope is gone
" as to us. To us the fun no longer flines
" with his usual brightness. No longer
" cheerfulness invests the face of Nature.
" On every objcEt a fad gloom appears
" to reft; and every employment of life
" is become an oppressive burden." With
the feelings of those who are thus dif-
tressed we naturally sympathise. They
are frequently the feelings of the most
virtuous and amiable minds: And yet
such persons must be told, that grief may
be indulged so far as to become immo-
derate and improper. There are bounds
which are prescribed to it both by reason

3 and

; ER M. and by religion. A Christian ought not

_ to mourn like those who have no bqe.

While he feels his sorrows as a man, he
lhould also study to bear them like a
man, with fortitude; and not abandon
himself to feeble and fruitless melancho-
ly. Let him have recourse to a flre-
nuous discharge of the duties of his fla-
tion, and confider it as incumbent on
him to make the best improvement that
he can of those comforts which Provi-
dence has still left in his poffeflion.

AGAIN; it sometimes happens that,

apart from grief, great reverses of world-
ly fortune give rife to the lamentation
in the text. This was the cafe with Job
himself. A sudden fall from opulence
into indigence and want; some undeferv-
ed disgrace incurred, or some unexpet-
ed cloud thrown over former reputation
and fame; the unkindness and desertion
of friends, or the insolent triumph of
enemies, are apt to overwheln the minds
of men with gloom, and to reduce them

B to

to be weary of life. To persons under SERM.
such calamities, sympathy is due. That
sympathy, however, will be proportion-
ed to the degree in which we confider
them as free from blame in the misfor-
tunes which they susser. As far as,
through their own mifcondu& and vice,
they have been the authors to themselves
of those misfortunes, we withdraw our
pity. The burthen which they have
brought on themselves we leave them
to bear as they can; and with little con-
cern we hear them exclaim that their
fouls are weary of life.-Not only so, but
even in cafes where calamities have fallen
on the innocent, to the pity which we
feel for them will be joined a secret con-
tempt, if we perceive that together with
their prosperity, their courage and for-
titude have also forsaken them. To
abandon themselves to dejecdion carries
no mark of a great or a worthy mind.
Instead of declaring that his foul is weary
of his life, it becomes a brave and a good
man, in the evil day, with firmness to

maintain

SERM. maintain his post; to bear up against the

._.. storm; to have recourse to those advan-

tages which, in the worif of times, are
always left to integrity and virtue; and
never to give up the hope that better
days may yet arise.

It is good for persons in such situations

to remark that, though Job was for a
long while severely tried by a variety of
distresses, yet his condition was not left
finally unhappy. On the contrary, the
goodness of that God whom he had ferv-
ed returned at lafl, to fline upon him
with greater brightness than ever. His
riches were restored to him twofold. The
lofles in his family were repaired by a
new offspring. His name became again
renowned in the East; and the latter
end of 'ob, we are told, was more blecd
than the beginning.

BUT fill, it may be afled, will not

the continuance of long and revere dif-
ease justify the exclamation in the text,
My, fol is wea7y of .'y lfe.? To persons

who

who are forsaken by all the blessings of ERM.
health, and who have no prospect left,
but that of lingering under sickness or
pain, Job's complaint may afluredly be
forgiven more than to any others. Though
it might be fuggeffed to them, that even
in old age and fickncfs, except in very
extreme cafes, some rcfources are always
left, of which they may avail themselves
for relief; yet it mufft be admitted, that
lawfully they may nwifl their fifferings
to be brought to an end. Still, however,
they muff remember, that resignation to
the pleasure of Heaven continues to be
their duty to the lass. As lohg as any
part remains to be ated, as long as their
continuance in the world can serve any
valuable purpose, it is more honourable
to bear the load with magnanimity, than
to give way to a querulous and dejeted
iDirit. It remains,

III. To address myself to another or-

der of men, among whom, though more
rarely than among those whom I have

described,

SER M. described, the sentiment of the test is to

1, be found. They are persons who have

no particular complaint to make of the
injuflice of the world, or the afflicqions
of their state. But they are tired of the
vanity of the world, of its insipid enjoy-
ments, and its perpetually revolving cir-
cle of trifles and follies. They feel
themselves made for something greater
and nobler. They are disgusted and hurt
with the scenes of wickedness that are
often pafling before their eyes. Their
hearts are warmed with the thoughts of
a purer and more perfect cxiftence de-
signed for man; and in the moments of
aspiration after it, the exclamation breaks
forth, My foul is liealy of my Ifi,.-0 that
I had wings like a dove ! for then I would
fy away and be at red. Lo then I would
wander far of, and remain in the wilder-
ness. I would aqflen my escape .rom the'
windy lorm and tempef. For I have fees
violence and Jlrfe in the city. iidkedLefs
is in the mii thereof; deceit and guile de-

part

part not from her Jreets *.-In this view s E R M.
the sentiment in the text may sometimes I,
be that of a devout man. But such per-
sons I muff admonish, that their devo-
tion, how sincere however, is not alto-
gether of a rational and chastened kind.
It was from this temper that, in former
ages of the church, the numerous race
sprung of anchorets, hermits, and all the
various orders who voluntarily abandon-
ed the world, to people the lonely defarts
and the monastic retreat. The ordinary
course of things seemed below them as
candidates for heaven. The concerns of
the world appeared unworthy of their
attention, and dangerous to their virtue.
Breathing after a higher state, they ima-
gined that they could not abftraft them-
selves too much from every earthly ainufe-
mcnt, as long as they were forced to re-
main in this place of exile.

Let us beware of all such imaginary
refinements as produce a total disrelish

* Pfal. v. 6- .
VOL. IV. C of

SE RM. of our present condition. They are, for

the mofi parr, grafted either on difap-
pointed pursuits, or on a melancholy and
Splenetic cast of mind. They are far
from contributing to happiness, and arc
inconfinent with all the active virtues of
man. This life defcrves not indeed to
be put in competition with that blessed
immortality to vwhich God has raised our
hopes. But such as it is, it is the gift
of God. It is the sphere in which his
wliflom has placed us, and appointed us
to a&c our parts. As long as it lasts, we
must neither flight the duties which it
requires, nor undervalue the innocent
enjoyments which it offers. It belongs
to a man to live among men as his bre-
thren; which he who declares himself
weary of life is not qualified to do with
propriety.

Trius I have placed before yvou in

various views, the si ntimn. il 't.e c:':t;
and have fhw,:n '. ,':.
: .~i.:cC,

Ille

life arises which is often found among SERM.
mankind. On a review of the whole, "
we cannot but acknowledge, that it is
oftener to be ascribed to our own vices
and follies, than to any other caufc.
Among the multitudes in the world, to
whom at this day life is burdensome, the
far greater number is of those who have
rendered it so to themselves. Their idle-
ness, their luxury and pleasures, their
criminal deeds, their immoderate pafflons,
their timidity and baseness of mind, have
dejeaed them in such a degree, as to
make them weary of their existence.
Preyed upon by discontent of their own
creating, they complain of life when they
ought to reprehend themfelvcs.

Various afflidtions there doubtless are

in the world; many persons with whom
we have cause to sympathise, and whom
we might reasonably forgive for wi(h-
ing death to close their sorrows. But of
the evils which embitter life, it muff be
admitted, that the greater part is such as
we have brought on ourselves; or at least

C 2 fuclI

S E R M. fich as, if we were not wanting to our-

selves, might be tolerably supported.
When we compute the numbers of those
who are disposed to fay, Myfoul is weary
of ny life, some there are to whom this
sentiment is excusable; but many more
among whom it is in no way justifiable.
I admit that, among the worthiest and
the best, there may be dark moments
in which some feeling of this nature may
be apt to intrude upon their minds. But
with them they are only moments of
occasional and passing gloom. They soon
recal the vigour of their minds; and re-
turn with satisfaction to the discharge
of the duties, and to a participation of
the cujoyments, of life.

One great cause of men's becoming

weary of life is grounded on the miftak-
en views of it which they have formed,
and the false hopes which they have en-
tcrtained from it. They have expetcd a
scene of enjoyment; and when they meet
with disappointments and difirefles, they
complain of life, as if it had cheated and

betrayed

betrayed them. God ordained no such S E R M.
possession for man on earth as continued v_
pleasure. For the wisest purposes he de-
signed our slate to be checquered with
pleasure and pain. As such let us receive
it, and make the best of what is doomed
to be our lot. Let us remain persuaded,
that simple and moderate pleasures are
always the best; that virtue and a good
conscience are the surest foundations of
enjoyment; that he who serves his God
and his Saviour with the pureit inten-
tions, and governs his paflions with the
greatest care, is likely to lead the happiest
life. Following thele principles, we shall
meet with fewer occasions of being wea-
ry of life; we ihall always find Iome fa-
tisfadions mixed with its crofies; and
fllall be enabled to wait with a humble
and contented mind till the Almighty,
in his appointed time, finish our state of
trial, and remove us to a more blefied
abode.

C3

# SERMON II. On CHARITY as the End of the COMMANDMENT. I TIMOTHY, i. 5. Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

[ 22 ]

SERMON II.
On CHARITY as the End of the COM-

MANDMENT.

i TIMOTHY, i. 5.
IVow the end of the comn,.andmzent is eoa-

rity out of a pure heart, and of a good
conifcience, and offaith bunfig.cd.

SERM. T appears from this chapter that one
I_- , design of the Apostle, in writing to

Timothy, was to guard him against cer-
tain corrupters of Chriflian doEtrine, who
had already risen in the church. To
thc i, false representations of religion he
opposes that general view of it which is
given in the text. Such summaries of

religion

religion frequently occur in the sacred SERM.
writings; and are extremely useful. By _-
the comprehensive energy with which they
express the great lines of our duty, they
both imprint them on our memory, and
bring them home to our conscience with
force. In the progress of this discourse,
I hope to make it appear, that the words
of the text afford a molt enlarged and
inftrudive view of religion in ail its
chief parts,

The Apotle pronounces charity to be

the end or scope of the commandment, that
is, of the law of God. At the fame time,
in order to prevent mistakes on this most
important subjea, he subjoins to charity
certain adjuncs, as necessary to qualify
it, and to render the Chriiflan character
complete. These are the pire heart, the
good conscience, and faith unfeigncd. In
treating of there, I shall (hew the nature
of their connexion with charity, and the
importance of their being always united
with it,

C4 She

s E M. The end of the commandment is charity,

L_,_ Charity is the fame with benevolence or

love; and is the term uniformly em-
ployed, in the New Testament, to denote
all the good affections which we ought
to bear towards one another. It consists
not in speculative ideas of general bene-
volence floating in the head, and leaving
the heart, as speculations too often do,
untouched and cold. Neither is it con-
fined to that indolent gocd nature, which
makes us reft satisfied with being free
from inveterate malice, or ill-will to our
fellow-creatures, without prompting us
to be of service to any. True charity
is an aative principle. It is not proper-
ly a single virtue; but a disposition re-
fiding in the heart, as a fountain whence
all the virtues of benignity, candour, for-
bearance, generosity, compassion, and li-
berality flow, as so many native itreams.
From general good-will to all, it extends
its influence particularly to those with
whom we stand in nearest connecion,
and who are direaly within the sphere

of

of our good offices. From the country SE RM.
or community to which we belong, it
descends to the smaller associations of
neighbourhood, relations, and fiiends;
and spreads itself over the whole circle
of social and domestic life. I mean not
that it imports a promiscuous undiftin-
guihing affecaion, which gives every
man an equal title to our love. Cha-
rity, if we fliould endeavour to carry it
so far, would be rendered an impraci-
cable virtue, and would resolve itself
into mere words, without affeaing the
heart. True charity attempts not to shut
our eyes to the distinction between good
and bad men; nor to warm our hearts
equally to those who befriend and those
who injure us. It reserves our esteem
for good men, and our complacency for
our friends. Towards our enemies it
inspires forgiveness and humanity. It
breathes universal candour, and liberality
of sentiment. It forms gentleness of
temper, and dictates affability of man-
ners. It prompts corresponding fympa-

thies

SERM. thies with them who rejoice and them
A_» who weep. It teaches us to flight and

despise no man. Charity is the comfort-
er of the affliaed, the protetor of the
oppressed, the reconciler of differences,
the intercessor for offenders. It is faith-
fulness in the friend, public spirit in the
magifirate, equity and patience in the
judge, moderation in the Sovereign, and
loyalty in the fubjeet. In parents it is
care and attention; in children it is re-
verence and lubmlilion. In a word, it
is the foul of social life. It is the fun
that enlivens and cheers the abodes of
men. It is like the dew of Hermon, fays
the Psalmist, and the dew that defcenedeth
on the mountains of Zion, where the Lord
commannded the blefing, even lIfe for ever-
more ".

SUCH charity, fays the text, is the end

of the conmmandment. This assertion of the
Apostle is undoubtedly consonant to all
that reason can fuggell on the fubjedc of

Pfal. cxxxiii. 3.

religion,

religion. For, on confidering the nature s E RM.
of the Supreme Being, reason gives us _'

H

much ground to believe, that the chief
design of all the commandments which
he has given to men, is to promote their
happiness. Independent and felf-fufficicnt,
that Supreme Being has nothing to exa.
from us for his own intcreft or felicity.
By our services he cannot be benefited,
nor by our offences injured. When he
created the world, it was benevolence that
moved him to confer existence. When
he made himself known to his creatures,
benevolende in like manner moved him
to give them laws for their conduct.
Benevolence is the spring cf legislation
in the Deity, as much as it was the mo-
tive of creation. Hie issued his com-
mands on earth on purpose that by obe-
dience to them, his creatures might be
rendered happy among themselves in this
life, and be prepared for greater happiness
in another. Charity, especially when
joined with purity, good conscience, and

faith,

SERM. faith, is obviously the great instrument

for this purpose ; and therefore must needs
possess the chief and primary place in the
laws of God.

Accordingly, throughout the New Tef-

tament, it is uniformly presented to us
in the fame light in which it is placed by
the text. This is known to all who have
any acquaintance with the sacrcd books.
Charity is termed the filflli;ng of the law,
and the bond of perfetc/fs-. jt was affum-
ed by our blessed Lord as the charade-
riftical dilind.ion of his disciples; and
in that magnificent eulogium u which the
apostle Paul pronounces upon it, in the
thirteenth chapter of the first epitle to the
Corinthians, it is expressly preferred by
Lim to faith and hope. This deserves to
be ferioufil con!idered by thole who are
apt to undervalue charity, as an appen-
dage of what they contemptuously call
Morality; while they confine true reli-
gion to onme favourite tenets and obferv-
ances of their own, which they confi-

13 der

der as comprehending the furn of what SER M.
is acceptable to God. Such persons shew v
themselves profoundly ignorant of the
nature of religion, and may too often be
fufpeded of being strangers to its influ-
ence. For, as the apnole John reasons,
He that loveth not his brotwher, ihom he
hathfien, hozw crian b love /th1t God vwhom
he bath notfcell '

AT the fame time, while I ascribe to

charity that high place in the fyftcm of re-
ligion, which justly belongs to it, I am not
to be understood as confi:.ing all religion
to this disposition alone. With mucl
wisdom and propriety, the text hath an-
nexed to it certain adjuncts, vwithout
which neither the characder of a good
man can be completed, nor charity it-
self exercised to advantage. To the con-
fideration of these I now prcceed; and
I enter the more readily on this branch
of the subjeCt, as there is graund to be-

* Johrn, iv. 2o.

lieve,

S E R . lieve, that many pretend to poflefs cha.
,.--, rity, without properly understanding its

nature and efficacy. There has been al-
ways an unhappy tendency among men
to run to extremes, on one fide or other,
in matters of religion. As one set of
men, who employ all their zeal on right
belief, are prone to undervalue good prac-
tice; so another set, who wifl to be
esteemed rational Chritfians, are inclined
to reft the whole of their duty on chari-
table deeds, while they overlook certain
dilfofitions and habits which ought always
to accompany them. It is therefore of
importance, that the mistakes of both there
classes of men ihould be rcCified, in order
that religion iray be held forth to the world
in its complete form, and in its full and
undiminished luilrc.

rT E first qu.licati oIlot charity point-

ed out in the text is purity ; chariity out
of a pure /i;c;'. Purity includes the vir-
tues which belong to the individual,

7 confidered

confidcred in himself, and with refped SE RM.
to the government of his desires and
pleafires. It hath its feat in the heart;
but extends its influence over so much
of the outward condut, as to form a
great and material part of the character.
They are only the pzre in heart, we are
told by our Saviour, who can fee God.
It is allf true, that they are only the pure
il heart who can properly dichiurge their
duties towards man!ind. Inordinate love
of pleaiure, iintenmpcaaicc, sensuality, and
a course of irregular life, arc inconlincnt,
not only with the general character of a
good man, but alob with the peculiar
exercises of charity and benevolence. For
nothing is more certain, than that habits
of licentious indulgence contribute to
stifle all the good ailceions; to harden
the heart; to nouriih that fclfiih attach-
ment to our own vitious pleasures which
renders us insensible to the circumflances

' MIa:th. v. S.

a.; tl

SER M. and wants of others. A profligate

,._ man is seldom found to be a good hus-

band, a good father, or a beneficent
neighbour. How many young persons
have at firfi set out in the world with
excellent dispositions of heart; generous,
charitable, and humane; kind to their
friends, and amiable among all with
w ;hon they had intercourse And yet
how often have we ieen all those fair
appearances unhappily blasted in the pro-
grefs of life, merely through the influ-
ence of loose and corrupting pleasures;
and those very persons who promised
once to be blessings to the world, funk
down, in the end, to be the burthen and
nuisance of ':iciy ? The profusion cf
expence which their pleasures occasion,
accounts in a great measure for the fatal
reverie that takes place in their charac-
ter. It not only drains the sources
whence the streams of beneficence should
flow, but often obliges them to become
oppressive and cruel to those whom it was

their

their duty to have patronised and sup- S

E M.
ported.

Purity of heart and conduc muff there-

fore be held fundamental to charity and
love, as well as to general piety and vir-
tue. The licentious, I know, are ready
to imagine, that their occasional deeds
of bounty and liberality will atone for
many of their private difordcrs. But,
besides that such plans of compensation
for vices, by some supposed virtues, are
always fallacious, the licentious may be
assured, that it is an appearance only of
charity, not the reality of it, to which
they can lay claim. For that great vir-
tue consists not in occasional actions of
humanity, in fits of kindness or compaf-
sion, to which bad men may be prompted
by natural inflinCt; but in the steady and
iegular exercise of those good affe1ions,
and the discharge of those important du-
ties towards others, for which the licen-
tious are in a great measure disqualified.
Their criminal propensities direc their
inclinations to very different objects and

VOL. IV. D pursuits;

S ER M. pursuits; and often determine them to
E-m,-» sacrifice the juit rights of others, some-

times to sacrifice the peace and the re-
putation of the innocent, to the gratifi-
cation of their paflions. Such is the per-
nicious influence which the love of plea-
sure has on the good qualities of its de-
voted votaries. The impure heart is like
the stagnant and putrifying lake, which
fends forth its poisonous exhalations to
corrupt and wither every plant that grows
on its banks.

THE second qualification annexed to

Charity, in the text, is, that it be of a
good co/cience. By this I understand the
Apofile to mean, that charity be in full
consistency with justice and integrity;
that the coifcience of the man who pur-
poses to perform ations of benevolence,
be free from the reproach of having ne-
glected the primary duties of equity.
For, undoubtedly, justice is a virtue pri-
mary to charity; that is, it must go be-
fore it in all its exertions. One must first

do

do jlufly before he can pretend that he s E R M.
loves mercy.-Religion, my friends, in or-
der to render it useful to mankind, must
be brought down by its teachers from the
fublimiiy of speculation to the funtions
and occupations of ordinary life. It is
my duty to admoniih you, that you muff,
in the first place, be fair in all your deal-
ings with others; you muff discharge the
debts you owe; you must pay the wages
due to your servants and dependents;
you must provide for your own family,
and be just to the claims of relations;
then, and then only, you can, from a good
concicence, as the text enjoins, perform
aas of generosity and mercy.

This leads to a refletion which here

deserves our attention; that, in order to
fulfil that charity which is the end of the
commandment oeconomy, and good order
in private life, ought to be carefully ftu-
died by all Chrifiians. This is more
closely connected with a good corfciencc,
than many seem inclined to admit. Oe-
conomy, when prudently and temperate-

D z ly

S E R M. ly conduced, is the safeguard of many

virtues; and is in a particular manner
favourable to the exertions of benevo-
lence. He who by inconsiderate con-
duct is injuring his circumfiances, will
probably in time lose the inclination, and
certainly is depriving himself of the means,
of being serviceable to his brethren. Some
important exertions, indeed, there are
of charity which have no connecion
with giving or bellowing. Candour, for-
givenefs, gentlcnefs, and sympathy, are
due to our brethren at all times, and in
every situation of our own fortune. The
poor have opportunities for displaying
there virtues, as well as the rich. They
who have nothing to give, can often afford
relief to others, by imparting what they
feel. But, as far as beneficence is in-
cluded in charity, we ought always to
remember, that juRice must, in the first
place, be held inviolably sacred.

The wifdoni of scripture remarkably

appears, in the connexion pointed out
by the text between cla-rty and good coz-

science

fiiece or integrity; a connexion which I S E RM.
apprehend is often not attended to so much y
as it deserves. Among the frugal and in-
duftrious, great regard is commonly paid
to justice. They will not defraud. They
will not take any unliawful advantage
in their dealings: And, latisfied with this
degree of good conlfcicnce, they are firan-
gers to that charity, which is the end
of the commandmlent. They are hard and
unfeeling. They are rigid and ievere in
their demands. They know nothing of
humanity, forgiveness, or compafion.-
Among another class of men, who have
been more liberally educated, and who
are generally of a higher rank in life, jus-
tice is apt to be confidered as a virtue less
noble than charity; and which may on
some occasions be dispensed with. They
are humane perhaps, and tendlr in their
feelings. They are easy to their depend-
ents. They can be liberal, even to profu-
sion. While, at the fame time, they are
accumulating debts, which they know
themselves unable to dil;harge. Their

D aTairs

SE R M. affairs are allowed to run into confusion.
I "l, Oeconomy and good order are neglected.

The innocent, in great numbers, susser
materially through their mismanagement:
And all the while they assume to them-
selves the praise of being generous and
good-hearted men. This surely is not that
charity which the Gospel enjoins; and
which, in its very essence, involves good
cotfcience and integrity. He who pre-
tends to do good to his brethren, without
first doing them justice, cannot be acount-
ed their real friend. True charity is not
a meteor, which occasionally glares; but a
luminary, which, in its orderly and re-
gular course, dispenses a benignant influ-
ence.

THE third and last adjunct conneted in

the text with charity is, that it be of faith
unfeigned. Faith, in the scripture sense of
it, includes the whole of religious princi-
ples refpecing God, and respeCting Christ.
Good principles, without good practice, I
confers, are nothing; they are of no avail

in

in the' fight of God, nor in the eftimatian s E R M.
of wife men. But pratice not founded .._
on principle is likely to be always unfta-
ble and wavering; and, therefore, the
faith of religious principles enters, fbr a
very considerable share, into the proper
discharge of the duties of charity.

It will be admitted that, without faith,

our duties towards God cannot be pro-
perly performed. You may be assured
that your duties towards men will al-
ways greatly susser from the want of it.
Faith, when pure and genuine, supplies
to every part of virtue, and in particular
to the virtue of charity, many motives
and assistances, of which the unbeliev-
er is destitute. He who ads from
faith ads upon the high principle of re-
gard to the God who hath made him,
and to the Saviour who redeems him;
which will often flimulate him to his
duty when other principles of benevo-
lence become faint and languid, or are
crofed by opposite intereits. When he
confiders himself as pursuing the appro-

D 4 bation

sE R M. bation of that divine Being, from whoma
-.- love descends, a sacred enthusiasm both

prompts, and consecrates, his charitable
dispositions. Regardless of men, or of
human recompence, he is carried along
by a higher impulse. He acds with the
spirit of a follower of the Son of God,
who not only has enjoined love, but has
enforced it by the example of laying
down his life for mankind. Whatever
he does in behalf of his fellow-creatures
he confiders himfeif as doing, in some de-
gree, to that divine Person, who hath
said, Inafiuch as ye have done it unto one
of the leafl of these my brethrn, ye have
done it nt!o me '. Hence charity is with
him not only a moral virtue, but a Chris-
tian grace. It acquires additional dignity
and energy from beilg conne&ed with
the heavenly state and the heavenly in-
habitants. He mingles with beings of a
higher order, while he is discharging his
duty to his fellow-creatures on earth; and

M'atLh. xxv. 40.

by

by joining faith and piety to good works, SE RM.
he completes the character of a Chris-
tian.

THiU I have endeavoured to cxp!ain

the full fenie of that comprehensive view
of religion which is given in the text.
I have shewn in what refpcSs charity
joined with the ptire heart, the good con-
fienlce, and fiith tnfeigned, forms the end
of the commandment. Let uss ever keep
in view those essential parts of a virtuous
character, and preserve them in their
proper union. Thus shall our religion
rife into a regular and well-proportioned
edifice, where each part gives firmness
and support to another. If any one of
those material parts be wanting in the
firudure; if, out of our system of cha-
rity, either purity, or justice, or faith,
be left, there will be cracks and flaws
in the building which prepare its ruin.

This is indeed one of the greatest and
molt frequent errors of men, in their

moral

SERM. moral conduci. They take hold of vir-

II.

tue by pieces and corners only. Few
are so depraved as to be without all sense
of duty, and all regard to it. To some
moral qualities, which appear to them
amiable or efimable, almost all men lay
claim; and on these they reft their worth,
in their own estimation. But these scat-
tered pieces of virtue, not uniting into
one whole, nor forming a consistent cha-
rader, have no powerful influence on
their general habits of life. From various
unguarded quarters they lie open to
temptation. Their lives are full of con-
tradition, and perpetually flucuate be-
tween good and evil. Virtue can nei-
ther rife to its native dignity, nor attain
its proper rewards, until all its chief parts
be joined together in our charaaer, and
exert an equal authority in regulating our
conduct.

# SERMON III. On our LIVES being in the Hand of GOD. [Preached at the Beginning of a New Year*.] PSALM xxxi. 15. My times are in thy hand. —

[ 43

SERMON III.
On our LIVES being in the Hand of

GOD.
[Preached at the Beginning of a New Year *.]

PSALMI xxxi. I5.

My times are in thy hand.-
~T HE fun that rolls over our heads, sER M.

the food that we receive, the reft:_

that we enjoy, daily admonifi us of a
superior power, on whom the inhabitants
of the earth depend for light, life, and
subsistence. But as long as all things

* January 6th, 1793.

proceed

SE R M. proceed in their ordinary course;. when
,__,d day returns after day with perfct: fimi-

larity; when our life seems Rfationary,
and nothing occurs to warn us of any
approaching change, the religious senti-
ments of dependence are apt to be for-
gotten. The great revolutions of time,
when they come round in their Rated
order, have a tendency to force some im-
pressions of piety even on the molt un-
thinking minds. They both mark our
existence on earth to be advancing to-
wards its close, and exhibit our condition
as continually changing; while each re-
turning year brings along with it new
events, and at the fame time carries us
forwards to the conclusion of all. We
cannot, on such occasions, avoid perceiv-
ing, that there is a Supreme Being who
holds in his hands the line of our existence,
and meafurcs out to each of us our allot-
ted portion of that line. Beyond a certain
limit, we know that it cannot be extend-
ed; and long before it reach that limit it
may be cut asunder by an invisible hand,

I which

which is flretched forth over all the inha- sERM.
bitants of the world. Then naturally .
arises the ejaculation of the text, My times,
0 God, are in thy hall. " My fate de-

pends on thee. The duration of my

"life, and all the events which in fu-
" ture days are to fill it, are entirely at
" thy difpofal."-Let us now, when we
have just seen one year close, and another
begin, meditate seriously on this senti-
ment. Let us confider what is implied
in our times being in the hand of God; and
to what improvement this meditation
leads.

TIIE text evidently implies, first, that

our times are not in our own hand; that,
as our continuance in life depends not
on ourselves, so the events which are
to happen, while life remains, are un-
known to us, and not under our own
direaion. Of this we may behold
many a proof, when we look back on the
tranfaaions of the year which is jus
finished. Recolleaion will readily present

to

SERM.to us a busy period, filled up with a

III.
.. *.mixture of business and amusement, of

anxieties and cares, of joys and sorrows.
We have talked, perhaps, and acted much.
We have formed many a plan; in pub-
lic or in private life, we have been en-
gaged in a variety of pursuits. Let me
now ask, how small a proportion of all
that has happened could have been fore-
seen, or foretold by us? How many
things have occurred, of which we had
no expectation; some, perhaps, that have
succeeded beyond our hopes; many,
also, that have befallen us contrary to
our wish? How often were each of us ad-
monished that there are secret wheels,
which, unseen by us, bring about the
revolutions of human affairs; and that,
while man was devising his way, Provi-
dence was direCLing the event ?

That scene is now closcd. The tale of

that year has been told. We look for-
ward to the year which is beginning;
and what do we behold there ?-All, my
brethren, is a blaink to our view: A dark

3 munknown

unknown presents itself. We are enter- E R M.
ing on an untried, undiscovered coun-
try, where, as each succeeding month
comes forward, new scenes may open;
new objecs may engage our attention;
changes at home or abroad, in public or
in private affairs, may alter the whole
slate of our fortune. New connexions
may be at hand to be formed, or old
ones just about to be diflblved; perhaps,
we may have little more to do with this
world, or with any of its connexions;
we may be tfanding on the verge of time
and life, and on the point of palsing
into a new region of cxiflence. In flhort,
the profpcec before us is full of awful
uncertainty. Life and death, prosperity
and adversity, health and sickness, joy
and trouble, lie in one undiftinguiflable
mass, where our eye can descry nothing
through the obscurity that wraps them
up.

While it is thus certain that our times

are not at our own disposal, we are
taught, by the text, that they are in, the

hand

S R M. hand of God. This may be confideric'
A_, in two views Our times are in the hand

of God, as a supreme Disposer of events
Thcv are in the hand of God, as a Guard-
ian and a Father.

Our times, I fay, are in the banid of

Goil as a supreme irresistible Ruler. All
that is to happen to us in this and the
succeeding years of our life,-if any fuc-
ceeding years we ihall be allowed to fee,-
has been foreknown and arranged by
God. The firfi view, under which hu-
man affairs present themselves to us, is
that of confused and irregular fucceflion
The events of the world seem thrown
together by chance, like the billows of
the ita, tumuling and tofirng over each
other, without rule or order. All that
is apparent to us is the fluQuation of hu-
man caprices and the operation of hu-
man passions. WVe fee the strife of am-
bition, and the efforts of stratagem, la-
bouring to accomplifli their several pur-
poics among the societies of men. But

it

it is no more than the surface, the out- SERM.
fide of things that we behold. Higher
counsels, than it is in our power to trace,
are concerned in the tranfaEions of the
world. If we believe in God at all, as
the Governor of the universe, we must
believe that, without his providence, no-
thing happens on earth. He over-rules,
at his pleasure, the passions of men. He
bends all their designs into subserviency
to his decree. He makes the wrath of man
to praise him; and ref/rains, in what mea-
sure he thinks fit, the remainder of wrath *.
He brings forth in their course all the
generations of men When the time is
come for their entering into light, they
appear on the stage; and when the time
fixed for their dismission arrives, he
changes their countenance, and fends them
away. The time of our appearing is now
come, after our ancestors had left their
place, and gone down to the dust. We

Pfrlm Ixxvi. Ie.
VOL. IV. E are

SER M. are at present permitted to act our part

t-^ freely and without conlraint. No vio-

lence is done to our inclination or choice.
But afluredly there is not a day of our life,
nor an event in that day, but was foreseen
by God. That succession of occurrences,
which to us is full of obscurity and dark-
ness, is all light and order in his view. He
fees from the beginning to the end; and
brings forward every thing that happens,
in its due time and place.

Our times are altogether ill is hand°

Let us take notice, that they are not in
the hands either of our enemies, or of
our friends. It is not in the power of
man to shorten or to prolong our life,
more or lets than God has decreed.
Enemies may emnploy craft or violence
in their attacks; friends may employ
Ikiil and vigilance for the preferva-
,ion of our health and safety; but
both the one and the other can have
effec only as far as God permints. They
wCork in subserviency to his purpose. By
him they are held in invisible bonds.

To

To the exertions of all hlmman agents SER ;M.
he fays, Hitherto fJhait tihou c;'iC, a;d o n(.o.
farther.

WE are to observe next, that owir t.'es

are in the hand of God, not only as an
almighty Disposer, but as a merciful
Guardian and Father. We are by no
means to imagine, that from race to race,
and from year to year, God sports with
the lives of succeeding generations of
men, or, in the mere wantonness of ar-
bitrary power, brings them forth, and
fends them away. No; if we have any
confidence in what either the light of Na-
ture suggests to all men, or what the
revelation of the Gospel has confirmed to
Christians, we have full ground to be-
lieve, that the adminitiration of human
affairs is conducted with infinite wifdorn
and goodness. The counsels of the Al-
mighty are indeed too deep for our limit-
ed understandings to trace. ] Iis s,/i
may often, as to us, be in the f'a, and s,:'

E 2 J ',H.

SERM.fooljeps in the nighty waters; while, ie-
._II verthelefs, all his paths are mercy and

truth. He who, from the benignity of
his nature, ere:ced this world for the
abode of men; He who furnished it so
richly for our accommodation, and tfored
it with so much beauty for our enter-
tainment ; He who, since first we en-
tered into life, hath followed us with such
a variety of mercies, surely can have no
?ieafure in our disappointment and dif-
trefs. He knows our frame; he remem-
bers we are diifl; and looks to frail man,
we are assured, with fich pitl as a father
beareth to his children :. To him we may
safely commit ourselves, and all our con-
cerns; as to one who is best qualified,
both to direct the incidents proper to
happen to us in this world, and to judge
of the time when it is fit for us to be re-
moved from it.

Even that ignorance of our future
destiny in life, of which we Sometimes

Psalm ciii. 13, 1.

complain,

complain, is a signal proof of his good- SERM.

III.

ness. He hides from us the view of fu- L-I-
turity, because the view would be dan-
gerous and overpowering. It would ei-
ther dispirit us with visions of terror, or
intoxicate us by the disclosure of success.
The veil which covers fiom our fight
the events of this and of succeeding years,
is a veil woven by the hand of mercy.
Our times are in his hand; and we have
reason to he glad that in his hand they
are kept, shut out from our view. Sub-
mit to his pleasure as an almighty Ruler
we must, because we cannot resist hiim.
Equal reason there is for trusting in him
as a Guardian, under whose disposal we
are safe.

SucHi is the import of the text, that
lour tines are in the hand of God. Our
times are unknown to us, and not under
our own diretion. They are in the
hands of God as a Governor and Ruler;
in the hands of God as a Guardian and
Father. These separate views of the text

E 3 require,

SE RM. require, on cur part, separate improve.

III.

ments.

SEEING our times are not in our own

hand, feeing futurity is unknown to us,
let us, first, check the vain curiosity of pe-
netrating into what is to come. Conjec-
ture about futurity we often must; but
upon all conjecures of what this year is
to p;oduce, Ict us lay a proper restraint.
Let us wait t:l God shall bring forward
events in their proper cour'e, without
wiflhing tu discover what he has conceal-
ed; le'l, if the diicovery were granted,
we fihould fee many things, which we
would * ih not to have fecn.

Ti:e most common propensity of man-

kind is to flore fiturtity xith whate-
ver is agreeable to them; especially in
thole periods of life when ian:gination is
lively, and hope is ardenr. Looking for-
ward to the year now beginning, they
are rea(.y lo promiie tlhe mfeves much
from f e flundations of polpierity which
they have laid; from the friendships and

7 connexions

connexions which they have secured; SE RM.
from the plans of conduct which they have
formed. Alas ! how deceitful do all these
dreams of happinels often prove! While
many are faying in secret to their hearts,
Io-morrow Jhall be as this day and more
abundantly, we are obliged in return to fiy
to them, BoaJt not lby/el'of' to-morrow,fur
thouL knoweft not what a i.',iy may bring
forih. I do not mean, that in the un-
known profped which lies before us, we
should forebode to ourselves nothing but
misfortunes.-May it be the pleallire of
Heaven that this year run in in a placid
and tranquil tenor to us all!-But this
I fay, that in fitch foresight of futurity
as we are allowed to take, we may rec-
kon upon it as certain, that this year
shall prove to us, as many pail have
proved, a checquered scene of tom)e corn-
forts and ftme troubles. In what pro-
portion one or other of these shall prevail
in it; whether, when it ends, it shall
leave with us the memory of joys or of
sorrows, is to be determined by him in

E 4 whose

SERM. whose hands our times are. Our wis-

.-.- - dom is, to be prepared for whatever the

year is to bring; prepared to receive
comforts with thankfulness, troubles with
fortitude; and to improve both for the
great purposes of virtue and eternal life.

ANOTHER important inftrution which

naturally arises from our times not be-
ing in our own hands is, that we ought
no longer to trifle with what it is not in
our power to prolong; but that we should
make haste to live as wife men; not de-
laying till to-morrow what may be done
to-day; doing now with all our might
whatever our hand findeth to do; before
that night comelh wherein no man can work.

Amidst the uncertainty of the events

which are before us, there is one thing
we have too much reason to believe,
namely, that of us who are now afrem-
bled in this congregation, and who have
seen the year begin, there are some who
shall not survive to fee it close. Whe-
ther it shall be you, or you, or I, who

13 ;hall

mhall be gathered to our fathers before SERM.
the revolving year has finished its round,
God alone knows. Our times are in his
hand!-But to our place, it is more than
probable that some of us shall have gone.
Could we foretel the month, or the day,
on which our change was to happen,
how diligent would we be in setting our
house in order, and preparing ourselves
to appear before our Maker? Surely,
that ought to be prepared for with most
care, concerning which we are ignorant
how soon it is to take place. Let us
therefore walk circlnfpetij,, and redeem
the time. Let us difinifs those trivial and
superfluous cares which burden or cor-
rupt our life, in order to attend to what
is of highest importance to us as men and
Christians. The beginning of each year
should carry to us all a solemn admoni-
tion of our folly, in neglecting to im-
prove suitably the years that are past.
It flould call up mifpent time into our
view; and be like the hand coming forth
upon the wall, in the days of Belflaz.

zar,

SERM.zar, and writing in legible characers

~_ _over against us, " 0 man ! thy days are num-

"bered; thou art weighed in the balance,
" and found wanting; take care left thy
"kingdom be on the point of departing
" from thee."

WiHEN we confider, in the next place,

that our times, as I before illuitrated,
are in the hand of God as a sovereign
Disposer, it is an obvious inference from
this truth, that we should prepare our-
selves to fibmit patiently to his pleasure,
both as to the events which are to fill up
our days, and as to the time of our con-
tinuing in this world. To contend with
him we know to be fruitlclf. The word
that is gone out of his mouth must land.
In the path which he has marked out
for us, whether it be fllort or long, rug-
ged or smooth, we must walk. Is it not
then the dieate of wisdom, that we fmould
previously reconcile ourselves to this so-
vereign ordination, and bring our minds
to harmonize with what is appointed to
be our destiny ? Let us fortify this tem-

per,

per, by recalling that reflexion of the SERM.
wife man; WIFo k)toweth what is good for _-
man in this life; all the days of his vain
life which he fpendeth as a .hadow ?

To enjoy long life, and fee many days,

is the universal wilh; and, as the with
is prompted by nature, it cannot be in
itself unlawful. At the fame time, fe-
veral circumstances concur to temper
the eagcrnefs of this wiih; an! to ihew
us that it should always Le trmed un-
der due submission to the v. iiCr judge-
ment of I-eaven. Who among us can
tell, whether, in wishing for 'ice conti-
nuance of many years on earth, wV may
not be or.ly wiflingy for a prolongation
of diftrcfs and milery ?-Yr, might live,
my friends, till you had unlergone lin-
gering rounds of severe pain, fricn which
death would have proved a clafonahle
deliverance. You might live till your
breafis were pierced with many a wound
from public calamities or private fcrrows.

* Eccles. vl. 1z.

Yoa

SERM. You might live till you beheld the death

of all whom you had loved; till you fur-
vived all those who love you; till you
were left as desolate firangers on earth,
in the midst of a new race, who neither
knew you, nor cared for you, but who
wished you off the tfage.-Of a nature so
ambiguous are all the profpeds which life
sets before us, that in every with we form,
relating to them, much reason we have
to be satisfied that our times are in the
hands of God, rather than our own.

THIS consideration is greatly firength-

ened when, in the last place, we think of
God acEing, not as a Sovereign only, but
as a Guardian, in the disposal of our
times. This is our great consolation in
looking forward to futurity. To God
as a wife Ruler, calm submission is due;
but it is more than fubmiflion that be-
longs to him as a merciful Father; it is
the spirit of cordial and affectionate consent
to his will. Unknown to us as the times
to comle are, it should be fuflicient to our

full

full repose that they are known to God. SE R M.
The day and the hour which are fixed __
in his counsels for our difmifflon from
life, we ought to be persuaded are fixed
for the best; and that any longer we
should not wish to remain.

When we fee that last hour drawing

nigh, though our spirits may be coin-
posed on our own account, yet, on ac-
count of our friends and families, no
little anxiety and sorrow may be some-
times apt to take possession of the mind.
Long we have enjoyed the comfort of
their society, and been accustomed to con-
fider them as parts of ourselves. To be
parted from them for ever is, at any rate,
a bitter thought; but to the bitterness of
this, is over and above added the apprehen-
sion of their fuffiring much by our death.
We leave many a relation, perhaps may
leave young children, and a helpless family,
behind us, to be exposed to various dan-
gers, and thrown forth on an unfriendly
world. Such virtuous anxieties often
oppress the tender and feeling heart at

the

S E R M. the cioling periods of iife.-Myr I brethrIcn

_. look up to that God, in whose hands Ihe

times of your fathers were; in whose
hand the times of your poflerity shall
be. Recolled, for your comfort, the ex-
perience of ages. When were the righte-
ous utterly forfakcn by God in times
past ? Why should they be forsaken by
him in times to come ? Well did he govern
the world before you had a being in it'
WVell shall he continue to govern it after
you are no more. No cause have you, there-
fore, to oppress your minds with the load
of unknown futurity. Commit your
cares to a Father in heaven. Surrender
your life, your friends, and your family,
to that God, who hath said, 'he children
of h.isfervants /f.all conti;nze, and their feed
JIall be cfabiy/:cd before him '".-Leavc
th, fitherlefs children, I will pitferve them
alive; and let thy widows trvlJ in me -.

I AVE thus shewn what the import
is, and what the improvement should be,

* Palmi cii, zS. . Jcremiah, x!x. 1.

01

of the doOrine of the text, that o0rr i;ncs S E R M.
are in thc hand of God. It aflerts a fad,
the truth of which can be called in quef-
tion by none; a fadc which, whether
persons have any sentiments of religion
or not, is calculated to make a serious im-
prefion on every mind; elpecially at sea-
sons when the revolution of years gives
us warning that our duration on earth
is mealured, and advances towards its
period. To persons who are rcligioufiy
di!i;oied, who study to improve life to
its proper purposes, to do their duty to-
wards God and man, and through the
merits of their Redeemcr to obtain grace
and favour from Hcaven, the dotrine
of the text is flill more important. A-
mong them it tends to awAvken imprcf-
fions'which are not only lerious, but, as
I have flhewn, salutary and comnforting
to the heart,-Thankful that our times
are in the hand of a Sovereign, vwho is
both wife and gracious, let us prcpnre
ourselves to meet the approaching events
of life with becoming rcfignation, and

SE R M. at the fame time with manly constancy

*1I. and firm trust in God. As long as it

ihall please him to continue our abode
in the world, let us remain faithful to
our duty; and when it ihall please him
to give the command for our removal
hence, let us utter only this voice: "In
"thy hand, O my God, my times are.
" Thou art calling me away. Here I
"am, ready to obey thy call, and at thy
" signal to go forth. I thank thee that
" I have been admitted to partake so
" long of the comforts of life, and to
"be a fpedator of the wisdom and good-
" ness displayed in thy works. I thank
" thee that thou haft borne so long with
" my infirmities and provocations; haft
" allowed me to look up to thy promises
" in the gospel, and to hear the words
" of eternal life uttered by my great Re-
"deemer. With gratitude, faith, and
" hope, I commit my foul to thee. Lord

now lettCl thou 1thuy frvant depart in

"peace; for mine eyes have seen thy fal-
" vatioi."-Such are the fentimcnts with

which

which every pious and good man should SERM.
conclude his life. Such indeed are the '-.
sentiments which he ought to carry
through every part of life. With these
may we begin, and with these conclude,
every succeeding year which God shall
think fit to add to our earthly existence

VOL. IV. F

# SERMON IV. On the Mixture of BAD MEN with the GOOD in HUMAN SOCIETY. MATTH. xiii. 30. Let both grow together until the harvest. —

[ 66 ]

SERMON IV.
On the AMixture of BAD MEN with the

GOOD in HUMANI SOCIETY.

MATT H. xiii. 30.

Let both grow together until the harvcfl.-
SERM. THE parable, of which these words

_v ~ are a part, contains a prophetical

description of the state of the church.
Our Lord predicfs that the societies of
Christians were to be infeacd with per-
sons of loose principles and bad difpofi-
tions, whom he likens to tares springing
up among weabt. IIe intimates that
there fliould arise some whose officious

zeal

zeal would prompt the desire of extermi- S E R M.

IV.

nating immediately all such evil men;
but that this were contrary to the de-
signs of Providence, and to the spirit of
Christianity; that a complete separation
was indeed to be made at last between
the good and the bad; but that this fe-
paration was to be delayed till the end
of the world, when, in the Rile of the
parable, the tares should be entirely ga-
tiered out from among the wheat. Let
both grows together until the harveJi.

When we look around us, nothing is

more conspicuous in the state of the
world, than that broad mixture of the
religious and the impious, the virtuous
and the wicked, which we find taking
place in every society. Strong objec-
tions seem hence to arise against either
the wisdom or goodness of divine Pro-
vidence; especially when we behold bad
men not only tolerated in the world, but
occasionally exalted in their circum-
flances, to the depreflion of thejuft. Why,

F 2 it

SE RM. it will be said, if a Supreme Being exist,
._._ and if his justice rule the universe, does

he allow such infamous persons as the
records of history often present, to have
a place, and even to make a figure in
his world? Why sleeps the thunder idle
in his hand, when it could so easily blast
them ? What shall we think of one who,
having the power of exterminating them
always at his command, permits them
to proceed without disturbance; nay,
sometimes appears to look on them with
complacency ?-It becomes highly wor-
thy of our attention to confider what an-
fwer can be made to these objections;
to inquire whether any reasons can be
given that serve to justify this difpenfa-
tion of Providence, in allowing a mix-
ture of bad men to continue on the face
of the earth until the end of time. This
inquiry liall make the subjea of the
present discourse, together with such re-
flecions as naturally arise from survey-
ing the fiate of human affairs.

BUT,

BUT, before entering diretly on such SERM.

IV.

inquiry, it may be proper to take no-
tice, that, in our estimation of who are
the good, who are the bad, we are often
in hazard of committing mistakes. The
real charaters of men are known only
to God. They frequently depend on the
secret and unseen parts of life. As in
judging of themselves men are always
partial, so in judging of others they of-
ten err, through the imperfect informa-
tion which they have gathered, or the
rath prejudices which they have formed.
They are too apt to limit the character of
virtue to those who agree with them in
sentiment and belief; and to exaggerate
the failings of those against whom they
have conceived dislike, into great and
unpardonable crimes. Were it left to
the indiscreet zeal of some to extirpate
from the earth all those whom they con-
fider as bad men, there is ground to ap-
prehend that, instead of tares, the wheat
would often be rooted out.-At the fame
time, we readily admit the fact, as too

F 3 manifest

SERM. manifest to be denied, that a multitude

IV.
<_,j of gross and notorious finners are now

mixed with the followers of God and
virtue. Let us proceed then to confider
how far this is confifent with the justice
and wisdom of the Governor of the
world.

IT is a principle in which all serious

and reflecting persons have agreed, and
which by many arguments is confirmed,
that our present state on earth is designed
to be a state of discipline and improvement,
in order to fit human nature for a higher
and better state which it is to attain here-
after. Ncw, this principle being once
admitted, we fay, that the mixture of vir-
tue and vice which here prevails, is cal-
culated to answer this purpose better
than a more unmixed and perfect slate
of society would have done,

FOR, in the first place, the crimes of

the wicked give occasion to the exercise
ps many excellent dispositions of heart

amonO

among the righteous. They bring forth SERM.
all the suffering virtues, which otherwise IV.
would have had no field; and by the
exercise of which the human character is
tried, and acquires tome of its chief
honours. Were there no bad men in the
world to vex and distress the good, the
good might appear in the light of harm-
less innocence; but could have no op-
portunity of dili'laying fidelity, magna-
nimity, patience, and fortitude. One half
of virtue, and not the least important
half, would be loft to the world. In
our present imperfect slate, any virtue
which is never exercised is in hazard of
becoming extinct in the human breast.
If goodncfs constantly proceeded in a
finooth and flowery path; if, meeting
with no adversary to oppose it, it were
surrounded on every hand with acclama-
tion and praise, is there no ground to
dread that it might be corrupted by va-
nity, or might fink into indolence? This
dangerous calm muff therefore be inter-
rupted. The waters muff be troubled,

F 4 left

SE R M. left they should stagnate and putrify.

1V. When you behold wicked men multiply-

ing in number, and increasing in power,
imagine not that Providence particularly
favours them. No; they are suffered for
a time to prosper, that they may fulfil
the high designs of Heaven. They are
employed as instruments in the hand of
God for the improvement of his servants.
They are the rods with which he cha-
ifens the virtuous, in order to rouse them
from a dangerous slumber; to form them
for the day of adversity, and to teach
them how to susser honourably.

IN the next place, the mixture of the

bad among the good serves not only to
give exercise to the passive graces, but al-
so to improve the active powers and vir-
tues of man. It inures the righteous to
vigilance and exertion. It obliges them
to stand forth, and aa their part with
firmness and constancy in evil times. It
gives occasion for their virtues to rhine
with conspicuous lustre; and makes them

appear

appear as the lights of the world amidst S E RM.
surrounding darkness. Were it not for i
the dangers that arise from abounding
iniquity, there would be no opportunity
for courage to ac, for wisdom to admo-
nifl, for caution to watch, nor for faith
to exert itself in overcoming the world. It
is that mixture of dispositions which now
takes place, that renders the theatre on
which we aa so busy and stirring, and
so much fitted for giving employment to
every part of man's intelligent and moral
nature. It affords a complete field for the
genuine display of charaaters; and gives
every man the opportunity to come forth
and ihew what he is. Were the tenor of
human conduc altogether regular and uni-
form, interrupted by no follies and vices,
no cross dispositions and irregular pas-
sions, many of our active powers would
find no exercise. Perhaps even our life
would languish, and become too frill and
insipid. Man is not yet ripe for a para-
dife of innocence, and for the enjoyment
of a pcrfect and faultless fcciety. As in

the

S E R M. the natural world, he is not made for

Iv.
H,-^ perpetual spring and cloudlets skies, but

by the wintry florm muff be called to ex-
ert his abilities for procuring ihelter and
defence; so in the moral world, the inter-
mixture of bad men renders many an ex-
ertion necessary, which in a more perfec
state of the world would find no place,
but which in the present state of trial is
proper and useful - The existence of
vice in the world afliuredly teftfies our pre-
sent corruption; and according to the de-
gree of its prevalence, is always, more or
lets, the oburce of misery. It is a stand-
ing proof of the fall and degeneracy of
man. But as long as that fallen state
continues, the wisdom of Providence
eminently appears in making the errors
and frailties of the wicked subservient
to the improvement of the just. Tazres
are for that reason suffered at present to
grow up among the wheat.

THESE observations on the wisdom of
Providence in this dispensation will be

farther

farther illufirated, by confidering the use- SERM.
ful inftrutions which we receive, or .*
which at leafd every wife man may re-
ceive, from the follies and vices of those
among whom we are obliged to live.

Fi,;l, They furnish infirudion con-

cerning the finares and dangers against
which we ought to be molt on our guard.
They put it thereby in our power to
profit by the errors and misconduct of
others. By observing from what finall
beginnings the greatest crimes have arisen;
observing how bad company has fe-
duced this man from his original prin-
ciples and habits; how a careless indul-
gence of pleasure has blinded and in-
toxicated that man; how the neglet of
divine inflitutions has, in another, gra-
dually paved the way for open profli-
gacy; much salutary inIrudion is con-
veyed to the virtuous. Tracing the dan-
gerous and slippery paths by which so
many have been insensibly betrayed in-
to ruin, their views of human nature are
enlarged; the fenle of their own Imbe-

cility

SERM. cility is strongly impressed upon them;

IV.
»I " accompanied with the conviction of the

necessity of a constant dependance on the
grace and assistance of Heaven. All the
crimes which they behold disturbing so.
ciety around them, serve as signals hung
out to them, beacons planted in their
view, to prevent their making shipwreck
among those rocks on which others have
split. It has been justly said, that not
only fiom the advices of his friends, but
from the reproaches of his enemies, a wife
man may draw inftrudion. In the fame
manner, it is not only by the examples
of good men, but likewise by those of
the wicked, that an attentive mind may
be confirmed in virtue.

Next, THESE examples of bad men,

while they admonish the virtuous of the
dangers against which they are to guard,
are farther profitable by the views which
they exhibit of the evil and the defor-
mity of fin. Its odious nature never ap-
pears in so firong a light as when dif-

played

played in the crimes of the wicked. It is s ER M.

'V.

true that, when vice is carried only to a
certain degree, and disguised by plausible
colours, it may pass unreproved, and
even for a while seem popular in the
world. But it is no less true that, when
it becomes open and flagrant, and is de-
prived of the fliadow of virtue, it never
fails to incur general reproach, and to
become the object either of contempt or
of hatred. How often, for instance, have
the greatest abilities, which once drew
esteem and admiration, funk, in a short
time, into the molt humiliating degrada-
tion, merely through the ascendant which
corrupted inclinations and low habits had
acquired over their pofleffor? How of-
ten have the riling honours of the young
been blared, by their forsaking the path
of honour on which they had once enter-
ed, for the blind and crooked traCts of
depravity and folly? Such fpedacles of
the infamy of vice, such memorials of
the disgrace attending it, are permitted
by Providence for general inftruaion;

10 and

SERM. and afiuredly are edifying to the world.

Iv, It was neceflary for moral improvement,

that the beauty and excellence of virtue,
and the deformity of vice, should be
strongly impressed on every intelligent
mind. This could never be done with
so great advantage as by the firiking con-
trafts of both which are produced by the
living examples of evil men intermixed
ivith the good. It is in this mirror that
we clearly contemplate how much the
righteous is wore excellent than his neigh-
bollr.

THE fame purpose of important in-

ftruction is farther promoted by the i'n-
stances of misery which the state of wic-
ked men on earth affords. I admit that
the worldly success, which sometimes at-
tends them, may blind and seduce the
unwary; but a little more refletion ena-
bles men to diflinguifl between apparent
success and real happiness. The condi-
tion of worthless men, whatever fplen-
dor riches may throw around them, is

easily

easily discerned to be a restless and mi- SE R M

IV.

ferable one; and the misery which they
liifter, to be derived from their vices. In
that great corrupted crowd which fur-
rounds us, what incefiant buflle and fitr,
what agitation and tumult take place?
What envy and jealousy of one another?
How much bitterness of resentment do
we behold among them; mutually de-
ceiving and deceived ; supplanting and
supplanted; ever pursuing, but never fa-
tisfied ? These are not matters of rare ob-
servation, or which require nice scrutiny
to difcovcr them. rWe need only open
our eyes to behold the wicked tormented
by their patfions, and far removed fiom
that sanctuary of calmness and tranquil-
lity which is the abode of real happiness.
Nay, when we appeal to bad men thcm-
selves, after they have run the whole
round of vicious plcafures, we will often
find them obliged to confers, that the
wretched result of their pursuits has been
vanit, and vcxalloi offpji-it; and that the
happiest days they have enjoyed were in

II the

S ER M. the times of innocence; before criminal

IV*' desires and guilty passions had taken

possession of their breasts. Such praai-
cal demonitrations as these of the infe-
licity of fin are yielded by the exam-
ples of evil doers whom we fee around
us. By attending to their situation, the
misery, as well as infamy of guilt is rea-
lifed, and rendered sensible to our appre-
henfion.

THUS, upon a fair inquiry, you be-

hold how the ways of God may, in this
remarkable cafe, be jultified to man. You
behold what important ends are advanced,
by permitting the tares at present to
grow together with the wheat. The
intermixture of evil men in human
society serves to exercise the suffering
graces and virtues of the good; by the di-
verfity of characers among those with
whom they have intercourse, it serves to
bring forth and improve their acive
powers and virtues, and to enlarge the
circle of useful occupations; it serves to

infuCrua

inftrut them in the temptations against s E R M.
which they are to guard, to reveal to iv.
them all the deformity of vice, and to
make its miseries pass conspicuously be-
fore their eyes. When we confider them
as actors on the theatre of the world, they
are thereby improved in the part they
have to perform. When we confider
·them as fpeaators of what is palling
on that theatre, their minds are thereby
inftruded; their views rectified and en-
larged by the objeCts that are set before
them.

FROM these important truths, several
refletions no less important arise.

We are naturally taught, in the first

place, never to be hasty in finding fault
with any of the arrangements of Provi-
dence. The present permifion of moral
evil on the earth seemed, on the first
view, to furnish a strong objecion against
either the wisdom or the goodness of
the Author of nature. After beholding
the useful purposes which are answered

VOL. IV. G by

SE R M. by that permission, how cautious fliould
IV., we be in advancing any of our rafi fpe-

culations against his government and con-
duct! To our confined and humble fta-
tion it belongs not to censure, but to sub-
mit, trust, and adore; satisfied that the
farther we inquire, the rectitude of his
ways will appear the more; thankful for
the discoveries of them which have been
imparted to us; and persuaded that, where
our discoveries fail, it is not because there
is no more wisdom or goodness to be seen,
but because our present condition allows
us not to fee more.

! IN the feccnd place, let us be taught
with what eye we are to look upon those
bad men whom we find around us in the
world. Not surely with an eye of envy.
Whatever prosperity they may seem to
enjoy, they are still no more than tares,
the weeds of the field; contemptible in
the fight of God; tolerated by his pro-
vidence for a while on account of the right-
2,ous, to whose improvement they are

6 rendered

rendered subservient. The parable in- ER M.

IV.

forms us that, in the end, they are to be v
gathered together and burnt. In this life
only they have their good things. But
their prosperity is transitory. They are
brolght into desolation in a moment, and ut-
terly coj1fimed with terrors. As a dream
when one awaketh, so, 0 God, when thor
awake, thou Jfalt deJfif their image.-
When we conlider their unhappy state, it
becomes us to behold them with the eye
of pity. Let us remember that, in the
midst of their errors, they are by nature
still our brethren. Let us not behave to
them in the spirit of bitterness. Insult
not their follies. Pride not yourselves
on superior virtue. Remember that, as
bad men are mixed with the good, so, in
the best men, vices are at present mixed
with virtues. Your own characer, good
as you may esteem it, is not free from
every evil; taint; and in the characters of
those whom you reprobate as vitious,

t Psalm Ixxiii. 19, 20.

G 2 there

s i R M. there are always some good qualities mix-
·-_LL ed with the bad ones. Study, as far as

you can, to reclaim and amend them;
and if, in any degree, you have been pro-
fited by their failings, endeavour, in re-
turn, to profit them, by good counsel and
advice; by advice, not administered with
officious zeal, or felf-conceited superiority,
but with the tenderness of compassion
and real friendship.

IN the third place, in whatever pro-

portion the admixture of vice may seem
to take place in the world, let us never
despair of the prevalence of virtue on the
whole. Let us not exaggerate, beyond
measure, the quantity of vice that is found
in the mixture. It is proper to observe,
that in the parable now before us, after
the owner of the field had sown his good
fced, no reason is gieen us to think, that
the good fecd swas entirely choked up by
tares. On the contrary, we are told that
Ihe bladem fr.g Al, ,7d ibro!:ght forth Jii;:
and, though the tiarr lsfo a-'oec, yet, in

3 the

the end, there was a harveJl, when the sE R M.
wheat wan reaped and gathered into the v.
barn. In the most corrupted times, God
never leaves himself without many wit-
neffes on earth. He is always atte tive
to the cause of goodness; and frequent-
ly supports and advances it by means
which we are unable to trace. He nou-
rifhes much piety and virtue in hearts
that are unknown to us; and beholds re-
pentance ready to spring up among ma-
ny whom we confider as reprobates.--
know that it has always been common
for persons to represent the age in which
they live as the worst that ever appeared;
and religion and virtue as just on the
point of vanishing from among men.
This is the language sometimes of the fe-
rious; often of the hypocritical, or of
the narrow-minded. But true religion
gives no sanction to such revere censures,
or such gloomy views. Though the tares
must be at all times springing up, there is
no reason for believing that they flial
ever overspread the whole field. The

G 3 nature

S E R M. nature of the weeds that spring up may

IV.
i- vary, according to the nature of the foil.

Different modes of iniquity may diftin-
guifh different ages of the world; while
the fum of corruption is nearly the fame.
Let not our judgments of men, and of
the times in which we live, be hasty and
presumptuous. Let us trust in the grace
of God; and hope the best of mankind.

IN the fourth and last place, let us keep

our eyes ever fixed on that important pe-
riod, which is alluded to in the text, as
the conclusion of all. Let both grow to-
gether until the harvefl. The great spirit-
ual year is to be closcd by a harveil,
when the hourfcholdcr is to gather the wheat
into his barn; when, at the end of the
world, the final diftinaion of men and
characters is to take place. The confused
mixture of good and evil, which now pre-
vails, is only a temporary dispensation of
Providence, accommodated to man's fallen
and imperfec state. Let it not tempt us
for a moment to distrust the reality of

the

the divine government; or to entertain SERM.

lV.

the remotest suspicion that moral good --
and evil are to be on the fame terms for-
ever. The frailties of our nature fitted
us for no more at present than the enjoy-
ment of a very mixed and imperfeEt so-
ciety. But when our nature, purified and
refined, shall become ripe for higher ad-
vancement, then shall the spirits of the
just, disengaged from any polluted mix-
ture, undisturbed by fin or by finners,
be united in one divine assembly, and re-
joice forever in the presence of him who
made them. Looking forward to this glo-
rious issue with steadfast faith, let no cross
appearances ever discomfit our hopes, or
lead us to suspect that we have been
serving God in vain. If we continue
faithful to the death, we may reft assured,
that in due time we fiall receive the crown

G 4

# SERMON V. On the RELIEF which the GOSPEL affords to the DISTRESSED. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. MATTH. xi. 28. Come unto me, all ye that labour, and are heavy ...

[ 88 ]

SERMON V.
On the RELIEF which the GOSPEL affords

to the DISTRESSED.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of

the Lord's Supper.

MATTH. xi. 28.
Come unto me, all ye that labour, and are

heavy laden, and I will give you rel.
SER M.R pHE life of man on earth is doomed

V. T.
--e-. to be clouded with various evils.

Throughout all ranks, the affliced form
a considerable proportion of the human
race; and even they who have a title to
be called prosperous, are always, in tome
periods of their life, obliged to drink
from the cup of bitterness. The Chris-

tian

tian religion is particularly entitled to our s E R M.
regard, by accommodating itself with
great tenderness to this distressed condi-
tion of mankind. It is not to be confi-
dered as merely an authoritative fyflem of
precepts. Important precepts it indeed
delivers for the wife and proper re-
gulation of life. But the fame voice
which enjoins our duty, utters the words
of consolation. The gospel deserves to
be held a dispensation of relief to man-
kind under both the temporal and fpiri-
tual distresses of their state.

This amiable and compassionate spirit

of our religion conspicuously appears in
the characer of its great Author. It
shone in all his aCions while he lived on
earth. It breathed in all his discourses;
and, in the words of the text, is expressed
with much energy. In the preceding
verse, he had given a high account of his
own person and dignity. All things are
delivered unto me of my Father; and no
man knoweth the Son but the Father; nei-
ther knoweth any man the Father, Jave

the

S E R M. the Son, and he to zchonfoever the Son weill

V.
i__L reveal him. But left any of his hearers

should be discouraged by this mysterious
representation of his greatness, he instant-
ly tempers it withl the most gracious be-
nignity; declaring, in the text, the mer-
ciful intention of his mission to the
world, Come unto nme, all ye that labour,
and are heanvy laden, and I will give you
rif.

THE first thing which claims our at-

tention in these words is, what we are to
underfiand by comiln unto Chr/is. This
is a phrase which has often given occa-
sion to controversy. By theological writ-
ers it has been involved in much need-
less myfiery, while the meaning is in it-
self plain and easy. The very metaphor
that is here used serves to explain it. In
the ancient world, disciples flocked round
their different teachers, and attended them
wherever they went; in order both to
tctify their attachment, and to imbibe
more fully the docrine of their masters.

Coming

Coming unto Chrit, therefore, is the fame SE R M.
with resorting to him as our declared _-
Master; acknowledging ourselves his dif-
ciples, believers in his doErine, and fol-
lowers of his precepts. As Christ is made
know to us under the charader both of
a Teacher and a Saviour, our coming to
him imports not only submission to his
inflruCtions, but confidence also in his
power to save. It imports that, forsaking
the corruptions of fin and the world, we
follow that course of virtue and obe-
dience which he points out to us; rely-
ing on his mediation for pardon of our
offences, and acceptance with heaven.
This is what is implied in the scripture
term Faith; which includes both the as-
sent of the understanding to the truth of
the Christian religion, and the concurrence
of the will in receiving it.

WHAT next occurs in the text to at-

tract our notice, is the description of those
to whom the invitation is addrefled. all
those who labour and are heavy laden,

that

SERM. that is, who, in one way or other, feel

themselves grieved and distressed, are
here invited to come to Chrift.-Now,
from two sources chiefly our distresses
arise; from moral, or from natural
causes.

Firj, THEY may arise from inward

moral causes; from certain feelings and
reflecions of the mind, which occafibn
uneasiness and pain. A course of fin
and vice always proves ruinous arid de-
ftrudtive in the iflue. But its tendency
to ruin is often not perceived, while that
tendency is advancing. For as fin is the
reign of passion and pleasure, it forms
men to a thoughtless inconsiderate state.
Circumstances, however, may occur, and
frequently, in the course of life, do occur,
which disclose to a vicious man the ruin
which he is bringing on himself, as an
offender against the God who made him.
When some occasional confinement to so-
litude, or iome turn of adverse fortune,
directs his attention immediately upon

his

his own character; or when, drawing to-s E R M.
wards the close of life, his passions sub- v_..
fide, his pleasures withdraw, and a future
state comes forward to his view; in such
situations it often happens, that the past
follies and crimes of such a man appear to
him in a light most odious and ihocking;
and not odious only, but terrifying to his
heart. He confiders that he is undoubt-
edly placed under the government of a just
God, who did not fend him into this world
for nought; that he has negleCted the part
afligned to him; has contemned the laws
of Heaven; has degraded his own nature;
and instead of being useful, having been
hurtful and pernicious to those among
whom he lived, is about to leave a detest-
able memory behind him.-What account
{hall he give of himself to his Maker?
Self-condemned, polluted by so many
crimes, how can he expeC to find mercy
in his fight ?-Hence, an overwhelmed
and dejeded mind; hence, dismal forebod-
ings of punishment; hence, that wouad-
edfpirit, which, when it is deeply pierced,

becomes

i

S E R M. becomes the forest of all human evils,

V.
, .-.and has Sometimes rendered existence a

burden which could not be endured.

Such distresses as there, arising from

moral internal causes, may be made light
of by the giddy and the vain; and re-
presented as confined to a few persons
only of distempered imagination. But to
those whose professions give them occasion
to fee men under various circumstances
of affliction, they are known to be far
from being unfrequent in the world; and,
on many more occasions than is commonly
imagined, to throw over the human mind
the blackest gloom of which it is fufcep-
tible. Religious feelings, be assured, have a
deep root in the nature of man. They form
a part of the human constitution. They
are interwoven with many of those fears
and hopes which actuate us in the chang-
ing situations of fortune. During the gay
and active periods of life, they may be
smothered; but with most men; they are
finothered rather than totally obliterated:
And if any crisis of our condition Ihall

awaken,

awaken, and bring them forth, in their SE RM.

V.

full force, upon a conscious guilty heart, o ,
woe to the man, who, in some difcon-
solate season, is doomed to susser their
extreme vengeance!

BoT, while under such difreiCes of

the mind, not a few may be said to [a-
boitr and to be h:avy laden, greater fill is
the multitude of those who, from natural
external causes, from the calamities and
evils of life, undergo much fufiiering and
misery. The life of man is not indeed
wholly composed of misery. It admits
of many plealing i'ccncs. On the whole,
there is reason to believe that it affords
more joy than grief. At the fame time,
the unfortunate, as I before observed,
form always a nu: crous class of man-
kind; and it may be said wi:h truth, that
o.re travel is ordai;edfJr; the sons of men.
Though the burden is no. equally laid on
all; tome there always are, on whom it
falls with oppressive weight.-Unexpe&-

ed

SERM. ed disappointments have crushed their

V. hopes, and blasted the plans which they

had formed for comfort in the world.
The world had, perhaps, smiled upon
them once, only to give them a sharper
feeling of its miseries at the last. Strug-
gling with poverty, unable to support
their families whom they fee languishing
around them, they, at the fame time, are
obliged by their situation in society to
conceal their necessities; and under the
forced appearance of cheerfulness, to hide
from the world a broken heart. They
are stung, perhaps, by the unkindness of
friends; cast off by those in whom they
had trusted; or torn by untimely death
from real friends, in connexion with
whom they might have flourished and
been happy; at the fame time borne
down, it may be, with the infirmities of
a sickly body, and left to drag a painful
life without alliilance or relief.-How many
fad scenes of this nature, on which it
were painful to infilt, does the world afford?

When

When we turn to those who are ac- S E R M.

counted prosperous men, we {hall always v,
find many sorrows minglcd with their
pleasures; many hours of care and vexa-
tion, wherein they acknowledge them-
felvcs clafled with those who labozr and
rc; heavy laden. In entering into some
gay feftivc assembly, we behold affcded
checrfulnefs dil'played on every counte-
nance; and might fancy that we had ar-
rived at the temple of unmixed plealure
and gladness of heart. Yet, even there,
could we look into the bosoms of thele
apparently happy persons, how often
would we find them inwardly prey-
ed upon by some tormenting suspicions,
fomc anxious fears, some secret griefs,
which either they dare not diic!olc to
tlhe world, or from which, if disclosed,
tlley can look for no relief?-In flort,
amiidft that great company of pilgrims,
who are journeying through life, many
there are whose journey lies through a
valley of tears; and many to whom that

VOL. IV. H valley

S E R M. valley is only cheered by traniient glimpses

V. i-._., of joy.

To these clafles of mankind is addressed

the invitation of the text. To them
it is in a particular manncr addressed;
overlooking the giddy and difdated mul-
titude. Come unto m1c, a!! 2be ,bat lblr,
and arc heavy llrcn. Not as if our Sa-
viour were always ready to accept that
fort of piety which is merely the confc-
quence of dif;re!s; or made all thole
welcome, who are driven by nothing but
fear or danger to have' recourse to him.
His words are to be understood as inti-
mating, that the icart which is humbled
and softened by afli&ion, is the objecl of
his compafilonatc regard ; that he will
not rejed us merely bccau!e we have been
cast off by the world; but that, if with
proper dilpnti.o'ns and fentimcnts we apply
to hIin il the evil day, we shall be sure of
meentg wvi ith a gracious reception. It now
remains to {hc\v, ;hat that reception is
.,hich we 'nay look' for; what that rcf

it

is which Christ hath promised to confer S ERM.

V.

on those who come to him; whether their
distress arise from moral or from natural
causes. Come tnlo mwe, and I will give
you rzet.

I. CHRIST affords reft to the disturb-

ed mind that labours under apprehen-
sions and fears of guilt. Let those who
susser dil'rels of this nature come to ChriJt,
that is, with contrition and repentance,
have recourse to him as their Saviour,
and they shall regain quietneis and peace.
Foolish and guilty they have been, and
justly lie under dread of puniihment; but
the penitent sorrow which they now feel,
implies their diljfofition to be changed. It
implies, as far as it is genuine, that, sensible
of their folly, they now desire to become
good and wile; and are determined for
the future to hold a virtuous course, could
they only hope to obtain pardon for the
pall. In this situation of mind, let them
not be cast down and despair. Chris: has

H 2 brought

SERM. brought with him from heaven the olive

V

branch. IIe carries in his hand the fig-
nal of forgiveness. The declaration which
he publifies is, Iet the wicked forsake his
way, anll the !lurighI/teos an his thoughts;
and let him return to the Lord, and he
will have meriicy; on him; and to our
God, for be wcill abu/ndan/tly pardon '. In-
sufficient though our own repentance
be, to procure pardon from heaven, we
are informed, that an all-fufficient atone-
ment has been made by Christ. Neither
the number nor the atrocity of offences
excludes, from forgiveness, the penitent
who returns to his duty. To all who
come under this description, the offer of
mercy extends, without exception. He
that pared not his owni Son, but delivered
him up for zus all, how Jhall he not wzithl
him ay ofriec/ give ,us all things '-?

This discovery of divine government,

afforded by the Gospel, is perfecly cal-
culated to scatter the gloom which had

* Isaiah, lr. 7. - Rom. viii. 32.

~S~~~~~ o'.,ercaf

overcast the defpondlng heart. The at- S E R M.

-b ~V.

mofphere clears up on every fide; and is _
illuminated by cheering rays of celestial
mercy. Not only is hope given to the
penitent, but it is rendered sinful not to
indulge that hope. We are not only al-
lowed and encouraged, but we are com-
manded to trufl in the divine clemency.
We are commanded to believe that none
Ctho come 1111io CJir he. will in ar.ywif' e
cejl ot' . As I live, fJiith th/,e Jrd God,
I have no pletafire in the t',th of the wic'-
led, but t hat te wicked turn friom his 'nay
and live; tlrn1 ye, tirn ye J;os: yo;or evil
wa'ss; sIS r vwhy wil jye die, 0 hose of IfJ
racl? -- Such is the relief which the
religion of Christ brings to theil who
labofr anii l. ire ''

ha lac.l under the im-

preflions of guilt and divine diipleafure;
a relief which nothing can render ineffec-
tual to tlhe heart, except the molt gloomy
fuperfiition, tounded on gross miirconceD-

ts* John,.vi. 37;. Ezesk xxxii. ;t.

H 3 tiousq

SE RM. tions of the nature and attributes of God.

V.

,--. Let us now,

II. CONSIDER what reJf the religion of

Christ gives to them whose distress arises
not from inward and moral, but from
natural and external causes; fiom ad-
verse fortune, or any of those numerous
calamities to which we are at present ex-
posed. To filch persons, it may seem
more difficult to promise any effectual
relief. In the former cafe, the ditirefs
lay entirely in the mind. As soon as its
views are reaified, and its apprehensions
quieted, the evil is removed, and the cure
effeacd. Here, the distress arises from
without; and the religion of Christ as-
seas not the course of external events.
But though it removes not all the evils
of life, though it pronifes no continuance
of undisturbed prosperity (which indeed
it were not salutary for man always to
enjoy), yet, if it mitigates the evils which
necessarily belong to our state, and sup-
ports us under them, it may justly be

- ;\ . said

said to give rfcJ to them; who labour and S E RM.
are heavy laden. When much that is_
material and important is effefted, we
have no cause to complain, though all
that we desire be not accomplill;cd.-In
this part of the dilcourle, 1 aia to be con-
fidered as addrefling mylelf not merely to
such as are at present fuicring any severe
calamity. I now fpcak'to many, who,
in the midlt of health and afiluence, en-
joy the various comforts of life. But I
must delre such persons to look forward
to what may one .day be their state. Let
them reflect how important it is to pre-
pare theimfelves for the future unknown
vicissitudes of the world. For,

/ f a man

live ;!ma!V' yea.rs, a(! re1joice in t/hem all, yet
l:s him remember the tlays of dark;nics, for
they Jhall be Imalny''.-Now, either in the
profpea of future distress, or under pre-
sent suffering, I fay, that the religion of
Christ gives rdl to the heart, by the for-.

U Eclef. xi. 8.

1H 4 titude

E R M. titude which it inspires, and by the con-
V.
-_-w folations which it affords.

SiEj, IT inspires fortitude. It disco-

vers a supreme adminiliration, so friendly
to the interests of goodness, as never
to allow the followers of Christ to dread,
that, in any situation of fortune, they
shall be negleacd by Heaven. From thm
ab)hra& consideration of the divine Fcr-
!Bdions, men had always some ground to
believe, that the general order of the uli-
verse was consulted by its great Ruler.
iBut how far the interest of individual.
might be obliged to yield, or, in ma;'
caics might be iacriliced, to this general o;-
der, they were left altogether in the dar-:.
Here the golpel of Chritt comes to our
aid, by the explicit assurance which i.
gives, that, in the great fyflcm of Provi-
dence, the welfare of every single gocd
man is particularly included. il/ tL,'::,
we are explrcf!)r told, are made to :'i,.
if'c!'r'r, not merely fcr tie order and 1'i'-
f;iiion of the v1hlel, but alibo G- ,-,'-/ ,:

s~~~~~~~~~~~~~~: ·

ithemI who love God ". The life of every S E R M.

V.

person, who comes under this description, ,-
forms a system complete within itself;
where every event that happens to him
poiTeltes its deflined place, and forms a
link in that great chain of causes, which
was appointed, firom the beginning of
things, for carrying on his improvement
and felicity. Such an arrangement of
the affairs of the world, may appear afto-
nifhing to our narrow capacities; yet
flrely implies no effort beyond the reach
of infinite power, joined with inlinite wis-
dom and goodness.

Hence aries a degrce of fortitude and

conflancy to good men, which can upon
no other grounds be attained. Faith, in
lthef principles of the gospel, erecs for
them a fortress, impregnable to the as-
ilults of the world, into which they can
at all times retreat. Sitting under the
1icltcr of divine protection, they calmly

* Rm,. viii. 28.

hear

SERM. hear the storm, when it blows with its

v. utmost violence around them. The floods

have lifted up their voice; they have lifed
up all their waves. Buet the Lord on high
is mightier than the noise of many waters;
yea, than the mnighly waves of the sea .
Of the man who pofiffees such principles,
it is justly said, His heart is eJibli. .,! ; he
Jhall not be afraid of evil tidi':igs; his heart
isfixed, trafting in the Lor.- J. Tranquil-
lity, order, and magnanimity, dwell with
him ; while all is confusion and trepida-
tion among those, who have nothing to
look to but the apparent disorders of the
world.

THE doCtrine of Christ not only arms us,

in this manner, with fortitude against the
approach of evil; but, supposing evils to fall
upon us with their heaviest pressure, it
lightens the load by many consolations to
which others are firangers. While bad men

Pral. xciii. 34. t Pfal. cxii. 7, 8.

trace,

trace, in the calamities with which they SER M.
are vilited, the hand of an offended So- -v-
vereign, Christians are taught to view
them as the well-intended chaftilements
of a merciful Father. They hear amidll
them, that still voice which a good con-
icience brings to their ear: Fear net, for
I amn with thee; be not difimned, Jor I am
ily God . They apply to themselves
the comfortable promises with which the
gospel abounds. They dilcover in there
the happy issue decreed to tleir troubles;
and wait with patience till Providence
liall have accomplilled its great and gocd
designs. In the mean time, devotion
opens to them its blessed and holy fandu-
ary: That fanduary in which the wound-
ed heart is healed, and the weary mind
is at retl; where the cares of the world
are forgotten, where its tumults are hush-
ed, and its miseries disappear; where
greater objects open to our view than
what the world presents; where a more

Isaiah, xli. io.

serene

' E R M. serene sky shines, and a sweeter and

V.
L-- iJ Ccalmer light beams on the afflided heart.

In those moments of devotion, a pious
man, pouring out his wants and forrowvs
to an almighty Supporter, feels that he is
not left solitary and forsaken in a vale
of woe. God is with him; Christ and
the Holy Ghost are with him; and, though
lie fliould be bereaved of every earthly
friend, he can look up in heaven to a Friend
who will never die.

To these present consolations, the re-

ligion of Christ adds the joyful prospeCt
of that future state, where eternal ref r-e-
mai'incib for the pceople of God. This life
they are taught to confider as only the
bouife of their pilgrimage; the temporary
mansion of painful though neceflary dif-
cipline. But let them endure for a little,
and the pilgrimage flall end, the difci-
pline Ihall be finiflied; and all the vir-
tuous be a iembled in those blissful re-
gions which are prepared for their re-
ward. Such a pro!jccd cheers the dark-

c Pc

eft hours of life; and affords a remedy SE R M.
to every trouble. 7The fiif-ings of this
prefc/lt time are not iworlhy to be compared
with the glory wich JIhall be revealed :
They appear in this comparative view,
as no more than a diftrefiing dream of
the night, from which one awakes into
health, and light, and joy.-Peculiar is
this high consolation to the religion of
Christ. It is what all nations had eager-
ly wiflLed for; what all philosophy had
anxiously fought to discover; but what
no refcarch, no philosophy were able to
ascertain to mankind, till Christ brought
the assurance of life and immortality from
heaven; and conferred on his disciples
this noble and ineftimabie gift.

THIus, on the whole, the Chrifian doc-

trine is found to be the great medicine of
life. It is the balm of human sorrows and
cares. In our present state, where so

' Rom, viii. i3,

many

SERM. manv are suffering actual difthefs, of orie
L_ j kind or other, and wheie all have reason to

dread the approach of dift1efs, it is religion
only that can alleviate the burdens of life,
and finooth (ur pallige through this evil
world - Let this view of religion per-
fuade uq to improve the sacred ordinance
of our Lord's fllpper for coming unto Chri/,
in the way before explainted: th:it is, join-
ing ourselves to him as his dilKipics; iiis
dilciples, not in words and profclflons oln-
ly, but in heart and in truth; taking pi(,on
us bis yoke, as is added in the words imme-
diately following the text; and Lkazmlnig of
him who is meek and lowly in/ heart. Let
those who labour under the sense of re-
membered follies and crimes, come unto
Chrifi with penitent dispositions, and they
ihall obtain pardon. Let thole who la-
bour under the fufiring of present, or
the apprchenfion of future f)rrows, co1ec
,unto Ch3rij, and they flall receive coni:c-
lation. All who are in any fenie heajr
ladcn, coming unto him, flall sisnd ref to
their fouls.

BEFORE

BEFORE concluding this discourse, there SER M.

V.

is another set of men, not yet mentioned, -J
to whom I muff also address the exhor-
tation in the text; those I mean, who la-
bouring under none of the distressful bur-
dens of life, are surfeited of its pleasures;
who labour under the burden only of lan-
guid ease, and the load of insipid profpe-
rity. You drag, my friends, but a miserable
cxiftence. Oppressed by no sorrow, you
feel vacuity and diifhtisfaciion within;
you are often weary of life; and in your
Iblitary hours, are disposed to confess that
all you have experienced is vanity. Where-
fore fihoul. you any longer fpcnd yt, r mo-
719 for that clhJich is not bread, and your

laboutr for tharit o'Pich

fitifeih not Come

to the wl:atcis wlhich are noweo offered to
you, an!, driiigi. Heat, and yutr fJ'iils Janll
live. Retreat from the corrupting vani-
ties of the world, to Christ, to religion,
and to virtue. New sources of enjoy-
ment shall then be opened to you. A
world yet untried l'.hal display itself to
your view. You fiall be formed to a re-

lifh

SE R M. lifh for the quiet and innocent pleasures

. of piety and devotion; of friendship, and
good affeTions; of useful knowledge, and
virtuous activity; of calm society, and
seasonable retirement; pleasures of which
at present you have no conception; but
which, upon trial, you shall find superior
to the trifling, or turbulent amusements,
in which you have hitherto passed your
days.-The true fatisfaftion of the hu-
man mind is only to be found in religion
and goodness; in a purified heart, and a
virtuous life. All other plans of happi-
ness are fallacious, and pregnant with
disappointment. It is only by acquainting
ourselves with God that we can find peace:
And those who are weary and heavy ladn'r
now, shall be weary and heavy laden to
the end, unless they come to him who ol-
ly can give them refi.

# SERMON VI. On LUXURY and LICENTIOUSNESS. ISAIAH, v. 12. The harp and the viol, the tabret and pipe and wine are in their feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the ...

1[ 3 ]

SERMON VI.
On LUXURY and LICENTIOUSNESS.

ISAIAH, v. 12.
The harp and the viol, the tabret and pipe

and wine are in their fealst; but they re-
gard not the work of the Lord, neither
confider the operation of his hands.
IT appears from many passages In the SERM;

writings of this prophet, that in his

days great corruption of manners had be-
gun to take place among the people of
Israel. Originally a fober and religious
nation, accustomed to a simple and pas-
toral life, after they had enlarged their

VOL. IV. I territories

S E R M. territories by conquest, and acquired
_- _, wealth by commerce, they gradually con-

traded habits of luxury; and luxury
soon introduced its usual train of attend-
ing evils. In the history of all nations,
the fame circulation of manners has been
found; and the age in which we live re-
fembles, in this refped, the ages which
have gone before it. Forms of iniquity
may var;t but the corrupt propensities
of men remain at all times much the
fame; and revolutions from primitive
simplicity to the refinements of criminal
luxury have been often exhibited on the
sage of the world. The reproof direa-
ed in the text to the Jews of that an-
tient age, will be found equally appli-
cable to the manners of many, in mo-
dern times. In discoursing from it, I
shall first confider the charader of those
who are described in the text, and shew
the guilt that is involved in it. I shall
next confider the duties which persons
of that charaaer are supposed to have

neglected;

neg!ected; to regard the Iwork oft he Lord, ER M.

VI.
and to cofider the operation of his hands. ,

I. WIIEN we take into view the cha-

rader pointed at in the text, it is evident
that what the prophet means to reprove
is, the spirit of inconsiderate dissipation,
of intemperate indulgence, and irreligious
luxury. It is not the se/i. anZd the wine, the
Jhaip ai.d the viol, which he means to
condemn. Music and wine arc, in them.
selves, things of innocent nature: Nay,
when temperately enjoyed, they may be
employed for ufcful purposes; for as-
fording relaxation from the oppressive
cares of life, and for promoting friendly
intercourse among men. The opulent
are not prohibited from enjoying the
good things of this world, which Pro-
vidence has bestowed upon them. Re-
ligion neither abolishes the diftinaion of
ranks, (as the vain philosophy of some
would teach us to do,) nor interferes
with a modest and decent indulgence of
pleafure.-It is the criminal abuse of

I 2 pleaficr

SE R M. pleasure which is here censured; that
a-__« thoughtless and intemperate enjoyment

of it which wholly absorbs the time and
attention of men; which obliterates every
serious thought of the proper business
of life; and effaces the sense of religion
and of God.

It may be proper to remark, that it is

not open and direct impiety, which is
laid to the charge of the persons here
charaderifed. It is not said, that in their
feasts they scoffed at religion, or blaf-
phemed the name of God. To this summit
of wickedness these persons had not yet
arrived; perhaps, the age in which they
lived gave not its countenance to this
wantonness of impiety. It is merely a
negative crime of which they are ac-
cufed; that they regarded not the work of
the Lord, neither cotfidered the operation of
his hands. But this absence of all religious
impressions is here pointed out, as fuffi-
cient to stigmatise their characers with
guilt. As soon as the (enfe of a Supreme
Being is loft, the great check is taken

6 off,

off, which keeps under restraint the pas- SERM.

VI.

sions of men. Mean desires, and low J
pleasures, take place of the greater and
nobler sentiments which reason and re-
ligion inspire. Amidst the tumult of the
wine and thefeasJ, all proper views of hu-
man life are forgotten. The duties which,
as men, they have to perform, the part
they have to at in the world, and the
distresses to which they are exposing them-
selves, are banished from their thoughts.
To-morrow fJall be as this day, and more
abundantly, is the only voice. Inflamed
by society, and circulated from one loose
companion to another, the spirit of riot
grows and swells, till it end in brutal excess.

Were such disorders rare and occasion-

al merely, they might perhaps be for-
gotten and forgiven. But, nourished by
repetition and habit, they grow up among
too many, to become the business and oc.
cupation of life. By these unfortunate
votaries of pleasure, they are accounted
essential to happiness. Life appears to

I3 stagnate

S E R . lagnate without them. Having no re-

VL
,_ i source within themselves, their spirits

fink, and their very being seems annihi-
lated, till the return of their favourite
pleafurcs awaken within them some tran-
fient sparkles of joy.-Idlcncfs, ease, and
prosperity have too naiural a tendency
to generate the lollies and vices now dc-
fcribed. Becatfi they have no chalnges,
said the Psalmist, therefrefo they fear noi
God*. They are the dark and solitary
hours of life, which recal men to recol-
lection and wisdom. They siew to the
unthinking what this world really is, and
what may be expeCted from it. But the
day that is always bright and unclouded,
is not made for men. It flatters them
with the dangerous illusion, that it is in
their power to render life one scene of
pleasure; and that they have no other
business on earth, but to piread the fe/l,
and call ;e hbap and the vicl to ifinl!
rlt i!c c::amplcs are o f frcuent, of the

? r,! Iv,. 15]'.

dai~cr.

dangers and the crimes which arise from SEV R M.

VI.

an intemperate abuse of pleasure, that oh
this part of the subjed it seems needless
to insist any longer. I proceed, there-
fore,

II. To confider the duties which men

are accused of having negledted; and
which, it is here supposed, if duly at-
tended to, would have aded as the cor-
reeives of dissolute and irreligious lux-
ury; these are, to regard the work of the
Lo.rd, and to confider the operation of his
hands.-By recommending such duties, I
do not mean to represent it as requisite
that the feast should be turned into an
aa of worship; that the countenances of
men ihould be always grave; or that,
in the hours of amusement and of social
festivity, no fiibjet may employ their
thoughts and their discourse, except God
and a future slate. All extremes in re-
ligion are dangerous; and, by carrying
auterity too far, we are in hazard of
only promoting hypocrisy, But though

I 4 some,

SE R M. some, in the last age, might be prone to

v. this extreme; yet, at the present day,

there is not much occasion for warn-
ing men against it.-What I now in-
sift upon is, that all our pleasures ought
to be tempered with a serious sense of
God; that scenes of gaiety and enjoy-
ment should never make us forget that
we are fubjets of his government, and
have a part allotted us to aa in his world;
that on no occasion they ihould be pro.
longed so much, repeated so often, or sus-
sered to transport us so far, as to lead us
to break any of the divine laws, or to aCt
inconsistently with the charater of men
and Christians. A prevailing sense of
God on the mind is to be ever held the
surest guard of innocence and virtue,
amidit the allurements of pleasure. It is
the salutary mixture which mufft be in-
fused into the cup of joy, in order to ren-
der it safe and innoxious.

This sense of God ihould lead us, in

the language of the prophet, to regard the
work of the Lord, and to colfider the opce

ration

ration of his hands; which expressions may S E R M.
be underflood as requiring us to have L-,-
God upon our thoughts under two views;
to regard his work, as the Author of na-
ture; and to conider the operation of his
hands, as the Governor of the world.
Let us attend more particularly to each
of these views of the Supreme Being.

IN the first place, we are to view God

as the Author of nature, or to regard the
work of the Lord. With his works we
are in every place surrounded. We can
caR our eyes no where, without discern-
ing the hand of Him who formed them,
if the grossness of our minds will only
allow us to behold Him. Let giddy and
thoughtless men turn aside a little from
the haunts of riot. Let them sand still,
and contemplate the wonderous works of
God; and make trial of the effe& which
such contemplation would produce.-It
were good for them that, even indepen-
dently of the Author, they were more
acquainted with his works; good for

them,,

SER M. them, that from the societies of loose and

VI.

A diiolute men, they would retreat to the

scenes of nature; would oftener dwell
among them, and enjoy thicir beauties,
This would form them to the rclifh of
uncorrupted, innocent pleasures; and
make thcrm feel the value of calm enjoy-
ments, as superior to the noise and tur-
bulence of licentious gaiety. From the
harmony of nature, and of nature's
works, they would learn to hear sweeter
founds than what arise from the viol, the
tabrct, and the pipe.

But to higher and more serious thoughts

these works of nature give occasion, when
confidered in conjundion with the Creator
who made them.-Let me call on you,
nv friends, to catcl some interval of
reficelion, some serious moment, for look-
ing with thoughtful eye on the world
:around you. Lift your view to that
imlcntc arch of heaven which encom-
'aiic3s you above. Behold the fun in all
5iis fplcndor rolling over your head hy
dTy; and the moon, by night, in mild

S and

and serene majesty, surrounded with that SERM.

VI.

hiof of stars which present to your ima-
gilation an innumerable multitude of
worlds. Liflen to the awful vo'ce of
thunder. Liften to the roar of th, tem-
pcft and the ocean. Survey the wc lers
that fill the earth which you in. it.
Contemplate a fleady and powerful H ,,
bringing round spring and summer, . -
tumn and winter, in regular course; (
corating this earth with innumerabi.:
beauties, diversifying it with innumerable
inhabitants; pouring forth comforts oit
all that live; and, at the fame time, over-:
a;:ving the nations with the violence of
the elements, when it plcafes the Creator
to let them forth,-After you have view-
Ad yourselves as surrounded with such a
iccne of wonders; after you have beheld
on every hand, such an astonishing dif-
piay of majefly united with wisdom and
goodncfs; arc you not ftized with so-
linn and serious awe ? Is there not some-
tli!ii which wvhif'iers you within, that to
r!ll; great Creator rievereno anld homage

are

E R M. are due by all the rational beings whom
Vi.

- j he has made? Admitted to be fpetaators of

his works, placed in the midlt of so ma-
ny great and interefring objects, can you
believe that you were brought hither for
no purpose, but to immerse yourselves in
gro's and brutal, or, at belt, in trifling
pleasures; loft to all sense of the wonders
you behold; loft to ail reverence of that
Cod who gave you being, and who has

eted this amazing fabric of nature, on
*hich you look only with stupid and un-
meaning eyes ?-No: Let the scenes which
.you behold prompt correspondent feel-
ings. Let them awaken you from the
degrading intoxication of licentiousness,
into nobler emotions. Every objea which
you view in nature, whether great or
small, serves to inftruc you. The flar
and the infe&, the fiery meteor and the
flower of spring, the verdant field and the
lofty mountain, all exhibit a Supreme
Power, before which you ought to trem-
ble and adore; all preach the doctrine,
all inspire the spirit, of devotion, and rever-

ence.

ence. Regarding, then, the work of the S E R M.

VI.

Lord, let rising emotions of awe and gra- J
titude call forth from your fouls such
sentiments as thee :-" Lord, wherever
" I am; and whatever I enjoy, may I ne-
" ver forget thee, as the Author of na-
" ture! May I never forget that I am
" thy creature and thy fubjce,! In this
" magnificent temple of the universe,
" where thou halt placed me, may I ever
" be thy faithful worshipper; and may
"the reverence and the fear of God be
"the first sentiments of my heart !"-
It is to such consideration of God I would
now recal your thoughts, from the wine
and the feqt, as proper to check the spirit
of levity and folly; and to inspire manly
and becoming sentiments, in the place of
criminal dissipation. But,

IN the second place, there is a confider-

ation of a nature still more serious, to be
employed for the fame purpose; the con-
fideration of God as not only the Author
of nature, but the Governor of his crea-

tures.

SE R M. tres. While we regardM the work of ilc

_". Lord, we are also to cofidcer 1th never-ceaf-

ing operation of his hands. We are to look
uip to an awful and irresistible Providence,
stretching its arm over our heads; di-
reaing the fate of men, and dispensing at
its pleasure happiness or misery. In the
giddy moments of jollity, the wanton and
thoughtless are apt to fay: " Let us eat and
6 drink, for to-morrow we die. Nothing
" is better for man, than to rejoice as
" much as he can all the days of his vain
" life; and to keep himself undisturbed
' by superstitious terrors. He who fit-
" teth in the heavens bestows no minute
' attention on the sons of earth. He per-
" mits all things to come alike to all; one
" event to happen to the righteous and to the
"wicked."-Be assured, my brethren, it
is not so. You greatly deceive your-
selves, by imagining that your Creator
and Governor is indiffcrcnt to the part
you are now a&cing; or that the diftri-
bution of good and evil, which now takes

place,

place, has no relation to your moral con- SERMg

VI.

dud. In some instances, that relation a
may not be apparent, because the moral
government of God is not completed in
this world. But a multitude of proofs
shew government to be already begun;
and point out to you the train in which
you may expec it to proceed.

In the history of all ages and nations,

you cannot but have observed a thousand
instances, in which the operation of the divine
hwd' has been displayed; overtaking evil
doers sooner or later with punishment, and
bringing-on their own heads the ruin they
had devised for others. You are not to
Imagine that this displeasure of Providence
is exerted only against the ambitious, the
treacherous, and the cruel, who are the au-
thors of extensive misery to the world. Un-
der this idea, perhaps, you may be desirous
to shelter yourselves, that your excefies are
of a harmless kind; that you seek nothing
more than the enjoyment of your own
pleasures; that your fiaft and your wine

interfere

SER M. interfere not with the order of the worlds

VI.
»._^ and that therefore you have done nothing

which should awaken the sleeping thun-
der, and bring it down from heaven on
your heads. Though not stained with
the blacket colours of guilt, your con-
duc may nevertheless be highly offen.
five to the Ruler of the world. His go.
vernment is not of that indolent inatten.
tive kind, which allows impunity to every
leser criminal. He beholds with dif-
pleasure the behaviour of those who de-
grade their nature by vicious disorders;
and contaminate, by their example, every
society with which they are conneaed.
His measures are taken, that in one way
or other, they shall susser.

Look around the circle of your ac-

quaintance, and observe, whether they
are not the fober, the industrious, and the
virtuous, who visibly prosper in the world,
and rife into reputation and influence; ob-
ierve whether the licentious and intem-
perate are not constantly humbled and

checked

checked by rome dark teverfe either insERM.
their health or their fortune; whether v_-
the irreligious and profligate are ever
!i'ffered to escape long, without being
marked with infamy, and becoming ob-
jets of contempt.-I ask, to what cause
this is to be ascribed, but to that opera-
tion of the Land of God, which I am now
calling you to confider ? Does it not
obviously carry the marks of a plan, a
system of things, contrived and fore-
ordained by Providence, for rewarding
virtue, and punishing vice in every form
of its diforders?-The Governor of the
world need not for this purpose ftep fiom
his throne, or put forth his hand from
the clouds. With admirable wisdom he
hath so ordered the train of human affairs,
that, in their natural course, men's own
-wickedinefi Jhall reprove them, and their
backflidings correct them; that they fJlall
be made to eat the fruit of their doings,
:;1d to fall into the pit which themfelvts had
digged.

VoL. IV. K These

SERM. These things lave been always so ap-

VI.
'_» parent to observation, that though a man

may have been reduced into irregular
and evil courses during his life, yet, at
the close of it, it seldom happens but he
discerns their pernicious nature, and con-
demns himself for them. Never, per-
haps, was there a father, who, after he
had spent his days in idleness, dissipation,
and luxury, did not, when dying, admo-
nifh the children whom he loved, to hold
a more honourable course, to follow the
paths of virtue, to fear God, and to fulfil
properly the duties of their tfation.-To
yourselves, indeed, I can confidently ap-
peal, whether what I am now faying, be
not confirmed by your own teflimony,
After you have been guilty of some cri-
minal ads, in the course of those riotous
pleasures which you indulge, have you
not, at certain times, felt the flings of
.remorse ? Were you not obliged to con-
fess to yourselves that a fad profpeC of
misery was opening before you, if such
excesses were to continue? Did you not

7 hear

hear an inward voice upbraiding you for S ERM.
having funk and degraded your charac- .
ter so far below that of many of your
equals around you ?-My friends, what
was this but the voice of God, Ifeaking,
as the Governor of his creatures, within
your heart; testifying loudly that your
courif of life was difpleafingr to him;
and warning you of punihinents that
were to follow? If his displeasure against
you is already begun to be testified, can
you tell where it is to tfop, or how long it
may continue to pursue you throughout
future flages of your existence? lho
knoweth the power of his wrath ?-To
this awful, this warning voice, will you
not be persuaded reverently to liften ? Im-
pressed by the dread authority which it
carries, shall you not fall down on your
knees before your Maker, imploring his
mercy to pardon your part offences, and
his grace to reLtify your future way ?

SUCH ought to be the effects of the
consideration of God as the Goverior of

K 2 the

SERM. the world. It leads to thoughts of a
V_ very serious nature. When we regard tie

work of thJ Lord, and contemplate him
as the Author of the universe, such con-
templation prompts devotion. But when
we coifider the operation of his hands in
providence, and contemplate him as the
Governor of mankind, such contempla-
tion prompts humiliation before him for
offences committed. The former ad-
dresses itself to the ingenuous sentiments
that are left in the heart; and awakens a
sense of our unworthiness, in neglecing
the Author of nature, amidst our riotous
pleasures. The latter addresses itself to
our regard for fafcty and happiness; and
awakens fear and dread, from conlciouf-
ness of the guilt we have contratedi.
Hence springs up in every thoughtful
mind, an anxious concern to avert the
displeasure, and regain the favour of that
Supreme Being to whom we are all
fiubje&. This, among unenlightened na-
tions, gave rife to T'fcrifices, expiations,
and all the rites of humble, though super-

fiiticus

flitious worship. Among nations, who SE RM.
have been infiruaed in true religion, fen- vi.
timents of the fame nature pave the way
for prayer, repentance, faith, and all those
duties, by means of which we may hope,
through a divine Mediator and Intercef-
for, to be reconciled to heaven. Natural
and revealed religion here appear in con-
cord. We behold the original dictates of
the human heart laying a foundation for
the glad reception of the comfortable tid-
ings of the gospel.

I HAVE thus endeavoured to shew in

what manner, by regarding the work of the
Lord, and cofidering the operation of his
hands, we may prevent the dangers arif-
ing from a thoughtless indulgence of
pleasure; we may be furnished with an
antidote to the poison which is too often
mixed in that intoxicating cup.-Human
life is full of troubles. We are all tempt-
ed to alleviate them as much as we can,
by freely enjoying the pleasurable mo-
ments which Providence thinks fit to al-

K 3 low

SERM. low us. Enjoy them we may: But, if

we would enjoy them safely, and enjoy
them long, let us temper them with the
fear of God. As soon as this is forgotten
and obliterated, the found of the harp
and the viol is changed into the signal of
death. The serpent comes forth from
the roses where it had lain in ambufli,
and gives the fatal fting. Pleasure in
moderation is the cordial, in excess it is
the bane, of life.

# SERMON VII. On the PRESENCE of GOD in a FUTURE STATE. PSALM xvi. 11. Thou wilt shew me the path of life: In thy presence is fulness of joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

[ '35 1

SE R M ON VII.
On the PRESENCE of GOD in a FUTURE

STATE.

PSALM xvi. II.
Thou wilt Jsew me the path of life: In

thy presence is filnefs of joy; at thy right
hand there are pleafires for evermore.
T HE apostle Peter, in a discourse SE R M.

which he held to the Jews, ap- -

plies this passage, in a mystical and pro-
phetical sense, to the Messiah *. But, in
its literal and primitive meaning, it ex-
presses the exalted hopes by which the

* Aas, ii. 25-28.

K 4 Psalmist

S ERM. Psalmist David supported himself amidfl

VII.
LV-. the changes and revolutions, of which

his life was full. By these hopes, when
flying before Saul, when driven from his
throne, and persecuted by an unnatural
son, he was enabled to preserve his vir-
tue, and to maintain unihaken trust in
God.-In that early age of the world,
those explicit discoveries of a fiate of im-
mortality, which we enjoy, had not yet
been given to mankind. But though
the Sun of righteousness was not arisen, the
dawn had appeared of that glorious day
which he was to introduce. Even in
those antient times, holy men, as the
apostle writes to the Hebrews, Jaw the
pronifes afar off, and were perfitaded of them
and embraced them; and confessing that they
were Jirangers and pilgrims on earth, de-
clared that they fought after a better coun-
try, that is an heavenly *. Indeed, in every
age, God permitted such hopes to as-
ford support and consolation to those

Heb. xi. 13-16.

who

who served him. The full effet of them S E R M.
we behold in those triumphant expref--
sions of the text, which are to be the sub-
jeaf of this discourse. They lead us to
confider; first, The hope of the Psalmist
in his present state; Thou ciilt Jsew me
the path of life. And, secondly, the ter-
mination of his hope in that future slate,
where in the presence of God is fulness
of jol, and at his right hand there are
pleafiires for evermore.

I. Thou wilt flew me the path of lfe.

This plainly imports that there are dif-
ferent paths or courses of conduct, which
may be pursued by men in this world;
a path which leads to life or happiness,
and a path which issues in death or de-
ftruftion. These opposite lines of con-
dut are determined by the choice which
men make of virtue or of vice; and hence
men are divided into two great clalegs,
according as their inclinations lead thirn
to good or to evil. The path of li/f is of-
ten a rough and difficult path, followed

only

E R M. only by a few. The opposite one is the

1,__ broad way, in which the multitude walk;

seemingly smooth, and strewed with flow..
ers; but leading in the end to death and
misery. The path of life conducs us up a
steep ascent. The palace of virtue has, in
all ages, been represented as placed on the
summit of a hill; in the ascent of which
labour is requisite, and difficulties are to
be surmounted; and where a conducor
is needed, to direct our way, and to aid
our steps.

Now, the hope which good men en-

tertain is, that this path of life shall be
shewn them by God; that, when their
intentions are upright, God will both in-
ftru& them concerning the road which
leads to true happiness, and will assist
them to pursue it fiiccefsfully. Among
nations where any suitable ideas of God
or of virtue began to be formed, hopes
of this nature also began to be entertain-
ed. It was consonant to the nature of
man, to think that the Supreme Being
was favourable to virtue. Accordingly,

in

in the writings of some of the antient phi- s E R M.
lofophers, we find various obicure traces v11.
of this belief, that there was a benign hea-
venly Spirit, who illuminated the minds
of the virtuous, and aflifted their endea-
vours to obtain wisdom and happiness.
They even afterted, that no man became
great or good without some inspiration of
Heaven.

But what they indiftinCly conceived,

and could not with confidence rely upon,
the docrine of Chriflianity hath clearly
explained and fully confirmed; exprefl-
ly and frequently teaching that, not only
by the external dikcoveries of revelation,
but by the inward operations of his Spi-
rit, he fizews to the humble and virtu-
ous the path of life. While, by his word,
he inftruts them in their duty, by
the influence of his grace he assists them
in the performance of it. In all revela-
tion there is certainly no dotrine more
comfortable than this. It is to good men
a noble and pleasing thought, that they
are pursuing a path which God has dif.

covered

SERM. covered and pointed out to them. For

I_ "they know that every path, in which he

is their conductor, must be honourable,
must be safe, must bring them in the end
to felicity. They follow that Shepherd
oflfrael, who always leads his flock into
green pafiures, and makes them lie down be-
fide the Jill -waters. At the fame time,
they know that, if there be truth in re-
ligion at all, on this principle they may
securely reft, that the Divine Being will
never desert those who are endeavouring
to follow out, as they can, the path which
he has Ihewn them. He beholds them
here in a state of great imbecillity; fur-
rounded with much darkness; exposed to
numberless dangers, from the temptations
that assault them without, and the feduc-
tion of misguided and disorderly paflions
within. In this situation, can they ever
fufpea that the Father of mercies will
leave his servants, alone and unbefriended,
to struggle up the hill of virtue, without
stretching forth a compassionate arm to aid
their frailty, and to guide them through

the

the bewildering paths of life ? Where were s E R M.
then the G;d of love P Where, those infi- V
nite compassions of his nature, in which
all his worshippers have been encouraged
to trust ?-No: He will- fend fortl his
light and his truth to bring them to his holy
bill. For the righteous Lord loveth right-
eofllefs, and his countenance beholdeth the
lpright. With him there is no oblique
purpose, to turn him aside fiom favouring
the cause of goodness. No undertaking
to which he has given his countenance
ihall prove abortive. No promise that he
has made Ihall be allowed to fail. Whom
he loveth, he loveth to the end. Thefecret
of the Lord is with them thatfear him, and
be wtll Jtew them his covenant. the meek
will he guide in judgment, and them will
he teach his way. His grace Jhall be sus-
jicant for them, and his jlrength be made
ps:'jfe/ in their weakness. They go from
jlrcngth to flrength ; evety one of them ap-
fearcth before God in Zion *.-Such are

Pfal, xx, 14, 9, 2 Co?. xii, 9. Pfial, .1xxiv. 7.

the

SER M. the hopes with which good men in a pre-
"^ ' sent life set forth on a course of piety and

virtue. Y'hou wilt siew me the path of
l/fe. Let us now proceed,

II. To confider the termination of these

hopes in a future state. In; thy presence is
fulness of joy; at thy right hand there are
pleafiures for evermore. All happiness as-
furedly dwells with God. The fountain
of life is justly said to be with him. That
supreme and independent Being muf ne-
ceffarily possess within himself every prin-
ciple of beatitude; and no cause from
without can pofibly affect his untroubled
felicity. Among created dependent bc-
ings, happiness flows in Icattered and feelle
streams; fireams that are often tinged
with the blackness of misery. But from
before the throne of God issues the river
of life, full, unmixed, and pure; and the
pleasures which now in scanty portions
we are permitted to taste, are all derived
from that source. Whatevcr gladdens

the

the hearts of men or angels, with any real s E R M.
and fatisfaaory joy, comes from heaven.
It is a portion of the pure ifluiencc flow-
ing firom the glory of the lhnmighty; a ray
iiing from the brightness of the everlafling
life. It is manifefi, therefore, that every
approach to God must be an approach to
felicity. The enjoyment of his imme-
diate presence must be the conlumma-
tion of felicity; and it is to this pre-
fence that the Pfalmifl here expresses his
hope that the path of lfe was to conduct
him.

The whole of what is implied in ar-

riving at the presence of the Divinity, we
cannot expet to comprehend. Such ex-
pressions as these of scripture, beholdi:ng
the face of God; being made glad with the
light of his countenance, and ftinJi cid wilhj
his likeness; f'eing lilght in his light; secing
no longcr darkly as throiugh a glain, b,,t face
to face; feeing him as he is; are expreflions
altogether mysterious, conveying iifblime
though obscure ideas of the most per eCL
happiness and highest exaltation of hrumann

nat ire,

SE R M. nature. This we know, that the absence
VII. van of God, the ditance at which we are now

placed from any communication with our
Creator, is one great source of our infeli-
city. Faith exerts its endeavours, but of-
ten ineffedtuaiiy, to raiie our fouls to him.
He is a God that hidth himself His ways
seem intricate and perplexed. We fre-
quently cannot reconcile them to the con-
ceptions which we had formed of his na-
ture; and with many a suspicion and
doubt they perplex the inquiring mind.
His works we survey with astonishment.
We wonder and adore. But while we
clearly trace the footsteps of their great
Author, his presence we can never dif-
cern. T'e go frirwcard, but he is not therC;
and backward, but we cannot perceive him:
on the lfit hand, ewhere he worketh, but -,c
cannot behold 1him: he hideth hinmflf on tbh
right hand, that we cannot fe him '. Hence
amidst the various sorrows and difcou-
ragements of the present state, that excla-

Job, xxiii. 8, 9.

3 mation

mation of Job's is often drawn forth from s ERM.
the pious heart, O that I knew where I might v.
find him, that I might come even to hisJeat*!

Surrounded by such distressing obfcu-

rity, no hope more transporting can be
opened to a good man, than that a period
is to come, when he ihall be allowed to
draw nearer to the Author of his exist-
ence, and to enjoy the sense of his pretence.
In order to convey some faint idea of that
future bliss, by such an image as we can
now employ, let the image be taken from
the most glorious representative of the Su-
preme Being, with which we are acquaint-
ed in this world, the Sun in the heavens. As
that resplendent luminary cheers and re-
vives the universe, when, after the dark-
ness of a tempefluous night, it comes
forth in the morning with its brightest
lufre, and inspires every heart with glad-
ness; as ascending gradually through the
heavens, it converts that whole vast ex-

*'Job, xxiii 3.
VOL. IV, L cent1

S E R M. tent, over which its beams are diffused,
,_. -into a region of light; and thus changes

entirely the state of objecs, by arraying
all nature in beauty, and transforming it
into the image of its own brightness:-
Some such change as this, though in a de-
gree infinitely superior, we may conceive
the revelation of the Divine Presence to
produce upon the human foul. I will
behold thy face in righteotfnefs; I fall be
fatified, when I awake, with thy likeness.-
But without endeavouring farther to un-
fold mysteries which we cannot explore,
there are two sublime and expressive views
of the Divine Essence given us in scrip-
ture, on which it may be edifying that
our thoughts should reft for a little, in or-
der to aid our conceptions of the blessed-
ness of good men hereafter, in the pre-
fel:e of God. It is said, God it light*;
God is love . Let us confider whatfil-
ness of joy must arise from such mani-

J
I John, i. 5. A John, iv. 8.

feftations

feftations ds the Divine Essence ,:o the S E R M.
blessed. vJ .

God is light. The revelation of his pre-

fence infers, of course, a complete diffu-
sion of light and knowledge among all
who partake of that presence. This un-
questionably forms a primary ingredient
of happiness. Ignorance, or the want of
light, is the source of all our present mif-
condut, and all our misfortunes. The
heart of man is dark; and in the dark-
ness of his heart is the feat of his corrup-
tion. He is unable to discern what is
truly good. Perpetually employed in
search of happiness, he is perpetually mif-
led by false appearances of it. The er-
rors of his understanding impose upon
his passions; and, in consequence of the
wrong diredion which his paflions take
he is betrayed into a thousand disorders.
Hence sensuality, covetoufieis, and all the
violent contests with others about trifles,
which occasion o- much misery, and so
many crimes in the world. He fiedeth of

L 2 /kces

S E R M. aJhes: a deceived heart bath turned bin

Vis aside, that he cannot deliver hisfoul, norfay,

Is there not a lie in my right hand*?-
Once open to him the perfect ources of
knowledge and truth; suppose him placed
in the presence of that God who is
Light; suppose him illuminated by light
derived immediately from the Supreme
Being; presently all his former errors
would fly away, as mists are dispelled by
the rifng fun. His whole nature would
be changed and reformed. The prejudices
which obscured his understanding would
be removed. The feduaions of his passions
would disappear. Reditude and virtue,
having nothing now to obftru: their en.
trance, would take entire possession of his
heart. Angels are happier than men, be-
cause they enjoy more enlarged knowledge
and views; because they labour under none
of our unhappy deceptions; but fee the
truth as it is in itself; fee it, as it is in
God. Sharing the fame light which il.

* Isaiah, xliv. 2o.

luminates

luminates them, good men in a future SERM.
slate will fiare in their felicity.

Moreover, the light that flows from the

pretence of Him who is the original
source of light, not only banishes miseries
which were the effects of former darkness,
but also confers the most exquisite enjoy-
ment. The knowledge afforded us at
present serves to supply our most pressing
wants; but it does no more. It is al-
ways imperfec and unsatisfactory; nay,
much painful anxiety it often leaves. Nar-
row is the sphere within which the mind
can fee at all; and even there it can fee
only darkly as through a glads. But when
it shall be enlarged beyond this dusky
territory, let loose from this earthly pri-
son, and in God's light permitted to fee
light, the most magnificent and glorious
fpeaacles muff open to the view of the
purified spirit. What must it be to be-
hold the whole stupendous scene of na-
ture unveiled, and its hidden mysteries
diiclofed! To trace the wife and just ga-

, 3 vernmept

S ER.M. vernment of the Almighty, through all
VII. those intricacies which had so long per-

plexed us! To behold his hand condut-
ing ten thousand worlds, which are now
unknown to us; and throughout all the
regions of boundless space, to view wis-
dom and goodness perpetually acting, and
diversifying its operations in forms of
endless variety! Well may such disco-
veries inspire that song of the blessed, which
the apostle John heard as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of mighty thunder-
iigs, Jfiying, Alleluinah ! For the Lord God
omnipotent reigneth. Great and marvellous
are thy works, Lord God Alm.ighty; jJui
and true are thy ways, thou King of /Jiints !
As God is Light, so also it is said in scrip-
ture,

God is Love. His pretence mufft of

course diffuse love, among all who are
permitted to dwell in it. He that loveIh

* Rev. xix. 6.; xv. 3.

}!0f,

,ot, knoweth not God. He that dwelletb s E R M.
in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him *. Vli.
Were man a tingle, solitary being, the
full enjoyment of light might suffice for
his happiness; as the perfelion of know-
ledge would rectify and improve to the
highest all his faculties. But, both here
and hereafter, he is conneted with other
beings. Heaven implies a society; and
the felicity of that society is constituted
by the perfection of love and gcodnefs,
flowing from the presence of the God of
love.

Hence follows the entire purification of

human nature from all those malevolent
passions, which have so long rendered our
abode on earth the abode of misery. We
greatly deceive ourselves, when we charge
our chief distresses merely to the account
of our external condition in the world.
From the disadvantages attending it, I ad-
mit, that we may often have been exposed
to susser. We may have met with dif-

* X John, iv. 8. 16.

L 4 appoint-

S E R M. appointments in our pursuits. By the

VII.
, , arrows of misfortune we may have

been wounded. Under infirmities of
body we may have languiihed. But on
this we may depend, that the worst evils
of our present condition arise from the
want of goodness and love; from the dif-
orders of selfish passions; from the irrita-
tion which these occasion when working
within ourselves, and the distress which
they produce when breaking out upon
us from others; in a word, from that
corrupted state of temper, and that reci-
procation of jealousies, suspicions, and in-
juries, which is ever taking place among
the societies of men. Could you baniih
distrust, craft, and uncharitableness from
the earth, and form all mankind into an
assembly of the just and the benevolent;
could you inspire every heart with kind
affetions, and render every one friendly
and generous to his neighbour; you would
banish at once the most affliCtive tribe of
human evils. Seldom would the voice of

6 complaint

complaint be heard. All nature would SERM.
assume a different aspet. Cheerfulness I
would be seen on every countenance. Pa.
radife would return. The wilderness
would smile; the defart rejoice and blofom
as the rofe.-Now such are the effeats
which the presence of the God of love
must produce on the inhabitants above.
Beholding his glory, they are changed into
the fame image. In that temple of eternal
love, which his presence has hallowed and -
consecrated, no found but the voice of
harmony is ever heard; no appearances
ever present themselves but those of peace
and joy.

THUS, confidering God under these two

illustrious charaaers which are given of
him in scripture, as Light, and as Love, it
follows that in his presence there must be
fulnefi ofjoy. But I am far from faying that
the few imperfect hints I have now given
exhaust, or even approach to, the fum of
those pleafires for evermore which are at
God's right hand. Ten thonfand plea-

fures

S E R M. fires are there, which now we have nei.
vl. ther faculties to comprehend, nor powers

to enjoy. Behind that mysterious cloud,
which covers the habitation of eternity,
the view of mortals cannot penetrate.
Content with our humble and distant
situation, we must as yet remain. Faith
can only look to those glories from afar.
In patient silence, it mufft wait, trufi, and
adore.

Supposing the ideas which I have set

before you, in this discourse, to be no
more than the speculations of a contem-
plative mind, such as were wont of old
to be indulged by the philosophers of the
Platonic school, still they would deserve
attention, on account of their tendency to
purify and elevate the mind, But when
they are confidered in connexion with a
revelation, which, upon grounds the most
unquestionable, we believe to be divine,
they are entitled to command, not atten-
tion only, but reverence and faith.-They
present to us such high expedations as
are sufficient to determine every reason-

able

able man to the choice of virtue; to sup- SE RM.
port them under all its present dilcourage- VIL.
ments, and to comfort him in the hour of
death. Justly may they cxcite in our
hearts that ardent aspiration of the Psalm-
ift: My foul thirJieth for God, for the
living God; 0 zwhen fiall I come and ap-
pear before him !-But, with this wish in
our hearts, never, I beseech you, let us
forget what was set forth in the first part of
this discourse; that, in order to arrive at
the presence of God, the path of life muff
previously be shewn to us by him, and
that in this path we must persevere to the
end. These two things cannot be dif-
joined, a virtuous life and a happy eter-
nity. 'bho Jiall ascend unto the hill of the
Lord?, and who JIall Jland in his holy
place ? Ie only who hath clean hands and
a pure heart. Between a corrupted heart
and the God of light and love, there
never can be any connexion. But of
this we may reft assured, that the path of
piety and virtue, purlued with a firm and

10 conflant

SERM. constant spirit, will, in the end, through

II. the merits of our blessed Redeemer, bring

us to that presence, where is fulness of
joy, and where are pleasures for ever.
more,

# SERMON VIII. On CURIOSITY concerning the AFFAIRS of others. JOHN, xxi. 21, 22. Peter seeing him, saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do? Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I ...

[ 157 1

S E R M O N VIII.
On CURIOSITY concerning the AFFAIRS

of others.

JOHN, XXi. 21, 22.
Peterfeeing him, faith to yefis, Lord, and

whatJhall this man do? Jesus faith unto
him, If I will that he tarry till I come,
what is that to thee ? Follow thou me,
T HE SE words occurred in a confer- s E R M.

ence which our Lord held with _-_

Simon Peter, after his refurretion from
the dead. Conscious of the disgrace which
he had incurred by his late denial of his
Master, Peter must at this time have ap-
peared before him with ihame. Our Lord,

after

sERM. after a tacit rebuke, implied in the question
VIII. V_.J.iwhich he repeatedly puts to him, Simon

son of yonas, loveJt thou me ? refores him,
with great benignity, to his office as an
apostle, by giving the commandment to
feed his fieep; and intimates also that it
should be his lot to susser death in the
cause of his Mailer. The apostle John,
distinguished here by the denomination
of the a'ciiple whom Yefis loved, being pre-
sent at this conversation, Peter, who was
always eager and forward, looking to John,
puts this queflion to our Saviour, Lord,
and whatfJall this man do ? " What shall
A be his employment? what his rank and
'1 station in thy kingdom ? what his future
" fate in life ?"-By what principle Peter
was moved to put this unseasonable and
improper question to his Master; whether
it arose from mere curiosity, or from some
emotion of rivalfhip and jealousy, does
rlot appear; but it is plain that our Lord
was dissatisfied with the inquiry which
he made; and presently he checks Peter's
curiosity, by a fevcre reply; T7hat is that

to

to thee ? " What is it to thee what this S E R M.
" manfJtall do; what shall be his rank; or V1.
" what the circumstances of his life or his
" death ? Attend thou to thine own duty.
" Mind thy proper concerns. Fulfil the
" part which I have allotted to thee. Fd-
" low thou me."-The inftruaion which
arises from this conversation of our Lord's
with Peter, is, That all prying inqui-
ries into the state, circumflances, or cha-
raater of others, are reprehensible and im-
proper; that to every man a particular
charge is assigned by his Lord and Maf-
ter, the fulfilment of which ought to be
the primary object of his attention, without
officiously thrufling himself into the con-
cerns of others. The illustration of these
points shall make the subjeC of the present
discourse.

THAT idle curiosity, that inquisitive

and meddling spirit, which leads men. to
pry into the affit's of their neighbours,
is reprehensible on three accounts. It in-
terrupts the good order, and breaks the

peace

SE R M. peace of society. It brings forward and
ALns s nourishes several bad passions. It draws

men aside from a proper attention to the
discharge of their own duty.

IT interrupts, I fay, the order, and

breaks the peace of society. In this world
we are linked together by many ties. We
are bound by duty, and we are prompted
by interest, to give mutual assistance, and
to perform friendly offices to each other.
But those friendly offices are performed
to most advantage, when we avoid to in.
terfere unnecessarily in the concerns of
our neighbour. Every man has his own
part to a&, has his own interest to consult,
has affairs of his own to manage, which
his neighbour has no call to scrutinize.
Human life then proceeds in its most na-
tural and orderly train, when every one
keeps within the bounds of his proper
province; when, as long as his pursuits
are fair and lawful, he is allowed, with-
out disturbance, to conduct them in his
own way. bThat ye Jiudy to be quiet, and

to

to do your own bufinefis , is the apoftoli- S E R M
cal rule, and indeed the great rule, for Vl
preservation of harmony and order. But
so it is, that, in every age, a set of men
have existed, who, driven by an unhappy
acivity of spirit, oftener perhaps than by
any fettled design of doing ill, or any mo-
tives of ambition or interest, love to in-
termeddle where they have no concern,
to inquire into the private affairs of others,
and from the imperfect information which
they collet, to form conclusions concern-
ing their circumstances and character.
These are they who, in scripture, are cha-
racerifcd as tatlers, and busy bodies in other
men's matters, and from whom we are called
to turn away.

Though persons of this description

should be prompted by nothing but vain
curiosity, they are, nevertheless, dangerous
troublers of the world. While they con-
ceive themselves to be inoffensive» they are

* Theff. iv. it.
VOL. IV. M sowing

S E R M. sowing difenfion and feuds. Crossing the

v.,. lines in which others move, they create

confusion, and awaken resentment. For
every man conceives himself to be in-
jured, when he finds another intruding in-
to his affairs, and, without any title, taking
upon him to examine his conduct. Being
improperly and unnecessarily disturbed,
he claims the right of disturbing in his
turn those who wantonly have troubled
him. Hence, many a friendship has been
broken; the peace of many a family has
been overthrown; and much bitter and last-
ing discord has been propagated through
society.

WIIILE this spirit of meddling curio-

fity injures so considerably the peace and
good order of the world, it also nourishes,
among individuals who are addicted to it,
a multitude of bad passions. Its most
frequent source is mere idleness, which, in
itself a vice, never fails to engender many
vices more. The mind of man cannot be
long without Tome food to nourish the ac-

tivity

tlvity of its thoughts. The idle, who have s E R M.
no nourishment of this fort within them- 1-
selves, feed their thoughts with inquiries
into the conduct of their neighbours.
The inquisitive and curious are always
talkative. What they learn, or fancy
themselves to have learned, concerning
others, they are generally in haste to di-
vulge. A tale which the malicious have
invented, and the credulous have pro-
pagated; a rumour which, arising among
the multitude, and transmitted by one to
another, has, in every ftep of its progress,
gained frelh additions, becomes in the
end the foundation of confident assertion,
and of rafim and severe judgment.

It is often by a spirit of jealousy and ri-

valry, that the researches of such persons
are prompted. They wih to discover some-
thing that will bring down their neigh-
bour's character, circumstances, or reputa-
tion, to the level of their own; or that will
flatter them with an opinion of their own
superiority. A secret malignity lies at
the bottom of their inquiries. It may be

M 2 concealed

SERM. concealed by an assesed shew of candour

VIII.
i (_ and impartiality. It may even be veiled

with the appearance of a friendly concern
for the interests of others, and with as-
seced apologies for their failings. But
the hidden rancour is easily discovered.-
While, therefore, persons of this defcrip-
tion trouble the peace of bciety, they at
The fame time poison their own minds
xv.;'i :.ialignant paflions. Their difpofi-
i-:; is entirely the reverie of that amiable
lirit of charity, on which our religion
lays so great a stress. Cnarity covreclb
?he multitlude of fins; but this prying and
:-leddling spirit seeks to difcovcr and di-
-ulge them. Charity tlinketh no evil; but
this temper inclines us always to fufpeft
the worst. Charity rcioiceth not in iiqui-
ty; this temper triumphs in the discovery
of errors and failings. Charity, like the
fun, brightens every objea on which it
shines; a censorious disposition casts
every character into the darlkeft. Iade it
will bear,

IT is to be farther observed, that all im- s E R M.

VIII.

pertinent curiosity about the affairs of v.
others tends greatly to obftruC personal
reformation; as it draws men's thoughts
aside from what ought to be the chief ob-
jec of attention, the improvement of their
own heart and life. They who are so of-
ficioufly occupied about their neighbours,
have little leisure, and less inclination, to
'*serve their own defeas, or to mind their
.wn duty, From their inquisitive re-
searches, they find, or imagine they find,
in the behaviour of others, an apology
for their own failings: And the favourite
result of their inquiries generally is, to reft
satisfied with themselves. They are at
leatd as good, they think, as others around
them. The condemnation which they
pass on the vices of their neighbours, they
interpret to be a sentiment of virtue in
themselves. They become thole hypo-
crites described by our Lord, who fee
clearly the notl thlt is in their neighbour's
eye, wehile the) (difcerln not the beam that is
in their owne

M 3 I

S E R M. IN opposition to such a character as this,
Vji the docrine plainly inculcated by the text

is, that to every pnan a particular charge
is given by his Lord and Master, a part is
assigned him by Providence to a&; that to
this he ought to bend his chief attention;
and, inifead of scrutinising the characer
or state of others, ought to think of him-
self, and leave them to stand or fall by
their own master. 7WhatJhall this man do ?
said Peter. What, replies our Lord, is that
to thee ? Follow thou me.

WHERE persons possess any important

fation, or distinguished rank, in the world,
the application of this doctrine to them is
manifest. If they have any candour, they
cannot refute to acknowledge that God
and the world have a title to expec from
them a diligent attention to their proper
part in life; and that to waste their time
in idle inquiries about others, with whom
they have nothing to do, is reprehensible
and sinful. But there are multitudes of
m.ankind, to whom this appears in a very

different

different light. They are humble and pri- s E R M.
vate men, who are willing to conceive VIII.
themselves as of little importance in the
world. Having no extensive influence,
and no call, as they think, to diftinguifl
themselves by active exertions in any
sphere, they imagine that they may inno-
cently lead' an idle life, and indulge their
curiosity, by canvassing at pleasure the
charaLer and the behaviour of those
around them. With persons of this de-
scription every society too much abounds.
-My brethren, no one ought to confider
himself as insignificant in the fight of God.
In our several fations we are all sent forth
to be labourers in God's vineyard. Every
man has his work allotted, his talent com-
mitted to him; by the due improvement
of which he might, in one way or other,
serve God, promote virtue, and be use-
ful in the world. Occupy till I come, is
the charge given to all Christians without
exception. To be entirely unemployed
and idle is the prerogative of no one, in
any rank of life.

M 4 Even

SERM. Even that sex, whose task is not to
VIII. .VL·I mingle in the labours of public and ac.

tive business, have their own part assigned
them to aft. In the quiet of domeflic
shade, there are a variety of virtues to be
exercised, and of important duties to be
discharged. Much depends on them for
the maintenance of private oeconomy and
order, for the education of the young, and
for the relief and comfort of those whole
functions engage them in the toils of the
world. Even where no such female du-
ties occur to be performed, the care of
preparing for future usefulness, and of at-
taining such accomplishments as procure
just esteem, is laudable. il such duties
and cares, how far better is time employ-
ed, than in that search into private con.
cerns, that circulation of rumours, those
discussions of the condut, and descants
on the characer of others, which engross
conversation so much, and which end,
for the most part, in severity of censure!

In whatever condition we are placed,
to adt always in charader should be our

constant

confant rule. He who ads in charac. SERM.
ter is above contempt, though his flation V'-i.
be low. He who aas out of charater
is despicable, though his flation be ever
so high. What is that to thee, what this
mnan or that man does? Think of what
thou oughteft to do thyself; of what is suit-
able to thy character and place; of what
the world has a title to expect from thee.
Every excursion of vain curiosity about
others, is a subtraction from that time and
thought which was due to ourselves and
due to God. Having gifts, fays the apostle
Paul, dffering according to the grace that is
given us, whether minifiry, let us wait on our
nin/ifring; or he that teachcth, on teaching;
or he that exhorteth, on exhortation. He
that giveth, let him do it with fimlplicity;
he that ruleth, with diligence; he that
Jhleweth mercy, with cheerfulnefi .

In the great circle of human affairs
there is room for every one to be busy

* Ram. xii. 6-9.

and

SERM. and well employed in his own province,
^vmi without encroaching upon that of others.

It is the province of superiors to diret;
of inferiors, to obey; of the learned, to be
inftruaive ; of the ignorant, to be docile;
of the old, to be communicative; of the
young, to be advisable and diligent. Art
thou poor? Shew thyself astive and in-
duftrious, peaceable and contented. Art
thou wealthy? Shew thyself beneficent
and charitable, condescending and hu-
mane. If thou livest much in the world,
it is thy duty to make the light of a good
example thine conspicuously before others.
If thou livest private and retired, it is thy
business to improve thine own mind, and
to add, if thou canst do no more, one
faithful subjed to the Messiah's kingdom.
There is indeed no man so fequcftered
from acive life, but within his own nar-
row sphere he may find some opportuni-
ties of doing good; of cultivating friend-
Ihip, promoting peace, and discharging
many of these lesser offices of humanity
and kindness, which are within the reach

of

of every one, and which we all owe to SE RM.
one another. In all the various relations -
which subsist among us in life, as hus-
band and wife, master and servants, pa-
rents and children, relations and friends,
rulers and fubjecs, innumerable duties
itand ready to be performed; innumerable
calls to virtuous aCtivity present them-
selves on every hand, sufficient to fill up
with advantage and honour the whole
time of man.

THERE is, in particular, one great and

comprehensive objeCt of attention, which,
in the text, is placed in direCt opposition to
that idle curiosity reprehended by our
Lord; that is, to follow Chrifit. Follow
thou me. What this man or that man
does; how he employs his time; what
use he makes of his talents; how he fuc-
ceeds in the world; are matters, concern-
ing which the information we receive can
never be of great importance to us; of-
ten, is of no importance at all. But how
our Saviour behaved while he was on

earth,

s ER M. earth, or how, in our ituation, he would
VIII. have behaved, are matters of the highest

moment to every Christian.

The commandment given in the text,

to follow him, includes both observance
of his words, and imitation of his exam-
ple. The words of Christ contain, as we
all know, the standing rule of our life.
His example exhibits the great model on
which our condua ought to be formed;
and it is to this that the precept here deliver-
ed direEly refers.-Examples have great
influence on all. But by all human exam-
ples, we are in danger of being occasion-
ally mified. We are ever obliged to be on
our guard, left the admiration of what is
estimable, betray us into a resemblance of
what is blemished and faulty. For the
most perfect human charaaers, in the
midfl of their brightness and beauty, are
always marked with some of those dark
spots which stain the nature of man.
But our Lord pofefled all the virtues of
the greatest and best men, without par-
taking any of their defects. In him, all

I was

was light without a shade, and beauty SERM.

¥111.

without a Rfain.-At the fame time, his I-
example is attended with this singular ad-
vantage, of being more accommodated
than any other to general imitation. It
was distinguisHed by no unnatural aufte-
rities, no affeced singularities; but exhi-
bits the plain and simple tenor of all those
virtues for which we have most frequent
occasion in ordinary life. In order to
render it of more universal benefit, our
Lord fixed his residence in no particular
place; he tied himself down to no parti-
cular calling or way of living; but gives
us the opportunity of viewing his beha-
viour, in that variety of lights which
equally and indifferently regard all man-
kind. His life was divided between the
retired and the aaive state. Devotion and
business equally shared it. In the dif-
charge of that high office with which
he was vefied, we behold the perfect mo-
del of a.public character; and we behold
the most beautiful example of private life,
when we contemplate him among his dif-

ciples,

SE R M. ciples, as a Father in the midst ot his fa-
VIII. ,-_. mily.-By such means he has exhibited

before us specimens of every kind of
virtue; and to all ranks and classes of
men has afforded a pattern after which
they may copy. Hardly is there any
emergency which can occur in life, but
from some incident in our Saviour's con-
dud, from some feature displayed in his
characer, we are enabled to fay to our-
selves, " Thus Christ would have spoken,
" thus he would have aced, thus he
" would have suffered, if he had been cir-
" cumftanced as we are now."

Inflead, therefore, of thinking of thy

neighbours around thee, and of inquiring
how they behave, keep Christ in thine eye,
and in thy whole conduCt follow him.
Follow him in his steady and conscientious
discharge of duty, amidst opposition from
evil men and a corrupted world. Follow
him in his patient submission to his Fa-
ther's will, and the calmness of his spirit
under all trials. Follow him in his ats
of difinterefled benevolence, in his com-

paflion

passion to the unhappy, in his readiness SERM.
to oblige, to assist, and to relieve. Imitate Am
the mildness and gentleness of his man-
ners. Imitate the affability and condefcen-
sion which appeared in his behaviour.
Imitate the uncorrupted simplicity and
purity which distinguished his whole
life.

THESE are much worthier and nobler

objecs of your attention, than any of those
trifling varieties which you can explore
and discover in the charaAers of those
among whom you live. By lifting your
view to so high a flandard, you will be
preserved from descending to those futile
and corrupting employments of thought,
which occupy the idle, the vain, and the
malignant. It is incredible, how much
time and attention are thrown away by
men, in examining the affairs of others,
and discussing their conduct. Were their
time and attention thrown away only, the
evil would, in some degree, be less. But
they are worse than thrown away; they

14 are

SERM. are not merely fruitless, but productive of

much mischief. Such a habit of thought
is-conneCed with a thousand vices. It is
the confRant source of rash and severe cen-
sure. It arises -from envy and jealousy,
It foments ill nature and pride. It pro-
pagates misunderstanding and discord. All
those evils would be prevented, if the re-
proof which our Lord administers in the
text came oftener home, with proper au-
thority, to the reflection of men: TVhat is
that to thee? Each of us have more mate-
rial and important business of our own to
fulfil. Our task is assigned; our part al-
lotted. Did we suitably examine how
that part was performed, we should be less
disposed to busy ourselves about the con-
cerns of others. We would discover
many a disorder to be corrected at home;
many a weed to be pulled out from our
own grounds; much remaining to be done,
in order to rendei ourielves useful in this
world, and fit for. a world to come.-
W herefore, inRfead of being critics on
others, let us empiloy our criticim on

ourselves.

ourselves. Leaving others to be judged SERM.

VIII.

by Him who fearcheth the heart, let us
implore his assistance for enabling us to
a& well our own part, and to follow
Christ.

VOL. IV. N

# SERMON IX. On our Present IGNORANCE of the WAYS of GOD. JOHN, xiii. 7. Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do, thou shall knowest not now; but thou shall know hereafter.

(i781

SE RMON IX.
On our Present IGN-ORANCE of tlc

WAYS of GOD.

JOHN, xiii. 7.

eeJuts answered and Jsid unto him, Vhalt 1
do, thou knoweJf not now; but tho!u fJall
know bercftcr.
SERM. T H ESE words of our Lord were oc-

lx_ cafioned by a circumstance in his

behaviour which appeared mysterious to
his disciples. When about to celebrate
his last passover, he meant to give them
an inftruaive lesson of condescension and
humility. The mode which he chose for

7 deliverin

delivering this inftrustion, was the em- SE R M.

Ix.

blematical aaton of wafling their feet. ,
When Simon Peter saw his Mailer addrcft-
ing himself to the performance of so me-
nial an office, le exclaims with the :;eat-
eft iurprife, Loicd, dfl thou c'airJJ .:; f:.'; ?.
Our Lord replies, in the words oi the
text, W7hat I dlo, thnou knowje not nowt , but
tholujfalt know hereafter. " My bclihaiour
" in this instance, may fccm unaccount-
" able to you at present; but you fliall
"afterwards receive a fatisfatory expli-
" cation of -the intent of that symbol
" which I now employ."

The expressions of a divine person, on

this occasion, can very naturally and
properly be applied to various iniftances,
where the conduc of Providence, in the
administration of human affairs, remains
dark and mysterious to us. WJhat I (do
tbou knowSJ not now. We must for a
while be kept in ignorance of the de-
signs of Heaven. But this ignorance,
though necessary at present, is not al-
ways to continue. A time shall come

N 2 when

S E R M. vlhen a commentary shall be afforded on
Ix. A,_- all that is now obscure; when the veil of

mystery shall be removed; and full fa-
tisfaaion be given to every rational mind.
Tbmtu Jhalt know hereafter. This is the
doatrine which I purpose to illustrate in
the following discourse,

I. OUR Saviour's words lead us to ob-

serve, that many things in the conduet
of Providence are at present mysterious
and unintelligible. The truth of this
observation will not be called in question.
It is indeed very readily admitted by all;
and ever since the beginning of the world
has been the foundation of many a com-
plaint, and of much scepticism concern-
ing the government of Heaven.-That
human affairs are not left to roll on ac-
cording to mere chance, and that Provi-
dence interposes in them to a certain de-
gree, is made evident by various tokens
to every candid mind. But the perplexity
and trouble of the thoughtful inquirer
arises from observing that Providence ap-

pears

pears not to pursue any regular or con- S ERM.
fifent plan. An unaccountable mixture
of light and darkness presents itself to us,
when we attempt to trace the affairs of
the world up to any wife and righteous
administration. We fee justice and order
begun; ')ut on many occasions they seem
to be d.ferted. The ray of light which
we had traced for a while, suddenly for-
fakes us; and, where we had looked for
the continuance of order, we meet with
confusion and difappointment.-For in-
stance; when we examine the conflitu,
tion of the human mind, we discern evi-
dent marks of its being framed with a
view to favour and reward virtue. Con-
science is endowed with signal authority
to check vice. It brings home un-
easiness and remorse to the bad; and it
sooths and supports the righteous with
felf-approbation and peace. The ordi-
nary course of human things is made to
coincide in some degree with this confli-
ultion of our nature. The worthy and

N 3 the

SER;I. the good are, in general, honoured and
,-__ esteemed. Je that walketh uprightl,, is,

for the most part, found to wi7alk firely.
The chief misfortunes that befal us in life
can be traced to some vices or follies
which we have committed; and it almost
never happens but the lsinsr's oal 'l wic-
kecitZfi is made, fooncr (v. : .: ,. to reprove
himi, and his bac/fJid igs It, r::-, '7' him.

All this carries the impress of a juif

Providence, of a wile and a benevolent
adminitlration of the universe. YVe can-
not avoid perceiving that the Almighty
hath Jft his throne for judgmcent. At
the fame time, when we pursue our in-
quiries, the Almighty appears to hold back
the face of his throne, and to fbread his cloud
ucon i;<. For in looking abroad into the
world, how many scenes do we behold
which are far from corresponding with
any ideas we could form of the govern-
ment of Heaven ? Many nations of the
earth we fee lying in a state of barbarity

Job, xxvi. 9.

and

and misery; funk in such gross igno- SERM.
rance as degrades them below the rank of , .
rational beings; or abandoned to be the
prey of cruel oppreflion and tyranny.'
When we look to the state of individuals
around us, we hear the lamentations of
the unhappy on every hand. We meet with
weeping parents, and mourning friends.
We behold the young cut off in the flower
of their days, and the aged left desolate
in the midst of sorrows. The useful and
virtuous are swept away, and the worth-
less left to flourish. The lives of the
best men are often filled with discourage-
ments and disappointed hopes. Merit lan-
guifhes in neglected solitude; and vanity
and presumption gain the admiration of
the world. From the scourge of calumny,
and from the hand of violence, the in-
jured look up to God as the Avenger of
their cause; but often they look up in
vain. He is a God that hideth himself.
IHe dwelleth, as to them, in the secret
place of darkness; or, if he dwelleth in

N 4 light,

*.

SER M. light, it is in light to which no man can
,_~ ,"' approach. Resignation may feal up their

lips; but in silence they drop the tear,
and mourn while they adore.

SUCH, it must not be diIfembled, are

the difficulties which encounter us when
we attempt to trace the present ways of
God. At the fame time, upon refletion,
wve may be satisfied that causes can be as-
signed for things appearing in this un-
favourable light; and that there is no
reason to be surprised at the divine con-
duc being mysterious at present.

The monarchy of the universe is a great

and complicated system. It comprehends
numberless generations of men, who are
brought forth to aft their parts for pur-
poses unknown to us. It includes two
worlds at once; the world that now is,
and which is only a small portion of
existence; and a world that is to come,
which endures for eternity. To us, no
more than the beginnings of things are
visible. We fee only some broken parts

of

of a great whole. We trace but a few SE R M.
links of that chain of being, which, Ix.
by secret connexions, binds together
the present and the future. Such know-
ledge is afforded us as is sufficient for
supplying the exigencies and wants of
our present slate; but it does no more.
Peeping abroad from a dark corner of the
universe, we attempt in vain to explore
the counsels that govern the world. It is
an attempt to found an unfathomable deep
with a scanty line; and with a feeble
wing to ascend above the flars. In any
complicated work, even of human art, it
is found necessary to be acquainted with
the design of the whole, in order to ju'lge
of the fitness of its parts. In a scheme
so complex as the administration of the
world, where all the parts refer to one
another, and where what is seen is often
fubprdinate to what is invisible, how is it
possible but our judgments must be of-
ten erroneous, and our complaints ill-
founded? If a peasant or a cottager be
incapable of judging of the govern-

ment

SER M. ment of a mighty empire, is it surprising
v__J that we should be at a lots concerning the

condua of the Almighty towards his crea-
tures ? What I do, thou knowfl not now.

BUT, on this argument still more can

be said for our fatisfation. We are to
observe, that complete information re-
speding the ways of God, net only was
not to be expected here; but, moreover,
that it would have been hurtful, if grant-
ed to us in our present fiate. It would
have proved inconfiLfent with that state;
viith the aCtions which we have to per-
form in it, and the duties we have to ful-
fil. It would indeed have overthrown
the whole design of our being placed
in this wcrld. We are placed here un-
der the trial of our virtue. Ignorance
of the events that are ordained to befal
us, ignorance of the plans and the decrees
of Heaven, enter necefiarily into a slate
of trial. In order to exercise both our
intellec'tual and moral powers, and to carry
them fcrwa'd to improvement, we must

be

be left to find our way i1, .' midst of SERM.

Ix.

difficulties and doubts, of liArllhips, and --
sufferings. We must be taught to aft our
part with conflancy, though the reward
of our constancy be distant. We must
learn to bear with patience whatever our
Creator judges proper to lay upon us,
though we fee not the reason of the hard-
ships he inflicts. If we wee let into the
secret of the whole plan of Providence;
if the justice of Heaven were, in every
ftep of its procedure, made manifect to
our view, man would no longer be the
creature he now is, nor would his present
state answer any purpofof ofdifcipline or trial.

Mystery and darkness, therefore, must

of neceflity now take place in the course
of things. Our present state can be no
other than a state of twilight or dawn,
where dubious forms shall often present
thcmfelves to us, and where we shall find
ourselves in a middle condition between
complete light and total darkness. Had
we enjoyed no evidence of a just Judge

ruling

SERM. ruling the earth, and of his providence
Amp interposing in our affairs, virtue would

have been altogether deprived of its en-
couragement and support. Had the evi-
dence, on the other hand, been so strong
as to place the hand of the Almighty con-
ftantly before our eyes, the intention of our
present existence would have been defeated,
and no trial of virtue have remained. In-
stead, therefore, of complaining of the ob-
fcurity which at present covers the con-
duat of Providence, we fee that, on the
whole, we have reason to submit and
adore.

II. THE text suggests that, though what

God is doing, or what he intends to do,
we k.cwuz not now, yet there is ground to
believe, that at some future, period we
shall receive information. What I do, thou
knoweft not now, but thou Jl'alt know here-
after. The question here arises, what that
hereafter is to which we are to look for
the solution of our present doubts?

IN

IN the first place, hereafter may, on SE RM.

Ix.

some occasions, refer to the subsequent _
course of events in this world. It often
happens that the consequences of things
throw light on the designs of God. The
history of Providence, in proportion as it
advances, disembroils itself. Though our
present condition forbids extensive and
complete information, yet as much is
sometimes allowed to appear as gives us
favourable openings into the righteous and
benevolent counsels of Heaven.-Thus, in
the public affairs of the world, it has been
frequently seen, that from the most un-
promising causes important and benefi-
cent effcts have, in the sequel, arisen. In
our own country, at one period, the vio-
lent paflions of a prince gave beginning to
the Reformation. At another period, ar-
bitrary attempts againit religion and li-
berty occasioned that happy Revolution
which has formed the ara of national
prosperity. In many instances, the wrath
of man has been made topraie God. Those
wars and commotions that shake the mo-

ral

SE R;M. ral .,: ri.:; :¥--, answered similar purposes

Ix.

iWit' wir, ..;,,);i,;r in the natural world, of
purging the air from noxious vapours, and
refloring it to a temperature more found
and wholesome. From the midf of con-
fusion order has been made to spring, and
from temporary niirchiefs, lasing advan-
tages to arile.- In all cafes of this na-
ture, with ~which sacred and cisil history
abounds, secret designs of I-leaven were
going on, which were unfolded in tle
end. The wheel was always in motion.
The hand of the clock was advnc ing with
unperceived progress, till the moment came
of its striking the appointed hour.

In like manner, with refpea to indivi-

duals, there is often ? hercafter in the
course of their - ^s, which difclofcs and
justifies the wa-. ' God. Not to mcntion
the good efleL., which misfortunes arc
found to produce on the minds of men,
by checklng their vices, and correCting
their errors, innumeralle exemplifications
can be given, of misfortunes paving their
way to future advancement in the world.

Vr.

We are always querulous and impatient SERM.

lx.

when designs succeed not acc)rdling to
our wish. Ignorant of what futurity is to
bring forward, occupied with nothing but
the present, we exclaim, Where is God?
Where the sceptre of righteousness ? Iath
be forgottcn to be gracions.? or doth he in-
deed fee, and is there knowledge in the
Most High? God fteth not as man feet/h:
He looketh not merely to what you sus-
ser, but to what the effect of these sus-
ferings is to be. Confider only in how
different a light the Patriarch Joseph would
view the events of his life after he had
seen in what they had terminated, friom
the light in which he saw them, when led
away by the Ishmaelites as a slave, or when
thrown by Potiphar into the Egyptian
prison. We rmurmur againf: Providence,
just as the impetuous youth frets againlt
his inftrutors and tutors, who are keep,-
ing him under a ftriec, and as he thin-:s
a needless, discipline. He knows not
that, by their inftrucEion and di!cip!inc,

they

SERM- they are laying the foundation of his fu-
A-_.-- ture fortunes; of the wealth which he is

to acquire; and of the advancement to
which he is to rile in the world. What
may jultly be said to him by his tutors
and initruaors, is equally applicable to
us all under our present state of educa-
tion; What I do, thou knoweft not now, but
thou Jhalt know hereafter. --Regarding,
then, the unknown iflue of all worldly
events in this life, let us never despair;
let us never think dishonourably of the
government of God; but have patience
till his providence accomplish its designs
in its own way, and at its own time. Al-
though thou Jfayef thou jhalt not fee him, yet
judgment is before him; therefore trut thou
in himl .

IN the second place, The expression of

hereafter in the text mufft be underltood
to refer, in its full extent, not to future
events in this life, but to a subsequent

Job, xxxv. 14.
2 slate

state of being. For this life is ro more SE R M.
than the beginning of the mighty and '^
extensive plans of Providence. The feeds
are only now sown, of what is to ripen
and come f6rth, at the harvest of the
world; when the revolution of the great
moral year ihall be inifhed, and the go-
vernment of God shall obtain its full com-
pletion. It is the chief scope of religion
to direct our view to this period; and it
hath often taught us that the knowledge
of the ways of God, then enjoyed by the
blessed, shall constitute a chief article of
their felicity. Now we foe throltgh a
glass darkly; bit then face to face. Now
we know in part; but then weJJjall know
even as we are known. When that iwhich
is pefect is come, then that which is in part
Jfall be done away. In God's light we Jfall
fee light*. The reasons that required ob-
fcurity to remain for a while on the ways
of God no longer subsist. The education

* I Cor. xiii. 10. 12. Psalm xxxvi.9.
VOL. IV. O of

S ER M. of good men is completed; and the inten-

lx. , tion of those fleps of education, which

once they could not comprehend, now be-
comes apparent-Why this man was pre-
maturely carried away from the world in
the beginning of a promising course; why
that deserving family were left overwhelm-
ed with grief and despair, by the loss of
one who was their sole benefactor and
support; why friendships cemented by
tender ties were suddenly torn asunder
by death: These are inquiries to which
we can now make no reply; and which
throw a dark gloom over the conduct of
the Almighty. But the spirits of the just
above, who are admitted to a larger view
of the ways of God, fee the reasons of
such counsels. They fee that one man
was seasonably taken away from dangers
and evils to come, which, unknown to
him, were hovering over his head. They
fee that Providence was in secret prepar-
ing unexpeted blessings for the family
who appeared to be left disconsolate and

hopeless

hopeless. They fee that it was time for S E R Mi
friendships to be dissolved, when their l
longer continuance would to some of the
parties have proved a snare. Where we
behold nothing but the rod of power
firetched forth, they discern an interpofi-
tion of the hand of mercy.

Let us wait till this promired hereafter

arrive, and we shall in like manner be fa-
tisfied concerning the events that now
diflurb and perplex us. We shall then
know why so much darkness and misery
have been so long permitted to remain on
the earth, and so much opprefion and
tyranny to prevail among the nations.
We shall fee rising, as from the ashes
of the old world, a new and beautiful
ftrucure; new heavens and a new earth,
wherein dwelleth righteoftiefs. As wide
as is the difference between the appearance
of the world, when it lay in its primitive
c!aos, iithout form and void, and the ap-
pearance it has now aflumed, when re-
splendent with the light of the fun, and
decked with the beauties of nature; such

0 2 is

S E R M. is the difference between the divine plans

L_, in their beginnings, and in their full

completion. At the conclusion, and not
till then, the glory of the Lord Ihall be-
come manifest to all; and, as it is described
in the book of the Revelation, a voice
shall be heard from every creature which
is in heaven and on the earth, and uN-
der the earth,faying, Bleffig, and honour,
and power, and glory, be to him that fit
teth on the throne. Great and marvellous
are thy works, Lord God Alzighty:
jifj and true are thy ways, thou King of
faints .

APPLICATION of the doarines that

have been illustrated may be made to
two classes of men.

Firt, To sceptics; who, from the pre-

sent mysterious conduct of Providence,
hastily draw the conclusion, that no go-
vernment is exercised over human affairs,
but that all things are suffered indifcri-
minately to come alike to all men.--I

Rev. v. 13.-xv. 3,

have

have shewn that, from the inadequate sE RM.

lx.

views which we are at present able to LJ
take of the general system, such myfte-
rious appearances of Providence muit be
expected to take place. Not only so, but
I have also flhewn it to be fit and necef-
fary that this mixture of obscurity should
now remain; as a full display of regular
justice and order would be inconsistent
with the moral improvement of men in
this life.-Let me desire the sceptic to look
to the Rate of the natural world. When
he thinks of the order and magnificence
that prevail in it, he will, perhaps, be un-
willing to pronounce it the mere produc-
tion of chance. He cannot but recog-
nife the hand of Intelligence, and acknow-
ledge it to have proceeded from a design-
ing Cause. I ask him, Whether in the
natural world he dilcerns not as many
mysterious and puzzling appearances as
are to be found in the moral world?
Are not deftruclive storms, burning
mountains, uninhabitable deserts, as dif-

0 3 ficult

SE RM. ficult to be reconciled to his pre-con-

IX.

_,ceived ideas of supreme wisdom and

goodness in the Creator, as the sufferings
and afflitions which in the course of Pro-
v;dence befal the just? The natural and
moral world are, in this respect, counter-
parts to one another. Both are marked
with the fame characters, and carry the
impress of the fame powerful and gracious
hand. In both, it is evidently the intention
of the first Auther not to render every
thing level to our capacity; but in the
midst of high design and order, to al-
low certain objeEcs to appear, which con-
tradilt the ideas we had formed, and
mock our vain researches. Now, if we
are obliged to admit that the order
and beauty of the natural world fuffici-
ently prove it to be the work of a wife
Creator, notwithstanding the teeming
deformities which it exhibits; are we
not led by the fame train of reasoning
to conclude, that the moral world is un-
der the direction of a wife Governor,

though

though much of what he now does we S E R M.
cannot fatisfadorily explain ? X

Secondly, TIE dodrine of the text is

to be applied not only for silencing fcep-
tics but for comforting the pious. Never
let them be dejeded by the darkness
which now covers the ways of the Al-
mighty. If he withdraws himself from
their view, it is not because he neglects
them; but because they are incapable of
comprehending his designs; because it
were not for their good that all his de-
signs were revealed to them.-Inftead of
perplexing themselves about what is ob-
fcure, let them reft on the clear and au-
thentic discoveries that have been given of
the divine goodness. Let them reft on those
great and iignal fads that prove it; par-
ticularly on that illustrious sac, the re-
demption of the world by Jesus Christ.
He that spared not his own Son, but gave
hini up for us all, will assuredly not always
conceal himself from those who serve him,
Though what he does they know not now,

0 4 the

S E R M. the time approaches when they Jhall know

ix.
I_^ _ hereafter. Till that time come, let them

believe and trust; let them hope and
adore. From this conclusion let them
never depart, that to fear God and keep his
commandments is in every situation the
truest wisdom; that, if there be govern-
ment in the universe at all, the virtuous
and the worthy are loved and proteted
by Heaven; that in dce season they fJall
reap if they faint not; for the care of them
is with the Lord, and their reward with
the MoJt High°

# SERMON X. On the SLAVERY of VICE. 2 PETER, ii. 19. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage.

[ 201 ]
SERMON X.

On the SLAVERY of VICE.

2 PETER, ii. 19.

CWhile they promise them liberty, they them-
Jelves are thefiervants of corrrption; for
of whom a man is overcome, of the fame
is he brought in bondage.
BONDAGE and fubjecion are difa-sERM.

greeable founds to the ear, disagree- X.

able ideas to the mind. The advo-
cates of vice, taking advantage of those
natural impreflions, have in every age
employed them for discrediting religion.
They represent it as the bondage and con-

8 finement

SERM, finement of the free-born foul of man;

X.
LL. as a state of perpetual conflraint, formed

by a system of severe rules, which design-
ing men have contrived to impose as set-
ters on the multitude. On the other hand,
they paint a licentious course to them-
selves, and hold it out to the world, as
the gay and pleasurable enjoyment of
life; where, having surmounted the pre-
judices of education, and the tim.orous
scruples of conscience, men can think and
aaC at pleasure, and give full scope to
every wilh of the heart.-But what if
those pretended sons of freedom be them-
selves hcld in miserable fubjetion, and
their boasts of liberty be no more than
the ficellinig words of vanity ? Tle Apoflle
affirts in the text, that while they promni'
liberty to others, they are the fierviants, or
slaves, of corrliticll, cvrcome, and broluht
into bonla'ii by it. This affcrtion of the
Apostle I purpose to illufirate. I flall en-
deavour to make it appear, that no true
liberty can arise fiom vice; that bad men

undergo

undergo the worst servitude; and that no s E R M.
one is free, but he who is virtuous and good. ,

IT is necessary to begin with removing

false ideas of liberty, and shewing in what
it truly confifs. We are not to imagine
that to be siee imports our being set loose
from restraint or rule of every kind. No
man, in any condition of life, is at liberty
to act always as he pleases, and to gratify
every wifl he forms. The nature of the
human stare necefarily imposes on all
men various restraints. The laws of so-
ciety allow no one to indulge himself in
pursuits or pleasures that are injurious to
his neighbour. Even our own nature
limits our pleasures within certain bounds.
All our desires cannot be gratified togc-
ther. They frequently interfere, and re-
quire him who would indulge one favour-
ite passion, to deny himself in another.
Diflinctions, therefore, must be made,
preferences be given, and some general
regulation of conduc be observed, by
every one who consults his own welfare.

If

SE R M. If there be any regulation which ensures

.J. us of safety and happiness, to be difen-

gragrd from the observance of that regu
h!tion is no article of liberty; at leaPt of
luch Iibcrty as a wife man would wish to
enjoy. It is in cffcct to be turned loose
to our o':n ruin. It is such liberty as a
blind nm n enjoys, of wandering at ran-
dom, and striking into every devious path,
without a guide to direct his steps, and
kive him from dcftrudion.

That unbounded licentiousness, there,

fore, which finners prefer to every regu-
lation of conduct, is altogether different
from true freedom. It is in moral beha-
viour the fame as anarchy is in a fiate,
where lawv and order are extin&. An-
archy, surely, is no less incompatible
with true liberty than absolute defpotifin;
and of the two it is hard to fay which is
the least eligible, or the most miserable
Rfate. Liberty by no means supposes the
absence of all government. It only sup-
poses that the government under which
we are placed is wife; and that the re-

firaints

ftraints to which we voluntarily submit S E R M.

X.

ourselves have been contrived for the ge- .'
neral interest.

To be free, therefore, imports, in ge-

neral, our being placed in filch circum-
fiances, that within the bounds ofjuitice and
good order, we can aft according to our
own deliberate choice, and take such mea-
fures for our conduct as we have reason
to believe are conducive to our welfare;
without being obftruded either by ex-
ternal force, or by violent internal impulse.
This is that happy and dignified state
which every wife man earnestly wishes to
enjoy. The advantages which result from
it are chiefly these three; freedom of choice;
independence of mind; boldness and fe-
curity. In opposition to these diftin-
guifhing characers of liberty, I now pro-
ceed to shew that, in the first place, vice
deprives bad men of free choice in their
actions; that, in the second place, it
brings them under a slavish dependence
on external circumstances; and that, in
the third place, it reduces them to that

abject,

SERM. abjed, cowardly, and difqu'eted slate
X '_.which is essentially charaderiftic of bond-

age.

I. VICE is inconsistent with liberty, as it

deprives finners of the power of free choice,
by bringing them under the dominion
of paflions and habits. Religion and virtue
address themselves to reason. They call
us to look round on every fide; to think
well of the consequences of our adions;
and, before we take any tep of importance,
to compare the good with the evil that
may ensue from it. He therefore who fol-
lows their didates, ads the part of a man
who freely consults, and choofes, for his own
interest. But vice can make no preten-
sions of this kind. It awaits not the test of
deliberate comparison and choice; but over-
powers us at once by some striking im-
pression of present advantage or enjoyment.
It hurries us with the violence of passion;
captivates us by the allurements of plea-
sure; or dazzles us by the glare of riches.
The finner yields to the impulse, merely

I3 because

because he cannot resist it. Reason re- SERM.

X.

·monltrates; conicience endeavours to
check him; but all in vain. Having once
allowed some firong passion to gain the
ascendant, he has thrown himself into
the middle of a torrent, against which he
may sometimes faintly fituggle, but the
impetuosity of the fream bears him along.
In this situation he is bo far from being
free, that he is not mafler of himself
He does not go, but is driven; toffed,
agitated, and impelled; paflive, like a ihip
to the violence of tl e waves.

After palfion has for a while excrcifed

its tyrannical sway, its vehemence may by
degrees subside. But when by long in-
dulgence, it has established habits of gra-
tification, the finner's bondage becomes
then more confirmed, and more miserable.
For during the heat of purifit he is little
capable of reflection. But, when his ar-
dour is abated, and nevertheless, a vitious
habit rooted, he has full leilure to per-
ceive the heavy yoke he has brought upon
himself. How many saves do we iee in

the

SE RM. the world to intemperance, and all kinds
,_ of criminal pleasure, merely through the

influence of customs which they had al-.
lowed to become so inveterate that it was
not in their power to alter them? Are
they not often reduced to a condition so
wretched, that when their licentious plea-
fures have become utterly insipid, they
are still forced to continue them, solely be-
cause they cannot refrain; not because
the indulgence gives them pleasure, but
because abstinence would give them pain;
and this too, even when they are obliged
at last to condemn their habits of life, as
injuring their fortune, impairing their
coinftitution, or disgracing their charac-
ter? Vice is not of such a nature that we
can fay to it, Hitherto Jhalt thou come and
no ftrther. Having once entered into its
territories, it is not in our power to make
a retreat when we please. He that cornm
mitteth fir is the servant of fin. No man
who has once yielded up the government
of his mind, and given loose rein to his
desires and paflions, can tell how far these

may

may carry him. He may be brought into S E R M.
such a desperate state, that nothing flall . -
remain for him but to look back with
regret upon the forsaken path of inno-
cence and liberty; and, fevercly conscious
of the thraldom he suffers, to groan under
fetters which he despairs of throwing off.
Can the Ethiopian ch. m;ge his Jill, or the
leopard his jpots? then many ye also do good
who are accutfomed to do evil .

Vice confirms its dominion, and ex-

tends it still farther over the foul, by com-
pelling the finner to support one crime by
means of another. Not only is he epflav-
ed to those vices which take their rife
from his own inclination, but they render
others necefnary, to which, againlt his in-
clination, he mull submit; and thereby
itrengthen the commanding power of ini-
quity within him. The immoderate love
of pleasure, for instance, leads him into
expence beyond his fortune. In order to
support that expcnce, he is obliged to

e Jeremiah, xiii. 23,
VOL. IV. P have

S ER M. have recourse to low and dishonourable
^ . methods of gain, which originally he de-

spifed. To cover these, he is forced upon
arts of dissimulation and fraud. One in-
fiance of fraud obliges him to support
it by another; till, in the end, there arises
a character of complicated vice; of lux-
ury {hooting forth into baseness, difho-
nefty, injustice, and perhaps cruelty. It
is thus that one favourite paflion brings
in a tribe of auxiliaries to complete the
dominion of fin. Among all our corrupt
passions there is a strong and intimate con-
nexion. When any one of them is
adopted into our family, it never quits us
until it has fathered upon us all its kin-
dred.-By such means as these, by the
violence of paflions, by the power of ha-
bits, and by the connexion of one vice
with another, fin eftablifles that servitude
over the will, which deprives bad men of
all power of free choice in their actions.

II. THE slavery produced by vice ap-
pears in the dependence under which it

brings

brings the finner to circumstances of exter- S E R M.

X.

nal fortune. One of the favourite charac- Aj
ters of liberty, is the independence it be-
stows. He who is truly a freeman is above
all servile compliances, and abject fubjeaion.
He is able to reft upon himself; and while
he regards his superiors with proper de-
ference, neither debases himself by cring-
ing to them, nor is tempted to purchase
their favour by dishonourable means,
But the finner has forfeited every privi-
lege of this nature. His paflions and
habits render him an absolute dependant
on the world, and the world's favour; on
the uncertain goods of fortune, and the
fickle humours of men. For it is by
these he subsists, and among these his
happiness is fought; according as his
passions determine him to pursue plea-
fures, riches, or preferments. Having no
fund within himself whence to draw enjoy-
ment, his only resource is in things with-
out. His hopes and fears all hang upon
the world. He partakes in all its vicifii-
tudes; and is moved and shaken by every

P 2 wind

SE R M. wind of fortune. This is to be in the
a..i lftriaeft sense a slave to the world.

Religion and virtue, on the other

hand, confer on the mind principles of
noble independence. The upright maii is
fatisfed from himfielf He despises not the
advantages of fortune; but he centers
not his happiness in them. With a mo-
derate share of them he can be contented;
and contentment is felicity. Happy in
his own integrity, conscious of the esteem
of good men, reposing firm trust in the
providence, and the promises of God, he
is exempted from servile dependence on
other things. He can wrap himself up
in a good conscience, and look forward,
without terror, to the change of the world.
Let all things shift around him as they
please, he believes that, by the divine or-
dination, they shall be made to work to-
getber in the issue for his good: And
therefore, having much to hope from
God, and little to fear from the world,
he can be easy in every slate. One who
pofieffes within himself such an establish-

ment

ment of mind, is truly free.-But shall S E R M.
I call that man free, who has nothing that ,
is his own, no property assured; whose
very heart is not his own, but rendered
the appendage of external things, and the
sport of fortune? Is that man free, let
his outward condition be ever so splendid,
whom his imperious paflions detain at
their call, whom they fend forth at their
pleasure to drudge and toil, and to beg
his only enjoyment from the casualties of
the world? Is he free, who must flatter
and lie to compass his ends; who muff
bear with this man's caprice, and that
man's scorn; must profess friendflip where
he hates, and refpea where he contemns;
who is not at liberty to appear in his own
colours, nor to speak his own sentiments;
who dares not be honest, left he should
be poor?- Believe it, no chains bind
so hard, no fetters are Ib heavy, as those
which fasten the corrupted heart to this
treacherous world; no dependence is
more contemptible than that under which
the voluptuous, the covetous, or the am-

P 3 bitious

SE R M. bitious man l;es to the means of pleasure,

X._ gain, or power. Yet this is the boasted li.

berty, which vice promises, as the recom-
pence of setting us free from the salutary
refRraints of virtue.

III. ANOTHER character of the slavery

of vice, is that mean, cowardly, and dif-
quieted fiate to which it reduces the finner,
Boldness and magnanimity have ever been
accounted the native effeds of liberty.
He who enjoys it, having nothing to ap-
prehend from oppressive power, performs
the offices, and enjoys the comforts of
life, with a manly and undisturbed mind.
Hence his behaviour is dignified, and his
sentiments are honourable; while he who
is accuflomed to bend under servile subjec-
tion, has always been found mean-fpirited,
timorous, and bafe.-Compare, in these
refpeas, the virtueus and the vicious man,
and you will easily fee to which of them
the charaderiftics of freedom most justly
belong. The man of virtue, relying on
a good conscience and the protection of

1 Heaven,

Heaven, aQs with firmness and courage; s E R M.

X.

and in the discharge of his duty, fears
not the face of man. The man of vice,
conscious of his low and corrupt aims,
shrinks before the stedfast and piecing
eye of integrity; is ever looking around
him with anxious and fearful circuinfpec-
tion, and thinking of fuibterfuges, by
which he may escape from danger. The
one is bold as a lion; the otherjlieth when
no man Sprfueth. To the one, nothing ap-
pears contemptible, by which he can pro-
cure any present advantage. The other
looks with difdaih on whatever would de-
grade his charater. " I will not," fays
he, " so demean myself, as to catch the
"favour of the greatest man, by this or
"that low art. It shall not be said or
"thought of me, that I did what was base
"in order to make my fortune. Let
" others stoop so low, who cannot be with-
" out the favours of the world. But I
"can want them, and therefore at filch a
"price I will not purchase them." This

P4 is

S ERM. is the voice of true liberty; and speaks

X.
.' _, that greatness of mind which it is formed

to inspire.

Corresponding to that abjea disposition

which charaderifes a bad man, are the
fears that haunt him. The terrors of a
slave dwell on his mind, and often appear
in his behaviour. For guilt is never free
from suspicion and alarm. The finner
is afraid, sometimes, of the partners of his
crimes, left they betray him; sometimes,
of those who have suffered by his crimes,
left they revenge themselves; frequently,
of the world around him, left it detect
him; and what is worst of all, he is re-
duced to be afraid of himself. There is
a witness within him that testifies against
his misdeeds; and threatens him in fe-
cret, when other alarms leave him. Con-
science holds up to his view the image of
his past crimes, with this inscription en-
graved upon it, " God will bring every
" work into judgment." How opposite is
such a state as this, to the peaceful fecu-

rity

rity arising from the liberty enjoyed bySERM.
the virtuous?- Were tl.:re nothing v._
more in the circumstances of finners to
affix upon them the marks of servitude,
this alone would be sufficient, that, as the
scripture expresses it, throughfear of death
they are all their lifetime fs/bjel to bondage*.
Death iets all other captives free. The
slave who digs in the mine, or labours
at the oar, can rejoice in the profpea of
laying down his burden together with
his life; and taftes the hope of being at
last on equal terms with his cruel op-
pressor. But to the slave of guilt there ariles
no hope from death. On the contrary,
he is obliged to look forward with con-
slant terror to this most certain of all
events, as the conclusion of all his hopes
and the commencement of his greatest
miseries.

I HIAVE thus set before you such clear
and unequivocal marks of the servitude

Heb. ii. 15.

undergone

SE R M undergone by finners, as fully verify the
a-,-^ assertion in the text, that a state of vice

and corruption is a state of bondage. In
order to perceive how severe a bondage
it is, let us attend to some peculiar cir-
cumftances of aggravation which belong
to it.

First, It is a bondage to which the mind

itself, the native feat of liberty, is subjeq-
ed. In other cafes, a brave man can
comfort himself with reflecting that, let
tyrants do their worst, let prisons or set-
ters be his lot, his mind remains uncon-
quered and free. Of this liberty they
cannot rob him; here he moves in a higher
sphere, above the reach of opprefflon or
confinement. But what avails the show
of external liberty, to one who has loft
the government of himself? As our Sa-
viour reasons, in another cafe, If the light
that is in thee be darktefnc, ow great is that
darkness? So we may reason here, if that
part of thy nature, thy mind, thy will,
by which only thou canst enjoy and re-
lith liberty, be itself in bondage to evil

passions

pafions and habits, how miserable must SER M.

X.
be that bondage ? .-.

Next, It is aggravated by this confider-

ation, that it is a bondage which we have
brought upon ourselves. To have been
forced into slavery, is misfortune and mi-
fery. But to have renounced our liberty
and chosen to be slaves, is the greatest re-
proach added to the greatest misery. Mo-
ments there frequently must be, when a
finner is sensible of the degradation of
his state; when he feels with pain the
slavish dependence under which he is
brought to fortune and the world, to viclent
passions and fettled habits, and to stars
and apprehensions arising from confcic;us
guilt. In such moments, how cruel is the
reflection, that of all this disgrace and
misery he has been the author to himself;
that by voluntary compliance, he has
given to his passions that haughty ascend-
ant which they now exercile over him;
has forged the chains with which he
is bound, and fold himself to do ini-
quity ?

Lastly,

SERM. Lastly, The servitude of vice is accom-

xj ppanied with this farther aggravation, that

it is fubjedion to our own servants. Those
desires and passions, which the finner has
raised to lawless rule, were given us as
instruments of felf-prefervation; but were
plainly designed to be under the direcion
of a higher power. Of themselves, they
are headstrong and blind; they bear all
the marks of intended subordination; and
conscience is invested with every en-
sign of authority and supremacy. But
fin inverts the whole frame of human na-
ture. It compels reason to bow down
before those passions which it was formed
to command; and leads it, as it were in
triumph, to grace the shameful conquest
of its ministers and servants. It has been
always observed that none are so insolent
in power, as they who have usurped an
authority to which they had no right;
and so it is found tc hold in this instance.
The desires and passions of a vicious man,
having once obtained an unlimited sway,
trample him under their feet. They

make

make him feel that he is subjea to divers, E R M.

X.

and contradiaory as well as imperious v..
mailers, who often pull him different
ways. His foul is rendered the recep-
tacle of many repugnant and jarring dif-
positions; and refemblcs some barba-
rous country, cantoned out into different
principalities, who are continually waging
war on one another.- Such is the tfate
into which finners have brought them-
selves, in order to be free fiom the sup-
posed confinement of virtue. Where they
had promised themselves nothing but cafe
and pleasure, they are made to experience
restraints more revere, and mortifications
more painful, than any which they would
have undergone under the discipline of
religion.

It will perhaps be contended by some,

that although the representation which
has now been given of the slavery of fir
holds true in certain instances, yet that
it is applicable only to those who come
under the description of atrocious finners.
They imagine that a certain moderate

course

SERM. course may be held in vice, by means of

X. 1which, men, without throwing altogether

aside the restraints of reason, may enjoy
an easy and plcafirable life.-- By rea-
ibning thus, my friends, you flatter and
deceive yourselves to your own deftruc-
tion. Be assurcd, that by every vicious
indulgence, you are making an approach
to a state of com:plete slavery; you are
forfeiting a certain llare of your liberty;
how soon the whole of it may be for-
feited, you are not aware. It is true that
all which has now been said of the fervi-
tude of fin, applies only to a character cor-
rupted in the extreme. But, iemember
that to this extreme no man ever arrives
at once. He pafies through many of
those intermediate stages, in one of which
you are now perhaps found. Vice al-
ways creeps by degrees; and insensibly
t, ;ines around us those concealed fetters
bj which we are at last completely bound.
-As you value therefore your liberty
anc -.our happiness, avoid every approach
to evi. Coiider all vicious pleasures as

enchanted

enchanted ground, by entering on which, SER M.

X.

you will be farther and farther ensnared ,-
within the magic circle, till at length you
are precluded from all retreat. The most
pure and virtuous man is always the
freest. The religion of Christ is justly
entitled the jcife7 law of liberty*. It is
only when the Son makes us free, that we
are free indeed: and it was with reason
the Psalmist said, I will walk at liberty,
for Ifeek thy precepts f.

Jamcs, i. . t Psalm cxix. 45.

# SERMON XI. On the IMPORTANCE of PUBLIC WORSHIP. PSALM xxvi. 8. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth.

[ 224 ]

SERMON XI.
On the IMPORTANCE of PUBLIC

WORSHIP.

PsALM xxvi. 8.
Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy

hoife, and the place where thine honour
dwelleth.
SER M. GOD is a Spirit, and they that worship

X-. him, mini worjhip him in spirit and in

truth. That religion chiefly consists in
an inward principle of goodness, is be-
yond dispute, and that its value and effi-
cacy are derived from its effedls in puri-
fying the heart, and reforming the life.

S All

All external services, which have not this S E R M.

XI.

tendency, are entirely insignificant. They
degenerate into mere superstition, equally
unacceptable to God, and unprofitable to
man. Hence they are so often treated in
scripture with high contempt, when sub-
ftituted in the room of the important du-
ties of a virtuous life.

Notwithstanding this, it is certain that

external services have their own place,
and a considerable one too, in the system
of religion. What their proper place is no
one can be at a loss to discern, who will
only make a just diflindion between the
means, and the end, in religion. It is
evident there is danger of men's erring
here, either on one fide or ether; and
it is certain that they have erred on both;
After it was observed, that mankind were
prone to lay too much weight on the ex-
ternal parts of religion, it began to bd
thought, that ho weight was to be allowed
to them at all. The time was, when all
religion centered in attending the duties
tof the church, and paying veneration to

VOL; IV. Q whatever

s E R M. whatever was accounted sacred. This alone

XI, sanCtified the charaacer, and compensated

every blemish in moral conduct. From
this extreme, the spirit of the age seems to
be running fast into the opposite extreme, of
holding every thing light that belongs to
public worship. But if superstition be an
evil, and a very great one it undoubtedly
is, irreligion is not a smaller evil: And
though the form of godlinfis may often
remain, when' the power of it is wanting;
yet the power cannot well subsist where
the form is altogether gone.-The holy
Psalmist, whose words are now before us,
discovers much better principles. Ex-
pressing always the highest regard for the
laws of God, and the precepts of virtue,
*he breathes, at the fame time, a spirit of
pure devotion. Though loaded with the
cares of royalty, and encircled with the
splendor of a court, he thought it well
became him to shew refpea to the great
Lord of nature; and on many occasions
expresses, as he does in the text, his de-
light in the public service of the temple.

Lord,

Hord, I have loved the habitation of thy s E R M.

XI

hoife, and the place where thine honour._
dwelleth. In discoursing from which words
I purpose to flew the importance of the
public worship of God, and the benefits
resulting from it. I ihall confider it in
three lights; as it refpets God; as it
refpeas the world; as it refpeds our-
selves.

I. LET us confider it with refpet to

God. If there exist a Supreme Being,
the Creator of the world, no consequence
appears more natural and direc than this,
that he ought to be worshipped by his crea-
tures, with every outward expression of
submission and honour. We need only
appeal to every man's heart, whether this
be not a principYe which carries along
with it its own obligation, that to Hint
who is the Fountain of our life and the
Father of our mercies; to Him who has
raised up that beautiful ftrudure of the
universe in which we dwell, and where
we are surrounded with so many blefd-

Q 2 )ngS

S E R M. ings and comforts; solemn acknowledge.
<_j ments of gratitude should be made, praises

and prayers should be offered, and all
suitable marks of dependence on him be ex-
preffed.-This obligation extends beyond
the silent and secret sentiments of our
hearts. Besides private devotion, it na-
turally leads to associations for public wor-
ship; to open and declared profeflions of
refped for the Deity. . Where blessings
are received in common, an obligation
lies upon the community, jointly to ac-
knowledge them. Sincere gratitude is al-
ways of open' and diffusive nature. It
loves to pour itself forth ; to give free vent
to it's emotions; and, before the world,
to acknowledge and honour a Bene-
facor.

So consonant is this to the natural fen-

timents of mankind, that all the nations
of the earth have, as with one consent,
agreed to institute fo'mie forms of worship;
to hold meetings, at certain times, in ho-
nour of their deities. Survey the focie-
ties of men in their rudest state; explore

X* 14 the

the African deserts, the wilds of America, E R M.

XI.

or the distant islands of the ocean; and
you will find that over all the earth Tome
religious ceremonies have obtained. You
will every where trace, in one form or
other, the temple, the priest, and the offer-
ing. The prevalence of the molt absurd
superstitions furnishes this testimony to
the truth, that in the hearts of all men
the principle is engraved, of worflip being
due tothat invisible Power who rules the
world.-Herein consists the great excel-
lency of Christian religion, that it hath
inftruded us in the simple and spiritual
nature of that worship. Disencumbered
of idle and unmeaning ceremonies, its ri-
tual is pure, and worthy of a divine Au-
thor. Its positive institutions are few in
number, most significant of spiritual
things, and direcly conducive to good
life and practice. How inexcusable then
are we, if, placed in such happy circum-
stances, the sense of thooe obligations to
the public worship of God shall be oblite-
rated among us, which the light of nature

Q3 inculcated,

S E R M. inculcated, in tome measure, on the most

XI. ^,-_, wild and barbarous nations ?

The refinements of false philosophy

have indeed suggested this shadow of ob-
jedion, that God is too great to ltand in
need of any external service from his crea-
tures; that our expreflions of praise and
honour are misplaced with refpea to Him,
who is above all honour and all praise;
that in his fight, the homage we seek to
pay must appear contemptible; and is
therefore in itself superfluous and tri-
fling.-But who hath taught those vain
reasoners, that all expreflions of gratitude
and honour towards a superior become
unsuitable, merely because that superior
needs not any returns? Were they ever
indebted to one whose favours they had
it not in their 'power to repay; and did
they, on that account, feel themselves set
loose from every obligation to acknow-
ledge, and to praise their benefactor ? On
the contrary, the more disinterested his
beneficence was, did not gratitude, in any
ingenuous mind, burn with the greater

ardour.

ardour, and prompt them the more eager- s E R IM.
ly to seize every opportunity of publicly xl
testifying the feelings of their hearts ?---
Almighty God, it is true, is too great to
need our service or homage. But he is
also too good not to accept it, when it is
the native expression of a grateful and ge-
nerous mind. If pride and felf-fuffici-
ency stifle all sentiments of dependance on
our Creator; if levity, and attachment to
worldly pleasures, render us totally ne-
gleCful of expressing our thankfulness to
Him for his blessings; do we not hereby
discover such a want of proper feeling,
such a degree of hardness and corruption
in our affecions, as fliews us to be im-
moral and unworthy; and muff jufily ex-
pose us to the high displeasure of Heaven ?
On the contrary, according to every no-
tion which we can form of the Father of
the universe, must it not be acceptable
to him to behold his creatures properly
affeced in heart towards their great Bene-
fator; assembling together to express, in
acts of worship, that gratitude, love, and

Q4 reverence

s E R M. reverence which they owe him; and thus

XI.

nourishing and promoting in one another
an affecionate sense of his goodness ? Are
not such dispositions, and such a behavi-
our as this, intimately conneted with all
virtue ?

0 Come, let us worJlip and bow down;

let us kneel before the Lord our maker. For
he is our God; and we are the flock of his
paftire. Enter into his gates with thankJf
giving, and his courtswithpraic. The prayer
of the upright is his delight. It cometh be-
fore him as incesfe, and the uplifting of their
hands as the evening sacrifice.- Having
thus shewn the reasonableness of public
worship with refped to God, let us now,

II. CONSIDER its importance in another

view, as it refpe&s the world. When we
survey the general state of mankind, we
find them continually immersed in world-
ly affairs; busied about providing the ne-
ceffaries of life, occupied in the pursuits
of their pleasures, or eagerly prosecuting
the advancement of their interests. In

such

such a situation of things, a finall mea- SE R M.

XI.

Hire of reflection might convince any one,
that without some returns of sacred days,
and some solemn calls to public worship,
it were impossible to preserve in the
world any sense of objets, so foreign to
the general current of thought as an in-
visible Governor, and a future slate. If it
be of importance to the peace and good
order of society, that there should prevail
among men the belief of One in the hea-
vens, who is the protector of righteousness
and the avenger of crimes; if it be of im-
portance that they be taught to look for-
ward to a day of judgment, when they
are to be brought to account for their
noft secret actions, and eternally reward-
ed or punished, according as their con-
duet has been good or evil; if such prin-
ciples as these, I fay, be of consequence
to the public welfare, they certainly en-
force the authority of public worship,
and prove the necessity of religious in-
itrudion.

I speak

SERM-. I speak now particularly with a view
1tC-'1 to the multitude, the great mass and body

of the people. We all know, how seldom
from education, or private inftrudtion,
they have the advantage of deriving fen-
timents of religion or morality. Early
obliged to labour for their bread, they
would remain all their days in gross igno-
rance of every moral or sacred principle,
were it not for those public assemblies in
which they hear of God, and Christ, and
judgment, and heaven and hell. -Shut
up those temples to which they resort
with reverence; exclude them from the
opportunities they now possess of receiv-
ing religious inftrution, and imbibing
religious ideas; and what can you expec
them to become ? No other than a feroci-
ous rabble, who set free from checks of
conscience, and fears of divine vengeance,
would be prone to every outrage which
they could commit with impunity. It is
well known that, in the early ages of the
world, fages and legislators who endea-
voured to tame and to associate the bar-

barous

barous hordes of men, found k necessary s E RM.
for this purpose, to have recourse to reli- *
gion. By bringing the rude multitudes to
worship together, and at stated times and
places, to join in hymns and songs to their
deities, they gradually restraincd them from
violence, and trained them to fubordina-
tion and civilized life.

During the progress of society in after

periods, religious assemblies at church con-
tinue, I am persuaded, to have a very con-
fiderable influence on the civilization and
improvement of the people. Even inde-
pendent of effect upon their moral princi-
ples, by leading numbers of them to meet to-
gether in an orderly way, and in their most
decent appearance, they tend to humanize
and polilh their manners. They firength-
en the social connexions, and promote
friendly intercourse among those who are
in the fame neighbourhood, and in the
fame lines of life. It must, at the fame
time, be agreeable to every humane mind
to think, that one day in ieven is allotted
for reft to the poor from their daily la-

bours,

SERM. bours, and for such enjoyments of ease

XL
.-,_ and comfort as their flation affords.

It is the only day which gives them oc-
cafion to feel themselves as belonging
to the fame class of beings with their fu-
periors; when joining with them in the
fame ads of worship, and recognizing
a common Lord. Amidst those dif-
tindions which the difference of ranks
necessarily introduces into human society,
it is surely fit that there be some occasions
when man can meet with man as a bro-
ther, in order that the pride of the great
may be checked; and the low may be
taught that, if they discharge properly
their appointed part, they have reason to
exped, from the Lord of the universe, the
fame rewards with the rich and the
mighty.

It will, I believe, be generally admit-

ted that forms of public worship, and
means of religious inftrudion, are import-
ant, on several accounts, for the body of
the people, and belong to the maintenance
of public safety and order. But many

who

who admit this are apt to think, that to SE RM.
the common people alone they may be
left. To perobns of liberal education and
enlarged minds, what benefit can arise
from hearing what they already know;
and what, perhaps, is to be inculcated on
them by those who are of inferior capa-
city to themselves ?- Admitting this plea
of superiority which their vanity forms,
and setting aside for the present any pcr-
fonal obligation they are under to wor-
fliip God, I must ask such persons, how
they can expea that religious assemblies
will be long respeCted by the lower ranks
of men, if by men of rank and edlcation
they are difcountenanced and forfalkcai
Do not they know, that those lower ranks
are ready to copy the manners, and to
follow the example, of their superiors in
all things; but alrurcdly in nothing more,
than in what appears to set them free
from restraint, and to gratify licentious-
ness? While they acknowledge the import-
ance, and even the necessity, of public re-
ligion to certain classes of men, do they
nevertheless, contribute by their beha-

viour

s ER M. viour to defeat the end of public religions

X--. and to annihilate that importance which

they ascribe to it ?-They are employ-
ed in framing laws and statutes for pre-
venting crimes, and keeping the difor-
derly multitude within bounds; and at
the fame time, by personally difcounte-
nancing public worship, they are weakening,
they are even abolishing, among the mul-
titude, that moral restraint, which is of
more general influence upon manners
than all the laws they frame. In vain
they complain of the dishonesty of
servants, of the insolence of mobs,
of the attacks of the highwayman.
To all these disorders they have them-
selves been accessory. By their open dif-
regard of sacred institutions, they have
disseminated profligacy among the peo-
ple. They have broken down the flood-
gates which served to restrain the torrent;
they have let it loose to overflow the land;
and by the growing deluge may them-
selves be swept away.-But I mufft next ar-
gue upon a different ground; and proceed,

III. To

III. To set forth the importance of the s E R M.

XI.

public worfliip of God to every indivi- ..
dual, in every rank of life. Whatever his
flation be, he is fRill a man; and has the
duties of a man to perform. Were his
attendance on divine worship of no other
effect, than to add countenance to a falu.
tary institution, this alone would render
it his duty. But moreover, we assert it to
be his duty on his own account; if it be
the duty of every man to ulb the proper
means of preserving and fortifying lis
virtue. All the Chrillian institutions have
a direct tendency to this end. They all
serve to give warmth to piety, and to
add solemnity to moral virtue. A very
high opinion, indeed, th.t man mufft
have of his own character, who ima-
gines that amid[t all the follies and
corruptions of the world, he stands in
need of no assistance for enabling him
to act his part with propriety and dig-
nity.

The quetlion is not, whether persons of
rank and education are to learn any thing

~~~5 ~ that

SE R M. that is new to them, by frequenting thd

x, places of public worship? The great prin-

ciples of piety and morality are obvious
and easily known; and we flall readily
admit, that there are many to whom no
new instruCtion is communicated in the
house of God. But, my friends, the pur-
pose of your going there is to have known
truths recalled to your mind, and their
dormant influence awakened; is to have
ferions meditations suggested; to have
good dispositions raised; to have the heart
adjusted to a composed and tranquil
frame. Is there any man of reason and
reflecion, who will not acknowledge such
effects, as far as they follow from attend-
ance on religious ordinances, to be of the
most beneficial nature? These occasional
cessations from the cares and anxieties of
life, there interruptions to the bustle and
the passions of the world, in order to think
and hear of eternity, are both a relief and
an improvement to the mind. By this re-
treat from its ordinary circle of thoughts,
it is enabled to return, with. more clearness

and

and more vigour, to the business of the SERM.
world, after a serious and proper pause. XL

But I muff afl the persons with whom

I now reason, whether there be no other
call to come to God's house, than to hear
inflruCtion there? Is not the devout ado-
ration of the God of heaven the principal
object of our religious aflemblies; and is
this what any man of refletion, and of
fober mind, dare to make light of? In the
temple of the Lord, the rich and the poor,
the prince and the peasant, appear as sup-
pliants alike for the protecion and favour
of the Almighty.-Great and sourishing
as thou mayst think thyself, know that
thou Randeft as much in need of that
protecion as the mcanell of the crowd
whiom thou bcholdeft worflipping, with
lowly reverence, the God of their fathers.
The fun of proij:crity hfincs at present on
thy head, and the thvourable gale carrics
thee softly along the iRream of life. i ut
the Almighty needs only to give the word,
aind intfantly the tempest shall rife; and
tliv frail bark ihall be driven into the

\OL. IV. R ocesn.

SERM. ocean, and whelmed in the deep. I, nmy
~I _ pro/9ei Iity I Jad /h. ll never be moved.

Thor, Lor;? didf bi;de ty face, and I was
tro.t'bd!:.-Look up, with dread, to that
awful hand of Providence which is firetch-
ed over your heads. Remember the in-
stability of all human things; remember
it, and tremble, ye who dcific the de-
vout acknowledgment of I-imr who dii-
poses of the human fate! yThoug'h ,e liLe
manj, years and r-joicc in, tnhem all, rem.'zi-
ber the days of darl;,,fs; for they jJl,,l
be in;a, -.

But aiter all tiat 'has been urged on tlis

fubjeIt, I am fnfible it may be objcaecd,
that many who v aie !c conlcience of pa)y-
ing fcriai regard to the infitutions of re-
iigion, do not appear to have dcrivced much
beneft from them. They are nor, it will
be fa'd, more impiovcd in moral conduc,
and in the proper (lcharge of the several
duties of life, than others who have been
apparently negligent of the fcrvices of the

* Eccles. ii. 8.

chrch,,

church. On the contrary, a f;rmal regard S E R M.
to these appears to be fubflilt'ld by X~'
many, in the room of the wei!,ilicr mat-
ters of the lawv.- Though this fhlou!d be
admitted, it goes no farther than to fhicw
that human weakness, or corrnption, may
defeat the purpose of the molt promising
means of moral improvement. That a
fiperlitious attention to external sworlfip,
has too often usurped the charanler, and
supplanted the place, of real virtue, will
not be denied. Admonitions against so
dangerous an error cannot be given too
often. But because the best things have
been often misapplied and abufLel, no ar-
gument thence arises for their being un-
dervalued, and thrown aside. So also rea-
son, instruction, and diicipline of every
kind ha've been fiequently perverted to
bad cnds; and yet their intrinsic wortl
and ufcfulnefs remain untouched and ac-
knowledged. -- Betides this, it cannot be
admitted that, because religious iniiPtu.
tions produce not all the good that mi;ght
be wified, and hoped for, they therefore

R 2 do

s R M. do no good at all. This were a rash and

X. ill-founded conclusion. If the morals of

men are not always amended by them as
they ought to have been, there is reason,
however, to think that they would have
been worse without them. Some check
is always given by them to open profli-
gacy. Some assistance is furniflied to good
dispositions of heart; at leans, to decency
of manners. Even momentary impref-
sions of seriousness made on the thoughtless
by the folemnities of religion, are not
without their fruit. They leave generally
some trace behind them; and when the
traces are often renewed, they may be
hoped, through the divine blessing, to
form at last a deep impreflion on the
mind.

At the fame time, I do not fay that re-

ligious institutions work upon the mind
like a charm; and that mere bodily at-
tendance on them will always ensure us
of some profitable effect. Let the means
that are employed, for the improvement
of rational beings, be ever so powerful in

3 themselves,

themselves, much of their success will al- S E R M.

XI

ways depend on the manner in which XI.
they are received and applied. I shall
therefore conclude my reasonings on this
iiibjea, with a few observations concerning
the dispositions requisite on our part, for
deriving benefit from the public ordi-
nances of religion.

THE ends for which we assemble in the

house of God are two; to worship God,
and to liflen to religious inftruaions.

The public worship of God is the chief

and mofl sacred purpose of every religious
aflembly of Christians. Let it here be re-
membered, that it is not the uttering, or
the hearing of certain words, that confti-
tutes the worship of the Almighty. It is
the heart that prailes, or prays. If the
heart accompany not the words that are
spoken or heard, we ofer the facsfice of
/ools. By the inattentive thought, and the
giddy and wandering eye, we profane the
temple of the Lord, and turn the appear-
ance of devotion into insult and mockery.

R 3 With

SER PM. With regard to religious inflruction, at-

XL. xL-_ Ltention and reverence are unqueltionably

due. All religious and moral knowledge
comes from God. It is a light from hea-
ven, firfl transmitted to man by the ori-
ginal constitution of his nature, and after-
wards made to thine with fairer and fuller
luflre by the revelation of the gospel in
Jesus Chrifl. Its brightness may some-
times be stronger, and sometimes weaker,
according to the mediums by which it is
conveyed. But fill, as far as the inflruc-
tions delivered from the pulpit are illu-
minated by the ray fiom heaven, they
are the truths of God, and ought to be re-
ceived as such. Refinements of vain phi-
lofophy, or intricate fuitilties of theologi-
cal controversy, are undoubtedly not en-
titled to luch regard. But when the great
principles of natural or revealed religion
are difcufied; when the important doc-
trines of the gospel concerning the life,
and sufferings, and death of our blessed Re-
deemer are displayed; or useful infiruc-
tions regarding the regulation of life, and

the

the proper dif£harge of our several duties, s E R M.
are the fubjeas brought into view; it is X
not then the human speaker, but the divine
authority, that is to be regarded.

In the speaker, many imperfetions and

infirmities may be dilcovered 'lhe disco-
veries of the golpel are representcd in
scripture, as a hidden treauflie brought to
light; but, by the appointment of God,
we have this treasure in earthCe vjiels '.
It is not the spirit of curiosity that ought
to bring us to church. Too oiten, it is to
be feared, we assemble there merely as
critics on the preacher; critics on iis fen-
timents, his language, and his delivery.
But, such are not the dispositions which
become us on so serious an occasion. It
is with humility, with fairness, and can-
dour, with an intention to improve our-
fcives in piety and virtue, with a view to
make personal application to our own cha-
rater, that we ought to hear the word of
God.-- When we enter the sacred temple,

* zCorinth. iv. 7.

R 4 let

SE RM. let US ever confider ourselves as crea-

XI.

tures surrounded with darkness, seeking
illumination from heaven; as guilty crea-
tures, imploring forgiveness from our
judge; as frail and mortal creatures, pre-
paring for that eternal habitation into
which we know not how soon we are to
pass.

IF, with such sentiments and imprel-

sions we join in the worship of God, and
the ordinances of religion, we may justly
hope that they shall be accompanied to us
with the divine blessing. It is the express
precept of God, not toforfake the aJembling
of ourselves together-,. Gather together the
people, men) women, and children, that they
may hear, acid that they may learn, andfear
the Lord your God, and observe to do all
the words of this law n. Enter his gates
with thanklfgiving, and his courts with
praise. Give unto the Lord the glory due to
his name.- Thus hath God commanded,

Heb, x. 25. . Deut. xxxi. 12.

and

and he never commanded his people to SERM.

XL.

seek his name in vain. For, where two or
three are gathered together in his name, our
Lord bath told us that he is in the midjf of
them :. God bath said that he loveth the
gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of
Jacob i~. The prayer of the upright is his
delight. Both in their temporal and fpi-
ritual concerns, they may be most expected
to prosper, who can fay with the Psalmist
in the text, Lord, I have loved the habita-
tion of thy hofife, and the place where thine
honour dwelleth.

* Matth. xviii. 20. t Pa. IxXxxii. 2,

t s Ivi. ;

# SERMON XII. On the FASHION of the WORLD passing away. 1 COR. vii. 31. — The fashion of this world passeth away.

t 2sO ]

SERMON XII.
On the FASHION of the WORLD

passing away.

1 COR. vii. 31.

'-Thefaj7jion of this world paoetb away.
S EX.M TO use this world so as not to abife it,

a-,_ ~is one of the most important, and at

the fame time one of the most difficult
lessons which religion teaches. By so ma-
ny desires and passions we are connecRed
with the objecs around us, that our at-
tachment to them is always in hazard of
becoming excefive and sinful. Hence re-
ligion is often employed in moderating

7 this

this attachment, by relifyinri our errone- S ERM.
ous opinions, and inftruSting us in the _ _,
proper value we ought to iet on worldly
things. Such was particularly the scope
of the Apostle in this context. He is put-
ting the Corinthians in mind that their
time ism/ort; that every thing here is tran-
fitory; and therefore, that in all the differ-
ent occupations of human life, in weclp-
ing and rejoicing, and biyi..g and onJ'5i.g,
they were ever to keep in view this con-
fideration, that the fqiion of tlhis worldalpn -
cth away. The original expression im-
ports, the figure or form under which the
world presents itself to us. The meaning
is, All that belongs to this vilible state is
continually changing. Nothing in hu-
man affairs is fixed or flable. All is in
motion and fluctuation; altering its ap-
pearance every moment, and palling into
;ome new form. Let us n!editatc for a
little on the serious view whicl is here
given us of the world, in order that we
may attend to the improvemicuts which
it f!ggefts.

1.72l;

S ER M. .. TheJfanJion of the world pafeth caway,

as the opinions, ideas, and manners of
men are always changing. We look in
vain for a standard to ascertain and fix
any of these; in vain expea that what
has been approved and ePtablifhed for a
while, is always to endure. Principles
which were of high authority among our
ancestors are now exploded. Syflems of
philosophy which were once universally
received, and taught as infallible truths,
are now obliterated and forgotten. Modes
of living, behaving, and employing time,
the pursuits of the busy, and the enter-
tainments of the gay, have been entirely
changed. They were the offspring of
fashion, the children of a day. When
they had run their course, they expired;
and were succeeded by other modes of
living, and thinking, and aaing, which
the gloss of novelty recommended for a
while to the public talte.

When we read an account of the man-

ners and occupations, of the studies and
opinions, even of our own countrymen,

in

in some remote age, we fecm to be read- SERM.

XII.

ing the history of a different world from X
what we now inhabit. Coming down-
wards, through some generations, a new
face of things appears. Mien begin to
think, and adt, in a diffleent train; and
what we call refinement gradually opens.
Arriving at our own times, we confider
ourselves as having widely enlarged the
sphere of knowledge on every fide, hav-
ing formed just ideas on every ilb-
jea; having attained the proper standard
of manners and behaviour; and wonder
at the ignorance, the uncoutlinefs, and
rusticity of our forefathers. But, alas!
what appears to us so perfect shall in its
turn pass away. The next race, while
they ihove us off the stage, will introduce
their favourite discoveries and innova-
tions; and what we now admire as the
height of improvement, may in a few ages
hence be confidered as altogether rude and
imperfelt. As one wave effaces the ridge
which the former had made on the sand
by the sea fliore, so every succeeding age

obliterates

SE R M. obliterates the opinions and modes of the
A -_ age which had gone before it. The f/aI.ion

of the world is ever palling away.

Let us only think of the changes which

our own ideas and opinions undergo in
the progress of life. One man differs not
more from another, than the fame man
varies from himself in different periods
of his age, and in different situations of
fortune. In youth, and in opulence, every
thing appears smiling and gay. We
fly as on the wings of fancy; and fnlrvey
beauties wherever we cast our eye. But
let some more years have pafled over our
heads, or let disappointments in the world
have depressed our fpilits; and what a
change takes place? The pleasing illusions
that once (hone before us; the splendid
fabrics that imagination had reared; the
enchanting maze in which we once wan-
dered with delight, all vanifli and arc for-
gotten. The world itself remains the
lame. But its form, its appcarancc, and
aspe&t, is changed to our view; its /:ij.io;,
as to us, hath p ' ;l arwa'.

II. WIILL

II. WHILE our opinions and ideas are SERM.

thus changing within, the condition of XII.
all external things is, at the fame time,
ever changing without us, and around us.
Wherever we cast our eyes over the face
of nature, or the monuments of art, we
discern the marks of alteration and viciffi-
tude. 'We cannot travel far upon the
earth, without being presented with many
a striking memorial of the changes made
by time. What was once a flourifiing
city, is now a negleEed village. Where
castles and palaces flood, fallen towers
and ruined walls appear. Where the Ing-
nificence of the great flionc, ail the mirth
of the gay resounded, there, as the prophet
Isaiah describes, the owl and tf5: riaven now
dwell, thorns come up, and lbe nettle and the
[ra'.i.!:l grow 'in fte courts.-- When we
read the hliftory of nations, what do we
read but the history of incefillt revolution
and change? We behold kingdoms alter-
nately riling and iailing; peace and war
taking place by turns; princes, hCeracs,
and ftatefnen, coming forth in fuccefiion

on

SERM, on the stage, attracting our attention for
XII. a little by the splendid figure they make,

and then disappearing and forgotten. We
fee thefa/f'ion of the world afluming all its
different forms, and in all of them, pasing
away,.

But to historical annals there is no oc-

cafion for our having recourse. Let any
one who has made some progress in life,
recollect only what he has beheld passing
before him in his own time. We have
seen our country rife triumphant among
the nations; and we have seen it also
humbled in its turn. We have seen in
one hemisphere of the globe new domi-
nions acquired, and in another hemi-
sphere, our old dominions loft. At
home, we have seen faacions and par-
ties flift through all their different
forms; and administrations, in succession,
rife and fall. What were once the great
themes of eager discussion, and political
contest, are now forgotten. Fathers re-
count them to their children as the tales
of other times. New ac2ors have come

forth

forth on the stage of the world. New ob- SE R M.
jeds have attraded the attention, and new x.
intrigues engaged the passions of men.
New members fill the feats of justice; new
ministers the temples of religion; and a
new world, in short, in the course of a
few years, has gradually and insensibly
risen around us.

When from the public scene we turn

our eye to our own private connexions,
the changes which have taken place in the
fnaJion of the worll, must touch every
refleding mind with a more tender fenfi-
bility. For where are now many of the
companions of our early years; many
of those with whom we first began the
race of life; and whose hopes and pro-
speds were once the fame with our
own? In recollecting our old acquaintance
and friends, what devastations have been
made by the hand of time? On the
ruins of our former connexions, new ones
have arisen; new relations have been
formed; and the circle of those among

VOL. IV. S whom

s E R M. whom we live is altogether changed from

XII.
, , what it once was. Comparing our pre-

sent situation with our former condition
of life; looking back to our father's house,
and to the scenes of youth; remembering
the friends by whom we were trained,
and the family in which we grew up; who,
but with inward emotion, recollects those
days of former years, and is disposed to
drop the silent tear, when he views the
faj/hion of the worldthus alwayspaging away!

III. NOT only our connexions with all

things around us change, but our own
life, through all its flages and conditions,
is ever palling away. How just, and how
affecing is that image, employed in the
sacred writings to describe the state of
man, wefPend our )ears as a tale that is
told*! It is not to any thing great or
lasting that human life is compared; not
to a monument that is built, or to an in-

* Pal. xc. 9.

scription

scription that is engraved; not even to S E R M.
a book that is written, or to a history that .i-.
is recorded; but to a tale, which is lill-
ened to for a little; where the words
are fugitive and pafling, and where one
incident succeeds and hangs on another,
till, by insensible transitions, we are
brought to the close; a talc, which in
tome passages may be amusing, in others,
tedious; but, whether it amuses or. fa-
tigues, is soon told, and soon forgotten.
Thus, year fReals upon us after year.
Life is never standing still for a moment;
but continually, though insensibly, slid-
ing into a new form. Infancy rites up fast
to childhood; childhood to youth; youth
passes quickly into manhood; and the
grey hair and the faded look are not
long of admonishing us, that old age is at
hand. In this course all generations run.
The world is made up of unceasing rounds
of transitory existence. Some generations
are coming forward into being, and others
hastening to leave it. The fiream which
carries us all along is ever flowing with a

S 2 quick

SERM. quick current, though with a flill and

X11
x/l noiseless course. The dwelling place of

man is continually emptying, and by a
frelh succession of inhabitants, continually
filling anew. The memory of man pq'illg
away, like the remembrance of a gutJt wbo
bath tarried but one night.

As the life of man, confidered in its du-

ration, thus fleets and passes away, so, du-
ring the time it lasts, its condition is per-
petually changing. It affords us nothing
on which we can set up our reft; no en-
joyment or poffeflion whiih we can pro-
perly call our own. When we have be-
gun to be placed in such circumstances
as we desired, and with our lives to pro-
ceed in the fame agreeable tenor, how
often comes some unexpected event across,
to disconcert all our schemes of happiness?
Our health declines; our friends die; our
families are scattered; Something or other
is not long of occurring, to shew us that
the wheel must turn round; the ftifl.ion of
the world muff pafi away. Is there any
man who dares to look to futurity with

85;~
~~ aan

an eye of confident hope; and to fay, that SERM.
against a year hence, he can promise be- X
ing in the fame condition of health or for-
tune, as he is at present? The leeds of
change are every where sown in cur late ?
and the very causes that seemed to pro-
mise us security, are often secretly under-
mining it. Great fame provokes the at-
tacks of envy and reproach. High health
gives occasion to intemperance and difcafe.
The elevation of the mighty never fails
to render their condition tottering; and
that obscurity which shelters the mean,
exposes them, at the ianie time, to become
the prey of opprcffion. So completely is
the fijhjion cf this world made by Provi-
dence for change, and prepared for paqing
away. In the midst of this instability, it
were some comfort, did human prosperity
decay as slowly as it riues. By flow de-
grees, and by many intervening iteps, it
rites. But one day is fufficicnt to scat-
ter, and bring it to nought. I might
add,

S 3 IV. THAT

s ER M. IV. THAT the world itself in which we

XII.
-y- dwell, the basis of all our present enjoy-

ments, is itself contrived for change, and
designed to pass away. While the gene-
rations of men come forth in their turns,
like troops of succeeding pilgrims, to a&
their part on this globe, the globe on
which they ac is tottering under their feet.
It was once overflowed by a deluge. It is
:(haken by earthquakes; it is undermined
by subterraneous fires; it carries many
a mark of having suffered violent con-
vulfions, and of tending to dissolution.
Revelation informs us, that there is a day
approaching, in which the heavens Jfall
pass away with a great noie; the elements
j7all melt with fervent beat; and the earth
and the works therein Jhall be burnt up.
When this destined hour arrives, the fa-
J7Sion of the world shall have finally paJt
away. Immortal spirits shall then look
back upon this world, as we do at present on
cities and empires, which were once mighty
and flprifhing, but now are swept from

existence,

existence, and their place is no more to be s ER M.
found. X

I SHALL insist no longer on this repre-

fentation of things. Enough has been
said, to shew that the fif.ion of t/e world,
in every sense, pases away. Opinions and
manners, public affairs and private con-
cerns, the life of man, the conditions of
fortune, and the earth itself on which we
dwell, are all changing around us.-Is
every thing, then, with which we are
connected, pafling and transitory? Is the
whole state of man no more than a dream
or fleeting vision? Is he brought forth. to
be only the child of a day ? Are we thrown
into a river, where all flows, and nothing
stays; where we have no means of resist-
ing the current; nor can reach any firm
ground, on which to reft our foot?-No,
my brethren; man was not doomed to be
so unhappy ; nor made by his Creator so
much in vain. There are three fixed and
permanent objects, to which I must now
call your attention, as the great flupports

4 of

S E R M. of human constancy amidst this fugitive

XIl.

state. Though this world changes and
passes away; virtue and goodness never
change; God never changes; heaven and
immortality pass not away.

Firq, VIRTUE and goodness never

change. Let opinions and manners, con-
ditions and situations, in public and in
private life, alter as they will, virtue is
ever the fame. It refts on the immove-
able basis of Eternal Truth. Among all
the revolutions of human things it main-
tains its ground; ever possessing the vene-
ration and esteem of mankind, and con-
ferring on the heart, which enjoys it, fa-
tisfaaion and peace. Consult the most
remote antiquity. Look to the most fa-
vage nations of the earth. How wild,
and how fluctuating soever the ideas of
men may have been, this opinion you will
find to have always prevailed, that probi-
ty, truth, and beneficence, form the honour
and the excellency of man. In this, the
philosopher and the savage, the warrior

and

and the hermit, join. At this altar all SE RM.

XII.

have worshipped. Their offerings may
have been unseemly. Their notions of
virtue may have been rude, and oc-
ca{ionally tainted by ignorance and fu-
perftition ; but the fundamental ideas of
moral worth have ever remained the
fame.

Here then is one point of flability, as-

feted by no vicissitudes of time and ii!e,
on which we may reft. Our fortunes
may change, and our friends may die;
but virtue may still be our own; and as
long as this remains, we are never mise-
rable. Till I die I wi.l not remove my inte-
grity firom me. My righteoullile I hold JafJ,
and will not let it go. My heart hall not ;e-
proach me Jo long as I live *. HIe who, with
the holy man of old, can hold this lan(:!.g;, i
may with undisturbed mind futrv,:y ;ilne
flying away, life decaying, and riwhole
faihion of the world changing arou: d him.
He hath within himself, a lource of con-
iolation and hope, independent of all

* Job, xxvii. 5, 6.

earthly

S ER M. earthly objects. Every terrestrial glory

XL.
L_-__ sparkles only for a little, with transient

brightness. But virtue shines with eternal
and unalterable splendour. It derives its ori-
gin from heaven; and partakes both of the
lustre, and the Liability, of celestial objeds.
It is the brightnef of the everlaJliag light;
the unjfpqtted mirror of Got, and the image
of his goodness.

IN thefecond place, God never changes.

Amidst the unceasing viciflitude of earth-
ly things, there remains at the head of
the universe an eternal ProteCtor of vir-
tue, whose throne is ejlablijed for ever.
With him there is no variablencfs, neither
anyl /Jadlow of turning; no inconstancy of
purpose, and no decay of wifdoin or of
power. We know that he loved righte-
oufnefs from the beginning of days, and
that he will continue to love it unaltcra-
bly to the last. Forcfeen by him was
every revolution which the course of ages
has produced. All the changes which
happen in the Ltate of nature, or the ife

of

of men, were comprehended in his decree. s E R M.
How much foevcr worldly things may X11.
change in themselves, they are all united
in his plan; they constitute one great fy)tern
or whole, of which he is the Author; and
which, at its final completion, flall appear
to be perfeCt. His do;ninion holds toge-
ther, in a continued chain, the successive va-
riety of human events; gives liability to
things that in themselves are fluctuating;
gives constancy even to the fajiion of the
world while it is pasing away. Wh erefore,
though all things change on earth, and we
ourselves be involved in the general mutabi-
lity, yet as long as, with trutl and hope, we
look up to this Supreme Being, we reft on
the rock of ages, and are safe amidst every
change. We poficfs a fortress to which we
can have recourse in all dangers; a refuge
under all itorms; a dwerlling place in all
generations.

IN the third and last place, H-eaven and

immortality pass not away. The fleeting
scenes of this life are to be confidered as
ao more than an introduCtion to a nobler

and

SERM. and more permanent order of things,
XII. ih">.j when man fliall have attained the matu-

rity of his being. This is what reason
gave some ground to exped; what reve-
lation has fully confirmed; and in con-
firming it, has agreed with the sentiments
and anticipations of the good and wife in
every age. We are taught to believe, that
what we now behold, is only the firfl stage
of the life of man. We are arrived no
farther than the threflold; we dwell as in
the outer courts of existence. Here, tents
only are pitched; tabernacles ereded for
the sojourners of a day. But in the re-
gion of eternity, all is great, stable, and un-
changing. There, the mansions of the jus
are prepared: there, the city whicb hath
folunations is built; there is established,
the kingdom which cannot be moved. Here,
every thing is in stir and fluctuation;
because here good men continue not, but
pass onward in the course of being.
There, all is serene, Ready, and orderly;
because there remaineth the final reft of
ite people of God. Here, all is corrupted

by

,by our folly and guilt; and of course SERM.

XII.

must be transient and vain. But there, _
purchased by the death, and lecured by the
relurredion of the Son of God, is an inhe-
ritance incorrl]ptible, undltfled, and tal tfaldth
not away. There reigns that tranquillity
which is never troubled. There flines that
fun which never sets. There flows that
river of plealures, which is alw.vas unruffled
and pure. Looking forward to thole di-
vine habitations, the changes of the pre-
sent world disappear to the eye of faith;
and a good man becomes afllamed of sus-
fering himfeif to be dejected by what is
so loon to pass away.

Suc t are the objci.s you outtt to op-

pose to the tranlient fiyicn of tlb vwor/,/ ;
Virtue, and God, and Heaven. Fixing
your regard on these, you will have no
reason to complain cf the lot of man, or
the world's nmutability.- The design of
tlhe preceding representation wl:ich I gave
of the world, was not to indulge vain de-
clamation ; to raise fi-uitlefs melancholy;
or to throw an unncccflary clcud over hu-

man

SE RM. man life. But to flew the moderation

M,_ requisite in our attachment to the world;

and at the fame time, to point out the
higher objects both of attention and con-
folation which religion affords.- Pass-
ing' and changeable as all human things
are, among them, however, we must at
present aat our part; to them we muff
return from religious meditation. They
are not below the regard of any Christian;
for they form the scene which Providence
has appointed at present for his activity,
and his duty. Trials and dangers they
may often present to him; but amidif
these le will fafrly hold his course, if,
when enig.ged in worldly affairs, he keep
in view those divine objeCts which I have
been setting before him. Let him ever
retain cinnexion with Virtue, and God,
and Heaven. By them let his conduc be
regulated, and his constancy supported.
So shall he ffe this world without abufng
it. He mall neither droop under its mif-
fortunes, nor be vainly elated by its ad-
vantages'; but through all its changes

shall

{llall carry an equal and steady mind; S E R M.
and in the end shall receive the accom- XII.
plifhment of the promise of scripture, that
though the world panfeth away, and the liZs
thereof, he that doth the will cf God raill
abide for ever i .

1 i John, ii. i,.

# SERMON XIII. On TRANQUILLITY of MIND. PSALM xv. 5. — He that doth these things shall never be moved.

E 272 ]

SERMO N XIII.
On TRANQJUILLITY of MIND.

PSALM XV. 5.
-He that dotb theif things fJall never be

mIoved.
SERM. T RANQUILLITY of mind, or, in the

a^ .
T~ lwords of the text, a mind not

moved or dilquieted by the accidents of
life, is undc;utedly one of the greatest
bleflings that we can poflefs on earth.
It is here mentioned as the reward of the
man, whose characer had been described
in this psalm, as leading a virtuous life,
and discharging his duty towards God

and

and his neighbour. It is indeed the ulti- S E R M.
mate aim, to which the wishes of the wife _j
and reflecing have ever been directed,
that with a mind undisturbed by anxieties,
cares, and fears, they might pass their
days in a pleating serenity. They juRly
concluded that, by enjoying themselves
in peace, they would enjoy, to the greatest
advantage, all the comforts of life that
came within their reach.

This happy tranquillity, the multitude

conceive to be most readily attainable by
means of wealth, or, at leafi, of an easy
fortune; which they imagine, would set
them above all the ordinarydifturbances
of life. That it has some effec for this
purpose, cannot be denied. Poverty and
itraitened circumifances are often incon-
fiftent with tranquillity. To be destitute
of those conveniencies that suit our rank
in the world; to be burthened with an-
xiety about making provision for every
day which passes over our head; instead of
bringing comfort to a family who look
up to us for aid, to behold ourselves fur-

VOL. IV. T rounded

S E R M. rounded with their wants and corn

XllI.
-- plaints, are circumstances which cannot

fail to give much uneafinels to every feel.
ing mind. To take measures, therefore,
for attaining a competent fortune, by lau-
dable means, is wife and proper. Entire
negligence of our affairs, and indifference
about our worldly circumstances, is, for
the molft part, the consequence of some
vice, or some folly.-At the fame time, I
must observe, that the attainment of opu-
lence is no certain method of attaining
tranquillity. Embarrafnments and vexa-
tions often attend it; and long experience
has shewn, that tranquillity is far from be-
ing always found among the rich. Nay,
the higher that men riie in the world, the
greater degrees of power and diftindion
which they acquire, they are often the
farther removed from internal peace.
The world affords so many initances of
miseries abounding in the higher ranks
of life, that it were needless to enlarge
on a topic so generally known and ad-
mitted.

Assuming

Affumiing it, therefore, for an undoubt- s E R M.

XIII.

ed truth, that the mere poffeflion of the
goods of fortune may be consistent with
the want of inward tranquillity, we must
look aroind for other more certain grounds
of it. We must inquire whether any line
of conduct can be pointed out, which, in-
dependent of external situation in the
world, flail tend to make us easy in mind;
lhall either bestow, or aid, that tranquilli-
ty which all men desire. The remaining
part of this discourse fliall be employed in
figgefting, with great plainness of speech,
such direaions as appear to me most mate-
rial on this important fubje2.

TIwfiiJJ direaion, which I have to fug-

gefr, is, that we imitate the charader of
the man who is described in this psalm as
walking uprigtl,., working righleotfnefi,
aid speaking te ra, he

trth, as he thikth in it

heart; that we study to preserve a clear
conscience, and to lead a virtuous and ho-
nourable, at least an inoffenlive and in-
nocent, life. Of such a man only it can

T be

SER M. be said, that doing these things he Jfall ne-

ver be moved. So great is the power of
conscience over every human being, that
the remembrance of crimes never fails to
overthrow tranquillity of mind. Be as-
fured, that he who defrauds his neighbour,
who has ensnared the innocent, has viola-
ted his trust, or betrayed his friend, shall
never enjoy within himself undisturbed
quiet. His evil deeds will at times recur
to his thoughts, like ghosts rising up
in black array before him to haunt his
couch. Even the sense of a foolish and
trifling conduc, of a life palt in idleness
and difipation; by which, though a man
has not been guilty of great crimes, he
has however wafted his substance, mifpcnt
his time, and brought upon himself just
reproach; even, this I fay, is sufficient to
create much uneasiness and disquiet to the
heart. Let him, therefore, who wishes to
enjoy tranquillity, study, above all things,
to aa an irreproachable part. With com-
fort he will reft his head on his pillow at
night, when he is confeious that through-

I o nit;

out the day he has been doing his duty S E R M.

XIII.

towards God and man; when none of the ,
tranfaaions of that day come back, in
painful remembrance, to upbraid him.
To this testimony of a good conscience, let
him be able,

IN thefecond place, to join humble trust

in the favour of God. As, after the belt
endeavours we can use, no man's beha-
viour will be entirely faultless, it is effen-
tial to peace of mind, that we have some
ground for hope in the Divine mercy,
that, through the merits of Jesus Christ,
our defets liall be forgiven, and grace
be shewn us by Heaven. This includes
all the duties of faith and repentance that
are required by the Gospel; the faithful
discharge of which duties is absolutely ne-
ceffary for delivering us from those fears
of another world, which, if not allayed,
are sufficient to banish all tranquillity from
the heart. Our religious principles muf
at the fame time be found and pure; and

T 3 care-

SE R M. carefully preserved from the taint of fu-

perflition, whose gloomy horrors, taking
possession of weak and ill-informed minds,
convert what they mistake for religion,
into a source of mifery.-Moreover, it is
necessary, that we be able to place trust in
God, not only as our future Judge, but as
the present Governor of human affairs.
So uncertain is the continuance of every
earthly comfort, that lie who reposes no
confidence in the Supreme Disposer of
events, must be often disquieted and de-
jeled. He alone pofleffes firm tranquil-
lity, who, amidit all human viciflitudes,
looks up with fettled trust, to an Almighty
Ruler, as to one under whose conduct he
is safe. To him alone belongs that hap-
py privilege, described by the Psalmist:
Ie Jl.all not be ajfai.i of evil tidings; his
heart isfixed; trtifing in the Lord *.

I have pointed out the primary and es-

fential foundations of tranquillity ; virtuous
condut, good principles, and pious dif-

Psalm cxii. 7.

positions.

positions. At the fame time, a man may SE R M.

XIII,

be both pious and virtuous, and yLt, i
through iome defets in the management
of his mind and temper, may not po!fis
that happy serenity and felf-enjoyment,
which ought to be the portion of virtue
and piety. Instances of this will occur to
every one who is acquainted with the world.
We too often behold perifns, whole prin-
ciples, and whose moral condudQ, are in the
main unexceptionable, leading anl uncom-
sortable life; through fretfulness of temper,
peeviflnefs of manners, or fullcnnelj of
disposition. There is, therefore, some
discipline to be studied; there are obme
subsidiary parts of charaiter to be at-
tended to,'in order to give piety and virtue
their full effeCt for conferring tranquillity.
To the contideration of these fccondary
means I now proceed. Let me then ad-
vise you,

IN the third place, to attend to the cul-

ture and improvement of your minds.
A fund of ufefuJ knowledge, and a ifock

T 4 of

S E R M. of ideas, afford much advantage for the
L-,.i enjoyment of tranquillity. I do not mean,

that every man must study to become
deeply learned. The situation of many
would not allow it. The taste, and the
habits of others, prevent it. But what I
mean is, that every man who wishes to
lead a comfortable life should provide for
himself, as much as he can, by means of
observation, reading, and reflecting, a
large field of useful thoughts. In a mind
absolutely vacant, tranquillity is seldom
found. The vacancy too often will be
filled up by bad desires and passions.
Whereas the mind of a wife man is a
kingdom to itself. In his lonely, or me-
lancholy hours, he finds always resources
within himself, to which he can turn for
relief. As there are many occasions when
external objeCs afford no pleasure, it is
only by being able to reft on the enter-
tainments afforded to himself by his
mind, that any one can pass his days with
felf-enjoyment. Let me recommend for
the fame purpose,

IN

IN the fourth place, that we be always S E R M.

XIII.

careful to provide proper employment for _
our time. Regular industry and labour,
with intervals of ease, is perhaps the Rate
most conducive of any to tranquillity. If
our station give no call to industry, it will
be profitable that we study to have some
end or objet in view, to which our atten-
tion ihall be directed. Relaxation from
intense, or incessant pursuit, is requisite for
comfort. But if relaxation degenerate
into total idleness, it becomes in a high
degree adverse to tranquillity. Every
man by his nature is formed, more
or less, for action. In a mind that is en-
tirely quiescent, and that has no object to
put it into motion, instead of felf-enjoy-
ment, there will be conflant languor, te-
dioufnefs, and misery. Life Magnates in
such a situation, like a pool of dead waters;
and the man becomes a burden to him-
self. Violent and dangerous pursuits,
which diftrad and embroil those who are
engaged in them, I cannot be underitood
to recommend. Every one fees how so-

rcign

S E R M. of ideas, afford much advantage for the
r' --enjoyment of tranquillity. I do not mean,

that every man must study to become
deeply learned. The situation of many
would not allow it. The taste, and the
habits of others, prevent it. But what I
mean is, that every man who wishes to
lead a comfortable life should provide for
himself, as much as he can, by means of
observation, reading, and reflecing, a
large field of useful thoughts. In a mind
absolutely vacant, tranquillity is seldom
found. The vacancy too often will be
filled up by bad desires and passions.
Whereas the mind of a wife man is a
kingdom to itself. In his lonely, or me-
lancholy hours, he finds always resources
within himself, to which he can turn for
relief. As there are many occasions when
external objects afford no pleasure, it is
only by being able to reft on the enter-
tainments afforded to himself by his
mind, that any one can pass his days with
felf-enjoyment. Let me recommend for
the fame purpose,

IN

IN the fourth place, that we be always S E R M.

XIII.

careful to provide proper employment for _.
our time. Regular industry and labour,
with intervals of ease, is perhaps the itate
most conducive of any to tranquillity. If
our station give no call to industry, it will
be profitable that we fudy to have some
end or objea in view, to which our atten-
tion shall be direced. Relaxation from
intense, or incessant pursuit, is requisite for
comfort. But if relaxation degenerate
into total idleness, it becomes in a high
degree adverse to tranquillity. Every
man by his nature is formed, more
or less, for action. In a mind that is en-
tirely quiescent, and that has no objet: to
put it into motion, infead of felf-enjoy-
ment, there will be conflant languor, te-
dioufnefs, and misery. Life fagnates in
such a situation, like a pool of dead waters;
and the man becomes a burden to him-
iclf. Violent and dangerous pursuits,
which diftrad and embroil those who are
engaged in them, I cannot be underflood
to recommend. Every one fees how so-

rcMir

SE R M. reign there are to a state of tranquillity.

XIII.
vJ_ But in the ordinary tenor of calm and

easy life, I would advise every one to have
some end before him ; some object which
shall bring the mind into action, and fill
up the vacuities of time. Provided the
object be innocent, and of no unsuitable
or degrading nature, it may answer this
purpose, though it Ihould nct bL in itself
of high importance. It is better for the
mind to have some determinate direction
given it, than to be always left floating,
as it were, in empty space.- But about
whatever objets we are employed, it is
still more material to tranquillity that, in
the

Fifth place, we learn to govern our pas-

sions. These are the moist frequent dif-
turbers of our peace. Nccefary as their
impulse is to give activity to the mind,
yet if they are not kept in subordination
to reason, they speedily throw all things
into confusion. Such of them as belong
to the malignant and unsocial class, evi-

dently

dently tend to produce vexation and dif- SERM.
quiet. Against luffering thele to gain XII.
pofelfion of the heart, adimo;ition is
icarcely necessary. But I must admoniff
you, that even those which are accounted
of innocent nature, and which therefore
may lay hold of virtuous minds, if they
obtain the entire mastery, are lifficient to
overtrliiyv the tranquillity of life. Let
every one, therefore, who values that tran-
quillity, fludy to retain moderation and
felf-command, even in the midst of pas-
sions which have a fair and bland appear-
ance. He will tind that the gratification
of any one of them, compenfhttes not that
perpetual slavery to which it will reduce
him, when it becomes inordinate.

I have farther to admonifhl you, that

this felf-command is particularly necef-
fary in all that relates to habitual temper.
Even where strong pailions are out of the
quefion, those flighter emotions which
ruffle or bour the temper, are sufficient, by
their frequent recurrence, to poison all
felf-enjoyment. He who would possess a

tranquil

SE R M. tranquil state, muff, above all things, cul-

XII.
.-_ ttivate calmness and gentleness of difpofi-

tion. He ought especially to cultivate it in
that society, whether domestic or social, with
which he has most frequent intercourse.
We all know, that there are thousands -who
in public, and in formal companies, appear
to be all gentleness and sweetness, but
who, at home, and among their nearest
relations, give vent, with freedom, to the
most harlh and peevish dispositions. Such
persons are not likely to enjoy much real
comfort. For it is in the daily and fami-
liar intercourse of life, that temper chief-
ly exerts its power, either for promoting
or for disturbing the tranquillity of our
days. On occasions when men come
closest together, if, initead of meeting in
smooth conta&, they rub and grate on
one another, the feelings produced on
both fides are of the most offensive and
displeasing kind. Nothing can be affum-
ed as a more certain axiom, than that he
who allows either inordinate passions, or
a cross temper, to govern him, must,

though

though he (hould possess all that flourih- s E R M.

XllI.

ing fortune can bestow, be a stranger to A-
tranquillity.

IN the fixtl place, let me adv:fc you ne-

ver to expet too much from the world.
High hopes, and florid views, are great
enemies to tranquillity. When rashly in-
dulged, they are constantly producing
disappointments. Their indulgence, in the
mean time, occasions discontent with our
present iituation; and he who is difcon-
tented cannot be happy. One of the firlt
lessons, both of religion and of wisdom, is,
to moderate our expectations and hopes;
and not to set forth on the voe age of life
like men who expect to be always carried
forward with a favourable gale. Let your
views be suited to your rank and fiation
in the world; and never fear fantastically
beyond them. Content yourselves with
fober pleasures, and form your relifli to
them. Be thankful when you are free
from pain, though you be not in the
midst of high enjoyment. Be satisfied if

the

SERM.the path you tread be easy and smooth,
_X11. though it be not firewed with flowers,

Human life admits not of continued
plealire; nor is it always rendered happy
by great exaltation. Remember, that it
is a middle region which is the native
station of tranquillity. It neither aspires
to those heights of the atmollhere where
the thunder is formed, nor creeps al-
ways on the ground. Affect not, on
every occasion, to put yourselves for-
ward. Be content to retire foinetimes
into the slade; and allow others to take
their proper place.- It will be easily
seen, that I speak not now to the ambiiious
and aliiring; but to thole who value tran-
quillity more than splendid appeara:lce in
the world.

Such persons I also advise, while they

expect not too much from the world,
neither, also, to form too high expeta-
tions from the characters of those on
whose friendship they ref, and with
whom it is their lot to be conneted,
either in social or domestic relations. If

I yOU

you have looked for perfecion any where, s E R M.
you will find yourself disappointed; and ,-
the confcquc;ice of this diiappointment
will be, that friendship will cool, and dif-
gust succeed. If you wish to enjoy com-
fort in any of your connexions, take
your fellow-creatures as they are, and
look for their imperfedions to appear.
You know you have your own; bear with
those of others, as you expecq that they
are to bear with you. As no one is with-
out his failings, few also are void of ami-
able qualities. SelcQ for your compa-
nions, those who have the greatest share
of such qualities; and value them accord-
ingly.-In a word, make the best of this
world as you find it. Reckon both on
the slate of human life, and on the society
of men, as mixed, and checqucred with
good and evil. Carrying always in your
eye such views of things, you will be best
formed to thole equal spirits, and that
reasonable disposition of mind, which
make the hafis of tranquillity. I shall
only add as mv

S'vcnit'h,

SE R M. Seventh, and lait advice on the fubjeAi
,XII. to mix retreat with the aaive business

of the world, and to cultivate habits of
serious thought and recollection. I before
.dvifed those who are not particularly en-
gaged in active life, to form to themselves
some objea of pursuit, in order to fur-
niflh proper employment to time and
thought. But the great multitude of men
are in a different situation. Industry is re-
quired of them; business and cares press;
and acive pursuits occupy their closest at-
tention. He, who, in this situation, pours
himself forth incefrantly on the world, can-
not escape partaking much of its disturb-
ance and trouble. Amidst bustle, in-
trigue, and dissension, he muff pass many
an uneasy hour. Here an enemy en-
counters him; there, a rival meets him.
A suspicious friend alarms him one hour;
an ungrateful one provokes him the next.
I do not recommend, that, for these rea-
sons, he who itudies tranquillity should
retire from all public business, and for.
fake the haunts of men. This were the

retreat

retreat of a monk, not of a good and a SERM.
wife man. Tranquillity were too dearly ,_-,
purchased by the negleq of those duties
which belong to a man, and a Christian.
Nor indeed in absolute seclusion from the
world is tranquillity ever found. On the
contrary, when the human mind is cut off
from those employments for which it was
designed by nature and Providence, it
preys on itself, and engenders its own mi-
fery. Tranquillity is always most likely
to be attained, when the business of the
world is tempered with thoughtful and
ierious retreat. Commune srith your hearts
on your bed, and beflill. Leaving this world
to itself, let there be seasons which you
devote to yourselves, and to God. Reflec-
tion and meditation allay the workings of
many unquiet passions; and place us at a
distance from the tumults of the world.
When the mind has either been ruffled ot
cast down, in intercourse with God and
heaven we find a fanauary to which we
can retreat. In the hours of contempla-
tion and devotion, a good man enjoys

VOL. IV. Ii hiwfelf

SE RM. himself in peace. He beholds nobler ob-

XIII.
-.i. jeds than what worldly men can behold,

He assumes a higher character. He lif-
tens to the voice of nature and of God;
and from this holy fanduary comes forth
with a mind fortified- against the little dif-
turbances of the world. Such habits,
therefore, cannot be too much recommend-
ed to the lovers of tranquillity, as power-
ful subsidiary means for attaining that
happy state.

I HAVE thus pointed out what appears

to me the discipline of religion and wis-
dom for tranquillity of mind. He that
doth tbefe things Jfiall never be moved.-
During the early periods of life, vivid ien-
fations of pleasure are the sole objets
thought worthy of pursuit. Mere ease and
calmness are despised, as the portion of
the aged only and the feeble. Some longer
acquaintance with the world, with its
disappointed hopes and fallacious plea-
fures, teaches almost all men, by degrees,
to wish for tranquillity and peace. But

you

ybo muff not imagine, that these are blefl- SE R M.
ings which will drop on men of their own I
accord, as soon as they begin to desire
them. No: The thoughtless, and the
profligate, will ever remain strangers to
them. They will remain the sport of every
accident that occurs to derange their minds,
and to disturb their life.-The three
great enemies to tranquillity are, Vice,
Superstition, and Idleness: Vice, which
poisons and disturbs the mind with bad
pafions; Superstition, which fills it with
imaginary terrors; Idleness, which loads
it with tediousness and disgust. It is only
by following the path which Eternal Wis-
dom has pointed out, that we can arrive
at the blessed temple of Tranquillity, and
obtain a station there: By doing, or at
leapt endeavouring to do, our duty to God
and man; by acquiring a humble trust
in the mercy and favour of God through
Jesus Christ; by cultivating our minds,
and properly employing our time and
thoughts; by governing our passions and
our temper; by correcting all unreason-

U 2 able

s E R M, able expeaations from the world, and from

XIII.
J -I men; and, in the midst of worldly bufi-

nces, habituating ourselves to calm retreat
and serious recolleCtion.-By such means
as these, it may be hoped, that, through
the divine blefling, our days shall flow in
a stream as unruffled as the human state
adzmits. The wicked are like the troubled
fia, when it cannot reJ . But the work of
righteouficfs ispcace; and the efe of righte-
o!liie/s is quietness and assurance for ever*.

Ir Jsiah, xxxii. 17.

# SERMON XIV. On the MISFORTUNES of MEN being chargeable on themselves. PROVERBS, xix. 3. The foolishness of man perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord.

[ 293 ]

S E R M O N XIV.
On the MISFORTUNES of MEN being

chargeable on themselves.

PROVERBS, Xix. 3.
The foollJnefs of man petverteth his way,

and his heart fretteth againjl the Lord.
'flOW many complaints do we hear SERM.

from every quarter, of the misery xlv

and distress that fill the world! In these
the high and the low, the young and the
aged, join; and since the beginning of
time, no topic has been more fertile of
declamation, than the vanity and vexation
which man is appointed to susser. But

U 3 are

S E R M. are we certain that this vexation, and this

XW.
L_._i vanity, is altogether to be ascribed to the ap-

pointment of Heaven? Is there no ground
to fufpe&t that man himself is the chiefand
immediate author of his own sufferings?
What the text plainly suggests is, that it is
common for men to complain ground-
lefsly of Providence; that they are prone
to accuse God for the evils of life, when
in reason they ought to accuse them-
selves; and 'that after their fooljiznefs
hath perverted their way, and, made
them undergo the consequences of their
own mifcondut, they impiously fret
in heart agaitls the Lord. This is the doc-
trine which I now purpose to illustrate, in
order to silence the sceptic, and to check
a repining and irreligious spirit. I shall
for this end make some observations, first,
on the external, and next, upon the inter-
nal, condition of man; and then con-
clude with such serious and useful imn-
provement as the subjet will naturally
suggest.

I. Let

I. LET US confider the external condi-SERM.

XIV.

tion of man. We find him placed in a
world, where he has by no means the dif-
pofal of the events that happen. Calami-
ties sometimes befal the worthiet and the
best, which it is not in their power to pre-
vent, and where nothing is left them, but
to acknowledge and to iubmit to the high
hand of Heaven. For such visitations of
trial, many good and wife reasons can be
assigned, which the present subjet leads
me not to discuss. But though those una-
voidable calamities make a part, yet they
make not the chief part, of the vexations
and sorrows that distress human life. A
multitude of evils beset us, for the source
of which we must look to another quar-
ter.-No sooner has any thing in the
health, or in the circumitances of men,
gone cross to their with, than they begin
to talk of the unequal distribution of the
good things of this life; they envy the
condition of others; they repine at their
own lot, and fret against the Ruler of the
world.

U 4 Full

s E R M. Full of there sentiments, one man pines
XIV. Go,^ under a broken constitution. But let us

ask him, whether we can, fairly and ho-
neftly, assign no cause for this but the
unknown decree of Heaven? Has he duly
valued the blessing of health, and al-
ways observed the rules of virtue and ib-
briety? Has he been moderate in his life,
and temperate in all his pleasures ? If now
he be only paying the price of his former,
perhaps his forgotten, indulgences, has
he any title to complain, as if he were
suffering unjustly? Were you to survey
the chambers of sickness and difftrefs, you
would find them peopled with the victims
of intemperance and sensuality, and with
the children of vicious indolence and
sloth. Among the thousands who lan-
guifh there, you would find the propor-
tion of innocent sufferers to be small.
You would fee faded youth, premature
old age, and the profpef of an untimely
grave, to be the portion of multitudes
who, in one way or other, have brought
those evils on themselves; while yet these

martyrs

martyrs of vice and folly have the affur- SERM.

XIV.

ance to arraign the hard fate of man, and *-
to fret againfl the Lord.

But you, perhaps, complain of hard-

ships of another kind; of the injustice of
the world; of the poverty which you sus-
ser, and the discouragements under which
you labour; of the crofes and difap-
pointments of which your life has been
doomed to be full. - Before you give
too much scope to your discontent, let
me desire you to reflect impartially upon
your past train of life. Have not sloth,
or pride, or ill temper, or sinful passions,
milled you often from the path of found
and wife conduCt? Have you not been
wanting to yourselves in improving those
opportunities which Providence offered
you, for bettering and advancing your
state ? If you have chosen to indulge your
humour, or your tafre, in the gratifica-
tions of indolence or pleasure, can you
complain because others in preference to
you, have obtained thoif advantages
which naturally belong to useful labours,

and

SE R M. and honourable pursuits? Have not the

XIV.
h_, consequences of some false Iteps, into

which your passions, or your pleasures,
have betrayed you, pursued you through.
much of your life; tainted, perhaps, your
characer, involved you in embarraffinents,
or funk you into neglect ?- It is an old
faying, that every man is the artificer of
his own fortune in the world. It is cer-
tain, that the world seldom turns wholly
against a man, unless through his own
fault. Godlincfs is, in general, proftable
unto all things. Virtue, diligence, and in-
duftry, joined with good temper and pru-
dence, have ever been found the surest
road to prosperity; and where men fail
of attaining it, their want of success is
far oftener owing to their having deviat-
ed from that road, than to their hav-
ing encountered insuperable bars in it.
Some, by being too artful, forfeit the re-
putation of probity, Some, by being too
open, are accounted to fail in prudence.
Others, by being fickle and changeable,
.are difirufted by all., -The cafe comn-

monly

monly is, that men seek to ascribe their SE RM.
disappointments to any cause, rather than. XV
to their own mifcondut ; and when they
can devise no other cause, they lay them
to the charge of providence. Their folly
leads them into vices; their vices into
misfortunes; and in their misfortunes
they fret agail the Lord. They are
doubly unjutt towards God. In their pro-
fperity, they are apt to ascribe their fuc-
cess to their own diligence, rather than to
God's blessing; and in their adversity,
they impute their distresses to his provi-
dence, not to their own misbehaviour.
Whereas, the truth is the very reverse of
this. Evey) good and every peyfenc gift
comzeth from above; and of evil and misery,
man is the author to himself.

When from the condition of indivi-

duals, we look abroad to the public state
of the world, we meet with more proofs
of the truth of this assertion. We fee
great societies of men torn in pieces by
intefline dissentions, tumults, and civil
commotions. We fee mighty armies go-

ing

sE RM. ing forth, in formidable array, against

XIV.
-- ,_ each other, to cover the earth with blood,

and to fill the air with the cries of widows
and orphans. Sad evils these are, to
which this miserable world is exposed.
- But are these evils, I beseech you,
to be imputed to God? Was it he who
sent forth slaughtering armies into the
field, or who filled the peaceful city with
massacres and blood? Are there miseries
any other, than the bitter fruit of men's
violent and disorderly passions? Are they
not clearly to be traced to the ambition
and vices of princes, to the quarrels of
the great, and to the turbulence of the
people?- Let us lay them entirely out
of the account, in thinking of Providence;
and let us think only of the folliJnefs of
men. Did man controul his passions, and
form his conduat according to the dic-
tates of wisdom, humanity, and virtue,
the earth would no longer be desolated
by- cruelty; and human societies would
live in order, harmony, and peace. In
those scenes of mischief and violence

which

which fill the world, let man behold, with s E R M.

XIV.

(hame, the picture of his vices, his igno-
rance, and folly. Let him be humbled
by the mortifying view of his own per-
vefenefi; but let not his heart fret againl
the Lord.- From the external condition,
let us proceed,

II. To confider the internal state of

man. It is certain that much disquiet
and misery may be found there, although
his outward condition appear undisturbed,
and easy. As far as this inward dif-
quietude arises from the stings of con-
science, and the horrors of guilt, there
can be no doubt of its being felf-created
misery; which it is altogether impossible
to impute to Heaven. But even, when
great crimes, and deep remorse, are not
the occasions of torment, how often is
poison infused into the most flourihing
conditions of fortune, by the follies and
the passions of the prosperous? We fee
them peevish and restless; corrupted with
luxury, and enervated by ease; impatient

2 of

SE RM of the fna'left disappointment; oppressed

XiV.
-V_ with low spirits, and complaining of every

thing around them. How many Ha-
mans, Hazaels, and Herods, are there in
the world, who, from what they susser
within, pass their days in more vexation
and misery, than they who undergo the
hardships of poverty? Dare such men, in
their most discontented moments, charge
the providence of Heaven with miseries
of their own procuring? Providence had
put into thIir i;aids the fairest opportu-
nity of passing their life with comfort.
But they themselves blaited every com-
fort that was offered; and verified the
prediction, that the profpcrity of fools fiall
deJfroy tlhemn .

As it is man's own foliTJ/efs which

ruins his prosperity, we muff not omit to
remark, that it is the fame cause which
aggravates and embitters his adversity.
That you susser from the external as-
fliations of the world, may often be ow-

Prov. i, 32.

ing

ing to God's appointment; but when, in SE R M.

XIV.

the midst of these, you also susser from _
the disorders of your mind and passions,
this is owing to yourselves; and they are
those inward disorders which add the fe-
verer fting to external affliations. Many
are the resources of a good and a wife man,
under all the disasters of life. In the midst
of them, it is always in his power to en-
joy peace of mind, and hope in God. He
may susser; but under suffering he will
not fink, as long as all is found within.
But when the spirit has been wounded by
guilt and folly, its wounds open, and bleed
afresh, upon every blow that is received
from the world. The mind becomes
sensible and fore to the slightest injuries of
fortune; and a finall reverse is felt as an
insupportable calamity.

On the whole; the farther you search into

human life, and the more you observe the
manners and conduct of men, you will
be the more convinced of this great truth,
that of the distresses which abound in the

1 4 world,

S E R iI. world, we are the chief authors. Among
XIv. the multitudes who are, at this day, bewail-

ing their condition and lot, it will be found
to hold, of far the greater part, that they
are reaping the fruit of their own doings;
their iniquities are reproving them, and their
backJlidings corricSing them. Unattainable
objeds foolifily pursued, intemperate pas-
sions nourished, vicious pleasures and de-
fires indulged, God and God's holy laws for-
gotten; these, these are the great scourges
of the world; the great causes of the life
of man being so embroiled and unhappy.
God hath ordained our state on earth to
be a mixed and imperfect state. We have
ourselves to blame for its becoming an in-
supportable one. If it bring forth nothing
to us but vexation and vanity, we have
sown the feeds of that vanity and vexa-
tion; and as we have sown, we muff reap.
-I now proceed to make improvement of
those truths which we have been confider-
ing,

IN

IN the fifJ place, let us be taught, to S E R M.

look upon fin as the source of all our mi-
seies. It may sometimes assume the gent-
ler names of folly, irregularity, or levity;
but under whatever form it appears, it
always imports a deviation from that fa-
cred law which ought to regulate our
conduct. It is still the root that beareth
gall and wormnwood*; and in exac pro-
portion to the quantity of this poisonous
weed, which we ourselves have infused
into our cup, we must expect to drink the
waters of bitterness. If the foolif'nefs of
man did not pervert his ways, his heart
would have no occasion to fret agaifl tle
Lord. He would enjoy competent satis-
fation in every situation of life; and un-
der its unavoidable evils, would derive
consolation from religion and virtue.--
Indeed, of every evil which we now en-
dure, of those evils which we look upon
to be the appointment of Providence, as
well as of others, fin is ultimately the
cause; as it was man's revolt from God,

* Deu. xxix. 18.
VOL. IV. X which

S R M. which gave rife originally to those evils,
,XV. and which rendered the chastisements we

undergo, in this state of discipline, necef-
fary, even for the ons of God.- But at
present, we confine our observation to
those miseries of which men are the im-
mediate procurers to themselves; and
from them alone, we find sufficient
reason to confider fin as the capital foe
to man; as the great troubler and di:l
turber of his life. To Providence, then,
let us look up with reverence. On fin let
our indignation be vented; and, what is
of more consequence, against fin and all
its approaches, let our utmost caution be
employed. As we proceed through the
different paths of life, let us accustom our-
selves to beware of fin, as the hidden
snake lurking among the grass, from
whose fatal touch we muf fly in hafle,
if we would not experience its fting.---
Too many have no just apprehensions of
this danger. Fools, said the wife man,
make a mock at fin. A fool indeed he must
be, who dares to think lightly of it. He

.ifnews

flTews not only the depravity of his heart, E R M.

x I V.

but, what perhaps he will be more aham- n-
ed to be charged with, he flews his ig-
norance of the world. He fliews that he
knows not, he understands not, even lli;
worldly interest, nor the interest and hap-
piness of human society.

IN the econd place, let us learn fiom

what has been set forth, one of the most
awful and important of all truths, the re-
ality of a divine government exerciied
over the world. Blind must that man be
who discerns not the rmoft friking marks
of it, in the doctrine which has ben utn-
der our review. If there be a sCeptic, who
contends, that unrefirained liberty in the
gratification of delire is given to man;
that in the fight of his Creator, all aLions
are equal; and that no rule of moral con-
dua hath been prescribed, or by any pe-
nalty enforced; in order to confute fulch
a man, we have not recourse to realfn-
ings, but simply appeal to plain and ob-
vious fas. We bid him look only to

X 2 the

S E R M. the life of man; and take notice how

x-_, every vice is, by the constitution of things,

conneaed with misery. We bid him
trace the hiltory of any one, with whose
conduct he had particular occalion to be
acquainted; and observe, whether the chief
misfortunes which pursued him were not
brought upon him by his own mirbeha-
viour. We bid him remark in the hifto-
ry of nations, whether public virtue has
not always exalted them; and whether
licentioufinefs and crimes have not paved
the way for their ruin. These are tefti-
monies to the truth of religion, which can-
not by any sophistry be evaded. This
is a voice, which speaks its warnings loud
and itrong to every heart.

The system upon which the divine go-

vernment at present proceeds, plainly is,
that men's own wickedness should be ap-
pointed to corr-cd them; that finners
should befnared in the work of their hands,
and fink in the pit which thenficlves had
digged; that the backJfider in heart Jt7oitld
be filled with his own ways.-- Of all the

plans

plans which could have been devised for SERM.
the government of the world, this ap- .
proves itself to reason, as the wisest and
most worthy of God; so to frame the
constitution of things, that the divine laws
ihould in a manner execute themselves,
and carry their fanations in their own bo-
fom. When the vices of men require pu-
nifhment to be inflicted, the Almighty is
at no loss for ministers of jufice. A
thousand instruments of vengeance are at
his command; innumerable arrows are
always in his quiver. But such is the
profound wisdom of his plan, that no pe-
culiar interpofals of power are requisite.
He has no occasion to ftep from his throne,
and to interrupt the order of nature.
With that majesty and solemnity which
befits Omnipotence, He pronounces, Eph-
raim is joined to his idols; let him alone :';
He leaves transgressors to their own guilt,
and punishment follows of course. Their
fins do the work of jutlice. They lift the

* Hosea, iv. 17.

X 3 scourge;

SERM. scourge; and with every stroke which
XIv. ,--,._, they inflict on the criminal, they mix this

revere admonition, that as he is only reap-
ing the fruit of his own ations, he de-
serves all that he flffers.- From what
has been said, I might take occasion,

IN the third place, to flew the injuflice

of our charging Providence with a pro-
mifcuous and unequal distribution of its
favours, among the good and the bad.
That unequal distribution takes place in
appearance only, not in reality. The
whole condua of Providence sufficiently
marks, which of those classes of men it
blesses and protects. The prosperity of
tinners is no more than a deceitful fhowv.
The great materials of happiness are pro-
vided for the virtuous; and evil never
fails to prtiuje the wicked. I shall close the
difcourle with oblerving,

IN thefctrth, and last place, the necessity

which plainly arises from our present con-
dition, of looking up to God for direc-

o tion

lion and aid, in the conduct of life. The SERM.

XIV.

result of the whole doctrine I have now
delivered is, that man's happiness or misery
is, in a great measure, put into his own
hands. In vain he complains of Provi-
dence. If his heart fret agaifl the Lord, it
is only because hisfooliJhnefs bath perverted
his waty: for on himself, and his own be-
haviour, it depends, to be free of those
miseries which harass the wicked.-But
alas! when we fay, that this depends upon
man, on what uncertain ground do we
place his security ? Is man, when left to
himself, equal to this high trust that is re-
posed in him, this important charge that
is committed to him, of attaining happi-
ness, by wife and irreproachable condut ?
Inconstant as he is in virtue, variable in
his resolutions, soft and yielding in his
nature to a thousand temptations; how
lhall he guide himself through such flip-
pery and dangerous paths as those of hu-
man life; where many hidden precipices
surround him; many false lights lead him
afiray; and where the confcquence of

X 4 every

S E R M. every ftep he takes may be deftrudion and
AlV.

,--. ruin ?-Thankful let us be to Heaven,

that in this situation, a merciful guide
stretches out his hand to aid us; that a
celestial light Ihines upon us from above;
that a divine Spirit is promised to illumi-
nate' and strengthen us. Let us humbly re-
quest of Heaven, that this Spirit of the Al-
mighty may ever be our guide; never pre-
fumptoufly trusting in our own wisdom;
but listening attentively to the voice of God;
and in all our ways acklowledging Him who
only can dire7 ourJleps.--Upon the whole,
let us hold fal tlhe perfualion of these
fundamental truths;-that in all his dif-
penfations, God is just and good; that the
cause of all the troubles we susser is in
ourselves, not in him; that virtue is the
surest guide to a happy life; that he who
forsakes this guide, enters upon the path
of death; hut that he who walketh up-
rightly, walketh surely; and that he who
keepeth the commandment, keepeth his own
foul.

# SERMON XV. On INTEGRITY as the GUIDE of LIFE. PROVERBS, xi. 3. The integrity of the upright shall guide them. —

t 313 1

SERMON XV.
On INTEGRITY as the GUIDE of LIFE,

PROVERBS, xi. 3.
the integrity of the upright Jhall guide

them.-
R IGHTEOUSNESS and fin are, in this SERM.

book of Proverbs, frequently con- XV

trafed with each other, and the advan-
tages of the former displayed. The righte-
ous man is shewn to be more excellent
than his neighbour, as the ways in which he
walks are ways of pleasantness, while the
way of tranfgrefors is hard. Honour is
represented as attending the one, while

fhatme

SERM. thame is the portion of the other. The

XV.

- path of the one leads to life; that of the

other to deftrution. In the text, an ad-
vantage of righteousness is specified,
which is not commonly attended to, and
which some will not readily allow that it
pofeflfes. We are told by the wife man,
that it affords light and direction to con-
dut, and will prove our best guide
through all the intricacies of life. The
integrity of the upright fJall guide them; or,
as it is added, to the fame purpose, in a fol-
lowing verse, the rightcozflcfi of the perfct
Jfall direcS his vway. There are many who
will admit, that integrity is an amiable qua-
lity; that it is entitled to much refped, and
in moif cafes ought to influence our beha-
viour; who nevertheless are unwilling to
allow it the chief place in the direction of
their worldly condut. They hold, that
a certain artful sagacity, founded upon
knowledge of the world, is the best ccn-
dutor of every one, who would be a fuc-
cefsful adventurer in life; and that a ftri&
attention to integrity, as his only guide,

would

would often lead him into danger and dif- s E R M.
trcfs. In opposition to tenets of this .v
kind, I now purpose to shew, that amidit
all perplexities and dangers, there is no
guide we can choose so safe, and so success-
ful on the whole, as the integrity of an
upright mind; and that upon every try-
ing occasion, principles of probity and ho-
nour will condua a good man through
life with more advantage, than if he were
to ad upon the most refined system of
worldly wisdom.

IT will not take much time to delineate

the charadler of the man of integrity, as
by its nature it is a plain one, and ealily
underflood. He is one, who makes it his
constant rule to follow the road of duty,
according as the word of God, and the
voice of his conscience, point it out to him.
I-Ie is not guided merely by affections,
which may Iometimes give the colour of
virtue to a loose and unstable characer.
The upright man is guided by a fixed
principle of mind, which dctcrmines hinL

to

SE R M. to efieem nothing but what is honour-

xv.
__^ able; and to abhor whatever is base and

unworthy, in moral conduct. Hence you
find him ever the fame; at all times, the
trusty friend, the affectionate relation, the
conscientious man of business, the pious
worshipper, the public spirited citizen.
He assumes no borrowed appearance. He
seeks no mask to cover him ; for he ads
no itudied part; but he is in truth what
he appears to be, fill of truth, candour,
and humanity. In all his pursuits, he
knows no path but the fair and diret
one; and would much rather fail of fuc-
cess, than attain it by reproachful means.
He never fllews you a smiling counte-
nance, while he meditates evil against
you in his heart. He never praises you
among your friends; and then joins in
traducing you among your enemies. You
will never find one part of his charaaer
at variance with another. In his man-
ners, he is simple and unaffected ; in all his
proceedings, open and confiftent.-Such is
the man of integrity spoken of in the

text.

text. Let us now proceed to shew, in what SERM.

XV.

manner, and with what effet, integrity ,_
fcrves for the guide of his life.

EVERY one, who has begun to make

any progress in the world, will be feiifible,
that to conduCt himself in human affairs,
with wisdom and propriety, is often a mat-
ter of no finall difficulty. Amidst that
variety of characters, of jarring difpofi-
tions, and of interfering interests, which
take place among those with whom we
have intercourse, we are frequently at a
stand, as to the part moRs prudent for us
to choose. Ignorant of what is passing
in the breasts of those around us, we can
form no more than doubtful conjetures
concerning the events that are likely to
happen. They may take some turn alto-
gether different from the course in which
we had imagined they were to run, and
according to which we had formed our
plans. The slightest incident often {hoots
out into important consequences, of which
we were not aware. The labyrinth be-

comes

SERM. comes so intricate, that the most sagacious

XV.

can lay hold on no clue to guide him
through it: He finds himself embarrassed,
and at a loss how to ad.-In public and
in private life, in managing our own con-
cerns, and in directing those of others,
the doubt flarted by the wife man fre-
quently occurs; iJVho knowet z what is
good!for man il this Ife ? While thus fa-
tigued with conjedure, we remain per-
plexed and undetermined in our choice;
we are at the fame time pulled to diffe-
rent fides, by the various emotions which
belong to our nature. On one hand, plea-
sure allures us to what is agreeable ; on
the other, interest weighs us down to-
wards what seems gainful. Honour at-
trads us towards what is fplcndid; and
indolence inclines us to what is cafy. In
the consultations which we hold with our
own mind, concerning our conduc, how
often are we thus divided within ourfelvcs;
puzzled by the uncertainty of future
events, and distracted by the contest of
different inclinations

It

It is in such situations as these, that the S E R M.

XV.

principle of integrity interpoles to give
light and direction. While worldly men
fluntuate in the midRt of thole perplexi-
ties which I have described, the virtuous
man has one Oracle, to which he resorts in
every dubious cafe, and whose decisions
he holds to be infallible: He consults his
conscience. Ie listens to the voice of
God. Were it only on a few occasions
that this Oracle could be confltlted, its
value would be less. But it is a mistake
to imagine, that its Responses are seldom
given. Hardly is there any ma'erial tranf-
action whatever in human life, any im-
portant question, that holds us in suspense
as to practice, but the difference between
right and wrong will siew itself; and the
principle of integrity will, if we liften to
it impartially, give a clear decision.
Whenever the mind-is divided within it-
self, conscience is seldom or never neutral.
There is always one fide or other to which
it leans. There is always one scale of the
balance, into which it throws the weight

of

SERM. of fame virtue; or some praJe; of some-

xv.
__, thing that isjuji and true, lovely, boneJt, and

of good report. These are the forms, which
rife to the observation of the upright
man. By others they may be unseen, or
overlooked; but in his eye, the lustre
of virtue outshines all other brightnesss
Wherever this pole star direcs him, he
fleadily holds his course.- Let the if-
sue of that course be ever so uncertain;
let his friends differ from him in opi-
nion; let his enemies clamour; he is not
moved; his purpose is fixed. He asks
but one question of his heart, What is the
most worthy and honourable part; what
is the part most becoming the station
which he possesses, the characer which
he wishes to bear, the expectations which
good men entertain of him ? Being once
decided as to this, he hesitates no more.
He shuts his ears against every folicita-
tion. He pursues the direa line of inte-
grity, without turning either to the right
hand or to the left. " It is the Lord who
" calleth. Him I follow. Let him or-

14 " der

" der what feemeth good in his fight." SE RM.

XV.

-- It is in this manner that the integrity _
of the tupright ads as their guide.

BUT as, upon a superficial view, it may

appear hazardous to place ourfclves en-
tirely under such a guide, let us now
proceed to confider what can be said
in defence of this plan of conduct,
and what advantages serve to recom-
mend it.

In thefty7 place, I affirm, that the guid-

ance of integrity is the safest under which
we can be placed; that the road in which
it leads us is, upon the whole, the freeit
from dangers. PerseEt immunity from
danger is not to be expected in this life.
We can choose no path, in which we may
not meet with disappointments and mif-
fortunes. Our life, at the best, is a pil-
grimage, and perils surround it. Againfl
these perils, the men of the world imagine
that craft and dexterity furnish the best
defence; and if, in any instance, they
over-reach the upright, they confider it as

Vor. IV. Y a mani-

sSERM. a manifest decision in favour of their

.XV plan. But instead of refting on a few

instances, let us take an extensive survey
of the course of human affairs. Let us
inquire who the persons are that, in all
the different lines of life, have gone
through the world with most success;
and we ihall find, that the men of probity
and honour form by far the most con-
fiderable part of the lift; we shall find
that men of plain understanding, acding
upon fair and diret views, have much
oftener prospered, than men of the deep-
eft policy, who were devoid of principle.
How few are the inflances of persons who
by fidelity, worth, and stedfast adherence
to their duty, have either loft their for-
tunes, or incurred general displeasure, in
times when human affairs were proceed-
ing in their ordinary train? But how nu-
merous and frequent are the examples of
those whose profpecs have been blasted,
whose circumstances have been ruined,
and their names funk into contempt by
vice and dishonesty ?

The

The man of the world aims at higher S ER M.

things, and more rapid success, than the __
man of moderation and \irtue. But, at
the fame time, he incurs greater rilques
and dangers. No calculation of proba-
bilities can ensure safety to h;m who is
ating a deceitful part. Amidst the un-
foreseen vicissitudes of the world, he has
to dread not only difapp)intment to his
plans, but the miseries allo which detect-
ed fallacies may bring on his head. He
walks on the edge of precipices, where a
single false ftep may be fatal. He fol-
lows a wandering light, which if it fail
of guiding him by a ihort path to the pa-
lace of ambition, lands him in the tpit, or
the lake. Whereas he who follows the
guidance of integrity, walks in the high
road on which the light of the fun shines.
He fees before him the habitation of peace
to which his steps are directed; and if he
be longer of arriving at it, he is sure of
neither wandering far astray, nor of meet-
ing on his road with any forms of unu-
fual terror.- Let it be always rememr

Y 2 bered

S E R M. bered that the principle of integrity which

direts a good man, is far from excluding
prudence in the conduct of life. It im-
plies no improvident or thoughtless fim-
plicity. On the contrary, it is closely
conneced with true wisdom. A man of
enlarged capacity, and extensive views, is
always upright. Craft is merely the sup-
plement of inferior abilities. It charac-
terizes a narrow comprehension, and a little
mind.-As the path of integrity is on the
whole the safest path of conduct; so,

IN the ficond place, it is unquestionably

the most honourable. Integrity is the
foundation of all that is high in characer
among mankind. Other qualities may add
to its splendor; but if this essential requisite
be wanting, all their lustre fades. Were I
drawing the character of one who claimed
the admiration of the world; and after I
had ascribed to him eloquence, valour,
and every endowment that is most shining
and captivating, did I add, that he was a
man of too much art to be trusted, I ap-

peal

peal to every one, whether, by this single SERM.

XV.

stroke, the whole character would not be .v-.
funk and degraded? An interested and
crafty man may perhaps rife into influ-
ence and high ltation; he may be a rich
and a powerful, but will never be a great,
man. He may be feared, and externally
honoured and courted; but in the secret
thoughts of men he finds no refpecd.
We all fee!, that magnanimous ientiments
cannot dwell in the fame breast with fel-
fifhnefs and deceit.

He who refts upon an internal principle

of virtue and honour, will at with a dig-
nity and a boldness, of which they are in-
capable who are wholly guided by interest.
He is above those timid suspicions, and
cautious restraints, which fetter and em-
barrafs their conduCt. That firmness
which the consciousness of recitude in-
spires, gives vigour and force to his exer-
tions on every great occasion. It adds dou-
ble weight to all the abilities of which he is
possessed. It even supplies the place of those
abilities in which he is defective. They

Y 3 who

s E R M. who oppose him are obliged to honour him,

XV.
_ ,They look up to him with a secret awe, as

to one who moves above them in a superior
sphere; regardless of their good or ill opi-
nion, of their promises or their threaten-
ings; like one of those celeRial luminaries
which holds its course through its orbit,
without being affedled by any commo-
tions among the elements below. Such a
man is trusted, and relied upon, as well as
esteemed, because all know where to find
him, and upon what fy[tem he ads. He
attaches friends and followers to himself,
without courting them; and though his
progress towards fame should be flow,
and interrupted at first by crooked arts,
it is nevertheless certain and lure. The
public may be milled for a while, in judg-
ing of real merit; but it is seldom unjust
at the lait. As lerfons continue to come
forward to view, and to ad their part in
trying circumptances, their characers are
at length fully ascertained; and, almost
always, rated as they deserve. How cor-
rupt soever the world may be, they can-

not

not with-hold approbation from him, whose SER M.

XV.

conduc is marked by uniform integrity .
and honour. Enemies he will have; but
the public favours him; the multitude of
men wish him success; and destine him,
in their thoughts, to every ftep of his pre-
ferment, before he arrives at it.

IN the third place, the plan of conduct

on which the man of integrity proceeds
is the most comfortable; that is, attended
with the greatest fatisfadion in a man's
own mind. Amidif the various and per-
plexing events of life, it is of singular ad-
vantage to be kept free from doubt, as to
the part most proper to be chosen. He
who consults nothing but worldly in-
terest muff, upon every turn of fortune,
undergo much painful suspense. He is
obliged to liften with anxious ear to every
whisper of report; and upon every new
afpedt which the face of affairs assumes,
must study how to place himself in a new
posture of defence. Bit the man of prin-
ciple is a firanger to these inward trou-

Y 4 bles.

S E RM. bles. His time is not loft, nor his temr

xv.
L-y_ per fretted, by long and anxious confulta-

tions. One light always flines upon him
from above. One path, the path of inte-
grity, always opens clear and diftindt to
his view.-But this is not his only advan-
tage, to be freed from embarrassments, by
having placed himself under the charge of
one constant guide, He is also rewarded
with the sense of having chosen his guide
well and wifely. He is delivered from all
inward upbraidings, from all misgivings
of mind, from all alarms founded on the
dread of discovery and disgrace. A good
conscience enables him to look back on
the part which he has aded, with satis-
faction; and to look forward to the iflue
which it may bring, without concern. It
is in the cafe of one ifile only, that the
man who acs from worldly interest can
enjoy fatisfadion; that is, when his de-
signs have succeeded according to his wish.
But it is the felicity of the man, who ads
under the direcion of integrity, that in
every issue, he has something to comfort

I him,

him. Though success has failed him, the sERM.
consolation remains of having done his X..
duty, and studied to approve himself to
God.

This reference of all his acions to di-

vine approbation, furnishes another bource
of fatisfalion and peace. He looks up,
with plealing hope, to a Protetor in the
heavens, who lovelt rigbteoyfsli, and whrofe
coultenance belholdeth the upright. The man
of vworldly widom is conscious of having
no title to the favour of that high admini-
firation which rules the universe. By
quitting the path of righteousness, he has
left that firaight road, in which God had
appointed him to walk. He has taken the
direction of his way to hinifelf; and cho-
fen to be his own guide and master. To
his own abilities, therefore, such as they'
are, he mufft trust; and is become wholly
responsible for the issue of his conduct.
But the man of virtue hath committed his
w,.ay to the Lord. He follows the divine
signal. He co-operates with the divine
purpose. The power which sways the

universe

S E R M. universe is engaged on his fide. By natu-

xv.
_ ral consequence, he has ground to exped,

that any teeming disappointments which
he may now incur, ihall be over-ruled at
the end to some salutary effect. Hence,
that peace of God keeping the heart, to which
worldly men are frangers. Hence a de-
gree of firmness and resolution in condut,
which it is impossible for them to possess.
Especially when we add,

IN thefourth and last place, that he who

thus pursues a course of integrity, has al-
ways in his view the profpe&t of immor-
tal rewards. That surely is the w;feft di-
recion of condud, which is most amply
recompenfed at last. But what recom-
pence can worldly wisdom beflow, com-
parable to what is promised by the gof-
pel to them who, by patient continuance in
iwell doing, look for glory, honour, and imnmor-
tality?-The recompence indeed is distant;
but the hope of it is present; and hope is
one of the most powerful principles of hu-
man adion. Let a man be firm in the

2 belief

belief that he is adting under the im- SE R M.
mediate protection of Heaven, and that xL
through all eternity he shall be rewarded
for what he now performs; and, as far
as this belief is prevalent, his conducl will
be steady and dctermited. Wherever re-
ligion di cas him to hold his course, he
will advance with intrepidity. He will
submit to reftraiilts without reluCtance.
He will meet dangers without fear. To
every motive which reason fuggefis in fa-
vour of virtue, the hope of life eternal
adds supernatural ftrength.-Accordingly,
in the behaviour of many holy men, un-
der the most trying circumstances of dif-
trefs, we behold this effeCt eminently ex-
emplilied. It appears, with much Inftre,
in the spirited and magnanimous senti-
ments of the Apostle Paul, when he had
the profpea of death before him. Beh6Id
1. go bound in the spirit to JeTru/lk, not
knowing the things that Janll bcfil nm there,
Jfav that the H6l, GhJof witneji'tf thct
bonds and affli7ions abide me. But nolc of
thefJ things move Ine; neither count I my

life

S E R M. life dear unto myfctf, so that I ,nay fiJiJ7. uy

xv.
X., coiurfe with joy `.- I am now readly to

be ofered, and the time of ,my, departure is
at hand. I have fought a good fght; I
have finJfled my corse; I have kelpt the
faith. Henceforth tlire is laid up fo-r mc a
crown of rigbJteofiiefi, wihich the Lord, the
righteous Judge, Jhall give eic at that da7 -'.

THUS I have endeavoured to fllew in

what manner the integrity of the upright
guides them; and what the advantages
are of placing ourselves under its guid-
ance. If it be the line of safety, or the
line of honour, which we choole to pur-
sue; if we consult our present comfort,
or look forward to future rewards; in all
these refpeas, the course which integrity
points out is by far the most eligible.

It is a great recommendation of the guid-

ance offered to us by integrity, that it is
easily understood by all men. Plans of
worldly policy are deep and intricate;

'* As, xx; 22.
2 2 Timothy, iv. 6.

and

and experience shews how often the ablest S E R M.

XV.

persons are mistaken in the measures -.
which they adopt for carrying them on.
But when men's intentions are fair and
upright, it will be found, that a moderate
ihare of understanding and attention is
all that is requisite, for conducting them-
selves with 1afety and propriety. Provi-
dence never intended, that the art of liv-
ing happily in this world flhold depend
on that deep penetration, that acute saga-
city, and those refinements of thought,
which few posiess. It has dealt more
graciously with us; and made happiness
to depend on uprightness of intention,
much more than on extent of capacity.
For the most part, the first sentiment
which strikes a good man, concerning
what he ought or ought not to do, is the
soundest, and suggests the best and wisest
counsel. When he hesitates, and begins
to deliberate how far his duty, or his ho-
nour, can be reconciled to what teems his
interest, he is on the point of deviating
into a dangerous path.- At the fame

time,

SER M. time, it is of great consequence, that he

xv.
l -_ who seeks to surrender his conduct to the

diretion of integrity, should be well ap-
prized of what true integrity requires.
Let him guard againfl burdening con-
science unnecessarily; left a fuperltitious re-
gard to trifles lead him to relax in mat-
ters of higher obligation. Let him avoid
minute scrupulosity, on the one hand.
Let hiin keep at a distance from loose ca-
fuiftry, on the other. But when he is fa-
tisfied that his conscience has been well
informed, let him, without wavering, ad-
here to its dictates in the whole of his
conduCt. This will prove the truest wis-
dorn both for this world and the next.
For he who walketh uprightly walketh
fitrely. The path of thejlfl is as the flining
light: And it fllall JJine more and more unto
theperfe7 day.

# SERMON XVI. On SUBMISSION to the DIVINE WILL. JOB, ii. 10. — Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?

[ 335 1

S E R M ON XVI.
On SUBMISSION to the DIVINE SWILL,

JOB, ii. 1o.
-Shall we receive good at the hand of

God, andJhall we not receive evil?
FEW fubjeEs of religious exhorta- S RM

tion are of more general concern XVI.

than those which refpeat the distresses
incident to human life. For no so-
ciety, no family, no person, can ex-
pea to be long exempted from them;
and when we speak of the prosperous,
we can only mean those who are more
rarely subjec to them than others. Now,

under

SE R M. under those diftreifes, religion perform:

XVI.
-v--i two offices: it teaches us how we ought

to bear them; and it assists us in thus
bearing them. Materials for both are
found in the words of the tcxt, which
contain a sentiment so natural and just,
as to carry conviction to every reasonable
mind. They were the words of Job, at
a time when, to his other calamities, this
domeflic affiicion was added, that one,
who ought to have afluaged and soothed
his sorrows, provoked his indignation by
an impious speech. Thou fpeakeJt, Job re-
plies, as one of the foolij7 womenJfpcalkth:
Whatt ? fJall we receive good at the band
of God, and fJ7all we not receive evil?
Three inftrutions naturally arise from the
text: First, That this life is a mixed state
of good and evil: Secondly, That both
the goods and the evils in it proceed from
God: And, thirdly, That there are just
reasons for our receiving with patience
the evils of life, from the fame hand
which bestows its goods.

I. THIS

I. TiII life is a mixed state of good SERM.

XVI.

and evil. This is a matter of fad, which .- ..
will be denied by none, and on which it
is not necessary to bestow much illuftra-
tion. It is evident to the slightest infpec-
tion, that nothing here is unallayed and
pure. Every man's state is checquered
with alternate griefs and joys, disappoint-
ment and success. No condition is alto-
gether flable. No life preserves always
the fame tenor. The vicissitudes of the
world sometimes bring forward the as-
flited into more comfortable circumstances;
and often trouble the joy of the pro-
fperous. This is the train in which hu-
man affairs have ever been found to pro-
ceed; and in which we may expet them
always to go on.

But though this be universally admit-

ted in speculation, and often confessed in
discourse, the misfortune is, that few think
of applying it to their own cafe. The
bulk of mankind discover as much confi-
dence in prosperity, and as much impa-
tience under the least reverse, as if Pro-

VOL. IV. Z vidence

SERM. vidence had first given them assurance
xv'.

that their prosperity was never to change,
and afterwards had cheated their hopes.
Whereas, what reason ought to teach us,
is, to adjust our mind to the mixed fate
in which we find ourselves placed; never
to presume, never to despair; to be thank-
ful for the goods which at present we en-
joy, and to expect the evils that may fuc-
ceed.-Thou haft been admitted to partake
of the feast of life. Its good things are
difiributed, in various portions, among the
guests. Thou haft had thine allotted
share. Complain not, when thy portion
is removed. It is not permitted to any
one, to remain always at the banquet.

II. VW are taught by the text, that both

the goods and the evils which compose
this mixed state, come from the hand of
God. A little refletion may convince
us, that in God's world, neither good nor
evil can happen by chance. If there were
any one moment, in which God quitted
the reins of the universe, and suffered any

power

power to intcrfere with his adminiftra- S E R M
tion, it is evident, that, from that moment, XV.
the measures of his government must be-
come disjointed and incomplete. He
who governs all things, must govern con-
tinually; and govern the least things as
well as the greatest. He neveir Jiumbers
nor Jeeps. There are no void spaces, no
broken plans, in his adminiliration; no
blefings that drop upon us without his
intention; nor any crofles that visit us,
unsent by him. Iam the Lord, and there
is none efe. I form iCh light, and create
darkne/s. I make peace, and create evil. I
the Lord do all thbe things:.

How it has come to pass, that this life

fliould contain such a mixture of goods
and evils, and that the mixture too should
be of God's appointment, gives rife to a
difficult inquiry. For how can any thing
but what is good proceed from the God
of love? Can darkness issue from the
source of light? or can it be any satis-

* Iaiah, xlv. 6, 7.

Z 2 facfion

s E R M. fadtion to the Father of imercies, to behold
XV_, the sorrows of creatures whom he has

made ?-Here there was room for much
perplexity, till revelation informed us, that
the mixture of evils in man's estate is ow-
ing to man himself. Had he continued
as God originally made him, he would
have received nothing but good from his
Creator. His apostasy and corruption
opened the gates of the tabernacle of
darkness. Misery issued forth, and has
ever since pursued him. In the present
condition of his nature, that misery is
partly punishment, partly trial. He is
become incapable of bearing uninter-
rupted prosperity; and by the mixture
of evils in his lot, merciful designs are
carried on for his improvement and reftora-
tion.

What the text leads us at present to cons

fider is, the effet that will follow from
imitating the example of Job, and refer-
ing to the hand of the Almighty, the evils
which we susser, as well as the goods which
we enjoy. Such a reference of the dif-

trefsful

trefsful events of our life to the appoint- s E R M.
ment of Heaven, not only is a duty XV
which piety requires, but tends also to
mitigate distress, and to suggest confo-
lation. For to dwell, as is too commonly
done, upon the instruments and fubor-
dinate means of our trouble, is fre-
quently the cause of much grief, and
much fin. When we view our fifferings
as proceeding merely from our fellow-
creatures, the part which they have ased
in bringing them upon us, is often more
grating than the suffering itself. The
unreasonableness, perhaps, of an enemy,
the treachery of a friend, the ingratitude
or insolence of one whom we had much
obliged, add weight to a load laid upon
us by means so provoking. The thoughts
of their malignity, or of our own neglect
in guarding against it, serve to poison
the fore. Whereas, if instead of looking
to men, we beheld the cross as coming
from God, these aggravating circum-
stances would assec us less; we would
feel no more than our proper burden;

Z 3 we

SER M. we would submit to it more patiently;
XVI. ixv. and many resources would open to us, as

ihall in a little be flcewn, from thinking
of the hand that lays it on. Had Job,
when despoiled of all his fubflance, thought
of nothing but the Chaldeans and Sabeans
who robbed him, with what violent pas-
sions would he have been transported, and
with what cager desires of revenge tor-
mented ? Whereas, confidering them as
rods and instruments only in the divine
hand, and receiving the correction as from
the Almighty himself, the tumult of his
mind subsided; and with refpedful com-
pofure he could fay, The Lord gave; and
the Lord hath taken away : Bleffd be the
name of the Lord. This leads me,

III. To confider the las, and most im-

portant inftruLion, arising from the text;
namely, that there are many reasons why
we, who receive good from the hand of
God, should receive with patience the
evils which he is pleated to inflict. This
is strongly conveyed by that interroga-

tory

tory form of speech, in which the senti- SERM.
ment of Job is expressed: What ? Jhall we XVI
receive good at the band of God, and fJall
we not receive evil? In order to unfold all
that is contained in this appeal made to
every man's conscience, let us confider,

IN the sirs place, that the good things

which God has bestowed, afford sufficient
evidence for our believing, that the evils
which he fends, are not caufelefsly or wan-
tonly inflicted. Did we live in a world
which bore the marks of a malicious or
cruel governor, there might be reason for
distrusting every ftep of his conduCt. But
in the world which we inhabit, we behold,
on the contrary, plain marks of predomi-
nant goodness. We behold the ftrucure of
the universe, the order of nature, the gene-
ral course of Providence, obviously arranged
with a benevolent regard to the welfare of
men. All the art and contrivance of which
the divine works are full, point to this
end; and the more they are explored,
create the firmer belief, that the good-

Z 4 ness

SERM. ness of the Deity gave rife to the sys-
, -.j tern of creation. What is the conclu-

sion to be thence drawn, but that in such
parts of the divine adminiitration as ap-
pear to us harsh and revere, the fame good-
ness continues to preside, though exercised
in a hidden and mysterious manner?

Let me desire you to confider, whether,

if some powerful friend had placed you
in an opulent and comfortable station,
and, in the general condua of your affairs,
had discovered the most disinterested kind-
ness, you would not ascribe any occasional
discouragements you received, to some un-
known reason or cause, rather than to his
unfaithfulness or cruelty? Ought not the
experience which we have had, and the
discovery which all nature affords, of the
divine goodness, to lead us to put a like con-
ftrucion on the evils which we susser
from a hand that hath so frequently load-
ed us with good ?- Have we forgotten,
in the midst of our complaints, who
brought us unto the light of day; who
watched over our helpless infancy; who

reared

reared our growing childhood; and S E R M.
through ten thousand surrounding dan- XVI.
gers, has been our proteCtor and guardian
until this day ? How often has he rescued
us from sickness and death, and made
our hearts glad with unexpeted com-
forts? Now, that some cloud is thrown
over our prosperity, or some blefming
withdrawn, in which for a time we had
rejoiced, can we imagine that there is no
good cause for this change of his pro-
ceeding? Shall we fufpec that his nature
is entirely altered ? Hath God forgotten to
be gracious ? Hatb he in anger jhut up
his tender mercies ? No, let us fay with
the Psalmist, This is my infirmity ; but I
will remember the Iworks of the Lord. I
will rememnber the years of the right hand
of the Molf High ".- One signal work
of the Most High, at leat, let us remember,
and rejoice in the remembrance of it;
even that final remedy which he has
provided for all the evils occasioned by

* Ps. Ixxvii. 9, lo.

fin,

SERM,. fin, in the redemption of the world
XvI. accomplished by Jesus Christ. He u'who

spared not his own Son, but delivered himn up
for us all, will he, in; any cafe, wantonly
afflia the children of men with superfluous
and unnecessary sorrows ? Is not this a
proof so fatisfafory, so express and demon-
firative, of the gracious purposes of God,
as ihould dispose us to take in good part,
every thing which proceeds from him?
Confider,

IN thefecond place, that the good things

we receive from God are undeserved, the
evils we susser are justly merited. Every
reasonable person mufl feel the weight of
this consideration, for producing patience
and submission. For, though to susser at
any rate be grievous, yet to susser unjust-
ly, is doubly galling. Whereas, when
one receives a mixed portion, whereof the
goods are above his deserts, and the evils
below his deserts, to complain, in such a
cafe, is unreasonable; there is more
ground for being thankful. All, it is

true,

true, have not deserved evil equally. Yet S ERM.

XVI.

all of us deserve it more or less; and to v-
merit good at the hand of the Lord, is
what none of us can pretend. At the belt
we are but unprofitablefrvants. Even this is
more than we are entitled to claim. For
if God were to enter into jludgment witlh
us, who could stand before him ? who
could justify himself in his fight? When
the most inoffensive compare their con-
duc with God's holy law; when they re-
flec upon the duties they have omitted,
and the actual guilt they have contracted,
they will find more realbn to accuse them-
selves, than to complain of the divine
chastisement. Whatever innocence any
of us may plead, nay, whatever merit we
may claim, with respect to men and the
world, we susser no more than what we
deserve from the Governor of the world;
and of his difpleafiure, we know that the
wrath of man is no other than the infiru-
ment.

Not only all of us have done evil, but,
what ought to be particularly attended

to,

S E R M. to, God has a just title to punish us for it.

XVI.
rryJ Although a man know that he defervcs

punishment, yet he will not allow every
one to infliEt it. A child will submit to his
parents, a servant to his mafler, a subjed to
the magistrate, when he would not bear
correcion from another hand. But no pa-
rent can have so complete a right to autho-
rity over his children, no master over his
servants, no magistrate over his subjeCts, as
the Almighty hath over us. When we
were born, we brought nothing with us
into God's world. During our conti-
nuance in it, we have lived on the good
things which God was pleased to lend
us; and of which, God and our own con-
science know that we have made but a
sorry improvement. When he thinks
proper to take any of them away, no
wrong is done us; for they were not
ours. To have enjoyed them so long, was
a favour. To enjoy them always, was
what we neither deserved, nor had any
title to expec.

Ix

iN the third place, the good things SERM.

which at different times we have received XVI
and enjoyed, arc much greater than the
evils which we fuffcr. Of this fae, I am
sensible it will be difficult to persuade the
afflited. But would they weigh, in a fair
balance, the whole of their circumstances,
they would find it true. Whatever per-
sons feel at the present, makes so firong
an impreflion upon them, as very com-
monly to obliterate the memory of all the
past. When one is oppressed with some
painful disease in his body, or wrung with
some fore difirefs of mind, every former
comfort, at that moment, goes for nothing.
Life is beheld in all its gloom. A dark
cloud seems to hang over it; and it is re-
viled, as no other than a scene of wretch-
ednefs and sorrow. But this is to be un-
just to human life, as well as ungrateful
to its author.-Let me only desire you
to think how many days, how many
months, how many years, you have passed
in health, and ease, and comfort; how
many pleasurable feelings you have had;

how

s EvM how many friends you have enjoyed;
A-r_ how many blessings, in short, of differ-

ent kinds you have tailed; and you will
be forced to acknowledge, that more ma-
terials of thanksgiving present themselves
than of lamentation and complaint.-
These blessings, you will fay, are pail.
But though past, ought they to be gone
from your remembrance ? Do they merit
no place, in the comparative estimate of
the goods and evils of your ltate ? Did
you, could you, expect, that in this muta-
ble world, any temporal joy was to last
for ever ? Has gratitude no influence to
form your minds to a calm acquiescence
in your benefator's appointments ? What
can be more reasonable than to fay, " Hav-
" ing in former times received so many
"good things from the hand of God,
" hall I not now, without murmuring,'
" receive the few evils which it pleases
"him to fend?"

IN thefourth place, not only the goods
of life are upon the whole greater than

7 its

its evils; but the evils which we susser SERM.
are seldom, or never, without some mix- xvl.
ture of good. As there is no condition
on earth of pure unmixed felicity, to there
is none so miserable, as to be destitute of
every comfort. Entire and complete mi-
fery, if ever it take place, is of our own
procuring, not of God's fending. None
but the most gross and atrocious finners
can be in such a Situation, as to discover
no ray of relief or hope. In the ordi-
nary distresses of life, it is generally our
own folly and infirmity which, upon the
loss of some one blessing that we had
highly prized, deprives us of satisfaCtion
in all other things. Many of our cala-
mities are purely imaginary, and felf-cre-
ated; arising from rivalflip or competi-
tion with others, and from false opinions
of the importance of objects, to which
custom and fashion have annexed an ideal
value. Were these mistaken opinions
once corrected by reason, the evil would
disappear, and contentment would resume
its place. With refpet to those calami-

ties

SE R M. tes which are inflided by God, his Pro-

XVI.
_ vidence has made this wife and merciful

constitution, that, after the first shock, the
burden by degrees is lightened. Time
brings a gentle and powerful opiate to all
misfortunes. What is very violent can-
not last long; and what lasts long we be-
come accustomed to bear. Every situation
that is permanent, at length is felt to be
tolerable. The mind accommodates it-
self to it; and by degrees regains its
usual tranquillity. Hence the greatest part
of the evils of life are more terrible in the
previous apprehension, than in the aQual
feeling; and it seldom happens but, in
one corner or other, something is found
on which the mind can lay hold for its
relief.

How many, for instance, do we behold

around us, straitened in their worldly
circumstances, and yet finding the means
to live cheerfully, with poverty and peace
in the fame habitation? If we are de-
prived of friends whom we tenderly loved,
are there not still some remaining, from

6 whom

whom we may expea much comfort? If s R 1l.

XVI.

our bodies are afflited with fore disease, _,
have we not reaobn to be thankful that
our mind continues vigorous and entire;
that we are in a situation to look around
us for whatever can afford us ease; and
that after the decay of this frail and moul-
dering tabernacle, we can look forward to
a horse not made with hands, eternal in the
iheavcns ?-In the midst of all difrefes,
there remains to every sincere Christian,
that mixture of pure and genuine confo-
lation, which springs from the promises
and hopes of the gospel. Confider, I be-
feech you, what a singularly happy dif-
tindion this makes in your situation, be-
yond the state of those who, under the va-
rious troubles of life, are left without hope,
and without God in the world; without
any thing to look to, but a train of un-
known causes and accidents, in which
they fee no light nor comfort.-Thank
the Father of mercies, that into all the
evils he fends, he infuses this joyful hope,
that the fferings of the prefest time are

VOL. IV. A a not

S E R M. not wiorthy to be compared icith the gloy

XVI.
a_^ that fiall be revealed in the end, to the

virtuous and good.

IN the fiftb and last place, as the evils

which we susser are thus alleviated by a
mixture of good; so we have reason to
believe, that the evils themselves are, in
many refpeds, good. When borne with
patience and dignity, they improve and
ennoble our character. They bring into
exercise several of the manly and heroic
virtues; and by the constancy and fide-
lity with which we support our trials on
earth, prepare us for the highest rewards
in heaven.-It has always been found,
that the present confitution of human na-
ture cannot bear uninterrupted profperi-
ty, without being corrupted by it. The
poisonous weeds which spring up in that
too luxuriant foil, require the hand of ad-
verfity to extirpate them. It is the expe-
rience of sorrow and distress that subdues
the arrogance of pride, tames the violence
of passion, softens the hardness of the self-

fiih

fifl heart, and humanizes the temper to s E RM.

XVI.

fcl lor the woes of others. Many have --
had reaion to laIy that it was good for them
to be aflirt7cd . lVhen men tal,' the tim-
brel and the harp, nd

h d rejoice at the found of

/the 0or,', they are apt to Jiii' unto God,
D)part fjicm uls, fOr 'Ic we c' not teb khnow-
:!,'e of t hy~, wa'., [17Iat is the Almighty
lthat we JhoIuhfl j

rvc him ? bat wbhen they

are b/olt'en in cor.ds ofJ na/ii iol, the hbe shew-
c/h them their wor, a.;d their itra f-Grioins
/hfat tJhe' have exceeded. Hie onetlh also
their ear to difciplini, and ccmmi'rdeth that
thje retllrn firom, iniiquity '-. Is his cafe to
be deplo-red as highly calamitous, who, by
forufeiting somd transient enjoyments of the
worid, puicliafes lafning improvement in
piety and virtue, and exchanges a fe,v of
the good things of tlis life for the better
things of another ?

INFLUENCED by such considerations as
thei, let us look up with reverence to the

NPCam cx;x. 71. '- J,.b, xxi. 12.--ixxvi. 8.

A a 2 great

S ER M. great Disposer of events; and under any
XVI.,

- distress with which he is pleated to visit

us, let us utter no other voice but this;
Shall we receive good at the hand of God,
andJhall we not receive cvil?-Men are
too often ingenious in making themselves
miserable, by aggravating to their own
fancy, beyond bounds, all the evils which
they endure. They compare themselves
with none but those whom they imagine
to be more happy; and complain that up-
on them alone has fallen the whole load of
human sorrow3. Would they look with
a more impartial eye on the world, they
would fee themselves surroundcd with
sufferers; and find that they are only
drinking out of that mixed cup, which
Providence has prepared for all. " I will
" restore your daughter again to life,"
said the Eastern sage, to a prince who
grieved immoderately for the loss of a bc-
loved child, " provided, you are able to
" engrave on her tomb the names of three
" persons who have never mourned." The
prince made inquiry after such persons;

8 but

but found the inquiry vain, and was S E R M.
filent.-To every reasonable person, who XVI.
retains the belief of religious principles,
many alleviating circumstances, and many
arguments for patience, will occur under
every diflrefs. If we reft on this firm
persuasion, that there is a wife and just
Providence whiclh disposes of all events,
we shall have reason to conclude, that
nothing happens to us here without some
good design. Trusting that a happy termi-
nation shall at last arrive to the disorders
of our present state, we flall be enabled,
amidlt all the varieties of fortune, to pre-
serve that equanimity which befits Chris-
tians; and under every trial to fay, It is
the Lord; let him do what fcctieth good in
1is fght.

Aa3

# SERMON XVII. On FRIENDSHIP. PROVERBS, xxvii. 10. Thine own friend, and thy father's friend, forsake not. —

[ 358 J
S E R M O N XVII.

On FRIENDSHIP.

PROVERBS, xxvii. 10.
th2ine own friend, and thy faithr's frie;d,

forsake not.-

SERM,. W HATEVER relates to the bela-
XVII. viour of men in their social cha-

racter, is of great importance in religion.
The duties which spring from that charac-
ter, form many branches of the great law
of charity, which is the favourite precept
of Christianity. They, therefore, who
wvould separate such duties from a rtligious
ipirit, or who at moit treat them as only

the

the inferior parts of it, do a real injury to s E R M.
religion. They are mistaken friends of .XVI.
piety, who, under the notion of exalting
it, place it in a fort of insulated cor-
ner, disjoined from the ordinary affairs
of the world, and the connexions of
men with one another. On the contra-
ry, true piety influences them all. It
ats as a vivifying spirit, which animates
and enlivens, which rectifies and conducts
them. It is no less friendly to men than
zealous for the honour of God; and by
the generous affections which it nourishes,
and the beneficent influence which it
exerts on the whole of conduEt, is fully
vindicated from every reproach which
the infidel would throw upon it.-In this
view, I am now to discourse on the na-
ture and duties of virtuous friendflip, as
closely connected with the true spirit of
religion. It is a subject which the inspired
philosopher, who is the author of this
book of Proverbs, has thought worthy of
his repeated notice; and in many passages
has bestowed the highest elogiums on

A a 4 friendship

s E R M. friendship among good men. As oitlment
XVIi L
,^ alnd perifule rejoice the heart, js dAth the

JweetnLes of a manl's friend by hearty counfcl.
Arzs ironJ7jarpeneth iron, so a man Jha;peneth
the countenance of hisfriiend. MakefiJre of
tlh friend; for faitfiul are the wounds of a
friend. A friend loveth at all times; and
a brother is bornfo advefity. 7here is a
friend that tJicetlh clo/er than. a brother.-.

'bhizie ownfcfiend, and tliy father's f-;iend,
it is said in the tcxt,Jforfae not,

I .'MsT begin the subjed, by observing,

that there are among mankind friend-
fliips of different kinds, or, at least, con-
ncxions which afilime that name. When
they are no more than confederacics of
bad men, they ought to be called confpi-
racies, rather than fricndfhips. Some bond
of common interefl , some league againfl;
the innocent and unfuipecting, may have
united them for a time. But they are
held together only by a rope of sand.
At bottom they arc all rivals, and hoitile
to one another. Their friendfliip can

fubfifl

subsist no longer than interest cements SERMt

XVII.

them. Every one looks with a jealous xv
eye on his supposed friend; and watches
the first favourable opportunity to desert,
or to betray.

Friendihips too there are of a differ-

ent kind, and of a more refpedable na-
ture, formed by the connexion of politi-
cal parties. It is not, perhaps, on selfish
or crooked designs that such friendships
are originally founded. Men have been
afobciated together by some public interest,
or general cause, or for defence against
some real or imagined danger; and con-
nexions thus formed, often draw men into
close union, and inspire for a season no
fmaal degree of cordial attachment. When
upon just and honourable principles this
union is founded, it has proved, on vari-
ous occasions, favourable to the cause of
liberty and good order among mankind.
At the fame time, nothing is more ready
to be abused than the name of public fpi-
tit, and a public caui.. It is a name, un-

der

SERM. der which private intcreft is often shelter-
XVII.
--_ ed, and selfish designs are carried on.

The unwary are allured by a specious ap-
pearance; and the heat of faction usurps
the place of the generous warmth of
friend hip.

IT is not of such friend(hips, whether

of the laudable or the suspicious kind,
that I am now to discourse; but of pri-
vate friendihips, which grow neither out
of interested designs, nor party zeal; but
which flow from that similarity cf dif-
positions, that corresponding harmony of
minds, which endears some person to our
heart, and makes us take as much part in
his circumstances, fortunes, and fate, as if
they were our own. a12e fiol Gs 7Fonathani
was knit with the foul of David; and 'o-
nathan loved himn as his own foul a. Such
friendships certainly are not unreal; and,
for the honour of human nature, it is to
to be hoped are not altogether unfrequent

I Simnucl, xviii. i.

amiong

among mankind.--Happy it is, when SERM.

XVII.

they take root in our early years; and *-,
are engrafted on the ingenuous sensibility
of youth. Friendflips then contracted, re-
tain to the lat a tenderness and warmth,
seldom possesed by friendfihips that are
formed in the riper periods of life. The
remembrance of ancient and youthful
connexions melts every human heart;
and the dissolution of them is, perhaps,
the most painful feeling to which we
are exposed here below.- But at what-
ever period of life friendflhips are formed,
as long as they continue sincere and assec-
tionate, they form, undoubtedly, one of
the greatet bleflings we can enjoy. By
the pleating communication of all our
sentiments which they prompt, they are
justly said to double our pleasures, and
to divide our sorrows. They give a
brighter funlline to the gay incidents of
life; and they enlighten the gloom of its
darker hours. A failfulfiriend, it is
justly and beautifully laid, by one of the

Apocryphal

SE R M. Apocryphal writers, is the mcdicine of
X,_ , life :. A variety of occasions happen,

when to pour forth the heart to one
whom we love and trust, is the chief
comfort, perhaps the only relief, we can
enjoy. Miserable is he who, shut up
within the narrow inclofure of felfilh
interest, has no person to whom he can
at all times, with full confidence, expand
his foul.

SINCE cordial fiiendfhip is so great a

blefing to human life, let us proceed to
confider what duties it requires, and by
what methods it may be cultivated to
most advantage. The fundamental qua-
lities of true friendflhip are, constancy and
fidelity. Without tlheic material ingre-
dients, it is of no value. An inconfiant
man is not capable of friendship. He
may perhaps have affecions which occa-
iionally glow in his heart; which excite
fondness for amiable qualities; or connec

* E cleGiaricl:s, vi. i6.

l'in

him with seeming attachment to one SERM.

XVII.

whom he esteems, or to whom he has Lr-
been obliged. But after these feelings
have lasted for a little, either fancied in-
terest alienates him, or some new objeat
attracts him; and he is no longer the
fame person to those whom he once loved.
A man of this inconstant mind cannot be
said to have any mind at all. For where
there is no fixedness of moral principle,
occasional feelings are of no value; mind
is of no effec; and with such persons it
is never desirable to have any connexion.
\Where confiancy is wanting, there can be
no fidelity, which is the other basis of
friendship. For all friendship filppofes
entire confidence and trust; supposes the
feal of secrecy to be inviolable; supposes
promises and engagements to be sacred;
and no advantage of our own to be pur-
sued, at the expence of our fiiend's honour.
An inconstant man, is despicable. A faith-
less man, is base.

But supposing neither constancy nor fide-
lity to be altogether wanting, still how-

ever

SERM. ever friendflip is in hazard of suffering
XVII.
xLl, from the follies, and unreasonable hu-

mours, to which all of us are liable. It
is to be regarded as a tender plant in an
unfavourable foil, which, in order to its
flourishing, requires to be reared and
nursed with care. The following direc-
tions may be of use for promoting its cul-
tivation, and preserving it from whatever
might be apt to blast and wither it.

IN theirft place, let me advise you not

to expect perfection in any with whom
you contract friendship. It holds in ge-
neral, with refpc& to all worldly pursuits,
that the more moderate our expecations
are, they are likely to be the more success-
ful. If, in any situation of life, we hope
to possess complete happiness, we may de-
pend on receiving mortifications. If, in
any person, we trust to find nothing but
perfeaion, we may be assured that, on
longer acquaintance, we fliall meet with
disappointments. In the cafe of friend-
thip, this admonition is the more necef-

fary

367
fary to be given, as a certain warmth and s E R M.

XVII.

enthufiafin belong to it, which are apt to
carry tfs beyond the bounds of nature,
In young minds, especially, a disposition
of this kind is often found to take place.
They form to themselves romantic ideas,
gathered perhaps from fiditious histories,
of the high and heroic qualities which be-
long to human nature. All those qua-
lities they ascribe, without reserve or li-
mitation, to the person with whom they
wish to enter into intimate friendship;
and on the leati failure appearing, aliena-
tion instantly follows. Hence many a
friendship, hastily perhaps contraced, is
as hastily difrolved, and disgust succeeds
to violent attachment.-Remember, my
friends, that a faultless charader on earth
is a mere chimera. lMany) failings you
experience in yourselves. Be not fur-
prifed, when you discover the like in others,
of whom you had formed the highest
opinion. The best and most estimable
persons are they, in whom the fevweft ma-
terial defects are found; and whole great

1 3 and

SERM.and folld qualities counterbalance the

XVII.
L-v», common infirmities of men. it is to

these qualities you are to look in forming
friendships; to good sense and prudence,
which contfitute the bails of every refpea-
able characer; to virtue, to good tem-
per, to fleadinefs of affecion; and accord-
ing to the union of those dispositions,
esteem yourselves happy in the friend
whom 'ou choose.

IN the second place, I must admonish

you not to be hurt by differences of opi.
nion arising in intercourse with your
friends. It is impossible for these not to
occur. Perhaps no two perforis were
ever cast so exactly in the fame mould, as
to think always in the fame manner, on
every subjec. It was wifely contrived by
Providence, that diversity of sentiment
ihould take place among men, on purpofi
to exercise our faculties, and to give varie-
ty to human life. Perpetual uniformity
of thought would become monotonous
and infipid.--When it is with regard to

trifles

trifles that diversity or contrariety of opi- S E R M.
nions shews itself, it is childish in the last x_..
degree, if this become the ground of
estranged affeaion. When from such
a cause there arises any breach of
friendship, human weakness is then dif-
covered in a mortifying light. In mat-
ters of serious moment, the sentiments
of the best and worthies may vary
from those of their friends, according
as their lines of life diverge, or as their
temper, and habits of thought, present
objects under different points of view.
But among candid and liberal minds,
unity of affedion will still be preserved.
No man has any title to erea his own
opinions into an universal and infallible
Rfandard: And the more enlarged that
any man's mind is, the more readily he
will overlook difference in sentiments,
as long as he is persuaded that the mind
of his friend is upright, and that he
follows the di&ates of conscience and
integrity.

VOL. IV. B b IN

s ER M. IN the third place, It is material to the
XVII.

_.preservation of friendihip, that openness

of temper and manners, on both hands,
be cultivated. Nothing more certainly
dissolves friendihip, than the jealousy
which arises from darkness and conceal-
ment. If your situation oblige you to
take a different fide from your friend, do
it openly. Avow your condut; avow
your motives; as far as honour allows,
disclose yourselves frankly; seek no cover
from unnecessary and mysterious fecrccy.
Mutual confidence is the foul of friend-
ihip. As soon as that is destroyed, or
even impaired, it is only a shew of friend-
ship that remains. What was once cor-
dial intimacy, degenerates first into formal
civility. Constraint on both fides next
succeeds; and disgust or hatred soon fol-
low.-The maxim that has been laid
down by certain crooked politicians, to
behave to a friend with the fame guarded
caution as we would do to an enemy, be-
cause it is possible that he may one day
become such, discovers a mind which never

7 was

was made for the enjoyments of friendship. s E R M.

XVII

It is a maxim which, not unreasonably I J
admit, may find place in those political
and party friendships, of which I before
spoke, where personal advancement is al-
ways in view. But it is altogether incon-
fiftent with the spirit of thofc friendihips,
which are formed, and underflood to be
nourished, by the heart.

THEfourth advice which I give is, To

cultivate, in all intercourse among friends,
gentle and obliging manners. It is a com-
mon error to suppose, that familiar inti-
macy supersedes attention to the leitr duties
of behaviour; and that, under the notion
of freedom, it may excuse a careless, or
even a rough, demeanor. On the con-
trary, an intimate connexion can only be
kept up, by a constant with to be pleating
and.agreeable. The nearer and clo'er that
men are brought together, the more fre-
quent that the points of contact between
them become, there is the greater necessity
for the surface being finooth, and every

B b 2 tiling

S E R M. thing being removed that can grate or of-
XVII,
L, fend.-Let no harshness, no appearance of

neglec, no supercilious affeaation of fu-
periority, occur in the intercourse of
friends. A tart reply, a proneness to re-
buke, a captious and contraditious spirit,
are often known to embitter domestic life,
and to set friends at variance. In those
smaller articles of behaviour, where men are
too apt to be careless, and to indulge their
humour without restraint, the real cha-
raaer is often underflood to break forth,
and shew itself. It is by no means
enough, that, in all matters of serious in-
terest, we think ourselves ready to prove
the sincerity of our friendship. These
occur more rarely. The ordinary tenor
of life is composed of finall duties and of-
sices, which men have occasion daily to
perform; and it is only by rendering daily
behaviour agreeable, that we can long
preserve the comforts of friendihip.

IN the fifth place, let me caution you
not to liften rashly to evil reports against

your

your friends. When upon proper grounds sERM.
you have formed a connexion, be flow of XVII
believing any thing againRt the friend whom
you have chosen. Remember, that there
is among mankind a spirit of malignity,
which too often takes pleasure in disturb-
ing the society of those who appear to en-
joy one another. The scripture hath warn-
ed us, that there is a whi/sperer who fepa-
rateth chief friends; there is a faie witness
who foweth discord among brethren. Give
not therefore a ready ear to the officious
insinuations of those who, under the guise
of friendly concern, come to admonish
you, that you ought to stand on your guard
against those whom they fee you disposed
to trust. Confider, whether, under this fair
appearance, there may not lurk some fe-
cret envy and rivalry, or some concealed
interest. Chafe not every flying report,
Suffer not the poison of jealousy easily to
taint your mind, and break your peace.
A wide difference there is between that
weak credulity which allows itself to be
imposed upon blindly, and that dark and

B b 3 suspicious

SERM. suspicious spirit which is always inclined
XVII. aY_ to the evil fide. It forms part of the cha-

ra&er of a wife and good man, that he is
not prone to take up a reproach againi his
neighbour.

IN the sixth and last place, let me exhort

you not to desert your friend in danger
or distress. Too many there are in the
world, whose attachment to those they
call their friends is confined to the day of
their prosperity. As long as that conti-
nues, they are, or appear to be, affe&ion-
ate and cordial. But as soon as their
friend is under a cloud, they begin to
withdraw, and to separate their interests
from his. In friendihips of this fort, the
heart, affuredlv, has never had much con-
cern. For the great test of true friendship,
is confiancy in the hour of danger, ad-
herence in the leafon of diftrefs.-When
your friend is calumniated, then is the
time, openly and boldly to espouse his
cause. When his situation is changed, or
his fortunes are falling, then is the time of

affording

affording prompt and zealous aid, When s ER M.

xVil.

sickness or infirmity occasion him to be _,_
negleted by others, that is the opportu-
nity which every real friend will seize, of
redoubling all the affetionate attentions
which love suggests. These are the im-
portant duties, the sacred claims of friend-
ship, which religion and virtue enforce on
every worthy mind.-To shew yourselves
warm, after this manner, in the cause of
your friend, commands esteem, even from
those who have personal interest in oppof-
ing him. This honourable zeal of friend-
ship has, in every age, attracted the vene-
ration of mankind. It has consecrated
to the latest posterity the names of those
who have given up their fortunes, and
have even exposed their lives, in behalf
of the friends whom they loved; while
ignominy and disgrace have ever been the
portion of them, who deserted their friends
in the evil day. bhine ownfriendforfake not,

BEFORE concluding, it muff not be
forgotten, that the injunction of the Wife

B b 4 Man

SE R M. Man in the. text, is. accompanied with this
x,_. remarkable expression; not only thine

own friend, but also, thy father's friend
forsake not. These words bring back to our
remembrance the days of former years;
and suggest a sentiment, which cannot but
touch every feeling heart. Thine own
friend may be dear; thy father's friend
ought to be sacred. As long as life re-
mains in any human breast, the memory
of those ancient ties ihould remain, which
conneted us once with our father, and
our father's houfe.-Thy father has per-
haps, long ago, gone down to the dust.
But when you recal the innocent days of
childhood and youth; when you think of
those family tranfations, which once glad-
dened your hearts; your father's friend, in
the midst of these, will rife to your re-
membrance. There was a time when you
accosted him with refpec, or looked up to
him with fondness, and was made happy
by his kindly notice. Does such a one
now survive, and ihall he not receive
from you some portion of filial reverence

and

and honour? To disregard and ne- SERM.

XVII.

gle:d him, is to spurn your father's me-
mory; is to insult the aflhes of him
who now sleeps in the grave; is to tranf-
mit yourselves to those who lhall fuc-
ceed you, as unfeeling and base. Thine
own friend, and thy father's friend, for-
fiake not.

I HAVE pointed out some of the chief

duties which belong to virtuous friend-
ihip; and some of the principal means
by which this sacred bond flhould be pre-
served unbroken; this holy flame should
be kept alive in the human breast. The
spirit, and sentiments, which I have studied
to inspire, are such as virtue breathes,
and such as true piety should increase.
It is thus we fulfil that great law of love,
which our divine Master taught. It is
thus we prepare ourselves for those happy
regions, where charity never faileth; where,
in the presence of the God of love, eternal
and invariable fricndfhips unite together

all

S E R M. all the blessed; friendships, which, by no
XV., human infirmity disturbed, by death ne-

ver separated, shall constitute throughout
endless ages, a great and diftinguiffied
portion of the celestial felicity.

# SERMON XVIII. On the CONDUCT to be held with regard to Future EVENTS. PROVERBS, xxvii. 1. Boast not thyself of to - morrow; for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth.

[ 379 ]

SERMON XVIII.
On the CONDUCT to be held with regard

to Future EVENTS.

PROVERBS, xxvii. I.
BoaJf not tbyfelf of to-morrow; for thou

knowef not what a day may bring forth.
FROM these words I purpose to dif- SERM.

course of the proper conduc which XVI.,

we ought to hold with regard to futurity,
amidf the present uncertainties of life.
Time and life are always going on, and
to each of us are preparing changes in our
state. What these may be, whether for
the better or for the worse, we cannot tell;

as

S ERRM as it hath pleated the wisdom of Provi-

C-r- dence, to cover futurity with a veil which

no mortal can lift up. In the mean time,
none of us can avoid forming designs,
and laying plans, for the time to come.
The present moment is never sufficient
to give full employment to the acive
mind of man, without iome excursions
into futurity; and in these excursions, the
present is often wholly spent. It is there-
fore of the highest consequence, that a pro-
per direction be given to the mind, in its
employments of thought relating to fu-
turity. Otherwise, in the profpeds which
wve take of that unknown region, false
hopes, or ill-grounded fears, shall flatter
or torment us in vain. WVe know not, as
the Wife Man tells us, what a day may
bring forth. It may, very probably, pro-
duce something that we had not looked
for; and therefore, instead of boasting
oii/felves of to-morrow, as the multitude
are apt to do, it becomes us to be dif-
ciplined and prepared, for whatever it may
bring.

IT

IT is needless to spend much time in S ER M.

XVIII.

confirming the truth, which is the found- i
ation of the admonition in the text; in
proving, either that change and mutability
belong to our present state, or that the
changes of it cannot be foreseen by us.
These are truths so obvious and con-
sessed, that an attempt to confirm them is
like proving, that all men are to die. At
the fame time, obvious as they are, it were
to be wished, that the thoughts of men
dwelt upon them more. For, by a strange
but prevailing deception, it would seem,
from the general conduct of mankind,
that almost every one thinks his own cafe
an exception from the general law; and
that he may build plans with as much
confidence on his present fitation, as if
some assurance had been given hin that
it were never to change. Hence it has
been often observed by serious persons,
that there is no more general cause to
which the vices of men can be ascribed,
their forgetfulness of God and their ne-
gled of duty, than to their prefiming

upon

S E R M. upon the continuance of life, of pleasure,
A-_-s, and prosperity.

Look but a little way, my friends, into

your own slate; and you must unavoid-
ably perceive that, from the beginning, it
has been so contrived by Providence, that
there should be no permanent flability to
man's condition on earth. The feeds of
alteration are every where sown. In your
health, life, poffeflions, connexions, plea-
fures, there are causes of decay impercep-
tibly working; secretly undermining the
foundations of what appears to you the
most liable; continually tending, to abo-
lifh the present form of things, and to
bring forward new appearances, and newv
objects in their order: So that nothing is,
or can be, stationary on earth. All
changes, and passes. It is a stream which is
ever flowing; a wheel which is ever turn-
ing round. When you behold the tree
covered with blossoms in the spring, or
loaded with fruit in the autumn, as well
may you imagine, that those blossoms, or
that fruit, are to remain in their place

through

through the whole year, as believe that S ERM.

XVIll.

human affairs are to continue, for to-day _
and to-morrow, for this year and the next,
proceeding in the fame tenor. To render
this reflection still more serious, think, I
pray you, on what small and inconfider.
able causes those changes depend, which
assea the fortunes of men, throughout
their whole lives. How soon is evil done!
There needs no great bustle or stir, no long
preparation of events, to over'urn what
seems most secure, and to blast what ap-
pears most flourishing. A gale of wind
rifes on the ocean; and the vessel which
carried our friends, or our fortunes, is
overwhelmed in the deep. A spark of a
candle falls by night in tome negleded
corner; and the whole fubftar -e of fami-
lies is consumed in flames before the
morning. A casual blow, or a sudden
fall, deranges some of our internal parts;
and the reft of life is distress and misery.
It is awful to think, at the mercy of how
many teeming contingencies we perpe-

ttally

SE R M. tually lie, for what we call happiness in
XVIII.

this world.

In the midif, however, of all there ap.

parent contingencies, plans and designs
for the future are every day formed; pur.
suits are undertaken; and life proceeds in
its afual train. Fit and proper it is, that
life should thus proceed. For the uncer-
tainty of to-morrow was never designed
by Providence, to deter us from aCing or
planning to-day; but only to admonish
us, that we ought to plan, and to at, fober.
ly and wifely.-What that wife and fober
conduct is which becomes us, what the
rules and precautions are, which, in such
a state as ours, refpea futurity, I now pro-
ceed to shew. They may be compre-
hended in the following direaions. Boafl
not thyself of to-morrow; Despair not of
to-morrow; Delay not till to-morrow what
is proper to be done to-day; Prepare thy-
self for whatever to-morrow may bring
forth; Build thy hopes of happiness on
something more solid and latfing than

14 .what

what either to-day or to-morrow will SE R M.

XV!lIl.
produce.

1. IN' the words of tile text, Boajl not

t/l;f,4'o/'f o-movnrow; that is, never pre-
funle :In'0catly on futurity ; in the most
fair and promiling state of fortune, beware
of pride and vanity; beware of refling
wholly upon yourselves, and forgetting
Him who (irccs the changes of this mu-
table fiate. If there be any virtues, whicl
the uncertain condition of the world in-
culcate on man, they are, assuredly, mo-
deration and humiiity. Man was, for
this end, placed in a world, where he
knows so little of what is before him, that
he might be impressed with a sense of his
dependence on the Ruler of the world;
that he might feel the importance of ac-
quiring favour and protection from Hea-
ven, by a life of piety and virtue; and
that, not knowing how toon his own con-
dition may be the fame with that of the
most wretched, he might be prompted to
act towards all his brethren the humane

VOL. IV. C c and

S ER M. and friendly part.-The favours whicl
xvi. Providence bestows upon him at present,

he ought to receive with thankfulness,
and may enjoy with checrfulnefs. Though
commanded not to bojl hi'fljof 'to-,lzorri:.',
the meaning of the precept is not, tllat
he must be fad to-day. Rejoice he Inay
in the day of profpcrity; but certainly,
Rejoice clith trmtblirg, is the infcriptioi
that ihould be written on all human plea-
fures.

As for them who, intoxicated wvith those

pleafuires, become giddy and insolent;
who, flattered by the illusions of profpe-
rity, make light of every serious admoni-
tion which the changes of the world give
them, wlhat can I lay too strong to alarm
them of their danuer ?-They have i;i]d
to thelfelves, 'MIy mo.it,9r ain ands J'roi.,
adil J7all never be moved. To-morroc f.1a!
be as this daiJ', ant more abundantly. If al
never fe adverfzlt.-Rafh and wretched
men ! are you sensible how impious such
words are? To the world perhaps you
dare not utter them ; but they Ipeak the

7 feerct

secret language of your hearts. Know, S F,. i.
you are ufuirping upon Providence ; you _
are setting I-Heaven at defiance; you are
not only preparing sharper tfings for your-
selves, when the changes of life fiall come,
but you are accelerating those changes;
you are fast bringing ruin upon your own
heads. For God will not fulffr pride in
man; and the experience of all ages hath
shewn, how careful he is to check it. In
a thousand memorable instances, the course
of his government has been visibly point-
ed against it. lie JJewieth firecn3/!h wiib
bis arm, and fi'altereth the proud in tih i?,a-
ginations oJ their hearts. 2'he day of the
Lord is upon every one that is proullti atn
lifted up; to humble the lo/?ty looks of ini,
and to/lain the pride of all g'1o '*. Some
of the ministers of divine pleafurc are
comminfioned to go forth; and to lium-
ble, without delay, the boajiers of to-mor-

' Luke, i. 15. Isaiah, ii. zl. xxiii. 9,

Cc2 II. As

s E R M. II. As we are not to boast, so neither
XVIII.
>^-_ i are we to deliair, cf to-morrow. The

former admonition was direaed to those
whom profpcrity had elated with vain
hopes. This is dcfigned for those whom
a more adverse situation in life has filled
with fears and alarns of what is to come.
The reason of both admonitions is the
fame ; tl lozi kowjl n:o! what a day' m72a
briizg fortz/. It may bring forth some un-
expeced misfortune; and therefore thou
fhouldr be humble in profiprity. It may
bring forth some nnforelcen relief; and
therefore thou flioullft hope under dif-
trefs.--It is too common with mankind,
to be totally cngrofld, and overcome by
prcfent events. Their preiei;lt condition,
wvha;t-vcr it is, they are apt to imagine,
will never change; and hlence by profpc-
rity they are lifted up, and by adversity are
dejected and broken ; prone, in the one
cafe, to forget God, in the other, to re-
pine againli hlim. Whcreas, the doctrine,
which the channges of tihe world perpetually

inculcate,

inculcate, is, tlat no state of external things SE R M.

XVIII.

should appear io imp.rtant, or ihould so _
affeet and agitate our spirits, as to deprive
us ot a caln, an equal, and a H{eady mind.
Man knoweth neither the good, nor the
evil which is before him. In yourl- pattinc
th!erfore, pofj; your fJis: trulling in the
day of sorrow, that God hath not foiot-
ten to be gracziou; andl that, Ithouh rccpLJ-
inTg 'R.i' eCdure /r a :.'jh!,

jvj o;inch to
the upright in thc ./:r;:i.:'.

DIl'lefs not yourlelves, then, wvith

anxiou, fears about tc-inorrowv. Let me
exhort you to diiils all solicitude, whiEch
goes beyond the bounds of prudent pre-
caution. Anxiety, when it !cizcs the
heart, is a dangerous dileale, produtive
both of Inuch fin, and much miifry. It
aQes as a corrolive of the miiid. It cats
out our prefcnlt enjoy:en!les, and iubfii-
tutes, in their place, many an acute pain.'
-Tie Wife Mlan, in the text, has advised
us i;st to boa/ fs tro-imor'cc ; and our Sa-
viour has infrtruded us to t;.'u: io thought

C c3 c.3

S ER M. for to-morrow V . Both there diretions,
XVIII.
i-.-« properly understood, are entirely consist-

ent; and the great rule of condut, re-
specting futurity, is compounded of them
both; requiring us, neither arrogantly
to presume on to-morrow, nor to be
anxiously, and fearfully solicitous about it.
To morrow, fays our Saviour, Jhall take
thotght for t'e things of its es We fiall
be better able to juldge of the course most
proper for us to hold, when events have be-
gun to come forward in their order. Their
pretence often fuggcfts \wi(r counlels, and
more successful expedients, than it is pof-
fible for us to contrive at a ditance. By
excess of fclicitude btforehand, we fre-
quently introduce that confliion of mind,
and that hurry and dilorller of spirits,
xwhich bring us into the most unfavourable
state for judging foundly.-Wherefore,
never indulge either anxiety, or dc-
ipair, about futurity. Affright not your-

e Matth. vi. 33.

selves

selves with imaginary terrors. Antici- E. M.

XVII1.

pate not evils, which perhaps may never
come. Make the best which you can of
this day, in the fear of God, and in the
practice of your duty; and, having done
so, leave to-morrow to itself. Stfficicnt
for the day, when it comes, will be the evil
thereof.

III. DELAY not till to-morrow any thing

which is fit and proper to be done to-day.
Reemmber, that thou art not the lord of
to-morrow. Thou art so far from having
any title to difpole of it, that thou art ig-
norant of the most material circumfnances
relating to it; not only of what it fllall
bring forth, but whether thou shalt live to
fee it.--Notwithftanding the uncontrove.-
tible evidence of this truth, procradinat,.! n
h!as, throughout every age, been the ruin
of 'mankind. Dwelling amidst cndlefs
projecs of what they are hereafter to do,
they cannot so properly be said to live, as
to be always about to live; and the fu-
ture has ever been the gulph in which the

C c 4 prcellt

SR RM. present is swallowed up and loft,-Hence
XVIII.
xX_ arise many of thole misfortunes which be-

fal men in their worldly concerns. What
might at present be arranged in their cir-
cumftances with advantage, being delay-
ed to another opportunity, cannot be ar-
ranged at all. To-morrow being loaded
with the concerns of to-day, in addition to
its own, is clogged and embarrassed. As-
fairs, which have been pofiponcd, multi-
ply and crowd upon one another; till, at
last, they prove so intricate and perplexed,
and the pressure of business becomes so
great, that nothing is lcft, but to fink un-
der the burden. Of him, therefore, who
indulges this lingering and delaying spirit
in worldly matters, it is ca3fy to prog-
noficate that the ruin is not far off.

Evils of the fame kind, arising from the

fame cause, overtake men, in their moral
and spiritual interests. There arc few,
but who are sensible of some things in
their character and behaviour, which
ought to be correled, and which, at one
time or other, they intend to correct;

I xtome

some headitrong paflion, which they de- SERM.
iign to subdue; some bad habit, which they V__J
purpose to reform; some dangerous con-
nexion, which they are resolved to break
off. But the convenient season for these
reformations is not yet come. Certain
obstacles are in the way, which they ex-
pet by and by to iurmount; and there.
fore they go on in peace for the present,
in their usual course-, trusting, at a future
day, to begin their designed improvement.
In the mean time the angel of death de-
scends; and, in the midfl of their diflant
plans, executes his commifflon, and carries
them away.-Guard against delusions of
this kind, which have been fatal to so
many.-Thou art now in tranquillity, in
health, in possession of a calm mind. Im-
prove these advantages, for performing all
that becomes thee, as a man, and as a
Christian; for who can tell how long thou
ihalt be permitted to enjoy them New'
alterations of fortune may be just coming
forward; new troubles in public, or in

private

SE R M. private life, about to arise; new exigencies

_-^^ ready to throw thee into some condition,

which shall leave thee neither leisure nor
opportunity, to execute any of the good
purposes thou haft at present in thy mind.
Wherefore, trifle no longer with what is
so serious, and what may be so critical;
but to-day, while it is called to-day, lifen
to the voice of God, and do his works.
Do now, as the Wife Man advises, witlb
thy might wvhatfoever thy hand fiideth to
do; for there is no work, nor device, nor

ito/ionm, in the grave whither thou goeJt'.

-- Instead of delaying till to-morrow
what ought be done to-day, let me ex-
hort you,

IV. To be every day prepared for what-

ever to-morrow may bring forth. , There
is a certain preparation for the vicissitudes
of life, in which the multitude are fufli-
ciently busied; providing, as they think,
against whatever may happen, by incrcafing

' Ecclc ix. i10

their

their riches, and strengthening themselves SERM.

XVIII.

by friends, connexions, and worldly ho-
nours. But tlele bulwarks which they
erect, are totally inlilftcient againiA the
dreaded flornn. It is to oime other quar-
ter we must look for our defence; for
when it is the world itself, whose changes
we have realon to dread, the world, and
the things of it, cannot afford us protec-
tion. The best preparation for all the
uncertainties of futurity consists, in a well-
ordered mind, a good conIcicnce, and a
cheerful fubmiflion to the will of Heaven.
You know net what !hall be on to-mor-
row. But there is One who knows it well;
for his decree hath fixed it. To him
look up with reverence; and fay, " Not
" my will, but thine be bdone; what thou ap-
" pointet is ever wife, and just, and good."
Seek to fulfil the part which he hath
afligned you; to do the things which
he lhath commanded you to do; and leave
all the reft to him. Whatever to- morrow
brings forth, let it find you employed
in doing jllly, lving mercyg, anld c'Dall-

l/l!

SE R M. ing humbl, with your God; and then you
.,_, ihall meet to-morrow without fear, when

you meet it without the upbraidings of
guilt.

If it shall bring forth to you any unex-

peaed good, prepare to receive it with
gratitude, temperance, and modefly. If
it shall bring forth evil, prepare to receive
it with manly fortitude. Let no events
of any kind, derange your equanimity, or
shake your constancy. Contraa your de-
fires, and moderate your hopes. Expect
not more from the world than it is able to
afford you. Take it for granted that what
is naturally mutable, will one day cliange;
that what was designed to be transient,
will pass away.-Look forward to futu-
rity without impatience. Be not desirous
to know it. It belongs to God. Let him
bring forward the events of the world, in
his own way. Imagine that you conti-
nually hear those words, which our Lord
once addressed to Peter, when he was in.
quiring about what was to happen to a
fellow disciple, What is that to thee? Fol-

.NX,

low tlhoii ie. Amidst all the uncertainty SERM.

XVIII.

of future events, this road of clear and xl
plain duty lies before you; follow Christ,
and inquire no farther. Seek no crooked
path, in order to avoid impending dan-
gers. Turn not to the r.ight hand, nor to
the lfi ; but commit thy rway inio the Lord;
t;rflt aso in, himn, and he JZ,7Sll bring to pnaf
t,',c dcfires of thJ heart.

V. BUILD your hopes of happiness on

somewhat more solid and lasting, than
wvhat either to-day or to-morrow are likely
to produce. From what has been said,
you may clearly perceive, that he who
refts wholly upon this world, builds his
house upon the sand. This life, by means
of wisdom and virtue, may be rendered to
a good man, a tolerable, nay a comfort-
able, state. But he who expeCts complete
happiness from it, will be greatly deceived.
Man, in his most flourifning condition,
were much to he pitied, if he was defli-
tllte of any higher hope. Roiling fiom

change

SE R M. change to change, throughout all the days
_xvm, of his life, with a dark and unknown

profpeat always before him in futurity,
what would avail a few snort interrupted
glimpses of happiness, which, fiom time to
time, he was permitted to enjoy ? Can we
believe, that only for such a state as this,
man was dcfigned by his great and good
Creator ?-No: Let us bless the God and
Father of our Lord

o cfis ChrtJ, who, accord-

ing to his abundant mercy, hath begotten iu
,again inlo a lively hope, by the reJfi-rrceion o
Ch'iji firom the dead, to an inheritance incor-
ruptible, undefled, and that fadeth not awna;.
Here is the Rock on which the mind, how-
ever toiled by the storms of life, can fecurcly
reft. Here is the objeCt to which a wvile
man will bend his chief attention, that,
after having acqed his part on earth with
fidelity and honour, he may be enabled,
through the merits of his Saviour, to look
for a place in the mansions of eternal
and untroubled peace. This profpcd is
the great correcive of the prieent vanity

of

of human life. It gives significancy and SERM.

[VIH.

importance to its most transitory seenes; --
and, in the midst of its mutability, discovers
one fixed point of reft. He who is habi-
tually influenced by the hope of immorta-
lity, will be able to look without dismay
on the changes of the world. He will
neither boast of to-morrow, nor be afraid
of it; but will pass through the varieties
of life with a manly and unbroken mind;
with a noble superiority to those fears and
expectations, those cares and sorrows,
which agitate the multitude.-Such are
the native effecs of Christian faith and
hope. To them alone it belongs, to fur-
mount all the discouragements to which
we are now exposed; to render our life
comfortable, and our death blessed; nay,
to make the day, of our d'ath better thlan the
',oy of our birthb.

# SERMON XIX. On following the MULTITUDE to do EVIL. EXODUS, xxiii. 2. Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil. —

[ 400 ]

SERM ON XIX.
On following the MULTITUDE to do

EVIL.

EXODUS, xxiii. 2.

ThouiJlJalt notfollow a multitude to do evil.-

SERM. IN this world, we are placed as compa-
XIX. nions and aflifants to one another.

Depending, for nmol of the comforts of
life, on mutual intercourse and aid, it was
neceflary, that we should be formed to de-
fire the company, acn to take pleasure in
the good-will of our fellows. But this
sociability of man, though essential to his

present

present condition, has, like many other SERM.

XIX.

good principles, been unhappily warped
from its original purpose ; and, in the pre-
sent slate of the world, has proved the
cause of much evil. For, as vice has
abounded in every age, it hath propa-
gated itself much more easily by the assist-
ance of this social disposition. We natu-
rally mould ourselves on the pattern of
prevailing manners; and corruption is
communicated from one to another. By
mutually giving, and taking, the example
of sinful liberties, licentioufnles spreads
and grows; each jufRifies himself by his
neighbour; and the multitude of finners
strengthen one another's hands to commit
iniquity. In all ages of the world, cuf-
tom has had more power than reaton.
Few take the trouble of inquiring what
is the right path; the greater part con-
tent themselves with following that in
which the multitude have gone before
them. No exhortation, therefore, is more
necessary to be frequently given, and to
be seriously enforced, than that which we

VOL. IV. D d receive

S ER M. receive from the text; T'Jou Jiallt not fol-
XIX.

l.ow a 17 mulltitiude to do evil.

To acquire a full view of any danger

to which we are exposed, is the first mea-
sure to be taken, in order to our safety.
Let us then begin the subjet, with confi-
dering how much we are in hazard of be-
ing milled into vice by the general man-
ners which we behold around us.-No
virtue is more necefiary to a Christian,
but scarcely is there any more difficult
to be put in pradice, than that firmners
of mind which can enable a man to main-
tain his principles, and to fiand his ground
againfi the torrent of custom, fashion, and
example. Example has upon all minds a
secret and insinuating influence, even
when we ourselves are infellible of its ope-
ration. We imperceptibly slide into some
resemblance of the manners of those with
whom wve have frequent intercourtf. This
often fllcws itfcif, in the most indifferent
things. But the resemblance is ifill more
readily contracted, when there is some-

14 thing

thing within ourselves, that leans to the S E R M.

XIX

fame fide which is countenanced by the i
practice of others. We are always glad to
find any apology for indulging our inclina-
tions and passions; and the example of the
multitude too readily suggests that apology.
Even before corruption has made great pro-
grefs in our hearts, sometimes, mere com-
plaifance and good nature incline us to fall
in with the ways of others. Sometimes, ti-
midity and false flaame prevent our differ-
ing from them: Frequently, expectation
and interest impel us strongly to comply.
How great is the danger we incur, when,
in times of prevailing vice, all these prin-
ciples of imitation and compliance unite
together against our virtue ?

The world is too jufily said by scrip-

ture, to lie in wickednejf. It is a school
wherein every vice is taught, and too
easily learned. Even from our earliest child-
hood, false sentiments are instilled into
our minds. We are bred up in admira-
tion of the external shew of life. We are
accustomed, as soon as we can understand

D d 2 any

SER M. any thing, to hear riches and honours
XIX- spoken of as the chief goods of men, and

proposed to us as the objecs to which our
future pursuits are to be directed. We
fee the measures of outward refpet and
deference taken from these alone. Reli-
gion and virtue are recommended to us,
in a formal manner, by our teachers and
infiruaors; but all improvements of the
mind and heart, are visibly placed by
the world, in an inferior rank to the ad-
vantages of fortune. Vices, that chance
to be fashionable, are treated as flight fail-
ings; and coloured over in common dif-
course, with those soft and gentle names
which express no condemnation. We en-
ter, perhaps, on the world, with good
principles, and an aversion to downright
vice. But when, as we advance in life,
we become initiated in that mystery of ini-
quity, which is called, the way of the
world; when we meet with deceit and
artifice in all ranks of men; when we be-
hold iniquity authorised by great names,
and often rewarded with success and ad-

vancement,

vancemcnt, our original good impressions S ERM.

XIX.

too soon decay. The practice of the multi- v
tude renders vice familiar to our thoughts;
and gradually wears off the abhorrence
with which we once beheld it. We begin
to think, that what is so very general, can-
not be highly criminal. The malignity
of fin appears diminished, by so many be-
ing sharers in the reproach; and instead
of men's vices detracting, as they ought
to do, from our good opinion of the men,
our attachment to the men oftener recon-
ciles us to the vices of which they are
guilty.

The countenance which fin receives

from the practice of the multitude, not
only removes the rcf{lraits which are im-
posed by modefry and shame; but, such
is the degeneracy of the world, that shame
is too often employed againfi the cause of
religion and virtue. Thc ridictle of the
giddy and unthinking bears down the
conviction of the obber and modest.
Againit their own belief, they appear to
adopt the notions of the infidel; and

D d 3 againil

SERM. against their own choice, they join in the
A-_^ vices of the libertine; that they may not

be reproached as persons of a narrow
mind, and still enslaved to the prejudices
of education. How much reason is there
to believe that, merely from this timidity
of temper, many, whose principles are on
the fide of religion and virtue, are never-
thelefs found walking in the zway of fJzncrs,
and fitting in the chair of the fcorfill ? -
Inteteft, too, often coincides with this
weakness of disposition, in tempting fucl
perfons.to follow the multitude. To fall
in with the prevailing taste, to suit them-.
selves to the passions of the great, or to
the humours of the low, with whom they
chance to be conneted, appears the rea-
dieft way to rile in the world. Hence
they are naturally led to relinquish the
firmness of an upright characer, for that
supple and verfable turn, which accommo-
dates itself to the times, and aflumes what-
ever appearance seems molt convenient
for interest.-- Such are the dangers to
which we are exposed, in times of corrup-

tion,

tion, of foio wiug the muiltitludr to do evil; SE R M:
dangers which require our molt serious .
attention and care, in order to guard our-
selves against them.-I proceed to lay such
considerations before you as may be useful
for that purpose.

IN theirfl place, Let us remember that

the multitude are very bad guides; are so
far from having a title to implicit regard,
that he who blindly follows them, may be
prefuned to err. For prejudice, and pas-
sion, are known to siway the crowd. They
are struck by the outside of things; they
inquire fuperiicially, admire false appear-
ances, and pursue false goods. Their
opinions are for the most part hastily form-
ed, and of course are variable, floating,
and inconfitent. In every age, how fiall
is the number of those who are guided
by reason, and calm inquiry? How few
do we find, who have the wisdom to think
and judge for themselves, and have fleadi-
ness to follow out their own judgment?

D d 4 Ignorance,

SER M. agains their own choice, they join in the
Ai vices of the libertine; that they may not

be reproached as persons of a narrow
mind, and still enslaved to the prejudices
of education. How much reason is there
to believe that, merely from this timidity
of temper, many, whose principles are on
the fide of religion and virtue, are never-
thelefs found walking in the way of f.inu.crs,
and fitting in the chair of ithefiornffil -
Inteieft, too, often coincides with this
weakness of disposition, in tempting such
perfons.to follow the multitude. To fall
in with the prevailing tate, to suit themi
selves to the pafions of the great, or to
the humours of the low, with whom they
chance to be conneced, appears the rea-
dieft way to rile in the world. Hence
they are naturally led to relinquifli the
firmness of an upright characer, for that
supple and verfable turn, which accommo-
dates itself to the times, and assumes what-
ever appearance seems most convenient
for interest.- Such are the dangers to
which we are exposed, in times of corrup-

tion,

tion, of followitg the lmulittifle to do evil; SERM.
dangers which require our mol: serious _
attention and care, in order to guard our-
selves against them.-I proceed to lay such
considerations before you as may be useful
for that purpose.

IN thesis place, Let us remember that

the multitude are very bad guides; are so
far from having a title to implicit regard,
that he who blindly follows them, may be
presumed to err. For prejudice, and pas-
sion, are known to sway the crowd. They
are struck by the outside of things; they
inquire superficially, admire false appear-
ances, and pursue false goods. Their
opinions are for the most part hastily form-
ed, and of course are variable, floating,
and inconsistent. In every age, how ifmall
is the number of those who are guided
by reason, and caln inquiry? How few
do we find, who have the wisdom to think
and judge for themselves, and have fteadi-
pess to follow out their own judgment?

1) d .4 Ignorance,

SER M. Ignorance, and low education, darken the
XIX.

views of the vulgar. Fafmion and pre-
judice, vanity and pleasure, corrupt the
sentiments of the great. The example of
neither, affords any standard of what is
right and wife. If the philosopher, when
employed in the pursuit of truth, finds it
necessary to disregard eftablifled preju-
dices and popular opinion, flall we, in the
more important inquiry after the rule of
life, submit to such blind guidance as the
practice of the many; esteeming whatever
they admire, and following wherever they
lead Be assured, that he who sets up the
general opinion as the standard of truth,
or the general praaice as the measure of
right, is likely, upon such a foundation,
to build no other fuperftru&ture except
vice and folly.-If the practice of the mul-
titude be a good pattern for our imnitation,
their opinions surely should be as good a
rule for our belief. Upon this principle,
we must exchange Christianity for Paga-
nifm or Mahometanifm, and the light of
the Reformation for the fuperititons of

Popery;

Popery; for these latter have ever had, and s E R M

XIX.

fiill have, the numbers and the multitude
on their fide.-Our Saviour has fuflicient-
ly charaderifed the way of the world,
when he describes the broaroad oad in which
the multitudes go, as the road 5Ihich leads
to dCflruiion; and the path which leads to
happineis, as a narrow pa/h, which fewer
find. From which it is an easy inference,
that to have the multitude on our fide, is
so far from affording any presumption
of our being safe, that it flould lead us
to fuilped that we are holding the course
of danger.

IN the feconl! place, As the pradice of

the multitude is no argument of a good
praftice, so it cannot afiord us either julli-
fication, or fafctty, in what is evil.- It as-
fords us, I fay, no jullification. Truth
and error, virtue and vice, are things of
immutable nature. The difference be-
tween them is grounded on that basis of
eternal reason, which no opinions or cuf-
toms of men can asset: or alter. lWhether

virtue

SERM. virtue be esteemed, or not, in the world,
XiX. this makes it neither more nor less cfti-

mable in itself. It carries always a divine
authority, which men cannot impair. It
flines with an essential lustre, which
praise cannot brighten, nor reproach tar-
nifi. It has a right to regulate the opi-
nions of men; but by their opinions can-
not be controlled. Its nature continues
invariably the fame, though all the mul-
titude of fools should concur in endea-
vouring to turn it into ridicule. [So un-
to them, fays the prophet Isaiah, that
call evil, good, and good, evil; that put
darkne cffs fn lt or

light, and lightr darks;

that put bitter for fwcct, and sweet for bit-
ter.-Their root jhall be as rottenness, and
their blojom Jfiall go up as dui; lecanfe they
have caJt away the law of the Lord of Hojls,
and defified the word of the lHoIl One of
Israel *.

As the pracice of the multitude fur-
nithes no justification to the finner, so

* Isaiah, v. 20, 24.

neither

neither does it afford him any safety. Re- SE R M.

XIX.

ligion is altogether a matter of personal r
concern. God hath delivered to every
man the rule of lif'e; and every man must
think and as for himself; becaufi for
himself he is to anfv.er. If others he
wicked, it will be the worse for them ; but
it will not, on that account, be the better
for us, if we 1all be evil also. Let vice
be ever so prevalent, it is still that evil
thiLng which Ihe Lord abborrcth; and,
though hlad join il hmand, the wicked shalt
not escape unpuniffied. So far is the
number of offcndcrs from furnishing any
ground of safety, that it calls more loudly
for divine justice to interpose. It is as
easy for the Almighty arm to crush a
whole guilty focicty, as to punifi a single
individual; and when the disobedient sub-
je&ts of God countenance and strengthen
one another in licentioufncfs, by tranf-
grefing in troops and bands, it becomes
high time for his government to exert
itself, and let its vengeance forth.-One
could fcarccly think that any professor of

Christian

S ER M. Christian faith would fancy to himself
XIX. C-Y__ any apology from the way of the worldl

when he knows that the declared design
of his religion was, to distinguish him
from the world, which is said to lie infi:;
and that. Christ came to call out for him-
self a peculliar people, whose character it
Ihould be, lnot o be conslrmed to the tcori,
but transfor]med by the renecwing of their
Ininds.-So little, indeed, can the pradicc
of the world either justify or extenuate
vice, that it deserves our serious confi-
deration,

IN the third place, Whether there be

not several circumstances, which peculiarly
aggravate the guilt of those who follow
the multitude in evil. Do you not, there-
by, itrengthen the power of fin, and per-
petuate the pernicious influence of bad
example ? By striking off from the cor-
rupted crowd, you might be eminently
ufefil. You might animate and recover
many, whom weakiiefs and timidity keep
under bondage to the customs of the

world;

world; whereas, by tamely yielding to the S ER M.
current of vice, you render that current Ik.-
stronger for carrying others along; you
add weight and itability to the bad cause;
you lend to the multitude all' the force of
your example, for drawing others after
them, to the commission of evil.-While
you are thus accessory to the ruin of others,
you are, at the fame time, fiamping
your own character with the foulest and
deepest impressions of corruption. By fur-
rendering your judgment, and your con-
science, to the multitude, you betray the
rights, and degrade the honour, of the ra-
tional nature. Nothing great or worthy
can be expeced of him, who, instead of
confidering what is right in itself, and
what part it is fittest for one in his fiation
to an, is only confidering what the world
will think, or fay of him; what)fort of
behaviour will pass with the fairest shew,
and be most calculated to please the ma-
ny. When a man has thus given up the
liberty and indepeldence of his mind, we

I O can

SERM. can no longer reckon upon him in any
XLx. thing. We cannot tell how far he may be

carried in vice. There is too much ground
to dread, that he will lie, dissemble, and be-
tray; changing himself, without fcruplc,
into every shape that will find favour
among those whom he seeks to gain.-
While this servility to the world infers
baseness towards men, it involves also the
highest impiety towards God. It liews
that we yield to the world that reverence
and submission, which is only due to the
divine law. We treat the government of
the Almighty with icorn; as if his pre-
cepts deserved to be obeyed, only when they
suited the caprice and the follies of the
multitude; and were entitled to no regard,
as soon as they contradiced the reigning
customs and faflions of the world.-
While such conduct carries in it so much
wickedness and folly, let us observe,

IN the fourth place, That the mos excel-
lent and honourable character which can

adorn

adorn a man and a Christian, is acquired, SERM.

XIX.

by refilling the torrent of vice, and ad- M
hering to the cause of God and virtue
against a corrupted multitude. It will be
found to hold in general, that all those,
who, in any of the great lines of life, have
distinguished themselves for thinking pro-
soundly, and aDing nobly, have despised
popular prejudices, and departed, in several
things, from the common ways of the
world. On no occasion is this more re-
quifite for true honour, than where reli-
gion and morality are concerned. In times
of prevailing licentiousness, to maintain
unblemished virtue, and uncorrupted in-
tegrity; in a public or a private cause, to
stand firm by what is fair apd jus, amidif
discouragements and opposition; delpifing
groundless censure and reproach; disdain-
ing all compliance with public manners,
when they are vicious and unlawful; and
never aflamed of the punaual discharge of
every duty towards God and man ;-this
is what flews true greatness of spirit, and
will force approbation even from the dege-

nerate

SERM. nerate multitude themselves. " This is

" the man," their conscience will oblige
them to acknowledge, " whom we are un-
" able to bend to mean condescensions.
"t We fee it in vain either to flatter or to
" threaten him; he relts on a principle
' within, which we cannot shake. To this

man you may, on any occasion, safely
"commit your cause. He is incapable

of betraying his trust, or deserting his

" friend, or denying his faith." Thus
his rightcoif Lcf comes forth as the light,
and his judlgmelt as the loon-day,

It is, accordingly, this steady inflexible

virtue, this regard to principle, superior to
all custom and opinion, which peculiarly
marked the characters of those, in any
age, who have Shone as faints or heroes;
and has consecrated their memory to all
posterity. It was this that obtained to
ancient Enoch the most singular testimony
of honour from heaven. He continued
to walk with God, when the world
apostatised from him. He pleated God,
and was beloved of him; so that, living

among

living among finners, he was translated to E R M.
heaven without feeing death; Yea,fpcedily xlx.
was he taken away, lesI wickedness Jlould
have altered his underlandiltg, or deceit be-
guiled his foul-. When Sodom could not
furnish ten righteous men to save it, Lot
remained unspotted amidst the contagion.
He lived like an angel among Ipirits of
darkness; and the destroying flame was not
permitted to go forth, till the good man
was called away by a heavenly messenger
fiom his devoted city. When all fejhJ had
corrupted their uway upon the earth, then
lived Noah, a righteous man, and a preach-
er of righteousness. He flood alone, and
was scoffed by the profane crew. But
they by the deluge were swept away;
while on him, Providence conferred the
immortal honour, of being the restorer of
a better race, and the father of a new
world. Such examples as there, and such
honours conferred by God on them who
withstood the m'iultitude of evil doers,

* WCfdom of Solomon, iv. I.
VOL. IT. E e should

SE R M. Should often be present to our minds.

XIX.
- Let us oppose them to the numbers of

low and corrupt examples, which we be-
hold around us; and when we are in ha-
zard of being swayed by such, let us for-
tify our virtue, by thinking of those who,
in former times, ihone like stars in the
midst of surrounding darkness, and are
now ihining in the kingdom of heaven, as
the brightness of the firmamnt, for ever and
ever.-As our honour is thus deeply con-
cerned in our acing a fledfaft and virtuous
part, let us also confider,

IN theSffth place, How little, in point

of interest, can be gained by the favour of
the multitude, and how much will cer-
tainly be loft, by following them to do
evil. We may, thereby, render ourselves
more agreeable to some with whom we
are conneted; and 'v artful compliances,
may please ourfelve, .vith the profpea
of promoting our fortu , But there ad-
vantages, such as they are, remain doubt-
ful and uncertain. The wi .! of popular

opinion

Opinion is ever shifting. It will often SERM.

XIX.

leave us at a loss what course to fleer; i
and, after all our trouble and anxiety to
catch the favourable gale, it may on a fud-
den forsake us. For the versatility of cha-
ra&er, the meanness and inconsistency of
conduct, into which a dependent on the
multitude is betrayed, frequently ren-
der him, in the end, an object of con-
tempt to those whom he fought to please.
But supposing him fuccefsfuil in his views,
no worldly advantages, which are pur-
chased by dishonourable means, can be
either solid or lasting. They bring no ge-
nuine fatisfadtion to a man, who is con-
fcious to himself of having given up his
principles to serve the world. As long as
he could be satisfied with his own conduet,
he might bear up under undeserved dif-
couragement;- but when he becomes def-
picable in his own eyes, worldly honours
lose their luftre.-What can the multitude
do for you, after you have followed them
in evil? They cannot restore to you the
peace of an innocent mind, nor heal the

E e 2 sorrows

S E R . sorrows of a wounded spirit, nor Ihield
XIX.

you from the dilpleafure of God. They
can do little to support you in the hour of
afflidion, and nothing to deliver your
fouls in the day of death. Forsaken and
disconsolate, the world, for the most part,
calls off its votaries in the end; and when
you compute the final amount, it will
prove a very small consolation, that, as you
have had sharers in guilt, you shall have
companions also in punishment.

Look forward to the issue of things.

The multitude of men possess now, in a
great measure, the difIribution of praise
and censure, of success and disappoint-
ment, according to their caprice. But this
confused and promiscuous distribution is
not always to subsist. The day cometh,
when we all are to appear before a more
difeerning Judge, and a more impartial
tribunal. The day cometh, when our
Lord Jesus Christ ihall descend from hea-
ven in all the glory of his Father, to un-
veil every character, and to render to every
man according to bis ior-ks. At that day,

how

how fiall he lift up his head, who hath SERM.

XIX

been all his life the slave of the world's _.
opinion; who hath moulded his principles,
and his practice, solely to please the mul-
titude; who hath been afitamed of his Sa-
viour and his words; and to gain favour
with men, hath apostatised fiom the na-
tive sentiments and ditates of his heart?
-To fay all in one word; there is a con-
test now between God and the world.
These form the opposite fides which di-
vide mankind. Confider well, to which of
these you willchoofe to adhere. On the one
fide, lie your allegiance, your honour, and
your interest; on the cther, lie your
guilt and your shame. For the one, con-
science and reason, for the other, passion
and inclination, plead. On the one hand,
are the approbation of God, immortal ho-
nour, and divine rewards; on the other,
-remember and beware,-are the flings
of conscience, endless puniflment, and
endless infamy.

Ee 3

# SERMON XX. On the WISDOM of GOD*. I TIMOTHY, i. 17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honour and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

[ 422 ]

SERMON XX.
On the WISDOM of GOD*.

i TIMOTHY, i. 17.
Now unto the King eternal, immortal, in.

viible, the only wife God, be honour and
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
s ExRM. IT s of the highest importance to reli-

_ gious conduct, that our minds be fill.

ed with suitable conceptions of the attri-

* This concluding difcoprfe was chiefly intended, to be

a general recapitulation of instances of the wisdom of
Providence, several of which have been more fully
illultrated in other discourses, contained in this, or in
some of the preceding volumes.

butes

butes of God. They are the foundations s ER M.
of our reverence for him; and reverence is XX
the foundation of religion. All the di-
vine perfections are interesting to man.
Almighty power, in conjuncion with
Eternity and Omnipresence, naturally in.
spires solemn awe. Infinite Goodness re-
lieves the mind from that oppression which
Power alone would produce; and, from
our experience of prelent benefits, and our
remembrance of the pait, creates love, gra.
titude, and trust. In the middle between
these, stands the contemplation of divine
Wisdom, which conjoins impreions of
awe with those of comfort; and while it
humbles us into profound submission, en-
courages, at the famed time, our reliance on
that King etcrnl, immortal, and inviible,
who is justly tiled in the text, the only wis
God.

Among men, wisdom is a quality en-

tirely different from cunning or craft.
It always supposes good and fair inten-
tion in the person who, poffefTes it; and

E e 4 imports,

SER M. imports, that laudable ends are pursued

xx.
,-__L by proper and jutifiable means. In like

manner, wisdom in the Supreme Being
cannot be separated from the reaitude of
his nature. It is, in him, an exertion of
benevolence; and imports, that the pur-
poses of justice and goodness are carried
on and accomplished, by means the most
effectual. To meditate on some of those in-
fiances in which this divine wisdom is dif-
played, cannot but be highly favourable to
the impressions both of piety, and of virtue.

IT is difficult to fay, whether the natu-

ral, or the moral, world, afford the most
conspicuous and finking displays of the
wisdom of God. Not one, nor many dif-
courses, nor indeed the study and labour 'of
a whole life, were, in any degree, sufficient
to explore them. Of the proofs of wis-
dom which the natural world affords, I
cannot attempt now to discourse. Any
illustration of there would lead to discus.
lions of a scientific kind, which more

properly

properly belong to the philosopher; and SERM.
on which philosophy has often employed , .
itself, with much utility and honour. I
shall only take notice that, in proportion
as human knowledge hath enlarged its
sphere of research and discovery, in the
fame proportion, hath the wiflom of the
Creator struck the minds of all inquirers
and observers, with the higlhet admiration.
All nature is in truth a scene of wonders.
In the disposition of the heavenly bodies,
and the general arrangement of the system
of the universe; in the firuture of the
earth; in the endless variety of living
creatures that fill it; and in the provision
made for them all, to enable them to fulfil
the ends of their being, it is not easy to
determine, whether power, wisdom, or
goodness be most conspicuous. It belongs
not only to the heavens to declare the glory
of God, and to the firmament to jew jorth
his handy-work; in the smallest and most
inconsiderable, as well as in the most il-
luRtrious works of God, equal marks ap-
pear of profound design and confulmmate

art.

SERM. art. It has been jutly said, that there is
XX.

^ not a vegetable that grows, nor an infect

that moves, but what is sufficient to con-
found the atheist, and to afford the candid
observer endless materials of devout ador.
ation and praile.

WHEN we turn to the moral world,

the field of admiration which opens to us
is no less extensive and striking. I can
only mention a few instances of that ex-
quifite wisdom which everywhere meets
us.

In the fiyt place, let us attend to the

constitution of human nature. Though we
are taught by revelation, to confider it as
now impaired by the fall, yet, as it flands,
we behold the traces of a noble ftruture,
planned and executed with the highest skill.
All the powers and faculties bestowed on
man are such, as perfetly suit his condition,
and adapt him to the purposes for which
he was defigned.-Senfes were given him,
that he might distinguish what is necef-
fary for the preservation and welfare of his

body.

body. Now, suppose that any one of S ER M.
those senses, the fight, for instance, or the XX.
hearing, or the touch, had been in a con-
fiderable degree either more blunt, or
more acute, than it is at present, what an
unhappy change would this have made
upon our fiate? On the one hand, greater
imperfecion of the organs, would have
deprived us of all the comfort and advan-
tage which we now enjoy from such
powers. On the other hand, a greater de-
gree of exquisite sensibility in them, would
have rendered life a burden to us. Our
senses, instead of being inlets to know-
ledge and pleasure, would then have be-
come constant avenues to uneasiness and
pain. Their powers, therefore, are fkil-
fully adjusted to that measure of strength,
which allows them to answer the purposes
of health, ilfety, and comfort; without
either falling short of this line of useful-
ness, or improperly, and hurtfully, firetching
beyond it.

In the mind, appetites and passions
were placed, as the moving powers of the

foul,

S ER M. foul, to impel its acivity. But as their
;_ impulse rcquired regulation and restraint.

reason was, at the fame time, conferred as
the direcing power.-Of all our paflions,
felf-love, and the desire of felf-prefervation,
were, with the utmost propriety, made the
itrongeft, for a reason which the meanest
capacity may comprehend. Every man
is mioft immediately committed by Provi-
dence to his own care and charge. He
knows his own situation best; and has
more opportunities of promoting his oywn
happiness, than he can have of advan-
cing the happiness of any other person.
It was therefore fit and wife, that, by
the strongest instinCt, he should be prompt-
ed to attend to himfelf.-At the fame
time, as no man standing alone is sus-
ficient for his own welfare, it was ne-
ceitEry that, by mutual sympathy and
facial iinftinds, we should be drawn to
give aid to one another. Here it deserves
our particular notice, that the force of
those social inftinds is, with admirable
propriety, proportioned by Providence to

the

the degree of their usefulness and import- s E R .
ance *. Thus, that parental affection, x
which the helpless Aate of infancy and
childhood renders so needful, is made the
firongeft of them all. Next, come those ties
of blood, which prompt mutual kindness
among those who are intimately joined to-
gether by brotherhood, and other family
connexions. To these luccecds that va-
luable infiint of pity, which impels us to
assist the diflleiltd, wherever we behold
them. To take part with others in their
good fortune belongs to man's social na-
ture, and increases the fum of happiness.
At the fame time, to take part with the
prosperous is less neceflary than to sym-
pathife with the unhappy; and therefore
the principle which prompts us to rejoice
with them that rejoice, is made not to be
so strong, as that which impels us to weep
with them that wleep.

But they are not only the laudable and
important parts of our dilfofition, which

See Serm. II. Vol. iii.

discover

SERM. discover the wisdom of the Author of our
xx. L-y. frame; even our imperfecions and fol-

lies, are by him rendered subservient to
uleful ends.-Amidft those inequalities
of condition, for inflance, which the state
of human life required, where it was ne-
ceflary that some should he rich, and
others poor, that some should be eminent
and distinguished, and others obscure and
mean, how seasonable is that good opinion
which every one entertains of himself;
that felf-complacency with which he com-
pares himself to others; and that fond
hope, which is ever pleasing him with the
profpec of future pleasures and advan-
tages in life? Without those flattering fen-
fations, vain as they often are, how totally
insupportable would this world become, to
many of its inhabitants? Whereas, by
means of them, Providence hath contrived
to balance, in a great measure, the inequa-
lities of condition among mankind. It hath
contrived to diffuse pleasure through all
ranks; and to bring the high and the
low nearer to a level with each other,

8 than

than might at first be supposed. It hath SE R L

XX.

smoothed the most rugged tracts of ,
human life; and hath gilded with
rays of borrowed light its moR dreary
scenes.

One instance of Divine wisdom, il

framing our nature, is so remarkable as
to demand particular attention; that is,
the measure according to which, God hath
dispensed knowledge and ignorance to
man. There is nothing of which we are
more ready to complain, than of our nar-
row and confined views of nature, and of
Providence, and of all things around us:
And yet, upon examination, it will be
found, that our views extend, on every fide,
just as far they ought; and that, to
fee and know more than is allowed us, in-
stead of bringing any advantage, would
produce certain misery*.-- We pry, for
instance, with impatient curiosity, into
future events. Happily for us, they are
veiled and covered up; and one peep be-

* See Serm. IV. Vol. i. and Serm. IX. Vol. iv.

hind

SE RM, hind that veil, were it permitted, would

xx. be sufficient to poison the whole comfort

of our days, by the anticipation of sorrows
to come.-In like manner, we often wish
with eagerness to penetrate into the secrets
of nature, to look into the invisible world,
and to be made acquainted with the whole
destiny of man. Our wish is denied;
we are environed on all hands with myf-
tery; and that mystery is our happiness.
For were those great invisible objets fully
disclosed, the fight of them would con-
found and overwhelm us. It would
either totally derange our feeble faculties,
or would engross our attention to flch
a degree, as to lay us aside from the buG-
ness, and concerns of this world. It would
have the fame effte, as if we were carried
away from the earth, and mingled among
the inhabitants of some other planet.-
The knowledge that is allowed to us, was
designed to fit us for acting our part in
our present slate. At the exaat point,
therefore, where usefulness ends, know-
ledge stops, and ignorance commences.

2 Light

Light shines upon us, as long as it serves E R.M.

XX.

to guide our path; but.forfakes us, as soon ~., ,
as it becomes noxious to the eye; and
salutary darkness is appointed to close the
fcene.-Thloughltlefs and fRupid must that
man be, who, in all this furniture of
the human mind, in this exaa adjust-
ment of its several powers to the great
purposes of life, discerns not the hand
of adorable Wisdom, as well as of infinite
Goodness.

' IN the second place, Let us contemplate
the fame wisdom, as exhibiting itself to
us in the moral government of the world.
We are informed by revelation, that this
life is designed by Providence to be an in-
troduaory part of existence to intelligent
beings; a fate of education and difci-
pline, where creatures fallen from their
original rank, may gradually recover their
recfitude and virtue. Under this view,
which is in itself perfectly consonant to
all that reason discovers, we shall find the
general course of human affairs, confused

VOL. IV. F f as

S E R M. as it may Sometimes appear, to have been

XX. ordered with exquisite wifdom.-It was

necessary to such a state, that all the
aCtive powers of man ihould be brought
forth into exercise, and completely tried.
It became proper, therefore, that there
ihould be a mixture of charaters in the
world; and that men should be {hewn in
a variety of situations *. Hence that di-
verfity of tempers and dispositions which
are found in society; those inequalities in
rank and station, which we fee taking
place; and those different talents and in-
clinations, which prompt men to different
pursuits. By these means, every depart-
ment in society is filled up; and every man
has some sphere prepared for him, in
which he can ac. He is brought forth
as on a busy stage, where opportunity
is given for his character to display itself
fully.-His life is, with great propriety,
varied by interchanges cf prosperity and
adverlity. Always prosperous, he would

* See Serm. IV. Vol. iv.

I0 become

become dissipated, indolent, and giddy :S ERM.
Always affliced, he would be fretful, de- .-n
jeted, and fullen. There are few perbons,
therefore, or none, whose lot fliares not of
both these flates; in order that every dif-
position of the heart may be explored,
and every mean of improvement afforded.
-As man is ultimately designed for a
higher slate of existence than the present,
it was not proper that this world fliould
prove a paradise to him, or fllould as-
ford him that complete fitisfacion which
he incessantly pursues. Disappointments,
therefore, are often made to blast his
hopes; and, even while the comforts of
life last, they are always mixed with tome
troubles; in order that an exceflive at-
tachment to this world may gradually be
loosened. The course of things is evi-
dently so ordered by Providence, that oc-
currences shall be always happening, to
bring down the most prolperous to a le-
vel with the reft of his brethren, and to
raise up, in their turn, the low and the
diltreffed.

Fs2 In

SE R M. In the midit of those vicissitudes, which
xx.

are so obviously conducive to improve-
ment, both wisdom and goodness required,
that the Supreme Governor of the world
should be feeh to protect the interefis, and
favour the fide of virtue. But in the de-
gree of evidence, with which this was to
be shewn, it was no less requisite, that a
proper temperament should be observed.
Had virtue been always completely re-
warded, and made happy on earth, men
would no longer have had a motive for
aspiring to a more blessed state. In the
cafe of every crime, had divine juflice
interposed to bring complete punishment
on the head of the criminal; or had all
the felicity which is prepared for the just
in a future world, and all the misery which
there awaits the wicked, been already dif-
played to the view, and rendered fenfib!l/
to the feelings of men, there would have
been an end of that slate of trial, for which
our whole condition on earth was intend-
ed. It was nreceflary, therefore, that, at
present, we fhculd jec thrcozgh a glass

7 (ar3ly.

darkly. A certain degree of mystery and s E R M.

XX.

obscurity was, with perfeCt wisdom, left L--
on the conduct of the Almighty *.--But;
amidst that obscurity, sufficient encou-
ragement and support is in the mean time
given to virtue; sufficient ground is afford-
ed for the full belief, that it is what the
Deity loves, and will finally reward. His
approbation of it is signified to every man
by the voice of conscience. Inward satis-
falion and peace are made always to be-
long to it; and general elteem and ho-
nour, for the moR part, to attend it. On
the other hand, the wicked, in no fitua-
tion of life, are allowed to be truly happy.
Their vices and their passions are made to
trouble their prosperity; and their pu-
nifhmnent to grow out of their crimes.
Let any one attentively recolleQ the ma-
terial incidents of his life; and he will,
for the most part, be able to trace the
chief misfortunes which have befallen

* See Serm. IV. Vol. i.

F f 3 him,

SERM. him, to some guilt he has contracted, or

xx. _i-- some folly he has committed . Such

is the profound wisdom with which Pro-
vidence conducts its counsels, that, al-
though it does not appear to interpose,.
men are made to reap from their actions,
the fruits which they had deserved; their
iniquities to correfE them, and their back.
Jlidingx to reprove them; and while they
susser, they are forced to acknowledge the
justice of their puniihment.--Thefe are
not matters of rare or occasional obferva-
tion; but deeply interwoven with the
texture of human affairs. They discover
a regular plan, a formed system, according
to which the whole train of Providence
proceeds; and which manifefls to every
serious observer the consummate wisdom
of its Author.-As thus, in the conftitu-
tion of human nature, and in the moral
government of the world, divine wisdom
so remarkably appears, I must oblerve,

See Serm. XIII. Vol. iv.

IN

IN the third place, That in the redemp- s E R M.

XX.

tion of the world, and in the oeconomy_
of grace, it ihines no less confpicoufly.
The subjet which opens to us here is too
extensive to be fully illustrated at present;
but the great lines of it are obvious *.-
In carrying on a plan, by which forgive-
ness was to be dispensed to an offending
race, wisdom required that the authority
of the legislator should be fully preserved,
and no such relaxation be introduced in-
to government, as might give licence or
encouragement to offenders. According-
ly, the most admirable provision was
made for these important purposes, by the
interposition of the Son of God suffering
and dying for finners. The sovereign
awe of juflice is maintained, while jus-
tice is tempered with mercy. Men are
bound to righteousness, under the highest
fantions; and ample security and con-
folation are, at the fame time, afforded to

* See Serm. V. Vol. i.-Serm. V. Vol. ii.-Serm. XV.
Vo. iii.-Serm. V. Vol. iv.

F f4 the

s E R M. the penitent. By the inftrudions, and

xx.
L-_ example, of their Saviour, they are in-

stru'ted in their duty; and through a
Mediator and Intercessor, they are en.
couraged to offer their worship and prayers
to the Almighty. They are allured that,
in whatever is too arduous for human
nature to perform, they fiall be assisied
by a Divine Spirit; and under all trials
and difficulties, they are supported by the
express promise of that eternal life, which
is brought to light by the gofpel.-It is
not possible for the understanding to con-
ceive any method of salvation, planned
with more goodness and executed with
more wisdom, than what is 'hewn in the
gospel of Christ. The consideration of
this constitution alone, gives us full rea-
son to join in that exclamation of the
Apostle: 0 the depth of the riches both of
the wildorm and the knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways pJy7 finding outl ! '

* Rom. i. 33.

FROM·

FROM this short survey which we have SERM.

taken of Divine wifdo:n, as discovering XX
itself, in the whole complex frame of the
moral world; in the conflitution of hu-
man nature; in the government of hu-
man affairs; and in the redemption of
the human race; we cannot but perceive
how much reason we have to prostrate
ourselves before God, and with all humi-
lity to worship and adore.-When we
view that immense firuaure of the uni-
verse in which we dwell; when we think
of Him, whose wisdom has planned the
whole system of being; whose mind com-
prehends, whose counsels diredt, the whole
course of events, from the beginning to the
end of time; by whom nothing is so in-
considerable as to be overlooked, or so
transient as to be forgotten; who attends
to the concerns of the poor man in his
cottage, while he is steering the fun and
the moon in their course through the
heavens; into what astonishment and
felf-annihilation do we fall! Before him
.11 our boatsed knowledge is ignorance,

and

SERM. and our wisdom is folly. Wherever we

xx. _e rcart our eyes on his works and ways, we

find all things adjufled in number, 'weight,
and nmenfire; and after all that we can
survey, Lo ! these are but a part of his
ways; and how fnall a portion is heard of
him .!

It is the power of God, which produces

among the multitude of men any impref-
lions of religion. When thunder roars
in the heavens, or an earthquake flakes
the ground, they are itruck with awe, and
disposed to worflip an invisible power.
But such impressions of Deity are occa-
fional, and transitory. The lasting reve-
rence of a Supreme Being ariles, in a well
informed mind, from the display of that
infinite wisdom which all the universe
presents. Its operations are constantly,
though silently, going on around us.
We may view it in the peaceful and fe-
date state of the universe, as well as in its
greatest conmmotions; we behold it in
every inlet that moves on the ground, at
the fiame time tlat we admeire it in the

revolutions

revolutions of the celestial bodies. Hap- SE R M.

xX.

py for us, if the contemplation flall nou- -
rifli that temper of habitual devotion,
which so well becomes dependent beings,
and is so intimately connected with all
virtue !

But the chief effeEt that ought to be

produced by meditation on the divine
wisdom, is perfect resignation to the Go-
vernor of the universe, and entire trust
in his administration. Our private mif-
fortunes and disappointments are too often
the fuljea of querulous complaints, and
even of unjust suspicions of Providence.
But when in the whole natural and mo-
ral world, we behold an arrangement of
things which plainly discovers the most
consummate wisdom, can we believe, that
in the arrangement of our petty concerns,
this wisdom is dormant and neglectftl?
How much more reason is there to think,
that our ignorance of the divine plans
nifleads our judgment, than that the

See Serm. XIX. VcI. iii.

nr ibex~

sE R M. wisdom of the Almighty has erred in di-

xx.
- treating our private affairs ?-Divine

wisdom, as I observed in the beginning,
is an exertion of divine benevolence. It
has, it can have, no other scope than to
accomplish the best ends, by the most
proper means. Let the wisdom, there-
fore, and the goodness, of the Deity, be
ever conjoined in our idea. Let every
new discovery of divine wisdom, be a
new ground of hope, of joy, and of cor-
dial submission, to every virtuous man.
Let him be thankful that he lives in a
world, where nothing happens to him by
chance, or at random; but where a great,
a wife, and beneficent Mind continually
superintends every event.

Under the faith of this great principle

of religion, let us proceed in the course
of our duty, with stedfast and undifmay-
ed mind. Let us retain faithful allegi-
ance to our Creator and our Redeemer;
and then we may always hope the best;
and cast our care upon him who caretb for
us. Wait on the Lord; be of good courage,

aind

and He Jhall Jrengthen your heart. Al- S E R M.

XX.

though thou fyeJef, thou canI not fee him, yet _
judgment is before him; therefo re r thou
in hbim.- Let us begin every undertak-
ing with humble dependance on his as-
fiftance for enabling us to prosecute it to
the end. When our undertakings are si-
nihfed, and the close of life approaches,
with praise to him let us conclude all our
labours.

Unto the King eternal, immortal, invifi-

ble, the only wis God, be honour and glory
for ever and ever. Amen.

F INI S.

# BOOKS printed for A. STRAHAN, and T. CADELL; and sold by T. CADELL Jun. and W. DAVIES, (Successors to Mr. CADELL,) opposite Catherine - street, in the Strand.

BOOKS printed for A. STRAHAN, and

T. CADELL; and fold by T. CADELL
Jun. and XW. DAVIES, (Succeflors to
MIr. CADELL,) opposite Catherine-fireet,
in the Strand.
I. LECTURES on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres.

By Hugh Blair, D.D. (Author of Sermons,
4Vols.) 3Vols. 4th Edition.

2. The History of Great Britain, from the first In-

vafion of it by the Romans under Julius Cdfar, written
on a new Plan. By Robert Henry, D.D. to Vols,
31. Ios.

*** Dr. Henry's History is written on the follow.

ing plan: Each Book begins and ends at rome re-
markable Revolution. Every Book is divided into
seven Chapters, which do not carry on the thread of
the hilory one after another, as in other works of this
kind; but the seven chap:trs of the fame book begin
at the fame point of time, run parallel to one another
and end toget!her, each chapter presenting ihe Reader
with the Hiltory of one particular objec, viz. the firli
contains the Civil and Military History of Great
Britian; the second, the History cf Religion, or the
Ecclesiastical History; the third, the Hiflory of the
Constitution, Goyernment, Laws, and Courts of Jus-
tice; fourth, the History of Learning, learned Men,
and of the chief Seminaries of Learning; fifth, the
History of Arts, uleful and ornamental; sixth, Com-
merce, Shipping, Money, Coin, and the Prices of
Commodities; seventh, Manners, Virtues, Vices,
remarkable Culloms, Language, Dress, Diet, DiVer-
sions, &c.

3I The History of England, from the Invasion of

7ulius Crefar to the Revolution in I688. By David
Hume, Elq. 8 Vols. A new edition, with his Life,

writt'el

written by himself, and illutrated with Plates.
21. i6s.

4. I he fame continued from the Revolution to the

Death of King Gcorge 11. by T. Smiltt, M. D.
5 Vols. with Plates, il. 15s.

14-t Complete Sets in 13 Vols. 41. 1 s.
5. The Hitfory of Scotlan', durinl t e R.igns of

Queen ilMary and of King /ames VI. till his Accellion
to the Crown of Enlandl; with a Review of the
SeCtti/fl Hiltory, previous to that Period; and an Ap-
pendix, containinl Original Ppers. 2 Vols. By
I/illiam Rcbertfjn, D. I). A new Edition.

6. The Hifiory of the Reign of the Emperor

Charles V., with a View of the I'rorcf of Society in
Europe, from the Suhverfion of the Roman Empire to
the Beginning of the 16th Century. By l7illiam
Robterjln, D. D. 4 Vols. adorned with Fiontifpieccs.
A new Edition.

7. The History of Amerkia. By Dr. Rolertfin, in

3 Vols. Illustrated with Maps.

8. The History of Ancient Greece, its ColonieR and

Conquefis, from the earlielt Accounts till the Divi-
sion of the Mancedo,'ian Empire in the Eal; including
the History of Literature, Philosophy, and the fine Arts.
By 7ohnGillies, LL. D. F. A. S. 2d Edition, 4 Vois.
II. 8s.

9. The Hifiory of the Reign of Philip II. King of

Spain. By Rclert Jatfcn, I.L. . Proleflbr of Phi-
lofophy and Rhetoric at the Univcrlity of St.. Anldrw's.
3d Edition, 3 Vols.

to. A Philosophical and Political Hillory of the

Settlements and Trade of the Eurcpsans in the Eafl
and fIeft Indies, translated from tbe Fi'cech of the Abbe
Reynall, by 7. O. ' i/ramos, 1;. R. S. A new Edition,
carefully collated with and including all the Additions
of the Author's last Edition ; with a rnwv Set of Maps,
including one of the United States of America, accord-
aig to last Treaty, in 8 Vols.

ix. An

rt. An Ecclesiastical Hiflory, Ancient and Miodern,

from the Bir:h of Chr/f to the Beginning of the
prc'fent Century. In which the Rife, Progress, and
Variations of Church Power are conlidered, in their
Connecifon with the State of Learning and Philofo-
phy, and the Political Hitlory of Europe, during that
Period. By the late learned John Lawrence MAjheim,
D. D. Translated and accomp.nied with Notes and
Chronological Tables. By Archibal( Macaine, D. D.
To the Whole is added, an accurate Index. The 4th
Edition corrected, and improved by additional Notes,
and several Appendixes. 6. Vols. 21. 2s.

12. Travels into Poland, Russia, Swedcn, and Den-

nark. Interspersed wiii hiftonrcal Relations, and po-
litical Enquiries. By WIiliam CGxe, A. M. F. R. S.
oneof the SeniorFellowsof King's College, Cambridge;
Chap!ain to his Grace the Duke of Marlborough;
Member of the Imperial Economical Society at St.
Peet:siurtgh, and of the Royal Academy of Sciences at
Gopeznhagen. lilufirated with Charts and Engravings,
5 Vols. 3d Edition, Il. )7s. 6d.

13. Travels in Switzerland and the Country of the

Grilons; in a Series of Letters to W'illijam Melmoth, Efq.
from Willian Coxc, A. M . F. R. S F. A. S. &c. &c.
with a large Mliap of Switzer.iid, and other Plates.
3 Vols. 1l. 7s.

14. A Tour through Siily and MIalta; in a Series of

Letters to 7illic.; Bccfsrld, Efq. o' Scmerly, in Surfolk,
froil P. By'donc, F. R. S. 2 Vols. illultrattd with a
Map, 31d Edition, I2S.

I5. A View of Society and Mannezrs in Frmnce, Swit-

zScrlandL, and Germany, with Anecdotes reiating to Inbe
cmienlt CharaqLcrs. By JChn AMiOre, M.D. 2 Vols.
5th Edition, I2s.

10. A View of Society and Manners in Italy, by
the fame Author. 2 Vols. .:h Edition, I4s.

I'.-t Colmplete Sets of Dr.Alco)re's Travels in France,
S.ci;e'-landai G:'z!aiy, and Italy, in ., Vols. II. 6s.

nit. P
