4»

A
CRITICAL

DISSERTATION

ON THE
POEMS OF

OSSI

A N,

T R, £:
SON

OF F I N

GAL.

LONDON:
Printed for T. B E c K E T and P.

Head, in the Strand.

A. DE HOND T, at T/ly's-
MDCCLXIII.

,~

# Advertisement.

Advertisement.

HE Substance of the following Dissertation was
delivered by the Author in the Course of his

Leaures on Rhetorick and Belles-Lettres, in the Univer-
fity of Edinburgh. At the Desire of several of his
Hearers, he has enlarged, and given it to the Publick, in
its present Form.

In this Dissertation, it is proposed, to make some Ob-

servations on the ancient Poetry of Nations, particularly
the Runic and the Celtic; to point out those Chara&ers of
Antiquity, which the Works of Oflian bear; to give an
Idea of the Spirit and Strain of his Poetry; and after ap-
plying the Rules of Criticifin to Fingal, as an Epic
Poem, to examine the Merit of Oflian's Compositions in
general, with Regard to Description, Imagery, and
Sentiment.

A
CRITICAL DISSERTATION

ON THE
POEMS OF OSSIAN,

THE
SO N OF F I N G A L.

MONG the monuments remaining of the ancient fRate of
nations, few are more valuable than their poems or songs.
History, when it treats of remote and dark ages, is seldom

very inffrudive. The beginnings of society, in every country, are
involved in fabulous confusion; and though they were not, they
would furnish few events worth recording. But, in every period of
society, human manners are a curious fpedacle; and the moit natural
pictures of ancient manners are exhibited in the ancient poems of
nations. These present to us, what is much more valuable than the
history of such transactions as a rude age can afford, The history of
human imagination and passion. They make us acquainted with
the notions and feelings of our fellow-creatures in the most artless
ages; discovering what objects they admired, and what pleasures
they pursued, before those refinements of society had taken place,
which enlarge indeed, and diversify the tranfadicns, but disguise
the manners of mankind.

__ __ ___ __I __

B

Betides

Besides this merit, which ancient poems have with philosophical

observers of human nature, they have another with persons of taste.
They promise fome-of the highest beauties of poetical writing. Ir-
regular and unpolifhed we may expea the productions of unculti-
vated ages to be; but abounding, at the fame time, with that en-
thufiafm, that vehemence and fire, which are the foul of poetry.
For many circumstances of those times which we call barbarous, are
favourable to the poetical spirit. That fiate, in which human nature
ihoots wild and free, though unfit for other improvements, certainly
encourages the high exertions of fancy and passion.

In the infancy of societies, men live scattered and dilberfed, in the

midst offolitary rural scenes, where the beauties of nature are their
chief entertainment. They meet with many objects, to them new
and itrange; their wonder and furprize are frequently excited; and
by the sudden changes of fortune occurring in their unsettled state
of life, their passions are raited to the utmost. Their pafions have
nothing to restrain them: their imagination has nothing to check it.
They display themselves to one another without disguise; and con-
verse and ad in the uncovered simplicity of nature. As their feelings
are strong, so their language, of itself, assumes a poetical turn.
Prone to exaggerate, they describe every thing in the strongest co-
lours; which of course renders their speech piPurefque and figura-
tive. Figurative language owes its rife chiefly to two causes; to the
want of proper names for objects, and to the influence of imagina-
tion-and passion over the form of exprefion. Both these causes con-
curr in the infancy of society. Figures are commonly confidered as
artificial modes of speech, devised by orators and poets, after the
world had advanced to a refined state. The contrary of this is the
truth. Men never have used so many figures of flyle, as in those
rude ages, when, besides the power of a warm imagination to fug-
gest lively images, the want of proper and precise terms for the ideas
they would express, obliged them to have recourse to circumlocu-
tion, metaphor, coiparifon, and all those substituted forms of ex-
pretlfon, which .give a poetical air to language. An American
chief, at this day, harangues at the head of his tribe, in a more
bold metaphorical ityle, than a modern European would adventure
to use in an Epic poem.

5

In
2

3

In the progress of society, the genius and manners of men un-

dergo a change more favourable to accuracy than to sprightliness and
sublimity. As the world advances, the underflanding gains ground
upon the imagination; the understanding is more exercised; the
imagination, less. Fewer objedts occur that are new or furprizing,
Men apply themselves to trace the causes of things; they correct
and refine one another; they subdue or disguise their passions; they
form their exterior manners upon one uniform flandard of politeness
and civility. Human nature is pruned according to method and
rule. Language advances from sterility to copiousness, and at the
fame time, from fervour and enthusiasm, to corredtnefs and preci-
lion. Style becomes more chaste; but less animated. The progress
of the world in this refped resembles the progress of age in man.
The powers of imagination are most vigorous and predominant in
youth; those of the understanding ripen more slowly, and often at-
tain not their maturity, till the imagination begin to flag. Hence,
poetry, which is the child of imagination, is frequently most glow-
ing and animated in the firfi ages of society. As the ideas of our
youth are remembered with a peculiar pleasure on account of their
liveliness and vivacity; so the tnoft ancient poems have often proved
the greatest favourites of nations.

Poetry has been said to be more ancient than prose: and how-

ever paradoxical such an assertion may seem, yet, in a qualified
sense, it is true. Men certainly never converted with one another
in regular numbers; but even their ordinary language would in
ancient times, for the rearons before afligned, approach to a poeti-
cal flyle; and the first compositions transmitted to posterity, beyond
doubt, were, in a literal sense, poems; that is, compositions in
which imagination had the chief hand, formed into some kind
of numbers, and pronounced with a musical modulation or tone.
Mufick or song has been found coaxval with society among the
most barbarous nations. The only fubjecs which could prompt
men, in their firfl rude state, to utter their thoughts in compofi-
tions of any length, were such as naturally assumed the tone of
poetry; praises of their gods, or of their ancestors; commemora-
tions of their own warlike exploits; or lamentations over their mif-
fortunes. And before writing was invented, no other compositions,
except songs or poems, could take such hold of the imagination and

B 2 memory,

memory, as to be preserved by oral tradition, and handed down
from one race to another.

Hence we may expect to find poems among the antiquities of all

nations. It is probable too, that an extensive search would discover
a certain degree of resemb-lance among all the most ancient poetical
producions, from whatever country they have proceeded. Ini a
similar state of manners, similar objects and passions operating upon
the imaginations of men, will framp their produ(tions with the
amne general characer. Some diverlity will, no doubt, be occa-
sioned by climate and genius. But mankind never bear such re-
fembling features, as they do in the beginnings of society. Its
subsequent revolutions give rife to the principal diftindions among
nations; and divert, into channels widely separated, that current of
human genius and manners, which descends originally fiom one
spring. What we have been long accustomed to call the oriental
vein of poetry, because some of the earliest poetical producions
have come to us from the East, is probably no more oriental than
occidental; it is charaCteriftical of an age rather than a country; and
belongs, in some measure, to all nations at a certain period. Of
this the works of Offlan seem to furniih a remarkable proof.

Our present fubjedt leads us to invefligate the ancient poetical

remains, not so much of the east, or of the Greeks and Romans,
as of the northern nations; in order to discover whether the Gothic
poetry has any refeinblance to the Celtic or Galic, which we are
about to confider. Though the Goths, under which name we
usually conmprehend all the Scandinavian tribes, were a people alto-
gether fierce and martial, and noted, to a proverb, for their igno-
rance of the liberal arts, yet they too, from the elrlief'c ti:-cs, ha:
their poets and their songs. Their poets were ditinguihed by tihe
title of Scal/ers, and their f)ngs were termed i\f's.' Saxo Gram-

maticus,

* Olaus WVormius, in the appendix to invention, he fays erprefly, that amonc;

!:is Treatie de Literatura Runica, has all these reafurcs, rhyme, or correfpon-
given a particulr accournt of the Gothic dence of final syllables, was never cni-
poetry, commonly called, Runic, from ployed. Hle anal)fes the firuclure of oanl
RiIn's, swhich firnifies the Gothic l:tters. of there kinds of verfgc, that in which the
lie informs us that there were no fewer poem f ,cdbrog, afterwards quoted, is
than ;'3 different 1heads of mcafrilre or written; which exhibits a very finuiilar
lerfe u fie in their J9y/,/;; an i th !iuh. we fpecics of harmnny, if it can be al!owvce
are acciufio:::c to call rh:yme a Goihic that lnarc, depending neither upon rhyme

.!O.it
:4

5

maticus, a Danifl Historian of considerable note, who flouri0aed in
the thirteenth' century, informs us that very many of these songs,
containing the ancient traditionary flories of the country, were found
engraven upon rocks in the old Runic charaAer; several of which
he has translated into Latin, and inserted into his History. But his
versions are plainly so paraphraftical, and forced into such an imita-
tion of the style and the mealures of the Roman poets, that one
can form no judgment from them of the native spirit of the ori-
ginal. A more curious monument of the true Gothic poetry is
preserved by Olaus Wormius in his book de Literatura Runica. It
is an Epicedium, or funeral song, cornpofed by Regner Lodbrog;
and translated by Olaus, word for word, from the original. This
Lodlrog was a king of Denmark, who lived in the eighth century,
famous for his wars and victories; and at the fame time an emi-
nent Sca/der or poet. It was his misfortune to fall at lalt into the
hands of one of hi; enemies, by whom he was thrown into prison,
and condemned to be deitroyed by serpents.. In this situation he
iolaced himself with rehearsing all the exploits of his life. The
poem is divided into twenty-nine flanzas, of ten lines each; and
every tfanza begins ,with there words, Pugnavimus Enfibus, We
have fought with our swords. Olaus's version is in many places so
obufcure as to be hardly intelligible. I have subjoined the whole be-

0 ow,

nor upon metrical feet, or quantity of
f;l.lables, but chiefly upon the number of
the syllables, and the disposition of the let-
ters In every flanza was an equal
number of lines: in every line fix fylla.-
bles. In each diflich. it was requisite
that three wzords flhould begin with the
l:amc letter; two of the corresponding
words placed in the firfl line of the iif-
tith, the third, in the second line. In
each line were also required two fyllabecs,
but never the final ones, formed either of
the fame cosifonants, or fame vowels.
is an exaimple of this mcafure, Olaus
giv's us U tlhc two Latin lincs, conflruecd
cxailiy accoiding to the above rules of
l.uiic vcrfuc

Chriflus caput nostrum
Coronet te b:nis.
'Tlic ilni;il letters of Chriftus, Caput

and Coronet, make the three correfponcd-
ing letters of the diflich. In the first line,
the first fvllhb!es of Chriftus and of
nol.rur ; in the second line, the cn in
co'-onet and in bonis make the requisite
correr)iondence of fyltables. Frequent in-
verfio;is ainJ transpositions swere i'ermitted
in this coetrv; which would naturally
follow from lfitch laborious attention to
the collocation of wtors.

The curiouis on this fibjcc'l may con-

fult likewise Dr. Hlicks's T'hesaurus i.in-
gtia; run Sn'_tentrionaliun, ; particuldrly
the 23(d Cipte- of his ( ranimm.tiea
AnSgo Saxonica & i\i;fo G';thica; where
they vi-iil find a full acc.;unt of the firuc-
turc of<l'tie A nlo-)-da;on verte,whicl- nearly
rcimb!cld the Gothic. TIhey will find a!so
furoe specimens bath of C(;:hic and Saxon
p(,e:il'. An cxtra(., which Dr. Hicks
has ivenI frol tile vlork of one of thz

D.luniix

low, e-xaEtly as he has published it;. and shall translate as much -as
inay give the 2.nglifh reader an idea of the spirit and firain of this
kind of poetry.*

cc We have fought with our fwords.-I was young, when, to-

"' wards the eaIft, in the bay of Oreon, we made torrents of blood
" flow, to gorge the ravenous
" footed bird. , There resounded

Daniih Scalders, entitled, Hervarer Saga,
containing an evocation from the dead,
may be found in the 6th volume of Mif-
cellany Poems, published by Mr. Dry-
den.

* I.

Pugnavimus Enfibus
Haud post longum tempus
Cum in Gotlandia acceffimus
Ad ferpentis immenfi necem
Tune impetravimus Thoram
Ex hoc vocarunt me virum
Quod serpentem transfodi
Hirfutam braccam ob illam cedem
Cufpide ialum intuli in colubrum
Ferro lucidorum ftipendiorum.

2.
Multum juvenis fui quando acquifivi-

mus

Orientem versus in Oreonico freto
Vulnerum amnes avidae ferae
Et flavipedi avi
Accepimus ibidem fonuerunt
Ad sublimes galeas
Dura serra magnam efcam
Omnis erat oceanus vulnus
Vadavit corvus in sanguine Caeforum.

3.

Alte tulimus tunc lanceas
Quando viginti annos numeravimus
Et celebrem laudem comparavimus passim
Vicimus oEto barones
In oriente ante Dimini portum
Aquila impetravimus tunc sufficientem
Hofpitii fumptum in illa firage
Sudor decidit in vulnerum
Oceano perdidit exercitus atatem.

beast of prey, and the yellow-
the hard fleel upon the lofty hel-

" mets

4-

Pugne faEla copia
Cum Helfingianos poftulavimus
Ad aulam Odini
Naves direximus in ostium Viftulxe
Mucro potuit turn mordere
Omnis erat vulnus unda
Terra rubefaEta Calido
Frendebat gladius in loricas
Gladius findebat Clypeos.

5.

Memini neminem tune fugilFe
Priufquam in navibus
Heraudus in bello caderet
Non findit navibus
Alius baro prsefantior
Mare ad portum
In navibus longis post illum
Sic attulit princeps passim
Alacre in bellum cor.

6.

Exercitus abjecit clypeos
Cum hafta volavit
Ardua ad virorum pedora
Momordit Scarforum cautes
Gladius in pugna
Sanguineus erat Clypeus
Antequam Rafno rex caderet
Fluxit ex virorum capitibus
Calidus in loricas sudor.

7.

Habere potuerunt tur corvi
Ante Indirorum infulas
Sufficientem predam dilaniandam
Acquifivimus feris carnivoris
Plenum prandium unico aAu
Difficile erat unius facere mentionem
Oriente sole
Spicula vidi pungere
Propulerunt arcus ex fe serra.

m mets of men. The whole oceaai was one wound. The crow

waded in the blood of the slain. When we had numbered
twenty years, we lifted our spears on high, and every where
spread our renown. Eight barons we overcame in the east, be-
fore the port of Diminum; and plentifully we feasted the eagle

', in

8.

Altum mugierunt enses
Antequam in I,aneo campo-
Eiflius rex cecidit
Proceffimus auro ditati
Ad terram proftratorum dimicandum
Gladius fecuit Clypeorum
PiAuras in galearum conventu
Cervicum muftum ex vulneribus
Diffufum per cerebrum fiffum.

9-.

Tenuimus Clypeos in sanguine
Cum haftam unximus
Ante Boring holmum
Telorum nubes difrumpuntclypeum
Extrufit arcus ex fe metallum
Volnir cecidit in conflictu
Non erat illo rex major
Cafi difperfi late per littora
Ferae ample&ebantur efcam.

IO.

Pugna manifefle crefcebat
Antequam Freyr rex caderet
In Flandrorum terra
Caepit caruleus ad incidendum
Sanguine illitus in auream
Loricam in pugna
Durus armorum mucro olim
Virgo deploravit matutinam lanienam
Multa prada dabatur feris.

11.

Centies centenos vidi jacere
In navibus
Ubi /Englanes vocatur
Navigavimus ad pugnam
Per sex dizs antequam exercitus caderet
Tranfegimus rmucronum miflam
In exortu solis
Coaótus eft pro noflris gladiis
Valdiofur in bello occumbere.

It2.

Ruit pluvia fanguinis de gladiis
Praeceps in Bardafyrde
Pallidum corpus pro accipitribus
Murmuravit arcus ubi mucro
Acriter mordebat Loricas
In conflitu
Odini Pileus Galea
Cucurrit arcus ad vulnus
Venenate acutus confperfus fudore fan-

guineo.

13.

Tenuimus magica scuta
Alte in pugne ludo
Ante Hiadningum finum
Videre licuit turn viros
Qui gladiis lacerarunt Clypeos
In gladiatorio murmure
Galexe attritae virorum
Erat ficut fplendidam virginemr
In leao juxta fe collocare

14.

Dura venit tempeflas Clypeis
Cadaver cecidit in terram
In Nortumbria
Erat circa matutinum tempus
Hominibus neceffum erat fugere
Ex pralio ubi acute
Caffidis campos mordebant gladii
Erat hoc veluti Juvenem viduam
In primaria fede ofculari.

15.

Herthiofe evafit fortunatus
In Auftralibus Orcadibus ipfe
Vitoriax in noffri3 hominibus
Cogebatur in armorum nimbo
Rogvaidus occumbere
Isle venit fummus super accipitres
LuEius in gladiorum ludo
Strenue jadabat concuffor
Galeae fanguinis tell. 16,

c: in that slaughter. The warm fiream of wounds ran into the
' ocean. The army fell before us. When we steered our fliips

intos the mouth of the Vistula, we sent the Helfingians to the

" Hall of Odin. Then did the sword bite. The waters were all
" one wound. The earth was dyed red with the warm fiream.

" The

16.

Quilibet jacebat tranfverfim supra alium
Gaudebat pugna laetus
Accipiter ob gladiorum ludum
Non fecit aquilam aut aprum
Qui Irlandiam gubernavit
Conventus fiebat ferri & Clypei
Marfianus re¥ jejunis
Fiebat in vedrae finu
Praeda data corvis.

,I7.

Bellatorem multum vidi cadere
Mane ante machaeram
Virum in mucronum difidio
Filio meo incidit mature
Gladius juxta cor
Egillus fecit Agnerum fpoliatum
Imperterritum virum vita
Sonuit lancea prope -lamdi
Grifeam loricam fplendebant vexilla.

18.

Verborum tenaces vidi diffecare
Haut rninutim pro lupis
Endili maris enfibus
Erat per Hebdomadae fpaciurn
Quasi mulieres vinurn apportarent
Rubefae.te erant naves
Valde in ftrepitu armorum
Sciffa erat lorica
In Scioldungorum praelio.

19.

Pu!chricomum vidi crepufculafcere
Virginis amatoremn circa matutinum
Et confabulationis amicum viduarum
Erat ficut calidum balneum
Vinei vafis nympha portaret
Nos in ilae freto
Antiquam Orn rex caderet
Sanguineurn Clypeum vidi ruptum
Hoc invertit virorum vitam.

20.

Egimus gladiorum ad credem
Ludum in Lindis infula
Cum regibus tribus
Pauci potuerunt inde laetari
Cecidit multus in ridum ferarum
Accipiter dilaniavit carnem cum lupo
Ut fatur inde difcederet
Hybernorum fanguis in oceanum
Copiofe decidit per maraationis tempus.

21.

Alte gladius mordebat Clypeos
Tune cum aurei coloris
Hafta fricabat loricas
Videre licuit in Onlugs infula
Per fecula multum polf
Ibi suit ad gladiorum ludos
Reges proceflerunt
Rubicundum erat circa infilam
Ar volans Draco vulncrurm.

22.

Quid eft viro forti morte certius
Etfi ipfe in armorum nimbo
Adveifus collocatus fit
Saepe deplorat atatem
Qui nunquam premitur
Malum ferunt timidum incitare
Aquilam ad gladiorum ludum
Meticulofus venit nufpiam
Cordi suo ufui.

23.

Hoc numero aquum ut procedat
In contaAu gladiorum
Juvenis unus contra alterum
Non retrocedat viraviro.
Hoc suit viri fortis nobilitas diu
Semper debet amoris amicus virginum
Audax efle in fremitu armorum.

24.

9

cC The sword rung upon the coats of mail, and clove the bucklers
" in twain. None fled on that day, till among his (hips Heraudus
" fell. .Than him no braver baron cleaves the sea with ships; a
' chearful heart did he ever bring to the combat. Then the host
" threw away their shields, when the uplifted spear flew -at the
" breaffs of heroes. The sword bit the Scarfian rocks; bloody
' was the shield in battle, until Rafno the king was slain. From
" the heads of warriors the warm sweat fireamqd down their ar-
' mour. The crows around the Indirian islands had an ample
" prey. It were difficult to single out one among so many deaths.
" At the rising of the fun I beheld the spears piercing the bodies of

foes, and the bows throwing forth their fteel-pointed arrows.

" Loud roared the swords in the plains of Lano.-The virgin long
" bewailed the slaughter of that morning."-In this firain the poet
continues to describe several other military exploits. The images
are not much varied; the noise of arms, the ireaming of blood, and

24.

Hoc videtur mihi re vera
Quod fata fequimur
Rarus tranfgreditur fata Parcarum
Non deflinavi Ella1
De vita exitu mea
Cum ego fanguinem femimortuus tegerem
Et naves in aquas protrufi
Paflim impetravimus turn feris
Efcam in Scotiae finubus.

25.

Hoc ridere me facit semper
Quod Balderi patris fcamna
Parata fcio in aula
Bibemus cerevifiam brevi
Ex concavis crateribus craniorum
Non gemit vir fortis contra mortem
Magnifici in Odini domibus
Non venio defperabundis
Verbis ad odini aulam.

26.

iic vellent nunc omnes

Filii Aflauga gladiis
Amarum bellum excitare
Si exaFte fcirent
Calamitates noltras
Quem non pauci angues
Venenati me difcerpunt
Matrem accepi meis
Filiis ita ut corda valeant.

C

27.

Valde inclinatur ad haereditatem
Crudele flat nocumentum a vipera
Anguis inhabitat aulam cordis
Speramus alterius ad Othini
Virgam in Ella sanguine
Filiis meis livefcet
Sua ira rubefcet
Non acres juvenes
Seflionem tranquillan facient,

28.

Habeo qu;inquagies
Prelia sub fignis facla
Ex belli invitatione & femel
Minime putavi hominum
Quod me futurus effet
Juvenis didici mucronem rubefacere
Alius rex praeftantior
Nos Afae invitabunt
Non efl lugendamors.

29.

Fert animus finire
Invitant me Dyfse
Q1ias ex Othini Aula
Othinus mihi mifit
Letus cerevifiam cum Aiis
In summa fede bibam
Vitae elapfae funt hore
Ridens moriar.

the

the feaqfing the birds of prey, often recurring. He mentions the death
of two of his soris in battle; and the lamentation he describes as made
for one of thenm is very singular. A Grecian or Roman poet would
have introduced the virgins or nymphs of the wood, bewailing the un-
timely fall of a young hero. But, fays our Gothic poet, " when
"t Rogvaldus was slain. for him mourned all the hawks of heaven,"
as lamenting a benefa6or who had so liberally supplied them with
prey; " for boldly," as he adds, " in the strife of swords, did the
"breaker of helmets throw the spear of blood."

The poem concludes with sentiments of the highest bravery and
contempt of death. " What is more certain to the brave man than

death, though amidif the form of swords, he stand always ready
to oppose it? He only regrets this life who hath never known
distress. The timorous man allures the devouring eagle to the

" fieldof battle. The coward, wherever he comes, is useless to him-
"self. This I esteen honourable, that the youth should advance to
"the combat fairly matched one against another; nor man retreat
c from man. Long was this the warrior's highest glory. He who
" aspires to the love of virgins, ought always to be foremost in the roar
"C of arms. It appears to me of truth, that we are led by the Fates.
" Seldom can any overcome the appointment of destiny. Little did
· I foresee that Ella * was to have my life in his hands, in that day
' when fainting 1 concealed my blood, and pushed forth my ships into
c" the waves; after we had spread a repast for the beads of prey
·' throughout the Scottish bays. But this makes me always rejoice
' that in the halls of our father Balder [or Odin] I know there are
" feats prepared, where, in a short time, we hfall be drinking ale
"out of the hollow ikulls of our enemies. In the house of the
" mighty Odin, no brave man laments death. I come not with the
" voice of despair to Odin's hall. How eagerly would all the sons
( of Alavoa now ruth to war, did they know the distress of their
" rather, whom a multitude of venomous serpents tear! I have given
" to my children a mother who hath filled their hearts-with valour.
" amn fail approaching to nmy end. A cruel death awaits me from

the viper's bite. A 'nake dwells in the midst of my heart. I
" eho:e thelat the sword ofr ome of my sons shall yet be stained with

the blood of Ella. The valiant youtis will wax red with anger,
, and vill not flt in peace. Fitiy and one times have I reared the

· This was the name of his enemy who had condemlned him to death.

5 " flardard

.' standard in battle. In my youth I learned to dye the sword in
"c blood: my hope was then, that no king among men would be
" more renowned than me. The goddesses of death will now
,c soon call me; I mufft not mourn my death. Now I end my
" ong. The goddefies invite me away; they whom Odin has sent
"to me from his hall. I will fit upon a lofty feat, and drink ale

joyfully with the goddesses of death. The hours of my life are
`c run out. I will smile when I die."

This is such poetry as we might expect from a barbarous nation.

It breathes a moit ferocious spirit. It is wild, harsh and irregular;
but at the fame time animated and itrong; the flyle, in the original,
full of inversions, and, as we learn fron fonme of Olaus's notes,
highly metaphorical and figured.

But when we open the works of Oflian, a very different scene

presents itself. There we find the fire and the enthusiasm of the
most early times, combined with an amazing degree of regularity
and art. We find tenderness, and even delicacy of fentinent, greatly
predominant over fierceness and barbarity. Our hearts are melted
with the softest feelings, and at the fame time elevated with the
highefl ideas of magnanimity, generosity, and true heroism. When
we turn from the poetry of Lodbrog to that of Ossian, it is like
passing from a savage defart, into a fertile and cultivated country.
How is this to be accounted for ? Or by what means to be recon-
ciled with the remote antiquity attributed to there poems ? This is a
curious point; and requires to be illustrated.

That the ancient Scots were of Celtic original, is pail all doubt.

Their conformity with the Celtic nations in language, manners and
religion, proves it to a full demonflration. The Celts, a great
and mighty people, altogether distinct from the Goths and Teu-
tones, once extended their dominion over all the weft of Europe;
but feeml to have had their mofi full and compleat ctlabliflnment in
Gaul. Wherever the Celtae or Gauls are mentioned by ancient wri-
ters, we seldom fail to hear of their Druids and their Bards ; the in-
flitution of which two orders, was the capital difiinction of their man-
ners and policy. The Druids were their philosophers and priess ;
the Bards, their poets and recorders of heroic a&ions: And both
these orders of men.. seem to have sublisted among them, as chief

C 2 members

I !

A CRITICAL DISSERTATION

members of the slate, from time immemorial *. Ve must not
therefore imagine the Celtax to have been altogether a gross and rude
nation. They possessed from very remote ages a formed iyftem of
discipline and manners, which appears to have had a deep aId last-
ing influence. Ammianus Marcellinus gives them this express tefti-
mony, that there flourished among them the study of the most laud-
able arts; introduced by the Bards, whose office it was to sing in
heroic verse, the gallant actions of illultrious men; and by, the.
Druids, who lived together in colleges or societies, after the Pythago-
rean manner, and philofbphizing upon the highest subjects, afierted
the immortality of the human foul -. Though Julius Caesar in h-is
account of Gaul, does not exprefly mention the Bards, yet it is plain
that under the title of Druids, he comprehend-s that whole college
Qr order; of which the Bards, who, it is probable-. were the di,-
ciples of the Druids, undoubtedly made a part. It deserves remark,
that according to his account, the Druidical institution first took rife
in Britain, and passed from thence into Gaul; so that. they who as-
pired to be thorough masters of that learning were wont to resort to
Britain. He adds too, that such as were to be initiated among the
Druids, were obliged to commit to their memory a great number of
verses, insomuch that some employed twenty years in this course of
education; and that they did not think it lawful to record there
poems in writing, but sacredly handed them down by tradition from
race to race _.

So firong- was the attachment of the Celtic nations to their poetry

and their Bards, that amidst all the changes of their government and
manners, even long after the order of the Druids was extinct,.

·

rgxs :'cc- -vrisusiCE>WssouvixCpovrw?

isk. BapJo0 TE t sC(uT£ ;, c
ApV c., Bap-

Tl -

*, l ·

·» ·
JobE ;UlTE C '7v;z -oXr' . Strabo. lib. 4.

E t& 7rTop uTro7T x{l' 7TOtlT-rat leXtv,

?s Ms &s O 'M X agssv. 8TO& J s-r Of Z-
sWV, rC AugCxS oao7v5 85Atsi/t j1Z40Id", Y5
J' jSAaxciEc/s-. Diodor. Sicul. 1. 5.

Ta cA x'irox XrX wrv

r rov 1iv x01 -

;'Otv PajeI. ;TroTat, Ya'701 Tufa, daP-;, MSET
;ns reFa1uvdg AEYOVTES. Pofidonius ap.
Atheneum,. 1. 6.

t Per haec loca (speaking of Gaul)

hominibus paulatim excultis, viguere flu-
dia laudabilium doe7rinarum; inchoata

*

per Biardos & Euhages & Druidas. Et
Bardi quidem fortia virorum illufirium
fa&ia heroicis compofita verfibus cum dul-
cibus lyrse modulis cantit,arunt. Euhages
vero fcrutantes feriem & fublimia nature
pandere conabantur. Inter h6s, Druide
ingeniis celfiores,) ut auaoritas Pythagorne
decrevit, fodalitiis adftriati confortiis, quaef-
tionibus altarum occultarurnque rerum
ereci funt; & defpedtantes humana pro-
nuntiarunt animas immortales. Ammn
Marcellinus, 1. 15. cap. 9.

t Vid. Cafar de bello Gall. lib. 6.

ai d

and the national religion altered, the Bards continued to flourish-;
not as a set of-ftrolling fongifers, like the Greek 'Ao.Ao; or Rhaplb'-
dits, in Homer's time, but as an order of men highly refpedted in,
the state, and supported by a publick establishment. We find
them, according to the testimonies of Strabo and Diodorus, before
the age of Augustus Caesar; and we find them remaining under the-
fame name, and exercising the fame functions as of old, in Ireland,
and in the north of Scotland, almolt down to our own times. It is
well known that in both these countries, every Regulus or chief had
his own Bard, who was confidered as an officer of rank in his court;
and had. lands assigned. him, which descended to his family. Of the
honour in which the Birds were held, many inflances occur in
Ossian's poems. On all important occasions, they were the ambafiia-
dors between contending chiefs; and their persons were held sacred-
" Cairbar feared to stretch his sword to the bards, though his foul
" was dark.-Loofe the bards, said his brother Cathmor, they are
; the sons of other times. Their voice shall be heard in other age,.
" when the kings of Temora have failed *.

From all this, the Celtic tribes clearly appear to have been ad'-

di&ed in so high a degree to poetry, and to have made it so much
their study from the earliest times, as may remove our wonder at
meeting with a vein of higher poetical refinement among them, than
was at first fight to have been expected among. nations, whom we
are accustomed to call barbarous. Barbarity, I .muf observe, is a
very equivocal term; it admits of many different forms and degrees;
and though, in all of them, it exclude polished manners, it is, how-
ever, not inconsistent with generous sentiments and tender assec-
tions -f-. What degrees of friendship, love and heroism, may pof-

sibly

* P. 188. 366 and 406. I flall subjoin Scheffer's
t Surely among the wild Laplanders, Latin version of one of them, which has

if any where, barbarity is in its most per- the appearance of being ftri.tly literal.
sect slate. Yet their love songs which Sol, clariffimum emitte lumen in palu-
Scheffer has given us in his Lapponia, are dem Orra. Si enifus in summa picearum
a proof that natural tenderness of sentiment cacumina Icirem me vifurum Orra palu-
may be found in a country, into which the dem, in ea eniterer, ut viderem inter quos
lealt glimmering of science has never pe- amica mea eflitflorcs; omnes (ufcindere.m
netrated. I' o most English readers there frutices ibi enatos, omnes ramos praefe-
songs are well known by the clegant carem, hos virentes ramos. Curium nu-
translations of them in the bpeCtator, No. bium effem fecutus, qua: iter fuum ii fti-

tuunr-.

I'3

sibly be found to prevail in a rude state of society, no one can fay.
Astonishing infeances of them we know, from history, have some-
times appeared: and a few characters distinguished by those high
qualities, might lay a foundation for a set of manners being intro-
duced into the songs of the Bards, more refined, it is probable, and
exalted, according to the usual poetical licence, than the real manners
of the country. In particular, with refpea to heroism; the great
employment of the Celtic bards, was to delineate the characters,
and sing the praises of heroes. So Lucan;

Vos quoque qui fortes animos, belloque peremptos,
Laudibus in longum vates diffunditis aevum
Plurima fecuri fudiftis carmina Bardi. Phearf . r.

Now when we confider a college or order of men, who, cultivating

poetry throughout a long series of ages, had their imaginations con-
tinually employed on the ideas of heroifmn who had all the poems
and panegylicks, which were composed by their predecefors, handed
down to them with care; who rivalled and endeavoured to outfirip
those who had gone before them, each in the celebration of his
particular hero; is it not natural to think, that at length the cha-
rader of a hero would appear in their songs with the highest lustre,
and be adorned'with qualities truly noble? Some of the qualities
indeed which diftinguifll a Fingal, moderation, humanity, and cle-
mency, would not probably be the first ideas of heroifin occurring
to a barbarous people: But no sooner had such ideas begun to dawn
on the minds of poets, than, as the human mind easily opens to the
native representations of human perfeEtion, they would be seized and
embraced; they would enter into their panegyricks; they would as-
ford materials for succeeding bards to work upon, and improve;

tuunt versus paludem Orra, si ad te volare
possem alis, cornicum alis. Sed mihi de-
funt alae, ala querquedulae, pedefque, an-
serum pedes plantave bonae, quae deferre
me valeant ad te. Satis expectafti diu;
per tot dies, tot dies tuos optimos, oculis
tuis jucundiffimis, corde tuo amiciflimo.
Quod si longiflime velles effugere, cito
tamen te confequerer. Quid fermius
validiufve effe poteft quam contorti nervi,

catenaeve ferreae, quae duriffime ligant?
Sic amor contorquet caput nofirum, mutat
cogitationes & fentcntias. Puerorum vo-
luntas, voluntas venti; juvenum cogita-
tiones, longe cogitationes. Quos si au-
direm omnes, a via, a via julta decli-
narem. Unum eft confilium quod ca-
piam; ita fcio viam reftiorem me reper-
turum. Schefferi Lapponia, Cap. 25.

they

I 5

they would contribute not a little to exalt the publick manners.
For such. ongs as there, familiar to the Celtic warriors from their
childhood, and throughout their whole life, both in war and in
peace, their principal entertainment, must have had a very confi-
derable influence in propagating among them real manners nearly
approaching to the poetical; and in forming even such a hero as-
Fingal. Especially when we confider that among their limited
objects of ambition, among the few advantages which in a savage
irate, man could obtain over man, the chief was Fame, and that Im-
mortality which they expeted to receive from their virtues and ex-
ploits, in the songs of bards -.

Havitrg made these remarks on the Celtic poetry and Bards in ge-

neral, I shall next confider tile particular advantages which Ossian
poffefTed. He appears clearly to have lived in a period which en-
joyed all the benefit I just now mentioned of traditionary poetry.
The exploits of Trathal, Trenmor, and the other ancestors of Fin-
gal, are spoken of as familiarly known. Ancient bards are frequently
alluded to. In one remarkable passage, Ossian describes himself as
living in a fort of-claffical age, enlightened by the memorials of for-
mer times, conveyed in the songs of bards; and points at a period
of darkness and ignorance which lay beyond the reach of tradition.
" His words," fays he, " came only by halves to our ears; they
"were dark as the tales of other times, before the light of the song
' arose +." Oman, himself, appears to have been endowed by na-
ture with an exquisite sensibility of heart; prone to that tender me-
lancholy which is so often an attendant on great genius; and sus-
ceptible equally of strong and of soft emotions. He was not only a
proFefled bard, educated with care, as we may easily believe, to all
the poetical art then known, and connected, as he flews us himself,
in intimate friendflhip with the other contemporary bards, but a war-
rior also; and the son of the most renowned hero and prince of his
age. This formed a conjunction of circumstances, uncommonly fa-
vourable towards exalting the imagination of a poet. He relates ex-
peditions in which he had been engaged ; he sings of battles in

t When Edward I. conquered Wales, the people; and of what nature he judged.

lie put to dcaih all the Welch bards. that influence to be. The Welch bards
This cruel policy plainly fliews, how were of the fame Celtic race with the
ureat an influence he iImatinied the songs Scottifil and Irifn.
of these Lards to hi'vc ove: the minds of f P. 1.

which

which he had fought and overcome; he had beheld the molt illus-
trious scenes which that age could exhibit, both of heroism in war,
and magnificence in peace. For however rude the magnificence
of those times may seem to us, we must remember that all ideas of
magnificence are comparative; and that the age of Fingal was an
,tera of diffinguifhed splendor in that part of the world. Fingal
reigned over a considerable territory he was enriched with the
spoils ofthe Roman province; he was ennobled by his vitories and
great actions; and was in all respects a personage of much higher
dignity than any of the chieftains, or heads of Clans, who lived in the
fame country, after a more extensive monarchy was established.

The manners of Ossian's age, so far as we can gather them from

his writings, were abundantly favourable to a poetical genius. The
two dispiriting vices, to which Longinus imputes the decline of
poetry, covetousness and effeminacy, were as yet unknown. The
cares of men were few. They lived a roving indolent life; hunting
and war their principal employments.; and their chief amusements,
the mufick of bards and " the feast of shells," The great object pur-
sued by heroic spirits, was " to receive their fame," that is, to become
worthy of being celebrated in the songs of bards; and - to have
" their name on the four gray stones." To die, unlamented by a
bard, was deemed so great a misfortune, as even to diflurb their
ghosts in another state. After death, they expected to follow em-
ployments of the fame nature with those which had amused them on
earth; to fly with their friends on clouds, to pursue airy deer, and
to liften to their praise in the mouths of'bards. In such times as
these, in a country where poetry had been so long cultivated, and so
highly honoured, is it any wander that among the race and succession
of bards, one Homer should arise; a man who, endowed with a na-
tural happy genius, favoured by peculiar advantages of birth and
condition, and meeting in the course of his life, with a variety of
incidents proper to fire his imagination, and to touch his heart,
should attain a degree of eminence in poetry, worthy to draw the
admiration of more refined ages ?

The compositions of Omflan are so firongly marked with charac-

ters of antiquity, that although there were no external proof to sup-
port that antiquity, hardly any reader of judgment and taste, could
hesitate in referring them to a very remote aera. There are four
great stages through which men successively pass in the progress of

society.

society. The first and earliest is the life of hunters; paflurage fuc-
ceeds to this, as the ideas of property begin to take root; next, agri-
culture; and lastly, commerce. Throughout Ossian's poems, we
plainly find ourselves in the first of there periods of society; during
which, hunting was the chief employment of men, and the principal
method of their procuring subsistence. Pasturage was not indeed
wholly unknown; for we hear of dividing the herd in the cafe of a
divorce *; but the allusions to herds and to cattle are not many; and
of agriculture, we find no traces. No cities appear to have been built
in the territories of Fingal. No art is mentioned except that of work-
ing in iron. Every thing presents to us the most simple and un-
improved manners. At their feasts, the heroes prepared their own
repast; they fat round the light of the burning oak; the wind lifted
their locks, and whittled through their open halls. Whatever was
beyond the necessaries of life was known to them only as the spoil of
the Roman province; " the gold of the stranger; the lights of the
" firanger; the iteeds of the firanger, the children of the rein -."

This representation of Ossian's times, must strike us the more, as

genuine and authentick, when it is compared with a poem of later
date, which Mr. Macpherson has preserved in one of his notes. It
is that wherein five bards are represented as pafling the evening in the
house of a chief, and each of them separately giving his description
of the night +. The night scenery is beautiful; and the author has
plainly imitated the style and manner of Ossian: But he has allowed
some images to appear which betray a later period of society. For
we meet with windows clapping, the herds of goats and cows seek-
ing shelter, the shepherd wandering, corn on the plain, and the
wakeful hind rebuilding the shocks of corn which had been over-
turned by the tempest. Whereas in Oflian's works, from beginning
to end, all is consistent; no modern allusion drops from him; but
every where, the fame face of rude nature appears; a country
wholly uncultivated, thinly inhabited, and recently peopled. The

* P. 31. litter; and the gems r.entioned in the de-
- The chariot of Cuchullin has been scription, are no other than the flining

thought by some to be represented as more tones or pebbles, known to be frequently
magnificent than is conjiftent with the po- found along the weflern coast of Scotland.
verty of that age; in Book I. of Fingal. I P. 253,
But this chariot is plainly only a horse-

17
D

grass

,-,~ . , . A
-

: - a. A - C-RtfTI.CAL DI§S.t 4i t T

A fT N ''i

grass of 'the rock, the d teer or the Heath he thife witflhl. i
beard, ate the chief orriieints of bis Iaiadfafes. ,' Thle: fS
fdyt Fihgal; " is enough to tiie, with all it's wbods ahd d'eer" *

The circle of, ideas and trarifat&6ris, is no ivideri thin suits fuich

an age.: Nor any greater diversity introidced into chadraaers, ,ithb
the events of that peri'od ldi hld atirallt display. ylotiit 'and bb.
dily strength are the admired qdliadlties. Cohtentibns arile, as is
usual among savage nations, from the slightest cauifes. To be as-
fronted at a tournament, or to be omitted in the invitation to a
feast, kindles a war. Women are often carried away by force;
and the whole tribe, as in the Homeric times, ¥rife to6 aveng th'e
wrong. The heroes show refinement of "fentime't indeed on feve-
ral occasions, but none of manners. They fpteak of their past ac-
tions with freedom, boast of their exploits, 'and sing their own
praise. In their battles, it is evident that idrims, trumpets or bag-
pipes, were not known or used. They -had no expedient for giving
the military alarms but striking a shield, or railing a loud cry: And
hence the loud and terrible voice of Fingal is 'ften mentioned, as a
neceiTary qualification of a great general; like the 03Gonv Oyaoso MEYEXOCO
of Homer. Of military discipline or skill, they appear to have been
entirely destitute. Their armies seem 'not to have been numerous;
their battles 'were disorderly; and terminated, for the most part, by a
personal combat, or wrestling of the two chiefs; after which, c" the
· bard sung the song of peace, and the battle ceased along the
'' field t-."

The manner of composition bears all the :marks of the greatef

antiquity. No artful transitions; nor full and extended conneCtion
of parts; such as we find among the poets of later times, when or-
der and regularity of composition were more fludied and known
but a style always rapid and vehement; in narration concise, even
to abruptness, and leaving several circumstances to be supplied by
the reader's imagination. The language has all that figurative cafl,
which, as I before shewed, partly a glowing and undifcipliried ima-
gination, partly the flerility of language, and the want of proper
terms, have always introduced into the early speech of nations; and
in several refpedts, it carries a remarkable resemblance to the style

'* P a a 7 S#

t Page 140,'

*;.

Vy

-

- .

.

:

r:g-._ apsJQ EMS.. o8 S.I AN. i

of the Qld Te¢tament. It deserves particular notice,. as one of tha
'most genuine and dectifive characers of antiquity, that very few ge-
neralrterms or abffradt ideas, are to be met with in the whole col-
le&ti'n-of Offan's works. The ideas of men at first, were all par-
.ticualar' They had' not words to express' general conceptions.
These 'were the confiequence of more profound reflection, .and 1on-
.ger acquaintance with the arts of thought and of fpeecla.- Ossian,
accordingly, almost never expresses himself in the abftrad. His
ideas extended little farther than to the objeAs he saw around him. *
A publick, a community, the universe, were conceptions beyond
his iphere. Even a mountain, a sea, or a lake, -which he has oc-
cafion to mention, though only in a simile, are for the most part
particularized; it is the hill of Cromla, the storm of the sea of Mal-
mor, or the -reeds of the lake of Lego. A mode of exprefilon,
which whilst it is charaderiffical of antient ages, is at the fame time
highly favourable to descriptive poetry. For the fame reasons, per-
fonification is a.poetical figure not very common with Ossian. In-
animate objets, such as winds, trees, flowers, he sometimes per-
fonifies with great beauty. But the personifications which are so
familiar to. later poets of Fame, Time, Terror, Virtue, and the reft of
that class, were unknown to our Celtic bard. These were modes of
conception too abftrac for his age.

All there are marks so undoubted, and some of them too, so nice

and delicate, of the most early times, as put the high antiquity of
there poems out of question. Especially when we confider, that if
there had been any imposture in this cafe, it must have been con-
trived and executed in the Highlands of Scotland, two or three cen-
turies ago; as up to this period, both by manuscripts, and by the
testimony of a multitude of living witnesses, concerning the uncon-
trovertible tradition of there poems, they can clearly be traced.
Now this is a period when that country enjoyed no advantages for a
composition of this kind, which it may not be fuppoied to have en-
joyed in as great, if not in a greater degree, a thoutand years before.
To suppose. that two or three hundred years ago, when we well
know the Highlands to have been in a state of gross ignorance and
barbarity, there should have arisen in that country a poet, of such
exquisite genius, and of such deep knowledge of mankind, and of
history, as to divert himself of the ideas and manners' of his ovwn

~~~D 2.~
~age,

age, and to give us a just and natural piacure of a slate of society
ancienter by a thousand years; one who could support this counter-
feited antiquity through such a large collection of poems, without
the least inconsistency; and who posseTsed of all this genius and art,
had at the fame time the felf-denial of concealing himself, and of
ascribing his own works to an antiquated bard, without the impof-
ture being detected; is a supposition that transcends all bounds of
credibility.

There are, betides, two other circumflances to be attended to,

still of greater weight, if possible, against this hypothesis. One is,
the total absence of religious ideas from this work; for which the
translator has, in his preface, given a very probable account, on the
footing of its being the work of Offan. The Druidical fuperfti-
tion was, in the days of Ossian, on the point of its final extincion;
and for particular reasons, odious to the family of Fingal; whilit
the Chriflian faith was not yet established. But had it been the
work of one, to whom the ideas of christianity were familiar from
his infancy; and who had superadded to them also the bigotted fu-
perftition of a dark age and country; it is impossible but in some pas-
sage or other, the traces of them would have appeared. The other
circumstance is, the entire silence, which reigns with refpeA to all the
great clans or families, which are now eflabliffed in the Highlands.
The origin of these several clans is known to be very ancient: And
it is as well known, that there is no palion by which a native High-
lander is more diftinguilhed, than by attachment to his clan, andjea-
lousy for its honour. That a Highland bard, in forging a work re-
lating to the antiquities of his country, should have inserted no cir-
cumfiance which pointed out the rife of his own clan, which afcer-
tained its antiquity, or increased its glory, is of all suppositions that
can be formed, the most improbable; and the silence on this head,
amounts to a demonfiration that the author lived before any of the
present great clans were formed or known.

Afluming it then, as we well may, for certain, that the poems

now under consideration, are genuine venerable monuments of very
remote antiquity; I proceed to make some remarks upon their ge-
neral spirit and firain. The two great characteristics of Offlan's
poetry are, tenderness and sublimity. It breathes nothing of the

gay

N TH P O E MS OF S S I A- N. 21

gay and chearful kind; an air of solemnity and seriousness is difflufed
over the whole. Offlan is perhaps the only poet who' never re-
laxes, or lets himself down into the light and amLnfing strain; which
I readily admit to be no small disadvantage to him, with the bulk of
readers. He moves perpetually in the high region of the grand and
the pathetick. One key notd is struck at the beginning, and sup-
ported to the end; nor is any ornament introduced, but what is per-
rfely concordant with the general tone or melody. The events re-
corded, are all serious and grave; the scenery throughout, wild and
romantic. The extended heath by the sea shore; the mountain
shaded with mist; the torrent rushing through a solitary valley; the
scattered oaks, and the tombs of warriors overgrown with mos ; all
produce a solemn attention in the mind, and prepare it for great
and extraordinary events. We find not in Ossian, an imagination
that sports itself, and dresses out gay trifles to please the fancy.
His poetry, more perhaps than that of any other writer, deserves to
be ifiled, The Poetry of the Heart. It is a heart penetrated with
noble sentiments, and with sublime and tender passions; a heart that
glows, and kindles the fancy; a heart that is full, and pours itself
forth. Ossian did not write, like modern poets, to please readers
and critics. He sung from the love of poetry and song. His de-
light was to think of the heroes among whom he had flourished;
to recall the affecing incidents of his life; to dwell upon his past
wars and loves and friendflips; till, as he expresses it himself, " the
c light of his foul arose; the days of other years rose before him ;"
and under this true poetic inspiration, giving vent to his genius, no
wonder we Ihould so often hear, and acknowledge in his strains, the
powerful and ever-pleafing voice of nature.

--- Arte, natura potentior omni.-
Eft Deus in nobis, agitante calefcimus il.o.

It is necessary here to observe, that the beaut.es of Ofmian's writings

cannot be felt by those who have given them only a single or a
hasty perusal. His manner is so different from that of the poets,
to whom we are most accustomed; his flyle is so concise, and so
much crowded with imagery; the mind is kept at iuch a stretch in
accompanying the author; that an ordinary reader is at sirss apt to
be dazzled and fatigued, rather than pleased. His poems require to
be taken up at intervals, and to be frequently reviewed; and then it

is

;~~~~~T

;; - '

~~ ~is impofible but his beauties mufi open .to every'reader whois capas

::. --ble offenofitiility. Those who have the 'higheft'degree of it, will re,-
-'' lifh them the-moft.

As Homer is of all the great poets, the one whose manner, andt

whose times come the nearest to Ossian's, we are naturally-led to run
a parallel in some instances between the Greek and the Celtic bard.
For though Homer lived more than a thousand years before. Ossian,
it is not from the age of theworld, but from the state of society, that
we are to judge of resembling times. The Greek has in several
points, a manifest superiority. He introduces a greater variety of in-
cidents; he pofleffes a larger compass of ideas; has more-diverfity
in his characters; and a much deeper knowledge of human nature.
It was not to be expected, that in any of these particulars, Ossian
could equal Homer. For Homer lived in a country-where society
was much farther advanced; he had beheld many more objects;
cities built and flourishing; laws inflituted; order, discipline, and
arts begun. His field of observation was much larger and more
splendid; his knowledge, of course, more extensive; his mind
alol, it f(all be granted, more penetrating. But if Oflian's ideas
and objects be less divertfifed than those of Homer, they are all,
however, of the kind fittest for pbetry: The bravery and generosity
of heroes, the tenderness of lovers, the attachments of friends, pa-
rents, and children. In a rude age and country, though the events
that happen be few, the undiffipated mind broods over them more;
they itrike the imagination, and fire the passions in a higher degree;
and of consequence become happier materials to a poetical genius,
than the fame events when scattered through the wide circle of more
varied acion, and cultivated life.

Homer is a more chearful and sprightly poet than OfTfan. You

dilcern in him all the Greek vivacity; whereas Ofilan uniformly
mnaintains the gravity and solemnity of a Celtic hero. This too is in
a great measure to be accounted for from the different situations in
which they lived, partly personal, and partly national. Ossian had
survived all his friends, and was disposed to melancholy by the inci-
dents of his life. But besides this, chearfulnefs is one of the many
bleflings which we owe to formed society. The solitary wild fRate
is always a serious one. Bating the sudden and violent burfis of

mirth,

mirth, which-fometme s break forthb.at their dances and feaits-; the
savage Amierican, tribes,, have beejn noted. by all travelletrs for their
gravity and' taciturnity. omewhiat- of thil taciturnity iia.yhbe alIfo
remarked in Oflian. On all occasions hei's frugal of 'bis words;
and never gives-you more of an image or a description, than is just
sufficient to place it before you in one clear point 'of view. It is 4-
blaze of lightning, which flashes and vanishes. Homer is more ex-
tended in his descriptions; and fills them up with a greater variety
of circumstances. Both the poets are dramatick; that is, they in-
troduce their personages frequently speaking before us. But Ossian
is concise and rapid in his speeches, as he is in every other thing.
Homer, with the Greek vivacity, had also some portion of the
Greek loquacity. His speeches indeed are highly charafteriftical;
and to them we are much indebted for that admirable display he has
given of human nature. Yet if he be tedious any where, it is in
these; some of them trifling; and some of them plainly unfeafon-
able. Both poets are eminently sublime; but a difference may be
remarked in the species of their sublimity. Homer's sublimity is
accompanied with more impetuosity and fire; Ofiian's with more of
a solemn and awful grandeur. Homer hurries you along; Ossian
elevates, and fixes you in astonishment. Homer is mofl sublime in
actions and battles; Ossian, in description and sentiment. In the
pathetick, Homer, when he chufes to exert it, has great power;
but Offan exerts that power much oftener, and has the charader
of tenderness far more deeply imprinted on his works. No poet
knew better how to seize and melt the heart. With regard to dig-
nity of sentiment, the pre-eminence must clearly be given to Ofian.
This is indeed a surprising circumstance, that in point of humanity,
magnanimity, virtuous feelings of every kind, our rude Celtic bard
should be distinguished to such a degree, that not only the heroes of
Homer, but even those of the polite and refined Virgil, are left far
behind by those of Offlan.

'After there general observations on the genius and spirit of our au-
thor, I now proceed to a nearer view, and more accurate examina-
tion of his works: And as Fingal is the most considerable poem in
this collection, it is proper to begin with it. To refute the title of
an epic poem to Fingal, because it is not in every little particular,
exacly conformable to the practice of Homer and Virgil, were the

mlere

mere squeamishness and pedantry of criticism. Examined even ac-
cording to Aristotle's rules, it will be found to have all the essential
requifitesbf a true and regplar epic; and to have several of them in
so high a degree, as at first view to raise our astonishment on finding
Ossian's composition so agreeable to rules of which he was entirely
ignorant. But our astonishment will cease, when we confider from
what source Aritfdtle drew those rules. Homer knew no more of
the laws of criticism than Ossian. But guided by nature, he com-
posed in verse a regular tfory, founded on heroic actions, which all
posterity admired. Aristotle, with great sagacity and penetration,
traced the causes of this general admiration. He observed what it
was in Homer's composition, and in the conduct of his icory, which
gave it such power to please; from this observation he deduced the
rules which poets ought to follow, who would write and please like
Homer; and to a composition formed according to such rules, he
gave the name of an epic poem. Hence his whole system arose.
Aristotle studied nature in Homer. Homer and Ossian both wrote
from nature. No wonder that among all the three, there should be
such agreement and conformity.

The fundamental rules delivered by Aristotle concerning an epic

poem, are these: That the aaion which is the ground work of the
poem, ihould be one, compleat, and great; that it should be
feigned, not merely historical; that it should be enlivened with
characters and manners; and heightened by the marvellous.

But before entering on any of these, it may perhaps be asked,

what is the moral of Fingal ? For, according to M. Boffu, an epic
poem is no other than an allegory contrived to illustrate some moral
truth. The poet, fays this critic, must begin with fixing on some
maxim, or inftru-tion, which he intends to inculcate on mankind.
He next forms a fable, like one of _Efop's, wholly with a view to
the moral; and having thus fettled and arranged his plan, he then
looks into traditionary history for names and incidents, to give his
fable some air of probability. Never did a more frigid, pedantic no-
tion, enter into the mind of a critic. We may safely pronounce,
that he who should compose an epic poem after this manner, who
should first lay down a moral and contrive a plan, before he had
thought of his personages and ators, might deliver indeed very

found

found inftrutiuon, but would find few readers. There cannot be
the least doubt- that the first objet which strikes an epic poet, which
fires his genius, and: giyes, him any idea of his work, is the ation'or
subjeCt he is to celebrate. Hardly is there any tale, any subjed a
poet can chute for such a work, but will afford some general moral
inftru&ion. An epic poem is by its nature one of the most moral of
all poetical compositions: But its moral tendency is by no means to
be limited to some common-place maxim, which may be gathered
from the story. It arises 'from the admiration of heroic actions,
-which such a composition is peculiarly calculated to produce; fiom
the virtuous emotions which the charaters and incidents raise,
whilst we read it; from the happy impression which all the parts
separately, as well as the whole taken together, leave upon the mind.
However, if a general moral be still insisted on, Fingal obviously
furnishes one, not inferior to that of any other Poet, viz. That
Wisdom and Bravery always triumph over brutal force; or another
nobler frill; That the moit compleat victory over an enemy is ob-
tained by that moderation and generosity which convert him into
a friend.

The unity of the Epic action, which, of all Aristotle's rules,

is the chief and most material, is so ftri&ly preserved in Fingal,
that it must be perceived by every reader. It is a more compleat
unity than what arises from relating the actions of one man, which
the Greek critic justly censures as imperfect; it is the unity of one
enterprise, the deliverance of Ireland from the invasion of Swa-
ran: An enterprise, which has surely the full Heroic dignity. All
the incidents recorded bear a constant reference to one end; no
double plot is carried on; but the parts unite into a regular
whole: And'as the action is one and great, so it is an entire or compleat
action. For we find, as the Critic farther requires, a beginning, a
middle, and an end; a Nodus, or intrigue in the Poem; Difficulties
occurring through Cuchullin's raflnefs and bad success; those dif-
ficulties gradually surmounted; and at last the work conducted to
that happy conclusion which is held essential to Epic Poetry.
Unity is indeed observed with greater exacnefs in Fingal, thani
in almost any other Epic composition. For not only is unity of
subject maintained, but that of time and place also. T'he Autumn
is clearly pointed out as the season of the action ; and from begin'

E Iping

Iiing to end the fcete is rieeVer shifted frotm ithe heatlh .f le'na,
albtig the ,fea-fhbore. the duration of'thei aeitrin ;n:FihgBl, rs tnanh
shorter tlhan in the Iliad -or Aiteid. Bat '.fie; theve may be
'hotter as Well as lodngier Heroic Poems; and -if the auhoerity of
Arfilotle be also tequiied for this, he fays exprefly that the Epic
composition is indefinite as to the time of its duration. Accordingly
the Aiion of the Iliad ltfts otily forty-feven -days, tvhi:lft that of
the iEneid is continued for rnore than a year.

Throughout the whole ofFingal, :there reigns that grandeur of

sentiment, flyle and imagery, which ought ever to distinguish this
high species of poetry. The ft6ry is conducedv With no fmnall art..
The Poet goes not back to a tedious recital, of the beginning of the
war with SWaran; 'but hasleting to the main action, he falls in ex-
acly, by a most happy coincidence of thought, with the rule of
Horace.

Semper ad eventum feftinat, & in medias res,
Non fecus ac notas, auditorem rapit--
Nec gemino bellum Trojanun orditur ab ovo.

De Arte Poet.

He invokes no muse, for he acknowledged none; but his occa-

fional addresses to Malvina, have a finer effect than the invocation of
any muse. He sets out with no formal proposition of his subjet;
but the subjec naturally and easily unfolds its self; the poem
opening in an animated manner, with the situation of Cuchullin,
and the arrival of a scout who informs him of Swaran's :landing.
Mention is presently made of Fingal, and of the expected assistance
from the ships of the lonely isle, in order to give further light to
the subject. For the poet often shows his address in gradually pre-
paring us for the events he is to introduce; and in particular the pre-
paration for the appearance of Fingal, the previous expectations that
are railed, and the extreme magnificence fully answering these ex-
pectations, with which the hero is at length presented to us, are all
worked up with such skillful conduct as would do honour to any
poet of the most refined times. Homer's art in magnifying the
character of Achilles has been universally admired. Ossian cer-
tainly shows no less art in aggrandizing Fingal. Nothing could be

more

moxe happily imagined for this purpose than the whole management
of the laif bst.le, wherein Gaul the son of Morni, had besought
Fingal to retire, and to leave to him and his-oqherchiefs the honour
of the day. The generosity of the King in agreeing to this propo-
fal; the majesty with whlich he retreats to the hill, from whence
he was to behold the engagement, attended by his Bards, and
waving the lightning of his sword; his perceiving the chiefs over-
powered by numbers, but loth to deprive them of the glory of
vicory by coming in person to their affiffiance; his fending Ullin,
the Bard, to animate their courage; and at iafi, when the dan-
ger becomes more pressing, his rising in his might, and interposing,
like a divinity, to decide the doubtful fate of the day; are all cir-
cumftances contrived with so much art as plainly discover the Cel-
tic Bards to have been not unpraafifed in Heroic poetry.

The fiory which is the foundation of the Iliad is in itself as simple

as that of Fingal. A quarrel arises between Achilles and Agamem-
non concerning a female slave; on which, Achilles, apprehending
himself to be injured, withdraws his affifance from the reft of the
Greeks. The Greeks fall into great distress, and beseech him to be
reconciled to them. He refutes to fight for them in person, but
fends his friend Patroclus; and upon his being slain, goes forth to
revenge his death, and kills Hecor. The subjed of Fingal is this:
Swaran comes to invade Ireland: Cuchullin, the guardian of the
young King, had applied for assistance to Fingal, who reigned in the
opposite coast of Scotland. But before Fingal's arrival, he is hurried
by rash counsel to encounter Swaran. He is defeated; he retreats;
and desponds. Fingal arrives in this conjunture. The battle is
for some time dubious; but in the end he conquers Swaran; and the
remembrance of Swaran's being the brother of Agandecca, who had
once saved his life, makes him dismiss him honourably. Homer it is
true has filled up his itory with a much greater variety ofparticulars
than Ossian; and in this has shown a compass of invention superior
to that of the other poet. But it must not be forgotten, that though
Homer be more circumstantial, his incidents however are less di-
verfified in kind than those of Ossian. War and bloodshed reign
throughout the Iliad; and notwithstanding all the fertility of Ho-
mer's invention, there is so much uniformity in his fubjeats, that
there are few readers, who, before the close, are not tired of perpetual

E 2 fighting.

fighting. Whereas in Ossian, the mind is relieved by a more agree-
able diversity. There is a finer mixture of war and heroism, with'
love and friendship, of martial, with'tender scenes, :than is to be
met with, perhaps, in any other poet. The Episodes- too, :have-
great propriety; as natural, and proper to that age and coun'try
consisting of the songs of Bards, which are known to have been the
great entertainment of the Celtic heroes in war, as well as-in peace-
These songs are not introduced at random; if you except the Epi-
fode of Duchommar and Morna, in the first book,. which, though
beautiful, is more unartful, than any of the reft, they have always
some particular relation to the aAtor who is interested or to the-
events which are going on; and, whilst they vary the'-fcene, they
preserve a sufficient connection with the main subjed, by the fitness-
and propriety of their introduction.

As Fingal's love to Agandecca, influences some circumstances of

the Poem, particularly the honourable dismission of Swaran at the
end; it was necessary that we should be let into this part of the
hero's story. But as it lay without the compass of the present ac-
tion, it could be regularly introduced no where, except in an Epi-
fode. Accordingly the poet, with as much propriety, as if Aristotle
himself had diredted the plan, has contrived an Episode for this pur-
pose in the song of Carril, at the-beginning of the third book.

The conclusion of the poem is ftridtly according to rule; and is

every way noble and pleasing. The reconciliation of the contending
heroes, the consolation of Cuchullin, and the general felicity that
crowns the acion, sooth the mind in a very agreeable manner, and
form that passage from agitation and trouble, to perfect quiet and
repose, which critics require as the proper termination of the Epic
work. " Thus they palTed the night in song, and brought back
" the morning with' joy. Finga! arose on the heath; and shook
" his glittering spear in his hand. He moved first towards the
" plains of Lena; and we followed like a ridge of fire. Spread

the fail, said the King of Morven, and catch the winds that
" pour from Lena.-We rose on the wave with songs; and rushed

with joy through the foam of the ocean."-So much for the
unity and general conduc of the Epic aAcion in Fingal.

WVith
i8s

- With regard to that property of the subjec which Aristotle re-
quires that it flould be feigned not historical, he must not be un---
derflood so ftridly, as if he meant to exclude all subjects which have
any foundation in truth. For such excluiion would both be unrea-
ibnable in itself; and what is more, would be contrary to the prac-
tice of Homer, who is known to have founded his Iliad on historical
fadts concerning the war of Troy, which was famous throughout
all Greece. Aristotle means no more than, that it is the business of
a poet not to be a mere annalist of Fads, but to embellish truth
with beautiful, probable, and useful fitions; to copy nature, as
he himself explains it, like painters, who preserve a likeness, but
exhibit their objecs more grand and beautiful than they are in reality.
That Oian has followed this course, and building upon true history,
has sufficiently adorned it with poetical fiction for aggrandizing his
characters and fads, will not, I believe, be queflioned by most
readers. At the'fame time, the foundation which those fadcs and
charadters had in truth, and the share which the poet himself had
in the tranfadions which he records, must be confidered as no-
finall advantage to his work. For truth makes an impression on the
mind far beyond any fiCtion; and no man, let his imagination be
ever so flrong, relates any events fofeelingly as those in which he has
been interefled; paints any.fcene so naturally as one which he has
seen; or draws any charaders in such firong colours as those which
he has personally known. It is confidered as an advantage of the
Epic subjed to be taken from a period so distant, as by being in-
volved in the darkness of tradition, may give licence to fable.
Though ODian's subjed may at first view appear unfavourable in
this refpedt, as being taken from his own times, yet when we reflec
that he lived to an extreme old age; that he relates what had been
tranfaded in another country, at the difrance of many years, and
after all that race of men who had been the acors were gone off the
flage; we flall find the objedtibn in a great measure obviated. In
so rude an age, when no written records were known, when tra-
diton was lovfe, and accuracy of any kind little attended to, what
was great and heroic in one generation, easily ripened into the mar-
vellous in the next.

The natural representation of human charaters in an Epic Poem
is highly elential to its merit: And in refpe-' to this there can be

no. 29

no doubt of Homer's excelling all; the heroic poets who have ever
wrote. But though' Offien be much inferior to Homer in this ar-
ticle, he will- be found to be equal at least, if not superior, to Virgil;
and has indeed given all the display of human nature which the
ii'mple occurrences of his times could be expected to furnish. No
dead uniformity of character prevails in Fingal; but on the contrary
the principal charaters are not only clearly diltinguifhed, but some-
times artfully corntrafted so as to illustrate each other. - Ofian's he-
roes are like Homer's, all brave; but their bravery, like those of
Homer's too, is of different kinds. For iinflance; the prudent,
the sedate, the modest and circumfped Connal, is finely opposed to
the presumptuous, rash, overbearing, but gallant and generous Cal-
mar. Calmar hurries Cuchullin into action by his temerity; and
when he fees the bad effedt of his counsels, he will not survive the
disgrace. Connal, like another Ulysses, attends Cuchullin to his
retreat, counsels, and comforts him under his misfortune. The
fierce, the proud, and high spirited Swaran is admirably contrasted
with the calm, the moderate, and generous Fingal. The character
of Oscar is a favourite one throughout the whole Poems. The
amiable warmth of the young warrior; his eager impetuosity in the
day of acion; his paflion for fame; his fubmiflion to his father;
his tenderness for Malvina; are the strokes of a materly pencil;
the ftroles are few; but it is the'hand of nature, and attracts the
heart. Ossian's own character, the old man, the hero, and the
bard, all in one, presents to us through the whole work a most
refpedable and venerable figure, which we always contemplate with
pleasure. Cuchullin is a hero of the highest class; daring, mag-
nanimous, and exquisitely sensible to honour. We become attached
to his interest, and are deeply touched with his distress ; and after
the admiration raised for him in the first part of the Poem, it is a
ilrong proof of Ossian's masterly genius that he durLt adventure to
produce to us another hero, compared with whom, even the great
Cuchullin, should be only an inferior personage; and who should
rife as far above him, as Cuchullin rites above the reft.

Here indeed, in the charater and description of Fingal, Ofiman

triumphs almost unrivalled: For we may boldly defy all antiquity to
thew us any hero equal to Fingal. Homer's Heaor possesses feve-
ral great and amiable qualities; but Hetor is a secondary personage

6 in
30

in the Iliad, not the hero of the work. We fee him only occa-
fionally; we know much less of him than we do of Fingal; who
not only in the Epic Poem, but throughout the reft of Ossian's
works, is presented in all that variety of lights, which give the full
display of a character. And though Hedor faithfully discharges his
duty to his country, his friends, and his family, he is tinctured,
however, with a degree of the fame savage ferocity, which prevails
among all the Homeric heroes. For we find him insulting over the
fallen Patroclus, with the most cruel taunts, and telling him, when
he lies in the agony of death, that Achilles cannot help him now;
and that in a short time his body, stripped naked, and deprived of
funeral honours, shall be devoured by the Vulturs *. Whereas in
the charater of Fingal, concur almost all the qualities that can en-
noble human nature; that can either make us admire the hero, or
love the man. He is not only unconquerable in war, but he makes
his people happy by his wisdom in the days of peace -+. He is
truly the father of his people. He is known by the epithet of
" Fingal of the mildest look ;" and distinguished on every occasion,
by humanity and generosity. He is merciful to his foes +; full of
affection to his children; full of concern about his friends; and
never mentions Agandecca, his first love, without the utmost ten-
dernefs. He is the universal proteL. >r of the difireffed; " None
" ever went fad from Fingal 11."--" O Oscar ! bend the strong
" in arms; but spare the feeble hand. Be thou a fiream of many
" tides against the foes of thy people; but like the gale that moves
" the grass, to those who ask thine aid. So Trenmor lived; such
"' Trathal was; and such has Fingal been. My arm was the sup-
" port of the injured; the weak refted behind the lightning of my
" steel §."-These were the maxims of true heroism, to which he
formed his grandson. His fame is represented as every where

* Iliad 16. 830. II. 17. 127. general slaughter of the foes, and to pre-
- P. 62. vent their saving themselves by flight;
T When he commands his sons, after but, like a wife general, he commands

Swaran is taken prisoner, to " pursue his chiefs to render the vicory complear,.
' the reft of Lochlin, over the heath of by a total rout of the enemy; that they

Lena; that no vessel may hereafter might adventure no more for the future,

cc bound on the dark-rolling waves of to fit out any fleet against him or his al-
-' Iniftore ;" he means not assuredly, as lies.
some have misrepresented him, to order a l P. 74. § P. 44.

spread

31

spread; the greatest heroes acknowledge his superiority; his ene-
mries tremble at his name; and the highest encomium that can be
bettowed on one whom the poet would imot exalt, is to fay, that his
foul was like the foul of Fingal.

To do jultice to the poet's merit, in supporting such a characer

as this, I must observe, what is not commonly attended to, that
there is no part of poetical execution more difficult, than to draw a per-
sect character in such a manner, as to render it diftind and affecting
to the mind. Some strokes of human imperfection and frailty, are
what ufially give us the most clear view, and the moit sensible
impreflion of a character; because they present to us a man, such
as we have seen; they recall known features of human nature.
When poets attempt to go beyond this range, and describe a fault-
less hero, they, for the most part, set before us, a fort of vague un-
diftingui-flable character, such as the imagination cannot lay hold of,
or realize to itself, as the objeac of affection. We know how
much Virgil has failed in this particular. His perfect hero, _Eneas,
is an unanimated, insipid personage, whom we may pretend to
admire, but whom no one can heartily love. But what Virgil has failed
in, OSTian, to our aftoniflment, has fuccefsfuily executed. His
Fingal, though exhibited without-any of the common human failings,
is nevertheless a real man; a character which touches and interests
every reader. To this it has much contributed, that the poet has
represented him as an old man; and by this has gained the advan-
tage of throwing around him a great many circumstances, peculiar
to that age, which paint him to the fancy in a more diftinA light.
lHe is surrounded with his family; he inRfructs his children in the
principles of virtue; he is narrative of his past exploits; he is vene-
rable with the grey locks of age ; he is frequently disposed to mo-
ralize, like an old man, on human vanity and the profpea of
death. There is more art, at least more felicity, in this, than may
at first be imagined. For youth and old age, are the two flates of
human life, capable of being placed in the most pi&urefque lights.
Middle age is more general and vague; and has fewer circumflances
peculiar to the idea of it. And when any object is in a situation,
that admits it to be rendered particular, and to be cloathed with a
-variety of circumstances, it always flands out more clear and full in
poetical description.

Besides
32

Besides human personages, divine or supernatural agents are

often introduced into epic poetry ; forming what is called the ma-
chinery of it; which most critics hold to be an essential part. The
marvellous, it must be admitted, has always a great charm for the
bulk of readers. Itgratifies the imagination, and affords room for
firiking and sublime description. No wonder therefore, that all
poets mlould have a firong propensity towards it. But 1 mull ot-
serve, that nothing is more difficult, than to adjust properly the
marvellous with the probable. If a poet iacrifice probability, and
fill his woirk, as Tasso has done, with extravagant supernatural
Icenes, he spreads over it an appearance of romance and childiih
fiction; he transports his readers from this world, into a phantaf-
tick, visionary region ; and loses that weight and dignity which
should reign in epic poetry. No work, from which probability is
altogether banished, can make a lasting or deep imprenfion. Hu-
man actions and manners, are always the most interefling objects
which can be presented to a human mind. All machinery, there-
fore, is faulty which withdraws these too much from view; or ob-
fcures them under a cloud of incredible fictions. Betides being
temperately employed, machinery ought always to have some foun-
dation in popular belief. A poet is by no means at liberty to in-
vent what system of the marvellous he pleases : He must avail him-
ielf either of the religious faith, or the Iiperftitious credulity of the
country wherein he lives; so as to give an air of probability to
events which are mroft contrary to the common course of nature.

In these refpe&s, Oflian appears to me to have been rema-i-bly

happy. IHe has indeed followed the fame course with H "'er.
For it is perfetly absurd to imagine, as some critics have done,
that Homer's mythology was invented by hitn, in consequence of
profound reflections on the benefit it would yield to poetry. H-omer
was no such refining genius. IHe found the traditionl-ary flories on
which he built his Iliad, mingled with popular legends, concern-
ing the intervention of the gods ; and he adopted thelb, because they
anmufed the fancy. Ossian, in like manner, found the tales of his
country full of ghosts and spirits: It is likely he believed them hirrm-
self; and he introduced them, because they gave his poems that
folernn and marvellous caRl, which Iuited his genius. This was

F the

33

the only machinery he could employ with propriety; because it was
the only intervention of supernatural beings, which agreed with the
common belief of the country. It was happy; because it.did not
interfere in the leafi, with the proper display of human characters
and actions; because it had less of the incredible, than most other
kinds of poetical machinery; and because it served to diversify the
scene, and to heighten the subjet by an awful grandeur, which is
the great design of machinery.

As Ossian's mythology is peculiar tohimfelf, and makes a con-

fiderable figure in his other poems, as well as in Fingal, it may. be
proper to make some observations on it, - independent of its fubfTr-
viency to epic composition. It turns for the most part on the ap-
pearances of departed spirits. These,. consonantly to the notions of
every rude age, are represented not as purely immaterial, but as
thin airy forms, which can be visible or invisible at pleasure ; their
voice is feeble; their arm is weak; but they are endowed with
knowledge more than human. In a separate iRate, they retain the
fame dispositions which animated them in this life. They ride on
the wind; they bend their airy bows; and pursue deer formed of
clouds. The ghosts of departed bards continue to sing. The
ghosts of departed heroes frequent the fields of their former fame.
"They reft together in their 'caves, and talk of mortal men.
" Their songs are of other worlds. They come sometimes to the
"' ear of reft, and raise their feeble voice ." All this presents to us
much the lfame set of ideas, concerning spirits, as we find in the ele-
venth book of the OdyfTey, where Ulysses visits the regions of the
dead: And in the twenty-third book of the Iliad, the ghoif of
Patroclus, after appearing to Achilles, vanishes precisely like one
of Offlan's, emitting a flrill, feeble cry, and melting away like
fmioke.

But though Itomer's and Ossian's ideas concerning ghosts were

of t'e:: Iaine nature, we cannot but observe, that Oflilan's ghosts are
drawnl with much Rrongcr and livelier colours than those of Homer.
Offlan detcribes ghoPts with all the particularity of one who had
ifen and convetled with them, and 'whose itlmaination was full of

* See P'. 24, 27, 103, 10', 218, 254.

the
34

the impreflion they had left upon it. He calls up those awful and
tremendous ideas which the

-- Simulacra modis pallentia miris,

are fitted to raise in the human mind; and which, in Shakefpear's
fiyle, " harrow up the foul." Crugal's ghofs, in particular, in the
beginning of the second book of Fingal, may vie with any ap-
pearance of this kind, described by any epic or tragic poet whatever.
Most poets would have contented themfclves with telling us, that he
resembled, in every particular, the living Crugal; that his form and
dress were the fame, only his face more pale and fad; and that he
bore the mark of the wound by which he fell. But Osman sets be-
fore our eyes a spirit from the invisible world ; diflinguifhed by all
those features, which a firong afionifhed imagination would give
to a ghost. " A dark-red fiream of fire comes down from the hill.
" Crugal fat upon the beam; he that lately fell by the hand of
c" Swaran, ifriving in the battle of heroes. His face is like the
" beam of the setting moon. His robes are of the clouds of the
c hill. His eyes are like two decaying flames. Dark is the wound
<C of his breat.--- The fears dim-twinkled through his form;
"c and his voice was like the found of a distant fiream." The cir-
cumfRance of the stars being beheld, " dim-twinkling through his
" form," is wonderfully piAurefque; and conveys the most lively
impression of his thin and shadowy substance. The attitude in
which he is afterwards placed, and the speech put into his mouth,
are full of that solemn and awful sublimity, which suits the subjei.
' Dim, and in tears, he flood and frbetched his pale hand over
"the hero. Faintly he raised his feeble voice, like the gale of the
" reedy Lego.-My ghost, 0 Connal! is on my native hills; but
" my corse is on the sands of Ullin. Thou shalt never talk with
,' Crugal, or find his lone feps in the heath. I am light as the
" blast of Cromla ; and I move like the shadow of mil. Connal,
" son of Colgar ! I fee the dark cloud of death. It hovers over the
· plains of Lena. The sons of green Erin ihall fall. Remove
c from the field of ghofts.-Like the darkened moon he retired, in
" the midl of the whirling blast."

Several

35

Several other appearances of spirits might be pointed out, as

among the most sublime passages of Ossian's poetry. The circum-
stances of them are considerably diverflfied; and the scenery always
suited to the occasion. " Oscar slowly ascends the hill. The me-,
"teors of night set on the heath before him. A distant torrent
{ faintly roars. Unfrequent blasts rush through aged oaks. The
"half-enlightened moon finks dim and red behind her hill. Fee-
" ble voices are heard on the heath. Oscar drew his sword."-
Nothing can prepare the fancy more happily for the awful scene that
isto follow. " Trenmor came from his hill, at the voice of his

mighty son. A cloud, like the fleed of the stranger, fuipported

" his airy limbs. His robe is of the miff of Lano, that brings
' death to the people. His sword is a green meteor, half-extin-
" guifhed. His face is without form, and dark. He sighed thrice
" over the hero: And thrice, the winds of the night roared

around. Many were his words to Ofcar--He ilowly va-

" nilhed,. like a mifft that melts on the funny hill *." To ap-
pearances of this kind, we can find no parallel among the Greek
or Roman poets. They bring to mind that noble description in the
book of Job : In thoughts from the visions of the night, when

deep sleep falleth on men, fear came upon me, and' trembling,

" which. made all my bones to lhake. Then a spirit passed before
" my fice. The hair of my fiefh flood up. It flood flill; but I

could not discern the form thereof. An image was before mine
eyes. There was silence ; and I heard a voice-Shall mortal
"man be moe juti than God ?" ~

As Ofilan's supernatural beings are described with a furprizing

force of imagination, so they are introduced with propriety. We
have only three ghosts in Fingal: That of Crugal, which comes to
warn the hoit of impending destruction, and to advise them to save
themcelves by retreat; that of Evirallin, the spouse of Ofian, which
calls him to rfe ald rescue their son from danger; and that of
Agandilcca, wvhich, jufR before the lat. engagemnent with Swaran,
moves Fingal to pity, by mourning for the approaching deftrucqion
o) her kilnfnen and people. In the other poem-, ghosts sometimes
aib'ear e.'n]i invoked to fbretell futurity; frequently, according to

*' P. Ioc, Ior. Job iv. 13---I7.

the
36

the notions of these times, they come as fore-runners of misfortune
or death, to those whom they visit; sometimes they inform their
friends at a distance, of their own death; and Sometimes they are
introduced to heighten the scenery on some great and solemn occa-
sion. " A hundred oaks burn to the wind; and faint light gleams
" over the heath. The ghosts of Ardven pass through the beam ;
" and (hew their dim and distant forms. Comala is half-unfeen on
< her meteor; and Hidallan is fullen and dim *."--( The awful
"faces of other times, looked from the clouds of Crona." ---
" Fercuth !. I saw the ghost of night. Silent he flood on that
' bank; his robe of mist flew on the wind. I could behold his
" tears. An aged man he seemed, and full of thought +."

The ghoRfs of strangers mingle not with those of the natives.

"' She is seen; but not like the daughters of the hill. Her robes
"are from the firangers land; and (he is still alone §." When
the ghost of one whom we had formerly known is introduced, the
propriety of the living characer is still preserved. This is remark-
able in the appearance of Calmar's ghost, in the poem entitled
The Death of Cuchullin. He seems to forebode CuchulIin's
death, and to beckon him to his cave. Cuchullin reproaches hiin
for supposing that he could be intimidated by such prognorfics.
" Why dost thou bend thy dark eyes on me, ghost of the car-
"borne Calmar ! Would'st thou frighten me, 0 Matha's is n!
" from the battles of Cormac ? Thy hand was not feeble in war;
" neither was thy voice for peace. How art thou changed, c!hie
"ofLara! if now thou doff advise to fly! - Retire thou to thy
" cave: Thou art not Calmar's ghot : I-Ie delighted in batt e; and
" his arm was like the thunder of heaven." Calnar makes no
return to this teeming reproach: But, " He retired in his llaft
" with joy; for he had heard the voice of h s praise It." This is
precisely the gholf of Achilles in Homner; who, notwitlftan-lingl
all the diffatisfation ihe exprefl s with his Rtate in thec region of the
dead, as soon as he had heard his ionl Nleoptolcimus praildti f-r
his gallant behaviour, frrode away with 'ient joy to rejoin the reif
of the Shades A.

P. 97. - P. 38. i P. .23. S P. Inc ,
! P. '.5'- s Odytfi Lib. Ir.

Ic
37

It is a great advantage of Onian's mythology, that it is not local

and temporary, like that of most other ancient poets;. which of
course is apt to seem ridiculous, after the superstitions have passed
away on which it was founded. ;Ossian's mythology is, to speak
so, the mythology of human nature; :for it is founded on what
has been the popular belief, in all ages and countries, and under all
forms of religion, concerning the appearances of departed spirits.
Homer's machinery is always lively and amusing; but far from be-
ing always supported with proper dignity. The indecent squabbles
among his gods, surely do no honour to epic poetry. Whereas
OfQian's machinery has dignity upon all occasions. It is indeed a
dignity of the dark and awful kind; but this is proper; because co-
incident with the strain and spirit of the poetry. A light and gay
mythology, like Homer's, would have been perfectly unsuitable
to the fubjeEts on which Ossian's genius was employed. But though
his machinery be always solemn, it is not, however, always dreary
or dismal; it is enlivened, as much as the subjea would permit, by
those pleasant and beautiful appearances, which he Sometimes in-
troduces, of the spirits of the hill. These are gentle spirits; de-
scending on sun-beams; fair-moving on the plain; their forms
white and bright; their voices sweet; and their visits to men pro-
pitious. The greatest praise that ,can be given, to the beauty of a
living woman, is to fay, " She is fair as the ghost of the hill; when
6' it moves in a sun-beam at noon, over the silence of Morven *."
--- " The hunter shall hear my voice from his booth. He ihall
c fear, but love my voice. For sweet shall my voice be for my
" friends; for pleasant were they to me -."

Besides ghosts, or the spirits of departed men, we find in Ossian

some instances of other kinds of machinery. Spirits of a superior
nature to ghosts, teem to be sometimes alluded to, which have
power to embroil the deep; to call forth winds and storms, and
pour them on the land of the stranger; to overturn forests, and to
fend death among the people '. WTe have prodigies too; a shower
of blood ; and when some disaster is befalling at a diflance, the
found of death heard on the firings of Offlan's harp §: all per-

P. 14. P. 2 2. Vid. P. 39, I 4, 13, 102, 180.
SP 1' 33, 168.

fectly

39

fedly consonant, not only to the peculiar ideas of northern nations,
but to the general current of a superstitious imagination in all coun-
tries. The description of Fingal's airy hall, in the poem called
Berrathon, and the ascent of Malvina into it, deserves particular no-
tice, as remarkably noble and magnificent. But above all, the en-
gagement of Fingal with the spirit of Loda, in Carric-thura, can-
not be mentioned without admiration. I forbear transcribing the
pafiage, as it muff have drawn the attention of every one who has
read the works of Offlan. The undaunted courage of Fingal, op-
posed to all the terrors of the Scandinavian god; the appearance and
the speech of that awful spirit ; the wound which he receives, and
the shriek which he fends forth, " as rolled into himself, he rose
" upon the wind ;" are full of the molt amazing and terrible ma-
jefty. I know no passage more sublime in the writings of any un-
inspired author. The fiction is calculated to aggrandize the hero;
which it does to a high degree; nor is it so unnatural or wild a sic-
tion, as might at first be thought. According to the notions of
those times, supernatural beings were material, and consequently,
vulnerable. The spirit of Loda was not acknowledged as a deity
by Fingal; he did not worship at the slone of his power; he
plainly confidered him as the God of his enemies only; as a local
Deity, whose dominion extended no farther than to the regions
where he was worshiped; who had, therefore, no title to threaten
him, and no claim to his submission. We know there are poetical pre-
cedents of great authority, for fictions fully as extravagant; and if
Homer be cfrgiven for making Diomed attack and wound in battle,
the gods whom that chief himself worflhiped, Ofiian fury is par-
donable for making his hero superior to the god of a foreign terri-
tory -.

Not-

t The fcete of this encounter of Fingal I ha;'e been well informed, there are

with the spirit of Loda is laid in Iniftore, or many pillars, and circles of lones, fl!i
the islands of Orkney ; and in the defcrip- remaining, ckn-wn by the name of the
tion of Fingl's landing there, it is said, stones ani circles of Loda, or Lodecn to
p. :98. " A rock bends along the coafl- which folne degree of fuperfitiious regard
Li with all its echoing wood. On the top is annexed to this cay. These iiLi;d:;,
' is the circle of Loda, with the moil until the year r146-, mnade a part of the
(t fione of power." In confirmation of Danii]. dominions. 'Their ancient lan-
Oifian's topography, it is proper to ac- gu.ge, of whichthere areyet some remisiins
quaint the reader that in there illands, as among the natives, is cailed the Norf';

8 w34..

Notwithstanding the poetical advantages which I have ascribed

to Ossian's machinery, 1 acknowledge it would have been much
more beautiful and perfect, had the author diScovered some know-
ledge of a fupream Being. Although -his silence on this head has
been accounted for by the learned and ingenious translator in a very
probable manner, yet frill it must be held a considerable difadvan-
tage to the poetry. For the mbof august and lofty ideas that can
embellish poetry are derived from the belief of a divine admini(lration
of the universe: And hence the invocation of a fupream Being, or
at least of some superior powers who are conceived as presiding over
human affairs, the folemnities of religious worship, prayers pre-
ferred, and assistance implored on critical occasions, appear with
great dignity in the works of almost all poets as chief ornaments of
their compositions. The absence of all such religious ideas from
Ofiian's poetry, is a sensible blank in it; the more to be regretted,
as we can easily imagine what an illustrious figure they would have
made under the management of such a genius as his; and how
finely they would have been adapted to many situations which
occur in his works.

The high merit of Fingal, as an Epic Poem, required a particular

difcufiion. But though the art shown in conducting a work of
such length difinguifhes it above the other poems in this collection,
thele, however, contain particular beauties equal, perhaps fuper'or,
to any in Fingal. They are historical poems, generally of the ele-
giac kind; and plainly discover, themselves to be the work of the
fame author. One confitfent face of manners is every where pre-
sented to us ; one spirit of poetry reigns; the manlerly hand of
Ossian appears throughout; the fame rapid and animated style;
the fame strong colouring of imagination, and the fame glowing
fen ibility of heart. Betides the unity which belongs to the compo-
fitlons o one man, there is moreover a certain unity offubjec which

and is a dialect; not of the Celtic, but of tations and evocations from the dead,
the ,candinavian tongue. The manners which were the favourite fuhjeads of the
.and the fuperftirions of the inhabitants, are old Runic poetry. They have many tra-
quite diftint from those of the Highlands ditions among them of wars in former
and weicrn isles of Scotland. Their an- times with the inhabitants of the weiterli
cien: rongs too, are ofa dififerent train and islands.
.'za!, !tcr, turniLng upon magical incan-

very
4o0

Very happily conneas all these poems. They form the poetical hillory
of the age of Fingal. The fame race of heroes whom we had met
with in the Epic poem, Cuchullin, Oscar, Connal and Gaul return
again upon the stage ;. and Fingal himself is always the principal
figure, presented on every occasion, with equal magnincence, nay
riing upon us to the last. The ci:cumftances of Ofiaii's old age
and blindness, his surviving all his fiiends, and his relating their
great exploits to Malvina, the spouse or miftrcfs of his beloved bon
Oscar, furnish the finest poetical situations that fancy could devili
for that tender pathetic which reigns in Offan's poetry.

As each ofthefe poems have their particular merit, there mighi

be room for examining them separately, and for flowing, in many
inflances, what art there is in the conduct and disposition of the
incidents, as well as what beauty in the descriptions and sentiments.
Carthon is a regular and highly finifmned piece. The main flory is
very properly introduced by Clefiammor's relation of the adventure
of his youth ; and this introduction is finely heightened by Fingal's
song of mourning over Moina; in which Ossian, ever fond of
doing honour to his father, has contrived to diftinguilh him, for
being an eminent poet, as well as warrior. Fingal's song upon this
occasion, when " his thousand Bards leaned forwards from their

feats, to hear the voice of the King," is inferior to no paflage

in the whole book; and with great judgment put in his mouth,
as the seriousness, no less than the sublimity of the birain, is peculiarly
suited to the Hero's character. Temora is the opening of an Epic
Poem, which appears to be equal in every refpett to Fingal. The
contrast between the characters of Cathmar and Cairbar, the death
of Oscar, and the affafination of the young prince Cornac, are ifch
intereftingfcenes, as give the greatest realbn to with the recovery
of the sequel. In Darthula are assembled almost all the tender
images that can touch the heart of man: FriendfLip, love, the
affecdions of parents, sons, and brothers, the distress of
the aged, and the unavailing bravery of the young. The beautiful
address to the moon, with which the poem opens, and the tranfi-
tion from thence to the subjet, most happily prepare the mind for
that train of affecting events that is to follow. -The story is regular,
dramatic, intereRing to the last. He who can read it without emo-
tion may congratulate himself, if he pleases, upon being completely

. G armed

4i

armed again f- sympathetic sorrow. As Fingal had no occasion of
appearing in the action of this poem, Ossian inakes a very artful
transition from his narration, to what was passing in the halls of
Selma. The found heard there onthe firings of his harp, the con-
cern which Fingal shows on hearing it, and the invocation of the
,ghoits of their fathers, to receive the Heroes falling in a distant land,
are introduced with great beauty of imagination to increase the so-
lemnity, and to diversify the scenery of the poem.

Carric-thura is full of the most fub!ime dignity; and has this ad-

vantage of being more chearful in the subject, and more happy in
the catastrophe than most of the other poems: Though tempered
at the fame time with episodes in that itrain of tender melancholy,
which seems to have been the great delight of Ossian and the Bards of
his age. Lathmon is peculiarly diftinguilhed, by high generosity of
sentiment. This is carried so far, particularly in the refusal of
Gaul, on one fide, to take the advantage of a sleeping foe; and of
Lathmon, on the other, to overpower by numbers the two young
warriors, as to recall into one's mind the manners of Chivalry;
some resemblance to which may perhaps be suggested by other
incidents in this collection of Poems. Chivalry, however,.
took rife in an age and country too remote from those of
Ossian to admit the suspicion. that the one could have borrowed
any thing from the other. So far as Chivalry had any real
existence, the fame military enthusiasm, which gave birth to
it in the feudal times, might, in the days of Ossian, that is, in the
infancy of a rising state, through the operation of the fame cause,,
very naturally produce effects of the fame kind on the minds and
manners of men. So far as Chivalry was an ideal fyflem exifiing
only in romance, it will not be thought surprising, when we reflect
on the account before given of the Celtic Bards, that this ima-
ginary refinement of heroic manners should be found among them,
as much, at least, as among the Trobadores, or strolling Provengal
Bards, in the loth or i ith century; whose songs, it is said, first
gave rife to those romantic ideas of heroism, which for so long a
time enchanted Europe -. Ossian's heroes have all the gallantry

*I Vid. Huetius de origine fabularum Romanenfium.

and
42

31

and generosity of those fabulous knights, without their extravagance;
and his love scenes have native tenderness, without any mixture of
those forced and unnatural conceits which abound in the old roman-
ces. The adventures related by our poet which resemble the moit
those of romance, concern women who follow their lovers to
war disguised in the armour of men; and these are so managed as to
produce, in the discovery, several of the most interesting situations
one beautiful inflance of which may be seen in Carric-thura, and
another in Calthon and Colmal.

Oithona presents a situation of a different nature. In the absence

of her lover Gaul, the had been carried off and ravished by Dun-
rommath. Gaul discovers the place where fle is concealed, and
comes to revenge her. The meeting of the two lovers, the sentiments
and the behaviour of Oithona on that occasion, are described with
such tender and exquisite propriety, as does the greatest honour
both to the art and to the delicacy of our author; and would have
been admired in any poet of the molt refined age. The conduct of
Croma must firike every reader as remarkably judicious and beau-
tiful. We are to be prepared for the death of Malvina, which is
related in the succeeding Poem. She is therefore introduced in
person; " ihe has heard a voice in a dream; she feels the slut-
" tering of her foul ;" and in a most moving lamentation addrefied
to her beloved Oscar, the sings her own Death Song. Nothing
could be calculated with more art to sooth and comfort her, than
the fory which Ossian relates. In the young and brave Fovar-
gormo, another Oscar is introduced; his praises are sung; and
the happiness is set before her of those who die in their youth,
" when their renown is around them; before the feeble behold
(' them in the hall, and smile at their trembling hands.'

But no where does Offan's genius appear to greater advantage,
than in the concluding poem of the whole collecion, "' The last

found of the Voice of Cona."

Qualis olor noto pofiturus littore vitam,
Ingerit, et masftis mulcens concentibus auras
Prafago queritur venientia funera cantu.

G ? The

The whore train of ideas is admirably suited to the subjed. Every'

thing is full of that invisible world, into which the aged Bard be-
lieves himself now ready to enter. The airy hall of Fingal presents
itself to his view; " he fees the cloud that shall receive his ghot ;
"he beholds the mifl that shall form his robe when he appears on

his hill ;" and all the natural objects around him seem to carry
the presages of death. " The thistle ihakes its beard to the wind.

The flower hangs its heavy head-it seems to fay, I am covered

"C with the drops of heaven; the time of my departure is near;
'c and the blast that lhall sCatter my leaves." Malvina's death is
hinted to him in the most delicate manner by the son of Alpin.
His lamentation over her, her apotheosis, or ascent to the habitation,
of heroes, and the introduc-ion to the story which follows from the
mention which Ofiran supposes the father of Malvina to make of
him in the hall of Fingal, are all in the highest spirit of Poetry.

And doff thou remember Ofiian, 0 Tofcar son of Comloch ?:
The battles of our youth were many; our swords went together

" to the field."-Nothing could be more proper than to end his
songs with recording an exploit of the father of that MlIalvina, of
whom his heart was now so full ; and who, from first to last, had:
been such a favourite objec throughout all his poems.

But as a separate difcufiion of the merit of each of the poems in

this collecion would lead us too far, I ihall content myself with
making some observations on the chief beauties of our author under
the general heads of Description, Imagery, and Sentiment.

A poet of original genius is always diffinguifhed by his talent

for- delci-ption -i-. A second rate writer discerns nothing new or pe-
culiar in the object he means to describe. His conceptions of it are
vague and loose ; his exprefiions feeble; and of course the object is
prel:cnted to us indiftintly and as through a cloud. But a true
Poet naes us 1 iagine that we fee it before our eyes : he catches
the dii;iin.,uifLi: i_ features ; he gives it the colours of life and reality;
lie places it in luch a iizlht that a painter could copy after him.
i his happy talent is chiefly owing to a lively imagination, which

I- See the rules of poetical description excellently illustrated by lord Kaims, in his
ilemeitsoi Cli ici m, \ol. iii. chap, 2 i. Of narration and dcicription.
44

45

first receives a strong impression of the objeEt; and then, by a pro-
per feletion of capital pieurefque circumstances employed in de-
icribing it, transmits that impression in its full force to the imagi-
nations of others. That Offlan possesses this descriptive power in
a high degree, we have a clear proof froni the effect which his
descriptions produce upon the imaginations of those who read him
swith any degree of attention and taste. Few poets are more inte-
refing.: ,ye contraAt al intimate acquaintance with his principal
heroes. The characters, the manners, the face of the country be-
come familiar; we even think we could draw the figure of his
ghoits: In a word,. whilst reading him, we are transported as into
a new region, and dwell among his objects as if they were all real.

It were easy to point out several inflances of exquisite painting in

the works of our author. Such, for instance as the scenery with
which Temora opens, and the attitude in which Cairbar is there
presented to us -; the description of the young prince Cormac, in
the fame book I[; and the ruins of Balclutha in Carthon ~. " I

have seen the walls of Balclutha, but they were desolate. The

' fire had resounded in the halls; and the voice of the people is
" heard no more. The stream of Clutha was removed from its

place by the fall of the walls. The thistle shook there its lonely
head: The moss whistled to the wind. The fox looked out
"from the windows; the rank grass of the wall waved round

his head. Desolate is the dwvelling of 'Moina; silence is in

' the house of her fathers." Nothing also can be more natural
and lively than the manner in which Carthon afterwards de-
fcribcs how the conflagration of his city afloeded him when a
child: " Have I not seen the fallen Balcltitha ? And mhall I feast
* with Comhal's son ? Comral ! who threw his fire in the

midst of my father's hall ! I was young and knew not the cause
" why the virgins wept. The columns of smoke pleased mine

eye, when they rose above my walls: 1 often looked back
" with gladness, when my fiiends fled above the hill. But when

the years of my youth came on, J beheld the moss of my fallen
" walls. IIy sigh ao with e mornin)g 3 and my tears c'fcended

- P. 1'7, 173. ii P. !85. , P. 1,2.

' with

with night. Shall I not fight, I said to my foul, againit the
"children of my foes? And I will fight, O Bard! I feel the

f trength of my foul -.." In the fame poem, the assembling of

the chiefs round Fingal, who had been warned of some impending
danger by the appearance of a prodigy, is described with so many
piSturefque circumstances, that one imagines himself present in the
assembly. " The king alone beheld the terrible fight, and he
" foresaw the death of his people. He came in silence to his' hall,

and took his father's spear; the mail rattled on his breast. The

· heroes rose around. They looked in silence on each other,
( marking the eyes of Fingal. They saw the battle in his face.
" - A thousand shields are placed at once on their arms; and
c' they drew a thousand swords. The hall of Selma brightened
"around. The clang of arms ascends. The grey dogs howl in
'" their place. No word is among the mighty chiefs. Each
5' marked the eyes of the King; and half assumed his spear +."

It has been objeted to Ofian, that his descriptions of military

actions are imperfect, and much less diversified by circumstances
than those of Homer. This is in some measure true. The amazing
fertility of Homer's invention is no where so much displayed as in
the incidents of his battles, and in the little history pieces he gives
of the persons slain. Nor indeed, with regard to the talent of de-
scription, can too much be laid in praise of Homer. Every thing is
alive in his writings. The colours with which he paints are those
of nature. But Ossian's genius was of a different kind from Homer's.
It led him to hurry towards grand objets rather than to amuse him-
self with particulars of less importance. He could dwell on the
death of a favorite hero; but that of a private man seldom flopped
his rapid course. Homer's genius was more comprehensive than
Ossian's. It included a wider circle of objecs ; and could work up
any incident into description. Ossian's was more limited; but
the region within which it chiefly exerted itself was the highest
of all, the region of the pathetic and sublime,

We muff not imagine, however, that Offman's battles consist
only of general indiftint description. Such beautiful incidents are

t1 P. 135.o P. I33.

some-
46

47

sometimes introduced, and the circumstances of the persons slain
so much diversified, as flow that he could have embellished his
military scenes with an abundant variety of particulars, if his genius
had led him to dwell upon them. One man " is firetched in the
" duff of his native- land ; he fell, where often he had spread the
" feast, and often raised the voice of the harp -." The maid of
Iniftore is introduced, in a moving apostrophe, as weeping for
another +; and a third, s" as rolled in the duff he lifted his

faint eyes to the king," is remembered and mourned by Fingal

as the friend of Agandecca 11. The blood pouring from the wound
of one who is slain by night, is heard " hissing on the halfextinguifhed
" oak," which had been kindled for giving light: Another, climbing
a tree to escape from his foe, is pierced by his spear from behind;

ihrieking, panting he fell; whilst moss and withered branches

" pirfue his fall, and firew the blue arms of Gaul §." Never
was a finer piEture drawn of the ardour of two youthful warriors
than the following: " I saw Gaul in his armour, and my foul
"was mixed with his: For the fire of the battle was in his eyes;
" he looked to the foe with joy. We spoke the words of friend-
< ship in secret; and the lightening of our swords poured together.
" We drew them behind the wood, and tried the strength of our
" arms on the empty air ¶I."

Oflian is always concise in his descriptions, which adds much

to-their beauty and force. For it is a great mistake to imagine, that
a crowd of particulars, or a very full and extended style, is of advan-
tage to description. On the contrary, such a diffuse manner for the
moit part weakens it. Any one redundant circumstance is a nui-
fance. It encumbers and loads the fancy, and renders the main
image indiftin&t. " Obflat," as Quintilian fays with regard to
style, " quicquid non adjuvat." To be concise in description, is
one thing; and to be general, is another. No description that refts
in generals can poflibly be good; it can convey no lively idea; for
it is of particulars only that we have a diitind conception. But
at the fame time, no firong imagination dwells long upon any one
particular; or heaps together a mars of trivial ones. By the happy
choice of some one, or of a few that are the moRt itriking, it pre-

- P. 28. t P 14. [ P. 59. P. 236. '1 P. 232.

sents

lents the image more compleat, shows us more at one glance, than
a feeble imagination is able to do, by turning its object rctund and
round into a variety of lights. Tacitus'is of all profe'writers the
most concise. He has even a degree of abruptness resembling our
author: Yet no writer is more eminent for lively description.
When Fingal, after having conquered thehaughty Swaran, proposes
to dismiss him with honour: " Raise to-morrow thy white fails to
' the wind, thou brother of Agandecca!" .- he conveys, by thus
addressing his enemy, a fironger imprerffon of the emotions then
passing within his mind, than if whole paragraphs had been spent
in describing the conflit between resentment against Swaran and
the tender remembrance of his ancient love. No amplification is
needed to give us the moil full idea of a hardy veteran, after the
few following words: " His shield is marked with the firokes of

battle; his red eye despises danger +." When Oscar, left alone,
was surrounded by foes, " he flood," it is said, " growing in iis

place, like the flood of the narrow vale 1 ;" a happy reprefenta-

tion of one, who, by daring intrepidity in the midst of danger, seems
to increase in his appearance, and becomes more formidable every
moment, like the sudden rising of the torrent hemmed in by the
valley. And a whole crowd of ideas, concerning the circumftrances
of domestic sorrow occasioned by a young warrior's first going forth
to battle, is poured upon. the mind by these words; " Calmar
"leaned on his father's spear; that spear which he brought fiom
" ILara's hall, when the foul of his mother was fad s."

The conciseness of Oflian's descriptions is the more proper on

account of his fubjeds. Descriptions of gay and finiling scenes
may, without any disadvantage, be amplified and prolonged. Force is
not the predominant quality expected in there. The defcripticn
may be weakened by being diffuse, yet notwithstanding, may be
beautiful fill. Whereas, with refped to grand, solemn and pa-
thetic fubjedts, which are Ossian's chief field, the cafe is very dif-
ferent. In these, energy is above all things required. The ima-
gination muff be seized at once, or not at all; and is far more
deeply impressed by one firong and ardent image, than by the an-
xious minuteness of laboured illustration.

t P. 77. I P. 174.
+ P.
72. § P. 40.

But
5

49

But Ofian's genius, though chiefly'turned towards the sublime

and pathetic, was not confined to it: In fubjefts also of grace and
delicacy, he discovers the hand of a masser. Take for an example
the following elegant ;description of Agandecca, wherein the ten-
dernefs of Tibullus seems united with the majefly of Virgil.
" The daughter of the fnowoverheard, and left the hall of her
"< secret sigh. She came in all her beauty; like the moon from
" the cloud of the East. Loveliness was around her as light. Her
" steps were like the music of songs. She saw the youth and loved
" him. He was the stolen sigh of her foul. Her blue eyes rolled
" on him in secret: And the blest the chief of Morven +." Se-
veral other instances might be produced of the feelings of love
and friendship painted by our author with a most natural and
happy delicacy.-

The simplicity of Ossian's manner adds great beauty to his de-

scriptions, and indeed to his whole Poetry. We meet with no as-
feted ornaments; no forced refinement; no marks either in style
or thought of a fludied endeavour to shine and sparkle. Ossian
appears every where to be prompted by his feelings; and to speak
from the abundance of his heart. I remember no more than one
inflance of what can be called quaint thought in this whole col-
letion of his works. It is in the first book of Fingal, where from
the tombs of two lovers two lonely yews are mentioned to have
sprung, " whose branches wifled to meet on high +." This sym-
pathy of the trees with the lovers, may be reckoned to border on
an Italian conceit ; and it is somewhat curious to find this single
inifance of that fort of wit in our Celtic poetry.

The " joy of grief, " is one of Ofilan's peculiar expressions, fe-

veral times repeated. If any one shall think that it needs to be
justified by a precedent, he may find it twice used by Homer; in
the Iliad, when Achilles is visited by the ghost of Patroclus; and in
the Odyssey, when Ulysses meets his mother in the ihades. On
both these occasions, the heroes, melted with tenderness, lament
.their not having it in their power to throw their arms round the

+2P-, 37. : P. Io8.

H

ghoia

ghofl, " that we might," fiay they, " in a mutual embrace, enjoy
" the delight of grief."

-*- cpvueoso TIrcP7rtepeóeer rooO *.

But in truth the expression stands in need of no defence from

authority; for it is a natural and just expression; and conveys a
clear idea of that gratification, which a virtuous heart often
feels in the indulgence of a tender melancholy. Ossian makes a
very proper distinction between this gratification, and the destructive
effet of overpowering grief. There is a joy in grief, when peace

"dwells in the breafs of the fad. But sorrow waftes the mournful,
0' daughter of Tofcar, and their days are few -j." To " give

"the joy of grief," generally signifies. to raise the strain of soft and
grave mufick ; and finely charaderifes the taste of Ofian's age and
country. In those days, when the songs of bards were the great de-
light of heroes, the tragic muTe was held in chief honour; gallant
actions, and virtuous sufferings, were the chosen theme; preferably
to that light and trifling strain of poetry and mufick, which pro-
motes light and trifling manners, and serves to emasculate the mind.
( Strike the harp in my hall," said the great Fingal, in the midst of
youth and viCtory. " Strike the harp in my hall, and let Fingal
" hear the song. Pleasant is the joy of grief-! It is like the shower
t of spring, when it softens the branch of the oak; and the young

leaf lifts its green head. Sing on, 0 bards! To-morrow we lift
4" the fail +."

Personal epithets have been much used by all the poets of the most

ancient ages; and when well chosen, not general and unmeaning,
they contribute not a little to render the style descriptive and ani-
mated. Besides epithets founded on bodily diftindions, akin to
many of Homer's, we find in Ossian several which are remarkably
beautiful and poetical. Such as, Oscar of the future fights, Fingal
of the mildest look, Carril of other times, the mildly blushing Evi-
rallin; Bragela, the lonely sun-beam of Dunfcaich; a Culdee, the
son of the secret cell.
* Odyfs. 1i. 211. Iliad 23. 98. t P. 250. : Carric-tbura, p. 193.

But

But of all the ornaments employed in descriptive poetry, compa-

rifons or similes are the most splendid. These chiefly form what is
called the imagery of a poem: And as they abound so much in the
works of Ossian, and are commonly among the favourite paflages
of all poets, it may be expected that I Should be somewhat particu-
lar in my remarks upon them.

A poetical simile always supposes two objeCts brought together,

between which there is some near relation or connection in the
fancy. What that relation ought to be, cannot be precisely defined.
For various, almost numberless, are the analogies formed among ob-
jects, by a sprightly imagination. The relation of adtualfimilitude,
or likeness of appearance, is far from being the only foundation of
poetical comparison. Sometimes a resemblance in the effect pro-
duced by two objects, is made the connecting principle: Sometimes
a resemblance in one distinguishing property or circumstance. Very
often two objects are brought together in a simile, though they re-
femble one another, ftritly speaking, in nothing, only because they
aife in the mind a train of similar, and what may be called, con-
cordant ideas; so that the remembrance of the one, when recalled,
serves to quicken and heighten the imprefion made by the other.
Thus, to give an instance from our poet, the pleasure with which
an old man looks back on the exploits of his youth, has certainly no
direct resemblance to the beauty of a fine evening; farther than that
both agree in producing a certain calm, placid joy. Yet Ossian has
founded upon this, one of the most beautiful comparisons that is to
be met with in any poet. " Wilt thou not liten, son of the rock,
"( to the song of Ossian? My foul is full of other times; the joy of
"my youth returns. Thus, the fun appears in the weft, after the
"c Reps of his brightness have moved behind a form. The green
" hills lift their dewy heads. The blue fireams rejoice in the vale.
' The aged hero comes forth on his tass; and his grey hair glitters
" in the beam *." Never was there a finer group of objects. It
raises a strong conception of the old man's joy and elation of heart,
by displaying a scene, which produces in every fpedator, a corref-
ponding train of pleating emotions; the declining fun looking forth

* P. 220.

H Z
\

:Sy

.3 'A c-R i Ti CAL DISSE'RTATION'

in his brightness after'a 'storm ;the'chearful face of all nature; 'and
the still life finely animated by the circumstance of the aged hero;
with his staff and his grey locks; a circumstance both extremely pic-
turefque in itself, and peculiarly suited to the main object of the
comparison. Such analogies and afrociations of ideas as these, are
highly pleasing to the fancy. They.give opportunity for introdu-
cing m nny a fine poetical picure. They diversify the scene; they
aggiandizete the ubjed; they keep the imagination awake and
sprightly. For as the judgment is principally exercised in. diflin-
guifhing objects, and remarking the differences among those which
seem like; so the highest amusement of the imagination is to.trace
likenefes and agreements among those which seem different.

The principal rules which refpe't poetical comparisons are, that

they be introduced on proper occasions, when the mind is difpofedc
to relish them; and not in the midst of some revere and agitating
passion, which cannot admit this play of fancy; that they be
founded on a resemblance neither too near and obvious, so as to give
little amusement to the imagination in tracing it, nor too faint and
remo:e, so as to be apprehended with difficulty; that they serve ei-
ther to illustrate the principal object, and to render the conception
of it, more clear and diftindt; or at least, to heighten and embellilh
it, by a suitable association of images A

Every country has a scenery peculiar to itself; and the imagery

of a good poet will exhibit it. For as he copies after nature, his
allusions will of course be taken -from those objets which he fees
around him, and which have ofteneft struck his fancy. For this
reason, in order to judge of the propriety of poetical imagery, we
ought to be, in £ome measure, acquainted with the natural history of
the country where the scene of the poem is laid. The introdu&ion
of foreign images betrays a poet, copying not from nature, but from
other writers. Hencefo many Lions, and Tygers, and Eagles and
Serpents, which we meet with in the similes of modern poets; as if
these animals had acquired some right to a place in poetical compa-
rifons for ever, because employed by ancient authors. They
employed them with propriety, as objects generally known in their

* See Elements ofCriticifm, ch. 19; vol. 3.
~ ~ country;

countryj but they are absurdly used for illufiration by us, who know-
them only at second hand, or by description. To most readers of
*modern poetry, it were more to the purpose to describe Lions or
Tygers by similes taken: from men, than to compare men to Lions.
Ossian is very correc in this particular. His imagery is,. without
exception, copied -from that face of nature, which he saw before his
eyes; and by consequence may be expeced to be lively. We meet
with no Grecian or Italian scenery;. but with the mists, and clouds,
and storms of a northern mountainous region,

No poet abounds more in: similes than Ossian. There are in this-

colledcion as many, at leaf, as in the whole Iliad of Homer,
though that be a longer work. I am indeed inclined to think, that
the works of both poets are too much crowded with them. Similes-
are sparkling ornaments; and like all things.that sparkle, are apt to
dazzle and tire us by their lustre. But if'Offian's similes be too
frequent, they have this advantage of being commonly shorter than
Homer's; they interrupt his narration less; he just glances aside to
some resembling object, and inflantly returns to his former track.
Homer's fitniles include a wider range of objets. But in return,
Ossian's are, without exception, taken from objects of dignity,
.which cannot be Laid for all those which. Homer employs. The
Sun,' the Moon, and the Stars, Clouds and Meteors, Lightning and
Thunder, Seas and Whales, Rivers, Torrents, Winds, Rain, Snow,
Dews, Mist, Fire and Smoke, Trees and Torrents, Heath and Grass
.and Flowers, Rocks and Mountains, Mufick and Songs, Light and
Darkness, Spirits and Ghosts; these form the circle, within which
Ossian's comparisons generally run. Some, not many, are taken
from Birds and Beafis; as Eagles, Sea Fowl,. the Horse, the Deer,
and the Mountain Bee; and a very few from such operations of art
as were then known. Homer -has divertfifed his imagery by many
more allusions to the animal world; to Lions, Bulls, Goats,
Herds of Cattle, Serpents, Inse&s; and to the various occupations
of rural and pafloral life. Ossian's defect in this article, is plainly
owing to the desert, uncultivated slate of his country, which fug-
gered to him few images beyond natural inanimate objects, in their
rudest form. The birds and animals of the country were probably
not numerous; and his acquaintance: with them was slender, as they
were little fubjeded to the uses of man.

The.

The great objection made to Oian's imagery, is its uniformity,

and the too frequent repetition of the fame comparisons. In a work
so thick sown with similes, one could not but expect to find images
of the fame kind sometimes suggested to the poet by resembling ob-
jects; especially to a poet like Offan, who wrote from the imme-
diate impulse of poetical enthusiasm, and without much preparation
of study or labour. Fertile as Homer's imagination is acknowledged
to be, who does not know how often his Lions and Bulls and
Flocks of Sheep, recur with little or no variation; nay, rometimes
in the very fame words ? The objetion made to Ofian is, however,
founded, in a great measure, upon a mistake. It has been supposed
by inattentive readers, that wherever the Moon, the Cloud, or the
Thunder, returns in a simile, it is the fame simile, and the fame
Moon, or Cloud, or Thunder, which they had met with a few
pages before. Whereas very often the similes are widely different.
The objet, whence they are taken, is indeed in substance the
fame; but the image is new; for the appearance of the object is
changed; it is presented to the fancy in another attitude; and
cloathed with new circumstances, to make it suit the different illus-
tration for which it is employed. In this, lies Ossian's great art; in so
happily varying the form of the few natural appearances with which
he was acquainted, as to make them correspond to a great many dif-
ferent objects.

Let us take for one inflance the' Moon, which is very frequently-

introduced into his comparisons ; as in northern climates, where the
nights are long, the Moon is a greater object of attention, than in the
climate of Homer; and let us view how much our poet has diverfi-
sied its appearance. The shield of a warrior is like " the darkened
" moon when it moves a dun circle through the heavens *." The
face of a ghost, wan and pale, is like s" the beam of the setting
" moon -+." And a different appearance of a ghost, thin and in-
diftin&, is like " the new moon seen through the gathered mist,
C' when the sky pours down its flaky snow, and the world is silent
" and dark + ;" or in a different form flill, it is like " the watry beam
" of the moon, when it rushes from between two clouds, and the

* P. 29. - P. 22. P P. 13 .

"( midnight
54

5!s

" midnight lhower is on the field *." A very opposite use is mad=
of the moon in the description ofAgandecca: " She came in all her
" beauty, like the moon from the cloud of the East t-." Hope,
succeeded by disappointment, is " joy rising on her face, and sorrow
"returning again, like a thin cloud on the moon :." But when
Swaran, after his defeat, is cheared by Fingal's generosity, " His face
"brightened like the full moon of heaven, when the clouds vanish
" away, and leave her calm and broad in the midiR of the Iky 11."
Venvela is " bright as the moon when it trembles o'er the wefRern
<" wave § ;" but the foul of the guilty Uthal is " dark as the trou-

bled face of the moon, when it foretels the form ¶[." And by a

very fanciful and uncommon allusion, it is said of Cormac, who
was to die in his early years, '" Nor long {halt thou lift the spear,
' mildly shining beam of youth! Death stands dim behind thee,
( like the darkened half of the moon behind its growing light **."

Another inflance of the fame nature may be taken from mist,

which, as being a very familiar appearance in the country of Ossian,
he applies to a variety of purposes, and pursues through a great
many forms. Sometimes, which one would hardly expect, he em-
ploys it to heighten the appearance of a beautiful object. The hair
of Morna is " like the mist of Cromla, when it curls on the rock,
c and shines to thebeam oftheweft-t."-"The fongcomeswith its
"mufick to melt and please the ear. It is like fbft mist, that rising
·' from a lake, pours on the silent vale. The green flowers are
" filled with dew. The fun returns in its strength, and the mist is
" gone J:-."-But, for the most part, mist is employed as a fimili-

P. 119.
P. 37.

t P. 119.
II P79.
§ P. I95.
f P. 264.
** P. 146.
+f- P. 8.

$t P. 215. There is a remarkable

propriety in this comparison. It is in-
tended to explain the effe&t of soft and
mournful mufick. Armin appears dif-
turbed at a performance of this kind.
Carmor fays to him, s" Why burrs the

" sigh of Armin? Is there a cause to
" mourn? The song comes with its
" mufick to melt and please the ear. It
"' is like soft miff, &c,," that'is, such
mournful songs have a happy effec to
soften the heart, and to improve it by
tender emotions, as the moisture of the
mist refreshes and nourishes the flowers;
whilst the sadness they occasion is only
transient, and Goon dispelled by the fuc-
ceeding occupations and amusements of
life: i" The fun returns in its strength,.
" and the mist is gone."

tude

i

stile of'fome disagreeable or terible object. " The foul of Nathos'
w'" was fad, like -the fuin in the day'lof miii, when his face is watery

"c and dim i" .- The darkness of old age comes like the mist of
·' the desert -." The face of a ghost is " pale as the mist of
" Cromla +." " The gloom of battle is rolled along as mifft that
" is poured on the valley, when fiorms invade the silent sun-shine
<C of heaven Il." Fame, suddenly departing, is likened to " 'mist'
"C that flies away before the rustling wind of the vale §." A ghost,
slowly vanishing, to " mist that melts by degrees on the: funny
" hill [." But of all the similes founded on mist, the rmoft highly
finished, is that wherein Cairbar, after his treacherous affaflination of
Oscar, is compared'to a pestilential fog. "' I love a foe like:Cath-

mor," fays Fingal, " his foul is great; his arm is itrong; his

"battles are full of fame. But the little foul is like a vapour that
" hovers round the marshy lake. It never rites on the green hill,
"left the winds meet it there. Its dwelling is in the cave; and it
" fends forth the dart of death **-." These instances may sufficiently
shew with what richness of imagination Ossian's comparisons abound,
and at the fame time, with what propriety of judgment they are
employed. If his field was narrow, it must be admitted to have
.been as well cultivated as its extent would allow.

As it is usual to judge of poets from a comparison of their similes

more than of other passages, it will perhaps be agreeable to the
reader, to fee how Homer and OfiTan have conducted some images
*of the fame kind. This might be shewn in many instances. For
as the great objects of nature are common to the poets of all nations,
and make the general flore-houfe of all imagery, the ground-work
of their comparisons must of course be frequently the fame. I shall
fele6t only..a few of the most considerable from both poets. Mr.
Pope's-tranflation of Homer can be of no use to us here. The pa-
rallel is altogether unfair between prose, and the imposing harmony
of flowing numbers. It is only by viewing Homer in the fitplicity
of a prose translation, that we can form any comparison between the
*two bards.

P. 59. - P P. 515.
P . P. 27.

§P. 9. 1 P. io7. * P. 189.

The

The shock of two encountering armies, the noise and the tumult

of battle, afford one of the most grand and awful fubjets of de-
scription; on which all Epic poets have exerted their strength. Let
us first hear Homer. The following description is a favourite one,
for we find it twice repeated in the fame words *. "I When now
' the conflicting hosts joined in the field of battle, then were mu-
" tually opposed shields, and swords, and the strength of armed
c men. The bossy bucklers were dashed against each other. The
". universal tumult rose. There were mingled the triumphant shouts
"c and the dying groans of the vi&ors and the vanquished. The
"earth streamed with blood. As when winter torrents, rushing
c from the mountains, pour into a narrow valley, their violent wa-

ters. They issue from a thousand springs, and mix in the

" hollowed channel. The distant shepherd hears on the mountain,
' their roar from afar. Such was the terror and the shout of the
" engaging armies." In another passage, the poet, much in the
manner of Offan, heaps simile on simile, to express the vafnefs of
the idea, with which his imagination seems to labour. " With a

mighty shout the hofls engage. Not so loud roars the wave of

" ocean, when driven against the hlore by the whole force of the
" boisterous north; not so loud in the woods of the mountain, the

noise of the flame, when rising in its fury to consume the forest;

· not so loud the wind among the lofty oaks, when the wrath of
< the storm rages; as was the clamour of the Greeks and Tro-
" jans, when, roaring terrible, they rushed against each other -."

To these descriptions and similes, we may oppose the following

from Oflian, and leave the reader to judge between them. He will
find images of the fame kind employed; commonly lets extended;
but thrown forth with a glowing rapidity which charaaerifes our
poet. " As autumn's dark storms pour from two echoing hills,
<c towards each other, approached the heroes. As two dark
, streams from high rocks meet, and mix, and roar on the plain ;t
ct loud, rough, and dark in battle, meet Lochlin and Inisfail.
,, Chief mixed his strokes with chief, and man with man. Steel
, clanging, founded on steel. Helmets are cleft on high; blood

* Iliad iv. 446, and II. viii. 60. -i- Iliad xiv. 393.

I c" burlts

57

·' bursts and.fmoaiks around.--As the totubled noise of the ocean,
" when rl11l thle waves oh hikhs; as; t'h lftl peatl of the thunidr 6f
c" heaven,, fuiCh is th'e noise of Ibariet*.-Asi roll a trhotifand Wave-s
<' to the rock, so Swaran's host catilr otio; as mefets a roek a thou--
' sand waves, so Inisfaitl met$ Swararan. De aifes all his voices
"around, and mixes with the ftondi of Shields.-The field echoes
" from wing to wing, as a' hundred hatnmers that rife by turns ohi
" the red son 6f the furnace-..---- As a hundred winds on Mor'-
s ven'; as the ffreams of a' hundred hills; ats eltids,' fly fcceffive'
·' over heaven-; or as the dark ocean assaults the fliore of the' de-'
*' fart; so roaring, so vast,. so terrible' the armies, mixed on Lena's

echoing heath $." In several of these i'mage, there is a remnark-

able similarity to Homer's; but what foll'ows is superior to any
comparison that Homer uses on this subjed. "' The groan of the
c' people spread over the hills; it was like the thunder of night,
s when the cloud burfis on Cona; and a thouiand ghosts shriek at
c' once on the hollow wind §." Never was an image of more aw-
fil sublimity employed to heighten the terror of battle.

Both poets compare the appearance of an army approaching, to

the gathering of dark clouds. " As when a shepherd," fays Ho-e
mer, " beholds fiom the rock, a cloud borne along the sea by the

weffern wind; black as pitch it appears from afar, failing over

" the ocean, and carryinfg the dreadful storm. He shrinks at the
' fight, ard drives his flock into the cave: Such, under the Ajaces,

moved on, the dark, the thickened phalanx to the war jj."

-c" They came," fays Oflian, " over the desert like stormy
·' clouds, when the winds roll them over the heath;. their edges
' are tinged with lightening; ard the echoing groves foresee the-
" storm ¶." The edges of the cloud tinged with lightning, is a
sublime idea; but the shepherd and his flock, render Homer's simile
more pidurefque. This is frequently the difference between the
vwo poets. Ofilan gives no more than the main image, firong and
full. Homer adds circumfiances and appendages, which amuse the
fancy by enlivening the scenery.

" P. 2. i P. 14. : P. 43. § Ibid.
g Iliad iv. 275. s P. 109.

Homer-

-59

Homer compares the.regular appearance of an army, to "clouds
' that are fettled on the mountain top, in the day of calmness,
l' when the strength of the north wind sleeps *." Offan, with full
as much propriety, compares ,he appearance -of a disordered army,
to " the mountain cloud, .when the blast hath entered its womb;
C and scatters the,curlinqgglpom .on every fide.t. .,Qflian's clouds
assume a great many,forms; and, as we m.ight expe ifrom his cli-
mate, are a fertile source of.imagery to hjm. " The warriors fol-
< .lqwed their.chiefs, like the gathering of therainy.clouds, behind
.c the red meteors .of heaven :." An army retreating without
coming to action, is likened to " clouds, that having long
I' threatened rain, retire slowly behind the hills§." The picture
of Oithona, after fhe.had determined to die, is lively and delicate.
· Her foul was.refolved, and the.tear was dried from her wildly-
< looking eye. A troubled joy rose on her mind, like the red path

of the lightning on a stormy cloud |I." The image also of the

gloomy Cairbar, .meditating, in silence, the assassination of Oscar,
until the moment came.when his designs were ripe for execution, is
extremely noble, and complete in all its parts. " Cairbar heard
c their words in silence, like the cloud of a shower; it stands dark
<' on Cromla, till the lightning burfs its fide. The valley gleams
c with red light; the spirits of the form rejoice. So flood the
" silent king of Temora; at length his words are heard a."

Homer's comparison of Achilles to the Dog-Star, is very sublime.

cc Priam beheld.him rushing along the plain, shining in his armour,
c like the star of autumn; bright are its beams, distinguished

amidst the multitude of liars in the dark hour of night. It rites

" in its fplendor;.but its splendor is fatal; betokening to miserable
' men, the destroying heat *." The first appearance of Fingal,
is, in like manner, compared by Offlan, to a lar or meteor.
" Fingal, tall in his flip, itretched his bright lance before himr
c Terrible was the gleam of his steel; it was like the green meteor
t( of death, setting in the heath ofMalmor, when the traveller isalone,

* Iliad, v. 522. + P. 224. t P- 4- § P. I65,
E P. 246. QT P. 176. ** Iliad, xxii. 26.

I 2

" and

" and the broad moon is darkened in heaven *." The hero's ap-
pearance in Homer, is more magnificent; in Ossian, more terrible.

A tree cut down, or overthrown by a storm, is a similitude fre-

quent among poets for describing the fall of a warrior in battle.
Homer employs it often. But the most beautiful, by far, of his
comparisons, founded on this objet, indeed one of the most beau-
tiful in the whole Iliad, is that on the death of Euphorbus. " As
" the young and verdant olive, which a man hath reared with care
<' in a lonely field, where the springs of water bubble around it; it
· is fair and flourishing; it is fanned by the breath of all the
" winds, and loaded with white blossoms; when the sudden blast
' of a whirlwind descending, roots it out from its bed, and itretches
' it on the duff --." To this, elegant as it is, we may oppose the
following simile of Offlan's, relating to the death of the three sons
of Ufioth. " They fell, like three young oaks which flood alone
· on the hill. The traveller saw the lovely trees, and wondered

how they grew so lonely. The blast of the desert came by night,
and laid their green heads low. Next day he returned; but they

( were withered, and the heath was bare :." Malvina's allusion to
the fime object, in her lamentation over Olcar, is so exquisitely
tender, that I cannot forbear giving it a place also. "' I was a
"lovely tree in thy presence, Oscar ! with all my branches round
< me. But thy death came, like a blast from the desert, and laid
" my green head low. The spring returned with its showers; but
i" no leaf of mine arose i11" Several of Ossian's similes taken from
trees, are remarkably beautiful, and diversified with well chosen
circumstances; such as that upon the death of Ryno and Orla:
<· They have fallen like the oak of the desert; when itlies across a
· stream, and withers in the wind of the mountains §:" Or that which
Ossian applies to himself; " I, like an ancient oak inMorven, moul-
"' der alone in my place; the blast hath lopped my branches away;
c and I tremble at the wings of the north ¶."

As Homer exalts his heroes by comparing them to gods, Ossian
makes the fame use of comparisons taken from spirits and ghosts.

. P. 41. + Iliad xvii. 53. t P. 170. | P. 250.
I P. 70· ¶I P. 191.

Swaran
p

Swaran " roared in battle, like the shrill spirit of a form that fits
-' dim on the clouds of Gormal, and enjoys the death of the ma-
" riner *." His people gathered around Erragon, " like storms
" around the ghost of night, when he calls them from the top of
' Morven, and prepares to pour them on the land of the ftran-

ger t."--- They fell before my son, like groves in the desert,.

" when an angry ghost tushes through night, and takes their green
" heads in his hand +." In such images, Ossian appears in his
strength; for very seldom have supernatural beings been painted
with so much sublimity, and such force of imagination, as by this
poet. Even Homer, great as he is, must yield to him in similes
formed upon these. Take, for in-fance, the following, which is
the most remarkable of this kind in the Iliad. " Meriones followed
" Idomeneus to battle, like Mars the destroyer of men, when he

rushes to war. Terror, his beloved son, strong and fierce, at-

" tends him; who fills with dismay, the most valiant hero. They
"come from Thrace, armed against the Ephyrians and Phlegyans;
"nor do they regard the prayers of either; but dispose of success at
" their will §." The idea here, is undoubtedly noble: But observe
what a figure Offlan sets before the astonished imagination, and with
what sublimely terrible circumflances he has heightened it. " He
" rushed in the found of his arms, like the dreadful spirit of Loda,
" when he comes in the roar of a thousand forms, and scatters

battles from his eyes. He fits on a cloud over Lochlin's leas.

c His mighty hand is on his- sword. The winds lift his flaming
"' locks. So terrible was Cuchullin in the day of his fame 1|."

Homer's comparisons relate chiefly to martial fubjecrs, to the ap-

pearances and motions of armies, the engagement and death of he-
roes, and the various incidents of war. In Omflan, we find a greater
variety of other fubjets illustrated by similes; particularly, the
songs of bards, the beauty of women, the different circumliiances
of old age, sorrow, and private diflrefs; which give occasion
to much beautiful imagery. What, for instance, can be more
delicate and moving, than the following simile of Oithona's,
in her lamentation over the dishonour she had suffered ? Chief of

* Pi. 3. + P. 1I4? tP. 180.
§ Iliad xiii. 298. [ P. 151.

{" Strumon,.

' :Strumon, replied the sighing -maid, why dilft -thou corae.over
"' the dark blue wave to'Nuath's mournful daughter ? Why did not
" I pass .way.in secret, like the flower of the rock, that,lifts its
" fair head unseen, and strews its withered leaves on the blat* ?"
The mufick of bards, a favourite object with Offlan, is .illufrated
by a variety of theimoft beautiful appearances that are.to.be found in
nature. :It iscompared to the calm shower of spring; to the dews
of the morning on the :hill'.of roes; to the.face of the blue:and -till
lake -. Two fimiles.on -this subjed, I shall quote, becaufethey
would do honour to any of the most celebrated claffies. The one
is; " Sit thou on theheath, .O bard! and let .us hear thy voice;

it is pleasant as the gale of the spring that sighs on the hunter's
c' ear, when he wakens :from dreams of joy, -and has ,heard.the
music of-the spirits of the.hill +." The other contains a short,

but exquisitely tender image, accompanied with the finest poetical
painting. " The music of Carryl was like the memory of joys
' that arepaft, pleasant and mournful to: the.foul. The ghofls of
" departed bards heard it-from Slimora's fide. Soft founds spread

along the wood.; and the filentivalleys of night rejoice;§." What

a figure would fuchimagery-and such feenery.have made, ;had they
been presented to us, adorned with: the sweetness and .harnonyof
the Virgilian numbers!

I have chosen all along to compare Ossian with-Homer, rather

than Virgil, for an obvious reason. There isaa much, nearer corref-
pondence between the- times and manners. of the two former poets.
Both wrote in an early period of society; both are originals; both
are distinguished by simplicity, sublimity, and fire. The correct
elegance of Virgil, his artful imitation of Homer, the Roman slate-
liness which he every where maintains, admit no parallel with the
abrupt boldness, and enthufiaftick warmth of the Celtic bard. In
one article, indeed, there is a resemblance. Virgil is more tender
than Homer; and thereby agrees more with Ossian ; with this dif-
ference, that the feelings of the one are more gentle and polished,
those of the other, more strong; the tenderness of Virgil softens,
that of Ofian dissolves and overcomes the heart.

* P. 244.4 Vid. p. 215, I8, 35, 194. 1 P. 72.
§ P. 147-

X A re-

A rafetmblanceemay be fortetimes, observed? between Ossian's comt-

p:aiifons, and th-ose employed by the faered writers. They abound
muchl in this figure;, and they use it with the utmost propriety*..
The- itiagery of Sciiipture exhibits a. bil aid climate altogether dif-
seien t fro-ti those of Ossia.n.;, a warmer country, a more smiling
face of.nature, the arts of agriculture and of rural life much farther
advanced. The wine press, and the threihing floor, are often pre-
fennted tb, us, the Cedar and the Palm-tree, the fragrance of per-
fusmes,. the voice of the Turtle, and the beds of Lillies. The
fimilks- are, like Offiao's- generall;y short, touching on one point of
refeinblance, rather than spread out into little episodes. In the fol-
lowing example,. may be perceived: what inexprefiible grandeur
poetry receiv'e from the intervention of the Deity. " The. nations
" hall rush like the rufhinigs of many waters; but God flall re-
" bu'ke them, and they shall fly far off, and mhall be chased as,
" the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like the down of
( the thistle before the whirlwind f-."

Betides formal comparisons, the poetry of Offlan is embellished

with many beautiful metaphors: Such as that remarkably fine one
applied to Deugala; " She was covered with the light of beauty;
" but her heart was the house of pride +" This mode of expref-
sion, which suppresses the mark of comparison, and fubfiitutes a
figured description in room of the object described, is a great en-
livener of flyle. It denotes that glow and rapidity of fancy, which
without pausing to form a regular simile, paints the objec at one
firoke. " Thou art to me the beam of the east, riling in a land
( unknown §."-" In peace, thou art the gale of spring; in war,
· the mountain tform I."-" Pleasant be thy reil, 0 lovely beam,
" soon haft thou set on our hills ! The fleps of thy departure were
c lately, like the moon on the blue trembling wave. But thou
,C haft left us in darkness, firfc of the maids of Lutha !-Soon haft
" thou set Malvina! but thou rjifct, like the beam of the east,,
"among the spirits of thy fiiends, where they fit in their stormy

halls; the chambers of the thunder ¶." This is correct and
finely supported. But in the following instance, the metaphor,

* See Dr. Lowth de Sacra Poefi FHcbraxorum. f- Isaiah xvii. 13.-
t P. 31. § P. 2+4. I P. 78, (T P. 25!.

thoughI

6-3

though very beautiful at the beginning, becomes imperfec before it
closes, by being improperly mixed with the literal sense. " Trothal
·' went forth with the stream of his people; but they met. a rock;
t Fingal flood unmoved; broken they rolled back from his fide.

Nor did they roll in safety; the spear of the king pursued their
flight *."

The hyperbole is a figure which we might expect to find often

employed by Ossian; as .the undisciplined imagination of early ages
generally prompts exaggeration, and carries its objects to excess;
whereas longer experience, and farther progress in the arts of life,
chasten mens ideas and expreflions. Yet Ossian's hyperboles appear
not to me, either so frequent or so har(h as might at first have been
looked for; an advantage owing no doubt to the more cultivated state,
in which, as was before ihewn, poetry subsisted among the ancient
Celta, than among most other barbarous nations. One of the most
exaggerated descriptions in the whole work, is what meets us at the
beginning of Fingal, where the scout makes his report to Cuchullin
of the landing of the foe. But this is so far from deserving censure,
that it merits praise, as being, on that occasion, natural and proper.
The scout arrives, trembling and full of fears; and it is well known,
that no passion disposes men to hyperbolize more than terror. It
both annihilates themselves in their own apprehension, and mnag-
nifies every object which they view through the medium of a
troubled imagination. Hence all those indistinct images of formidable
greatness, the natural marks of a disturbed and confused mind,
which occur in Moran's description of Swaran's appearance, and in
his relation of the conference which they held together; not unlike
the report, which the affrighted Jewish Ipies made to their leader of
the land of Canaan. " The land through which we have gone to
" search it, is a land that eateth up the inhabitants thereof; and

all the people that we saw in it, are men of a great fiature: and
there saw we giants, the sons ol Anal, which come of the giants;
(' and we were in our own fight as grasshoppers, and so were we
6 in their fight -F."

P P. 202. t Numbers Miii. 32, 33.

With
64

With regard to personifications, I formerly observed that Oflian

was sparing, and 1 accounted for his being so. Allegorical per-
fonages he has none; and their absence is not to be regretted. For
the intermixture of those ihadowy Beings, which have not the sup-
port even of mythological or legendary belief, with human a6tors,
seldom produces a good effie. The fiction becomes too visible and
phantaftick; and overthrows that inpreffion of reality, which the
probable recital of human actions is calculated to make upon the
mind. In the serious and pathetick scenes of Ossian especially, allego-
rical charaters would have been as much out of place, as in Tra-
gedy; serving only unseasonably to amuse the fancy, whilst they
flopped the current, and weakened the force of paflion.

With apostrophes, or addresses to persons absent or dead, which

have been, in all ages, the language of pation, our poet abounds;
and they are among his highest beauties. Wi:ness the apostrophe,
in the first book of Fingal, to the maid of Iniftore, whose lover had
fallen in battle; and that inimitably fine one of Cuchullin to Bra-
gela at the conclusion of the fame book. He commands the harp
to be itruck in her praise; and the mention of Bragela's name, im-
mediately suggesting to him a crowd of tender ideas; " Dost thou
" raise thy fair face from the rocks," he exclaims, " to find the
" fails of Cuchullin ? The sea is rolling far difiant, and its white
" foam shall deceive thee for my fails." And now his imagination
being wrought up to conceive her as, at that moment, really in this
situation, he becomes afraid of the harm ihe may receive from the
inclemency of the night; and with an enthusiasm, happy and ,f-
secing, though beyond the cautious strain of modern poetry, ' Re-

tire," he proceeds, " retire, for it is night, my love, and the
dark winds sigh in thy hair. Retire to the hall of my feafis, and

" think of the times that are past; for I will not return till the florin
" of war has ceased. O Connal, speak of wars and arms, and fend
"her from my mind ; for lovely with her raven hair is the white-

bosoned daughter of Sorglan *." This breathes all the native
spirit of pafiLon and tenderneis.

The addrefTes to the fun *-, to the moon -, anr to the evnir.g
star §, muLt draw the attention of every reader of t.rfe, as ant o;g

P. 18. - .

1 .
1 5 i5 .2

K1

t '1t

the mofi splendid ornaments of this collection. The beauties of
each are too great; and too obvious. to need any particular comment.
'n one pafl. ge only of the address to-the moon, there appears onme
obscurity. " Whither dost thou retire from thy course, when the

darkness of thy countenance grows ? Haft thou thy hall like
Oflan ? Dwelleft thou in the shadow of grief ? Have thy sifters

" fallen from heaven ? Are they who rejoiced with thee at night,
" no more? Yes, they have fallen, .fair light ! and thou doff often
" retire to mourn." We may be at a loss to comprehend, at first
view, the ground of these speculations of Ossian, concerning the
moon; but when all the circumitances are attended to, they will
appear to flow naturally from the present situation of his mind. A
mind under the dominion of any firong passion, tindtures with its
own difpoficion, every objed which it beholds. The old bard, with
his heart bleeding for the lots of all his friends, is meditating on the
different phases of the moon. Her waning and darkness, presents
to his melancholy imagination, the image of sorrow; and presently
the idea arises, and is indulged, that, like himself, ihe retires to
mourn over the loss of other moons, or of flars, whom he calls her
fitters, and fancies to have once rejoiced with her at night, nows
fallen from heaven. Darkness suggested the idea of mourning; and
mourning fuggefied nothing so naturally to Ossian, as the death of
beloved friends. An instance precisely similar of this influence of
pafimon, may be seen in a passage which has always been admired
of Shakefpear's King Lear. The old man on the point of difiraction,
through the inhumanity of his daughters, fees Edgar appear dif-
guised like a beggar and a madman.

Lear. Didit thou give all to thy daughters ? And art thou come

to this ?
Couldst thou leave nothing ? Didft thou give them all ?

Kent. He hath no daughters, Sir.

Lear. Death, traitor! nothing could have subdued nature,
To such a lowness, but his unkind daughters.

King Lear, At 3. Scene 5.

The

, The apostrophe to the winds, in the opening of Darthula, is in
the highest spirit of poetry. " But the winds deceive thee, O

Darthula! and deny the woody Etha to thy fails. These are

"not thy mountains, Nathos, nor is that the roar of thy climbing
" waves. The. halls of Cairbar are near, and the towers of the
" foe lift their head.-Where have ye been, ye southern winds;
" when the sons of my love were deceived ? But ye have been
"sporting on plains, and pursuing the thistle's beard. O that ye
c had been ruffling in the fails of Nathos, till the hills of Etha
"c rose! till they rose in their clouds, and saw their coming
" chief !" This passage is remarkable for the refemb'ance it
bears to an expoflulation with the wood nymphs, on their absence at
a critical time; which, as a favourite poetical idea, Virgil has co-
pied from Theocritus, and Milton has very happily imitated from
both.

Where were ye, nymphs ! when the remorseless deep
Clos'd o'er the head of your lov'd Lycidas ?
For neither were ye playing on the iteep
Where your old bards, the famous Druids, lie;
Nor on the flaggy top of Mona high,
Nor yet where Deva spreads her wizard itream -.

Having now treated fully of Ossian's talents, with refped to d2-

scription and imagery, it only remains to make some observations on
his sentiments. No sentiments can be beautiful without being pro-
per; that is, suited to the characer and situation of those who utter
them. In this refped, Offan is as correct as most writers. His
characters, as above observed, are in general well supported; which
could not have been the cafe, had the sentiments been unnatural
or out of place. A variety of personages of different ages, sexes, and
conditions, are introduced into his poems; and they (peak and ad
with a propriety of sentiment and behaviour, which it is surprising
to find in so rude an age. Let the poem of Darthula, throughout,
1be taken as an example.

* P. 157.
t Milton's Lycidas. And Virg. Eclog. 1o.

See Theocrit. Idyll. 1. QU.e nemora, aut qui vos saltus ha
ITo 7rct o , rV'a-' oxz Aoa; Ery.s-roETO 7; r buere, puelle, &c.

?7ricx, NTuCKasK, &c.

K But

67

But it is not enough that sentiments be natural and proper. In

order to acquire any high degree of poetical merit, they must also be
sublime and pathetick.

The sublime is not confined to sentiment alone. It belongs to de-

scription also; and whether in description or in sentiment, imports-
such ideas presented to the mind, as raise it to an uncommon degree
of elevation, and fill it with admiration and astonishment. This is
the highest effect either of eloquence or poetry: And to produce
this effect, requires a genius glowing with the flrongeft and warmest
conception of some object awful, great or magnificent. That this
charader of genius belongs to Ossian, may, I think, sufficiently ap-
pear from many of the passages I have already had occasion to quote.
To produce more inftanees, were superfluous. If the engagement
of Fingal with the spirit of Loda, in Carric-thura; if the encoun-
ters of the armies, in Fingal; if the address to the fun, in Carthon;
if the similes founded upon ghosts and spirits of the night, all for-
merly mentioned, be not admitted as examples, and illustrious ones
too, of the true poetical sublime, I confers myself entirely ignorant
of this quality in writing.

All the circumstances, indeed, of Ossian's cornpofition, are fa-

vourable to the sublime, more perhaps than to any other species of
beauty. Accuracy and corredtnefs; artfully connected narration;
exact method and proportion of parts, we may look for in polished
times. The gay and the beautiful, will appear to more advantage
in the midst of smiling scenery and pleasurable themes. But amidit
the rude scenes of nature, amidst rocks and torrents and whirlwinds
and battles, dwells the sublime. It is the thunder and the lightning
of genius. It is the offspring of nature, not of art. It is negligent
of all the lesser graces, and perfecly confiflent with a certain noble
disorder. It associates naturally with that grave and solemn spirit,
which distinguishes our author. For the sublime, is an awful and
serious emotion ; and is heightened by all the images of Trouble,
and Terror, and Darkness.

Ipfe pater, media nimborum in node, corufca
Fulmina molitur dextra; quo maxima motu

Terra

69'

Terra tremit l fugere seram; & mortalia corda
Per gentes, humilis firavit pavor; ille, flagranti
Aut Atho, aut Rhodopen, aut alta Ceraunia telo
Dejicit.-- - VIRG. Georg. I.

Simplicity and conciseness, are never-failing charad:eriftics of the

flile of a sublime writer. He refts on the majesty of his sentiments,
not on the pomp of his expressions. The main secret of being
sublime, is to fay great things in few, and in plain words: For
every fuperfluous-decoration degrades a sublime idea. The mind
rites and swells, when a lofty description or sentiment is presented to
it, in its native form. But no sooner does the poet attempt to spread
out this sentiment or description, and to deck it round and round
with glittering ornaments, than the mind begins to fall from its
high elevation; the transport is over; the beautiful may remain,
but the sublime is gone. Hence the concise and simple style of'
Ossian, gives great advantage to his sublime conceptions; and assists
them in seizing the imagination with full power *.

Sublimity as belonging to sentiment, coincides in a great measure

with magnanimity, heroism, and generosity of sentiment. What-
ever discovers human nature in its greatest elevation; whatever be-
speaks a high effort of foul; or shews a mind superior to pleasures,

* The noted faying of Julius Caesar,

to the pilot in a florm; " Quid times ?
" Cafarem vehis;" is magnanimous and
sublime. Lucan, not satisfied with this
simple conciseness, resolved to amplify
and improve the thought. Observe, how
every time he twifis it round, it departs
farther from the sublime, till at last, it
end in tumid declamation.

Sperne minas, inquit, Pelagi, ven-

toque furenti
Trade finum. Italiam, si caelo

auEtore, recufas,
Me, pete. Sola tibi caufa hec eft

julta timoris

Veaorem non nofle tuum; quern

numina nunquam
Deftituunt; de quo male tunc for-

tuna meretur,
Cum post vota venit; medias per-

rumpe procellas
Tutela secure mea. Coeli isle fre-

tique:,
Non puppis nofirae, labor eft. Hlanc

Caefare prefTam
A fluCtu defendit onus.

--- Quid tanta firage paratur,
Ignoras ? Quarit pelagi caslique tu-

multu
Quid pr-es:et fortuna mihi.--

PI^ARSAL. V. 578,

s

to dangers, and to death, forms what may be.called 'the moral or
sentimental sublime. For this, Ossian is eminiently distinguished.
No poet maintains a higher tone of virtuous and noble senti-
ment, throughout all his works. Particularly in all the fen-
timents of Fingal, .there is a grandeur. and loftiness proper. to swell
the mind with the highest ideas of human perfeeion. Wherever
he appears, we behold the hero. The objects which he pursues,
are always truly great; to bend the proud; to proted the injured;
to defend his fiiends ; to overcome his enemies by generosity more
than by force. A portion of the fame spirit actuates all the other
heroes. Valour reigns; but it is a generous valour, void of cruelty,
animated by honour, not by hatred. We behold no debasing pas-
sions among Fingal's 'arriors ; no spirit of avarice or of insult;
but a perpetual contention for fame; a desire of being distinguished
and remembered fbr gallant actions; a love ofjuftice; and a zea-
lous attachment to their friends and their country. Such is the
itrain of sentiment in the works of Oflian.

But the sublimity of moral sentiments, if they wanted the soften-

ing of the tender, would be an hazard of giving a hard and stiff
air to poetry. It is not enough to admire. Admiration is a cold
feeling, in comparison of that deep interest, which the heart takes
in tender and pathetick scenes; where, by a myfrerious attachment
to the objects of compassion, we, are pleated and delighted, even
whilst we mourn. -With scenes of this kind, Ossian abounds; and
his high merit in there, is incontestable. He may be blamed for
drawing tears too often from our eyes; but that he has the power
of commanding them, I believe no man, who has the least fenfibi-
lity, will question. The general character of his poetry, is the he-
roic mixed with the elegiac itrain; admiration tempered with
pity. Ever fond of giving, as he expresses it, " the joy of grief,"
it is visible, that on all moving fubjeds, he delights to exert his ge-
nius; and accordingly, never were there finer pathetick situations,
than what his works present. His great art in managing them, lies
in giving vent to the simple and natural emotions of the heart. We
meet with no exaggerated declamation; no subtile refinements on
sorrow; no substitution of description in place of passion. Offlan
felt (trongly himself; and the heart when uttering its native lan-

guage
6

guage never fails, by powerful sympathy, to assei the heart. A
great:variety of examples might be produced. We need only open
the book to find them every where. What, for instance, can be
more moving, than the lamentations of Oithona, after her misfor-
tune ? Gaul, the son of Morni, her lover, ignorant of what Ihe had
suffered, comes to her rescue. Their meeting is tender in the
highest degree. He proposes to engage her foe, in tingle combat,
and.gives her in charge what she is to do, if he himself shall fall.
"And shall the daughter of Nuaith live, (he replied with a bursting
c sigh ? Shall I live in Tromathon, and the son of Morni low ?

My. heart is not of that rock; nor my foul careless as that sea,

" which lifts its blue waves to every wind, and rolls beneath the
'" form. The blast, which fluall lay thee low, shall spread the

branches of Oithona on earth. We Ihall wither together, son of
"car-borne Morni ! The narrow house is pleasant to me; and the

grey flone of the dead; for never more will I leave thy rocks, sea-
surrounded Tromathon !--Chief of Strumon, why cameft thou

" over the waves to Nuath's mournful daughter ? Why did not I
( pass away in secret, like the flower of the rock, that lifts its fair
"' head unseen, and strews its withered leaves on the blafi? Why

didft thou come, O Gaul ! to hear my departing sigh ?-.-0 had:

"I dwelt at Duvranna, in the bright beams of my fame ! Then
" had my years come on with joy; and the virgins would bless my
" eps. But I fall in youth, son of Morni; and my father flhall

blush in his hall *."

Oithona mourns like a woman; in Cuchullin's expressions of

grief after his defeat, we behold the sentiments of a hero, generous
but desponding. The situation is remarkably fine. Cuchullin,
rouzed from his cave, by the noise of battle, fees Fingal victorious
in the field. He is described as kindling at the ig2ht. " His hand

is on the sword of his fathers; his red-rolling eyes on the foe.

" He thrice attempted to rush to battle ; and thrice did Connai flop
4t him;" suggesting, that Fingal was routing the foe ; and that he
ought not by the hfow of superfluous aid, to deprive the king of any
part of the honour of a vitory, which was owing to him alone,

* P. 244, 245, 248.

CuchullirL

71

Cuchullin yields to this generous sentiment; but we fee it flinging
him to the heart with the sense of his own disgrace. "Then,
"Carril, go, replied the chief, and greet the king of Morven.
v When Lochlin falls away like a stream after rain, and the noifr~
"of the battle is over. Then be thy voice sweet in his-ear, to
'c praise the king of swords. Give him the sword of Caithbat; for

Cuchullin is worthy no more to lift the arms of his fathers. But,

"c 0 ye ghosts of the lonely Cromla ! Ye fouls of chiefs that are no
· more Be ye the companions of Cuchullin, and talk to him in
" the cave of his Sorrow. For never more ahall I be renowned
" among the mighty in the land. I am like a beam that has rhone:
,c Like a mist that has fled away; when the blast of the morning
< came, and brightened the shaggy fide of the hill. Connal! Talk
" of arms no more: Departed is my fame. My sighs faall be on
a, Cromla's wind; till my footsteps cease to be seen. And thou,
"C white-bofomed Bragela! mourn over the fall of my fame; for
·' vanquished, I will never returnto thee, thou sun-beam of Dun-

fcaich *

--------- ---JEuat Ingens

Uno in corde pudor, lueufque, & confcia virtus.

Besides such extended pathetick scenes, Ossian frequently pierces
the heart by a tingle unexpected stroke. When Oscar fell in battle,

No father mourned his son slain in youth ; no brother, his bro-

"ther of love; they fell without tears, for the chief of the people
" was low --." In the admirable interview of Hector with An-
dromache, in the sixth Iliad, the circumstance of the child in his
nurse's arms, has often been remarked, as adding much to the ten-
dernefs of the scene. In the following pafiage relating to the death
of Cuchullin, we find a circumstance that must ttrike the imagina-
tion with fill greater force. " And is the son of Semo fallen ?
" said Carril with a sigh. Mournful are Tura's walls, and sorrow
" dwells at Dunfcaich. Thy spouse is left alone in her youth ; the
"son of thy love is alone. He shall come to Bragela, and ask her

why the weeps. He shall lift his eyes to the wall, and fee his
" father's sword. Whose sword is that ? he will fay; and the

* P. 6o. + P. 182.

' foul
72

f' fotl of-ls mother is fid :." Soon after Fingat had' hewn all the
grief :o :a father's heart for Ryno, one of his sons, fallen in battle,
he is calling, after his accustomed manner,, his sons to the chace.
" Call." .fays he, " Fillan and Ryno-But he is not here-My
" son reis on :the bed of death t'."'-This unexpe&ed start of an-
guflbi is;. worthy of the highest tragic poet,

If she come in, she'll sure speak to my wife-
My wife! my wife-What wife ?-I have no wife-
Oh insupportable! Oh heavy hour !

Othello, AC. 5. Scene 7.

The contrivance of the incident in both poets is similar; but the

circumstances are varied with judgment. Othello dwells upon the
name of wife, whenri it had fallen from him,. with the confusion
and horror of one tortured with guilt. Fingal, with the dignity of
a hero,, corrects himself, and suppresses his riling grief.

The contrait which Ossian frequently makes between his present

and his former tfate, diffuses over his whole poetry, a solemn pathe-
tick air, which cannot fail to make impression on every heart. The
conclusion of the songs of Selma, is particularly calculated for this.
purpose. Nothing can be more poetical and tender, or can leave
upon the mind, a fironger, and more affecting idea of the venerable
aged bard. " Such were the words of the bards in the days of the
( song; when the king heard the music of harps, and the tales of
" other times. The chiefs gathered from all their hills, and heard
"the lovely found. They praised the voice of Cona ; the first
'c among a thousand bards. But age is now on my tongue, and my
" foul has failed. I hear, Sometimes, the ghosts of bards, and learn:
", their pleasant song. But memory fails on my mind; I hear the
" call of years. They fay, as they pass along; why does Oflian
"' ing ? Soon shall he lie in the narrow house, and no bard shall
Cc raise his fame. Roll on, ye dark-brown years ! for ye bring no
", joy in your course. Let the tomb open to Oflian, for his firength
's has failed. The sons of the song are gone to reit. My voice re-

* P. 152. +P P. 81. t Ossian himself is poetically called,
the voice. of Cona.

L

11 mnains,~

mains, like a blast, that roars lonely on a; fea-furrounded roek: as-

,' ter the winds are laid. The dark: moss w-hifles.' there, and thcy
" distant mariner fees the waving trees*."

Upon the whole-;- if to feel-ftrongly, and to- describe. naturally,

be the two chief ingredients in poetical genius, Offlan muff, after,
fair examination, be held -to possess that genius in a high degree.
The question is not, whether a few improprieties. may be
pointed -out in his works; whether this, or that passage,. might
not have been worked up with more art and. skill, by some
writer of happier times? A thousand such cold and frivolous
criitcifms, are altogether indecisive as to his genuine merit.
But, has he the spirit, the fire, the inspiration of a poet ? Does.he
utter the vo'ce of nature ? Does he elevate by his fentirents ? Does-
he interest by his defcriltions ? Does he paint to the heart as; welt as
to the fancy ? Does he make his readers glow, and tremble, and
weep? There are the great charafierifficks of true poetry. Where
there are found, he muff be a minute critic indeed, who can dwell
upon flight defets. A few beauties of this high kind, transcend
whole volumes of faultless mediocrity. Uncouth and abrupt,
Ossian may sometimes appear by reason of his conciseness. But he is
sublime, he is pathetick, in an eminent degree. If he has not the
extensive knowledge, the regular dignity of narration, the fulness
and accuracy of description, which we find in Homer and Virgil,
yet in strength of imagination, in grandeur of sentiment, in native
majesty of passion, he is fully their equal. If he flows not always
like a clear fiream, yet he breaks forth often like a torrent of fire. Of
art too, he is far fiom being destitute; and his imagination is re-
markable for delicacy as well as strength. Seldom or never is he ei-
ther trifling or tedious; and if he be thought too melancholy, yet he
is always moral. Though his merit were in other refpec6s much less
than it is, this alone ought to entitle him to high regard, that his
writings are remarkably favourable to virtue. They awake the ten-
dereft sympathies, and inspire the moss generous emotions. No
reader can rife from him, without being warmed with the senti-
ments of humanity, virtue and honour.

i P. 217.

I Though
F

75

Though unacquainted with the original language, there is no one

but must judge the tranflation'to deserve the highest praise, on ac-
count of its beauty and elegance.. Of its faithfulness and accuracy,
I have been assured .5iy e'ffiKs cIkiled in thi Galic tongue, who
from their youth, were acquainted with many of these poems of
Ofian. To tranisfufe such- spirited and fervid ideas from one lan-
guage into anOdtler; to translate literally,..and yet with such a glow
of poetry ;,to keep alive so much passion, and support so much
dignity, thioughout,'. is oineo of thej motl difficult works of genius,
and proves the translator to have been animated with no fiYail por-
tion of Offilan's spirit -

The measured prose which he has employed, poffefTes confider-

able advantages above any fort of verififcatin he could have chosen.
Whilst it pi-eafesr and fills the ear with a variety of harmonious ca-
dences, being, at the faine time; freer from constraint in- the choice
and arrangement of words, it allows the spirit of the original to be
exhibited with more jufllnefs force, and simplicity. Elegant how-
ever, and masterly as Mr. Macpherson's translation is, we muff
never forget,- whilst we, read it, that, we are putting the merit of
the original to a revere tell. For, we are examining a poet,
firipped of his native dress; divested of the harmony of his own
numbers. We know how much grace and energy the works of the
Greek and Latin poets receive from the charm of versification in
their original languages. If then, destitute of this advantage, ex-
hibited in.a literal version, Offlan still has power to please as a poet;
and not to please only, but often to command, to transport, to melt
the heart; we may very safely infer, that his productions are the
offspring of true and uncommon genius; and we may boldly
aflign him a place among those, whose works are to lass for ages.

F I N I S.

# IN THE PRESS,

- llS_ *

BR'TA .

N w tIB IP R 2 S S.
T E M O I

An E P I C P 0 1

In EIGHT BOOKS;

With the remaining Works of
O SS I A N the Son of F I N

To which will be prefixed
A D IS S E R T A T

And some Part of the 0 R I G-I

Translated from the Galic Language,

By Mr. M A C P H E S
PRiRted for T. B c KE T and P. A. D'E H N D T, i

. **)

. G A L.

I
N

0

AL;

0e N.

n the Strand..

Of whom may be had,

N G A

E P I C P O E M
In S I X B O OKS.

N,
F

I
An

A.
t - 1
