tX -

/t,2 e /4
, :

t11 'I ~ ~ ~

,,-.?: '-.-; 6 '
SERMON S,

Es
HUGH BLAIR, D. D. F. R. S. ED.

One of the MINISTERS of the HIGH CHURCH,

AND
PROFESSOR of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTRES

in the UNIVERSITY, of EDINBURGII.
VOLUME THE FOURTH.

LOND O N:
Printed for A. STRAHAN; and T. CADELL in the Strand;

and W. CREECH, Edinburgh.

M DCC XCIV.

:I

102wl c.I

KRIIT.A\I
.N 1 O' Xa

# THE CONTENTS.

THt
CON TENTS.

SERMON I.
On the Causes of Men's being weary

of Life.
JOB X. I. MyJoul is weary of my life Page I

SERMON II.
On Charity as the End of the Com-

mandment,
I TIMOTHY i. 5. Now the end of the

commandment is charity out of a pure
heart, and of a good conscience, and of
faith rutfeigned. ,^

SERMON III.
On ourLives being in the Hand of God.

Preached at the beginning of a New Year.
PSALA. xxxi. 15. My times are in thy

hand.- 43

SERMON 1V.
On the Mixture of Bad Men with the

Good in human Society.
MATTHEW xiii. 36. Let both grow to-

gether until the harvefi.- Page 66

SERMON V.
On the Relief which the Gospel as-

fords to the Distressed.
Preached at the celebration of the sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.
MATTHEW xi. 28. Come unto me all

ye that labour and are heavy laden,
and I will give you ret. 8

SERMON VI.

On Luxury and Licettioufnefs.
ISAIAH v. 12. The harp and the viol,

the tabret and the pipe and wine are
in their feafls; but they regard not the
work of the Lord, neither confder the
operation of his hands.. l 3

vs

SERMON VII.
On the Presence of God in a Future

State.
PSALM XVi. . Thou wilt /few me

the path of life; in thy presence is
fulness of joy; at thy right hand there
are pleafires for evermore Page 135

S'E R M O N VIII.
On Curiosity concerning the Affairs of

others.

JOHN xxi. 21, 22. Peter feeing him.

faith to Jefits, Lord, and what /lall
this man do? Je/its Jaith to him, If
1 will that he tarry till I come, what
is that to thee ? Follow thou me. i57

SERMON IX.
On our,.prefent Ignorance of the Ways

* (if God.
JOHN xiii. 7. Jesus at/wered and said

unto him, What I do thou knowc/f not
now; but thouJ salt know hereafter. x7S

SERMON X.

On the Slavery of Vice.
2 PETER ii. 19. While they promise them

liberty, they themJelves are the ier-
vants of corruption; for of whom a man
is overcome, of the fame is he brought
in bondage. Page 201

SERMON XI.

On the Importance of Public Worlhip.
PSALA xxvi. 8. Lord, I have loved the

habitation of thy house, and the place
where thine honour dwelleth. 224

SERMON XlI.
On the Vaflii9n of the World pafling

away.
i CORINTH. vii. 31.-The faJhion of

this world pafalth away. 250

SE RMON 'XIII.

On Tranquillity of Mind.
PSALM xv. 5 --He that doth these

things Jhall never be moved. 272

SERMON XIV.
On the Misfortunes of Men being

chargeable on themselves.
PROVERBS xix. 5. The foolil/nefs of

man perverteth his way, and his heart
fretteth againfl the Lord. Page 293

SERMON XV.

On Integrity as the Guide of Life.
PROV. Xi. 3. The integrity, of the up-

right fjall guide them.- 313

SERMON XVI.

On Submission to the Divine Will.
JOB ii I. . -Shall we receive good at

the hand of God, andfhall we not re-
ceive evil? 335

SERMON XVII.

On Friendihip.
PROV. xxvii. 10. Thine own friend, and

thyfather'sfriend,forfake not, 358

S E R M ON XVIII.
On the Condua to be held with regard

to Future Events.
PROV. xxvii. i. Boafl not thyself of to-

morrow; for thou knoweft not what
a day may bring forth. Page 379

SERMON XIX.

On following the Multitude to do Evil.
EXODUS xxiii. 2. Thou Jhalt not follow

a Multitude to do evil.- 400

SERMON XX.

On the Wisdom of God.
I TIMOTHY i. 17. Now unto tht King

Eternal, immortal, invisible, the only
wife God, be honour and glory for
ever and ever. Amen. 422

# SERMON I. On the CAUSES of MEN'S being weary of LIFE. JOB X. I. My soul is weary of my life. —

S ERM 0N I.
On the CAUS.ES of MEN'S being weary

of LIFE.

JOB x. i.

My foul is oeary of my lIfe.-

OB, in the first part of his days, was SE RIM,

J the greatest of all the men of the Eafl.
His possessions were large; his family
was numerous and flourifling; his own
character was fair and blameless. Yet
this man it pleased God to visit with
extraordinary reverses of fortune. IHe
was robbed of his whole substance. His
sons and daughters all perifled; and he

VoL. IV. A himself,

S E R. himself, fallen from his high eflate, childl
a__= less and reduced to poverty, was finitten

with fore disease. His friends came a-
bout him, kcemingly with the purpose of
adminiflering comfort. But from a haifli
and ill-founded conftrution of the in-
tention of Providence in his disasters,
they only added to his sorrows by un-
just upbraiding. Hence those many pa-
thetic lamentations with which this book
abounds, poured forth in the most beau-
tiful and touching itrain of Oriental poe-
try. In one of those hours of lamenta-
tion, the sentiment in the text was utter-
ed; My foul is weary of my life; a fen-
timent, which surely, if any situation
can justify it, was allowable in the cafe
of Job.

In situations very different from that

of Job, under calamities far less revere,
it is not uncommon to find such a fen-
timent working in the heart, and some-
times breaking forth from the lips of
men. Many, very many there are, who
on one occasion or other, have experien-

ced

ced this wearihefs of life, and been tempt- S E R M.
ed to wifli that it would come to a close. --j
Let us now examine in what circumftan-
ces this feeling may be deemed excuse-
able; in what it is to be held sinful;
and under what reftritions we may, on
any occasion, be permitted to fay, My
foul is weary of my lift.

I SHALL confidel the words of the text

in three lights; as exprefling, FirJ/, The
sentiment of a discontented man; Second-
ly, The sentiment of an affliAed man;
Thirdly, The sentiment of a devout man,

, I. LET iUs confider the text as exprefling
the sentiment of a discontented man;
with whom it is the effusion of spleen,
vexation, and diffatisfa6ion with life, a-
rising from causes neither laudable nor
justifiable. There are chiefly three claf-
fes of men who are liable to this disease
of the mind: the idle; the luxurious; the
criminal,

A 3! nij

SERM. Fitfi, Tils weariness of life is often

I^ -found among the idle; persons common-

ly in easy circumstances of fortune, who
are not 'eigaged in any of the laborious
occupations of the world, and who are,
at the fame time, without energy of mind
to call them forth into any other line of
active exertion. In this languid, or ra-
ther torpid state, they have so many va-
cant hours, and are so much -at a loss
how 'to fill up their time, that their fpi-
rits utterly fihk; they bec6me burden-
some to themselves, and to every one a-
rotiiid them; and drag with pain the
load of existence. What a convincing
proof is 'hereby afforded, that man was
designed by his'Creator to be an active
being, whose happiness is to be found
not merely in reft, but in occupation
'and puffuit? The idle are doomed to
susser the natural punishment of their
inactivity and 'folly; and for their coin-
:plaints of the tirefomnenefs of :life there
is no remedy but to awake from the
dream of sloth, and to fill up with pro-

per

per employment the mierable vacancics s ER M.
of their days. Let them study to be-
'come useful to the world, and they fliall
soon become less burdenlome to them-
selves. They lhatl begin to enjoy exist-
ence; they fiall reap the rewards which
Providence has annexed to virtuous ac-
tivity; and. have no more cause to fay,
Mlyforll is weary of my lie.

Next, THE luxurious and the dissipated

form another class of men, among whom
such complaints are flill more frequent.
With them they are not the fruit of idle-
ness. These are men who have been
busied enough; they have run the whole
race of pleasure; but they have run it
with such inconsiderate speed, that it ter-
minates in weariness and vexation of fpi-
rit. By the perpetual course of diflipa-
tion in which they are engaged ; by the
excesses which they indulge; by the rio-
tous revel, and the midnight or rather
morning hours to which they prolong
their festivity; they have debilitated their

A 3 bodies,

SERM. bodies, and worn out their spirits. Sa.
-.-o tiated with the repetition of their ac-

customed pleasures, and yet unable to
find any new ones in their place; wan-
dering round and round their former
haunts of joy, and ever returning' dif-
appointed; weary of themselves, and of
all things about them, their spirits are
oppressed with a deadly gloom, and the
complaint bursts forth of odious life and
a miserable world. Never are these com-
plaints more frequent than at the close
of rounds of amusement, and after a long
repetition of fefial pleasures; when the
spirits which had been forced up, as by
fomen intoxicating drug, to an unnatural
height, subside into profound dejetion.
What increases the evil is, that it is not
among the infirm and the aged, but a-
mong the young, the gay, and the prof-
perous, who ought to be reputed the hap-
pieft men, that this distaste of life most
frequently prevails.

When persons of this description, in
their peevifi and splenetic hours, exclaim,

My

MIy foul is weary of m!Y life, let them SER r.
know,-let them be aflured, that this is -
no other than the judgement of God o-
vertaking them for their vices and fol-
lies. Their complaints of misery are cn-
titled to no compafion; nay, they are
sinful, because they arise from a sinful
cause; from a mind broken and debafedt
by luxury and corruption. They arc the
authors of their own misery, by having
thrown away on the follies of the world
those powers which God had bellowed
on them for nobler ends.-Let them re-
turn to the duties of men and Chriflians.
Let them retreat from fiivolity, and ab-
stain from excess. Let them fudy tem-
perance, moderation, and felf-command.
By entering on a virtuous and manly
course of adion, and applying to the ho-
nourable discharge of the funaions of
their station, they will acquire different
views. They will obtain more real enjoy-
ment of life, and become more willing to
prolong it.- But, after the warnings
which Godhas given them of their mif-

A 4 behaviour

SERM. behaviour by the inward misery they

n-, susser, if they still continue to run the

fame intemperate round,. and: to drain
pleasure to the last dregs, it shall come
to pass, that they who now contemn life,
and are impatient of its continuance,
shall- be the persons -most eager to pro-
long it. When they behold it in reality
drawing towards a close, and are' obliged
to look' forward to. what is to come after
it, they ihall be rendered awfully fenfi-
ble of its 'value. They will then grasp
eagerly at the flying hours; anxious to
flop them if they could, and to employ
every moment that remains in: repairing
theii past errors, and in making. their
peace, if poflibe, 'with God arid heaven,
According' as thiy hakne Jfwn, they now
reap. They are reduced -to eat the fruit
of their own ways, aid to be filled. with
their own devices.-

THERE remains still a third class of thoft

who from- discontent are become weary
of lifei such as have embittered it to

themselves

themselves by the confciouiilces of cri- s E Rl I.
minal deeds. They have been, perhaps, -
unnatural to their parents, or treache-
rous' to their friends; they have viola-
ted their fidelity; have cnfniacd and
ruined the innocent; or have occalioned
the death of others. There is no won-
der that such persons fliould lose their
relish for life. To whatever nats they
mnay have recourse for procuring a de-
ceitful peace, conscience will at times ex-
ert its native power, and fliae over them
its terrific. scourge. The internal' misery
they endure has ibmetimes arisen to filch
a height, as has made them terminate,
with their own hands, an existence which
they felt to be infupportable.-To the
complaints of such persons no remedy
can be furnilled, except what arises from
the bitterness of sincere and deep repen-
tance. We can do no more than exhort
them to atone as much as is in their power
for the evils they have committed ; and
t: fly to the divine mercy through Jelils

Christ

SERM. Christ for pardon and forgiveness. Let
'-*y^ aUS now,

II. TURN to persons of another defcrip-

tion, and confider the sentiment in the
text as extorted by situations of distress.
These are so variously multiplied in the
world, and often so oppressive and heavy,
that assuredly it is not uncommon to hear
the afflited complain that they are weary
of life. Their complaints, if not always
allowable, yet certainly are more excusable
than those which flow from the sources
of diffatisfation already mentioned. They
are fuffercrs, not so much through their
own mifcondut, as through the appoint-
ment of Providence; and therefore to
persons in this situation it may seem more
needful to offer consolation, than to give
admonition. However, as the evils which
produce this impatience of life are of
different forts, a distinction must be made
as to the situations which can most ex-
cufe it.

SOMETIMES,

SOaMETIMES, the exclamation in the SERM.

text may be occasioned by deep and over-
whelming grief. When they whom we
had most affectionately loved, and in
whom we had placed the felicity of our
days, are taken away, our connection
with life appears to be dilfolved. " Why
" should we survive those to whom our
" fouls were tied? Would to God we
" had died before them ! Now when they
" are gone, all pleasure and hope is gone
" as to us. To us the fun no longer Ihincs
" with his usual brightness. No longer
" cheerfulness inv'ets the face of nature.
' On every objec a fad gloom appears
" to reft; and every employment of life
" is become an oppreflive burden." With
the feelings of those who are thus tdif-
trefTed we naturally sympathise. They
are frequently the feelings of the molt
virtuous and amiable minds: And yet
such persons must be told, that grief may
be indulged so far as to become immo-
derate and improper. There are bounds
which are prescribed to it both by realbn

and

SER M. and by religion. A Christian ought not

to mourn like those who have no hope,
While he feels his sorrows as a man, he
should also study to bear them like a
man, with fortitude; and not abandon
himself to feeble and fruitless melancho.
ly. Let him have recourse to a ftre-
nuous discharge of the duties of hh fta-
tion, and confider it as incumbent on
him to make the best improvement that
he'can of those comforts which Provi-
dence has fill left in his possession.

AGAIN ; it sometimes happens that, a.

part from grief, great reverses of world-
ly fortune give rife to the lamentation
in the text. This was the cafe with Job
himself. A sudden fall from opulence
into indigence and want; some undeferr
ved disgrace incurred, or some unexpet,
ed cloud thrown over former reputation
and fame; the unkindness and desertion
of friends, or the insolent triumph of er
nemies, are apt to overwhelm the minds
of men with gloom, and to reduce them

to

to be weary of life. To persons under E R M.
such calamities, sympathy is due. That
ifmpathy, however, will be proportion-
ed to the degree in which we confider
them as free from blame in the misfor-
tunes which they susser. As far as,
through their own mifconduc and vice,
they have been the authors to themselves
of those misfortunes, we withdraw our
pity. The burthen which they have
brought on themselves we leave them
to bear as they can; and with little con-
cern we hear them exclaim that their
fouls are weary of life.-Not only so, but
even in cafes where calamities have fallen
on the innocent, to the pity which we
feel for them will be joined .a secret con-
tempt, if ve perceive that together with
their prosperity, their courage and for-
titude have also forsaken them. To a-
bandon themselves to dejection carries
·no mark of a great or a worthy mind.
Instead of declaring that his foul is wcary
of his life, it becomes a brave and a good
man, in the evil day, with firmncfs to

maintain

SER M. maintain his post; to bear up againit tlie
Do,, fiorm; to have recourse to thole advan-

tages which, in the worfl of times, are
always left to integrity and virtue; and
never to give up the hope that better
days may yet arise.

It is good for persons in such situations

to remark that, though Job was for a
long while severely tried by a variety of
distresses, yet his condition was not left
finally unhappy. On the contrary, the
goodness of that God whom he had ferv.
ed returned at last, to ihine upon him
with greater brightness than ever. His
riches were restored to him twofold. The
lords in his family were repaired by a
new offspring. His name became again
renowned in the East; and the latter
end of Job, we are told, was more ble/
fed than the beginning.

BUT till, it may be asked, will not

the continuance of long and severe dif-
ease justify the exclamation in the text,
My Jful is weary of my lfe ? To persons

Xi ' VY1who

who are forfalken by all the blessings of S E R M.
health, and who have no profpe2 left, ,y
but that of lingering under sickness or
pain, Job's complaint may affiredly be
forgiven more than to any others. Though
it might be suggested to them, that even
in old age and sickness, except in very
extreme cafes, some resources arc always
left, of which they may avail themif'lves
for relief; yet it must be admitted, that
lawfully they may wifli their sufferings.
to be brought to an end. Still, however,
they must remember, that resignation to
the pleasure of heaven continues to be
their duty to the last. As long as any
part remains to be acted, as long as their
continuance in the world can serve any
valuable purpose, it is more honourable
to bear the load with magnanimity, than
to give way to a querulous and dejected
spirit. It remains,

III. To address myself to another or-

der of men, among whom, though more
rarely than among those whom I have

described,

SER M. describcd; the sentiment of the text is to

be found. They are persons who have
no particular complaint to make of the
injustice of the - world, or the afflicions
of their slate. But they are tired of the
vanity of the world, of its insipid enjoy-
ments, and its perpetually revolving cir-
cle of trifles and follies. They feel
themfclves made for something greater
and nobler. They are disgusted and hurt
with the scenes of wickedness that are
often passing before their eyes. Their
hearts are warmed with the thoughts of
a purer and more perfea existence de.
signed for man; and in the moments of
aspiration after it, the exclamation breaks
forth, ly'foul is weary of my lile.-O that
1 had wings like a dove! for then I would
flv away and be at rejf. Lo then I would
wander far of, and remain in the wilder-
nels. I would ha/len my escape from the
windy form 'and tempefl. For I have seen
violence and Jtrife in the city. Wickedness
is in the mitfl thereof; deceit and guile de-

part

part not from her Jlreets - .-In this view S IE IdM.
the fentinient in the text may sometimes ,I
be that of a devout man. But such per-
sons I mu't admonifl, that their devo-
iion, how sincere however, is not alto-
gether of a rational and chastened kind.
It was from this temper that, in former
ages of the church, the numerous race
fprurig of anchorets, hermits, and all the
various orders who voluntarily abandon-
ed the world, to people the lonely defarts
and the monastic retreat. The ordinary
course of things seemed below them as
candidates for heaven. The concerns of
the world appeaied unworthy of their
attention, and dangerous to their virtue.
Breathing after a higher state, they ima-
gined that they could not abftrat them-
selves too much from every earthly a-
iufement, as long as they were forced
to remain in this place of exile.
VOL. 1V. B Let

«Pfal.lv. (,U

SERMI. Let us beware of all such imaginary

LY* refinements as produce a total dificlifh

of our present condition. They are, for
the most part, grafted either on difap-
pointed pursuits, or on a melancholy and
splenetic cast of mind. They are far
from contributing to happiness, and are
inconsistent with all the acive virtues of
man. This life deserves not indeed to
be put in competition with that blessed
immortality to which God has railed our
hopes. But such as it is, it is the gift
of God. It is the sphere in which his
wildom has placed us, and appointed us
to at our parts. As long as it lasts, we
must neither flight the duties which it
requires, nor undervalue the innocent
enjoyments which it offers. It belongs
to a man to live among men as his bre-
thren; which he who declares himself
weary of life is not qualified to do with
propriety.

THUS I have placed before you, in
various views, the sentiment in the text;

and

and have fliewn in what circumstances, SEtrM.
and from what causes, that diificlifl of ej
life arises which is often found among
mankind. On a review of the whole,
we cannot but acknowledge, that it is
oftener to be ascribed to our own vices
and follies, than to any other cause. A-
mong the multitudes in the world, to
whom at this day life is burdensome, the
far greater number is of those who have
rendered it so to themielves. Their idle-
nets, their luxury and pleasures, their
criminal deeds, their immoderate passions,
their timidity and baseness of mind, have
dejected them in such a degree, as to
make them weary of their existence.
Preyed upon by discontent of their own
creating, they complain of life when they
ought to reprehend themfclves.

Various affmicions there doubtless are

in the world; many persons with whom
we have cause to sympathise, and whom
we might reasonably forgive for wifli-
ing death to close their sorrows. But of
the evils which embitter life, it must be

B 2 admitted,

SERM. admitted, that the greater part is such aa

we have brought on ourselves; or at least
such as, if we were not wanting to our-
selves, might be tolerably supported.
When we compute the numbers of those
who are disposed to fay, My foul is vweary
of my life, some there are to whom this
sentiment is excusable; but many more
among whom it is in no way justifiable.
I admit that, among the worthiest and
the best, there may be dark moments
in which some feeling of this nature may
be apt to intrude upon their minds. But
with them they are only moments of
occasional and passing gloom. They soon
recall the vigour of their minds; and re-
turn with fatisfa6lion to the discharge
of the duties, and to a participation of
the enjoyments, of life.

One great cause of men's becoming

weary of life is grounded on the mifla-
ken views of it which they have formed,
and the false hopes which they have en-
tertained from it. They have expe&ed a
scene of enjoyment; and when they meet

with

with disappointments and distresses, they SE R M.
complain of life, as if it had cheated and I
betrayed them. God ordained no such
poffefion for man on earth as continued
pleasure. For the wifell purpoles he dc-
signed our slate to be checquered with
pleasure and pain. As such let us receive
it, and make the best of what is doomed
to be our lot. Let us remain persuadcd,
that simple and moderate pleasures are
always the bell; that virtue and a good
conscience are the furelt foundations of
enjoyment; that he who serves his God
and his Saviour with the purest inten-
tions, and governs his paflions with the
greatest care, is likely to lead the happiest
life. Following these principles, we shall
meet with fewer occasions of being wea-
ry of life; we {hall always find fonle fa-
tisfaaions mixed with its crosses; and
flall be enabled to wait with a humble
and contented mind till the Almighty,
in his appointed time, finiflh our state of
trial, and remove us to a more blessed
abode.

B 3 SERMON

# SERMON II. On CHARITY as the End of the COMMANDMENT. I TIMOTHY i. 5. Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

S E R M ON ItL
On CHARITY as the End of the CoM-

MANDAIENT.

I TIMOTHY i. 5.
Now-the end of the commandment is chuaC

rity out O'a pure hearts and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

IT appears from this chapter, that one
SERM. design of the Apoflle, in writing to

j -Timothy, was to guard him against cer-

tain corrupters of Christian doctrine, who
had already arisen in the church. To
their false representations of religion he
opposes that general view of it which is
given in the text. Such Summaries of

religio.

religion frequently occur in the sacred S ERM.
writings; and are extremely ufcful. By ,aj
the comprehensive energy with which they
express the great lines of our duty, they
both imprint them on our memory, and
bring them home to our conscience with
force. In the progress of this discourse,
I hope to make it appear, that the words
of the text afford a most enlarged and
inftrutive view of religion in all its
chief parts.

The Apostle pronounces charity to be

the end or scope of the commandment, that
is, of the law of God. At the fame time,
in order to prevent mistakes on this most
important subjea, he subjoins to charity
certain adjuncts, as necessary to qualify
it, and to render the Christian charater
complete. These are the pure heart, the
good conscience, and faith unfeigned. In
treating of these, I shall shew the nature
of their connexion with charity, and the
importance of their being always united
with it.

B 4 The

SERM. The end of the commandment is charity.

Ij. Charity is the fame with benevolence or

love; and is the term uniformly em-
ployed, in the New Testament, to denote
all the good affeCtions which we ought
to bear towards one another.. It consists
not in speculative ideas of general bene-
volence floating in the head, and leaving
the heart,. as speculations too often do,
untouched and' cold. Neither is it con-
fined to that indolent good nature, which
xiakes xts reft satisfied with being free
from inveterate malice, or ill-will to our
fellow-creatures, without prompting us
to be of service to any. 'True' charity
is an ative principle. It is not proper-
ly a single virtue; but a disposition re-
fidingin the heart, as a fountain whence.
all the virtues of benignity,,catdour, for-
bearance, generosity, companion, and li-
berality, flow, as so many native itreams.
From general good-will to all,-it extends
its influence particularly to those with
whom we Hand in nearert connection,
*nd who are direcly within the sphere

of

of our good offices. From the country SE RM.
or community to which we belong, it
descends to the finaller aflociations of
neighbourhood, relations, and friends;
and spreads itself over the whole circle
of social and domestic life. I mean not
that it imports a promiscuous undifiin-
guifliing affecion, which gives every
man an equal title to our love. Cha-
rity, if we fhoukl endeavour to carry it
ob far, would be rendered an impracti-
cable virtue, and would resolve itself
into mere words, without asseting the
heart. True charity attempts not to shut
.our eyes to the difiincrion between good
and bad men; nor to warm our hearts
equally to those who befiiend and thofc
who injure us. It reserves our esteem
for good men, and our complacency for
our friends. Towards our enemies it
inspires forgiveness and humanity. It
breathes universal candour, and liberality
of sentiment. It forms gentleness of
temper, and didates affability of man-
ners. It prompts corresponding fympa-

thies

sERMI. thies with them who rejoice and them

who weep. It reaches us to flight and
derpife no man. Charity is the comfort-
er of the afflied, the protector of the
oppressed, the reconciler of differences,
the interccfior for offenders. It is faith-
fulness in the friend, public spirit in the
magistrate, equity and patience in the
judge, moderation in the sovereign, and
loyalty in the subjec. In parents it is
care and attention; in children it is re-
verence and submission. In a word, it
is the foul of social life. It is the fun
that enlivens and cheers the abodes of
men. It is like the dew of Hermon, fays
the Psalmist, and the dew that defcendeth
at the mountains of Zion, where the Lord
commanded the bleitfig, evelt life for ever-
more *.

SUCH charity, fays the text, is the end
of the coinmandment. This assertion of the

ApoRtle
.* Pr. cxuii, 3,

Apostle is undoubtedly confimnant to all SEltM.
that reason can iuggeft on the fubjct of
religion. For, on confidering the nature
of the Supreme Being, reafbn gives us
much ground to believe, that the chief
design of all the commandments which
he has given to men, is to promote their
happiness. Independent and felf-fufficicnr,
that Supreme Being has nothing to exaL
from us for his own interest or felicity.
By our services he cannot be benefited,
nor by our offences injured. WVhen he
created the world, it was benevolence that
moved him to confer existence. When
he made himself known to his creatures,
benevolence in like manner moved him
to give them laws for their conduct.
Benevolence is the spring of legilation
in the Deity, as much as it was the mo-
tive of creation. He issued his com-
mands on earth on purpose that by o-
bedience to them, his creatures might be
rendered happy among themselves in this
life, and be prepared for greater happinel'
}1 another. 'Charity, especially when

joined

SERII. joined with purity, good conscience, and
<.j, faith, is obviously the great instrument

for this purpose; and therefore must needs
possess the chief and primary place in the
laws of God.

Accordingly, throughout the New Tef-

tament, it is uniformly presented to us
in the fame light in which it is placed by
the text. This is known to all who have
any acquaintance with the sacred books.
Charity is termed the fusiling of the law,
and the bond of peifeilnfi. It was affum-
ed by our blessed Lord as the charaCte,
riftical diflindion ps his disciples; an4
in that magnificent eulogium which the
Apostle Paul pronoupces upon it, in the
thirteenth chapter of the first epistle to the
Corinthians, it is exprefs!y preferred by
him to faith and hope. This deserves to
be seriously confidered by those who are
apt to undervalue charity, as an appen-
*dage of what they contemptuously call
Morality; while they confine true reli-
gion to some favourite tenets and obfer-
vances of their own, whith.they confi-

8 . I~~~~~~~~~<e

der as comprehending the fum of what SERM.
is acceptable to God. Such persons fibow I
themselves profoundly ignorant of the
nature of religion, and may too often be
fufpeted of being strangers to its influ-
ence. For, as the apostle John reasons,
He that loveth not his brother, whom he
hath seen, how can he love that God twhom
he hath notfeen ' ?

AT the fame time, while I ascribe to

charity that high place in the system of re-
ligion, which jufily belongs to it, I am not
to be understood as confining all religion
to this disposition alone. With much
wisdom and propriety, the text hath an-
nexed to it certain adjuncds, without
which neither the character of a gooc
man can be completed, nor charity it-
'elf exercised to advantage. To the con-
fideration of these I now proceed; and
I enter the more readily on this branch

ik JQbn iv. 2.of
* l ]ubn iv. 2s.

SERM. of the subject, as there is ground to lie

lieve, that many pretend to possess cha-
rity, without properly understanding its
nature and efficacy. There has been al-
ways an unhappy tendency among men
to run to extremes, on one fide or other,
in matters of religion. As one set of
men, who employ all their zeal on right
belief, are prone to undervalue good prac-
tice; so another set, who with to be e-
iteemed rational Christians, are inclined
to reft the whole of their duty on chari-
table deeds, while they overlook cer-
tain dispositions and habits which ought
always to accompany them. It is there-
fore of importance, that the mistakes of
both these clafes of men should be recli-
fled, in order that religion may be held
forth to the world in its complete form,
and in its full and undiminihfled lutfre.

THE first qualification of charity point-

ed out in the text is purity; charity out
of a pure heart. Purity includes the vir-
tues which belong to the individual,

confidered

confidered in himself, and with refpec s ER M.
to the government of his desires and -L
pleasures. It hath its feat in the heart;
but extends its influence over so much
of the outward conduct, as to form a
great and material part of the character.
They are only the pure in heart, we are
told by our Saviour, 'who can fee God '.
It is also true, that they are only the pure
in heart who can properly discharge their
duties towards mankind. Inordinate love
of pleasure, intemperance, sensuality, and
a course of irregular life, are inconsistent,
not only with the general character of a
good man, but also with the peculiar
exercises of charity and benevolence. For
nothing is more certain, than that habits
of licentious indulgence contribute to
ftiffle all the good affieions; to harden
the heart; to nourifll that felfifli attach-
ment to our own vitious pleasures which
renders us insensible to the circumftan-

ces
, Matth. v. R.

SER A. ces and wvants of others. A profligate

j man is Seldom found to be a good hus

band, a good father, or a beneficent
neighbour. HoI many young persons
have at sirs set but in the wdrld with
excellent dispositions of heart; generous,
charitable, and humane; kind to their
friends, and amiable among all with
whom they had intercourse? And yet
how often have we seen all those fair
appearances unhappily blasted in the pro-
grefs of life, merely through the influ.
ence of loose and corrupting pleasures;.
and those very persons who promised
once to be blessings to the world, funk
down, in the end, to be the burthen and
nuisance of society? The profusion of
expence which their pleasures occasion,
accounts in a great measure for the fatal
reverse that takes place in their charac-
ter. It not only drains. the sources
whence the streams of beneficence should
flow, but often obliges them to become
oppressive and cruel to those whom it was

3 * their

their duty to have patronised and sup- s El M.
ported.

Purity of heart and conduc muf there-

fore be held fundamental to charity and
love, as well as to general piety and vir-
tue. The licentious, I know, are ready
to imagine, that their occasional deeds
of bounty and liberality will atone for
many of their private disorders. But,
besides that such plans of compensation
for vices, by some supposed virtues, are
always fallacious, the licentious may be
assured, that it is an appearance only of
charity, not the reality of it, to which
they can lay claim. For that great vir-
tue consists not in occasional acions of
humanity, in fits of kindnels or compaf-
sion, to which bad men may be prompted
by natural inftind; but in the fleady and
regular exercise of those good affections,
and the discharge of those important du-
ties towards others, for which the licen-
tious are in. a great measure disqualified.
Their criminal propensities direct their
inclinations to very different objects and

VOL. IV. C pursuits;

SERM. pursuits; and often determine them to

sacrifice the just rights of others, some-
times to sacrifice the peace and the re-
putation of the innocent, to the gratifi-
cation of their passions. Such is the per-
nicious influence which the love of plea-
sure has on the good qualities of its de-
voted votaries. The impure heart is like
the stagnant and putrifying lake, which
fends forth its poisonous exhalations to
corrupt and wither every plant that grows
on its banks.

THE second qualification annexed to

Charity, in the text, is, that it be of a
good conscience. By this I understand the
Apostle to mean, that charity be in full
confiflency with justice and integrity;
that the cocience of the man who pur-
poses to perform actions of benevolence,
be free from the reproach of having ne-
gleted the primary duties of equity.
For, undoubtedly, juatice is a virtue pri-
mary to charity; that is, it must go be-
fore it in all its exertions. One must first

do

do ji/lly before he can pretend that he SE i I.
loves mercy.-Religion, my friends, in or- >-
der to render it useful to mankind, must
be brought down by its teachers from the
sublimity of speculation to the functions
and occupations of ordinary life. It is
my duty to admonifli you, that you muff,
in the first place, be fair in all your deal-
ings with others; you must discharge the
debts you owe; you must pay the wages
due to your servants and dependents;
you mutt provide for your own family,
and be just to the claims of relations;
then, and then only, you can, Jromn a good
conJfience, as the text enjoins, perform
ats of generosity and mercy.

This leads to a reflecion which here

deserves our attention; that, in order to
fulfil that charity which is the end of the
connandment, oeconomy, and good order
in private life, ought to be carefully ftu-
died by all Christians. This is more
closely connected with a good conscience,
than many seem inclined to admit. Oe-
conomy, when prudently and temperate-

C 2 ly'

SERM. ly conducled, is the safeguard of many
\^^ ' virtues; and is in a particular manner

favourable to the exertions of benevo-
lence. He who by inconsiderate con-
duti i1 injuring hi's citcumftances, will
probably in tiime lose the inclination, and
cerrainly is deprivihg himself of the means,
of beitsg fevic'eable to his brethren. Some
impor'ltant exertions, indeed, there a're
of charity, Which have no connecion
with giving dr beft6vWing. Cado'ur, for-
givif'efs, gentlefiefs, and fyYnpathy, are
ddue t6O our brethetn at all times, and in
every 'fituationi of 6ur own fortune. The
poor have 'oppofttinities for displ'aying
these virtues, a's well as 'the rich. They
wlio .hve 'n6thing to;give, can often afford
'relief 'to 'dthers, by iiiparfting what they
'feel. 'But, as 'far as beneficence is in-
clded 'in charity, we ought al*ays to
ieiiember, that justice imft, in the first
'plate, be held inviolably'facred.

The wifdore of scripture remarkably

appears, in the connexion pointed 'ut
by the text between chJrity arid good 'con-

fcien¢e

ficcence or integrity; a connexion which I SE RM.
apprehend is often not attended to so much \..i
as it deserves. Among the frugal and in-
duflrious, great regard is commonly paid
to justice. They will not defiaud. They
will not take any unlawful advantage
in their dealings: And satisfied with this
degree of good cotnfience, they are ftran-
gers to that charity, which is the end
of the commandmlent. They are hard and
unfeeling. They are rigid and fevcre in
their demands. They know nothing of
humanity, forgiveness, or compassion.-
Among another class of men, who have
been more liberally educated, and who
are generally of a higher rank in life, jus-
tice is apt to be confidered as a virtue less
noble than charity; and which may, on
some occasions be dispensed with. They
are humane perhaps, and tender in their
feelings. They are easy to their depend-
ents. They can be liberal, eyen to profu-
fipn. While, at the fame time, they are
accumulating debts, which they know
themselves unable to discharge. Their

C 3 affairs

SERM. affairs are allowed to run into confusion.

j Oeconomy and good order are neglected.

The innocent, in great numbers, susser
materially through their mifinanagement:
And all the while they assume to them-
selves the praise of being generous and
good-hearted men. This surely is not that
charity which the Gospel enjoins; and
which, in its very essence, involves good
corifcience and integrity. He who pre-
tends to do good to his brethren, without
first doing them jullice, cannot be acount-
ed their real friend. True charity is not
a meteor, which occasionally glares; but a
luminary, which, in its orderly and re-
gular course, dispenses a benignant influ-
ence.

THE third and last adjunc connected in

the text with charity is, that it be of faith
unfeigned. Faith, in the scripture sense of
it, includes the whole of religious princi-
ples respeCting God, and refpeaing Christ.
G3ood principles, without good practice, I
confess, are nothing; they are of no avail

inl

in the fight of God, nor in the efitmation S E R M.
of wife men. But pratice not founded
on principle is likely to be always unfta-
ble and wavering; and, therefore, the
faith of religious principles enters, for a
very considerable flhare, into the proper
discharge of the duties of charity.

It will be admitted that, without faith,

our duties towards God cannot be pro-
perly performed. You may be assured
that your duties towards men will al-
ways greatly susser from the want of it.
Faith, when pure and genuine, supplies
to every part of virtue, and in particular
to the virtue of charity, many motives
and aflfitances, of which the unbelie-
ver is destitute. He who aAs from
faith aas upon the high principle of re-
gard to the God who hath made him,
and to the Saviour who redeems him;
which will often stimulate him to his
duty when other principles of benevo-
lence become faint and languid, or are
crossed by opposite interelts. When he
confiders himself as pursuing the appro-

C 4 bation

SERM. bation of that divine Being, from whom
I-I rlove descends, a sacred enthufiafin both

prompts, and consecrates, his charitable
dispositions. Regardless of men, or of
human recompence, he is carried along
by a higher impulse. He ads with the
spirit of a follower of the Son of God,
who not only has enjoined love, but has
enforced it by the example of laying
down his life for mankind. Whatever
he does in behalf of his fellow-creatures,
he confiders himself as doing, in some de-
gree, to that divine Person, who hath
said, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one
of the leafi of theft my brethren, ye have
done it unto me *. Hence charity is with
him not only a moral virtue, but a Chris-
tian grace. It acquires additional dignity
and energy from being connected with
the heavenly state and the heavenly in-
habitants. He mingles with beings of a
higher order, while he is discharging his

duty
* Matth. xxv. 49,

duty to his fellow-creatures on earth ; and S E R. t.
by joining faith and piety to good works, j
he completes the character of a Chril-
tian.

THUS I have endeavoured to explain

the full sense of that comprehensive view
of religion which is given in the text.
I have shown in what refpecs charity
joined with the pure heart, the good con-
Jfience, and faith unfeigned, forms the end
of the commandment. Let us ever keep
in view those essential parts of a virtuous
character, and preserve them in their
proper union. Thus flall our religion
rife into a regular and well-proportioned
edifice, where each part gives firmness
and support to another. If any one of
those material parts be wanting in the
trucAure; if, out of our Glftem of cha-
rity, either purity, or justice, or faith,
be left, there will be cracks and flaws
in the building which prepare its ruin.

This is indeed one of the greatest and
most frequent errors of men, in their

moral

SERM. moral conduc. They take hold of vir-

tue by pieces and corners only. Few
are so depraved as to be without all sense
of duty, and all regard to it. To some
moral qualities, which appear to them
amiable or effimable, almofi all men lay
claim; and on these they reft their worth,
in their own estimation. But there scat-
tered pieces of virtue, not uniting into
one whole, nor forming a confitent cha-
rafter, have no powerful influence on
their general habits of life. From-various
unguarded quarters they lie open to
temptation. Their lives are full of con-
tradiction, and perpetually fluctuate be-
tween good and evil. Virtue can nei-
ther rife to its native dignity, nor attain
its proper rewards, until all its chief parts
be joined together in our character, and
exert an equal authority in regulating our
conduct.

SERMON

# SERMON III. On our LIVES being in the Hand of GOD. [Preached at the beginning of a New Year*.] PSALM xxxi. 15. My times are in thy hand. —

S ERMO N II.
On our LIVES being in the Hand of

GOD.
[Preached at the beginning of a New Year *.]

PSALM xxxi. 15.

My times are in thy hand.-
T HE fun that rolls over our heads, SER M.

the food that we receive, the reft I[.

that we enjoy, daily admonish us of a
superior power, on whom the inhabitants
of the earth depend for light, life, and
subsistence. But as long as all things

proceed
* January 6th, 1793.

SER M. proceed in their ordinary course; when

ws^j day returns after day with perfect fimi-

larity; whcn our life seems stationary,
and nothing occurs to warn us of any ap-
proaching change, the religious senti-
ments of dependence are apt to be for-
gotten. The great revolutions of time,
when they come round in their stated
order, have a tendency to force some im-
pressions of piety even on the most un-
thinking minds. They both mark our
existence on earth to be advancing to-
wards its close, and exhibit our condition
as continually changing; while each re-
turning year brings along with it new e-
vents, and at the fame time carries us
forwards to the conclusion of all. We
cannot, on such occaiions avoid perceiv-
ing, that there is a Supreme Being who
holds in his hands the line of our existence,
and measures out to each of us our allot-
ted portion of that line. Beyond a certain
limit, we know that it cannot be extend-
ed; and long before it reach that limit it
may be cut asunder by an invisible hand,

which

Xvhich is stretched forth over all the inha- s ER M.
bitants of 'the world. Then naturally a- A
rifes the ejaculation of the text, My times,
0 God, are in thy bIaid. " My fate de-
"pends on thee. The duration of my
" life, and all the events which in fu-
" ture days are to fill it, are entirely at
" thy difpofal."-Let us now, when we
have just seen one year close, and another
begin, meditate seriously on this senti-
ment. Let us confider what is implied
in our times being in the hand of God; and
to what improvemient this meditation
leads.

THE text evidently implies, first, that

our times are not in 'our own hand; that,
as our 'continuance in life depends not
on ourselves, 'so the 'events which are
to happen, while 'life remains, arc un-
known to us, and not under our own
direction. Of this' e may behold ma-
ny a proof, When we look back on the
tranfaltions'of the year which is just si-
nihfed. "RecolleAion will readily present

t*

SERM. to us a busy period, filled up with a

! mixture of business and amusement, of'

anxieties and cares, of joys and sorrows.
We have talked, perhaps, and ated much.
We have formed many a plan; in pub-
lic or in private life, we have been en-
gaged in a variety of pursuits. Let me
now ask, how small a proportion of all
that has happened could have been fore-
seen, or foretold by us? How many
things have occured, of which we had
no expectation; some, perhaps, that have
succeeded beyond our hopes; many,
also, that have befallen us contrary to
our wish ? How often were each of us ad-
monished that there are secret wheels,
which, unseen by us, bring about the
revolutions of human affairs; and that,
while man was devising his way, Provi-
dence was direcing the event ?

That fccne is now closed. The tale of

that year has been told. We look for-
ward to the year which is beginning;
and what do we behold there?-All, my
brethren, is a blank to our view: A dark

unknown

unknown presents itself. We are enter- s E r rM.

Ilt.

ing on an untried, undiicovered coun- ,-
try, where, as each succeeding month
comes forward, new scenes may open;
new objeds may engage our attention;
changes at home or abroad, in public or
in private affairs, may alter the whole
ltate of our fortune. New connecions
may be at hand to be formed, or old
ones just about to-be dissolved; perhaps,
we may have little more to do with this
world, or with any of its connections;
we may be (landing on the verge of time
and life, and on the point of passing
into a new region ofexillence. In flort,
the prospect before us is full of awful
uncertainty. Life and death, prosperity
and adversity, health and sickness, joy
and trouble, lie in one undiftinguiflhable
mass, where our eye can descry nothing
through the obscurity that wraps them
up.

While it is thus certain that our tintes

are not at our own disposal, we are
taught, by the text, that they are in the

3 Ihand

SERM. hand of God. This may be confideicd

III.
x,_^ in two views. Our titnes are in the hand

of God, as a supreme Disposer of events.
They are in the hand of God as a Giar-
dian and a Father.

Our timesi I fay, are in the hand of

God as a supreme itrefiftible Ruler. All
that is to happen to us ih this and the
succeeding years of our life,-if any fuc-
ceeding years we fliall be allowed to fee,-
has been foreknown and arranged by
God. The first view, under which hu-
man affairs present themselves to us, is
that of confuted and irregular succession.
The events of the world seem thrown
together by chance, like the billows of
the sea, tumbling 'and tofling over each
other, without rule or order. All that
is apparent to us is he fluctuation of hu-
man caprice, and the operation of hu-
man passions. We fee the strife of am-
bition, and the efforts of stratagem, la-
bouring to accompliih theit several put-
poses among the societies of men. But

2 it

it is no more than the surface, the out- SERM.
fide of things, that we behold. Higher .
counsels, than it is in our power to trace,
are concerned in the tranfadtions of the
world. If we believe in God at all, as
the Governor of the universe, we must
believe that, without his providence, no-
thing happens on earth. He over-rules,
at his pleasure, the passions of men. He
bends all their designs into subserviency
to his decree. He makes the wraih of man
toprajif him; and refjrains, in' what mea-
sure he thinks fit, the remainder of wrath *.
He brings forth in their course all the
generations of men. When the time is
come for-their entering into light, they
appear on the stage; and when the time
fixed for their difiniffion arrives, he chan-
ges their countenance, and fends them a-
way. The time of our appearing is now
come, after our anceRftrs had left their
place, and gone down to the dull. We
VOL. IV. D are

Psalm. Ixxvi. 1o.

SERM. are at present permitted to aa our part
III. M.j freely, and without constraint. No vio-

lence is done to our inclination or choice.
But assuredly there is not a day of our life,
nor an event in that day, but was foreseen
by God. That succession of occurrences,
which to us is full of obscurity. and dark-
ness, is all light and order in his view. He
fees from the beginning to the end; and
brings forward every thing that happens,
in its due time and place.

Our times are altogether in his band.

Let us take notice, that they are not in
the hands either of our enemies, or of
our friends. It is not in the power of
man to lhorten or to prolong our life,
more or less than God has decreed.
Enemies may employ craft or violence
in their attacks; friends may employ
.-.kill and vigilance for the preferva-

tion of our health and safety;. but
both, the one and the other can have
effie only as far as God permits. They
work in subserviency to his purpose. By
him they are held in invisible bonds.

1 - '
To

To the exertions of all human agents E RM.
he fays, Mitherto Jkalt thoui come, and no l
farther.

WE are to observe next, that our tines

are in the hand of God, not only as an
almighty Disposer, but as a merciful
Guardian and Father. We are by no
means to imagine, that from race to race,
and from year to year, God fpdrts with
the lives of succeeding generations of
men, or, in the mere wantonness of ar-
*bitrary power, brings them forth, and
fends them away. No; if we have any
confidence in what either the light of na-
ture suggests to all men, or what the
revelation of the gospel has confirmed to
Christians, we have full ground to be-
lieve,, that the adminifiration of human
affairs is conduced with infinite wifdoin
and goodness. The counsels of the Al-
mighty are indeed too deep for out limit-
.ed understandings to trace. His path
may often, as to us, be in thefea, and his
footteps in the mighty waters; while, ne-

D 2 verthelefi,

SERIM. verthelefs, all his paths are mercy and

IlL.
uw., truth. He who, from the benignity of

his nature, erected this world for the a-
bode of men; He who furnished it so
richly for our accommodation, and fto-
red it with so much beauty for our en-
tertainment; He who, since first we en-
.tered into life, hath followed us with such
a variety of mercies, surely can have no
pleasure in our disappointment and dif-
trefs. He knows our frame; he remenm-
bers we are duji; and looks to frail man,
we are assured, with such pity as a father
beareth to his children *. To him we may
safely commit ourselves, and all our con-
cerns'; as 'to one who is belt qualified,
both to direct the incidents proper to
happen to us in this world; and to judge
of the time when it is fit for us to be re-
moved from it.

Even that ignorance of our future def-
tiny in life, of which we sometimes

complain,.
. Pfalfl cii. 13, I4,

complan, is a signal proof of his good- SE RM.
ness. He hides from us the view of fu-
turity, because the view would be dan-
gerous and overpowering. It would ei-
ther dispirit us with visions of terror, or
intoxicate us by the disclosure of success.
The veil which covers from our fight
the events of this and of succeeding years,
is a veil woven by the hand of mercy.
Our times are in his hand; and we have
reason to be glad, that in his hand they
are kept, shut out from our view. Sub-
mit to his pleasure as an almighty Ruler
we mutt, because we cannot resist him.
Equal reason there is for trusting in him
as a Guardian, under whose disposal we
are safe.

SUCH is the import of the text, that

our times are in the hand of God. Our
times are unknown to us, and not under
our own direction. They are in the
hands of God as a Governor and Ruler;
in the hands of God as a Guardian and
Father, These separate views of the text

D 3 require,

SERM. require, on our part, separate improve-
,^y-^j ments.

SEEING our times are not in our own

hand, feeing futurity is unknown to us,
let us, first, check the vain curiosity of'pe-
netrating into what is to come. Conjec-
ture about futurity we often mutt; but
upon all conjecures of what this year is
to produce, let us lay a proper reitraint.
Let us wait till God shall bring forward
events in their proper course, without
wishing to discover what he has conceal-
ed; left, if the discovery were granted,
we should fee many things, which we
would will not to have seen.

The most common propensity of man-

kind is to store futurity with whate-
ver is agreeable to them; especially in
those periods of life when imagination is
lively, and-hope is ardent. Looking for-
ward to the year now beginning, they
are ready to promise themselves much
from the foundations of prosperity which
they have laid; from the friendships and

connetions

connections which they have secured; s E R M.
from the plans of concdud which they have -
formed. Alas! how deceitful do all these
dreams of happiness often prove ! While
many are faying in secret to their hearts,
To-morrow fl/all be as this day and more a-
bundantly, we are obliged in return to sav
to them, Boast not thyself of to-morrow, for
thou. know)ef tnot what a day may bring
forth. I do not mean, that in the un-
known profped which lies before us, we
should forebode to ourselves nothing but
misfortunes.-May it be the pleasure of
Heaven that this year run on in a placid
and tranquil tenor to us all !-But this
I fay, that in such foresight of futurity
as we are allowed to take, we may rec-
kon upon it as certain, that this year
ihall prove to us, as many past have pro-
ved, a checquered scene of some com-
forts and some troubles. In what pro-
portion one or other of these shall prevail
in it; whether, when it ends, it shall
leave with us the memory of joys or of
sorrows, is to be determined by him in

D 4 whose

SERM. whose hands cur times are. Our wis-
t, , dom is, to be prepared for whatever the

year is to bring; prepared to receive
comforts with thankfulness, troubles with
fortitude; and to improve both for the
great purposes of virtue and eternal life.

ANOTHER important intruCtion which

naturally arises from our times not be-
ing in our own hands is, that we ought
no longer to trifle with what it is not in
our power to prolong; but that we Ihould
make haste to live as wife men; not de-
laying till to-morrow what may be done
to day; doing now with all our might
whatever our hand findeth to do; before
that night comreth wherein no man can work.

Amidst the uncertainty of the events

which are before us,, there is one thing
we have too much reason to believe
namely, that of us who are now assem-
bled in this congregation, and 'who have
seen the year begin, there'are some who
mhall not survive to fee it clo'e.. Whe-
ther it Ihall be you, or you, or I, who

2 fImall

shall be gathered to our fathers before SERM.
the revolving year has finished its round, 1J
God alone knows. Our times arc in his
hand? But to our place, it is more than
probable that some of us lhall have gone.
Could we foretel the month, or the. day,
on which our change was to happen,
how diligent would we be in setting our
house in order, and preparing ourselves
to appear before our Maker? Surely,
that ought to be prepared for with molt
care, concerning which we are ignorant
how soon it is to take place. Let us
therefore walk circunj/fpetly, and redeemn
the time. Let us dismiss those trivial and
superfluous cares which burden or cor-
rupt our life, in order to attend to what
is of highest importance to us as men and
Christians. The beginning of each year
ihofuld carry to us all a solemn admoni-
tion of our folly, in neglecing to im-
prove suitably the years that are past.
It ihould call up mifpent time into our
view; and be like the hand coming forth
upon the wall, in the days of Belflhaz-

tar,

SEr M. zar, and writing in legible characers o-

y ver against us, "0 man! thy days are num-
" bred; thou art weighed in the balance,
"and found wanting; take care left thy

kingdom be on the point of departing
"from thee."

WHEN we confider, in the next place,

that our times, as I before illustrated,
are in the hand of God as a sovereign
Disposer, it is an obvious inference from
this truth, that we flould prepare our-
selves to submit patiently to his pleasure,
both as to the events which are to fill up
our days, and as to the time of our con-
tinuing in this world. To contend with
him we know to be fruitless. The word
that is gone out of his mouth must stand.
In the path which he has marked out
for us, whether it be short or long, rug-
ged or smooth, we must walk. Is it not
then the dictate of wisdom, that we should
previously reconcile ourselves to this so-
vereign ordination, and bring our minds
to harmonize with what is appointed to
be our destiny? Let us fortify this tem-

per

per, by recalling that reflexion of the S ERM.
wife man; WIho knoweth what is good jbr ,,i
man in this life; all the days of his vain
life which he fpendeth as a Jladow ? a

To enjoy long life, and fee many days,

is the universal wifli; and, as the wifl
is prompted by nature, it cannot be in
itself unlawful. At the fame time, fe-
veral circumstances concur to temper
the eagerness of this wifli; and to lhow
us that it fiould always be formed un-
der due fibmiiffion to the wiser judge.
ment of Heaven. Who among us can
tell, whether, in wilhing for the conti-
nuance of many years on earth, we may
not be only wiflling for a prolongation
of distress and misery ?-You might live,
my friends, till you had undergone lin-
gering rounds of revere pain, from which
death would have proved a Ieafonable
deliverance. You might live till your
breasts were pierced with many a wound
from public calamities or private sorrows.

You
*Ecclcf. vi. i2.

SE RM. You might live till you beheld the death
t.-,j of all whom you had loved; till you fur-

vived all those who love you; till you
were left as desolate strangers on earth,
in the midst of a new race, who neither
knew you, nor cared for you, but who
wished you offthc ftage.-Of a nature so
ambiguous are all the profpets which life
sets before us, that in every will we form,
relating to them, much reason we have
to be satisfied that our times are in the
hands of God, rather than our own,

Tins consideration is greatly strength-

ened when, in the last place, we think of
God aCting, not as a Sovereign only, but
as a Guardian, in the disposal of our
times. This is our great consolation in
looking forward to futurity. To God
as a wife Ruler, calm fubmiflion is due;
but it is more than submission that be-
longs to him as a merciful Father; it is
the spirit of cordial and affectionate content
to his will. Unknown to us as the times
to come are, it should be sufficient to our

full

full repose that they are known to God. SE RM,
The day and the hour which are fixed v
in his counsels for our difiniflion from
life, we ought to be perfiadcd are fixed
for the belt; and that any longer we
flould not wish to remain.

When we fee that last hour drawing

nigh, though our spirits may be com-
posed on our own account, yet, on ac-
count of our friends and families, no
little anxiety and sorrow may be some-
times apt to take possession of the mind.
Long we have enjoyed the comfort of
their society, and been accustomed to con-
fider them as parts of ourselves. To be
parted from them forever is, at any rate,
a bitter thought; but to the bitterness of
this, is over and above added the apprehen-
sion of their suffering much by our death.
We leave many a relation, perhaps may
leave young children, and a helpless family,
behind us,. to be exposed to various dan-
gers, and thrown forth on aj unfriendly
world. Such virtuous anxieties often
oppress the tender and feeling heart at

the

SE RM. the closing periods of life.-My brcthren,
k--jx look up to thatGod, in whose hands the

limes of your fathers were; in whose
hand the times of your posterity ihall
be. Recollect, for your comfort, the ex-
perience of ages. When were the riglh
teous utterly forsaken by God in times
pat ? Why should they be forsaken by
him in times to come? Well did he govern
the world before you had a being in it:
Well shall he continue to govern it after
you are no more. No cause have you, there-
fore, to oppress your minds with the load
of unknown futurity. Commit your
cares to a Father in heaven.. Surrender
your life, your friends, and your family,
to that God, who hath said, The children,
of his servants Jiall continue, and their feed
Jiall be ejtablyijed befori him *.-Leave
thy fatherlefi children, I will prefirve them
alive; and let thy widows truji in me t.

I HAVE thus shown what the import
is, and what the improvement should be,

of
* Psalm cii, iS. . Jeremiah xlix. x.

of the doctrine of the text, that our t1imes SERM.
are in the hand of God. It aflerts a fadc,
the truth of which can be called in quef-
tion by none; a fad which, whether
persons have any sentiments of religion
or not, is calculated to make a serious im-
pression on every mind ; especially at sea-
sons when the revolution of years gives
us warning that our duration on earth
is measured, and advances towards its
period. To persons who are rcligioully
disposed, who study to improve life to
its proper purposes, to do their duty tc-
wards God and man, and through the
merits of their Redeemer to obtain grace
and favour from -leaven, the doarine
of the text is still more important. A-
mong them it tends to awaken impref-
sions which are not only serious, but, as
I have lhown, salutary and comforting
to the heart.-Thankful that our times
are in the hand of a Sovereign, who is
both wife and gracious, let us prepare
ourselves to meet the approaching events
of, life with becoming resignation, and

at

SERM. at the fame time with manly conflancy

J and firm trust in God. As long as it

lhall please him to continue our abode
in the world, let us remain faithful to
our duty; and when it liall please him
to give the command for our removal
hence, let us utter only this voice: "In
" thy hand, 0 my God, my times are.
" Thou art calling me away. Here I
( am, ready to obey thy call, and at thy
"signal to go forth. 1 thank thee that
" I have been admitted to partake so
"long of the comforts of life, and to
" be a fpedator of the wisdom and good-
" ness displayed in thy works. I thank
" thee that thou haft borne so long with
"my infirmities and provocations; haft
" allowed me to look up to thy promises
" in the gospel, and to hear the words
" of eternal life uttered by my great Re-
" deemer. With gratitude, faith, and
" hope,[ commit my foul to thee. Lord,
" now letteft thou thy servant depart in
" peace; for mine eyes have feei thy fJl-
"vation."-Such are the sentiments with

which

which every pious and good man fliould SER M.
conclude his life. Such indeed are the \~-r
sentiments which he ought to carry .
through every part of life. With there
may we begin, and with these conclude,
every succeeding year which God flall
think fit to add to our earthly existence!

VOL.'IV. E SERMON

# SERMON IV. ON the Mixture of BAD MEN with the GOOD in HUMAN SOCIETY. MATTH. xiii. 30. Let both grow together until the harvest. —

SERMON IV.
ON. the Mixture of BAD MEN with the

GOOD in HUMAN SOCIETY.

MATTH. xiii. 30.

Let both grow together until the harveJf.-
SERM. T HE parable, of which these words

IV. are a part, contains a prophetical

description of the state of the church.
Our Lord predicts that the societies of
Christians were to be infeced with per-
sons of loose principles and bad difpofi-
tions, whom he likens to tares springing
up among wheat. He intimates that
there fiould arise some whose officious

zeal

zeal would prompt the desire of extermi- SE R M.
nating immediately all such evil men; v.
but that this were contrary to the de-
signs of providence, and to the spirit of
Christianity; that a complete reparation
was indeed to be made at last between
the good and the bad; but that this fe-
paration was to be delayed till the end
of the world, when, iri the stile of the
parable, the tares fliould be entirely ga-
thered out from among the wheat. Let
both grow together until the harvclt.

When we look around us, nothing is

more conspicuous in the state of the
world, than that broad mixture of the
religious and the impious, the virtuous
and the wicked, which we find taking
place in every society. Strong objec-
tions seem hence to arise against either
the wisdom or goodness of divine Pro-
vidence; especially when we behold bad
men not.only tolerated in the world, but
occasionally exalted in their circumitan-
ces, to the depreflion of the just. Why,
it will be said, if a Supreme Being exist,

E 2 and

SE R M. and if his justice rule the universe, does
'v he allow such infamous persons as the

records of history often present, to have
a place, and even to make a figure in
his world? Why sleeps the thunder idle
in his hand, when it could so easily blalf
them ? What shall we think of one who,
having the power of exterminating them
always at his command, permits them
to proceed without disturbance; nay,
sometimes appears to look on them with
complacency ?-It becomes highly wor-
thy of out attention to confider what an-
fwer can be made to these objections;
to inquire whether any reasons can be
given that serve to jufify this difpenfa-
tion of Providence, in allowing a mix-
ture of bad men to continue on the face
of the earth until the end of time. This
inquiry ihall make the subject of the
present discourse, together with such re-
fleAions as naturally arise from survey-
ing the slate, of human affairs.

BUT, before entering directly on fucli

inquiry,

inquiry, it may be proper to take no- s ER M.
tice, that, in our cltimation of who are Iv-
the good, who are the bad, we are often
in hazard of committing mistakes. The
real characters of men are known only
to God. They frequently depend on the
secret and unseen parts of life. As in
judging of themselves men are always
partial, so in judging of others they of-
ten err, through the imperfed informa-
tion which they have gathered, or the
rafl prejudices which they have formed.
They are too apt to limit the character
of virtue to those who agree with them
in sentiment and belief; and to exagge-
rate the failings of those against whom they
have conceived dislike, into great and
unpardonable crimes. Were it left to
the indiscreet zeal of some to extirpate
from the earth all those whom they con-
fider as bad men, there is ground to ap-
prehend that, initead of tares the wheat
would often be rooted out,-At the fame
time, we readily admit the fad, as too
ilanifeft.to be denied, that a multitude

El of

SERM. of gross and notorious finners are now
Iv. Ivj mixed with the followers of God and

virtue. Let us proceed then to confider
how far this is consistent with the jus-
tice and wisdom of the Governor of the
world.

IT is a principle in which all serious

and reflecting persons have agreed, and
which by many arguments is confirmed,
that our present state on earth is designed
to be a state of discipline and improvement,
in order to fit human nature for a higher
and better state which it is to attain here-
after. Now, this principle being once
admitted, we fay, that the mixture of vir-
tue and vice which here prevails, is cal-
culated to answer this purpose better
than a more unmixed and perfe6t state
of society would have done.

FOR, in the first place, the crimes of

the wicked give occasion to the exercise
of many excellent dispositions of heart
among the righteous. They bring forth

all

all the suffering virtues, which otherwise SERM.
would have had no field; and by the A
exercise of which the human character is
tried, and acquires some of its chief
honours. Were there no bad men in the
world to vex and distress the good, the
good might appear in the light of harm-
less innocence; but could have no op-
portunity of displaying fidelity, magna-
nimity, patience, and fortitude. One half
of virtue, and not the least important
half, would be loft to the world. In
our present imperfect (tate, any virtue
which is never exercised is in hazard of
becoming extinct in the human breast.
If goodness conltantly proceeded in a
smooth and flowery path; if, meeting
with no adversary to oppose it, it were
surrounded on every hand with acclama-
tion and praise, is there no ground to
dread that it might be corrupted by va-
nity, or might fink into indolence? This
dangerous calm must therefore be inter-
rupted. The waters muff be troubled,
left they fliould stagnate and putrify.

E 4 When

SER M. When you behold wicked men multiply.

IV.
J^>, ing in number, and increasing in power,

imagine not that Providence particularly
favours them. No; they are suffered for
a time to prosper, that they may fulfil
the high designs of heaven. They are
employed as instruments in the hand of
God for the improvement of his servants.
They are the rods with which he chaf-
tens the virtuous, in order to route them
from a dangerous fumber; to form them
for the day of adversity, and to teach,
them how to susser honourably.

IN the next place, the mixture of the

bad among the good serves not only to
give exercise to the passive graces, but al-
so to improve the active powers and vir-
tues of man. It inures the righteous to
vigilance and exertion. It obliges them
to fland forth, and' ac their part with
firmness and constancy in evil times. It
gives occasion for their virtues to Ihine
with conspicuous lustre and makes them
appear as the lights of the wtorld amidst

X surrounding

surrounding darkness. Were it not for SERM.
the dangers that arise from abounding .-V
iniquity, there would be no opportunity
for courage to ad, for wisdom to admo-
nifli, for caution to watch, nor for faith
to exert itself in overcoming the 'worl,. It
is that mixture of dispositions which now
takes place, that renders the theatre on
which we ad so busy and stirring, and
so much fitted for giving employment to
every part of man's intelligent and moral
nature. It affords a complete field for the
genuine display of characters; and gives e-
very man the opportunity to come forth
and flhow what he is. Were the tenor of
human condud altogether regular and uni-
form, interrupted by no follies and vices,
no cross dispositions and irregular pas-
sions, many of our adive powers would
find no exercise. Perhaps even our life
would languifl, and become too flill and
insipid. Man is not yet ripe for a para-
dife of innocence, and for the enjoyment
Of a perfet and faultless society. As in

thQ

SERM. the natural world, he is not made for

perpetual spring and cloudless ikies, but
by the wintry itorm must be called to ex-
ert his abilities for procuring ihelter and
defence; so in the moral world, the inter-
mixture of bad men renders many an ex-
ertion necessary, which in a more perfec
state of the world would find no place,
but which in the present slate of trial is
proper and useful.- The existence of
vice in the world assuredly testifies our pre-
sent corruption; and according to the de-
gree of its prevalence, is always, more or
less, the source of misery. It is a fland-
ing proof of the fall and degeneracy of
man. But as long as that fallen state
continues, the wisdom of Providence e-
minently appears in making the errors
and frailties of the wicked subservient
to the improvement of the just. Tares
are for that reason suffered at present to
grow up amlng the wheat.

THrEse.obfervations on the wifdsm of
Providence in this dispensation will be

3 farther

farther illustrated, by confidering the use- SE R M.
ful inftrutions which we receive, or Cj
which at least every wife man may re-
ceive, from the follies and vices of those
among whom we are obliged to live.

Fir/I, They furnish inftruclioi. con-

cerning the hnares and dangers againlt
which we ought to be most on our guard.
They put it thereby in our power to pro-
fit by the errors and misconduct of o-
thers. By observing from what small
beginnings the greatest crimes have a-
risen; observing how bad company has
seduced this man from his original prin-
ciples and habits; how a careless indul-
gence of pleasure has blinded and in-
toxicated that man; how the neglect of
divine institutions has, in another, gra-
dually paved the way for open profliga-
cy; much salutary instruction is con-
veyed to the virtuous. Tracing the dan-
gerous and slippery paths by which so
many have been insensibly betrayed in-
to ruin, their views of human nature are
enlarged; the sense of their own imbe-

cility

SERM. cility is firongly impressed upon them;

1V.
,^yj accompanied with the convicdion of the

necessity of a constant dependence on the
grace and affiflance of heaven. All the
crimes which they behold disturbing so-
ciety around them, serve as signals hung
out to them, beacons planted in their
view, to prevent their making ihipwreck
among those rocks on which others have
split. It has been justly said, that not
only from the advices of his friends, but
from the reproaches of his enemies, a wife
man may draw infiruclion. In the fame
manner, it is not only by the examples
of good men, but likewise by those of
the wicked, that an attentive mind may
be confirmed in virtue.

Next, THESE examples of bad men,

while they admonifl the virtuous of the
dangers against which they are to guard,
are farther profitable by the views which
they exhibit of the evil and the defor-
mnity of fin. Its odious nature never ap-
pears in so firong a light as when dif-

played

played in the crimes of the wicked. It is SE RM.

IV.

true that, when vice is carried only to a ,,J
certain degree, and disguised by plausible
colours, it may pass unreprpved, and e-
ven for a while seem popular in the
world. But it is no less true that, when
it becomes open and flagrant, and is de-
prived of the shadow of virtue, it never
fails to incur general reproach, and to
become the object either of contempt or
of hatred. How often, for instance, have
the greatest abilities, which once drew e-
fleem and admiration, funk, in a ihort
time, into the most humiliating degrada-
tion, merely through the ascendant which
corrupted inclinations and low habits had
acquired over their possessor? How of-
ten have the rising honours of the young
been blasted, by their forsaking the path
of honour on which they had once enter-
ed, for the blind and crooked trats of
depravity and folly? Such fpedacles of
the infamy of vice, such memorials of
the disgrace attending it, are permitted
by Providence fcr general inrtruction;

and

SERM. and assuredly are edifying to the world.
k-;V-J It was necessary, for moral improvement,

that the beauty and excellence of virtue,
and the deformity of vice, ihould be
firongly impressed on every intelligent
mind. This could never be done with
so great advantage as by the striking con-
trafts of both which are produced by the
living examples of evil men intermixed
with the good. It is in this mirror that
we clearly contemplate how much the
righteous. is more excellent than his neigh-
bour.

THE fame putpofe of important in-

ftruf.ion is farther promoted by the in-
fiances of misery which the state of wic-
ked men on earth affords. I admit that
the worldly success, which sometimes at-
tends them, may blind and reduce the
unwary; but a little more reflecion ena-
bles men to distinguish between apparent
success and real happiness. The condi-
tion of worthless men, whatever fplen-
dor riches may throw around them, is

easily

easily discerned to be a restless and mi- E R M.

IV.

ferable one; and the misery which they
sutler, to be [derived from their vices. In
that great corrupted crowd whichi fur-
rounds us, what incelfant buflle and fair,
what agitation and tumult take place?
What envy and jealousy of one another ?
How much bitterness of resentment do
we behold among them; mutually de-
ceiving and deceived; supplanting and
supplanted; ever pursuing, but never fa-
tisfied ? These are not matters of rare ob-
servation, or which require nice scrutiny
to discover them. We need only open
our eyes to behold the wicked tormented
by their passions, and far removed from
that fantuary of calmness and tranquil-
lity which is the abode of real happincfs.
Nay, when we appeal to bad men them-
selves, after they have run the whole
round of vicious pleasures, we will often
find them obliged to confess, that the
wretched result of their pursuits has been
vanity and vexation of spirit; and that the
happiest days they have enjoyed were in

the

SERM. the times of innocence; before criminal

Iv' desires and guilty passions had taken

possession of their breasts. Such praai-
cal demonRtrations as these of the infe-
licity of fin are yielded by the exam-
ples of evil doers whom we fee around
us. By attending to their Situation, the
tnifevy, as well as infamy of guilt is rcali-
fed, and rendered sensible to our appre-
henfion.

THuS, -pon a fair inquiry, you be-

hold how the ways of God may, in'this
remarkable cafe, bejuftified to man. You
behold what important ends are advan-
ced, by permittihg the tares at: present
to grow together with the' wheat. The
intermixture of evil men in human so-
ciety serves to exercise the suffering gra-
ces and virtues of the' good; by the di-
verfity of characters among those with
whom they have intercourse, it serves to
bring forth and improve their acdive
powers and virtues, and to-enlarge the
circle of useful occupations; it serves to

inftruft

inltru& them in the temptations againit SE Itr.
which they are to guard, to reveal to v
them all the deformity of vice, and to
make its miseries paTs conspicuously be-
fore their eyes. When we confider them
as actors on the theatre of the world, they
are thereby improved in the part they
have to perform. When we confider
them as fpeftators of what is pafllng
on that theatre, their minds are thereby
infructed; their views rectified and en-
larged by the objects that are set before
them.

FROM these important truths, several
reflections no less important arise.

We are naturally taught, in the first

place, never to be halty in finding fault
with any of the arrangements of Provi-
dence. The present permission of moral
evil on the earth feemeed, on the first
view, to furnish a strong objection against
either, the wisdom or the goodnef' of
the Author of nature. After beholding
the useful purposes which are answered

VOL. IV. F by

SERM. by that permission, how cautious fliould

IV.
x uj swe be in advancing any of our rafli fpe-

culations against his government and con-
duc! To our confined and humble fta-
tion it belongs not to censure, but to sub-
mit, trust, and adore; satisficd that the
farther we inquire, the recitude of his
ways will appear the more; thankful for
the discoveries of them which have been
imparted to us; and persuaded that, where
our discoveries fail, it is not because there
is no more wisdom or goodness to be seen,
but because our present condition allows
us not to fee more.

IN the second place, let us be taught

with what eye we are to look upon those
bad men whom we find around us in the
world. Not surely with an eye of envy.
Whatever prosperity they may seem to
enjoy, they are ftill'no more than tares,
the weeds of the field; contemptible in
the fight of God; tolerated by his pro-
tidence for a while on account of the righ-
teous, to whose improvement they are

rendered

rendered subservient. The parable in- SERM.

IV.

forms us that, in the end, they are to be vJ
gathered together and burnt. In this life
only they have their good things. But
their prosperity is transitory. They are
brought into dejblation in a moment, and ut-
terly cotnfiumd with terrors. A4 a dreanm
when one awaketh, Jo, 0 God, when thou
awakefl, thou Jhalt Jepije theii image *.-
When we confider their unhappy state, it
becomes us to behold them with the eye
of pity. Let us remember that, in the
midst of their errors, they are by nature
still our brethren. Let us not behave to
them in the spirit of bitterness. Insult
not their follies. Pride not yourselves
on superior virtue. Remember that, as
bad men aie mixed with the good, so, in
the belt men, vices are at present mixed
with virtues. Your ovn character, good
as you may esteem it, is not free from e-
very evil taint; and in the charalters of

dS

xxi thofi;
1 Psalm: Ixiii. I9; za.

84. On the Mixture of Bad Men

SERMb. those whom you reprobate as vitious,
,yv» there arc always some good qualities mix-

ed with the bad ones. Study, as far as
you.can, to reclaim and amend them;
and if, in any degree, you have been pro-
fited by their failings, endeavour, in re-
turn, to profit them, by good counsel and
advice; by advice, not administered with
officious zeal, or felf-conceited superiority,
but with the tenderness of compaffiou
and real friendihip.

In the third place, in whatever pro.

portion the admixture of vice may seem
to- take place in the world, let us never
despair of the prevalence of virtue on the
whole. Let us not exaggerate, beyond
measure, the quantity of vice that is found
in the mixture. It is proper to observe,
that in the parable now before us, after
the owner of the field had sown his good
feed, no reason is given us to think, that
the good feed was entirely chocked up by
tares. On the contrary, we are told that
the blade fprug urp, and broiughtforth fruit;

and,

and, though the tares also arose, yet,- in S E RM.
the end there was a har'vefl, when the v
wheat was reaped and gathered into the
barn. In the:moft corrupted times, God
never leaves himself without many wit-
neffes on earth. He is always attentive
to the caufc of goodneis; and fiequent-
ly supports and advances it by means
which we are unable to trace. He nou-
rifles much piety and virtue in hearts
that are unknown to us; and beholds re-
pentance ready to spring up among ma-
ny whom we confider as reprobates.-I
know that it has always been common
for persons to represent the age in which
they live as the worst that ever appeared;
and religion and virtue as jutt on the
point of vanishing from among men.
This is the language sometimes of the fe-
rious; often of the hypocritical, or of
the narrow-minded. But true religion
gives no fandion to such icvere censures,
or such gloomy views. Though the tares
must be at all times springing up, there is
no reason for believing that they fhlall

F 3 ever

SERM. ever overspread the whole field. The

Iv. nature of the weeds that spring up may

vary, according to the nature of the foil.
Different modes of iniquity may diftin-
guifh different ages of the world; while
the fum of corruption is nearly the tame.
Let not our judgements of men, and of
the times in which we live, be hasty and
presumptuous. Let us trust in the grace
ps God; and hope the belt of mankind.

IN the-fourth.andl last place, let us keep

our eyes ever fixed on that important pe?
riod, which is alluded to in the test, as
the conclusion of all. Let both grow to-
gether until the har.vef. The great spirit
tual year is to be closed by a harveJi,
when the householder is to gather the wheat
into his barn; when, at the end of the
world,, the final diftindion of men and
characters is to take place. The confused
mixture of good and evil, which now pre-
vails, is only a temporary dispensation of
Providence, accommodated to man's fal.
len and imperfect state. Let it not tempt

us

us for a moment to diflruft the reality of S E R M.

iv.

the divine government; or to entertain 1--v
the remotcft suspicion that moral good
and evil are to be on the fame terms for-
ever. The fiailties of our nature fitted
us for no more at present than the enjoy-
ment of a very mixed and imperfect so-
ciety. But when our nature, purified and
refined, fl{all become ripe for higher ad-
vancement, then flall the spirits of the
just, disengaged from any polluted mix-
ture, undisturbed by fin or by finners,
be united in one divine assembly, and re-
joice forever in the presence of him who
made them. Looking forward to this glo-
rious issue with ftcdfaft faith, let no cross
appearances ever discomfit our hopes, or
lead us to fufpea that we have been
serving God in vain. If we continue
faiilthul io the death, we may test assured,
that in due time we shall receive the crown
of lift.S

F 4 SERMON

# SERMON V. On the RELIEF which the GOSPEL assords to the DISTRESSED. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. MATTH. xi. 28. Come unto me, all ye that labour, and are heavy ...

SERMON V.
On the RELIEF which the GOSPEL affords

to the DISTRESSED.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacra-

nment of the Lord's Supper.

MATTII. Xi. 28.
Come unto me, all ye that labour, and are

heavy laden, and I will give you refl.
SE RM . H E life of man on earth is doomed

V. to be clouded with various evils.

Throughout all ranks, the afflicted form
a considerable proportion of the human
race; and even they who have a title to
be called prosperous, are always, in some
periods of their life, obliged to drink
from the cup of bitterness. The Chris-

tian

tian religion is particularly entitled to our S E R M.
regard, by accommodating itself with V'
great tenderness to this diftrefled condi-
tion of mankind. It is not to be confi-
dered as merely an authoritative s)ysem of
precepts. Important precepts it indeed
delivers for the wife and proper re-
gulation of life. But the fame voice
which enjoins our duty, utters the words
of consolation. The gospel defervcs to
be held a dispensation of relief to man-
kind under both the temporal and fpiri-
tual distresses of their state.

This amiable and compaflionate spirit

of our religion conspicuously appears in
the character of its great Author. It
shone in all his ations while he lived on
earth. It breathed in all his discourses;
and, in the words of the text, is expressed
with much energy. In the preceding
verse, he had given a high account of his
own person and dignity. All things are
delivered unto me of my Father; and nto
man knoweth the Son but the Father; nei-
ther knoweth any man the Father, save

the

SE R M. the Son, and he to whomnfoever the Son qwill

V.
q 1ereveal him. But least any of his hearers

flould be discouraged by this myiterious
representation of his greatness, he initant-
ly tempers it with the most gracious be-
nignity; declaring, in the text, the mer-
ciful intention of his miflion to the
world, Come unto ne, all ye that labour,
and arc heavy laden, and I will give you
refi.

THE first thing which claims our at-

tention in these words is, what we are to
understand by coming unto Chril. This
is a phrase which has often given occa-
sion to controversy. By theological wri-
ters it has been involved in much need-
less niyftery, while the meanCihg is in it-
self plain and easy. The very metaphor
that is here used fervcs to explain it. In
the ancient world, disciples flocked round
their different teachers, and attended them
wherever they went; in order both to
testify their attachment, and to imbibe
more fully the doArine of their matters.

*Coming

Coming unto Chris/, therefore, is the fime S E R M
with resorting to him as our declaredl ,'.
Master; acknowledging ourislves his dif-
ciples, believers in his docrine, and fol-
lowers of his precepts. As Christ is made
known to us under the charaAcer both of
a Teacher and a Saviour, our coting to
hIJm imports not only fubiniflion to his
initrudions, but confidencc also in his
power to favc. It imports that, forsaking
the corruptions of fin and the world, we
follow that courfc of virtue and obe-
dience which he points out to us; rely-
ing on his mediation for pardon of our
offences, and acceptance with heaven.
This is what is implied in the fcripturc
term Faith; which includes both the as-
sent of the understanding to the truth of
the Christian religion, and the concurrence
of the will in receiving it.

WIIAT next occurs in the text to at-

trat our notice. is the description of those
to whom the invitation is addreflicd. All
those who labour and are heavy lader,

that

SERM. that is, who, in one way or other, feel

j<,I themselves grieved and distressed, arc

here invited to come to Chrift.-Now,
from two sources chiefly our distresses a-
rife; from moral, or from natural causes.

Firfl, THEY may arise from inward

moral causes; from certain feelings and
reflexions of the mind, which occasion
uneasiness and pain. A course of fin
and vice always proves ruinous and de-
ftrufive in the issue. But its tendency
to ruin is often not perceived, while that
tendency is advancing. For as fin is the
reign of paflion and pleasure, it forms
men to a thoughtless inconsiderate slate.
Circumstances, hlowever, may occur, and
frequently, in the course of life, do occur,
which disclose to a vicious man the ruin
which he is bringing on himfeif, as an
offender against the God who made him.
When some occasional confinement to so-
litude, or some turn of adverse fortune,
direcs his attention immediately upon

his

his own characer; or when, drawing to- S R M.

V.

wards the close of life, his paflions sub- v
fide, his pleasures withdraw, and a future
state comes forward to his view; in fuih
situations it often happens, that the past
follies and crimes of such a man appear to
him in a light most odious and flocking;
and not odious only, but terrifying to his
heart. He confiders that he is undoubt-
edly placed under the government of a just
God, who did not fend him into this world
for nought; that he has neglected the part
assigned to him; has contemned the laws
of heaven; has degraded his own nature;
and instead of being useful, having been
hurtful and pernicious to those among
whom he lived, is about to leave a detel-
table memory behind him.-What ac-
count shall he give of himself to his Ma-
ker ? Self condemned, polluted by so many
crimes, how can he expet to find mercy
in his fight ?-Hence, an overwhelmed
and dejeced mind; hence, dismal forebo-
dings of punishment; hence, that wotnd-
edpi!rit, which, when it is deeply pierced,

becomes

SErRM. becomes the forest of all human evils,

v and has sometimes rendered exiltence a

burden which could not be endured.

Such distresses. as these, arising from

moral internal causes, may be made light
of by the giddy and the vain; and re-
presented as confined to a few persons on-
ly of distempered imagination. But to
those whose profeflions give them occasion
to fee men under various circumstances
of afflition, they are known to be far
from being unfrequent in the world; and,
on many more occasions than is commonly
imagined, to throw over the human mind
the blackest gloom of which it is iufcepti-
ble. Religious feelings, be assured, have a
deep root in the nature of man. They form
a part of the human constitution. They
are interwoven with many of those fears
and hopes which acuate us in the change
ing situations of fortune. During the gay ,
and acive periods of life, they may be
smothered; but with most men, they are
i'mothered rather than totally obliterated:
And if any crisis of our condition ihall a,

waken

waken, and bring them furth, in their SEItR.i.
full force, upon a conscious guilty heart, .,J
woe to the man, who, in Ibme dilfon-
solate feabon, is doomed to fufler their
extreme vengeance!

BuT, while under such distresses of

the mind not a few may. be said to la-
bour and to be heavy laden, greater fill is
the multitude of those who, from natural
external causes, from the calamities and
evils of life, undergo much suffering and
misery. The life of man is not indeed
wholly composed of misery. It admits
of many pleasing scenes. On the whole,
there is reason to believe that it affords
more joy than grief. At the fame time,
the unfortunate, as I before observed,
form always a numerous class of man-
kind; and it may be said with truth, that
jore travel is ordained fbr the fans cf' men.
Though the burden is not equally laid on
all; ibme there always are, on whom it
falls with oppressive weight.-Unexpect-
ed disappointments have crulhed their

3 hopes,

SERM. hopes, and blaffed the plans which they

V. had formed for comfort in the world.

The world had, perhaps, smiled upon
them once, only to give them a sharper
feeling of its miseries at the last. Strug-
gling with poverty, unable to support
their families whom they fee languifling
around them, they, at the fame time, are
obliged by their situation in society to
conceal their necessities; and under the
forced appearance of cheerfulness, to hide
from the world a broken heart. They
are flung, perhaps, by the unkindness of
friends; cast off by those in whom they
had trusted; or torn by untimely death
from real friends, in connexion with
whom they might have flourished and
been happy; at the fame time borne
down, it may be, with the infirmities of
a sickly body, and left to drag a painful
life without assistance or relief.-How
many fad scenes of this nature, on which
it were painful to infifR, does the world
afford ?

When

When we turn to those who are ac- E R M.

counted prosperous men, we lhall always v
find many sorrows mingled with their
pleasures; many hours of care and vexa-
tion, wherein they acknowledge them-
selves classed with those who labour and
are heavy laden. In entering into some
gay festive asSembly, we behold assesed
chearfulnefs displayed on every counte-
nance; and might fancy that we had ar-
rived at the temple of unmixed pleasure
and gladiefs of heart. Yet, even there,
could we look. into the boliums of these
apparently happy persons, how often
would we find them inwardly prey-
ed upon by some tormenting suspicions,
some anxious fears, some secret griefs,
which either they dare not disclose to
the world, or from which, if discloscd,
they can look for no relief ?-In flort,
amidst that great company of pilgrims,
who are journeying through life, many
there are whose journey lies through a
valley of tears; and many to whom that
VOL. 1V. G valley

SE RM. valley is only cheared by tranficnt glimpr

j fes of joy.

To these classes of mankind is addref-

fed the invitation of the text. To them,
it is in a particular manner addrefled;
overlooking the giddy and dissipated mul-
titude. Come unto me all ye that labour,
and arc heavy nlden. Not as if our Sa-
viour were always ready to accept that
fort of piety which is merely the confe-
quence of distress; or made all thofc
welcome, who are driven by nothing but
fear or danger to have recourse to him.
His words are to be underllood as inti-
mating, that the heart which is humbled
and softened by afflition, is the objet of
his compaflionate regard; that he will
not rejec us merely because we have been
cast off by the world; but that, if with
proper dispositions and sentiments we apply
to him in the evil day, we flall be sure of
meeting with a gracious reception. It nowv
remains to {how, what that reception is
which we may look for; what that refI

is

is which Christ hath promired to confer SE RI.

V.

on those who come to hilm; whether their V
distress arise from moral or from natu-
ral causes. Come unto me, and I lwill give
you reft.

I. CHRIST affords reft to the disturb-

ed mind that labours under apprchcn-
sions and fears of guilt. Let those who
susser distress of this nature come to Chi-,
that is, with contrition and repentance,
have recourse to him as their Saviour,
and they flall regain quietness and peace.
Foolifli and guilty they have been, and
juflly lie under dread ofpunifliment; but
the penitent sorrow which they now feel,
implies their disposition to be changed. It
implies, as far as it is genuine, that, sensible
of their folly, they now defirc to become
good and wife; and are determined for
the future to hold a virtuous course, could
they only hope to obtain pardon for the
past. In this situation of mind, let them
not be cast down and despair. Christ has
brought with him from heaven the olive

G X branch,

§SERI. branch. He carries in his hand the fig-

v-L nal of forgiveness. The declaration which

he publishes is, Let the wicked forsake his
way, and the unrighteous nan his thoughts;
and let him return to the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon hin; and to our
God, for he will abundantly pardon '. In-
sufficient though our own repentance
be, to procure pardon from heaven, we
are informed, that an all-fufficient atone-
ment has been made by Christ. Neither
the number nor the atrocity of offences
excludes, from forgiveness, the penitent
who returns to his duty. To all who
come under this description, the offer of
mercy extends, without exception. He
that Jpared not his own Son, but delivered
him up for us all, how Jhall he not 'with
him also freely give us all things 1 ?

This discovery of divine government,

afforded by the Gospel, is perfectly cal-
culated to scatter the gloom which had

overcal
* Isaiah lv. 7. Rom. viii. 32.

overcast the delponding heart. The at- SER M.
mofphere clears up on every fide; and is u j
illuminated by chearing rays of celeflial
mercy. Not only is hope given to the
penitent, but it is rendered sinful not to
indulge that hope. We are not only al-
lowed and encouraged, but we are com-
manded to trust in the divine clemency.
We are commanded to believe that none
uwho come unto Chrifi he will in all y wife
cast out *i As I live, faith the Lord God,
I have no pleasure in the death of the wic.
ked, but that the wicked turn from his way
and live; turn ye, turn ye from your evil
rways; for why will ye die, 0 hoife of If-
rael '? -- Such is the relief which the
religion of Christ brings to them who
labour and are heavy laden under the im-
prefl;ons of guilt and divine displeasure;
a relief which nothing can render ineffec-
tual to the heart, except the most gloomy
superstition, founded on gross mifconcep-

G 3 tions
John vi; 37. ' Ezek. xxxiii. xI.

S E R M. tions of the nature and attributes of God,

v Let us now,

II. Confider what reft the religion of

Christ gives to them whose diflrefs arises
not from inward and moral, but from
natural and external causes; from ad-
verse fortune, or any of those numerous
calamities to which we are at present ex-
posed. To such persons, it may seem
more difficult to promise any effectual
relief. In the former cafe, the distress
lay entirely in the'mind. As soon as its
views are recified, and its apprehensions
quieted, the evil is removed, and the cure
effedted. Here, the distress arises from
without; and the religion of Christ as-
fels not the course of external events.
'But though it removes not all the evils
of life, though it promises no continuance
of undisturbed prosperity, (which indeed
it were not salutary for man always to
enjoy) yet, if it mitigates the evils which
necessarily belong to our slate, and sup-
ports us under them, it may justly be

a2~~~ ~~. said

;ild to give rfl t to the who labour and SE R M.
are heavy laden.I When much that is j
material and important is effected, we
have no cause to complain, though all
that we desire be not accomplifhed.-In
this part of the discourse, I am to be con-
fidered as addrcffing myself not merely to
such as are at prelent suffering any severe
calamity. I now Ipeak to many, who,
in the midst of health and affluence, en-
joy the various comforts of life. But I
muff desire such persons to look forward
to what may one day be their hfate. Let
them reflec how important it is to pre-
pare themselves for the future unknown
viciflitudes of the world. For, if a mnn
live many years, and rtjaice in them all, yet
let him remember the days of darknefi, for
they flJall be many *'.-Now, either in the
prospect of future distress, or tinder pre-
sent iufferirig, I fay, that the religion of
Christ gives reft to the heart, by the for-

G 4 titude
Eccles. xi. 8.

SE R M. titude which it inlfilres, and by the con-
_V> rfolations which it affords.

Fitl, IT inspires fortitude. It disco-

vers a supreme administration, so friend-
ly to the interests of goodnefi, as never
to allow the followers of Christ to dread,
that, in any situation of fortune, they
ihall be neglected by Heaven. From the
abflrac consideration of the divine per-
fetions, men had always some ground to
believe, that the general order of the uni-
verse was consulted by its great Ruler.
But how far the interest of individuals
might be obliged to yield, or, in many ca-
fes might be sacrificed, to this general or-
der, they were left altogether in the dark.
Here the gospel of Christ comes to our
aid, by the explicit assurance which it
gives, that, in the great fyflem of Provi-
dence, the welfare of every single good
man is particularly.included. All things,
we are expressly told, are made to iwrk
tcgether, not merely for the order and per-
feclion of the whole, but also fr good to

3 . then

/thun lwho love God ". The life of every SERM.
person, who comes under this defiription, V
forms a system complete within itself;
where etery event that happens to him
possesses its destined place, and forms a
link in that great chain of causes, vwhich
was appointed, from the beginning of
things, for carrying on his improvement
and felicity. Such an arrangement of
the affairs of the world, may appear alto-
nifhing to our narrow capacities; yet
surely implies no effort beyond the reach
of infinite power, joined with infinite wis-
dom and goodness.

Hence arises a degree of fortitude and

confancy to good men, which can upon
no other grounds be attained. Faith, in
these principles of the gospel, eredes for
them a fortress, impregnable to the al:
faults of the world, into which they can
at all times retreat. Sitting under the
shelter of divine protection, they calmly

hear
* Rom. viii. 28.

SERM. hear the storm, when it blows with its

v. utmost violence around them. The floods

have lifted up their voice; they have lifted
up all their waves. But the Lord on high
is mightier than the noise of many waters;
yea, than the mighty waves of the sea :.
Of the man who possesses such principles,
it is justly said, lis heart is ef/abljiled; he
Jhall not be afraid of evil tidings; his heart
is fixed, triufing in the Lord -t. Tranquil-
lity, order, and magnanimity, dwell with
him; while all is confulion and trepida-
tion among those, who have nothing to
look to but the apparent disorders of the
world.

TH E dlocrine of Christ not onlyarms us,

in this manner, with fortitude against the
approach of evil; but, supposing evils to fall
upon us with their heaviest pressure, it
lightens the load by many consolations to
which others are strangers. While bad men

trace,
* Pfal. xciii. 34. Pfal. cxii. 7, 8

trace, in the calamities with which they SER M,
are visited, the.hand of an offended I b-
vereign, Chriilians are taught to view
them as the well-intended chastisements
of a merciful Father. They hear amidst
them, that still voice which a good con-
science brings to their ear: Feat not, for
I anm with thee; be not difinayed, for I am
thy God *, They apply to themselves
the comfortable promises with which the
gospel abounds. They discover in these
the happy issue decreed to their troubles;
and wait with patience till Providence
fliall have accomplilhed its great and good
designs. In the mean time, devotion o-
pens to them its blessed and holy fandua-
ry: That fanauary in which the wound-
ed heart is healed, and the weary mind
is at reft; where the cares of the world
are forgotten, where its tumults are huflh-
ed, and its miseries disappear; where
greater objects open to our view than

what
* Isaiah xli. Io.

SERM. what the world presents; where a mord

v serene fly shines, and a sweeter and

calmer light beams on the affliCed heart.
In those moments of devotion, a pious
man, pouring out his wants and ibrrows
to an almighty Supporter, feels that he is
not left solitary and forsaken in a vale
of woe. God is with him; Christ and
the Holy Ghost are with him and, though
he mould be bereaved of every earthly
friend, he can look up in heaven to a Friend
who will never die.

To these present consolations, the re-

ligion of Christ adds the joyful profpeA
of that future slate, where eternal rejt re-
maineth for the people of God. This life
they are taught to confider as only the
hou/b of their pilgrimage; the temporary
mansion of painful though necessary dif
cipline. But let them endure for a little,
and the pilgrimage flall end, the difci-
pline lhall be finished; and all the vir-
tuous be aflembled in those blissful re-
gions which are prepared for their re-
ward. Such a profped chears the dark-

eR

eft hours of life; and affirds a remedy IF, RM,
to every trouble. TEe Jfilc'is t.'s .
pre/ent time are not wortlo to be comparcd
with the glory .which Jhall be revealed : .
They appear in this comparative view,
as no more than a distressing dream of
the night, fiom which one awakes into
health, and light, and joy.-Peculiar is
this high consolation to the religion of
Christ. It is what all nations had eager-
ly wished for; what all philosophy had
anxiously fought to discover; but what
no research, no philosophy were able to
ascertain to mankind, till Chrill brought
the assurance of life and immortality from
heaven; and conferred on his difciplcs
this noble and inestimable gift.

Tius, on the whole, the Christian doc-

trine is found to be the great Medicine of
life. It is the balm of human sorrows and
cares. In our present sPate, where so ma-

ny
Rom. viii. i 8.

S E RM. ny are suffering acual distress, of one kind

or other, and where all have reason to
dread the approach of distress, it is religion
only that can alleviate the burdens of life,
and finooth our passage through this evil
world.-Let this view of religion per-
fuade us to improve the sacred ordinance
of our Lord's supper for coming unto ChriJf,
in the way before explained: that is, join-
ing ourselves to him as his disciples; his
disciples; not in words and professions on-
ly, but in heart, and in truth; taking upon
us his yoke, as is added in the words imme-
diately following the text; and learning of
him who is meek and lowly in heart. / Let
those who labour under the sense of re-
membered follies and crimes, come unto
Chris with penitent dispositions, and they
{hall obtain pardon. Let those who la-
bour under the suffering of present, or
the apprehension of future sorrows, come
unto Chrifl, and they Ifall receive confo-
lation. All who are in any sense heavy
laden, coming unto him, lhall find reJi to
their fouls.

BEFORE

BEFORE concludingi this dicourfc, tlIhee SE RM.

V.

is another set of men, not yct mentioned, J
to whom I must also addrlls the exhor-
tation in the text; those I mean, who la-
bouring under none of the difreciful bur-
dens of life, are ftirfeited of its pleallurcs;
who labour under the burden only of lan-
guid cafe, and the load of insipid prioleri-
ty. You drag, my friends, but a mifcra)le
exiltence. Oppressed by no sorrow, you
feel vacuity and dillitisfacion within;
you are often weary of life; and in your
solitary hours, are difpoled to confels that
all you have experienced is vanity. Where-
fore flould you any longer peud your mo-
ney for that whicb is not bread, and ?our la-
bout for that vwicb Jiltisfieth not ? Come
to the waters which are 1.ow cffered to
you, and drink. Hear, and y'our fouls Jh3all
live. Retreat from the corrupting vani-
ties of the world, to Christ, to religion,
and to virtue. New sources of enjoy-
ment fliall then be opened to you. A
world yet untriedl small display itself to
your view. You shall be formed to a re-

lifl

SE RM. lifl for the quiet and innocent pleasures

of piety and devotion; of friendship, and
good affections; of uieful knowledge, and
virtuous activity; of calm society, and
fcafonable retirement; pleasures of which
at present you have no conception; but
which, upon trial, you ihall find superior
to the trifling, or turbulent amusements,
in which you have hitherto passed your
days.-The true fatisfacion of the hu-
man mind is only to be found in religion
and goodness; in a purified heart, and a
virtuous life. All other plans of happi-
ness are fallacious, and pregnant with
disappointment. It is only by acquahftiig
ourselves with God that we can find peace:
And those who are weary and heavy laden
now, flall be weary and heavy laden to
the end, unless they come to him who on-
ly can give them ref.

SERMON

# SERMON VI. On LUXURY and LICENTIOUSNESS. ISAIAH v. 12. The harp and the viol, the tabret and pipe and wine are in their feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation ...

SERMO N VI.
On LUXURY and LICENTIOUSNESS.

ISAIAH V. 12.
The harp and the viol, the tabret and pip

ani wine are ill their /e/ls ; but they re-
gard not the work of the Lord, neither
corfider the operation of his hands.
T appears from many paflages in the S E R,.

writings of this prophet, that in his LJ

days great corruption of manners had be-
gun to take place among the people of
Israel. Originally a lbber and a religious
nation, accustomed to a imple.and pas-
toral life, after they had enlarged their

VOL. IV. H territories

E R M. territories by conquest, and acquiredr
VL.
\t wealth by commerce, they gradually con-

traded, habits of luxury; and luxury
soon introduced its usual train of attend-
ing evils. In the history of all nations,
the fame circulation of manners has been
found; and the age in which we live re-
fembles, in this refpet, the ages which
have gone before it. Forms of iniquity
may vary; but the corrupt propenfitiea
of men remain at all times much the
fame; and revolutions from primitive
simplicity to the refinements of criminal
-luxury have been often exhibited on the
llage of the world. The reproof directd
ed in the text to the Jews of that an-
tient age, will be found equally appli-
cable to the manners of many, in mo-
dern times. In discoursing from it, I
shall first confider the character of those
who' are described in the text, and ihow
the guilt that is involved in it. I fialt
next confider the duties which persona
of that character are supposed to have

s neglected

ihcleCted; to regard the wo'tk of the Lord, s ER a,
en.r t cotfider the operation of his handls. >

I. WrHEN we take into view the clha-.

i'acer pointed at in the text, it is evident
that what the prophet means to reprove
is, the spirit of inconfidcratc dissipation,
of intemperate indulgence, and irreligious
luxury. It is not the Icaft and the wine, the
harp andl the viol, which he means to
condemn; Mafic and wine are, in them-
filves, things of innocent nature: Nayy
whlen temperately enjoyed, they may be
employed for ulfful purposes; for as-
fording relaxation from the oppressive
cares of life, and for promoting friendly
intercourse among men, The opulent
are not prohibited from enjoying the
good things of this world, which Pro-
vidence has bestowed upon them. Re-
ligion neither abolifles the diftin6tion of
ranks, (as the vain philosophy of some
would teach us to do), nor interferes
wtith a modest and decent indulgence of
pleafure.-It is the criminal abuse of

]t[ ? plcafure

SE RM. plcafurc which is here censured; that

VI.
IJ' thoughtless and intemperate enjoyment

of it which wholly ablbrbs the time and
attention of men; which obliterates eve-
ry serious thought of the proper bufinels
of life; and effaces the fenie of religion
and of God.

It may be proper to remark, that it is

not open and direcS impiety, which is
laid to the charge of the persons here
charaCderifed. It is not said, that in their
feafrs they scoffed at religion, or blafphe-
med the name of God. To this summit
of wickedness these persons had not yet
arrived; perhaps, the age in which they
lived gave not its countenance to this
wantonncfs of impiety. It is merely a
negative crime of which they are accu-
fed; that they regarded not the work of
the Lord, 'either cofl.idered the operation of
his hands. But this ablence of all religious
impressions is here pointed out, as iuffi-
cient to stigmatise their characters with
guilt. As soon as the sense of a Supreme
Being is loft, the great check is taken

off,

ofilwhich keeps under restraint the pas- S F. t.
sions of men. Mean dctircs, and low v
pleaflires, take place of the greater anid
nobler fiietimcnts which reason and re-
ligion inspire. Amidll the tumult of the
uwine and thefeaf, all proper views of hu-
man life are forgotten. The duties which,
as men, they have to perform, the part
they have to ac' in the world, and the
ditreffes to which they are cxpofing thcm-
selves, are banifled from their thoughts.
To-morrowu Jhall be as this lday, and more
abundantly, is the only voice. Inflamed
by society, and circulated from one loofl
companion to another, the spirit of riot
grows and swells, till it end in brutal
excess.

Were such disorders rare and occasion-

al merely, they might perhaps be for-
gotten and forgiven. But, nourifled by
repetition and habit, they grow up among
too many, to become the business and oc-
cupation of life. By these unfortunate
votaries of pleasure, they are accounted
cffential to happincfs. Life appears to

H 3 ftagnat

SERnM. flagnate without them. Having no re-

VI
,rC, source within themselves, their Ipirits

fink, and their very being seems annihi-
lated, till the return of their favourite
pleasures awaken within them some tran-
fient sparkles of joy-IJdlenefs, ease, and
prosperity, have too natural a tendency
to generate the follies and vices now de-
fcribed. Becadf/ they have no changes,
laid the Psalmist, therefore they fear not
God *. They are the dark and solitary
hours of life, which recal men to recol-
lecqion and wisdom. They show to the
unthinking what this world really is, and
what may be expected from it. But- the
day that is always bright and unclouded,
is not made for men. It flatters them
with the dangerous illusion, that it is in
their power to render life one scene of
pleasure; and that they ]lave no other
business on earth, but to spread the feJaf,
and call the harp and the viol to found.

But
P salm. lv. i9«

'But the examples are so frequent, of the S E t M.
dangers and the crimes which afife from an w-J
intemperate abuse of pleasure, that on this
part of the fubje& it seems needless to in-
ifit any longer. I proceed, therefore,

II. To confider the duties which men

are accused of having negleced; and
which, it is here supposed, if duly at-
tended to, would have aAcd as the cor-
rcclives of dissolute and irreligious lux-
ury; these are, to regard the 'work of the
Lord, and to confider the operation of his
hands.-By recommending such duties, I
do not mean to represent it as requisite
that the feast fliould be turned into an
aft of worship; that the countenances of
men should be always grave; or that,
in the hours of amusement and of social
feitivity, no fubjecl may employ their
thoughts and their discourse, except God
and a future slate. All extremes in re-
ligion are dangerous; and, by carrying
austerity too far, we are in hazard of
only promoting hypocrisy. But though

1H'4 hfomce,

SERI. some, in the last age, might be prone to

vjtS this extreme; yet, at the prefcnt day,

there is not much occasion for warn-
ing men against it.-What I now in-
sift upon is, that all our pleafurcs ought
to be tempered with a serious sense of
God; that scenes of gaiety and enjoy-
ment flould never make us forget that
we are fubjecs of his government, and
have a part allotted us to ad in his world;
that on no occasion they should be pro-
longed so much, repeated so often, or sus-
sered to transport us so far, as to lead us
to break any of the divine laws, or to ad
inconsistently with the character of men
and Christians. A prevailing sense of
God on the mind is to be ever held the
surest guard of innocence and virtue, a-
midst the allurements of pleasure. It is
the salutary mixture which must be in-
fused into the cup of joy, in order to ren-
der it safe and innoxious.

This sense of God fiould lead us, in

the language of the prophet, to regard the
work of the Lord, and to coifidcr the ope-

ratio!

rat;on of his hsands; which cxprcflions may s LM.
l)e underltood as requiring us to have
God upon our thoughts under two views;

it regard his uwork, as the Author of na-
turc; and to coifilder the operation of 1is
halnds, as the Governor of the- world.
Let us attend more particularly to cacil
of thee views of the Supreme Being.

IN the first place, we arc to view Go,'l

as the Author of nature, or to regard thC
work of the Lord. With his works we
are in every place surrounded. We can
cast our eyes no where, without disce;rn-
ing the hand of Him who formed them,
if the grossness of our minds will only
allow us to behold Him. Let giddy and
thoughtless men turn aside a little fro:n
the haunts of riot. Let them tland still,
and contemplate the wondrous worl;s of
God; and make trial of the eflfcc which
such contemplation would pro(luce.-It
were good for them that, even indepen-
dently of the Author, they were more
acquainted with his works; good for

them:n

S E RM. them, that from the focicties of loose and

VI.
-vY-J dissolute men, they would retreat to the

scenes of nature; would oftener dwell
among them, and enjoy their beauties.
This would form them to the relifli of
uncorrupted, innocent pleasures; and
make them feel the value of calm enjoy-
ments, as superior to the noise and tur-
bulence of licentious gaiety. From the
harmony of nature, and of nature's
works, they would learn to hear sweeter
founds than what arise from the viol, the
tabret, and the pipe.

But to higher and more serious thoughts

these works of nature give occasion, when
confidered in conjunction with the Creator
who made them.-Let me call on you,
my friends, to catch some interval of
reflecion, some serious moment, for look-
ing with thoughtful eye on the world a-
round you. Lift your view to that im-
mense arch of heaven which encompaf-
fcs you above. Behold the fun in all
his splendor rolling over your head by
day; and the moon, by night, in mild

and

and fcrene majelty, surrounded with that s E i' M.
holt of flars which present to your ima-
gination an innumerable multitude of
worlds. Liften to the awful voice of
thunder. Liflen to the roar of the ternm-
pelt and the ocean. Survey the Wionders
that fill the earth which you inhabit.
Contemplate a steady and powerful Hand,
bringing round spring and summer, au-
tumn and winter, in regular course; de-
corating this earth with innumerable
beauties, diversifying it with innumerable
inhabitants; pouring forth comforts on
all that live; and, at the fame time, over-
awing the nations with the violence of
the elements, when it pleases the Creator
to let them forth.-After you have view-
ed yourselves as surrounded with such a
Ilene of wonders; after you have bchell,
on every hand, such an astonishing dilL
play of majefly united with wifdoin and
goodness; are you not seized with so-
lemn and serious awe ? Is there not some.
thing which whispers you within, that to
this great Creator reverncce and homage

(Wl'

sE l M. are due by all the rational beings whom

@y- he has made? Admitted to be fpeLtators of

his works, placed in the midst of fb ma-
ny great and interesting objects, can you
believe that you were brought hither for
no purpose, but to immerse yourselves in
grots and brutal, or, at belt, in trifling
pleasures; loft to all sense of the wonders
you behold; loft to all reverence of that
Got who gave you being, and who has
erected this amazing fabric of nature, on
which you look only with flupid and un-
meaning eyes ?-No: Let the icenes which
you behold prompt correspondent feel-
ings. Let them awaken you from the
degrading intoxication of licentiousness,
into nobler emotions. Every objedwhich
you view in nature, whether great or
finall, serves to instruct you. The flar
and the insec, the fiery meteor and the
flower of spring, the verdant field and the
lofty mountain, all exhibit a supreme
Power, before which you ought to trem-
ble and adore; all preach the doctrine,
all inspire the spirit, of devotion, and reve-

$. *3,~~~~ rence.

rence. Regarding, then, the work of the SERtM.
Lrrd, let rising emotions of awe and gra- c ,.
titude call forth from your fouls such
ientiments as thee :-" Lord, wherever

I am, and whatever I enjoy, may I ne-
ver forget thee, as the Author of na-

' ture ! May I never forget that I am
" thy creature and thy ifbjec ! In this

magnificent temple of the universe,

" where thou haft placed me, may I ever
"be thy faithful worshipper; and may
"the reverence and the fear of God be
"the first sentiments of my heart!"-
It is to such consideration of God I would
now recal your thoughts, from the wine
and the featl, as proper to check the spirit
of levity and folly; and to inspire manly
and becoming sentiments, in the place of
criminal diflipation. But,

IN the fccond place, there is a confide-

ration of a nature still more serious, to be
employed for the fame purpose; the con-
fideration of God as not only the Author
of nature, but the Governor of his crea-

tures.

SE RM. tires. While we regard the work of thr

VI.
xi_-J Lord, we are also to contidler the never- ceaf-

ing operation of his hands. ' We are to look
up to an awful and irrefiflible Providence,
firetching its arm over our heads; di-
reAing the fate of men, and dispensing at
its pleasure happiness or misery. In the
giddy moments of jollity, the wanton and
thoughtless arc apt to fay " Let us eat and
" drink, for to-morrow we die. Nothing
" is better for man, than to rejoice as
"much as he can all the days of his vain
" life; and to keep himself undisturbed
" by fuperflitious terrors. He who fit-
" teth in the heavens bestows no minute
" attention on the sons of earth, He per-
" mits all things to come alike to all; one
" event to happen to the righteous and to the

wicked."-Be assured, my brethren, it

is not so. You greatly deceive your-
-selves, by imagining that your Creator
and Governor is indifferent to the part
you are now aCting; or that the diflri-
bution of good and evil, which now takes

place,

place, has no relation to your moral con- S E R M.
dud. In some inliances, that relation \,
may not be apparent, becauie the moral
government of God is not completed ill
this world. But a multitude of proofs
lhow government to be already begun
and point out to you the train in which
you may expeA it to proceed.

In the hillory of all ages and nations,

you cannot but have observed a thouflind
instances, in which the operation of the divine
hand has been displayed; overtaking evil
doers sooner or later with punilhment, and
bringing on their own heads the ruin they
had devised for others. You are not to i-
magine that this displeasure of Providence
is exerted only against the ambitious, the
treacherous, and the cruel, who are the au-
thors ofextenfive miferyto the world. Un-
der this idea, perhaps, you may be desirous
to ihelter yourselves, that your exceftes are
of a harmless kind; that you seek nothing
more than the enjoyment of your own plea-
fures; that your fcaft and your wine

interfere

SERM. interfere not with the order of the world;
VI.

and that therefore you have done nothing
which flould awaken the sleeping thun-
der, and bring it down from heaven on
your heads. Though not stained with
the blackest colours of guilt, your con-
duct may nevertheless be highly oflen-
five to the Ruler of the world. His go-
vernment is not of that indolent inatten-
tive kind, which allows impunity to eve-
ry lesser criminal. He beholds with dif-
pleasure the behaviour of those who de-
grade their nature by vitious disorders;
and contaminate, by their example, every
ibciety with which they are connected.
His measures are taken, that in one way
or other, they fliall susser.

Look around the circle of your ac-

quaintance, and observe, whether they
are not the fober, the industrious, and the
virtuous, who i'ifibly prosper in the world,
and rife into reputation and influence; ob-
serve whether the licentious and intem-
perate are not constantly humbled and

checked

chceked I)Y some dark reverse either in s E RM.
their health or their fortune; whether t.
the irreligious and profligate arc ever
filfered to escape long, without being
marked with infamy, and becoming ob-
jecs of contempt.--I alk, to what cause
this is to be ascribed, but to that opera-
tion of the hand of God, which 1 am now
calling you to confider ? Does it not obvi-
oufly carry the marks of a plan, a fyftemn
of things, contrived and fore-ordained by
Providence, for rewarding virtue, and pu-
nithing vice in every form of its difor-
ders?-The',Governor of the world need
not for this purpose ftep from his throne
or put forth his hand from the clouds.
With admirable wisdom he hath so or-
dered the train of human aflairs, that, in
their natural course, mens owtn vwickednefs
Jball reprove them, and their- back/lidings
corred them; that they /7jall be made to eat
the fruit of their doings, and to fall into the
pit which therniylvcs had digged.

VOL, IV, ' I These

SE R M. These things have been always soap-

VI.
k~ parent to observation, that though a man

may have been seduced into irregular
and evil courses during his life, yet, at
the close of it, it seldom happens but he
discerns their pernicious nature, and con-
demns himself for them. Never, per-
haps, was there a father, who, after he
had spent his days in idleness, dissipation,
and luxury, did not, when dying, admo-
nifh the children whom he loved, to hold
a more honourable course, to follow the
paths of virtue,' to fear God, and to fulfil
properly the duties of their ftation.-To
yourselves, indeed, I can confidently ap-
peal, whether what I am now faying, be
hot confirmed by your own testimony.
After you have been guilty of some cri-
minal ads, in the course of those riotous
pleasures which you indulge, have you
not, at certain times, felt the flings of
remorse ? Were you not obliged to con-
fess to yourselves that a fad profped of
misery- was opening before you, if such
excefies were to cpntinue ? Did you not

hear

hear an inward voice upbraiding you for SE RM.
having funk and degraded your charac- / -
ter so far below that of many of your
equals around you?-My friends, what
was this but the voice of God, speaking,
as the Governor of his creatures, within
your heart; teflifying loudly that your
course of life was displeasing to him;
and warning you of puniflments that
were to follow ? If his displeasure against
you is already begun to be testified, can
you tell where it is to flop, or how long it
may continue to pursue you throughout
future flages of your existence ? Who
knoweth the power of his wrath --To
this awful, this warning voice, will you
not be persuaded reverently to liften? Im-
pressed by the dread authority which it
carries, ihall you not fall down on your
knees before your Maker, imploring his
mercy to pardon your past offences, and
his grace to rectify your future way ?

SUCH ought to be the effedts of the
eonfideration of God as the Governor of

la- th<

SE R M. the world. It leads to thoughts of a ve-

ry serious nature. When we regard the
·work of the Lord, and contemplate him
as the-Author of the universe, such con-
templation prompts devotion. But when
we confider the operation of. his hands in
providence, and contemplate him as the
Governor of mankind, such contempla-
tion prompts humiliation before him for
offences committed. The former ad-
dresses itself to the ingenuous sentiments
that are left in the heart; and awakens a
sense of our unworthiness, in neglecting
the Author of natire, amidst our riotous
pleasures. The latter addresses itself to
our regard for safety and happiness; and
awakens'fear and dread, from conscious-
ness of the guilt we have contracted.
Hence springs up in. every thoughtful
mind, an anxious concern to avert the
displeasure, and regain the favour of that
Supreme, TBeing to whom we are all
subjed.' This, among unenlightened na-
tions, gave rife to sacrifices, expiations,
and all the rites of humble, though super-

ftitious

flitious worfliip. Among nations, who SE I. r.
have been inflrufted in true religion, len- j
timents of the fame nature pave the way
for prayer, repentance, faith, and all those
duties, by means of which we may hope,
through a divine Mediator and Intcrcef-
for, to be reconciled to heaven. Natural
and revealed religion here appear in con-
cord. We behold the original difates of
the human heart laying a foundation for
the glad reception of the comfortable tid-
ings of the gospel.

I IIAE thus endeavoured to flow in

what m;funer, by regarding the work of the
Lord, and confidering the operation of his
hands, we may prevent the dangers aril
ing from a thoughtless indulgence of
pleasure; we may be furnilhed with an
antidote to the poison which is too often
mixed in that intoxicating cup..-Human
life is full of troubles. We are all tempt-
ed to alleviate them as much as we can,
byfreely enjoying the pleasurable mo-
ments which Providence thinks fit to al-

I 3 low

SERM. low us. Enjoy them we may: But, if

VI.
kj_ ~ we would enjoy them safely, and enjoy

them long, let us temper them with the
fear bs God. As soon as this is forgotten
and obliterated, the found of the harp
and the viol is changed into the signal of
death. The serpent comes forth from
the roses where it had lain in ambufl,
and gives the fatal fling. Pleasure in
moderation is the cordial, in excess it is
the bane, of life.

SERMON

# SERMON VII. On the PRESENCE of GOD in a Future State. PSALM xvi. II. Thou wilt shew me the path of life: In thy presence is fulness of joy: at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

S ERMON VII.
On the PRESENCE of GOD in a Future

State.

PSALM xvi. II.
Thou ,wilt flJew me the path of life: it

thy presence is fulness of joy: at thy right
hand there are pieafiures for evermore.
T HE apostle Peter, in a discourse SERBM.

which he held to the Jews, ap- V".

plies this passage, in a mystical and pro-
phetical sense, to the Messiah *. But, in
its literal and primitive meaning, it ex-
presses the exalted hopes by which the

I 4 Psalmist
· A/ts ii. 25$-28.

SER M. Pfalinif David fnpported himself amidllt
<-,y the changes and revolutions, of which

his life was full. By tl.cle hopes, when
flying before Saul, when driven fiom his
throne, and perfccuted by an unnatural
son, he was enabled to prelerve his vir-
tue, and to maintain unshaken trust in
God.-In that early age of the world,
those explicit discoveries of a slate of im-
mortality, whicl we enjoy, had not yet
been given to mankind. But though
the Sun of righieou ie/s vrwas not arisen, the
dawn had appeared of that ?glorious day'
which he was to introduce. Even in
those antient times, holy men,, as the a-
poftle writes to the Hebrews, Jaw the
promises fiar of, and.were petfifuded of themN
cand embraced them; and colfei9zng tha they
* wei'e Jhrangers and pilgrims .on earlt, de-
clrred that they foug.ht aeter abctter counl-
fiy, that is an h.caienly *. Indeed, in eve-
1.yage, God permitted such hopes to as-
sod . support' ad consolation to those

- Heb. xi. ..
3.

* -4 A \~~~~~~~~~~~,.,'IU

who served him. The full effct of them SERIM.
we behold in thole triumphant exprfl- l.-j-
lions of the text, wvhich arc to be the sub-
ject of this dil'courte. They lead us to
confider; firtf, The hope of the Palmilift
in his present Rate; Thou wilt Jbew me
the path of life. And, secondly, the ter-
mination of his hope in that future state,
where in the presence of God is iblnefis of
joy, and at his right band there are plea-
fures for evermore.

I. Thou wilt Jsew me the path of lile.

This plainly imports that there are dif-
ferent paths or courses of conduct, which
may be pursued by men in this world;
a path which leads to life or happinef',
and a path which issues in death or dc-
itrucaion. These opposite lines of con.
dud are determined by the choice whiclh
men make of virtue or of vice; and hence
men are divided into two great classes,
according as their inclinations lead them
to good or to evil. The path of life is of-
tela a rough and difficult path, followed

Only

SERM. only by a few. The opposite one is the

VII.
\ j broad way, in which the multitude walk;

seemingly finooth, and strewed with flow-
ers; but leading in the end to death and
misery. The path of life conducs us up a
tfecp ascent. The palace of virtue has, in
all ages, been represented as placed on the
summit of a hill; in the ascent of which
labour is requisite, and difficulties are to
le surmounted; and where a conductor
is needed, to direA our way, and to aid
our iteps.

Now, the hope which good men en-

tertain is, that this path of life shall be
jhewn them by God; that, when their
intentions are upright, God will both in-
itrua them concerning the road which
leads to true happiiefs, and will assist
them to pursue it successfully. Among
nations where any suitable ideas of God
or of virtue began to be formed, hopes
of this nature also began to be entertain-
ed. It was consonant to the nature of
man, to think that the Supreme Being
was favourable to virtue. Accordingly,

in

in the writings of some of the ancient phi- s r 1 M.

VI1.

lofophers, we find various obscure traces Wo
of this belief,, that there was a benign hea-
venly spirit, who illuminated the minds
of the virtuous, and affifed their cndea-
vours to obtain wisdom and happiness.
They even asserted, that no man became
great or good without some inspiration of
heaven.

But what they indiflindly conceived,

and could not with confidence rely upon,
the doctrine of Chriltianity hath clearly
explained and fully confirmed; express-
ly and frequently teaching that, not only
by the external discoveries of revelation,
but by the inward operations of his Spi-
rit, he s/ows to the humble and virtu-
ous the path of life. While, by his word,
he inftruas them in their duty, by
the influence of his grace he assists them
in the performance of it. In all revela-
tion there is certainly no docrine more
comfortable than this. It is to good men
a noble and pleasing thought, that they
are pursuing a path which God has dii-

covered

SE rM. covered and pointed out to them. For
<y rthey know that every path, in which he

is their condudor, must be honourable,
muff be safe, muff bring them in the end
to felicity. They follow that Shepherd
of Israel, who always leads his flock into
green pailures, and makes theml lie down be-
Jide the /lill caters. At the fame time,
they know that, if there be truth in re-
ligion at all, on this principle they may
securely reft, that the Divine Being will
never desert those who are endeavouring
to follow out, as they can, the path which
he has {hewn them. He beholds them
here in a tfate of great imbecillity; fur-
rounded with much darkness; exposed to
numberlcfs dangers, froni the temptations
that assault them without, and the feduc-
tion of misguided and disorderly passions
within. In this situation, can they ever
suspect that the Father of mercies will
leave his servants, alone and unbefriended,
to firuggle up the hill of virtue, without
stretching forth a compaflionate arm to aid:
their frailty, and to guide them through

the

the bewildering paths of life? W here were SE RM.
then the God of love? Where, those infi- vI.
nite compaflions of his nature, in which
all his worfnippers have been encouraged
to trust ?-No: He will fend Jorth his
light and his truth to bring them to his holy
hill. For the righteous Lord loveth right-
eoufnefs, and his countenance beboldeth the
upright. With him there is no oblique
purpose, to turn him aside from favouring
the cause of goodness. No undertaking
to which he has given his countenance
shall prove abortive. No promise that he
has made fliall be allowed to fail. Whom
he loveth, he loveth to the end. The secret
of the Lord is with them that fear him, andl
he will JJew7 them his covenant. The meek
will he guide in judgement, and them will
he teach his way. -is grace fiall be sis-
ficient for them, and his Jlrength be made
perfec? in their weakness. They go from
flrengtb to Jlrength; every one of them ap-
peareth before God in Zion *.-Such are

the
Pfal. xxv. 14,9. 2 Cor. xii. 9. Pfhl. l:xrxiv. 7.

S E R M. the hopes with which good men in a pre-

l ent life set forth on a course of piety and
virtue. Thou wilt Jhew me the path of
life. Let us now proceed,

II. To confider the termination of thcfe

hopes in a future ltate. In thy prejence is
fulness of joy; at thy right hand there are
pleaflres Jfr evermore. All happiness as-
furedly dwells with God. The fountain
of life is justly said to be with him. That
supreme and independent Being must ne-
ceffarily possess within himself every prin-
ciple of beatitude; and no cause from
without can possibly affect his untroubled
felicity. Among created dependent be-
ings, happiness flows in scattered and fee-
ble streams; streams that are often tinged
with the blackness of misery. But from
before the throne of God issues the river
of life, full, unmixed, and pure; and the
pleasures which now in scanty portions
we are permitted to taste, are all derived
from that source. Whatever gladdens

I the

the hearts of men or angels, with any real s E R M.
and fatisfacory joy, comes from heaven. V,.
It is a portion of the pure iljluence Jlow-
ing from the glory of the Almighty; a ray
ifuing from the brigbtnefs of the everlafiing
life. It is manifest, therefore, that every
approach to God must be an approach to
felicity. The enjoyment of his imme-
diate presence mufl be the confumma-
tion of felicity; and it is to this presence
that the Psalmist here expresses his hope
that the path of life was to conduct him.

The whole of what is implied in ar-

riving at the presence of the Divinity, we
cannot expec to comprehend. Such ex-
pressions as these of scripture, beholding
the face of God; being made glad with the
light of his countenance, and Jatisfied with
his likeness; feeing light in his light; feeing
no longer darkly as through a glass, but fice
to face; feeing him as he is; are expreflions
altogether mysterious, conveying sublime
though obscure ideas of the most perfect
happiness and highest exaltation of human
mature. This we know, that the abfcnce

of

SEt M. of God, the diflance at which we are now

VII.
v.-J placed from any communication with our

Creator, is one great source of our infeli-
city. Faith exerts its endeavours, but of-
ten ineffectually, to raise our fouls to him.
He is a God that bideth hinijelf. His ways
seem intricate and perplexed. We fie-
quently cannot reconcile them to the con-
ceptions which we had formed of his na-
ture; and with many a suspicion and
doubt they perplex the inquiring mind.
His works we survey with aftonifliment.
We wonder and adore. But while we
clearly trace the footsteps of their great
Author, his presence we can never dif-
cern. tFe go forward, but he is not there;
and backward, but we cannot perceive him :
on the left hand, where he worketh, but we
cannsot behold him : he hidcth hinellf on the
right hand, that we cannot fee him ". Hence
amidst the various sorrows and difcou-
ragements of the present slate, that excla-

mation
j Job xxiiii 8, 9.

mation of Job's is often drawn forth from s ER M.
the pious heart, 0 that I knew where I V"'
nught find him, that I might cotne even to his
feat *!

Surrounded by such distressing obfcu-

rity, no hope more transporting can be
opened to a good man, than that a period
is to come, when he shall be allowed to
draw nearer to the Author of his exist-
ence, and to enjoy the sense of his presence.
In order to convey some faint idea of that
future bliss, by such an image as we can
now employ, let the image be taken from
the most glorious representative of the Su-
preme Being, with which we are acquaint-
ed in this world, the Sun in the heavens. As
that resplendent luminary chcars and re-
vives the universe, when, after the dark-
ness of a tempestuous night, it comes
forth in the morning with its brightest
lustre, and inspires every heart with glad-
ness; as. ascending gradually through the
heavens, it converts that whole vast cx-

VOL. IV. K tent

* Job xxiii. 3.

SERM. tent, over which its beams are diffused,

Il. into a region of light; and thus changes

entirely the slate of objecs, by arraying
all nature in beauty, and transforming it
into the image of its own brightness:-
Some such change as this, though in a de-
gree infinitely superior, we may conceive
the revelation of the Divine Frefence to
produce upon the human foul. 1 will
behold thy face in righteotfnefs; I fJall be
Jatisied, 'when I awake, wvith thy likcintes.-
But without endeavouring farther to un-
fold mysteries which we cannot explore,
there are two sublime and expressive views
of the Divine Essence given us in scrip-
ture, on which it may be edifying that
our thoughts should reft for a little, in or-
der to aid our conceptions of the blessed-
ness of good men hereafter, in the pre-
fence of God. It is said, God is light *;
God is love. r. Let us confider what Jul-
nCef of joy must arise from such mani-

feftations
8 I John i, 5. s i John iv. 8.

feflations of the Divine Eifence to the blef- s . R M.
fed. -
.

God is light. The revelation of his prc-

fence, infers of course, a complete difiF-
sion of light and knowledge among all
who partake of that presence. This un--
questionably forms a primary ingredient
of happiness. Ignorance, or the want of
light, is the source of all our present mif-
condut, and all our misfortunes. Ttie
heart of man is dark; and in the darkl
ness of his heart is the feat of his corrup-
tion. He is unable to discern what is
truly good. Perpetually employed in
search of happiness, he is perpetually nlif-
led by false appearances of it. The er-
rors of his understanding impose upon
his passions; and, in consequence of the
wrong direction which his passions take,
he is betrayed into a thousand disorders.
Hence sensuality, covetousness, and all the
violent contests with others about trifles,
which occasion so much misery, and so
many crimes in the world. He fecdeth of

K 2' fleJ:

SERM. aftes: a deceived heart hath turned hin
VII. I-J qafide, that he cannot deliver hisJoul, norfay,

Is there not a lie in my right hand *?-
Once open to him the perfet sources of
knowledge and truth; suppose him pla-
ced in the presence of that God who is
Light; suppose him illuminated by light
derived immediately from the Supreme
Being; presently all his former errors
would fly away, as mists are dispelled by
the rising fun. His whole nature would
be changed and reformed. The prejudices
which obscured his understanding would
be removed. The feduftions of his passions
would disappear. Rectitude and virtue,
having nothing now to obfrua their en-
trance, would take entire possession of his
heart. Angels are happier than men, be-
cause they enjoy more enlarged knowledge
and views; because they labour under none
of our unhappy deceptions; but fee the
truth as it is in itself; fee it, as it is in

God.
Isaiah x4iv. 20.

God. Sharing the fame light which il- SERTr.
luminates them, good men in a future
state will share in their felicity.

Moreover, the light that flows from the

presence of Him who is the original
source of light, not only banishes miseries
which were the effects of former darkness,
but also confers the most exquisite enjoy-
ment. The knowledge afforded us at
present serves to supply our most pressing
wants; but it does no more. It is al-
ways imperfect and unfatisfadory; nay,
much painful anxiety it often leaves. Nar-
row is the sphere within which the mind
can fee at all; and even there it can fee
only darkly as through a gla/i. But when
it ihall be enlarged beyond this dusky
territory, let loose from this earthly pri-
son, and in God's light permitted to fee
light, the mots magnificent and glorious
fpeaacles must open to the view of the
purified spirit. What must it be to be-
hold the whole stupendous scene of na-
ture unveiled, and its hidden mysteries
difelofed! To trace the wife and just go-

K 3 vernment

SE R l. vernment of the Almighty, through all
VII. v' those intricacies which had so long per-

plexed us! To behold his hand conduct-.
ing ten thousand worlds, which arc now
unknown to us; and throughout all the
regions of boundlcfs space, to view wis-
dom and goodness perpetually acing, and
diversifying its operations in forms of
endless variety! Well may such difcove-
ries inspire that song of the blessed, which
the apofile John heard as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of mighty thunder-
ings, fayiing Alleltiab! For the Lord God
omnipotent reigneth. Great and marvellous
are thy wuorks, Lord God Almighty.; just
and true are thy ways, thou King offaints : !
As God is Light, so also it is said in .scrip-
ture,

God is Love. His presence must of

course diffuke love, among all who are per-
mitted to. dwell in it. He that lovetb

not,
*Rev. xix. 6. xv. 3.

mot, knoweth not God. He that drwclelt SERLM.
in love, diwellet il Gl d, Go,

a God in him t. ,Y

Were man a ingle, solitary being, the
full enjoyment of light might ilffice for
his happiness; as the perfeetion of know-
ledge would rectify and improve to the
highest all his faculties. But; both here
and hereafter, he is conne&ed with other
beings. Heaven implies a iociety; and
the felicity of that society is conRtituted.
by the perfecfion of love and goodness,
flowing from the presence of the God of
love.

Hence follows the entire purification of

human nature from all tholf malevolent
passions, which have so long rendered our
abode on earth the abode of misery. We
greatly deceive ourTelves, when we charge
our chief distresses merely to the account
of our external condition in the world.
From the disadvantages attending it, I ad-
.mit, that we may often have been exposed

K 4 to
* i John iv.' 8, i6,

SERM. to fufler. We may have met with dif-
vlL appointments in our pursuits. By the

arrows of misfortune we may have
been wounded. Under infirmities of
body we may have languifled. But on
this we may depend, that the worst evils
of our present condition arise from the
want of goodness and love; from the dif-
.orders of felfiih passions; from the irrita-
tion which there occasion when working
within. ourselves, and the distress which
they produce when breaking out upon
us from others, in a word, from that
*corrupted -fate of temper, and that reci-
procation of jealousies, suspicions, and in-
juries, which is ever taking place among
the Societies of men. Could you banish
distrust, craft, and uncharitableness, from
the earth, and form all mankind into an
assembly of the just and the benevolent;
could you inspire every heart with kind
,affections, and render every one friendly
.and generous to his neighbour; you would
banifli at once the most afilicive tribe of
human evils. Seldom would the voice of

3 complaint

complaint be heard. All nature would SE RI.
assume a different aspec. Cheerfulness li
would be seen on every countenance. Pa-
radife would return. The wilderness
would finile; the defart rejoice and blojomn
as the rofi.-Now such are the effects
which the presence of the God of love
must produce on the inhabitants above.
Beholding his glory, they are changed into
the fame image. In that temple of eternal
love, which his pretence has hallowed and
consecrated, no found but the voice of
harmony is ever heard; no appearances
ever present themselves but those of peace
and joy.

THnU, confidering God under these two

illuftriou characters which are given of
him in scripture, as Light, and as Love, it
follows that in his presence there muff be
fulneji ofjoy. But I am far from fiying that
the few imperfect hints I have now given,
exhaust, or even approach to, the rum of
those pleaJitres Jor evermore zvh;ch are at
God's right hand. Ten thousand plea-

fures

SE R M. fures are there, which now we have nei-
VII. >j~ Ather faculties to comprehend, nor powers

toenjoy. Behind that myflerlous cloud,
which covers the habitation of eternity,
the view of mortals cannot penetrate.
Content with our humble and dillant i-
tuation, we must as yet remain. Faith
can only look to those glories from afar.
In patient filcnce, it must wait, trust, and
adore.

Supposing the ideas whichI have Let

before you, in this discourse, to be no
more than the speculations of a contem-
plative mind, such as were wont of old
to be indulged by the philosophers of the
Platonic school, still they would deserve
attention, on account of their tendency to
purify and elevate the mind. But when
they are confidered in connexion with a
revelation, which, upon grounds the most
urqueftionable, we believe to be divine,
they are entitled to command, not atten-
tion only, but reverence and faith--They
present to us such high expectations as
re sufficient to determine every reason-

able

able man to the choice of kirtue; to fiip SERM.
port him under all its pretfnt diicourage- _J
ments, and to comfort him in the hour of
death. Jufl.ly may they excite in our
hearts that ardent aspiration of the Pfal-
milt: My foul thifltcth for God, for the
living God; 0 wben l'all I come and ap-
pear before him !-But, with this wimf in
our hearts, never, I beieech you, let us
forget what was set forth in the first part of
this discourse ; that, in order to arrive at
the presence of God, the path ofli/ie mufi
previously be flewn to us by him, andl
that in this path we must persevere to the
end. These two things cannot be dif-
joined, a virtuous life and a happy eter-
nity. Who fJall ascend unto the hill of the
Lord? and who J7Vall fland in his holy
place ? He only who hath clean hands and
a pure heart. Between a corrupted heart
and the God of light and love, there
never can be any connection. But of
this we may reft assured, that the path of
piety and virtue, pursued with a firm antd

constant

SERM. constant spirit, will, in the end, through
VII. the merits of our blessed Redeemer, bring

us to that presence, where is julnefs of
joy, and where are pleasures for evermore.

SERMON

# SERMON VIII. On CURIOSITY concerning the AFFAIRS of others. JOHN xxi. 21, 22. Peter seeing him, saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do? Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I ...

S E R M O N VIII.
On CURIOSITY concerning the AFFAIRS

of others.

JOHN xxi. 21, 22.

Peter secing him, faith to Jesus, Lord, and

what Jhall this man do ? 7eJits faith unto
him, If 1 will that he tarry till I come,
what is that to thee? Follow thou me.
T HESE words occurred in a confe- SER M.

VIII.

_T rence which our Lord held with ,-,
Simon Peter, after his refurrecion from
the dead.. Conscious of the disgrace which
he had incurred by his late denial of his
Matter, Peter must at this time have ap-
peared before him with mhame. Our Lord,

after

S E R Ar. after a tacit rebuke, implied in the qucftioa

J which he repeatedly puts to him, Simo11

Jfn of 7lc.as, lovefi tho; lue ? reflores him,
with great benignity, to his office as an a-
pofle, by giving the commandment to
feed his flecp; and intimates also that it
should be his lot to susser death in the
cause of his Master. The apostle John,
diflinguiflled here by the denomination
of the lifciple whonm 7eTus loved, being pre-
sent at this convcrfation, Peter, who was
always eager and forward, looking to John,
puts this question to our Saviour, Lord,
and wthat Jliall this man do ? " What shall
" be his employment ? what his rank and
" fation in thy kingdom? what his future
" fate in life ?"-By what principle Peter
was moved to put this unseasonable and
improper queflion to his Malter ; whether
it arose from mere curiosity, or from some
emotion of rivalfhip anid jealousy, does
not appear; but it is plain that our Lord
was dissatisfied with the inquiry which
lie made; and presently he checks Peter's
curiosity, by a. severe reply; if/hat is that

I to

to thee ? "What is it to thee what this S RItM.
" man fl/all do; what fliall be his rank; or ,-,J '
' what the circuinftances of his life or his
"death ? Attend thou to thine own duty.
" Mind thy proper concerns. Fulfil the
"part which I have allotted to thee. Fol-
" low thou me."-The initruction which
arises from this conversation of our Lord's
with Peter, is, That all prying inqui-
ries into the slate, circumflances, or cha-
racqer of others, are reprehensible and im-
proper; that to every man a particular
charge is assigned by his Lord and Maf-
ter, the fulfillment of which ought to be
the primary objeA of his attention, without
officiously thrulling himself into the con-
cerns of others. The illuifration of these
points fliall make the fuibjcA of the prcfcnt
discourse.

THAT idle curiosity, that inquisitive

and meddling spirit, which leads men to
pry into the affairs of their neighbours,
is reprehensible on three accounts. It in-
terrupts the good order, and breaks the

peace

SE R M. peace of society. It brings forward and
vjl. nourilhes several bad passions. It draws

.men aside from a proper attention to the
discharge of their own duty.

IT interrupts, I fay, the order, and

breaks the peace of society. In this world
we are linked together by many ties. We
are bound by duty, and we are prompted
by interest, to give mutual assistance, and
to perform friendly offices to each other.
But those friendly offices are performed
to most advantage, when we avoid to in-
terfere unnecessarily in the concerns of
our neighbour. Every man has his own
part to adt, has his own interest to consult,
has affairs of his own to manage, which
his neighbour has no call to icrutinize.
Human life then proceeds in its most na-
tural and orderly train, when eyery one
keeps within the bounds of his proper
province; when, as long as his pursuits
are fair and lawful, he is allowed, with-
out disturbance, to' conduct them in his
own way. That ye Jludy to be quiet, and

to

to do your own bfinefs , is the apoftoli- SERM.
cal rule, and indeed the great rule, for
preservation of harmony and order. But
so it is, that, in every age, a set of men
have existed, who, driven by an unhappy
activity of spirit, oftener perhaps than by
any fettled design of doing ill, or any mo-
tives of ambition or interest, love to in-
termeddle where they have no concern,
to inquire into the private affairs of others,
and from the imperfect information which
they collect, to form conclusions concern-
ing their circumfiances and character.
These are they who, in scripture, are cha-
raderifed as tatlers, and busy bodies in other
mens matters, and from whom we are cal-
led to turn away.

Though persons of this description

flould be prompted by nothing but vain
curiosity, they are, nevertheless, dangerous
troublers of the world. While they con-
ceive themselves to be inoffensive, they are

VOL. IV. J4 sowing

i Theft, iv; n:

SE R i. lowing dissension and feuds, Crossing the
'~-. lines in which others move, they create

confusion, and awaken resentment. For
every man conceives himself to be inju-
red, when lie finds another intruding in-
to his afiairs, and, without any title, taking
upon him to examine his conduc. Being
improperly and unneceflarily disturbed,
he claims the right of disturbing in his
turn those who wantonly have'troubled
him. Hence, many a friendship has been
broken; the peace of many a family has
been overthrown; and much bitter and last-
ing difcbrd has been propagated through.
society.

WHILE this spirit of meddling curio-

fity injures so considerably the peace and
good order of the world, it also nourishes,
among individuals who are addifced to it,
a multitude of bad paflions. Its most
frequent source is mere idleness, which, in
itself a vice; never fails to engender many
vices more. The mind of man cannot be
!ngwithout some food to nourish the ac-

tivity

bvity of its thoughts. The idle, who have s E R M.
no nouriflment of this fort within them- -
selves, feed their thoughts with inquiries
into the condut of their ieighbours.
The inquisitive and curious are always
talkative. What they learn, or fancy
themfclves to have learned, concerning o-
thers, they are generally in hate to di-
vulge. A tale which the malicious have
invented, and the credulous have pro-
pagated; a rumour which, arising among
the multitude, and tranfinitted by one to.
another, has, in every ftcp of its progress,
gained fresh additions, becomes in the
end the foundation of confident assertion,
and of rafli and severe judgement.

It is often by a spirit ofjealoufy and ri-

valry, that the researches of such persons
are prompted. They wish to discover some-
thing that will bring down their neigh-
bour's character, circumstances, or reputa-
tion, to the level of their own; or that will
flatter them with an opinion of their own
superiority. A secret malignity lies at
the bottom of their inquiries. It may be

'L.z concealed

S .R M. concealed by an affected fliow of candour
VIII. yj~ and impartiality. It may even be veiled

with the appearance of a friendly concern
for the interests of others, and with as-
seCed apologies for their failings. But
the hidden rancour is easily discovered.-
While, therefore, persons of this defcrip-
tion trouble the peace of society, they at
the fame time poifn- their own ilinds
with malignant passions. Their difpofi.
tion is entirely the reverse of that amiable
spirit of charity, on which our religion
lays so great a itrefs. Charity covereth
the multitude of fins; but this prying and
meddling spirit seeks to discover and di-
vulge them. Charity thinketb no evil; but
this temper inclines us always to fufpe&
the worst. Charity rejoicetb not in iniqui-
ty; this temper triumphs in the discovery
of errors and failings. Charity, like the
fun, brightens every objet on which it
shines; a censorious disposition casts e-
very character into the darket flhade it
will bear.

3 IT

IT is to be farther observed, that all im- s ER M.

pertinent curiosity about the affairs of o- .v1.
thers tends greatly to obftru&t personal
reformation; as it draws mens thoughts
aside from what ought to be the chief ob-
jedt of attention, the improvement of their
own heart and life. They who are so of-
ficioufly occupied about their neighbours,
have little leisure, and less inclination, to
obherve their-own defecs, or to mind their
own duty. From their inquisitive rc-
searches, they find, or imagine they find,
in the behaviour of others, an apology
*for their own failings: And the favourite
result of their inquiries generally is, to reft
satisfied with themselves. They are at
least as good, they think, as others around
them. The condemnation which they
pass on the vices of their neighbours, they
interpret to be a sentiment of virtue in
themselves. They become those hypo-
crites' described by our Lord, who fee
clearly the mote that is in their neighbour's
eye, while they discern not the beam that is
in their own.

L3 IN

S E RM. IN opposition to ftch a character as this,
.-.,. the doctrine plainly inculcated by the text

is, that to every man a particular charge
is given by his Lord and Master, a part is
afligned him by Providence to as; that to
this he ought to bend his chief attention;
and, instead of scrutinising the characer
or state of others, ought to think of him-
self, and leave them to fiand or fall by
their own matier. What Jfall this mtan do?
said Peter. What, replies our Lord, is that
to thee ? Follow thou me.

WHERE persons possess any important

station, or diftinguifled rank, in the world,
the application of this doctrine to them is
manifest. If they have any candour, they
cannot refuse to acknowledge that God
and the world have a title to expec from
them a diligent attention to their proper
part in life; and that to waste their time
in idle inquiries about others, with whom
they have nothing to do, is reprehensible
and sinful. But there are multitudes of
mankind, to whom this appears in a very

different

diffcrent light. They are humble and pri- SEr M.

VIII.

vate men, who are willing to conceive j
themselves as of little importance in the
world. Having no extensive influence,
and no call, as they think, to diftinguili
themselves by active exertions in any
sphere, they imagine that they may inno,
cently lead an idle life, and indulge their
curiosity, by canvassing at pleasure the
character and the behaviour of those a-
round them. With persons of this de-
scription every society too much abounds.
-My brethren, no one ought to confider
himfelfas insignificant in the fight of God.
In our several stations we are all sent forth
to be labourers in God's vineyard. Every
man has his work allotted, his talent com-
mitted to him; by the due improvement
of which he might, in one way or other,
firve God, promote virtue, and be ule-
ful in the world. Occupy till I come, is
the charge given to all Christians without.
exception. To be entirely unemployed
and idle is the prerogative of no one, in
any rank of life.

L 4 Even

SERM, Even that sex, whose task is not to
VII. ^vls mingle in the labours of public and ac-

tive business, have their own part assigned
them to a&. In the quiet of domestic
Itade, there are a variety of virtues to be
exercised, and of important duties to be
discharged. Much depends on them for
the maintenance of private oeconomy and
order, for the education of the young, and
for the relief and comfort of those whose
funtions engage them in the toils of the
world. Even where no such female du-
ties occur to be performed, the care of
preparing for future usefulness, and of at-
taining such accomplifliments as procure
just esteem, is laudable. In such duties
and cares, how far better is time employ-
ed, than in that search into private con-
cerns, that circulation of rumours, those
discussions of the conduct, and descants
on the character of others, which engross
conversation so much, and which end,
for the most part, in severity of censure!

In whatever condition we are placed,
tp aS always in character should be our

constant

constant rule. He who acs in charac- s E R M.
ter is above contempt, though his station ,jV1
be low. He who ads out of characer
is despicable, though his station be ever
so high. IWhat is that to thee, what this
man or that man does? Think of what
thou oughteft to do thyself; of what is fui-
table to thy characer and place; of what
the world has a title to expect from thee.
Every excursion of vain curiosity about
others, is a fubtradion from that time and
thought which was due to ourselves and
due to God. Having gifts, fays the ApoRle
Paul, differitg according to the grace that is
given us, whether minliJlry, let us wait on our
mini/?ring; or he that teacheth, on teaching;
or he that exhorteth, on exhortation. fIe
that gveth, let him do it with simplicity;
he that ruleth, with diligence; he that
Jheweth mercy, with cheerfuilnefs *.

In the great circle of human affairs
there is room for every one to be busy

and
* Rom. xii. 6,-9,

SERM. and well employed in his own province,
VIII. viii without encroaching upon that of others.

It is the province of superiors to dired;
of inferiors, to obey; of the learned to be
inftrudive; of the ignorant, to be docile;
of the old to be communicative; of the
young to be advifeable and diligent. Art
thou poor? Show thyself acive and in-
dultrious, peaceable and contented. Art
thou wealthy? Show thyself beneficent
and charitable, condescending and hu-
mane. If thou livest much in the world,
it is thy duty to make the light of a good
example shine conspicuously before others.
If thou livest private and retired, it is thy
business to improve thine pvon mind, and
to add, if thou canst do no more, one
faithful fubjedt to the Messiah's kingdom.
There is indeed no man so sequestered
from active life, but within his own nar-
row sphere he may find some opportuni-
ties of doing good; of cultivating friend-
ship, promoting peace, and discharging
many of these lesser offices of humanity
and kindness, which are within the reach

of
\N

of every one, and which we all owe to SERM.

VIII.

one another. In all the various relations J
which subsist among us in life, as hus-
band and wife, matter and servants, pa-
rents and children, relations and friends,
rulers and fubjeats, innumerable duties
stand ready to be performed; innumera-
ble calls to virtuous activity present them-
selves on every hand, sufficient to fill up
with advantage and honour the whole
time of man.

THERE is, in particular, one great and

comprehensive object of attention, which,
in the text, is placed in direct opposition to
that idle curiosity reprehended by our
Lord; that is, to follow Christ. Follow
thou me. What this man or that man
does; how he employs his time; what
use he makes of his talents; how he fuc-
ceeds in the world; are matters, concern-
ing which the information we receive can
never be of great importance to us; of-
ten, is of no importance at all. But how
our Saviour behaved while he was on

earth,

SERMt. earth, or how, in our situation, he would

VIII.
x,>!_ have behaved, are mattcrs of the highest

moment to every Christian.

The commandment given in the text,

to follow him, includes both obtervance
of his words, and imitation of his exam-
ple. The words of Christ contain, as we
all know, the standing rule of our life.
His example exhibits the great model on
which our condua ought to be formed;
and it is to this that the precept here deliver-
ed diretly- refers.-Examples have great
influence on all. But by all human exam-
ples, we are in danger ofbeing occasion-
ally misled. We are ever obliged to be on
our guard, left the admiration of what is
estimable, betray us into a resemblance of
what is blemilhed and-faulty. For the
most perfect human characters, in the
midlt of their brightness and beauty, are
always marked with some of those dark
spots which stain the nature of man.
But our Lord possessed all the virtues of
the greatest and betl Amen, without par-
taking any of their defets. In him, all

was

was light without a shade, and beauty SERM.

VIii.

without a ftain.-At the lame time, his
example is attended with this singular ad-
vantage, of being more accommodated
than any other to general imitation. It
was diftinguiflied by no unnatural aufle-
rities, no affected singularities; but exhi.
bits the plain and simple tenor of all those
virtues for which we have most frequent
occasion in ordinary life. In order to
render it of more universal benefit, our
Lord fixed his residence in no particular
place; he tied himself down to no parti-
cular calling or way of living; but gives
us the opportunity of viewing his beha-
viour, in that variety of lights which e-
qually and indifferently regard all man-
kind. His life was divided between the
retired and the acive state. Devotion and
business equally liared it. In the dif-
charge of that high office with which
he was vested, we behold the perfeAt mo-
del of a public character; and we behold
the most beautiful example of private life,
when we contemplate him among his dif-

ciples,

SERM. ciples, as a Father in the midlf of his fad-
^s,~ mily.-By such means he has exhibited

before us specimens of every kind of
virtue; and to all ranks and classes of
men has afforded a pattern after which
they may copy. Hardly is there any e-
mergency which can occur in life, but
from some incident in our Saviour's con-
duct, from some feature displayed in his
character, we are enabled to fay to our-
selves, " Thus Christ would have spoken,
" thus he would have acted, thus he
" would have suffered, if he had been cir-
" cumftanced as we are now."

Instead, therefore, of thinking of thy

neighbours around thee, and of inquiring
how they behave, keep Christ in thine eye,
and in thy whole conduct follow him.
Follow him in his steady and conscientious
discharge of duty, amidst opposition from
evil men, and a corrupted world. Follow
him in his patient submission to his Fa-
ther's will, and the calmness of his spirit
under all trials. Follow him in his acAs
of disinterested benevolence, in his corn-

xr·^~~~
· passion

passion to the unhappy, in his readiness S ERM,
to oblige, to assist, and to relieee. Imitate v
the mildness and gentleness of his man-
ners. Imitate the affability and condefccn-
sion which appeared in his behaviour.
Imitate the uncorrupted simplicity and
purity which diftinguified his whole life.

THESE are much worthier and nobler

objecs of your attention, than any of those
trifling varieties which you can explore
and discover in the characters of those
among whom you live. By lifting your
view to so high a standard, you will be
preserved from descending to those futile
and corrupting employments of thought,
whiAh occupy the idle, the vain, and the
malignant. It is incredible, how much
time and attention are thrown away by
men, in examining the affairs of others,
and discussing their conduct. Were their
time 'and attention thrown away only, the
evil would, in some degree, be less. But
they are worse than thrown away; they
are not merely fruitless, but productive of

much

SE RM. much mischief. Such a habit of thought
V1YI is connected with a thousand vices. It is

the constant source of rafli and revere cen,
sure. It arises from envy and jealousy.
It foments ill nature and pride. It pro-
pagates mifunderflanding and discord. All
those evils would be prevented, if the re-
proof which our Lord administers in the
text came oftener home, with proper au-
thority, to the reflexion of men: Fiahat is
that to thee ? Each of us have more mate-
rial and important business of our.own to
fulfil. Our talk is assigned; our part al-
lotted. Did we suitably examine how
that part was performed, we should be left
disposed to busy ourselves about the con-
cerns of others. We would discover ma-
ny a disorder to be corrected at home;
many a weed to be pulled out from our
own grounds; much remaining to be done,
in order to render ourselves useful in this
world, and fit for a world to come.-
Wherefore, instead of being critics on
others, let us employ our criticism on

ourselves.

ourselves. Leaving others to be judged SERM.
by Him who fearcheth the heart, let us i-j
implore his affitance for enabling us to
aC well our own part, and to follow
Christ.

VOL.IV. M SERMON

# SERMON IX. On our Present IGNORANCE of the WAYS of GOD. JOHN xiii. 7. Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do, thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter.

S E R M' 0 N IX.
On our Present IGNORANCE of the WAYS

of GOD.

Jo H N Xiii. 7.
Jesus answered and said unto him, What I

do, thou knoweJl not now; but thou Jhalt
know hereafter.
SERM. T HESE words of our Lord were oc-

x- 1 cafioned by a circumstance in his

behaviour which appeared mysterious to
his disciples. When about to celebrate
his last passover, he meant to give them
an inftrudive lesson of condescension and
humility. The mode which he chose for

delivering

delivering this inftrution, was the em- SE R r.
blematical acdion of waffling their feet. xJ.
When Sipnon Peter saw his Malter addref-
sing himself to the performance of so me-
nial an office, he exclaims with the great-
eft surprise, Lord, doff thou waflj my et ?
Our Lord replies, in the words of the
text, What I do thou knoweft not now, but
thouJhalt know hereafter. " My behaviour
" in this instance, may seem unaccount-
" able to you at present; but you flall
" afterwards receive a fatisfadory expli-
" cation of the intent of that symbol
" which I now employ."

The expressions of a divine person, on

this occasion, can very naturally and
properly be applied to various instances,
where-the conduct of Providence, in the
\ administration of human affairs, remains

dark and mysterious to us. JI'hat I do~
thou knowefl not now. We muff for a
while be kept in ignorance of the de-
signs of heaven. But this ignorance,
though necessary at present, is not al-
ways to continue. A .time flall come

M a when

SERM. when a commentary fliall be afforded orm
IX. all that is now obscure; when the veil of

mystery fliall be removed; and full fa-
tisfaftion be given to every rational mind.
Thou /fjalt know hereafter. This is the
doctrine which I purpose to illuitrate in
the following discourse,

I. OUR Saviour's words lead us to ob-

serve, that many things in the conduct
of Providence are at present mysterious
and unintelligible. The truth of this
observation will not be called in question.
It is indeed very readily admitted by all;
and ever since the beginning of the world
has been the foundation of many a com-
plaint, and of much scepticism concern-
ing the government of Heaven.-That
human affairs are not left to roll on ac-
cording to mere chance, and that Provi-
dence interposes in them to a certain de-
gree, is made evident by various tokens
to every candid mind. But the perplexi-
ty and trouble of the thoughtful inqui-
rer arises fron observing that Providence

1»Al~ ~~appears

appears not to pursue any regular or con- SERM.

Ix.

fiftent plan. An unaccountable mixture - J
of light and darkness presents itself to us,
when we attempt to trace the affirs of
the world up to any wife and righteous
adminiRtration. We fee jultice and order
begun; but on many occasions they seem
to be deserted. The ray of light which
we had traced for a while, suddenly for-
fakes us; and, where we had looked for
the continuance of order, we meet with
confusion and difappointment.-For in-
itance; when we examine the conftitu-
tion of the human mind, we discern evi-
dent marks of its being framed with a
view to favour and reward virtue. Con-
science is endowed with signal authori-
ty to check vice. It brings home un-
easiness and remorse to the bad; and it
sooths and supports the righteous with
felf-approbation and peace. The ordi-
nary course of human things is made to
coincide in some degree with this confti-
tution of our nature. The worthy and
the good are, in general, honoured and

M 3 eftcemed.

SERM. esteemed. He that walketh uprightly, is,
IX. for the most part, found to wvalk Jiirely,

The chief misfortunes that befal us in life
can be traced to some vices or follies
which we have committed; and it almost
never happens but the finner's own uwic-
kednefs is made, sooner or later, to reprove
him, and his backJlidings to correct him.

All this carries the impress of a just

Providence, of a wife and a benevolent
administration of the universe, We can-
not avoid perceiving that the Almighty
hath jet his throne for judgement. At
the fame time, when we pursue our in-
quiries, the Almighty appears to hold back
the face of his throne, and to Jfread his cloud
tpon it*. For in looking abroad into the
world, how many scenes do we behold,
which are far from corresponding with
any ideas we could form of the govern-
ment of Heaven? Many nations of the
earth we fee lying in a slate of barbarity

and
X Job sxxvi. 9.

and misery; funk in such gross igno- E R M.
rance as degrades them below the rank of Ix.
rational beings; or abandoned to be the
prey of cruel oppression and tyranny.
When we look to the ilate of individuals
around us, we hear the lamentations of
the unhappy on every hand. We meet with
weeping parents, and mourning, friends.
We behold the young cut off in the flower
of their days, and the aged left desolate
in the midst of sorrows. The useful and
virtuous are swept away, and the worth-
less left to flourifli. The lives of the best
men are often filled with discouragements
and disappointed hopes. Merit languish-
es in neglected solitude; and vanity and
presumption gain the admiration of the
world. From the scourge of calumny,
and from the hand of violence, the inju-
red look up to God as the Avenger of
their cause; but often they look up in
vain. He is a God that hideth hinife!lf
He dwelleth, as to them, in the secret
place of darkness; or, if he dwelleth in

M4 light,

SE R M. light, it is in light to which no man can
jw approach. Resignation may feal up their

lips; but in silence they drop the tear,
and mourn while the)' adore.

SUCH, it mutt not be dissembled, are

the difficulties which encounter us when
we attempt to trace the present ways of
God. At the fame time, upon refle&ion,
we may be satisfied that causes can be as-
signed for things appearing in this un,
favourable light; and that there is no
reason to be surprised at the divine .con-
du& being mysterious at present.

The monarchy of the universe is a great

and complicated system. It comprehends
numberless generations of men, who are
brought forth to aa& their parts for pur-
poses unknown to us. It includes two
worlds at once; the world that now is,
and which is only a finall,.portion of
existence; and a world that i'is to come,
which endures for eternity. To us, no
more than the beginnings of! things are
visible. We fee only fome.;'broken parts

·"V^'~ '¥":of

of a great whole. We trace but a few SEIM.
links of that chain of being, which, r_
by secret conne'idns, binds together
the present and the future. Such know-
ledge is afforded us as is sufficient for
supplying the exigencies and wants of
our prelent ifate; but it does no more.
Peeping abroad from a dark corner of the
univerle, we attempt in vain to explore
the counsels that govern the world. It is
an attempt to found an unfathomable deep
with a scanty line; and with a feeble
wing to ascend above the stars, In any
complicated work, even of human art, it
is found neccflary to be: acquainted with
the design of the whole, in order to judge
of the fitness of its parts. In a scheme
so complex as the administration of the
world, where all the parts refer to one
another, and where what is seen is often
fubordinatg.!to what is invisible, how is it
possible .but our judgements must be of-
ten erroneous', and our complaints ill-
founded ; :If a peasant or a cottager be
incapable of judging of the govern-

menit: .

SE R M. ment of a mighty empire, is it surprising
Ix.j that we flould be at a loss concerning the

conduct of the Almighty towards his crea-
tures ? Wha! 1 do thou knowejt not now.

BUT, on this argument still more can

be said for our fatisfation. We are to
observe, that complete information re-
fpeAing the ways of God, not only was
not to be expected here; but, moreover,
that it would have been hurtful, if grant-
ed to us in our present state. It would
have proved inconsistent with that state;
with the acions which we have to per-
form in it, and the duties we have to ful-
fil. It would indeed have overthrown
the whole design of our being placed
in this world. We are placed here un-
der the trial of our virtue. Ignorance
of the events that are ordained to befal
us, ignorance of the plans and the decrees
of heaven, enter necessarily into a state
of trial. In order to exercise both our
intellectual and moral powers, and to car-
ry., them forward to improvement, we must
I:,f. ' hbe

be left to find our way in the midlt of s ER ,r.
difficulties and doubts, of hardflips, and 'X
sufferings. We must be taught to ad our
part with conflancy, though the reward
of our constancy be difRant. .We must
learn to bear with patience whatever our
Creator judges proper to lay upon, us,
though we fee not the reason of the hard-
flips he inflids. If we were let into the
secret of the whole plan of Providence;
if the justice of Heaven were, in every
ftep of its procedure, made manifest to
our view, man would no longer be the
creature he now is, nor would his present
state answer any purpose of discipline or
trial.

Mystery and darkness, therefore, must

of necessity now take place in the courlf
of things. Our present state can be no
other than a state of twilight or dawn,
where dubious forms shall often present
thcmfelves to us, and where we liall find
ourselves in a middle condition between
complete light and total darkness. Had
we enjoyed no evidence of a just Jxuge

ruling

SERM. ruling the earth, and of his providence

xrj interposing in our affairs, virtue would

have been altogether deprived of its en-
couragement and support. Had the evi-
dence, on the other hand, been so itrong
as to place the hand of the Almighty con-
ftantly before our eyes, the intention of our
present existence would have been defeated,
and no trial of virtue have remained. In-
flead, therefore, of complaining of the ob-
fcurity which at present covers the con-
dua of Providence, we fee that, on the
whole, we have reason to submit and a-
dore.

II. THE text suggests that, though what

God is doing, or what he intends to do,
we know not now, yet there is ground to
believe, that at some future period we
ihall receive information. What I do thou
knoweft not now, but thou fibalt know here-
after. The question here arises, what that
hereafter is to which we are to look for
the solution of our present doubts.?

IN

IN the first place, hereafter may, on SERM.

some occasions, refer to the subsequent j-
course of events in this world. It often
happens that the conlequences of things
throw light on the designs of God. The
history of Providence, in proportion as it
advances, disembroils itself. Though our
present condition forbids extensive and
complete information, yet as much is
sometimes allowed to appear as gives us
favourable openings into the righteous and
benevolent counsels of heaven.--Thus, in
the public affairs of the world, it has been
frequently seen, that from the mofr un-
promising causes important and benefi-
cent efftes have, in the sequel, arisen. In,
our own country, at one period, the vio-
lent passions of a prince gave beginning to
the Reformation. At another period, ar-
bitrary attempts against religion and li-
berty occasioned that happy Revolution
which has formed the ara of national
prosperity. In many instances, the uwrath
of man has been made to prai/e God. Those
wars and commotions that flhake the mo-

ral

SE RM. ral world have answered similar purposes
Ix. with tempests in the natural world, of

purging the air from noxious vapours, and
restoring it to a temperature more found
and wholesome. From the midst of con-
fusion order has been made to spring, and
from temporary mischiefs, lasing advan-
tages to arife.-In all cafes of this na-
ture, with which sacred and civil history
abounds, secret designs of heaven were
going on, which were unfolded in the
end. The wheel was always in motion.
The hand of the clock was advancing with
unperceived progress, till the moment came
of its striking the appointed hour.

In like manner, with refpec to indivi-

duals, there is often a hereafter in the
course of their lives, which discloses and
justifies the ways of God. Not to mention
the good effects which misfortunes are
found to produce on the minds of men,
by checking their vices, and correcing
their errors, innumerable exemplifications
can be given, of misfortunes paving their
way to future advancement in the world.

we

We are always querulous and impatient SE RM.

IX.

when designs succeed not according to I
our with. Ignorant of what fiturity is to
bring forward, occupied with nothing but
the present, we exclaim, Where is God?
Where the sceptre of righteousness ? Hath
he forgotten to be gracious ? or doth he in-
deed fee, and is there knowledge in the
Molt High ?-God Jeeth not as man fecta:
He looketh not merely to what you sus-
ser, but to what the effect of these sus-
ferings is to be. Confider only in how
different a light the Patriarch Joseph would
view the events of his life after.he had
seen in what they had terminated, from
the light in which he saw them, when led
away by the lihmaelites as a slave, or when
thrown by Potiphar into the Egyptian
prison. We murmur against Providence,
just as the impetuous youth frets againfr
his inftrutors and tutors, who are keep-
ing him under a stria, and as he thinks
a needless, discipline. He knows not
that, by their inftrulion and discipline,
they are laying the foundation of his fu-

3 ture

SERM. ture fortunes; of the wealth which he is
,v- to acquire, and of the advancement to

which he is to rife in the world. What
may jultly be said to him by his tutors
and inttrucors, is equally applicable to
us all under our present state of educati-
on; What I do, thou knoweft not now, but
thou Jf)alt know hereafter.-R egarding,
then, the unknown issue of all worldly
events in this life, let us never despair;
let us never think diflionourably of the
government of God; but have patience
till his providence accomplifli its designs
in its own way, and at its own time. Al-
though thoufayeJt thou J7halt not fee him, yet
judgement is before him; therefore trufJ thou
in him *.

IN the second place, the expreflion of

hereafter in the text must be understood
to refer, in its. full extent, not to future
events in this life, but to a subsequent

state
*Job xxxv. 14.

slate of being. For this life is no more SERM.

Ix.

than the beginning of the mighty and we
extensive plans of Providence. The feeds
are only now sown, of what is to ripen
and come forth, at the harvePt of the
world; when the revolution of the great
moral year fliall be finifled, and the go-
vernment of God shall obtain its full com-
pletion. It is the chief scope of religion
to direct our view to this period; and it
hath often taught us that the knowledge
of the ways of God, then enjoyed by the
blessed, fllall constitute a chief article of
their felicity. Now we fee through a
glass darkly; but then face to face. Now
we know in part; but then we Jfiall know
even as we are known. When that which
is peifec7 is come, then that which is in part
shall be done away. In God's light weJhall
fee light. The reasons that required ob-
fcurity to remain for a while on the ways
of God no longer subsist. The education

VOL. IV. N of

l Cor. xiii. io, IX. Psalm xxxvi. 9.

SERM. of good men is completed; and the inten-
c-^j tion of those steps of education, which

once they could not comprehend. now be-
comes apparent-Why this man was pre-
maturely carried away from the world in
the beginning of a promising course; why
that deserving family were left overwhelm-
ed with grief and despair, by the lots of
one who was their sole benefactor and
support; why friendfliips cemented by
tender ties were suddenly torn asunder
by death: These are inquiries to which
we can now make no reply; and which
throw a dark gloom over the condut of
the Almighty. But the spirits of the just
above, who are admitted to a larger view
of the ways of God, fee the reasons of
such counsels. They fee that one man
was seasonably taken away from dangers
and evils to come, which, unknown to
him, were hovering over his head. They
fee that Providence was in secret prepa-
ring unexpesced blessings fpr the family
who appeared to be left 4.fconfolate and
hopeless. They fee thafit was time for

A friend:ips

friendships to be dissolvcd, when their SE R.
longer continuance would to some of the ire
parties have proved a snare. Where we
behold nothing but the rod of power
stretched forth, tlley discern all interpofi-
tion of the hand of mercv.

Let us wait till this promised hereafter

arrive, and we fiall in like manner be fa-
tisfied concerning the events that now
disturb and perplex us. We lhall then
know why so much darkness and misery
have been so long permitted to remain on
the earth, and so much opprcflion and
tyranny to prevail among the nations.
We shall fee rising, as from the alhles
of the old world, a new and beautiful
structure; new heavens and a new earth,
wh:rein dwelleth righteoziihefs. As wide
as is the difference between the appearance
of the world, when it lay in its primitive
chaos, withoutform and void, and the ap-
pearance it has now assumcd, when re-
fplendenf ~th the light of the fun, and
decked with he beauties of nature; such
is the difference between the divine plans

f i N2 in
1
'

SE R . in their beginnings, and in their full

IX. Ix.j completion. At the conclusion, and not

till then, the glory of the Lord fliall be-
come manifest to all; and, as it is de-
fcribed in the book of the Revelation, a
voice flall be heard from every creature
which is in heaven and on the earth, and un-
der the earth, fiaying, Blejing, and honour,
and power, and glory, be to him that fittetb
on the throne. Great and marvellous are
thy works, Lord God Almighty; jujf and
true are thy wayss thou King of Jaints *.

APPLICATION of the dotrines that

have been illustrated may be made to
two classes of men.

FirtI, To sceptics; who, from the pre-

sent mysterious conduct of Providence,
haflily draw the conclusion, that no go-
vernment is exercised over human affairs,
but that all things are suffered indifcri-
minately to come alike to all men.-I

have
"Rev. v. 13.-xv. 3.

have flown that fiom the inadequate SERM.
views which we are at present able to -
take of the general system, such myfle-
rious appearances of Providence mullt be
expeted to take place. Not only so, but
1 have also lhown it to be fit and neceffa-
ry that this mixture of obscurity ihould
now remain; as a full display of regular
jullice and order would be inconsistent
with the moral improvement of men in
this life.-Let me desire the sceptic to look
to the slate of the natural world. When
he thinks of the order and magnificence
that prevail in it, he will, perhaps, be un-
willing to pronounce it the mere produc-
tion of chance. He cannot but recog-
nife the hand of Intelligence, and acknow-
ledge it to have proceeded from a design-
ing Cause. 1 ask him, Whether in the
natural world he discerns not as many
mysterious and puzzling appearances as
are to be found in the moral world?
Are not deftrutive storms, burning
mountains, uninhabitable deserts, as dif-

N 3 ficult

SERM. ficult to be reconciled to his pre-con-

IX.
- conceived ideas of supreme wisdom and

goodness in the Creator, as the fufierings
and afflictions which in the course of Pro-
vidence befal the just? The natural and
moral world are, in this refpec, counter-
parts to one another. Both are marked
with the fame characters, and carry the
impress of the fame powerful and gracious
hand. In both, it is evidently the intention
of the first' Author not to render every
thing level to our capacity; but in the
midst of high design and order, to al-
low certain objeas to appear, which con-
tradia the ideas we had formed, and
mock our vain researches. Now, if we
are obliged to admit that the order
and beauty of the natural world fuffici-
ently prove it to be the work of a wife
Creator, notwifhftanding the seeming
deformities which it exhibits; are we
not led, by the fame train of reafonmng,
to conclude that the moral world is un-
der the direction of a wife Governor,

3 though

though much of what he now does we SE Rl.
cannot fatisfac'orily explain? I X

Secondly, TIE doctrine of the text is

to be applied rot only for silencing fcep-
tics but for comforting the pious. Nc-
ver let them be dejected by the darkness
which now covers the ways of the Al-
mighty. If he withdraws himself from
their view, it is not becaule he neglects
them; but because they are incapable of
comprehending his designs; because it
were not for their good that all his de-
signs were revealed to them.--nftead of
perplexing themselves about what is ob-
fcure, let them reft on the clear and au-
thentic discoveries that have been given of
the divine goodness. Let them reft on those
great and signal fads that prove it; par-
ticularly on that illustrious fact, the re-
demption of the world by Jesus Christ,
He that spared not his own Son, but gave
him up for us all, will assuredly not always
conceal himself from those who serve him.
Though what he does they know not now,

N 4 the

S E R M. the time approaches when they flall know

IX. ,.r>. hereafter. Till that time come, let them

believe and trust; let them hope and a-
dore. From this conclusion let them ne-
ver depart, that to fear God and keep his
commandments is in every situation the
truest wisdom; that, if there be govern-
ment in the universe at all, the virtuous
and the worthy are loved and protected
by Heaven; that in due JeaJbn they flaall
reap if they faint not; for the care of them
is with the Lord, and their reward with
the Mofi High.

SERMON

# SERMON X. On the SLAVERY of VICE. 2 PETER ii. 19. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage.

SERMON X.
On the SLAVERY of VICE.

2 PETER ii. 19.

While they promise them liberty, they them-

Jelves are the servants of corruption ; for
of whom a man is overcome, of the Jame
is he brought in bondage.
BONDAGE and fubjecion are difa- SERM.

greeable founds to the ear, disagree- X.

able ideas to the mind.' The advo-
cates of vice, taking advantage of those
natural impressions, have in every age
employed them for discrediting religion.
They represent it as the bondage and con-

finement

E R M. finement of the free-born foul of man;

as a state of perpetual constraint, formed
by a fyfiem of severe rules, which design-
ing men have contrived to impose as set-
ters on the multitude. On the other hand,
they paint a licentious course to them-
selves, and hold it out to the world, as
the gay and pleasurable enjoyment of
life; where, having surmounted the pre-
judices of education, and the timorous
Scruples ofconfcience, men can think and
ac at pleasure, and give full scope to
every wish of the heart.-But what if
those pretended sons of freedom be them-
selves held in miserable lubjeetion, and
their boasts of liberty be no more than
the fwJelling words of vanity ? The Apostle
afierts in the text, that while they promnit
liberty to others, they are the firvants, or
slaves, of corruption, overcome, and brought
into bondage by it. This assertion of the
Apotle I purpose to illufirate. I shall en-
deavour to make it appear, that'no true
liberty can arise from vice; that bad men

undergo

undergo the worst servitude; and that no S E R M.
one is free, but he who is virtuous and good. x

IT is necessary to begin with removing

false ideas of liberty, and ihowing in what
it truly consists. We are not to imagine
that to be siee imports our being let loose
from restraint or rule of every kind. No
man; in any condition of life, is at liberty
to a& always as he pleases, and to gratify
every wish he forms. The nature of the
human itate necessarily imposes on all
men various restraints. The laws of so-
ciety allow no one to indulge himself in
pursuits or pleasures that are injurious to
his neighbour. Even our own nature
limits our pleasures within certain bounds.
All our desires cannot be gratified toge-
ther. They frequently interfere, and re-
quire him who would indulge one favour-
ite passion, 'to deny himself in another.
Diftindions, therefore, mufl be made,
preferences be given, and some general
regulation of conduct be observed, by
every one who consults his own welfare.

If

SERM. If there be any regulation which ensures

J us of safety and happiness, to be difen-

gaged firom the obtirvancc of that regu-
lation is no article of liberty; at lealt of
such liberty as a wife man would wifli to
enjoy. It is in effec to be turned loose
to our own ruin. It is such liberty as a
blind man enjoys, of wandering at ran-
dom, and striking into every devious path,
without a guide to dire0c his' steps, and
save him from deftrueion.

That unbounded licentiousness, there-

fore, which finners prefer to every regu-
lation of condut, is altogether different
fiom true freedom. It is in moral beha-
viour the fame as anarchy is in a state,
where law anid order are extint. An-
archy, surely, is no leis incompatible
with true liberty than absolute defpotifin;
and of the two it is hard to fay which is
the least eligible, or the most miserable
slate. Liberty by no means supposes the
abfcnce of all government. It only fulp-
poses that the government under which
we are placed is wife; and that the re-

firaints

ftraints to which we voluntarily fubmiit SEtRM.

X.

ourselves have been contrived for the ge-
neral interest.

To be free, therefore, imports, in gene-

ral, our being placed in such circumflan-
ces, that within the bounds ofjuflice and
good order, we can act according to our
own deliberate choice, and take such mea-
fures for our conduct as we have reason
to believe are conducive to our welfare;
without being obftruded either by ex-
ternal force, or by violent internal impulse.
This is that happy and dignified slate
which every wife man earnestly wishes to
enjoy. The advantages which result from
it are chiefly these three; freedom of choice;
independence of mind; boldness and fe-
curity. In opposition to these diftin-
guifhing characters of liberty, I now pro-
ceed to flow that, in the first place, vice
deprives bad men of free choice in their
acions'; that, in the second place, it
brings them under a flavifll dependence
on external circumstances; and that, in
the third place, it reduces them to that

xI~~
. aabject,

SERM. abjec, cowardly, and disquieted ftatc

>j~ which is effcntially charatleriftic of bon-

dage.

I. VICE is inconfifter' with liberty, as it

deprives finners of the power of free choice,
by bringing them under the dominion
of passions and habits. Religion and virtue
address themselves to reason. They call
us to look round on every fide; to think
well of the consequences of our actions;
and, before we take any ftep of importance,
to compare the good with the evil that
may ensue from it. He therefore who fol-
lows their dictates, aas the part of a man
who freely consults, and chutes, for his own
interest. But vice can make no preten-
sions of this kind. It awaits not the test of
deliberate comparison and choice; but o-
verpowers us at once by some striking im-
pression of present advantage or enjoyment.
It hurries us with the violence of paflion;
captivates us by the allurements of plea-
sure; or dazzles us by the glare of riches.
The finner yields to the impulse, merely

because

because he cannot resist it. Reason re- SEItM.
monftratcs; confkience endeavours to -v
check him; but all in vain. Having once
allowed some strong pafiion to gain the
ascendant, he has thrown himself into
the middle of a torrent, against which he
may Sometimes faintly firuggle, but the
impetuosity of the stream bears him along.
In this situation he is so far from being
free, that he is not matter of himself.
He does not go, but is driven; toffed, a-
gitated, and impelled; paflive, like a fiip
to the violence of the waves.

After paflion has for a while exercised

its tyrannical sway, its vehemence may by
degrees subside. But when by long in-
dulgence, it has established habits of gra-
tification, the finner's bondage becomes
then more confirmed, and more miserable.
For during the heat of pursuit he is little
capable of reflection. But, when his ar-
dour is abated, and nevertheless, a vitious
habit rooted, he has full leisure to per-
ceive the heavy yoke he has brought upon
himself. How many slaves do we fee in

the

SERM. the world to intemperance, and all kinds

xs^ of criminal pleasure, merely through the

influence of customs which they had al-
lowed to become so inveterate that it was
not in their power to alter them? Are
they not often reduced to a condition so
wretched, that when their licentious plea-
fures have become utterly insipid, they
are still forced to continue them, solely be-
cause they cannot refrain; not because
the indulgence gives them pleasure, but
because abstinence would give them pain;
and this too, even when they are obliged
at last to condemn their habits of life, as
injuring their fortune, impairing their
constitution, or disgracing their charac-
ter ? Vice is not of such a nature that we
can fay to it, Hitherto Jhalt thou come and
no further. Having once entered into its
territories, it is not in our power to make
a retreat when we please. He that con-
initteth fin is the Jervant ofJin. No man
who has once yielded up the government
of his mind, and given loose rein to his
desires and paflions, can tell how far these

may

may carry him. He may be brought into S E i M.
such a desperate slate, that nothing ihall x
remain for him but to look back with
regret upon the forsaken path of inno-
cence and liberty; and, severely conscious
of the thraldom he suffers, to groan under
fetters which he despairs of throwing of.
Can the Ethiopian change his Jkin, or the
leopard his /pots ? then may ye ails do good
'who are accu/tomed to do evil **

Vice confirms its dominion, and ex-

tends it still farther over the foul, by com-
pelling the finner to support one crime by
means of another. Not only is he enflav-
ed to those vices which take their rife
from his own inclination, but they render
others necessary, to which, against his in-
clination, he must submit; and thereby
firengthen the commanding power of ini-
quity within him. The immoderate love
of pleasure, for instance, leads him into
expence beyond his fortune. In order to

O
0 support
* Jeremiah Xii. 23.

SERM. support that expencc, he is obliged to
lX. vw-J have recourse to low and diflonourable

methods of gain, which originally he de-
spifcd. To cover these, he is forced upon
arts of dissimulation and fraud. One in-
fiance of fraud obliges him to support
it by another; till, in the end, there a-
rifes a character of complicated vice; of
luxury {hooting forth into baseness, dif-
honesty, injustice, and perhaps cruelty.
It is thus that one favourite paflion brings
in a tribe of auxiliaries to complete the
dominion of fin. Among all our corrupt
passions there is a strong and intimate con-
necion. When any one of them is a-
dopted into our family, it never quits us
until it has fathered upon us all its kind-
red.-By such means as these, by the
violence of passions, by the power of ha-
bits, and by the connection of one vice
with another, fin eftabliflles that servitude
over the will, which deprives bad men of
all power of free choice in their actions.

II. THE slavery produced by vice ap-

pears

pears in the dependence under which it SERtm.
brings the finner, to circumstances of exter- x.
nal fortune. One of the favourite charac-
ters of liberty, is the independence it bc-
llows. He who is truly a freeman is above all
servile compliances, and abject fubjeclion.
He is able to reft upon himself; and while
he regards his superiors with proper de-
ference, neither debases himfclf by cring-
ing to them, nor is tempted to purchale
their favour by dishonourable means.
But the finner has forfeited every privi-
ledge of this nature. Ilis passions and
habits render him an absolute dependant
on the world, and the world's favour; on
the uncertain goods of fortune, and the
fickle humours of men. For it is by
these he subsists, and among these his
happiness is fought; according as his
passions determine him to pursue plea-
fures, riches, or preferments. Having no
fund within himself whence to draw enjoy-
ment, his only resource is in things with-
out. His hopes and fears all hang upon
the world. He partakes in all its viciffi-
tudes; and is moved and shaken by eve-

0 2 ry

SE RM. ry wind of fortune. This is to be in the

x x^ ftrideft sense a slave to the world.

Religion and virtue, on the other

hand, confer on the mind principles of
noble independence. ThIe upright man is
fatijsfedfrom hinefie: He despises not the
advantages of fortune; but he centers
not his happiness in them. With a mo-
derate ihare of them he can be contented;
and contentment is felicity. Happy in
his own integrity, conscious of the esteem
of good men, reposing firm trust in the
providence, and the promises of God, he
is exempted from servile dependence on
other things. He can wrap himself up
in a good confcicnce, and look forward,
without terror, to the change of the world.
Let all things shift around him as they
please, he believes that, by the divine or-
dination, they shall be made to work to-
gether in the issue for his good: And
therefore, having much to hope from
God, and little to fear from the world,
he can be easy in every state. One who
possesses within himself such an establish-

ment

ment of mind, is truly free.-But flall SE R M.
I call that man firee, who has nothing that
is his own, no property assured; whose
very heart is not his own, but rendered
the appendage of external things, and the
sport of fortune? Is that man free, let
his outward condition be ever so splendid,
whom his imperious passions detain at
their call, whom they fend forth at their
pleasure, to drudge and toil, and to beg
his only enjoyment from the.cafualties of
the world? Is he free, who mul flatter
and lie to compass his ends; who must
bear with this man's caprice, and that
man's scorn; must profess friendflip where
he hates, and respect where he contemns;
who is not at liberty to appear in his own
colours, nor to speak his own sentiments;
who dares not be hoieft, left he should
be poor ?-Believe it, no chains bind
so hard, no fetters are so heavy, as those
which fasten the corrupted heart to this
treacherous world; no dependence is
more contemptible than that under which
the voluptuous, the covetous, or the am-

0 3 bitiou-.

SE R M. bitious man lies to the means of pleasure,

X. Fosj gain, or power. Yet this is the boasted li-

berty, which vice promises, as the recom-
pence of setting us free from the salutary
restraints of virtue.

III. ANOTHER character of the slave-

ry of vice, is that mean, cowardly, and dif-
quieted slate, to which it reduces the finner.
Boldness and magnanimity have ever been
accounted the native effets of liberty.
He who enjoys it, having nothing to ap-
prehend from oppressive power, performs
the offices, and enjoys the comforts of
life, with a manly and undisturbed mind,
Hence his behaviour is dignified, and his
sentiments are honourable; while he who
is accuitomed to bend under servile subjec-
tion, has always been found mean-fpirited,
timorous, and bafe.-Compare, in these
,refpeas, the virtuous and the vicious man,
and you will easily fee to which of them
the charateriftics of freedom most justly
belong. The man of virtue, relying on
a good conscience and the protection of

Heaven,

H-Ieaven, acs with firmnes and courage; s ERM.
and in the discharge of his duty, fears X.
not the face of man. The man of vice,
conscious of his low and corrupt aims,
flirinks before the fRedfaft and piercing
eye of integrity; is ever looking around
him with anxious and fearful circumfpec-
tion, and thinking of subterfuges, by
which he may escape fiom danger. The
one is bold as a lion; the other Jlieth when
no man pufiueth. To the one, nothing ap-
pears contemptible, by which he can pro-
cure any present advantage. The other
looks with disdain on whatever would de-
grade his charater. " I will not," fays
he, " so demean myself, as to catch the
" favour- of the greatest man, by this or
" that low art. It hmall not be said or
" thought of me, that d(lid what was base
" in order to make my fortune. Let o-
" thers stoop so low, who cannot be with-
" out the favours of the world. But I
"can want them, and therefore at fich a
"price I will not purchase them." This

04 is

SERM is the voice of true liberty; and speaks

X.
,-,' that greatnets of mind which it is formed

to inspire.

Corresponding to that abject disposition

which charaderifes a bad man, are the
fears that haunt him. The terrors of a
slave dwell on his mind, and often appear
in his behaviour. For guilt is never free
from suspicion and alarm. The finner
is afraid, Sometimes, of the partners of his
crimes, left they betray him; sometimes,
of those who have suffered by his crimes,
left they revenge themselves; frequently,
of the world around him, left it detect
him; and what is worst of all, he is re-
duced to be afraid of himCelf There is
a witness within him that testifies against
his misdeeds; and threatens him in fe-
cret, when other alarms leave him. Con-
science holds up to his view the image of
his past crimes, with this inscription en-
graved upon it, " God 'vill bring every
'" ork into judgement." How opposite is
such a slate as this, to the peaceful fecu-
rity arising from the liberty enjoyed by

the

the virtuous ?- Were there nothing SERM.

X.

more in the circumfiances of finners to .-,
affix upon them the marks of servitude,
this alone would be sufficient, that, as the
Scripture expresses it, through fear of death
they are all their lifetinmefiibjeE to bondage*.
Death sets all other captives free. The
slave who digs in the mine, or labours
at the oar, can rejoice in the profpedt of
laying down his burden together with
his life; and taftes the hope of being at
last on equal terms with his cruel opprcf-
for. But to the slave of guilt there arises
no hope from death. On the contrary,
he is obliged to look forward with con-
ftant terror to this most certain of all
events, as the conclusion of all his hopes
and the commencement of his greatest
miseries.

I HAVE thus set before you such clear
and unequivocal marks of the servitude

undergone
* HI.b. ii. x5.

SE RM. undergone by finners, as fully verify the
\^^j assertion in the text, that a flate.of vice

and corruption is a slate of bondage. In
order to perceive how severe a bondage
it is, let us attend to some peculiar cir-
cumftances of aggravation which belong to
it.

First, It is a bondage to which the mind

itself, the native feat of liberty, is subjed-
ed. In other cafes, a biave man can
comfort himself with reflecing that, let
tyrants do their worst, let prisons or set-
ters be his lot, his mind remains uncon-
quered and free. Of this liberty they
cannot rob him; here he moves in a high-
er sphere, above the reach of oppression or
confinement. But what avails the show
of external liberty, to one who has loft
the government of himself? As our Sa--
viour reasons, in another cafe, If the light
that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness? So we may reason here, if that
part of thy nature, thy mind, thy will,
by which only thou canst enjoy and re.
liih liberty, be itself in bondage to evil

passions

passions and habits, how miserable must SERMI.
be that bondage ? -v

Next, It is aggravated by this confidc-

ration, that it is a bondage which we have
brought upon ourselves. To have been
forced into slavery, is misfortune and mi-
fery. But to have renounced our liberty
and chosen to be slaves, is the greatest rc-
proach added to the greatet milery. Mo-
ments there frequently must be, when a
finner is sensible of the degradation of his
state; when he feels with pain the flavilt
dependence under which he is brought to
fortune and the world, to violent passions
and fettled habits, and to fears and ap-
prehensions arising from conscious guilt.
In such moments, how cruel is the reflec-
tion, that of all this disgrace and misery
he has been the author to himself; that
by voluntary compliance, he has given to
his paflions that haughty ascendant which
they no* exercise over him; has forged
the chains with which he is bound ; and
fold himself to do iniquity!

Lastly,

SE RM. Lastly, The servitude of vice is accomr
x.,-- panied with this farther aggravation, that

it is fubjeeion to our own servants. Those
desires and pafiTons, which the finner has
raised to lawless rule, were given us as
instruments of felf-prefervation ; but were
plainly designed to be under the dire&con
of a higher powern Of themselves, they
are headltrong and blind, they bear all
the marks of intended subordination; and
conscience is invelted with every en-
sign of authority and supremacy. But
fin inverts the whole frame of human na-
ture. It compels reason to bow down
before those passions which it was formed
to command; and leads it, as it were in
triumph, to grace the shameful conquest
of its ministers and servants. It has been
always observed that none are so iniblent
in power, as they who have usurped an
authority to which they had no right;
and so it is found to hold in this inltance.
The desires and paflions of a vitious man,
having once obtained an unlimited sway,
trample him under their feet. They

3 make

make him feel that he is subject to divers, SERM.
and contradictory as well as imperious x
mailers, who often pull him different
ways. His foul is rendered the recep-
tacle of many repugnant and jarring dif-
poftions; and refeinbles some barbar-
ous country, cantoned out into different
principalities, who are continually waging
war on one another. -- Such is the Rfate
into which finners have brought them-
selves, in order to be free from the fuppof-
ed confinement of virtue. Where they
had promised themselves nothing but cafe
and pleasure, they are made to experience
restraints more revere, and mortifications
more painful than any which they would
have undergone under the discipline of
religion.

It will perhaps be contended by some,

that although the representation which
has now been given of the slavery of fin
holds true in certain inilances, yet that
it is applicable only to those who come
under the description of atrocious finlers.
They imagine that a certain moderate

course

SERM. course may be held in vice, by means of

N.- which, men, without throwing altogether

aside the restraints of reason, may enjoy
an easy and pleaiurable life.- By rea-
soning thus, my friends, you flatter and
deceive yourfclves to your own deftruc-
tion. Be assured, that, by every vitious
indulgence, you arc making an approach
to a itate of complete slavery; you are
forfeiting a certain fliare of your liber-
ty; how soon the whole of it may be for-
feited, you are not aware. It is true that
all which has now been said of the fervi-
tude of fin, applies only to a character cor-
rupted in the extreme. But, remember
that to this extreme no man ever arrives
at once. He passes through many of
those intermediate stages, in one of which
you are now perhaps found. Vice al-
ways creeps by degrees; and inferifbly
twines around us those concealed fetters
by which we are at last completely bound.
-As you value therefore your liberty
and your happinefs,,avoid every approach
to evil. Confider all vitious pleasures as

enchanted

enchanted ground, by entering on which, s E M.
you will be farther and farther ensnared X
within the magic circle, till at length you
are precluded from all retreat. The most
pure and virtuous man is always the
freest. The religion of Christ is justly
entitled the perfec7 law of liberty *. It is
only when the Son makes us free, that we
are free indeed: and it was with reason
the Psalmist said, 1 will walk at liberty,
for Ifeek thy precepts 1-.

* James i. 25. ' Psalm cxix. 45.

SERMON

# SERMON XI. On the IMPORTANCE of PUBLIC WORSHIP. PSALM xxvi. 8. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth.

SERMON XI.
On the IMPORTANCE of PUBLIC WOR-

SHIP,

PSALM Xxvi. 8.
Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy

house, and the place where thine honour
dwelleth.
SERM. GOD is a Spirit, and they that wor/hip

hint muf/ worShip him in spirit and in

truth. That religion chiefly consists in
an inward principle of goodness, is be-
yond dispute, and that its.value and effi-
cacy are derived from its effets in puri-
fying the heart, and reforming the life.

All

All external services, which have not this S E lr M.
tendency, are entircly infignificaut. They j
degenerate into mere superstition, equally
unacceptable to God, and unprofitable to
man. Hence they are so often treated in
Icripture with high contempt, when sub-
ftituted in the room of the important du-
ties of a virtuous life.

Notwithstanding this, it is certain that

external fcrviccs have their own place,
and a considerable one too, in the fyilem
of religion. What their proper place is no
one can be at a loss to discern, who will
only make a just diffinAion between the
means, and the end, in religion. It is
evident there is danger of mens erring
here, either on one fide or other; and it
is certain that they have erred on both.
After it was observcd, that mankind were
prone to lay too much weight on the e:;-
ternal parts of religion, it began to be
thought, that no weight was to be allowed
to them at all. The time was, when a1
religion centered in attending the duties
of, the church, and paying veneration to

VOL. IV. P whatever

SE R M. whatever was accounted sacred. This .aone

XI.

r fanriffied the charader, and compensated

every blemish in moral conduct. From
this extreme, the spirit of the age seems to
be running fast into the opposite extreme, of
holding every thing light that belongs to
public worship. But if fuperilition be an
evil, and a very great one it undoubtedly
is, irreligion is not a finaller evil: And
though the form of godlinefi may often
remain, when the power of it is wanting;
yet the power cannot well subsist where
the form is altogether gone.-The holy
Psalmist, whose words are now before us,
discovers much better principles. Ex-
pressing always the highest regard for the
laws of God, and the precepts of virtue,
he breathes, at the fame time, a spirit of
pure devotion. Though loaded with the
cares of royalty, and encircled with the
splendor of a court, he thought it well be-
came him to lhow respeCt to the great
Lord of nature; and on many occasions
expresses, as he does in the text, his de-
light in the public service of the temple.

Lord,

Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy SE RM.
holue, and the place where thine honour Ij
dwelleth. In discoursing from which words
I purpose to flow the importance of the
public worship of God, and the benefits
resulting from it. I fiall confider it in
three lights; as it refpeAs God; as it re-
'fpefts the world; as it respects ourselves,

I. LET us confider it with refpecl to

God. If there cxift a Supreme Being,
the Creator of the world, no consequence
appears more natural and direE than this,
that he ought to be worihipped by his crea-
tures, with every outward expression of
fubmifion and honour. We need only
appeal to every man's heart, whether this
be not' a principle which carries along
with it its own obligation, that to Him
who is the Fountain of our life, .and the
Father of our mercies; to Him who has
raised up that beautiful-ftruclure of the
universe in which we dwell, and where
we are surrounded with so 'rnny blef-
sings and comforts; solemn acknowledge-

P 2 ments

SE R M. ments of gratitude flould be made, prai-

fes and prayers should be offered, and all
suitable marks of dependance on him be ex-
preffed.-This obligation extends beyond
the silent and secret sentiments of our
hearts. Besides private devotion, it na-
turally leads to associations for public wor-
ship; to open and declared profeflions of
refpea for the Deity. Where blessings
are received in common, an obligation
lies upon the community, jointly to ac-
knowledge them. Sincere gratitude is al.
ways of open and diffusive nature. It
loves to pour itself forth; to give free vent
to its emotions; and, before the world,
to acknowledge and honour a Benefactor.

So consonant is this to the natural fen-

timents of mankind, that all the nations
of the earth have, as with one consent,
agreed'to institute fomeiforms of worship;
to hold meetings, at certain times, in ho-
nour of their deities. Survey the focie-
ties of men in their rudest state; explore
the African defarts, the wilds of America,

or
'

or the distant islands of the ocean; and s E ir.
you will find that over all the earth some XI.
religious ceremonies have obtained. You
will every where trace, in one form or o-
ther, the temple, the pricft, and the offer-
ing. The prevalence of the most absurd
superstitions furnishes this teltimony to
the truth, that in the hearts of all men
the principle is engraved, of worflip being
due to that invisible Power who rules the
world.--Herein consists the great excel-
lency of Christian religion, that it hath
inftruaed us in the simple and spiritual
nature of that worship. Disencumbered
of idle and unmeaning ceremonies, its ri-
tual is pure, and worthy of a divine 'Au-
thor. Its positive institutions are few in
number, most significant of spiritual
things, and directly conducive to good
life and pracice. How inexcusable then
are we, if, placed in fiuch happy circum-
fRances, the sense of those obligations to
the public worfliip of God fliall be oblite-
tated among us, which the light of nature

P 3 i'nculcated;

SERM. inculcated, in some measure, on the imof
xl.j wild and barbarous nations ?

The refinements of false philosophy

have indeed suggested this shadow of ob-
jeation, that God is too great to stand in
need of any external Service from his crea-
tures; that our expressions of praise and
honour are misplaced with refpeC to him,
who is above all honour and all praise;
that in his fight, the homage we seek to
pay must appear contemptible; and is
therefore in itself superfluous and tris-
ling.- But who hath taught those vain
reasoners, that all expressions of gratitude
and honour towards a superior become
unsuitable, merely because that superior
needs not any returns Were they ever
indebted to one whose favours they had
it not in their power to repay; and, did
they, jn that account, feel them.selves set
loose from every obligation to acknow-
ledge, and to praise their benefactor? On
the contrary, the more disinterested his
beneficence was, did not gratitude, in any
ingenuous mind, burn with the greater

2a ' ardour,

ardour, and prompt them the more eager- E RM.
ly to seize every opportunity of publicly x.
testifying the feelings of their hearts ?-
Almighty God, it is true, is too great to
need our service or homage. But he is
also too good not to accept it, when it is
the native exprefiion of a grateful and ge-
nerous mind. If pride and felf-fufficien-
cy ftiffle all sentiments of dependance on
our Creator; if levity, and attachment to
worldly pleasures, render us totally ne-
gle&ful of expressing our thankfulness to
Him for his blessings do we not hereby
discover. such a want of proper feeling,
such a degree of hardness and corruption
in our affections, as lhows us to be im-
moral and unworthy; and must justly ex-
pose us to the high displeasure of heaven ?
On the contrary, according to every no-
tion which we can form of the Father of
the universe, must it not be acceptable
to him to behold his creatures properly
affected in heart towards their great bene-
fador; assembling together to express, in
afts of worship, that gratitude, love, and

P 4 reverence

SERM. reverence which they owe him; and thus

xt- nourifling and promoting in one another

an affeclionate sense of his goodness ? Are
not filch dispositions, and such a behavi-
our as this, intimately connected with all
virtue ?

0 Come, let us wortjJip and bow down;

let us kneel before the Lord our maker. For
he is our God; and we are the flock of his
paflure. Enter into his gates with thanks-
g iving and his courts with praise. The pray-
er of the upright is his dclight. It coneth be-
fore him as incetfe, and the uplifting of their
hands as the evening Jfcrfice.--Having
thus shown the reasonableness of public
worihip with refpe& to God, let us now,

II. CONSIDER its importance in another

view, as it refpeds the world. When we
survey the general fate -of mankind, we
find them continually immersed in world-
ly affairs; busied about providing the ne-
ceffaries of life, occupied in the pursuits
of their pleasures, or eagerly profecutihg
the advancement of their interefits. In

03o~~ ~such

such afituation of things, a finall nca- S ERr,

XI.

sure of reflexion might convince any one, --J
that without Iome returns of sacred days,
and some foleinn calls to public worship,
it were impossible to preserve in the
world any sense of objecs, so foreign to
the general current of thought as an in-
visible Governor, and a future state. If it
be of importance to the peace and good
order of society, that there flould prevail
among men the belief of One in the hea-
vens, who is the protector of righteousness
and the avenger of crimes; if it be of im-
portance that they be taught to look for-
ward to a day of judgement, when they
are to be brought to account for their
most secret acions, and eternally reward-
ed or punished, according as their con-
duct has been good or evil; if such prin-
ciples as these, I fay, be of consequence
to the public welfare, they certainly en-
force the authority of public worship,
and prove the necessity of religious in-
ftrudtion.

t

S ER M. I speak now particularly with a view

XI.
W-oj to the multitude, the great mass and body

of the people. We all know, how seldom
from education, or private inftruaion,
they have the advantage of deriving fen-
timents of religion or morality. Early
obliged to labour for their bread, they
would rcmain all their days in gross igno-
rance of every moral or sacred principles
were it not for those public assemblies in
which they hear of God, and Christ, and
judgement, and heaven and hell. Shut
up those temples to which they resort
with reverence; exclude them from the
opportunities they now possess of receiv-
ing religious inftruaion, and imbibing
religious ideas; and what can you expect
them to become? no other than a feroci-
ous rabble, who set free- from checks of
conscience, and fears of divine vengeance,
would be prone to every outrage which
they could commit with impunity. It is
well known that, in the early ages of the
world, fages and legifiators who. endea-
voured to tame and to aflociate the bar-

barous

barous hordes of men, found it necessary s E R .
for this purpose, to have recourse to reli- x
gion. By bringing the rude multitudes to
worship together, and at stated times and
places, to join in hymns and songs to their
deities, they gradually restrained them from
violence, and trained them to fubordina-
tion and civilized life.

During the progress of society in after

periods, religious assemblies at church con-
tinue, I am persuaded, to have a very con-
fiderable influence on the civilization and
improvement of the people. Even inde-
pendent of effeet upon their moral princi-
ples, by leading numbers of them to meet to-
gether in an orderly way, and in their most
decent appearance, they tend to humanize
and polifli their manners. They strength-
en the social conneAions, and promote
friendly intercourse among those who are
in the fame neighbourhood, and in the
fame lines of life. It must at the fame
time, be agreeable to every humane mind
to think, that one day in seven is allotted
for reft to the poor fiom their daily la-

bours.

SERM. bours, and for such enjoyments of efr
Jl and comfort as their flation affords.

It is the only day which gives them oc-
cafion to feel themselves as belonging
to the fame class of beings with their fu-
periors; when joining with them in the
fame afts of worship, and recognizing
a common Lord. Amidfl those dif-
tincions which the difference of ranks
necessarily introduces into human society,
it is surely fit that there be some occasions
when man can meet with man as a bro-
ther, in order that the pride, of the great
may be checked; and the low may be
taught that, if they discharge properly
their appointed part, they have reafbn to
expect, from the Lord of the universe, the
tame rewards with the rich and the
mighty.

It will, I believe, be generally admit-

ted that forms of public worship, and
means of. religious intlruction, are impor-
tant, on several accounts, for the body of
the people, and belong to the maintenance
of public safety and order. But many

who'

who admit this are apt to think, that to SERIM.

XI.

the common people alone they may be -
left. To persons of liberal education and
enlarged minds, what benefit can arifi
from hearing what they already know;
and what, perhaps, is to be inculcated on
them by those who are of inferior capaci-
ty to themselves ?- Admitting this plea
of fuperioriry which their vanity forms,
and Ietting aside for the present any per-
fonal obligation they are under to wor-
lhip God, I must ask such persons, how
they can expec that religious assemblies
will be long refpeted by the lower ranks
of men, if by men of rank and education
they are difcountenanced and forsaken?
Do not they know, that those lower ranks
are ready to copy the manners, and to
follow the example of their fuipriors in
all things; but aflhredly in nothing more,
than in wha: appears to set them free
from restraint, and to gratify licentious-
ness ? While they acknowledge the impor-
tance, and even the necessity, of public re-
!igion to certain clases of men, do they,

nevertheless

SERM. nevertheless, contribute by their beha-
Xl-. viour to defeat the end of public religion,

and to annihilate that importance which
they ascribe to it ?--They are employ-
ed in framing laws and statutes for pre-
venting crimes, and keeping the disorder-
ly multitude within bounds; and at the
fame time, by personally difcountenan-
cing public worihip, they are weakening,
they are even aboliihing, ationg the mul-
titude, that moral restraint, which is of
more general influence upon manners
than all the laws they frame, In vain
they complain of the difionefty of
Servants, of the insolence of mobs,
of the attacks of the highwayman.
To all these disorders they have them-
'elves been accessory. By their open dif-
regard of sacred institutions, they have
disseminatcd profligacy among the peo-
ple. Tley have broken down the flood-
gates which ferved'to restrain the torrent;
they have let it loose to overflow the land;
and by the growing deluge may them-
selves be swept away.-But I must next ar-
gue upon a different ground; and proceed.

III. To

II. To set forth the importance of the sv'r.

XL

public worfllip of God to every individu- r
al, in every rank of life. Whatever his
ftatiofi be, he is still a man; and has the
duties of a man to perform. Were his
attendance on divine worship of no other
effect, than to add countenance to a falu-
tary' institution, this alone would render
it his duty. But moreover, we assert it to
be his duty on his own account; if it be
the duty of every man to use the proper
means of preserving and fortifying his
virtue. All the Christian institutions have
a direct tendency to this end. They all
serve to give warmth to piety, and to add
solemnity to moral virtue. A very high
opinion, indeed, that man mut. have of
his own character, who imagines that, a-
midst all the follies and corruptions of the
world, he stands in need of no affiltance
for enabling him to aft his part with pro-
priety and dignity.

The question is not, whether persons of

rank and education are to learn any thing
that is new to them, by fiequenting the

places

SE R M. places of public worship. The great prin-
XI.- ciples of piety and morality are obvious

and easily known; and we shall readily
admit, that there are manr to whom no
new instruction is communicated in the
house of God. But, my friends, the pur-
pose of your going there is to have known
truths recalled to your mind, and their
dormant influence awakened; is to have
serious meditations suggested; to have
good dispositions raised; to have the heart
adjusted to a composed and tranquil
frame. Is there any man of reason and
reflection, who will not acknowledge such
effects, as far as they follow from attend-
ance on religious ordinances, to be of the
most beneficial nature? These occasional
cessations from the cares and arxieties of
life, there interruptions to the bustle and
the passions of the world, in order to think
and hear of eternity, are both a relief and
an improvement to the mind. By this re-
treat from its ordinary circle of thoughts,
it is enabled to return, with more clea ness

and

and hnore vigour, to the business of the SE R .
\vorld, after a serious and proper pause.

But I muit ask the persons with whom

I now reason, whether there be no other
call to come to God's house, than to hear
inftrucion there? Is not the devout ado-
ration of the God of heaven the principal
object of our religious assemblies; and is
this what any man of reflection, and of
fober mind, dare to make light of? In the
temple of the Lord, the rich and the poor,
the prince and the peasant, appear as sup-
pliants alike for the protection and favour
of the Almighty.--Great and flourifling
as thodn mayst think thyself, know that
thou flAtdelt as much in need of that
protetiboi, as the meanest of the crowd
whom thou beholdeft worihipping, with
lowly reverence, the God of their fathers.
The fun of prosperity shines at present on
thy head, and the favourable gale carries
thee softly along the itream of life. But
the Almighty needs only to give the word,
and initantly the tempet shall rife; and
thy frail bark {hall be driven into the o-

VoL. IV. Q cean,

SER M. cean, and whelmed in the deep. In my

xI. pro/perity Ifaid I Jfiall never be moved.

Thou, Lord, didJI hide thy face, and I was
troubled.-Look up, with dread, to that aw-
ful hand of providence which is stretched
over your heads. Remember the inflabi-
lity of all human things; Remember it,
and tremble, ye who despise the devout
acknowledgement of Him who disposes of
the human fate! Though ye live many years
and rejoice in them all, remember the days of
darkness; for they Jhall be many *.

But after all that has been urged on this

subjet, I am sensible it may be objeced,
that many who make conscience of pay-
ing ftrit regard to the institutions of re-
ligion, do not appear to have derived much
benefit from them. They are not, it will
be said, more improved in moral condut,
and in the proper discharge of the several
duties of life, than others who have been
apparently negligent of the services of the

church.
* Eclef. ii. 8.

church. On the contrary, a formal re- SE R M.
gard to thele appears to be substituted by x
many, in the room of the weightier mat-
ters of the law.- Though this Ihould be
admitted, it goes no farther than to ihow
that human weakness, or corruption, may
defeat the purpose of the most promiling
means of moral improvement. That a
fuperltitious attention to external worflip,
has too often usurped the charateer, and
supplanted the place of real virtue, will
not be dehied, Admonitions against lb
dangerous an error cannot be given too
often. But because the best things have
been often mirapplied and abused, no ar-
gument thence ariles for their being un-
dervalued, and thrown aside. So also rea-
1bn, instruction, and discipline of every
kind, have been frequently perverted to
bad ends; and yet their intrinsic worth
and ufefulnefi remain untouched anti ac-
knowledged.-- Betides this, it cannot be
admitted that, becauie religious inltitu-
tions produce not all the good that might
be wifled, and hoped for, they therefore

QZ (do

SERM. do no good at all. This were a rash and

XI.
,-vL ill-founded conclusion. If the morals of

men are not always amended by them as
they ought to have been, there is reason,
however, to think that they would have
been worse without them. Some check
is always given by them to open profliga-
cy. Some afiftance is furnished to good
dispositions of heart; at least, to decency
of manners. Even momentary impref-
lions of seriousness made on the thoughtless
by the folemnities of religion, are not
without their fruit, They leave general-
ly some trace behind them; and when the
traces are often renewed, they may be
hoped, through the divine blessing, to
form ast last a deep impression on the
mind. .

At the fame time, I do. not fay that re-

ligious institutions work upon the, mind
like a charm;. and that mere bodily at-
tendance on. them will always ensure us
of some profitable effect. Let the means
that are employed, for the improvement
of rational beings, be ever so powerful in

themselves,

themselves, much of their success will al- S ER M.
ways depend on the manner in which x"i
they are received and applied. I shall
therefore conclude my reasonings on this
fubje&, with a few observations concerning
the dispositions requisite on our part, for
deriving benefit from the public ordinan-
ces of religion.

THE ends for which we assemble in the
house of God are two; to worship God,
and to liften to religious instructions.

The public worship of God is the chief

and most sacred purpose of every religious
aflembly of Christians. Let it here be re-
membered, that it is not the uttering, or
the hearing of certain words, that confti-
tutes the worship of the Almighty. It is
the heart that praises, or prays. If the
heart accompany not the words that are
spoken or heard, we ofer the sacrifice of
fools. By the inattentive thought, and the
giddy and wandering eye, we profane the
temple of the Lord, and turn the appear-
ance of devotion into insult and mockery.

0Q3 VWith

SERM. With regard to religious inflruLtion, at-

tention and reverence are unquestionably
due. All religious and moral knowledge
comes from God. It is a light from hea-
ven, first transmitted to man by the ori-
ginal constitution of his nature, and after-
wards made to shine with fairer and fuller
lustre by the revelation of the gospel in
Jesus Christ. Its brightness may some-
times be itrnnger, and sometimes weaker,
according to the mediums by which it is
conveyed. But fill, as far as the initruc.
tions delivered from the pulpit are illu-
minated by the ray from heaven, they
are the truths of God, and ought to be re-
ceived as such. Refinements of vain phi-
lofophy, or intricate fubtilities of theologi-
cal controversy, are undoubtedly not en-
titled to such regard. But when the great
principles of natural or revealed religion
are discussed; when the important doc-
trines of the gospel concerning the life,
and sufferings, and death of our blessed Re-
deemer are displayed;, or useful 'infruc-
tions regarding the regulation of life, and

the

the proper discharge of our several duties, s E R.

XI.

are the fubjedts brought into view; it is k-J
not then the human speaker, but the di-
vine authority that is to be regarded.

In the speaker, many imperfecions and

infirmities may be discovered. The disco-
veries of the gospel are represented in
scripture, as a hidden treasure brought to
light; but, by the appointment of God,
we have this treasure in earthen vefels *.
It is not the spirit of curiosity that ought
to bring us to church. Too often, it is to
be feared, we assemble there merely as
critics on the preacher; critics on his fen-
timents, his language, and his delivery.
But, such are not the dispositions which
become us on so serious an occasion. It
is with humility, with fairness, and can-
dour, with an intention to improve our-
selves in piety and virtue, with a view to
make personal application to our own cha-
racter, that we ought to hear the word of

tQ4 God.
2 Corinth. 4. 7.

SERM. God.---When we enter the sacred tcLn-

XI.
,_,j pie, let us ever conrider ourselves as crea-

tures surrounded with darkness, seeking
illumination from heaven; as guilty crea-
tures, imploring forgiveness from our
judge; as frail and mortal creatures, pre-
paring for that eternal habitation into
which we know not how soon we are to
pass.

IF, with such Sentiments and impref-

sions we join in the worihip of God, and
the ordinances of religion, we mayjuftly
hope that they shall be accompanied to us
with the divine blefing. It is the exprefa
precept of God, not toforfake the a/embting
of otpjelves together *. Gather together the
people, men, women, and children, that they
may hear, and that they may learn, and fear
the Lord your God, and observe to do all
the words of this law t. Enter his gates

with

Heb. io. 25.
t Deut. xxxl. 12,

with thanksgiving, and his courts with SERRM.

XI.

praifc. Give unto the Lord the glory due to -,
his name.- Thus hath God commanded,
and he never commanded his people to
seek his name in vain. For, where two or
three are gathered together in his name, our
Lord hath told us that he is in the midjif of
them *. God hath Jaid that he loveth the
gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of
Jacob t. The prayer of the upright is his
delight. Both in their temporal and fpi-
ritual concerns, they may be most expected
to prosper, who can fay with the Psalmist
in the text, Lord I have loved the habita-
tion of thy house, and the place where thine
honour dwelleth.

Matth. xviii. 20.
t PL xxxvii. 2.

SERMON

# SERMON XII. On the FASHION of the WORLD passing away. I COR. vii. 31. — The fashion of this world passeth away.

S E R M O N XII.
On the FASHION of the WORLD pafling

away.

I COR. vii. 31.

-Thefafiion of this world pabeth away.
SERM. O use this world so as not to abuse it,

T-y~ J is one of the most important, and at
the fame time one of the most difficult
lessons which religion teaches. By so ma-
ny desires and passions we are connected
with the objects around us, that our at-
tachment to them is always in hazard of
becoming excessive and sinful. Hence re-
ligion is often employed in moderating

this

this attachment, by recCifying our errone- SERM.
ous opinions, and inftruting us in the x-
proper value we ought to set on worldly
things. Such was particularly the scope
of the Apoflle in this context. He is put-
ting the Corinthians in mind that their
time is fljort; that every thing here is tran-
fitory; and therefore, that in all the diffe-
rent occupations of human life, in weep-
ing and rejoicing, and buying and poe;ng,
they were ever to keep in view this con-
fideration, that thefanfion of this world pas-
feth away. The original expreflion im-
ports, the figure or form under which the
world presents itself to us. The meaning
is, All that belongs to this visible state is
continually changing. Nothing in hu-
man affairs is fixed or flable. All is in
motion and flutuation; altering its ap-
pearance every moment, and pafling into
some new form. Let us meditate for a
little on the serious view which is here
given us of the world, in order that we
may attend to the improvements which
it suggests.

I. The

SE R M. I. The fasJion of the worldpafeth away,
ALv- as the opinions, ideas, and manners of

men are always changing. We look in
vain for a standard to ascertain and fix
any of these; in vain expe6c that what
has been approved and established for a
while, is always to endure. Principles
which were of high authority among our
ancestors are now exploded. Systems of
philosophy which'were once universally
received, and taught as infallible truths,
are now obliterated and forgotten. Modes
of living, behaving, and employing time,
the pursuits of the busy, and the enter-
tainments of the gay, have been entirely
changed. They were the offspring of
fashion, the children of a day. When
they had run their course, they expired;
and were fdcceeded by other modes of
living, and thinking, and acing, which
the gloss of novelty recommended for a
while to the public taste.

When we read an'account of the man-

ners and occupations, of the studies and
opinions, even of our own countrymen,

in

in some reinote age, we seem to be read- s E R .
ing the history of a different world from xIL
what we now inhabit. Coming down-
wards through some generations, a new
face of things appears. Men begin to
think, and at, in a different train; and
what we call refinement gradually opens.
Arriving at our own times, we confider
ourselves as having widely enlarged the
sphere of knowledge on every fide, hav-
ing formed just ideas on every sub-
je&t; having. attained the proper standard
of manners and behaviour; and wonder
at..the ignorance, the uncouthness, and
rusticity of our forefathers. But, alas!
what appears to us so perfet fllall in its
turn pass away. The next race, while
they shove us off the flage, will introduce
their favourite discoveries and innova-
tions; and what we now admire as the
height of improvement, may in a few ages
hence be confidered as altogether rude and
imperfect. As one wave effaces the ridge
which the former had made on the sand
by the sea shore, fo.every succeeding age

obliterates

SE R . obliterates the opinions and modes of the
xt., age which had gone before it. Thefa/hion

of the 'world is ever passing away.

Let us only think of the changes which

our own ideas and opinions undergo in
the progress of life. One man differs not
more from another, than the fame man
varies from himself in different periods
of his age, and in different situations of
fortune. In youth, and in opulence, eve-
ry thing appears smiling ard gay. We
fly as on the'wings of fancy; and survey
beauties wherever we cal our eye. But
let some more years have passed over our
heads, or let disappointments in the wdrld
have depressed our spirits; and what a
change takes place? The pleasing illusions
that once ihone before us; the splendid
fabrics that imagination had reared; the
enchanting maze in which we once Wan-
dered with delight, all vanish and are for-
gotten. The world itself remains the
fame. But its form, its appearance, and
aspeA, is changed to our view; itsfa/hiotf,
as to us, hath pased away.

- II. WHILE

II. WHILE our opinions and ideas are SERM.

thus changing within, the condition of x-
all external things is, at the fame time,
ever changing without us, and around us.
Wherever we cast our eyes over the face
of nature, or the monuments of art, we
discern the marks of alteration and viciffi-
tude. We cannot travel far upon the
earth, without being presented with many
a firiking memorial of the changes made
by time. What was once a flourishing
city, is now a negleced village. Where
castles and palaces stood, fallen towers
and ruined walls appear. Where the mag-
nificence of the great shone, and the mirth
of the gay resounded, there, as the prophet
Isaiah describes, the owl and the raven now
dwell, thorns come up, and the nettle and the
bramble grow in the courts.-When we
read the history of nations, what do we
read but the history of incessant revolution
and change? We behold kingdoms alter-
nately rising and falling; peace and war
taking place by turns; princes, heroes,
and statesmen, coming forth in succession

3 on

SERM. on the stage, attracting our attention for
xji. a little by the splendid figure they make,

and then disappearing and forgotten. Wd
fee thefaJfion of the world affiuming all its
different forms, and in all of them, paring
away.

But to historical annals there is no oc-

cafion for our having recourse. Let any
one, who has made some progress in life,
recollec only what he has beheld passing
before him, in his own time. We have
seen our country rife triumphant among
the nations; and we have seen it alf(i
humbled in its turn. We have seen in
one hemisphere of the globe new do-
nions acquired, and in another hemi-
sphere, our old dominions loft. At
home, we have seen factions and par-
ties shift through all their different
forms; and administrations, in fucceflion,
'rife and fall. What were once the great
themes of eager difcuflion, and political
contest, are now forgotten. Fathers re-
count them to their children as the tales
of other times. New adtors have come

Zat-~ ~forth

forth on the stage of the world. New ob- s E R M.

XII.

jets have attracted the attention, and new ,j
intrigues engaged the passions of men.
New members fill the feats ofjultice; new
ministers the temples of religion; and a
new world, in fliort, in the course of a
few years, has gradually and insensibly
risen around us.

When from the public scene we turn

our eye to our own private connections,
the changes which have taken place in the
faJhion of the ,world, must touch every
refleAing mind with a more tender fenfi-
bility. ,For where are now, many of the
companions of our early years; 'many
of those with whom we first began the
race of life; and whofc hopes and pro-
ipeas were once the fame with our
own? In recollecing our old acquaintance
and friends, what devafations have been
made. by the hand of time? On the ru-
ins of our former connections, new ones
have arisen; new relations have been
formed; and the circle of those among
whom we live is altogether changed from

VOL. IV. R what

SERM. what it once was. Comparing our pre¢
xll sent situation with our former condition

of life; looking back to our father's house,
and to the scenes of youth; remembering
the friends by whom we were trained,
and the family in which we grew up; who,
but with inward emotion, recollects those
days of former years, and is disposed to
drop the silent tear, when he views the
fajhion of the world thus always paffng a.
way !

III. NOT only our connections with all

things around us change, but our own
life, through all its itages and conditions,
is ever passing. away. How just, and how
affecing is that image, employed .in the
sacred writings to describe the state of
man, we spend our years as a tale that is
told ! It is not to any thing great or
lasting that human life is compared; not
to a monument that is built, or to an in-

scription
Pfal. xc9.

rcription that is engraved(; not even to a SE RM.
book that is written, or to a hiilery that is i
recorded; but to a tale, -which is lillened
to for a little; where the words arc fu-
gitive and passi'ng, and where one incident
Ihccceds and hangs on another, till, by in-
sensible transitions, we are brought to the
close; a tale, which in bome pafliges may
he aiufing, in others, tedious; but whe-
ther it amuses or fatigues, is soon told,
and soon forgotten. Thus, year fleals up-
on us after year, Life is never htanding
fill for a moment; but continually, though
insensibly, sliding into a new form. Infancy
rils up fait to childhood; childhood to
youth; youth palffs quickly into manhood;
and the grey hair and the faded look are not
long of admnonifling us, that old age is at
hand. In this course all generations run.
The world is made up of unceasing rounds
of transitory existence. Some generations
are coming forwvard into being, and others
hatening to leave it. The stream which
carries us all along is ever flowing with a

R 2 quick

SERM. quick current, though with a Uill andt

-,,, noiseless course. The dwelling place of

man is continually emptying, and by a
fresh succession of inhabitants, continually
filling anew. The memory of man pafetl
awayj, like the remembrance oJ a guteJt wh
hath tarried but one night.

As the life of man, confidered in its du.

ration, thus fleets and pases away, so du-
ring the time it lasts, its condition is per-
petually changing. It affords us nothing
on which we can set up our reft; no en-
joyment or possession which we can pro.
perly call our own. When we have be-
gun to be placed in such circumstances
as we desired, and wifli our lives to pro.
ceed in the fame agreeable tenor, how of-
ten comes some unexpeced event across,
to disconcert all our schemes of happiness?
- Our health declines; our friends die; our

families are scattered; something or other
is not long of occurring, to fliow us that
the wheel muff turn round; the fyijion of
the 'world muff pas away.' Is there. any
man who dares to look to futurity with

all

an eye of confident hope; and to fly, that s E RM.
against a year hence, he call promise be-
ing in the fame condition of health or for-
tune, as he is at prefnt ? The feeds of
change are every where sown in our flatc;
and the very causes that seemed to pro-
mise us security, are often secretly under-
mining it. Great fame provokes the at-
tacks of envy and reproach. High health
gives occasion to intemperance and disease.
The elevation of the mighty never fails
to render their condition tottering; and
that obscurity which fielters the mean,
exposes them, at the fame time, to become
the prey of oppreflion. So completely
is tlheftjiioi of ihis 'world made by Provi-
dence for change, and prepared for pa/finj
away. In the midst of this inflability, it
were some comfort, did human prosperity
decay as slowly as it rifes. By flow de-
grees, and by many intervening fleps, it
rifes. Bit one day is sufficient to scat-
ter, and bring it to nought. I might
add,

R 3 IV. THAT

S E R M. IV. T hat the world itself in which we
x". dwell, the basis of all our prefcnt enjoy.

ments, is itfclf contrived for change, and
designed to pass away. While the gene.
rations of men come forth in their turns,
like troops of succeeding pilgrims, to act
their part on this globe, the globe oa
which they ac't is tottering under their feet,
It was once overflowed by a deluge. It is
shaken by earthquakes; it is undermined
by subterraneous fires; it carries many
a mark of having suffered violent con-
vulfions, and of tending to dissolution.
Revelation informs us, that, there is a day
approaching, in which the heavens f/Jil
pass away with a great noifr; the elenwit
Jjall melt with fe, vent heat; and the earti
and the works therein Jhall be burnt tp.
When this deltined hour arrives, the Jl-
Jflion of the world flall have finally paql
away. Immortal spirits lhall then look
back upon this world, as we do at present on
cities and empires, which were once mighty
and flourishing, but now are swept fiomn

s~~~~~~. sr

.iltence, and their place is no more to be s E It r.
found. ,-

I SHALL infif no longer on this repre-

fentation of things. Enough has been
said, to flow that the f/Jion i of the wo, IA,
in every sense, pses away. Opinions and
manners, public affairs and private con-
cerns, the life of man, the conditions of
fortune, and the earth itself on which we
dwell, are all changing around us.-Is
every thing, then, with which we are
connected, passing and transitory ? Is the
whole slate of man no more than a dream
or fleeting vision ? Is he brought forth, to
be only the child of a day ? Are we thrown
into a river, where all flows, and nothing
stays; where we have no means of resist-
ing the current; nor can reach any firm
ground, on which to reft our foot ?-No,
my brethren; man was not doomed to be
so unhappy; nor made by his Creator so
much in vain. There are three fixed and
permanent objects, to which I must now
call your attention, as the great supports

R4 of

SERM. of human confancy amidst this fugitive
XII fiate. Though this world changes and

paffcs away, virtue and goodness never
change; God never changes; heaven and
immortality pass not away.

Fiif, VIRTUE and goodness never

change. Let opinions and manners, con-
ditions and situations, in public and in
private life, alter as they will, virtue is
ever the fame. It refts on the immove-
able basis of Eternal Truth. Among all
the revolutions of human things it main-
tains its ground; ever pofieffing the vene-
ration and esteem of mankind, and con-
ferring on the heart, which enjoys it, fa-
tisfadion and peace. Consult the moit
remote antiquity. Look to the molt fa-
vage nations of the earth. How wild,
and how fluctuating soever the ideas of
men may have been, this opinion you will
find to have always prevailed, that probi-
ty, truth, and beneficence, form the honour
and the excellency of man. In this, the
philosopher and the ravage, the warrior
.D3 -and

and the hermit, join. At this altar all S ltRM.
have worflhipped. Their offerings may
have been unseemly. Their notions of
virtue may have.been rude, and occasion-
ally tainted by ignorance and fuprfltition;
but the fundamental ideas of moral worth
have ever remained the fame.

Here then is one point of stability, as-

sected by no vicissitudes of time and life,
on which we may reft. Our fortunes
may change, and our friends may die;
but virtue may still be our own; and as
long as this remains, we are never mifera-
ble. Till I die I will not remove my inte-
grityfrom me. My righteotnlefs 1 holdfafl,
and will not let it go. My heart fliall not re-
proach mefo long as I live '*. He who, with
the holy man of old, can hold this language,
may with undisturbed mind survey time
flying away, life decaying, and the whole
faihion of the world changing around him.
He hath.within himself, a source of con-
folation and hope, independent of all earth-

ly
. Job xxvii. i 6.

SERM. ly objets. Every terrestrial glory spar-

XII.
tsr-o kles only for a little, with transient bright-

ness. But virtue flines with eternal and
unalterable splendour. It derives its ori-
gin from heaven; and partakes both of the
lustre, and the stability, of celestial objecs.
It is the brightness of the everlaJling light;
the fotpotted mirror of God, and the image
of his goodnefi.

IN the second place, God never changes,

Amidst the unceasing viciflitude of. earth-
ly things, there remains at the head of
the universe an eternal protedor of vir-
tue, whose throne is eflablijhed for ever.
With him there is no variablene/i, neither
any /hadow of turning; no inconstancy of
purpose, and no decay of wisdom or of
power. We know that he loved righte-
ou'fnefs from the beginning of days, and
that he will continue to love it unaltera-
'bly to the last. Foreseen by him was eve-
ry revolution which the course of ages
has produced. All the changes which
happen in the slate of nature, or the life

of

of men, were comprehended in his decree. s E II m.

xl'.

H-low much soever worldly things may ,.,
change in themfclves, they are all united
in his plan; they conltitute one great iyf-
tem or whole, of which he is the Author;
and which, at its final completion, fliall
appear to be perfec. His dominion
holds together, in a continued chain, the
fucceflive variety of human events; gives
flability to things that in themrfilves arc
flucuating; gives constancy even to the
fjiion of the world while it is pagfing awan.
Wherefore, though all things change on
earth, and we ourselves be involved in the
general mutability, yet as long as, with
trust and hope, we look up to this Supreme
Being, we reft on the rock of ages, and are
safe amidst every change. We possess a
fortress to' which we can have recourse in
all dangers; a refuge under all florms
a dwelling place in all generations.

IN the third and last place, heaven and

immortality pass not away. The fleeting
scenes of this life are to be confideied as
no more than an introdution to a nobler

and

S ERM. and more permanent order of things,
XIIj when man shall have attained the matu-

rity of his being. This is what reason
gave oIme ground to expect; what reve-
lation has fully confirmed; and in con-
firming it, has agreed with the sentiments
and anticipations of the good and wife in
every age. We are taught to believe, that
what we now behold, is only the firlt tlage
of the life of man. We are arrived no
farther than the threflold; we dwell as in
the outer courts of existence. Here, tents
only are pitched; tabernacles eresced for
the sojourners of a day. But in the re-
gion of eternity, all is grcht, tfable, and un-
changing. There, the mansions of the just
are prepared: there, the city which hath
foundations is built; there is established,
the kingdom whic canniot be moved. Here,
every thing is in ifir and fluctuation;
because here good men continue not, but
pass onward in the course of being.
There, all is fercne, steady and orderly;
because there remaineth the final rejt of
the people of God. Here, all is corrupted

by

by our folly and guilt; and of courfc sl. Il.
muff be transient and vain. But there, 'il
purchased by the death, and secured by the
refurretion of the Son of God, is an inhle-
ritance incorruptible, undefiled; and that fadeth
not away. There reigns that tranquillity
which is never troubled. There fliines that
fun which never sets. There flows that ri-
ver of pleasures, which is always unruffled
and pure. Looking forward to those di-
vine habitations, the changes of the pre-
sent world disappear to the eye of faith;
and a good man becomes ashamed of sus-
fering himself to be dejeced by what is
so soon to pass away.

SucHr are the objeds you ought to op-

pose to the transient falhion of the world;
Virtue, and God, and Heaven. Fixing
your regard on these, you will have no
rcafon to complain of the lot of man, or
the world's mutability.- The design of
the preceding representation which I gave
of the world, was not to indulge vain de-
clamation; to raise fruitless melancholy;
or to throw an unnecessary cloud over hu-

man.

S ERM . ilan life. But to show the moderation

.--, requisite in our attachment to the world;

and at the fame time, to point out the
higher objects both of attention and con-
folation which religion affords.-Paff-
ing and changeable as all human things
are, among them, however, we muif at
present aót our part; to them we mufl
return from religious meditation. They
are not below the regard of any Christian;
for they form the scene which providence
has appointed at present for his activity,
and his duty. Trials and dangers they
may often present to him; but amidlt
these he will safely hold his course, if,
when engaged in worldly affairs, he keep
in view those divine objecs which I have
been setting before him. Let him ever
retain connection with Virtue, and God,
and I-eaven. By them let his conduc be
regulated, and his constancy supported.
So lhall he t/ei this world without abtfing
it. He shall neither droop under its miif
fortunes, nor be vainly elated by its ad-
vantages; but through all its changes

flhall

fllall carry an equal and fecady mind; SERM.

XII.

and in the end shall receive the accom- \~J
plifiment of the promise of scripture, that
though the world ptrfeth away, and the lust
thereof, he that doth the will of God fJall
abidefor ever *.

I John ii. I7.

SERMON

# SERMON XIII. On TRANQUILLITY of MIND. PSALM xv. 5. — He that doth these things shall never be moved.

S E R M 0 N XIII,
On TRANQUILLITY of MIND.

PSALM xv. 5.
-He that doth these things Jhall never be

moved.
SERM. T RANQUILLITY of mind, or, in the

X , _ words of the text, a mind not

moved or disquieted by the accidents of
life, is undoubtedly one of the greatest
blessings that we can possess on earth.
It is here mentioned as the reward of the
man, whose character had been described
in this psalm, as leading a virtuous life,
and discharging his duty towards God

and

ild his neighbour. It is indeed the ulti- S E R M.
mate aim, to which the wishes of the wife
and reflecting have ever been directed,
that with a mind undilturbed by anxieties,
cares, and fears, they might pass their
days in a pleasing serenity. They justly
concluded that, by enjoying themselves
in peace, they would enjoy, to the greatest
advantage, all the comforts of life that
came within their reach.

This happy trahquillity, the multitude

conceive to be most readily attainable by
means of wealth, or, at least, of an easy
fortune; which they imagine would set
them above all the ordinary disturbances
of life. That it has some effec for this
purpose, cannot be denied. Poverty and
straitened circumstances are often incon-
fiftent with tranquillity. To be destitute
of those conveniencies that suit our rank
in the world; to be burdened with an-
xiety about making provision for every
day which passes over our head; instead of
bringing comfort to a family who look
up to us for aid, to behold ourselves fur-

VOL. IV. S rounded

SERM. surrounded with their wants and com'.
xl.j plaints, are circumfiances which cannot

fail to give much uneasiness to every feel-
ing mind. To take measures, therefore,
for attaining a competent fortune, by lau-
dable means, is wife and proper. Entire
negligence of our affairs, and indifference
about our worldly circumltances, is, for
the most part, the consequence of some
vice, or some folly.-At the fame time, I
must observe, that the attainment of opu-
lence is no certain method of attaining
tranquillity. Embaraffinents and vexa-
tions often attend it; and long experience
has flown, that tranquillity is far from be-
ing always found among the rich. Nay,
the higher that men rife in the world, the
greater degrees of power and diftinAion
which they acquire, they are often the far-
ther removed from internal peace. The
world affords so many inflances of miseries
abounding in the higher ranks of life,
that it were needless to enlarge on a topic
so generally known and admitted.

~I ~ ~
' ' Assuming

Assuming it, therefore, for an undoubt- s E R IM.

XIII,

ed truth, that the mere pofffion of the x
goods of fortune may be confident with
the want of inward tranquillity, we must
look around for other more certain grounds
of it. We must inquire whether any line
of conduct can be pointed out, which, in-
dependent of external situation in the
world, fliall tend to make us easy in mind;
mhall either bestow, or aid, that tranquilli-
ty which all men desire. The remaining
part of this discourse flal' be employed in
suggesting, with great plainness of speech,
such directions as appear to me most mate-
rial on this important fubjedt.

THE fief direcion, which I have to fug-

gest, is, that we imitate the character of the
man who is dcfcribed in this psalm as
walking uprightly, working rightceoiitess,
and speaking the truth, as he thinketh in his
heart; that we study to preserve a clear
conscience, and to lead a virtuous and ho-
nourable, at leafd an innoffenfive and in-
nocent, life. Of such a man only it can

S2 be

SERaM. be said, tl\at doing these things he Jhall ie-
XIIII
\Xj ver be miovcd. So great is the power of

conscience over every human being, that
the remembrance of crimes never fails to
overthrow tranquillity of mind. Be as-
fured, that he who defrauds his neighbour,
who has ensnared the innocent, has viola-
ted his.truft, or betrayed his friend, {hall
never enjoy within himself undisturbed
quiet. His evil deeds will at times recur
to his thoughts, like ghosts rising up
in black array before him to haunt his
couch. Even the sense of a foolish and
trifling condut, of a life past in idleness
and dissipation; by which, though a man
has not been guilty of great crimes, he
has however wafted his substance, mifpent
his time, and brought upon himself just
reproach; even this, I fay, is fuflicient to
create much uneafinefs.and disquiet to the
heart, Let him, therefore, who wiflles to
enjoy tranquillity, study, above all things,
to aa an irreproachable part. With com-
fort he will reft his head on his pillow at
night, when he is conscious that through-

out

out the day he has been doing his duty S ER M.
towards God and man; when none of the i
tranfaaions of that day come back, in
painful remembrance, to upbraid him.
To this testimony of a good conscience, let
him be able,

IN thefecond place, to join humble trult

in the favour of God. As, after the bes
endeavours we can use, no man's beha-
viour will be entirely faultless, it is effen-
tial to peace of mind, that we have some
ground for hope in the Divine mercy,
that, through the merits of Jeffis Christ,
our defects ihall be forgiven, and grace
be shewn us by Heaven. This includes
all the duties of faith and repentance that
are required by the Gospel; the faithful
discharge of which duties is absolutely ne-
ceffary for delivering us from those fears
of another world, which, if not allayed,
are sufficient to banish all tranquillity from
the heart. Our religious principles must
at the fame time be found and pure; and
carefpl!y preferyed from the taint of fu-

S 3 perfition

SERM. perflition, whose gloomy horrors, taking
xnl. poffeflion of weak and ill-informed minds,

convert what they miflake for religion, in-
to a source of mifery.-Moreover, it is ne-
ceffary, that we be able to place trust in
God, not only as our future Judge, but as
the present Governor of human affairs.
So uncertain is the continuance of every
earthly comfort, that he, who reposes no
confidence in the Supreme Disposer of e-
vents, mufft be often disquieted and de-
jected.. He alone possesses firm tranquil-
lity, who, amidst all human vicissitudes,
looks up, with fettled trust, to an almighty
Ruler, as to one under whose condudt he
is safe. To him alone belongs that hap-
py; privilege, described by the Psalmist:
Hle /hfall not be afraid of evil tidings; his
heart is fxed; trunfing in the Lord *.

I have pointed out the primary and es-

fential foundations of tranquillity; viituous
conduc, good principles, and pious dif-

positions.
Psalm cxii. 7.

positions. At the fame time, a man may s E RM.
be both pious and virtuous, and yet,
through some defects in the management
of his mind and temper, may not possess
that happy serenity and felf-enjoyment,
which ought to be the portion of virtue
and piety. Inflances of this will occur to
every one who is acquainted with the world.
We too often behold persons, whose prin-
ciples, and whose moral condut, are in the
main unexceptionable, leading an uncom-
sortable life; through fretfulness of temper,
peevishness of manners, or sullenness of
disposition. There is, therefore, some dif-
cipline to be ftddied; there are some fubfi-
diary parts of character to be attended to,
in order to give piety and virtue their full
effect for conferring tranquillity. To the
consideration of these secondary means I
now proceed. Let me then advise you,

In the third place, to attend to the cul-

ture and improvement of your minds.
A fund of useful knowledge, and a flock
of ideas, afford much advantage for the

S 4 enjoyment

SE R M. enjoyment of tranquillity. I do not mean,
\^tj that every man mutl study to become

deeply learned. The situation of many
would not allow it. The talle, and the
habits of others, prevent it. But what I
mean is, that every man who wishes to
lead a comfortable life ihould provide for
himself, as much as he can, by means of
observation, reading, and refleting, a
large field of useful thoughts. In a mind
absolutely vacant, tranquillity is seldom
found. The vacancy too often will be
filled up by bad desires and passions.
Whereas, the mind of a wife man is a
kingdom to itself. In his lonely, or me-
lancholy hours, he finds always resources
within himself, to which he can tlrn for
relief. As there are many occasions when
external objects afford no pleasure, it is
only by being able to reft on the enter-
tainments afforded to himself by his
mind, that any one can pass his days with
felf-enjoyment. Let me recommend for
the fame purpose,

.r

In the fourth place, that we be always SERlM

XII.

careful to provide proper employment for ,,-
our time. Regular industry and labour,
with intervals of ease, is perhaps the state
moit conducive of any to tranquillity. If
our tfation give no call to industry, it will
be profitable that we tfudy to have fmce
end or object in view, to which our atten-
tion fllall be directed. Relaxation from
intense, or incessant pursuit, is requisite for
comfort. But if relaxation degenerate
into total idleness, it becomes in a high
degreee adverse to tranquillity. Every
man by his nature, is formed, more
or less, for action. In a mind that-is en-
tirely quiescent, and that has no object to
put it into motion, instead of felf-enjoy-
ment, there will be contlant languor, te-
dioufnefs, and misery. Life flagnates in
such a situation, like a pool of dead waters;
and the man becomes a burden to him-
self. -Violent and dangerous pursuits,
which distract and embroil thoe-wvlho are
engaged in them, I cannot be underltood
to recommend. Every one fees how so-

reign

6ERM. reign these are to a slate of tranquillity,
-rjv But in the ordinary tenor of calm and

easy life, I would advise every one to have
some end before him; some objec which
1hall bring the mind into action, and fill
up the vacuities of time. Provided the
objec be innocent, and of no unsuitable
or degrading nature, it may answer this
purpose, though it fliould not be in itself
of high importance. It is better for the
mind to have some determinate direcion
given it, than to be always left floating, as
it were, in empty fpace.-But about What-
ever objects we are employed, it is still
more material to tranquillity that, in the

Fifth place, we learn to govern our pas-

sions. There are the most frequent dif-
turbers of our peace. Necessary as their
impulse is to give activity to the mind,
yet if they are not kept in fubdrdination
to reason, they speedily throw all things
into confusion. Such of them as belong
to the malignant and unsocial class, evi-
dently tend to produce vexation and dif-
.uict. Against suffering these to gain

possession

poflcffion of the heart, admonition is SE R I.
scarcely necessary. But I muff admoniflh X-
you, that even those which arc accounted
of innocent nature, and which therefore
may lay hold of virtuous minds, if they
obtain the entire mastery, are sufficient to
overthrow the tranquillity of life. Let
every one, therefore, who values that tran-
quillity, study to retain moderation and
felf-command, even in the midfl of pas-
sions which have a fair and bland appear-
ance. He will find that the gratification
of any one of them, compensates not that
perpetual slavery to which it will reduce
him, when it becomes inordinate.

I have farther to admonifi you, that

this felf-command is particularly neceffa-
ry in all that relates to habitual temper.
Even where strong passions are out of the
queflion, those flighter emotions which
ruffle or four the temper, are sufficient, by
their frequent recurrence, to poison all
felf-enjoyment. He who would possess a
tranquil state, must, above all things, cul-
tivate calmness and gentleness of difpofi-

tion,

SE RM. tion. He ought especially to cultivate it in

i that society, whetherdomeftic orfocial,with

which he has most frequent intercourfc.
We all know, that there are thousands who
in public, and in formal companies, appear
to be all gentleness and sweetness, but
who, at home, and among their nearest
relations, give vent, with freedom, to the
most harfil and peevifli dispositions. Such
persons are not likely to enjoy much real
comfort. For it is in the daily and fami-
liar intercourse of life, that temper chief-
ly exerts its power, either for promoting
or for disturbing, the tranquillity of our
days. On occasions when men come clof-
eft together, if, infiead of meeting in
finooth contat, they rub and grate on
one another, the feelings produced on
both fides are of the most offensive and
displeasing kind. Nothing can be affum-
ed as a more certain axiom, than that he
who allows either inordinate passions, or
a cross temper, to govern him, must,
though he should poffels all that flourili-

ing

ing fortune can bestow, be a ftrangcr to SERM.

XIII.
tranquillity. J

In the Jixth place, let me advise you ne-

ver to expect too much from the world.
High hopes, and florid'views, are great e-
nemies to tranquillity. When raflily in-
dulged, they are constantly producing
disappointments. Their indulgence, in the
mean time, occasions discontent with our
present situation; and he who is difcon-
tented cannot be happy. One of the firit
lesions, both of religion and of wisdom, is,
to moderate our expectations and hopes;
and not to set forth on the voyage of life
like men who expeEt to be always carried
forward with a favourable gale. Let your
views be suited to your rank and station
in the world; and never soar fantastical-
ly beyond them. Content yourselves with
fober pleasures, and form your relifl to
them. Be thankful when you are free
from pain, though you be not in the
midst of high enjoyment. Be satisfied if
the path you tread be easy and smooth,

a though

SERM. though it be not firewed with flowers.
XIII.
'w Human life admits not of continued plea-

sure; nor is it always rendered happy by
great exaltation.' Remember, that it is a
middle region which is the native stations
of tranquillity. It neither aspires to those
heights of the atmosphere where the thun-
der is formed; nor creeps always on the
ground. Asset not, on every occasion, to
put yourselves forward. Be content to
retire sometimes into the shade; and al-
low others to take their proper place.-
It will be e'fily seen, that I speak not now
to the ambitious and aspiring; but to
those who value tranquillity more than
splendid appearance in the world.

Such persons I also advise, while they

expec not too much from the world;,
neither, also, to form too high expecta-
tions 'from the characters of those on
whose friendship they reft, and 'with
whom it is their lot to be connected, ei-
Niher in social or dometfic relations. 'If
you have looked for perfection any where,
you will find'youifelf disappointed'; nhd

the

the consequence of this disappointment S ER .
will be, that friendship will cool, and dif- -j
gult succeed. If you wifl to enjoy com-
fort in any of your connections, take
your fellow-creatures as they are, and
look for their imperfe&ions to appear.
You know you have your own; bear with
those of others, as you expect that they
are to bear with you. As no one is with-
out his failings, few also are void of ami-
able qualities. Selea for your compa-
nions, those who have the greatest fliare
of such qualities; and value them accord-
ingly.-In a word, make the belt of this
world as you find it. Reckon both on
the state of human life, and on the society
of men, as mixed, and checquered with
good and evil. Carrying always in your
eye such views of things, you will be belt
formed to those equil spirits, and that
reasonable disposition of mind, which
make the basis of tranquillity. I ihall
only add as my

Seventh, and last advice on the subject,

to

SERM. to mix retreat with the ative btfinefs
xll. of the world, and to cultivate habits of

serious thought and recollection. 1 before
advised those who are not particularly en-
gaged in aftive life, to form to themselves
ibme objeA of pursuit, in order to fur-
nifh proper employment to time and
thought. But the great multitude of men
are in a different situation. Industry is re-
quired of them; business and cares press;
and active pursuits occupy their closest at-
tention. He, who, in this situation, pours
himself forth incessantly on the world, can-
not escape partaking much of its disturb-
ance and trouble. Amidst bustle, in-
trigue. and dissension, he muff pass many
an uneasy hour. Here an enemy en-
counters him; there, a rival meets him,
A suspicious friend alarms him one hour;
an ungrateful one provokes him the next.
I do not recommend, that for there rea-
sons, he who studies tranquillity fliould
retire from all public business, and for-
fake the haunts of men. This were the
retreat of a monk, not Qs a good and a

wife

wife man. Tranquillity were too dearly sE RM.
purchased by the neglcet of tlofe duties
which belong to a man, and a Christian.
Nor indeed in absolute seclusion from the
world is tranquillity ever found, On the
contrary, when the human mind is cut off
fiom those employments for which it was
designed by nature and Providence, it
preys on itself, and engenders its own mi-
fery. Tranquillity is always most likely
to be attained, when the business of the
world is tempered with thoughtful and
serious retreat. Comnrene with y'our hearts
on your bed, and be /lill. Leaving this world
to itself, let there be seasons which you
devote to yourselves, and to God.. Reflec-
tion and meditation allay the workings of
many unquiet passions; and place us at a
distance from the tumults of the world.
When the mind has either been ruffled or
cast down, in intercourse with God and
heaven we find a fanauary to which we
can retreat. In the hours of contempla-
tion and devotion, a good man enjoys
himself in peace. He beholds nobler ob-

VOL, IV. T jecas

SERM. je.s than what worldly men can bchold.

He assumes a higher charaler. He lif-
tens to the voice of nature and of God;
and from this holy faneluary comes forth
with a mind fortified against the little dif-
turbances of the world. Such habits,
therefore, cannot be too much recommend-
ed to the lovers of tranquillity, as power-
ful subsidiary means for attaining that
happy state.

I HAVE thus pointed out what appears

to me the discipline of religion and wis-
dom for tranquillity of mind. He that
doth these things Jiall never be moved.-
During the early periods of life, vivid fel-
fations of pleasure are the sole objecs
thought worthy of purfiit. Mere ease and
calmness are despised, as the portion of
the aged only and the feeble. Some long-
eracquaintance with the world, with its
disappointed hopes and fallacious plea-
fures, teaches almost all men, by degrees,
to wifli for tranquillity and peace. But
you muf not imagine, that these are blef-

sings

iings which will drop on men of their own s E R M.
accord, as soon as they begin to desire w
them. No: The thoughtless, and the
profligate, will ever remain itrangers to
them. They will remain the sport of every
accident that occurs to derange their minds,
and to dilturb their life.--The three
great enemies to tranquillity are, Vice,
Superfition, and Idleness: Vice, which
poisons and disturbs the mind with bad
passions; Superilition, which fills it with
imaginary terrors; Idleness, which loads
it with tediousness and disgust. It is only
by following the path which Eternal Wis-
dom has pointed out, that we can arrive
at the blessed temple of Tranquillity, and
obtain a station there: By doing, or at
least endeavouring to do, our duty to God
and man; by acquiring a humble trust
in the mercy and favour of God through
Jesus Christ; by cultivating our minds,
and properly employing our time and
thoughts; by governing our paflions and
our temper; by correcing all unreason-
able expectations from the world, and from

T 2 men;

SE R M. men; and, in the midst of worldly bufi-
glvl nneis, habituating ourselves to calm retreat

and ierious recollection.-By stich means
as these, it may be hoped, that, through
the divine blessing, our days flall flow in
a fiream as unruffled as the human Rtate
admits. The uwicked are like the troubled
sea, wUhen it cannot reJf. But the work of
righteotifnefs is peace; and the effei of right
eoitt/eJJ is quietneJi and (ajlirance for ever *.

# Isaiah xxxii. 17.

SERM ON

# SERMON XIV. On the MISFORTUNES of MEN being chargeable on themselves. PROVERBS xix. 3. The foolishness of man perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord.

S ERMON XIV.
On the MISFORTUNES of MEN being

chargeable on thernfelves.

PROVERBS xix. 3.
The foolilJjnefi of man perverteth his way,

and his heart fretteth againjl the Lord.
H OW many complaints do we hear SE RM.

from every quarter, of the misery J

and distress that fill the world! in there
the high and the low, the young and the
aged, join; and since the beginning of
time, no topic has been more fertile of
declamation, than the vanity and vcxavion
which man is appointed to susser. But

T3 are

SE RM. are we certain that this vexation, and thia

1v.
Iv- vanity,is altogether to be ascribed to the ap-

pointment of heaven? Is there no ground
to fufpel that man himself is the chief and
immediate author of his own sufferings
What the text plainly suggests is, that it is
common for men to complain ground-
lefly of Providence; that they are prone
to accuse God for the evils of life, when
in, reason they ought to accuse them-
selves ; and that after their foolij7Jnefs
hath perverted their way, and made
them undergo the confcquences of their
own mifcondu&, they impiously fret
in heart againJ the Lord. This is the doc-
trine which I now purpose to illustrate, in
order to silence the sceptic, and to check
a repining and irreligious spirit. I fihall
for this end make some observations, first,
on the external, arid next, upon the inter-
nal, condition of man; and then conclude
with such serious' and useful improvement.
as the subjea will naturally suggest.

I. Let

I. LET US confider the external condi- SERMI.

XIV.

tion of m n. We find him placed in a x
world, where he has by no means the dif-
pofil of the events that happen. Calami-
ties sometimes befal the worthiest and the
best, which it is not in their power to pre-
vent, and where nothing is left them, but
to acknowledge and to submit to the high
hand of Heaven. For such visitations of
trial, many good and wife reasons can be
assigned, which the present subjea leads
me not to discuss. But though those una-
voidable calamities make ia part, yet they
make not the chief part, of the vexations
and sorrows that diltrefs human life. A
multitude of evils beset us, for the source
of which we muff look to another quar-
ter.-No sooner has any thing in the
health, or in the circumstances of men,
gone cross to their wiTh, than they begin
to. talk of the unequal distribution of the
good things of this life; they envy the
condition of others; they repine at their
own lot, and fret against the Ruler of the
world.

T 4 Full

SERM. Full of there sentiments, one man pines

XIV.
J1v, under a broken constitution. But let us

ask him, whether he can, fairly and ho-
neftly, assign no cause for this but the
unknown decree of heaven? Has he du-
ly valued the blessing of health, and al-
ways observcd the rules of virtue and so-
briety ? Has he been moderate in his life,
and temperate in all his pleasures ? If now
he be only paying the price of his former,
'perhaps his forgotten, indulgences, has
he any title to complain, as if he were
suffering unjustly? Were you to survey
the chambers of sickness and distress, you
would find them peopled with the victims
of intemperance and sensuality, and with
the children of vitious indolence and
sloth. Among the thousands who lan-
guilli there, you would find the propor-
tion of innocent sufferers to be small.
You would fee faded youth, premature
old age, and the profpea of an untimely
grave, to be the portion of multitudes
who, in one way or other, have brought
those evils on themselves; while yet these

!. ,8*~ ~ martyrs

martyrs of vice and folly have the affur- S ERM.
ance to arraign the hard fate of man, and XlV.
to fret t,-aiiJt the Lord.

But you, perhaps, complain of hard-

ihips of another kind; of the injustice of
the world; of the poverty which you sus-
ser, and the discouragements under which
you labour; of the crosses and difap-
pointments of which your life has been
doomed to be full.- Before you give
too much scope to your discontent, let
me desire you to reflect impartially upon
your past train of life. Have not sloth,
or pride, or ill temper, or sinful passions,
milled you often fiom the path of found
and wife conduct? Have you not been
wanting to yourselves iii improving those
opportunities which Providence offered
you, for bettering and advancing your
state ? If you have choferi to indulge your
humour, or your taftc, in the gratifica-
tions of indolence or plcafure, can you
complain because others, in preference to
you, have obtained those advantages
which naturally belong to useful labours,

and

SE R M. and honourable pursuits? Have not the
XIV.
Jvow consequences of ibme faire fleps, into

which your passions, or your pleasures,
have betrayed you, purfled you through
much of your life; tainted, perhaps, your
chara&er,'involved you in embaraffinents,
or funk you into neglec ?- It is an old
faying, that every man is the artificer of
his own fortune in the world. It is cer-
tain, that the world seldom turns wholly
against a man, unless through his own
fault. Godlinefi is, in general, profitable
unto all things. Virtue, diligence and in-
duitry, joined with good temper and pru-
dence, have ever been found the surest
road to prosperity; and where men fail
of attaining it, their want of success is
far oftener owing to their having deviat-
ed from that road, than to their hav-
ing encountered insuperable bars in it.
Some, by being too artful, forfeit the re-
putation of probity. Some, by being too
open, are accounted to fail in prudence.
Others, by being fickle and changeable,
are diftruited by all.- The cafe com-

monly

maonly is, that men seek to ascribe their s E RM-
.ifappointments to any cause, rather than 4J
to their own mifcondudt; and when they
can devise no other cause, they lay them
to the charge of Providence. Their folly
leads them into vices; their vices into
misfortunes; and in their misfortunes
they fret agaitjl the Lord. They are
doubly unjust towards God. In their pro-
fperity, they are apt to ascribe their fuc-
cess to their own diligence, rather than to
God's blessing; and in their adversity,
they impute their distresses to his provi-
dence, not to their own misbehaviour.
Whereas, the truth is the very reverse of
this. Every good and every pelfet gift
comethfronz above; and of evil and mise-
ry, man is the author to himself.

When from the condition of indivi-

duals, we look abroad to the public state
of the world, we meet with more proofs
of the truth of this assertion. We fee
great societies of men torn in pieces by
intestine diffcnfions, tumults, and civil
commotions. We fee mighty armies go-

ing

SERAI. ing forth, in formidable array, againfI
XIV.
jlvj each other, to cover the earth with blood,

and to fill the air with the cries of widows
and orphans. Sad evils there are, to
which this miserable world is exposed.
-- But are these evils, I beseech you,
to be imputed to God? Was it he who
sent forth slaughtering armies into the
field, or who filled the peaceful city with
massacres and blood? Are these miseries
any other, than the bitter fruit of mens
violent and disorderly passions ? Are they
not clearly to be traced to the ambition
and vices of princes, to the quarrels of
the great, and to the turbulence of the
people ?- Let us lay them entirely out
of the account, in thinking of Providence;
and let us think only of the JoolJnefs of
men. Did man controul his paflions, and
form his conduc according to the dic.
tates of wisdom, humanity and virtue,
the earth would no longer be desolated
by cruelty; and human societies would
live in order, harmony and peace. In
those scenes of mischief ard violence

which

which fill the world, let man behold, with sE R M.
flame, the piture of his vices, his igno- C-
rance, and folly. Let him be humbled
by the mortifying view of his own per-
vetJeneji; but let not his heart friet agnalt
the Lord.-From the external condition,
let us proceed,

II. To confider the internal state of

man. It is certain that much disquiet
and milery may be found there, although
his outward condition appear undifturb-
ed, and easy. As far as this inward dif-
quietude arises fiom the flings of con-
science,. and the horrors of guilt, there
can be no doubt of its being felf-created
mifcry; which it is altogether impossible
to impute to Heaven. But even, when
great crimes, and deep remorse, are not
the occasions of torment, how often is
poison infused into the most flouriflting
conditions of fortune, by the follies and
the passions of the prosperous? We fee
them peevifli and refflefs; corrupted with
luxury, and enervated by eafc; impatient

of

SER M. of the ,smallest disappointment; oppressed

xv^ with low spirits, and complaining of eve-

ry thing around them. How many Ha-
mans, Hazaels, and Herods, are there in
the world, who, from what they susser
within, pass their days in more vexation
and misery, than they who undergo the
hardships of poverty? Dare such men, in
their most discontented moments, charge
the providence of Heaven with miseries
of their own procuring? Providence had
put into their hands the fairest opportu-
nity of pafling their life with comfort.
But they themselves blatted every com-
fort that was offered; and verified the
prediction, that the projpe rity of fools fJall
deitroy them X.

As it is man's own fool1jnefis which

ruins his prosperity, we must not omit to
remark, that it is the fame cause which
aggravates and embitters his adversity.
That you susser from the external as-

flicions
-* Prov. i. 32.

flictions of the world, may often be ow- S E R M.

XIV.

ing to God's appointment; but when, in x
the midst of there, you also fufrer from
the disorders of your mind. and passions,
this is owing to yourselves; and they are
those inward disorders which add the fe-
veref fling to external afflitions. Many
are the resources of a good and a wife man,
under all the disasters of life. In the midst
of them, it is always in his power to en-
joy peace of mind, and hope in God. He
may susser; but under fufiering he will
not fink, as long as all is found within.
But when the spirit has been wounded by
guilt and folly, its wounds open, and bleed
afreih, upon every blow that is received
from the world. The mind becomes
sensible and fore to the slightest injuries of
fortune; and a small reverse is felt as an
insupportable calamity.
On the whole; the farther you search into
human life, and the more you observe the
manners and the conduct of men, you will
be the more convinced of this great truth,
that of the distresses which abound in the

world,

SERM. world, we are the chief authors. Among
xiv.
x,~ the multitudes who are, at this day, bewail-

ing their condition and lot, it will be found
to hold of far the greater part, that they
are reaping the fruit of their own doings;
their iniquities are reproving them, and their
backJlidings correfling them. Unattainable
objects fooliflly pursued, intemperate pas-
sions nourifled, vicious pleasures and de-
fires indulged, Godand God's holy laws for-
gotten; these, thele are the great scourges
of the world ; the great causes of the life
of man being so embroiled and unhappy.
God hath.ordained our slate on earth to
be a mixed and imperfect state. We have
ourselves to blame for its becoming an in-
supportable one. If it bring forth nothing
to us but vexation and vanity, we have
sown the feeds of that vanity and vexa-
tion; and as we have sown, we must reap.
-I now proceed to make improvement of.
those truths which we have been confider-
ing.

IN the sirs/ place, let us be taught, to

ay2~~ . ~look

look upon fin as the source of all oui mi'. s R M.
series. It may sometimes assume the gent- xv
ler names of folly, irregularity, or levity;
but under whatever form it appears, it
always imports a deviation from that fa-
cred law which ought to regulate our
conducl. It is still the root that beareth
gall and wormwood ; and in exact pro-
portion to the quantity of this poisonous
weed, which we ourselves have infused in-
to our cup, we mruft expeCt to drink the
waters of bitterness. If the foolijhncfs of
man did not pervert his woays, his heart
would have no occafioa to fret againSf the
Lord. lie would.enjoy competent satis-
fadion in every situation of life; and un-
der its unavoidable evils, would derive
consolation from religion and virtue; -
Indeed, of every evil which we now en-
durej of those evils which we look upon
to be the appointment of providence, as
well as of others, fin is ultimately the
cause; as it was man's revolt from God,
VOL. IV. U which

Dent; txix. t8:

SE R M. which gave rife originally to those evils,

j and which rendered the chastisements we

undergo, in this state of discipline, neceffa-
ry, even for the /Ins of God.--But at
present, we confine our observation to
those miseries of which men are the im-
mediate procurers to themselves; and
from them alone, we find sufficient
reason to confider fin as the capital foe
to man; as the great troubler and dif-
turber of his life. To Providence, then,
let us look up with reverence. On fin let
our indignation be vented; and, what is
of more consequence, against fin and all
its approaches, let our utmost caution be
employed. -As we proceed through the
different paths of life, let us accustom our-
selves to beware of fin, as the hidden
snake lurking" among the grass, from
whose fatal touch we must fly in haste,
if we would not ..experience its fting.-
Too many have -no just apprehensions of
this danger. Fools, said the wife man,
make a mock atJin. . A fool indeed he must
be, who dares to think lightly of it. He
lows not only the depravity of his heart,

but,

but, what perhaps he will be more aflam- S E R M.

XIV.

ed to be charged with, he shows his ig- -
norance of the world. He flows that he
knows not, he underltands not, even his
worldly interest, nor the interest and hap-
piness of human society.

IN the second place, let us learn from

what has been set forth, one of the mos
awful and important of all truths, the re-
ality of a divine government exercised o-
ver the world. Blind mull that man, be
who discerns not the most striking marks
of it, in the doctrine which has been un-
der our review. If there be a sceptic, who
contends, that unrestrained liberty in the
gratification of desire is given to man;
that in the fight of his Creator, all actions
are equal; and that no rule of moral con-
duct hath been prescribed, or by any pe-
nalty enforced; in order to confute such
a man, we have not recourse to reason-
ings, but simply appeal to plain and ob-
vious fats. We bid him look only to
the life of man; and take notice how e-
very vice, is by the constitution of things,

U 2 conncted

SE t M. connected with misery. We bid him
-XIV. ,_j trace the hilfory of any one, with whose

conduct he had particular occasion to be
acquainted; and obferve,'whether the chief
misfortunes which pursued him were not
brought upon him by his own mifbeha-
viour. We bid him remark in the hifto-
ry of nations, whether public virtue has
not always exalted them; and whether
licentiousness and crimes have not paved
the way for their ruin. These are tefti-
monies to the truth of religion, which can-
not by any-fophiftry be evaded. This
is a voice, which speaks its warnings loud
and strong to every heart.

The system upon which the divine go-

vernment at present proceeds, plainly is,
that mens own wickedness fliould be ap-
pointed to correct them; that finners
fihould be Jihared in the work of their hands,
anid Junk in the pit which themjelves had
digged; that the backflier in heart JhIould
be filled With his oVwn ways.- Of all the
plans which could have been devised for
the government of the world, this ap-

proves

proves itself to reason, as the wisest and S E R M.
most worthy of God; so to frame the
constitution of things, that the divine laws
lhould in a manner execute themselves,
and carry their fmanions in their own bo-
fom. When the vices of men require pu-
nifhment to be inflicted, the Almighty is
at no loss for ministers of jultice. A
thoufind instruments of vengeance are at
his command; innumerable arrows are
always in his quiver. But such is the
profound wisdom of his plan, that no pe-
culiar interpofals of power are requisite.
He has no occasion to ftep from his throne,
and to interrupt the order of nature.
With that Majesty and solemnity which
befits omnipotence, He pronounces, Eph-
raimn is joined to his idols; let him alone';
He leaves transgressors to their own guilt,
and puniflment follows of course. Their
fins do the work ofjuftice. They lift the
scourge; and with every stroke which

U 3 they
Hosea iv. '7.

SE RM. they inflic on the criminal, they mix this
xlJv severe admonition, that as he is only reap-

ing the fruit of his own actions, he de-
serves all that he suffers.- From what
has been said, I might take occasion,

IN the third place, to show the injultice

of our charging Providence with a pro-
mifcuous and unequal difribution of its
favours, among the good and the bad.
That unequal distribution takes place in
appearance only, not in reality. The
whqle conduct of Providence sufficiently
marks, which ofthofe classes of men it
blesses and protecs. The prosperity of
finriers is no more than a deceitful show.
The great materials of happiness are pro-
vided for the virtuous, and evil never
fails to purfite the wicked.. 1 ihall close the
discourse with observing,

IN the fourth and last place, the neceffi-

ty which plainly arises from our present
condition, of looking up to God for direc-
tion and aid, in the condua of life. The

result

result of the whole doctrine I have now SE R M.
delivered is, that man's happiness or mise- xv.
ry is, in a great measure, put into his own
hands. In vain he complains of Provi-
dence. If his heart siet agaifiy the Lord, it
is only because his foolifhne/s hath perverted
his way: for on himself, and his own be-
haviour, it depends, to be siee of those mi-
series which harrafs the wicked.-But a-
las! when we fay, that this depends upon
man, on what uncertain ground do we
place his security ? Is man, when left to
himself, equal to this high trust that is re-
posed in him, this important charge that
is committed to him, of attaining happi-
ness, by wife and irreproachable conduct ?
Inconstant as he is in virtue, variable in
his resolutions, soft and yielding in his
nature to a thousand temptations; how
shall he guide himself through such flip-
pery and dangerous paths as those of hu-
man life; where many hidden precipices
surround him; many false lights lead him
atlray; and where the consequence of eve-
ry ftep he takes may be dcftruation and

U 4 ruin?

SERrM. ruin?-Thankful let us be to heaven,

XIV.
l--cJ that in this fituatibn, a merciful guide

stretches out his hand to aid us; that a
celestial light shines upon us from above;
that a divine Spirit is promised to illumi-
nate and firengthen us. Let us humbly re-
quest of Heaven, that this Spirit of the Al-
tmighty may ever be our guide; never pre-
sumptuously trusting in our own wisdom;
but lifteningattentively to the voice of God;
and in all our ways acknowledging Him whQ
only can dire F ourfieps.-Upon the whole,
let us hold fast the persuasion of these
fundamental truths;-that in all his dif-
penfations, God isjuft and good; that the
cause of all the troubles we susser is in
ourselves, not in him; that virtue is the
surest guide to a happy life; that he who
forsakes this guide, enters upon the path
of death; but that he who walketh up-
rightly, walkethfurely; and that he who
keepeth the commandment, keepeth his own
foul.

SERMON

# SERMON XV. On INTEGRITY as the GUIDE of LIFE. PROVERBS xi. 3. The integrity of the upright shall guide them. —

S E R M ON XV.
On INTEGRITY as the GUIDE of LIFE.

- ~~~B~~s

PROVERBS xl. 3.
The integrity of the upright fl/all guide

them.-
R IGHTEOUSNESS and fin are, in this SE RM.

book of Proverbs, frequently con- Xv

tracted with each other, and the advanta-
ges of the former displayed. The righ-
teous man is ihown to be more excellent
than his neighbour, as the ways in which he
walks are ways of pleasantness, while' the
way of trainfgrefors is hard. Honour is re-
presented as attending the one, while

fliame

SERM. fliame is the portion of the other. The

xv.
x.v. path of the one leads to life; that of the

other to defiruCtion. In the text, an ad-
vantage of righteousness is specified,
which is not commonly attended to, and
which some will not readily allow that it
possesses. We are told by the wife man,
that it affords light and direction to con-
dud, and will prove our best guide
through all the intricacies of life. The
integrity of the upright J7all guide them; or,
as it is added, to the fame purpose, in a fol-
lowing verse, the righteouftefs of the perfJe7
Jhall.direSI his way. There are many who
will admit, that integrity is an amiable qua-
lity; that it is entitled to much refpe&, and
in molt cafes ought to influence our beha-
viour; who nevertheless are unwilling to
allow it the chief place in the direcion of
their worldly conduct. They hold, that
a certain artful sagacity, founded upon
knowledge of the world, is the best con-
dutor of every one, who would be a fuc-
cefsful adventurer in life; and that a ftrit
attention to integrity, a6 his only guide,

would

would often lead him into danger and dif- SE R I.

xv.

trefs. In opposition to tenets of this x-
kind, I now purpose to show, that amidst
all perplexities and dangers, there is no
guide we can chute so safe, and so success-
ful on the whole, as the integrity of an
upright mind; and that upon every try-
ing occasion, principles of probity and ho-
nour will conduct a good man through
life with more advantage, than if he were
to ac upon the most refined fyrtem of
wordly wisdom.

IT will not take much time to delineate

the character of the man of integrity, as
by its nature it is a plain one, and easily
underflood. He is one, who makes it his
constant rule to follow the road of duty,
according as the word of God, and the
voice of his conscience, point it out to him.
He is not guided merely by affeAions,
which may sometimes give the colour of
virtue to a loose and unstable character.
The upright man is guided by a fixed
principle of mind, which determines him

to

SERM. to esteem nothing but what is honour-
xv. va able; and to abhor whatever is bale and

unworthy, in moral conduA. Hence you
find him ever the fame; at all times, the
trusty friend, the affeCtionate relation, the
conscientious man of business, the pious
wormfipper, the public spirited citizen.
He assumes no borrowed appearance. He
seeks no mask to cover him; for he ats
no studied part; but he is in truth what
he appears to be, full of truth, candour,
and humanity. In all his pursuits, he
knows no path but the fair and direc
one; and would much rather fail of fuc-
cess, than attain it by reproachful means.
He never shows you a smiling counte-
nance, while he meditates evil against
you in his heart. He never praises you
among your friends; and then joins in
traducing you among your enemies. You
will never find one part of his character
at variance with another. In his man-
ners, he is simple and unaffected; in all his
proceedings, open and confifdent.--Such is
the man of integrity spoken of in the

3 text.

text. Let us now proceed to flow, in what s , t M.
manner, and with what effect, integrity xv.
serves for the guide of his life.

EVERY one, who has begun to make

any progress in the world, will be sensible,
that to conducl himifelf in human affairs
with wisdom and propriety, is often a mat-
ter of no finall difficulty, Amidst that
variety of characters, of jarring difpofi-
tions, and of interfering interests, which
take place among those with whom we
have intercourse, we are frequently at a
ltand, as to the part most prudent for us
to chufe. Ignorant of what is passing
in the breasts of those around us, we can
form no more than doubtful conjecures
concerning the events that are likely to
happen. They may take some turn alto-
gether different from the course in which
we had imagined they were to run, and
according to which we had formed our
plans. The flightell incident often lhoots
out into important consequences, of which
we were not aware. The labyrinth be-

comes

SERM. comes so intricate, that the most sagacious

>~j can lay hold on no clue to guide him

through it: He finds himself embarrassed,
and at a loss how to aft.-In public and
in private life, in managing our own con-
cerns, and in directing those of others,
the doubt tfarted by the Wife man fre-
quently occurs; Who knoweth what is
good for man in this life ?-While thus fa-
tigued with conjecture, we remain per-
plexed and undetermined in our choice;
we are at the fame time pulled to diffe-
rent fides, by the various emotions which
belong to our nature. On one hand, plea-
sure allures us to what is agreeable; on
the other, interest weighs us down to-
wards what seems gainful. Honour at-
tracts us towards what is splendid; and
indolence inclines us to what is easy. In
the consultations which we hold with our
own mind, concerning our conduct, how
often are we thus divided within ourselves;
puzzled by the uncertainty of future e-
vents, and diffracted by the contest of
different inclinations ?

I It

It is in such situations as these, that the sER M.

xv.

principle of integrity interposes to give
light and direction. While worldly men
flucuate in the midst of those perplexi-
ties which I have described, the virtuous
man has one Oracle, to which he resorts in
every dubious cafe, and whose decisions
he holds to be infallible: He consults his
conscience. He listens to the voice of
God. Were it only on a few occasions
that this Oracle could be consulted, its
value would be less. But it is a mistake
to imagine, that its Responses are seldom
given: Hardly is there any material tranf-
afion whatever in human life, any im-
portant question, that holds us in fufpence
as to practice, but the difference between
right and wrong will ihow itself; and the
principle of integrity will, if we liften to
it impartially, give a clear decision.
Whenever the mind is divided within it-
self, conscience is seldom or never neutral.
There is always one fide or other to which
it leans. There is always one scale of the
balance, into which it throws the weight

of

SE R M. of f/me virtue; orJfome prai]e; of some"
v__J thing that isjifl and true, lovely, hone/I, and

of good report. These are the forms, which
rife to the observation of the upright
man. By others they may be unseen, or
overlooked; but in his eye, the lufire of
virtue outshines all other brightness.
Wherever this pole' flar directs him, he
fleadily holds his courfe.-Let the if-
sue of that course be ever so uncertain;
let his friends differ from him in opi-
nion; let his enemies clamour; he is not
moved; his purpose is fixed. He asks
but one question of his heart, what is the
most worthy and honourable part; what
is the part most becoming the flation
which he possesses, the character which
he withes to bear, the expectations which
good men entertain of him ? Being once
decided as to this, he hesitates no more;
He mhuts his ears against every folicita-
tion. He pursues the direc line of inte-
grity, without turning either to the right
hand or to the left. " It is the Lord who
" calleth. Him I follow. Let him or-

" der

der what feemeth good in his figtl." SER M.

- It is in this manner that the integrity xv.
of the nuright adts as their guidle,

But as, upon a superficial view, it may

appear hazardous to place ourselves en-
tirely under Iuch a guide, let us now pro-
ceed to confider what can be said in de-
fence of this plan of conduct, and what
advantages ftrve to recommend it,

In thefiyfl place, I affirm, that the guid-

ance of integrity is the fifeft under which
we can be placed; that the road in which
it leads us is, upon the whole, the freest
fiom dangers. Perfect immunity from
danger is not to be expected in this life.
We can chufe no path, in which we may
not meet with disappointments and mif-
fortunes. Our life, at the belt, is a pil-
grimage, and perils surround it. Againfl
these perils, the men of the world imagine
that craft and dexterity furniflh the bell
defence; and if, in any inltance, they o-
ver-reach the upright, they confider it as
a manifest decision in favour of their

VOL. IV. X plan.

SERM. plan. But inflead of refling on a few
xv.

instances, let us take an extensive survey
of the course of human affairs. Let us
enquire who the persons are that, in all
the different lines of life, have gone
through the world with molt success;
and we fiall find, that the men of probity
and honour form by far the most con-
fiderable part of the lift; we shall find
that men of plain understanding, acing
upon fair and direct views, have much
oftener prospered, than men of the deep-
eft policy, who were devoid of principle.
How few are the instances of persons who
by fidelity, worth, and stedfast adherence
to their duty, have either loft their for-
tunes, or incurred general displeasure, in
times when human affairs were proceed-
ing in their ordinary train? But how nu-
merous and frequent are the examples of
those whose profpees have been blasted,
whose circumitances have been ruined,
and their names funk into contempt by
vice and dishonesty?

The man of the world aims at higher

3 things,

things, and more rapid success, than the SE R M.

xv.

man of moderation and virtue. But, at -
the fame time, he incurs greater rifqucs
and dangers. No calculation of proba-
bilities can ensure safety to him who is
acting a deceitful part. Amidit the un-
foreseen vicissitudes of the world, he has
to dread, not only disappointment to his
plans, but the miseries also which detect-
ed fallacies may bring on his head. He
walks on the edge of precipices, where a
single false flep may be fatal. He fol-
lows a wandering light, which, if it fail
of guiding him by a flort path to the Pa-
lace of ambition, lands him in the pit, or
the lake. Whereas he who follows the
guidance of integrity, walks in the high
road on which the light of the fun slaines.
He fees before him the Habitation of peace
to which his Rteps are directed; and if he
be longer of arriving at it, he is sure of
neither wandering far astray; nor of meet-
ing on his road with any forms of unu-
fual terror.-Let it be always remerm-
bered that the principle of integrity which

X z direcss

SE R,. direds a good man, is far from excluding

XV. x. prudence in the conduc of life. It im-

plies no improvident or thoughtless fim-
plicity. On the contrary, it is closely
connected with true wisdom. A man of
enlarged capacity, and extensive views, is
always upright. Craft is merely the sup-
plemcnt of inferior abilities. It charac-
terizes a narrow comprehension, and a
little mind.-As the path of integrity is
on the whole the safest path of con-
du ; so,

IN thcficond place, it is unquestionably

the molt honourable. Integrity is the
foundation of all that is high in character
among mankind. Other qualities may add
to its s'plendor; but if this essential requisite
be wanting, all their lustre fades. Were I
drawing the character of one who claimed
the admiration of the world; and after I
had ascribed to him eloquence, valour,
and every endowment that is most flin-
ing and captivating, did I add, that he was
a man of too much art to be trusted, I ap-

peal

peal to every one, whether, by this single E i, M.
firoke, the whole charalacr would not be x\.
funk and degraded ? An intcrpfed and
crafty man may perhaps rile into inllu.
ence and high itation; he may be a rich
and a powerful, but will never be a great,
man. He may be feared, and externally
honoured and courted; but in the secret
thoughts of men he finds no refpcI,
We all feel, that magnanimous sentiments
cannot dwell in the lame breast with ifl-
filhnefs and deceit.

He who refts upon an internal principle

of virtue and honour, will aet with a dig-
nity and a boldness, of which they are in-
capable who are wholly guided by interest.
He is above those timid suspicions, and
cautious restraints, which fetter and em-
barrafs their conduct. That firmness
which the consciousness of rectitude in-
spires, gives vigour and force to his exer-
tions on every great occasion. It adds dou-
ble weight to all the abilities of which he is
poffelt. It even supplies the place of tlhofe
abilities in which he is defective. They

X 3 who

8 E R M. who oppose him are obliged to honour him.

xv.
_>^ They look up to him with a secret awe, as

to one who moves above them in a superior
sphere; regardless of their good or ill opi-
nion, of their promises or their threaten-
ings; like one of those celestial luminaries
which holds its course through its orbit,
without being asseted by any commo-
tions among the elements below. Such a
man is trusted, and relied upon, as well as
esteemed, because all know where to find
him, and upon what system he adts. He
attaches fiiends and followers to himself,
without courting them; and though his
progress towards fame flould be flow,
and interrupted at first by crooked arts,
it is nevertheless certain and sure. The
public may be misled for a while, in judg-
ing of real merit; but it is seldom unjust
at the last. As persons continue to come
forward to view, and to a& their part in
trying circumflances, their characters are
at length fully ascertained; and, almost
always, rated as they deserve. How cor-
fupt soever the world may be, they can-

not

not with-hold approbation from him, SE R M.
whose condua is marked by uniform xv
integrity and honour. Enemies he will
have; but the public favours him; the
multitude of men with him success; and
destine him, in their thoughts, to every ftep
of his preferment, before he arrives at it.

IN the third place, the plan of conduct,

on which the man of integrity proceeds
is the most comfortable; that is, attended
with the greatet fatisfaaion in a man's
own mind. Amidst the various and per-
plexing events of life, it is of singular ad-
vantage to be kept free from doubt, as to
the part most proper to be chosen. He
who consults nothing but worldly inte-
reft must, upon every turn of fortune, un-
dergo much painful fififence. He is o-
bliged to liften with anxious ear to every
whisper of report; and upon every new
aspea which the face of affairs assumes,
must study how to place himself in a new
posture of defence. But the man of prin-
ciple is a stranger to there inward trou-

X 4 bles.

SE RM. bles. His time is not loft; nor his tem-

XV.
L-Y-i per fretted by long and anxious conultla-

tions. One light always Ihines upon him
from above. One path, the path of inte-
grity, always opens clear and ditind to
his view.-But this is not his only advan-
tage, to be freed from embaraffinents, by
having placed himself under the charge of
one conflant guide. He is also rewarded
with the sense of having chosen his guide
well and wifely. He is delivered fiom all
inward upbraidings, from all misgivings
of mind, from all alarms founded on the
dread of discovery and dilgrace. A good
conscience enables him to look back on
the part which he has ated with satis-
fation; and to look forward to the issue
which it may bring, without concern. It
is in the cafe of one illue only, that the
man who acds from worldly interest can
enjoy fatisfadion; that is, when his do-
signs have succeeded according to his wilh.
But it is the felicity of the man, lwJo ads
under the direction of integrity, that in
every issue, he has something to comfort

him.

him. Though success has failed him, the s E It N.

XV.

consolation remains of havinig done his \
duty, andl sidied to approve himself to
God.

This reference of all his a&ions to di-

vine approbation, furnilhes another source
of satisfaction and peace. He looks up,
with pleasing hope, to a Protecor in the
heavens, who loveth righteoufiefi, and whose
countenance beholdeth the upright. The man
of worldly wiftlom is conscious of having
no title to the favour of that high adnlini-
firation which rules the universe. By
quitting the path of righteousness, he has
left that firaight road, in which God had
appointed him to walk. He has taken the
direction of his vay to himself; and cho-
ifn to be his own guide and matler. To
his own abilities, therefore, such as they
are, he inuft trust; and is become wholly
rcifonfible for the issue of his conducl.
But the man of virtue hath committed his
way to the Lord. He follows the divine
signal. He co-operates with the divine
purpose. The power which sways the u-

niverfe

SERIM. niverfe is engaged on his fide. By natu-

Xv.
\Y rral consequence, he has ground to expet,

that any teeming disappointments which
he may now incur, flall be over-ruled at
the end to some salutary effec. Hence,
thatpeace of God keeping the heart, to which
worldly men are firangers. Hence a de-
gree of firmness and resolution in condut,
which it is impossible for them to possess.
Especially when we add,

IN the fourth and last place, that he who

thus pursues a course of integrity, has al-
ways in his view the profpec of immor-
tal rewards. That surely is the wisest di-
rection of conduct, which is most amply
recompenfed at last. But what recom-
pence can worldly wisdom bellow, com-
parable to what is promised by the gof-
pel to them who, by patient continuance in
svell doing, look for glory, honour, and immor-
tality ?-The recompence indeed is distant;
but the hope of it is present; and hope is
one of the most powerful principles of hu-
bnan aclion. Let a man be firm in the

belief

belief that he is acding under the im- SERM.

XV.

mediate protection of Heaven, and that
through all eternity he flall be rewarded
for what he now performs; and, as far
as this belief is prevalent, his conduc will
be fleady and determined. Wherever re-
ligion directs him to hold his course, he
will advance with intrepidity. He will
submit to restraints without reluclance.
He will meet dangers without fear. To
every motive which reason suggests in fa-
vour of virtue, the hope of life eternal
adds supernatural trength.-Accordingly,
in the behaviour of many holy men, un-
der the most trying circumlsances of dif-
trefs, we behold this eflit eminently ex-
emplified. It appears, with much lultre,
in the spirited and magnanimous fcnti-
ments of the Apoflle Paul, when he had
the profpel of death before him. Behold
'I go bound in the Spirit to :eruJalcin. not
knowing the things that Jhall be/ll me there,
five that the Holy GhoJi witnejf th that
bonds and ajffilions abide me. But .one o'
fbefe things move me; neither cornt I my

IUfe

E R M.; le dear unto nzlf,, Jo that I may finijh my
xv. XYI colnjbe with joy .--I am now ready to

be offered, and the time of my departure is
at hand. I have Jbught a good fight; I
have jfifjled my coutrje; I have kept the
Jfith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a
crown! of righteofiifefs, which the Lord, the
righteous Jludge, Jhall give me at that day J.

Tnus I have endeavoured to Ihow in

what manner the integrity of the upright
guides them; and what the advantages
are of placing ourfclves under its guid-
ance. If it be the line of safety, or the
line of honour, which we chufe to pur-
sue; if we consult our present comfort,
or look forward to future rewards; in all
these refpeds, the course which integrity
points out is by far the most eligible.

It is a great recommendation of the guid-

ance offered to us by integrity, that it is
easily understood by all men. Plans of

worldly
' AOs xx. 22. 2 Timothy iv. 6.

worldly policy are deep and intricate; s. E P .
and expericnce lhows how often the a- J
blest persons arc miltakcn in the mecafircs
which they adopt for carrying them on.
But when men's intentions are fair and
upright, it will be found, that a moderate
flare of undcrltanding and attention is
all that is requisite, for conducting them-
selves with safety and propriety. Provi-
dence never intended, that the art of liv-
ing happily in this world {hould depend
on that deep penetration, that acute saga-
city, and thole refinements of thought,
which few possess. It has dealt more
graciously with us; and made happincfs
to depend on uprightness of intention,
much more than on extent of capacity.
For the most part, the first fentimenr
which ftrikcs a good man, concerning
what he ought, or ought not to do, is the
fouudeft, and suggests the bcft and wisest
counsel. When he hesitates, and begins
to deliberate how far his duty, or his ho-
nour, can be reconciled to what seems his
intercft, he is on the point of deviating

into

SE R . into a dangerous path.- At the fameo
xv-y time, it is of great consequence, that he

who seeks to surrender his condut to the
direction of integrity, fliould be well ap-
prized of what true integrity requires.
Let him guard against burdening confci-
ence unnecessarily; left a superstitious re-
gard to trifles lead him to relax in mat-
ters of higher obligation. Let him avoid
minute scrupulosity, on the one hand.
Let him keep at a distance from loose ca-
fuiftry, on the other. But when he is fa-
tisfied that his conscience has been well
informed, let him, without wavering, ad-
here to its dictates in the whole of his
condut. This will prove the truest wis-
dorr both for this world and the next.
For he who walketh uprightly walkethfure-
ly. The path of the jufl is as the hiinitg
light: And it ihall .hine more and more unto
the perfeA day.

SERMON

# SERMON XVI. On SUBMISSION to the DIVINE WILL. JOB ii. 10. — Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?

S ERMON XVI.
On SUBMISSION to the DIVINE WILL.

JOB ii. 10.
-Shall we receive good at the hand of

God, and flJall we not receive evil ?
F E W fubjets of religious exhorta- SER M.

tion are of more general concern x.-

than those which refpeet the diftref-
fes incident to human life. For no so-
ciery, no family, no person, can ex-
pea to be long exempted from them;
and when we speak of the prosperous,
we can only mean those who are more

rarely

S E R M. rarely subject to them than others. Now,
XVW.
v J under those distresses, religion performs

two offices: It teaches us how we ought
to bear them; and it affifs us in thus
bearing them. Materials for both are
found in the words of the text, which
contain a sentiment so natural and just,
as to carry convition to every reasonable
mind. They were the words of Job, at
a time when, to his other calamities, this
domestic affliction was added, that one,
who ought to have assuaged and soothed
his sorrows, provoked his indignation by
an impious speech.. Thou fpeakefl, Job re-
plies, as one of the fooliflJ women Jpeaketh:
Whlat? Jlall we receive good at the hand
of God, and Jhall we not receive evil?-
Three inftrutions naturally arise from the
text: First, That this life is a mixed slate
of good and evil: Secondly, That both
the goods and the evils in it proceed from
God: And, thirdly, That 'there are jult
reasons for our receiving with patience
the evils of life, from the fame hand
which bestows its goods.

I. THIS

I. TIIs life is a mixed ftatc of good S ER M.

and evil. This is a matter of fad, which XVI.
will be denied by none, and on which it
is not necefnary to bellow much illuftra-
tion. It is evident to the slightest infpec-
tion, that nothing here:is unallayed and
pure. Every man's state is checquered
with alternate; griefs and joys, difippoint-
ment and ficcefs. No condition is alto-
gether stable. No life preserves always
the fame tenor. The viciflitudes of the
world. bometimes bring forward the as-
flisted into more comfortable circimftan-
ces; and often trouble the joy of the proA
fperous.' This is the train in which hu-
inan. affairs have ever been found to pro-
ceed; and in which we may expect them
always to go dn.

:Butithough this be universally admit-
ted in fpecilation, and often confessed in
discourse, the misfortune is4 that few think
of applying it to their own cafe..' The
bulk ofimalikind diitcoverl as much confi-
(leincin pr6fpert-y, arid as mdch imupa-
tience under the leal'. teverfe, as if Pro-

VoL. iV. Y videncd

SE RM. vidence had firlt given them assurance

^_ that their prosperity was never to change,

and afterwards had cheated their hopes.
Whereas, what reason ought to teach us,
is, to adjust our mind to the mixed Rate
in which we find ourselves placed; never
to presume, never to despair; to be thank-
ful for the goods which at present we en-
joy, and to expet the evils that may fuc-
ceed.-Thou haft been admitted to partake
of the feast of life. Its good things are
distributed, in various portions, among the
guests. Thou haft had thine allotted
share. Complain not, when thy portion
is removed. It is not permitted to any
one, to remain always at the banquet.

II. WE are taught by the text, that both

the goods and the evils which compose
this mixed Rate, come from the hand of
God. A little reflection may convince
us, that, in God's world, neither good nor
evil can happen by chance. If there were
any one moment, in which God quitted
the reins of the universe,, and suffered any

power

power to interfere with his admiiiiftraj SE RMi

XVI.

tiont it is evident, that, from that moment,
the measures of his government must be-
come disjointed and incomplete. He
who governs all things, muff govern con-
tinually; and govern the least things as
well as the greatest. He never liumbers
norJleeps. There are no void spaces, no
broken plans, in his administration; no
blessings that drop upon us without his
intention; nor any crofies that visit us;
unsent by him, I am the Lord, and there
as none else. I form the lights and create
darknes. I make peace, and create evil. I
the Lord do all theft things *.

How it has come to pass, that this life

lhould contain such a mixture of goods
and evils, and that the mixture too mhould
be of God's appointment, gives rife to a
difficult inquiry. For how can any thing
but what is good proceed from the God
of love. Can .darkness issue from the

Y x source
Wa %>laS óii )if.

ST.RM.. source of light? or can. it be.any satis
%XIV facioqnto the Father of mnercies; to behold.

the: folrows of. creatures whom .he: has
made?-.'Here there was room :foi much;
perplexity, tilt revelation informed, usy that,
the miXtire of evils in man'$ .etaate .iSowr.-
ing to',man himself. .'I-ad., he.contintled(
as .God origihally -made . him, he would,

,,a ye :r.reei.yed. nothing: but goo.d;fri-m:his;
GCrato:. : His appftafy .and corruptioii: o-:
g.ened.the.gates ofEthe tabernacle of'dark-.
nefs....Mifery issued -fo.rth,, aidd, as: ever
since ,pursued liim, .- In .the prefeht condi-
tion.. of. his nature .that misery is'partly
punishment, partly trial. He is become
incapable of Ibearing.unintertupted .pto-
fperity'; and by the inixture of.evils :lt
his lot, .merciful:defigns:are carried on for
his. :improvement and reitoration. . ,.

, hat..t:he text leads us at. prefert to cOri?
fider i,,: tle effe& ,.that will follovw..from:
imiitating: the example. of. Job,; atnd.refer-
ring to the hand of the; Almighty, the evils
which we susser, as well as the goods which
we enjpy. Euch a reference of:.the di-

irefsfutl

stressful events of our life to the appoint- s.R It.
nent 'of Heaven, not only is a duty which
piety requires, but tends also to mitigate
diitrefs, and to suggest consolation. For
to dwell, as is too commonly done, upon
the instruments and subordinate means of
our trouble, is frequently the cause of
much grief, and much fin; When we
vieiv our sufferings -as proceeding merely
frtoii our fellow-creattlres, the part which
'they have aAted in bringing them upon
.us, is often more grating than the hfffer-
,ing itself. 'The'unreafonablenefs, perhaps,
of 'an enemy, the 'treachery of a friend,
\the ingratitude or insolence of one whom
wve had much obliged, add weight to a
load laid upon us by means so provoking.
The thoughts of their malignity, or of our
own'negleC int guarding against it, serve
,to poison the fore. Whereas, if instead of
looking to men, we beheld the cross as
coming from God, these aggravating cir-
-cumftances would'afte't us less; we would
feel no more than our proper burden;

'Y3 we

SER M. we would submit to it more patiently;
XVI. v_>, and many resources would open to us, as

shall in a little le shown, from thinking
ps the hand that lays it on. Had Job,
when despoiled of all his fubflance, thought
of nothing but the Chaldeans and Sabeans
who robbed him, with what violent pas-
sions would he have been transported, and
with what eager desires of revenge torn
mented? Whereas, confidering them as
rods and instruments only in the divine
hand, and receiving the' orrection as from
the Almighty himself, the tumult of his
mind subsided; and with refpeftful com-
pofure he could fay, The Lord gave; and
the Lord hath taken away: Blefed be tke
anme of the Lord. This leads me,

III. To confider the last, and most in-:

portant inftrution, arising from the text;
namely, that there are many reasons why
we, who receive good, from the hand of
God, should receive with patience the
evils which he is pleased to inflit. This
i. strongly conveyed by that interroga-

tory

tory form offpeech, in which the senti- SE RM.

XVI.

ment of Job is expressed: IWhat ? fjlall we V
receive good at the hand of God, and Jfiall
we not receive evil ? In order to unfold all
that is contained in this appeal made to eve-
ry man's conscience, let us confider,

IN the sirs place, that the good things

which God has bellowed, afford sufficient
evidence for our believing, that the evils
which he fends,' are not ca; felefsly or wan-
tonly inflicted. Did we live in a world
which bore the marks of a malicious or
cruel governor, there might be reason for
distrusting every ftep of his conduct. But
in the, world which we inhabit, we behold,
on.the contrary, plain marks of predomi,
nant goodness. We behold the ftrudure of
the universe, the order of nature, the gene-
ral course of Providence, obviously arranged
with a benevolent regard to the welfare of
men. All the art and contrivance of which
the divine works are full, point to this
end; and the more they are explored,
create the firmer helief, that the good;

Y 4 ness

SERM. ness of the Deity gave rife to the sys-
.XVI. kwrJ tern of creation. What is the conclu-

sion to be thence drawn, but that in such
parts of the divine administration as ap-
pear to us harih and feve;e, the lanme good-
ness continues to preiide, though exerci-
fed in a hidden and mflerious manner ?

Let me desire you to confider, whetler,

if fbme powerful friend had placed you
in an opulent and comfortable flation,
and, in the general conduct of your affairs,
had discovered the most disinterested kind-
ness, you would not ascribe any occasional
discouragements you received, to Tome un-
known reason or cause, rather than to his
unfaithfulness or cruelty ? Ought not the
experience which we have had, and the
'discovery which all nature affords, of. the
divine,goodnefs, lead us to put a like con-
flruAion on the evils which we fiffer
from a hand that hath so frequently load-
ed us with good ?- Have we forgotten,
in the midst of our complaints,: who
brought us unto the light of day; who
watched over our helpless infancy; who

reared

reaied our growing childhood; and. s E I M.
through ten thoufanld surrounding dan- ~
gers, has been our protector and guardian
until this day ? How often has he refcu-
ed us from sickness and death, and made
our hearts glad with unexpclcd com-
forts ? Now, that some cloud is thrown o-
ver our prosperity, or some blessing with-
drawn, in which for a time we had rejoi-
ced, can we imagine that there is no good
caule for this change of his proceeding?
Shall we fufpec that his nature is entirc-
ly altered ? H.ath God fJorgotten to be gra-
cios ? Hath he in angler f ilt up his teudr
mercies ? No, let us Iay with ftle Plhlmill,
'hs iismy ijfirmity; but I will remcemb'r
the works of the Lord. I will remember the
years of the right hand of the towflt ligh .
- One signal work of the moR High,
at leaf, let us remember, and rejoice in
the remembrance of it; even that final
remedy which. he has provided for all the

evils
* pL. lxxvii. ix. 1o.

SERM. evils occasioned by fin, in the redemption

XVI.
xl-~ of the world accomplished by Jesus Christ.

He wuho/fpared not his own Son, but deliver-
ed hin up for us all, will he, in any cafe,
wantonly afflict the children of men with
superfluous and unnecessary sorrows? Is
not this a proof so fatisfafory, so express
and demonfirative, of the gracious pur-
polcs of God, as flould dispose us to take
in good part, every thing which proceeds
from him ? Confider,

IN theficond place, that the good things

we receive from God are undeserved, the
evils we susser are justly merited. Every
reasonable person mult feel the weight of
this consideration, for producing patience
and submission. For, though to susser at
any rate be grievous, yet to susser unjust-
ly, is doubly galling. Whereas, when
one receives a mixed portion, whereof the
goods are above his deserts, and the evils
below his deserts, to complain, in such a
cafe, is unreasonable; there is more
ground for being thankful.- All, it is

3 true,

true, have not deserved evil equally. Yet S ERM.

XVI.

all of us deserve it more or less; and to -
merit good at the hand of the Lord, is
what none of us can pretend. At the belt
we are but unprofitable /e vants. Even this is
more than we are entitled to claim. For
if God were to enter into judgement with
us, who could fiand before him? who
could jufRify himself in his fight ? When
the most inoffensive compare their con-
,dut with God's holy law; when they re-
flec upon the duties they have omitted,
and the actual guilt they have contracted,
they will find more reason to accuse them-
selves, than to complain of the divine
chastisement, Whatever innocence any
of us may plead, nay, whatever merit we
may claim, with refped to men and the
world, we uffier no more than what we
deserve from the Governor of the world;
and of his displeasure, we know that the
wrath of man is no other than the inftru-
ment.

Not only all of us have done evil, but,
what ought to be particularly attended

to,

iE R M. to, God has a jut title to pulniil us for it.
xvl Although a man, know, that he deserves

punilhmnent, yet he will not allow every
oneto infliC it. A child will submit td his
parents, a servant to his mailcr, a 'subjea to
.the magifirate,' when he would not bear
correfsion from another hand. Bnt no pa-
.*ent can have so complete a right toiatitho-
rity over his childrefi', no miafter:'over his
servants, no magistrate oker his fibjets,' as
the Alihighty hath' over us.' When' we
were born, wee brought nottl.rig stith us
into God's world. During our conti-
nuance in it, we have elived on'the good
tliifigs which God:was pleiaed to lend
us; and of whih, God and our own con-
fcicnce know that we have made but a
fdo:ry improvement. When he thinks
proper to take any of them ivay,-'io
vrong is done us; for they were not
burs. To have enjoyed them'r iso long, was
a favour. ' To enjoy themiialwajs, was
what we neither deserved, nor had any
title to expeCt

'* . -- -* : * IN

; IT:,h¢ e

. tbhiri! place,: the. good things s RiM.

wliiihll it different times :e have reccivcl .ed
antd enjoyed, are much greater than the
eCila w:hicl we tuffcr.: Of this fact, -I aml
iinfb.le. it:,vj.l :be difficult to. persuade. tie
asldied.;:.,t· .vwould tbUey,weighn, ina fir
bAlance, the v.Mhole of: their, circumltancqs;
ihstyv.'wuld find. it .triue. .'i;Whate~,expar,~
fons.ffeel at thp prefelnt: makes foi.lrong
'Ix imnptellion, uponp: them,. as very;.com.-
3).only8otq;(.bltenratci the!mium3ry ,f. al! tjht
past,. ;W hen; one is, opprefled. \tith ;fonle
painful 4ifieaimn:his body, .or wriuag xvitd
fom.e.fo.eoidiiltrufs .of. mind, every. frmnei-
eoinf6r.;l attala t rmomcnt, 'gsos for nothing;
Life.Ais,. beheld in all its.glfom..: A dark5
clotid feems.to hahg. over t;: and it is re-
.iled,; as !n .other than a fene. of wretch-
e'dnef's indi;£orron w. :But tlis .is to be un-
juft;tQ,himatan-life,: as well as ufgiratefu'
to.its auhQti '.--Let me -only;defire yoiv
to think how many days,. how.; manny
months, how many years, you have paled
ii, heaaltli) ahd ease, and' romrTort,; ;how
rnanir'ipeafiurabld feelings,.you havc'lhad;

how

S ERM. how many friends you have enjoyed;
xvr, how many blessings, in Ihort, of diffe-

rent kinds you have tailed; and you will
be forced to acknowledge, that more ma-
terials. of thanksgiving present themselves
than of lamentation and complaint.--
These blessings, you will fay, are paftl
But though past, ought they to be gone
from'your remembrance? Do they merit
no place, in the comparative eflimate of
the goods and evils of your state? Did
you, could you, expect, that in this muta-
ble world, any temporal joy-was to last
for ever? Has gratitude no 'influence to
form your minds to a calm acquiefcerice
in your Benefator's appointments ? What
can be more reasonable than to fay, " Hay-
" ing in former times received -so many
" good things from the hand of God,.
" shall I not now, without murmuring,
" receive the few evils which it pleases
" him to fend?"

IN the fourh 'place, not only the goods
of life are upon the whole-greater than

" its

its evils; but the evils which we fiffer SEItRM.

XVI.

are seldom, or never, without ibme mix-

l

ture of good. As there is no condition
on earth of pure unmixed felicity, tb there
is none so miserable, as to be destitute of
every comfort. Entire and complete mi-
fery, if ever it take place, is of our own
procuring, not of God's fending. None
but the most gross and atrocious finners
can be in such a situation, as to discover
no ray of relief or hope. In the ordina-
ry distresses of life, it is generally our
own folly and infirmity which, upon the
loss of some one blessing that we had
highly prized, deprives us of fatisfadtion
in all other things. Many of our cala-
mities are purely imaginary, and felf-cre-
ated; arising from rivalihip or competi-
tion with others, and fiom false opinions
of the importance of objects, to which
cultom and fashion have annexed an ideal
value. Were these mistaken opinions
once correced by reason, the evil would
disappear, and contentment would refuiue
its place.. With refpeA to those calami-

ties

SE R M: tics.which are inflictd by God, his Prd-
XVI.
Jv-^j vidence has made this 'wife and merciful

conflitution,:that, after the first flock, the
burden by degrees is lightened. Time .
brings a gentle and powerful opiate to all
misfortunes. What is very vviolent can-
not last long; and what lasts long -we be-
come accustomed to bear. Every.fituation
that:is permanent, at. length.' isfelt to be
tolerable. The mind accoinmodates it-
felfto-it; anil by degrees regains its u-
fial tiahqti'illityi -Hence the greatest part
of:the evils' of -life are more terrible in the
previouts ipprchenfion, than in-the actual
feefrlg; .anil it feldbm happens but, in
crie'corner or other, something is found
on which the mind can lay hold for its
relief.
*.: How many, for instance, do we behold
around us, straitened in their worldly
circumstances, and yet finding the means
to live chearfully,: with poverty and peace
in the fame habitation? If we are depriv-
ed of friends whom we tenderly loved,
are there not fill'lbme remaining, from
-:: I whom

whom we may expect much comfort? If SER I.

xv r.

our bodies are aflicled with fore disease, v-a
have we not reason to be thankful that
our mind continues vigorous and entire;
that we are in a situation to look around
us for whatever can afford us ease; and
that after the decay of this frail and moul-
dering tabernacle, we can look forward to
a hoibt/ not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens ?-In the midli of all distresses,
there remains to every sincere Chriflian,
that mixture of pure and genuine confo-
lation, which springs from the promises
and hopes of the gospel. Confider, 1 be-
feech you, what a singularly happy dif-
tinCion this makes in your situation, be-
yond the state of those who, under the va-
rious troubles of life, are left without hope,
and without God in the world; without
any thing'to look to, but a train of un-
known causes and accidents, in which
they fee no light nor comfort.-Thank
the Father of mercies, that into all the e-
vils he fends, he infules this joyful hope,
that the tffJerittgs f. the prefint time are

VOL. LY. Z not

SE R M. not wrorthy to be compared with the glory
XVI.

that Jiall be revealed in the end, to the
virtuous and good.

IN the fifth and last place, as the evils

which we susser are thus alleviated by a
mixture of good; so we have reason to be-
lieve, that the evils themselves are, in ma-
ny refpelts, good. When borne with pa-
tience and dignity, they improve and e-
noble our character. They bring into
exercise several of the manly and heroic
virtues; and by the constancy and fide-
lity with which we support our trials on
earth, prepare us for the highest rewards
in heaven.-It has always been foufid,
that the present constitution of human na-
ture cannot bear uninterrupted profperi-
ty, without being corrupted by it. The
poisonous weeds which spring up in that
too luxuriant foil, require the hand of ad-
verfity to extirpate them. It is the expe-
rience of sorrow and diflrefs that subdues
the arrogance of pride, tames the violence
of passion, softens the hardness of the fel-

3 fiih

fiflh heart, and humanizes the temper to s E Ir.

XVI.

feel for the woes of others. Many have J
had reason to fay, that it was good for them
to be qafflied W. jlhen men take the tim-
brel and the harp, and rzjoice at the obund of
the organ, they are apt to Jiy unto God,
Depart from us,for we desire not the know-
ledge of thy ways. What is :he Almnighty
that wue flouldferve himn ? But when they
are holden in cords of afflifion, then he Jhew-
eth them their work, and their tranfgrefions
that they have exceeded. He openeth also
their ear to discipline, and commandeth that
they return from iniquity t. Is his cafe to
be deplored as highly calamitous, who, by
forfeiting some transient ernoyments of the
world, purchases lasting improvement in
piety and virtue, and exchanges a few of
the good things of this life for the better
. things of another ?

INFLUENCED by such considerations as
these, let us look up with reverence to the

Z 2 great
Psalm cxix. 7,. t Job xxi. I2---xxsvi. 8.

SE R M. great Disposer of events; and under any
XVI

4 distress with which he is pleased to visit

us, let us utter no other voice but this;
Shall we receive good at the hand of GoJ,
qnd Jflall we not rective evil ?-Men are
too often ingenious in making themselves
mifcrable, by aggravating to their own
fancy, beyond bounds, all the evils which
they endure. They compare themselves
with none btt tholi whom they imagine
to be more happy; and complain that up-
on them alone has fallen the whole load of
human sorrows. Would they look with
a more impartial eye on the world, they
would fee themselves surrounded with
sufferers; and find that they are only
drinking out of that mixed cup, which
Providence has prepared for all.-" I will
" restore your daughter again to life,"
said the Eallern sage, to a prince who
grieved immoderately for the loss of a be-
loved child, " provided, you are able to
" engrave on her tomb the names of three
" persons who have never mourned." The
prince made inquiry after such persons;

but

but found the inquiry vain, and was si. sr.l r.
lcnt.-To every reafunable pcrfon who x.-1
retains the belief of religious principles,
many alleviating circumflances, and many
arguments for patience, will occur under
every diflrefs. If we reft on this firm
perfiifion, that there is a wife and jutl
Providence which disposes of all events,
we fiall have reason to conclude, tlat
nothing happens to us here without some
good design. Trussing that a happy termi-
nation fliall at last arrive to the disorders
of our present slate, we Ihall be enabled,
ami(lft all the varieties of fortune, to pre-
serve that equanimity which befits Chris-
tians; and under every trial to fay, It is
the Lord; let himi di what Jreemeth good in
,hisJs ht .

Z3 S RRMON

# SERMON XVII. On FRIENDSHIP. PROVERBS xxvii. 10. Thine own friend, and thy father's friend, forsake not. —

S E R M 0 N XVII.

On FRIENDSHIP.

PROVERBS xxvii. 10.
Thine own friend, and thy father's friend,

forsake not.--

SERM. WT HATEVER relatei to the behavi-
XVII. our of men in their social cha-

rater, is of great importance in religion.
The duties which spring from that charac-
ter, form many branches of the great law
of charity, which is the favourite precept
of Christianity. They, therefore, who
would separate such duties firom a religious
spirit, or who at most treat them as only

the

tile inferior parts of it, do a real injury to S E R Mr;
religion, They are miflaken friends of xvt,
piety, who, under the notion of exalting
it, place it in a fort of insulated cor-
ner, disjoined from the ordinary ara;irs
of the world, and the connections of
men with one another. On the contra-
ry, true piety influences them all. It
ads as a vivifying spirit, which animates
and enlivens, which retifies and conducts
them. It is no less friendly to men than
zealous for the honour of God; and by
the generous affections which it nourifll-
es, and the beneficent influence which it
exerts on the whole of conduCt, is fully
vindicated from every reproach which
the infidel would throw upon it.-ln this
view, I am now to discourse on the na-
ture and duties of virtuous frientdflip, as
closely connected with the true spirit of
religion, It is a subjec which the infpi-
red philosopher, who is the author of this
book of Proverbs, has thought worthy of
his repeated nbtice; and in many pai'ages
has bestowed the highest elogiums on

Z 4 friendship

S ER M. friendfihip among good men. As ointment
XVII.
vi "and peijume rejoice the heart, so doth the

fwueetneJs of a man's friend by hearty counlfl.
As ironJhtarpeneth iron, jo a mantJhatpeneth
the countenance of his friend. Make Jure of
thy friend; for fithuli are the wounds of a
friend. A friend loveth at all times; and
a brother is born for adveifity. There is a
friend that Jlicketh eloJer than a brother.-
Thine own friend, and thy Jather's friend,
it is said in the text, forJike not.

I MUST begin the fubje, by observing,

that there are among mankind friend-
Ihips of different kinds, or, at least, con-
nexions which assume that name. When
they are no more than confederacies of
bad men, they ought to be called confpi-
racies, rather than friendihips. Some bond
of common interest, some league against
the innocent and unfufpeding, may have
united them for a time. But they are
held together only by a rope of sand.-
At bottom they are all rivals, and' hostile
to one another. Their friendflip can

fubfiE

subsist no longer than interest cements S ER .
them. Every one looks with a jealous xv.
eye on his supposed friend; and watches
the firlt favourable opportunity to defcrt,
or to betray.

Friendlhips too there are of a diffe-

rent kind, and of a more refpeEtablle na-
ture, formed by the connetion of politi-
cal parties. It is not, perhaps, on felfifl
or crooked designs that such friendflips
are originally founded. Men have been
associated together by some public interest,
or general cause, or for defence against
some real or imagined danger; and con-
nexions thus formed, often draw men into
close union, and inspire for a season no
finall degree of cordial attachment. When
upon just and honourable principles this
union is founded, it has proved, on va-
rious occasions, favourable to the cause of
liberty and good order among mankind.
At the fame time, nothing is more ready
to be abused than the name of public fpi-
rit, and a public cause. It is a name, un-
der which private interest is often shelter-

ed,

SE RM.ed, and selfish designs are carried oi,
XVII.
\ i The unwary are allured by a specious ap-

pearance; and the heat of faction usurps
the place of the generous warmth of
friendilip.

IT is not of such friendships, whether

of the laudable or the suspicious kind,
that I am now to discourse; but of pri-
vate friendships, which grow neither out
of interested designs, nor party zeal; but
-which flow from that similarity of difpo-
fitions, that corresponding harmony of
minds, which endears some person to our
heart, and makes us take as much part in
his circumstances, fortunes, and fate, as if
they were our own. The Jbul of Jonathan
was knit with the foul of David; and Jo-
nathan loved him as his own foul a. Such
friendships certainly are not unreal; and
for the honour of human nature, it is to
be hoped are not altogether unfrequent

among
* t Samuel xviii, I.

among mankind.-- Happy it is, when SEt RM.

XVII.

they take root in our early years; and X
are engrafted on the ingenuous sensibility
of youth. Friendships then contracred, re-
tain to the last a tenderness and warmth,
seldom poffeifed by fiiendflips that are
formed in the riper periods of life. The
remembrance of antient and youthful con-
necions melts every human heart; and
the dissolution of them is, perhaps, the
most painful feeling to which we are ex-
posed here below.- But at whatever pe-
riod of life friendflips are formed, as long
as they continue sincere and affecdonate,
they form, undoubtedly, one of the great-
elt bieffings we can enjoy. By the pleas-
ing communication of all our sentiments
which they prompt, they are jufily said
to double our pleasures, and to divide our
sorrows. They give a brighter funfline
to the gay incidents of life; and they en-
lighten the gloom of its darker hours. A
faithful friend, it is justly and beautifully
hiid, by one of the Apocryphal writers,

SE R M. is the medicine of life *. A variety of oc-
XVII.
,cvi cafions happen, when to pour forth the

heart to one whom we love and trufl, is
the chief comfort, perhaps the only relief,
we can enjoy. Miserable is he who, shut
up within the narrow inclofure of fclfifll
interelt, has no person to whom he can
at all times, with full confidence, expand
his foul.

SINCE cordal friendship is so great a

blefling to human life, let .us proceed to
confider what duties it requires, and by
what methods it may be cultivated to
most advantage. The fundamental qua-
lities of true friendflip are, constancy and
fidelity. Without these material ingre-
dients, it is of no value. An inconstant
man is not capable of friendIhip. He
may perhaps have affections which occa-
fionally glow in his heart; which excite
fondness for amiable qualities; or connect

him
*EcclefiaRicus vi. x6.

him with seeming attachment to one SE R M.
whom he esteems, or to whom he has v
been obliged. But after there feelings
have lasted for a little, either fancied in-
terelt alienates him, or some new object
attrats him; and he is no longer the
fame person to those whom he once loved.
A man of this inconfrant mind cannot be
said to have any mind at all. For where
there is no fixedness of moral principle,
occasional feelings are of no value; mind
is of no effect; and with such persons it
is never desirable to have any connexion.
Where contlancy is wanting, there can be
no fidelity, which is the other basis of
friendihip. For all friendfliip supposes
entire confidence and trust; supposes the
feal of secrecy to be inviolable; fuppoles
promises and engagements to be sacred;
and no advantage of our own to be pur-
Iued, at the expence of our friend's honour.
An inconstant man, is despicable. A faith-
less man, is bare.

But supposing neither constancy nor si-
delity to be altogether wanting, still how-

ever

SERM. ever friendship is in hazard of suffering
XVII. _L, from the follies, and unreafbnable hu-

mours, to which all of us are liable. It
is to be regarded as a tender plant in an
unfavourable foil, which, in order to its
flourifling, requires to be reared and
nursed with care. The following direc-
tions may be of use for promoting its cul-
tivation, and preserving it from whatever
might be apt to blast and wither it.

IN the firfl place, let me advise you not

to expect perfection in any with whom
you contrat friendship. It holds in ge-
neral, with refpec6 to all worldly pursuits,
that the more moderate our expectations
are, they are likely to be the more success-
ful. If, in any situation of life, we hope
to possess complete happiness, we may de-
pend on receiving mortifications. If, in
any person, we trust to find nothing but
perfection, we may be assured that, on
longer acquaintance, we fliall meet with
disappointments. In the cafe of friend-
fliip, this admonition is the more ncceffa-

ry

ry to be given, as a certain warmth and s ERt M.

XVII.

enthufiain belong to it, which are apt to Xv- J
carry us beyond the bounds of nature.
In young minds, especially, a disposition
of this kind is often found to take place.
They form to themselves romantic ideas,
gathered perhaps from fictitious histories,
of the high and heroic qualities which be-
long to human nature. All those qua-
lities, they alcribe, without reserve or li-
mitation, to the person with whom they
wish to enter into intimate friendship;
and on the least failure appearing, aliena-
tion instantly follows. Hence many a
friendship, hastily perhaps contraAled, is
as.haftily dissolved, and disgust succeeds
to violent attachment.- Remember, my
friends, that a faultless character on earth
is a mere chimera. Many failings you
experience in yourselves. Be not furpri-.
fed, when you discover the like in others,
of whom you had formed the highest o-
pinion. The belt and most eftilmable
persons are they, in whom the fewest ma-
terial defecs are found; and whose great

and

SE R M. and solid qualities counterbalance the
XVII.
kvllJ common infirmities of men. It is to

these qualities you are to look in forming
friendships; to good l:nfe and prudence,
which constitute the basis of every relpec-
table charader; to virtue, to good tP-:-
per, to steadiness of affection; and accord-
ing to the union of thole dispositions,
esteem yourselves happy in the friend
whom you chufe.

IN the second place, I mufi admonish

you not to be hurt by differences of opi-
nion. arising in intercourle with your
friends. It is impossible for these not to
occur. Perhaps no two persons were e-
ver cast so exacQly in the fame mould, as
to think always in the fame manner, on
every subjea. It was wifely contrived by
Providence, that diversity of sentiment
should take place among men, on purpose
to exercise our faculties, and to give varie-
ty to human life. Perpetual uniformity
of thought would become monotonous
and insipid.-- Vhen it is with regard to

~~~~~~I - trifles

trifles that diversity or contrariety of opi- S ER M.
nions shows itself, it is childilh in the last xvl
degree, if this become the ground of e-
ftranged affection. When from such a
cause there arises any breach of friend-
flip, human weakness is then discovered
in a mortifying light. In matters of fe-
rious moment, the sentiments of the belt
and worthiest may vary from those. of
their friends, according as their lines6s
life diverge, or as their temper, and habits
of thought, present objects under different
points of view. But among candid and
liberal minds, unity of affection will still
be preserved. No man has any title to
ered his own opinions into an universal
and infallible flandard: And the more en-
larged that any man's mind is, the more
readily he will overlook difference in fen-
timents, as long as he is perfaded that
the mind of his friend is upright, and that
he follows the didates of conscience and
integrity.

VOL. IV. A a IN

SERM. IN the third place, It is material to the
xvj preservation of fiieididhip, that openness

of temper and manners, on both Lands,
be cultivated. Nothing more certainly
dissolves friendship, than the jealousy
which arises fiom darkness and conceal-
ment. If your situation oblige you to
take a different fide from your friend, do
it openly. Avow your conduCt; avow
your motives; as far as honour allows,
di'clofe yourselves frankly; seek no cover
from unnecessary and mysterious secrecy.
Mutual confidence is the foul of friend-
ship. As soon as that is destroyed, or
even impaired, it is only a flIow of friend-
fhlip that remains. What was once cor-
dial intimacy, degenerates firtf into formal
civility. Confiraint on both fides next
succeeds; and disgust or hatred soon fol-
low.-Tlfe maxim that has been laid
down by certain crooked politicians, to
behave to a friend with the fame guarded
caution as we would do to an enemy, be-
cause it is possible that he may one day
becomne fuich, discovers a mind which never

was made for the enjoyments of friendflip. SE R M.
It is a maxim which, not unrcafonably I -,.,
admit, may find place in tlhoe political
and party friendflips, of which I before
spoke, where personal advancement is al-
ways in view. But it is altogether incon-
fiftent with the spirit of those fiiendflips,
which are formed, and underflood to be
nouriffied, by the heart.

TIHE fourth advice which I give is, To

cultivate, in all intercourse among friends,
gentle and obliging manners. It is a com-
mon error to suppose, that familiar intima-
cy supersedes attention to the lefler duties
of behaviour; and that, under the notion
of freedom, it may excuse a careless, or
even a rough, demeanour. On the con-
trary, an intimate connection can only be
kept up, by a constant wish to be pleating
and agreeable. The nearer and closer that
men are brought together, the more fre-
quent that the points of contact between
them become, there is the greater neceflity
for the surface being smooth, and every

A a thing

SERM. thing being removed that can grate or of-
XVII. xv2J fend.-Let no harshness. no appearance of

neglect; no supercilious affectation of fu-
periority, occur in the intcrcourfe of
friends. A tart reply, a proneness to re-
buke, a captious and contradidious spirit,
are often known to embitter domestic life,
and to set friends at variance. In those
smaller articles of behaviour, where men are
too apt to be careless, and to indulge their
humour without reflraint, the real cha-
ratcer is often underflood to break forth,
and ihew itself. It is by no means e-
nough,,that, in all matters of serious in-
tereit, we think ourselves ready to prove
the sincerity of our firiendfhip. These
occur more rarely. The ordinary tenor
of life is composed of finall duties and of-
sices, which men have occasion daily to
perform; ard it is only by rendering dai-
ly behaviour agreeable, that we can long
preserve the comforts of friendship.

IN the filth place, let me caution you
pot to lifien rashly to-evil reports against

your

your friends. When upon proper grounds SE RM.
you have formed a connetion, be flow of x*
believing any thing againtl the friend whom
you have chosen. Remember, that there
is among mankind a spirit of malignity,
which too often takes pleasure in dilturb-
ing the society of those who appear to en-
joy one another. The scripture hath warn-
ed us, that there is a whifpercr who /epa.
rateth chice frileids; there is a file witness

uwho /oweth dii/ord among brethren. Give
not therefore a ready ear to the officious
insinuations of those who, uinder the guise
of friendly concern, come to admonish
you, that you ought to fland on your guard
against those whom they fee you disposed
to trust. Confider, whether, under this fair
appearance, there may not lurk some fe-
cret envy and rivalry, or rome concealed
interest. Chafe not every flying report.
Suffer not the poison of jealousy easily to
taint your mind, and break your peace..
A wide difference there is between that
weak credulity which allows itself to be
imposed upon blindly, and that dark and

A a 3. fulpicious

S E I M. suspicious spirit which is always inclined

-1 jto the evil fide. It forms part of the cha-

rater of a wife and good man, that he is
not prone to take up a reproach againfl bis
neighbour.

IN thefixth and lafft place, let me exhort

you not to desert your friend in danger
or ditlrefs. Too many there are in the
world, whose attachment to those they
call their friends is confined to the day of
their prosperity. As long as that conti-
nues, they are, or appear to be, affetion-
ate and cordial. But as soon as their
friend is under a cloud, they begin to
withdraw, and to separate their interests
from his. In friendships of this fort, the
heart, assuredly, has never had much con-
cern. For the great test of true friendfiip,
is conflancy in the hour of danger, adhe-
rence in the season of diftrefs.-When
your friend is calumniated,. then is the
time, openly and boldly to espouse his
cause. When his situation is changed, or
his fortunes are falling, then is .the time of

affording

affording prompt and zealous aid. When SE R .
sickness or infirmity occasion him to be
neglclcd by others, that is the opportu-
nity which every real friend will feizc, of
redoubling all the affectionate attentions
which love suggests. These are the im-
portant duties, the sacred claims of friend-
ihip, which religion and virtue enforce on
every worthy mind.-To flho yourselves
warm, after this manner, in the cause of
your fiiend, commands esteem, even fiom
those who have personal interelt in oppof-
ing him. This honourable zeal of friend-
ihip, has, in every age, attralced the vene-
ration of mankind. It has consecrated
to the latest posterity the nlimes of those
who have given up their fortunes, and
have even expolcd their lives, in behalf
of the friends whom they loved; while
ignominy and disgrace have ever been the
portion of them, who deserted their friends
in the evil day. Thine own friend fJrfake not.

BEFORE concluding, it must not be
forgotten, that the injunction of the Wife

A a 4 Man

SERM. Man in the text, is accompanied with this
XVII. */<v remarkable expreflion; not only thine

own friend, .but also, thy father's friend
forlake not. These words bring back to our
remembrance the days of former years;
and suggest a sentiment, which cannot but
touch every feeling heart. Thine own
friend may be dear; thy father's friend
ought to be sacred. As long as life re-
mains in any human breast, the memory
of those antient ties flould remain, which
conneced us once with our father, and
our father's houfe.-Thy father has per-
haps, long ago, gone down to the dust.
But when you recal the innocent days of
childhood and youth; when you think of
those family tranfafilons which once glad-
dened your hearts; your father's friend, in
the midst of these, will rife to your re-
membrance. There was a time when you
accosted him with refpea, or looked up to
him with fondness, and was made happy
by his kindly notice. Does such a one
now survive, and {hall he not receive

from

from you some portion of filial reverence E R M.
and honour? To disregard and neglect
him, is to spurn your father's memory;
is to insult the aflies of him who now
sleeps in the grave; is to tranfinit your-
selves to those who fiall succeed you, as
unfeeling and base. Thine 'own friend,
and thy Jather's Jriend,foijJke not.

I HAVE pointed out some of the chief

duties which belong to virtuous friend-
ship; and some of the principal means
by which this sacred bond should be pre-
served unbroken; this holy flame should
be kept alive in the human breast. The
spirit, and sentiments, which I have ftu-
died to inspire, are such as virtue breathes,
and such as true piety should increase.
It is thus we fulfil that great law of love,
which our divine Master taught. It is
thus we prepare ourselves for those happy
regions, where charity never fiileth; where,
in the pretence of the God of love, eternal
and invariable friendships unite together

all

SERRM. all the blessed; friendflips, which, by no
Xvii. human infirmity disturbed, by death ne-

ver separated, fliall conflitute throughout
endless ages, a great and diltinguiflied
portion of the celestial felicity.

SERMON

# SERMON XVIII. On the CONDUCT to be held with regard to Future EVENTS. PROVERBS xxvii. I. Boast not thyself of to-morrow; for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth.

S E R M O N XVIII.
On the CONDUCT to be held with regard

to Future EVENTS.

PROVERBS xxvii. 1.
Bolas not tl'ielff of to-morrow; for thou

knowveJt not what a day may bring forth.
FROM these words I purpose to dif- S ERM.

course of the proper conduc which xvuI.

we ought to hold with regard to futuri-
ty, amidst the present uncertainties of life.
Time and life are always going on, and
to each of us are preparing changes in our
state. What there may be, whether for
the better or for the worse, we cannot tell;

as

SERIM. as it hath pleased the wisdom of Provi-
XV11. JJ dence, to cover futurity with a veil which

no mortal can lift up. In the mean time,
none of us can avoid forming designs,
and laying plans, for the time to come.
The present moment is never sufficient
to give full employment to the acive
mind of man, without some excursions in-
to futurity; and in there excursions, the
present is often wholly spent. It is there-
fore of the highest consequence, that a pro-
per direction be given to the mind, in its
employments of thought relating to fu-
* turity. Otherwise, in the profpets which

we take of that unknown region, false
hopes, or ill-grounded fears, shall flatter
or torment us in vain. We know not, as
the Wife Man tells us, what a day may
bring fJrtb. It may, very probably, pro-
duce something that we had not looked
for; and therefore, instead of boa/ling our-
selves oJ to-morrow, as the multitude are
apt to do, it becomes us to be'difciplined
and prepared, for whatever it may bring.

IT

IT is needless to spend much time in SERM

confirming the truth, which is the foun- x-J
dation of the admonition in the text; in
proving, either that change and mutability
belong to our present fiate, or that the
changes of it cannot be foreseen by us.
These are truths so obvious and consef-
fed, that an attempt to confirm them is
like proving, that all men are to die. At
the fame time, obvious as they are, it were
to be wished, that the thoughts of men
dwelt upon them more. For, by a strange
but prevailing deception, it would teem,
from the general conduct of mankind,
that almost every one thinks his own cafe
an exception from the general law; and
that he may build plans with as much
confidence on his present situation, as if
some assurance had been given him that
it were never to change. Hence it has
been often observed by serious persons,
that there is no more general cause to
which the vices of men can be ascribed,
their forgetfulness of God. and their ne-
glea of duty, than to their prefhming

3 upon

SE R M. upon the continuance of life, of pleasure,
XVIII.
xvj and prbfperity,

Look but a little way, my friends, into

your own state; and you must unavoid-
ably perceive that, from the beginning, it
has been so contrived by Providence, that
there fliould be no permanent stability to
man's condition on earth. The feeds of
alteration are every where sown. In your
health, life, possessions, connections, plea-
filres, there are causes of decay impercep-
tibly working; secretly undermining the
foundations of what appears to you the
moit flable; continually tending, to abo-
lifli the present form of things, and to
bring forward new appearances, and new
objects in their order: So that nothing is
or can be, stationary on earth. All chan-
ges, and passes. It is a itream which is
ever flowing; a wheel which is ever turn-
ing round. When you behold the tree
covered with blossoms in the spring, or
loaded with fruit in the autumn, as well
may you imagine, that those blossoms, or
that fruit, are to remain in their place

Z~I~~~ through

through the whole year;, as believe that SE R M.

XVII I.

human affairs are to continue, for to-day J
and to-morrow, for this year and the next,
proceeding in the fame tenor.-To render
this reflecion still more serious, think, I
pray you, on what small and inconfidcra-
ble causes those changes depend, which
affecd the fortunes of men, throughout
their whole lives. How soon is evil done!
There needs no great bustle or fir, no long
preparation of events, to overturn what
seems most secure, and to blalt what ap-
pears most flourifling. A gale of wind
rifes on the ocean; and the vessel which
carried our fiiends, or our fortunes, is o-
verwhelmed in the deep. A spark of a
candle falls by night in some negledcd
corner; and the whole substance of fami-
lies is consumed in flames before the
morning. A casual blow, or a sudden
fall, deranges some of our internal parts;
and the reft of life is diflrefs and misery.
It is awful to think, at the mercy of how
many seeming contingencies we perpe-

tually

SERM tually lie, for what we call happiness in
XVII this world.

In the midpt, however, of all these ap-

parent contingencies, plans and designs
for the future are every day formed; pur-
suits are undertaken; and life proceeds in
its usual train. Fit and proper it is, that
life fliould thus proceed. For the uncer-
tainty of to-morrow was never designed
by Providence, to. deter us from adting or
planning to day; but only to admonish
us, that we ought to plan, and to at, fober-
ly and wifely.-What that wife and fober
conduct is which becomes us, what the
rules and precautions are, which, in such
a state as ours, refpeA futurity, I now pro-
ceed to lhow. They may be compre-
hended in the following direcions. Boast
not thyself of to-morrow; Despair not of
to morrow; Delay not till to-morrow what
is proper to be done to day; Prepare thy-
self for whatever to-morrow may bring
forth; Build. thy hopes of happiness on
something imore solid and latfing than

what

with regard tofature Events. 38S

what either to.day or to-morrow will pro- SE R M.
duce.

I. IN the words of the text, Boafl not

thy/elf of to-morrow; that is, never pre-
fume arrogantly on futurity; in the most
fair and promising slate of fortune. beware
of pride and vanity; beware of refting
wholly upon yourselves, and forgetting
Him who directs the changes of this mu-
table state. If there be any virtues, which
the uncertain condition of the world in-
culcate on man, they are, assuredly, mo-
deration and humility. Man was, for
this end, placed in a world, where he
knows so little of what is before him, that
he might be impressed with a sense of his
dependence on the Ruler of the world;
that he might feel the importance of ac-
quiring favour and protection from Hea-
ven, by a life of piety and virtue; and
that, not knowing how loon his own con-
dition may be the fame with that of the
molt wretched, he might be prompted to
act towards all his brethren the humane

VOL. IV. B b and

SE R M. and friendly part.-The favours which
XVIII.
vow Providence bestows upon him at prefenr,

he ought to receive with thankfulness,
and may enjoy with chearfulnefs. Though
commanded not to boafl hinfelfofto-morrow,
the meaning of the precept is not, that he
mufl be fad to day. Rejoice he may in
the day of prosperity; but certainly, Re-
joice with trembling, is the inscription that
fliould be written on all human pleasures.

As for them who, intoxicated with those

pleasures, become giddy and insolent;
who, flattered by the illusions of profpe-
rity, make light of every serious admoni-
tion which the changes of the world give
them, what can I fay too strong to alarm
them of their 'danger ?-They have said
to tlemfelves, My mountain Jlands f/rong,
and Shall never be moved. To-morrow flall
be as this day, and more abundantly. IJhall
never fee adverfity.-Rafh and wretched
men! are you sensible how impious such
words are? To the world, perhaps you
dare not utter them; but they speak the
secret language of your hearts. Know,

you

you are usurping upon Providence; you SE RM.

XVIII.

arc letting Heaven at defiance; you are -,
not only preparing iharper lings for your-
felvcs, when the changes of life flhall come,
but you are accelerating those changes;
you are fast bringing ruin upon your own
heads. For God will not fuffcr pride in
man; and the experience of all ages hath
flown, how careful he is to check it. In
a thousand memorable instances, the course
of his government has been visibly points
ed against it. He Jheweth Jtrength with
his arm, and fcattereth the proud in the imna-
ginations of their hearts. The day of the
Lord is upon every one that is proud and
lifted up; to humble the lofty looks of man
and to slain the pride of all glory *. Some
of the ministers of divine displeasure are
commissioned to go forth; and to hum.
ble, without delay, the boaJ/ler of to-mor-
row.

Bb2 II. A
*Luke i. 15. Isaiah ii. i. xiii. g9

SERM. II. As we are not to boast, so neither
XVIII.
xvll are we to despair, of to-morrow. The

former admonition was direted to those
whom prosperity had elated with vain
hopes. This is designed for those whom
a more adverse situation in life has filled
with fears and alarms of what is to come.
The reason of \both admonitions is the
fame; thou knowefi not twhat a day may
bring forth. It may bring forth some un-
expeAed misfortune; and therefore thou
shouldst be humble in prosperity. It may
bring forth some unforeseen relief; and
therefore thou fhouldit hope under dif-
trefs.-It is too common with mankind,
to be totally engrossed, and overcome, by
present events. Their present condition,
whatever it is, they are apt to imagine,
will never change; and hence by profpe-
rity they are lifted up, and by adversity are
dejeced and broken; prone, in the one
cafe, to forget God, in the other, to re-
pine against him. Whereas, the doctrine,
which the changes of the world pepetually

3 inculcate

culcate is, that no slate of external things s E R A.
flould appear so important, or mhould so XVII.
affect and agitate our ipirits, as to deprive
us of a calm, an equal, and a steady mind.
Man knoweth neither the good, nor the
evil which is before him. In your patience,
therefore, polfefi your ruls: trusting, in the
day of sorrow, that God hath not forgot-
ten to be gracious; and that though weep-
ing may endure for a night, joy cometb to
the upright in the morning.

Distress not yourselves, then, with an-

xious fears about to-morrow. Let me
exhort you to difnifs all folicitudc, which
goes beyond the bounds of prudent pre-
caution. Anxiety, when it seizes the
heart is a dangerous disease, produtive
both of much fin, and much miery. It
ass as a corrosive of the mind. It eats
out our present enjoyments, and fublti-
tutes, in their place, many an acute pain.
-The Wife Man, in the text, has advised
us not to boafl of to-morrow ; and our Sa-
viour has inftruded us to take no thought

Bb 3 for

SERM. for to-morrow *. Both these dircCtions,
XVIII. -y-J properly understood, are entirely consist-

ent; and the great rule of conduct, re-
speding futurity, is compounded of them
both; requiring us, neither arrogantly
to presume on to-morrow, nor to be an-
xioufly, and fearfully solicitous about it.
The morrow, fays our Saviour, Jfhall take
thought for the things of itself. We ihall
be better able to judge of the course molt
proper for us to hold, when events have be-
gun to come forward in their order. Their
presence often faggefts wiser counsels, and
more successful expedients, than it is pof-
fible for us to contrive at a diflance. By
excess of solicitude before hand, we fre-
quently introduce that confusion of mind,
and that hurry and disorder of spirits,
which bring us into the 'most unfavour.
able state for judging foundly.-Where-
fore, never indulge either anxiety, or de-
fpair, about futurity. Affright not your-

selves
* Matth. vi..33.

selves with imaginary terrors. Antici- S E RM.

XVIII.

pate not evils, which perhaps may never x
come. Make the best which you can of
this day, in the fear of God, and in the
practice of your duty; and, having done
so, leave to-morrow to itself. Sufficient
for the day, when it comes, will be the evil
thereof.

III. DELAY not till to-morrow any thing

which is fit and proper to be done to-day.
Remember, that thou art not the lord of
to-morrow. Thou art so far from having
any title to dispose of it, that thou art ig-
norant of the most material circumstances
relating to it; not only of what it fiall
bring forth, but whether thou fialt live to
fee it.-Notwithflanding the uncontrover-
tible evidence of this truth, procrastination
has, throughout every age, been the ruin
of mankind. Dwelling amidst endless
projects of what they are hereafter to do,
they cannot so properly be said to live, as
to be always about to live; and the fu-
ture has ever been the gulph in which the

B b 4 prefect

SE R M. present is swallowcd up and loft.-Hence
XVIII.
V- arise many of those misfortunes which be-

fal, men in their worldly concerns What
might at present be arranged in their cir-
cumftances with advantage, being delay-
ed to another opportunity, cannot be ar-
ranged at all. To-morrow being loaded
with the concerns of to-day, in addition to
its o-r, is clogged and embarrassed. As-
fairs, which had been poftporled, multi-
ply and crowd upon one another; till, at
last, they prove so intricate and perplexed,
agid 'the pressure of business becomes so
great, tlat nothing is left, but to fink un-
d'edr the burden. Of him, therefore, who
indulges this lingering and delaying fpi-
.rit in worldly matters, it is easy to prog-
nofticate that the ruin is not far off.

Evils of the fime kind, arising from the

fame cause, overtake men, in their moral
and spiritual interefls. There are few,
but who are sensible of some things in
their character and behaviour, which
ought to be corrected, and which, at one
'time or other, they intend to correct;

rome

some headstrong paflion, which they de- S E R M.
sign to fibdue; fbme bad habit, which they j
purpose to reform; some dangerous con-
nection, which they are relblved to break
off. But the convenient season for these
reformations is not yet come. Certain
oblticles are in the way, which they cx-
pet by and by to surmount; and there-
fore they go on in peace for thepre.fent,
. in-their usual courses, trufling, at a future
day, to begin their designed improvement.
In the mean time. the angel ot death de-
scends; and in the midst of their. distant
plans, executes his commission, and carries
them away.-Guard againif delusions of
this kind, which have been fatal to so ma-
ny.-Thou art now in tranquillity, in
health, in possession of a calm mind. Im-
prove these advantages, for performing all
that becomes thee, as a man, and as a
Christian; for who can tell how long thou
shalt be permitted to enjoy them ? New
alterations of fortune may be just coming
forward; new troubles in public, or in
private life, about to arise; new exigencies

ready

SER M. ready to throw thee into some condition,
XVIII.

which flall leave thee neither leisure nor
opportunity, to execute any of the good
purposes thou haft at present in thy mind.
Wherefore, trifle no longer with what is
so serious, and what may be so critical;
but to day, while it is called to day, litfen
to the voice of God, and do his works.
Do now, as the Wife Man advises, with
thy tnight whatsoever thy hand findeth to
do; for there is no work, nor device, nor
wisdom, in the grave whether thou goe.t s.
-Instead of delaying till to-morrow
what ought to be done to-day, let me ex-
hort you,

1V. To be every day prepared for what-

ever to-morrow may bring forth. There
is a certain preparation for the viciflitudes
of life, in which the multitude are fuffi-
ciently busied; providing, as they think, a-
gainft whatever may happen, by increasing

their
* Eccles. ix. io.

their riches, and strengthening themselves SERM.
by friends, conneiions, and worldly ho- v
nours. But thele bulwarks which they
eret, are totally insufficient against the
dreaded storm. It is to some other quar-
ter we must look for our defence; for
when it is the world itself, whose changes
we have reason to dread, the world, and
the things of it, cannot afford us protec-
tion. The best preparation for all the
uncertainties of futurity consists, in a well
ordered mind, a good conscience, and a
chearful fubmifflion to the will of Heaven.
You know not what ihall be on to-mor-
row. But there is One who knows it well;
for his decree hath fixed it. To him
look up with reverence; and fay, " Not
" my will, but thine be done; what thou ap-
" pointeft is ever wife, andjult, and good."
Seek to fulfil the part which he hath as-
signed you; to do the things which he hath
commanded you to do; and leave all the
reft to him. Whatever to-morrow brings
forth, let it find you employed in doing

I jiisll}',

SE R M. juflpy, loving mercy, and walking humbly
XViII. with yourt God; and then you ihall meet

to-morrow without fear, when you meet
it without the upbraidings of guilt.

If it ihall bring forth to you any unex-

peted good, prepare to receive it with
gratitude, temperance, and modefly. If
it {hall bring forth evil, prepare to receive
it with manly fortitude. Let no events
of any kind, derange your equanimity, or
flake your constancy. Contraf your de-
fires, and moderate your hopes. Expea
not more from the world than it is able to
afford you. Take it for granted that what
is naturally mutable, will one day change;
that what was designed to be transient,
will pass away.-Look forward to futu-
rity without impatience. Be not desirous
to know it. It belongs to God. Let him
bring forward the events of the world, in
his own way. Imagine that you conti-
nually hear those words, which our Lord
once addressed to Peter, when he was in-
quiring about what was to happen to a
fellow disciple, What is that to thee? Fol-

low

low thou me. Amidst all the uncertainty SE R M
of future events, this road of clear and xvl"
plain duty lies before you; follow Christ,
and inquire no farther. Seek no crooked
path, in order to avoid impending dan-
gers. Turn not to the right hand, nor to
the left; but commit thy way unto the Lord;
trufl aso in him, and he Ji]all bring to pass
the desires of thy heart.

V. BUILD your hopes of happiness on

somewhat more solid and lasting, than
what either to-day or to-morrow are like-
ly to produce. From what has been said,
you may clearly perceive, that he who
refts wholly upon this world, builds his
house upon the sand. This life, by means
of wiilom and virtue, may be rendered to
a good man, a tolerable, nay a comfort-
able, state. But he who expets complete
happiness from it, will be greatly deceived.
Man, in his mofl flourifing condition,
were much to be pitied, if he was defti-
tute of any higher hope. Rolling from

change

S ER . change to change, throughout all the days
XVIII. CVJ~ of his life, with a dark and unknown

profpet always before him in futurity,
what would avail a few fliort interrupted
glimpses of happiness, which, from time to
time, he was permitted to enjoy ? Can we
believe, that only for nhch a state as this,
man was designed by his great and good
Creator ?-No: Let us bles the God and
i ather of our Lord Yefus Chrfl, who, accord
ing to his abundant mercy, hath begotten ru
again into a lively hope, by the rejrretlion of
Chriftfrom the dead, to an inheritance incor-
ruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away,
Here is the Rock on which the mind, howe-
ver toll by the storms of life, can securely
reft. Here is the objea to which a wife
man will bend his chief attention, that, as-
ter having ated his part on earth with
fidelity and honour, he may be enabled,
through the merits of his Saviour, to look
for a place in the mansions of eternal
and untroubled peace. This profpe& is
the great corrective of the present vanity
of human life. It gives significancy and

importance

importance to its most transitory fcencs; q , R.
and, in the midst of its mutability, discovers XVIII.
one fixed point of rell. Ie who is habi-
tually influenced by the hope of immorta-
lity, will be able to look without :lifmay
on the changes of the world. He will
neither boast of to-morrow, nor be afraid
of it; but will pass through the varieties
of life with a manly and unbroken mind;
with a noble superiority to those fears and
expectations, those cares and sorrows,
which agitate the multitude.-Such are
the native effects of Chriflian faith and
hope. To them alone it belongs, to fur-
mount all the discouragements to which
we are now exposed; to render our life
comfortable, and our death blessed; nay,
to make the day of our death better than the
day of our birth.

SERMON

# SERMON XIX. On following the MULTITUDE to do EVIL. EXODUS xxiii. 2. Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil. —

S ERMO N XIX.
On following the MULTITUDE to do

EVIL.

EXODUS xxiii. 2.

TholJhalt not follow a multitude to do evil.-

SERM. IN this world, we are placed as compa-
xlx- I nions and assistants to one another.

Depending, for most of the comforts of
life, on mutual intercourse and aid, it was
necessary, that we ihould be formed to de-
fire the company, and to take pleasure in
the good will of our fellows. But this
sociability of man, though essential to his

pre'ent

present condition, has, like many other SERM.

XIX.

good principles, been unhappily warped j
from its original purpose; and, in the pre-
sent state of the world, has proved the
cause of much evil. For, as vice has a-
bounded in every age, it hath propaga-
ted itself much more easily by the afift-
ance of this social disposition. We natu-
rally. mould ourselves on the pattern of
prevailing manners; and corruption is
communicated from one to another. By
mutually giving, and taking, the example
of sinful liberties, licentiousness spreads
and grows; each justifies himself by his
neighbour; and the multitude of finners
strengthen one another's hands to commit
iniquity. In all ages of the world, cuf-
tom has had more power than reason.
Few take the trouble of inquiring what
is the right path; the greater part con-
tent themselves with following that in
which the multitude have gone before
them. No exhortation, therefore, is more
necessary to be frequently given, and to
be seriously enforced, than that which we

VOL. IV. C c receive

si rlM. receive from the text; Thou Fialt notfoa-

IX.J lowo a multitude to do evil.

-To acquire a full view of any danger
to which we are exposed, is the first mea-
sure to be taken, in order to our safety,
Let us then begin the subjeA, with confi-
dering how much we are in hazard of be-
ing misled into vice by the general man-
ners which we behold around us.-No
virtue is more necessary to a Christian,
but scarcely is there any more difficult
to be put in practice, than that firmness
of mind which can enable a man to main-
tain his principles, and to (land his ground
against the torrent of cuRtom, fashion, and
example- Example has upon all minds a
secret and insinuating influence, even
when we ourselves are insensible of its ope-
ration. We imperceptibly slide into some
resemblance of the manners of those with
whom we have frequent intercourse. This
often shows itself, in the molt indifferent
things. But the resemblance is frill more
readily contrated, when there is some-

- -' ..*........- :- thing

thing within ourselves, that leans to the SERM.

XIX.

fame fide which is countenanced by the I
pracice of others. We are always glad
to find any apology for indulging our
inclinations and palions; and the exam-
ple of the multitude too readily suggests
that apology. Even before corruption
has made great progress in our hearts,
sometimes, mere complaisance and good
nature incline us to fall in with the ways
of others. Sometimes, timidity and false
Ihame prevent our differing from them:
Frequently, expecation and interest impel
us strongly to comply. How great is the
danger we incur, when, in times of pre-
vailing vice, all these principles of imita-
tion and compliance unite together a-
gainft our virtue?

The world is too justly said by scrip-

ture, to lie in wickednefi. It is a school
wherein every vice is taught, and too ea-
fily learned. Even from our earliest child-
hood, false sentiments are instilled into
our minds. We are bred up in admira-
tion of the external show of life. We are
accuttomed, as soon as we can underltand

C c 2 any

SFRM. any thing, to hear riches and honours
XIX wvi spoken of as the chief goods of men, and

proposed to us as the objects to which our
future pursuits are to be directed. We
fee the measures of outward respeCt and
deference taken from thele alone. Reli-
gion and virtue are recommended to us,
in a formal manner, by our teachers and
inflrucors; but all improvements of the
mind and heart, are visibly placed by
the world, in an inferior rank to the ad-
vantages of fortune. Vices, that chance
to be faflhionable, are treated as flight fail-
ings; and coloured over, in common dif.
course, with those soft and gentle names
which express no condemnation. We en-
ter, perhaps, on the world, with good
principles, and an averfiori to downright
vice. But when, as we advance in life,
we become initiated in that mystery of ini-
quity, which is called, the way of the
world; when we meet with deceit and
artifice in all ranks of men; when we be-
hold iniquity authorised by great names,
and often rewarded with success and ad-

vancement,

vancement, our original good impressions s E R M.
too soon decay. The pradtice of the multi-
tude renders vice familiar tt our thoughts;
and gradually wears. off the abhorrence
with which we once beheld it. We begin
to think. that what is so very general, can-
not be highly criminal. The malignity
of fin appears diminified, by so many be-
ing {harers in the reproach; and instead
of mens vices detracting, as they ought
to do, from our good opinion of the men,
our attachment to the men oftener recon-
ciles us to the vices of which they ard
guilty.

The countenance which fin receives

from the pradice of the multitude, not
only removes the restraints which ate im-
posed by modefly and shame; but, such
is the degeneracy of the world, that Ihame
is too often employed' againit the cause of
religion and virtue. The ridicule of the
giddy and unthinking bears down !lh
conviction of the faber and modest,
Against their own belief, they appear to
adopt the notions of the infidel; and a-

C c 3 -gainfl

SE R M. gainft their own choice, they join in tTh
XIX. LXi vices of the libertine; that they may not

be reproached as persons of a narrow
mind, and still enfaved to the prejudices
of education. How much reason is there
to believe that, merely from this timidity
of temper, many, whose principles are on
the fide of religion and virtue, are never-
thelefs found walking in the way offinners,
and fitting in the chair of the fcornfill?-
Interest, too, often coincides with this
weakness of disposition, in tempting such.
persons to follow the multitude. To fall
in with the prevailing taste, to suit them-
selves to the passions of the great, or to
the humours of the low,. with whom they
chance to be conneced, appears the rea-
dieft way to rife in the world. Hence
they are naturally led to relinquifli the
firmness of an upright characer, for that.
supple and verfable turn, which accommo-
dates itfelfto'the times, and assumes what-
ever appearance seems most convenient
for interest.- Such are .the-.dangers to
whliich weare exposed, in times of corrup-

~~~B ~~u~tion,

tion, of following the multitude to do evil; SE R M.
dangers which require our most serious \
attention and care, in order to guard our-
selves against them.-I proceed to lay such
considerations before you as may be useful
for that purpose.

IN the firl place, Let is remember that

the multitude are very bad guides; are so
far from having a title to implicit regard,
that he who blindly follows them, may be
presumed to err. For prejudice, and pas-
sion, are known to sway the crowd. They
are struck by the outside of things; they
inquire superficially, admire false appear-
ances, and pursue false goods. Their o-
pinions are for the most part hastily form-
ed, and of course are variable, floating,
and inconfilfent. In every age, how finall
is the number of those who are guided
by reason, and calm inquiry ? How ser
do we find, who have the wisdom to think
and judge for themselves, and have ftea'
diness to follow out their own judgement?

C c 4 Ignorance

SERM. Ignorance, and low education, darken the

XIX.
a_^ views of the vulgar. Faflion and pre-

judice, vanity and pleasure, corrupt the
sentiments of the great. The example of
neither, affords any tfandard of what is
right and wife. If the philosopher, when
employed in the pursuit of truth, finds it
necessary to disregard eftablifled preju-
dices and popular opinion, shall we, in the
more important inquiry after the rule of
life, submit to such blind guidance as the
practice of the many; esteeming whatever
they admire, and following wherever they
lead? Be assured, that he who sets up the
general opinion as the standard of truth,
or the general pracice as the measure of
right, is likely, upon such a foundation,
to build no other superstructure except
vice and folly.-If the pracice of the mul-
titude be a good pattern for our imitation,
their opinions surely should be as good a
rule for our belief. Upon this principle,
we murt exchange Christianity for Paga-
nifin or Mahometanifm, and the light of
the Reformation for the fuperfitions of Po-

pery;

pery; for these latter have ever had, and sE R M.

XIX.

still have, the numbers and the multitude e VJ
on their filc.-Our Saviour has fuilicient-
ly characterised the way of the world,
when he describes the broad road in which
the multitudes go, as the road which leads
to deltruc7ion; and the path which leads to
happiness, as a narrow path, which fewer
find. From which it is an easy inference,
that to have the multitude on our fide, is
so far. from affording any presumption
of our being safe, that it should lead us
to fufped that we are holding the course
of danger.

IN the second place, as the practice of

the multitude is no argument of a good
practice, so it cannot afford us cither julf
tification, or safety, in what is evil.-It as-
fords us, 1 fay, nojuftification. Truth
and error, virtue and vice, are things of
immutable nature. The difference be-
tween them is grounded on that basis of
eternal rcafon, which no opinions or cuf-
toms of men can asset or alter. Whether

virtue

SERM. virtue be esteemed, or not, in the world,
-vYLJ this makes it neither more nor less eftima-

ble in itself. It carries always a divine
authority. which men cannot impair. It
shines with an essential lustre, which
praise cannot brighten, nor reproach tar-
nifh. It has a right to regulate the opi-
nions of men; but by their opinions can-
not be controlled. Its nature continues
invariably the fame, though all the mul.
titude of fools fiould concur in endea-
vouring to turn it into ridicule. Wo un-
to them, fays the prophet Isaiah, that
call evil, good, and good, evil; that put
darkness Jor light, and light for darkness;
that put bitter for sweet, andJweet for bit-
ter-Their root shall be as rottenness, and
their,blof/ombhallgo up as duJI; bccaufe they
have call away the law of the Lord of hofis,
and de/pifed the word of the holy one of If
rael .

As the pracice of the multitude fur-

nifes
* Isaiah v. to, 24+.

nifhes no juflification to the finner, so SE KM.
neither does it afford him any safety. Re- vow
ligion is altogether a matter of personal
concern. God hath delivered to every
man the rule of life; and every man must
think and at for himself; because for
himself he is to answer. If others be wic-
ked, it will be the worse for them; but
it will not, on that account, be the better
for us, if we shall be evil also. Let vice
be ever so prevalent, it is still that evil
thiwg which the Lord abhorreth; and,
though hand join in hand, the wicked shall
not escape unpunished. So far is the num-
ber of offenders from furnishing any
ground of safety, that it calls'more loudly
for divine justice to interpose. It is as
easy for the Almighty arm to crush a
whole guilty society, as to. punish a single
individual; and when the disobedient
subjects of God countenance and strength-
en one another in licentiousness, by tranf-
greffing in troops and bands, it becomes
high- time for his government to exert
itself, and let its vengeance forth.-One

could

SE R M. could scarcely think that any profeflbr of
XlX.
xlx3 Christian faith would fancy to himself

any apology from the way of the world,
when he knows that the declared deign
of his religion was, to diftinguifhl him
from the world, which is said to lie infin;
and that Christ came to call out for him-
self a peculiar people, whose chara&er it
should be, not to be conformned to the world,
but tratsformed by the renewing of their
minbs.-So little, indeed, can the practice
of the world either justify or extenuate
vice, that it deserves our serious confidera-
tion,

IN the third place, whether there be

not several circumstances, which peculiar-
ly aggravate the guilt of those who follow
the multitude in evil. Do you not, there-
by, strengthen the power of fin, and per-
petuate the pernicious influence of bad
example? By striking off from the cor-
rupted crowd, you might be eminently
useful.. You might animate and recover'
many, whom weakness and timidity keep'

under

under bondage to the cufloms of the SE! AM.

XIX.

world; whereas, by tamely yielding to the x
current of vice, you render that current
fironger for carrying others along; you
add weight and flability to the bad caule;
you lend to the multitude all the force of
your example, for drawing others after
them, to the commission of evil.-While
you are thus acceifory to the ruin of o-
thers, you are, at the fame time, stamping
your own characer with the foulet and
deepest impreflions of corruption. By fur-
rendering your judgement, and your con-
science, to the multitude, you betray the
rights, and degrade the honour, of the ra-
tional nature. Nothing great or worthy
can be expected of him, who, inflead of
confidering what is right in itIelf, and
what part it is fittest for one in his fRation
to aa, is only confidering what the world
will think, or fay of him; what fort of
behaviour will pals with the fairest flow,
and be most calculated to please the ma-
ny, When a man has thus given up the

liberty

E R M. liberty and independence of his mind, we
XlX can no longer reckon upon him in any

thing. We cannot tell how far he may be
carried in vice. There is too much ground
to dread, that he will lie, dissemble, and be-
tray; changing himself, without scruple,
into every shape that will find favour a-
mohg those whom he seeks to gain.-
While this servility to the world infers
baseness towards men, it involves also the
highest impiety towards God. It shows
that we yield to the world that reverence
and submission, which is only due to the
divine law. We treat the government of
the Almighty with scorn; as if his pre-
cepts deserved to be obeyed, only when they
suited the caprice and the follies of the
multitude; and were entitled to no regard,
as soon as they contradiced the reigning
customs and faihions of the world.-
While such conduct carries in it so much
wickedness and folly, let us observe,

IN the fourth place, that the most excel-
lent and honourable charaaer which can a-

dorn

dorn a man and a Chrillian, is acquired, s E RM.

XIX.

by resisting the torrent of vice, and adhe- -
ring to the cause of God and virtue a-
gainft a corrupted multitude. It will be
found to hold in general, that all those,
who, in any of the great lines of life, have
distinguished themselves for thinking pro-
soundly, and acting nobly, have despised
popular prejudices, and departed, in several
things, from the common ways of the
world. On no occasion is this more re-
quifite for true honour, than where reli-
gion and morality are concerned. In times
of prevailing licentiousness; to maintain
unblemished virtue, and uncorrupted in-
tegrity; 'in a public or a private cause, to
stand firm by what is fair and just, amidst
·discouragements and opposition; despising
groundless censure and reproach; difdlain-
ing all compliance with public manners,
when they are vicious and unlawful; and
never aihamed of the punctual discharge of
every duty towards God and man;-this
is what shows true greatness of spirit, and
will force approbation even from. the dege-

nerate

SERM. nerate multitude themselves. "This is
lxl L" the man," their conscience will oblige

them to acknowledge, " whom we are un-
"able to bend to mean condescensions.
" We fee it in vain either to flatter or to
" threaten him; he refts on a principle
" within, which we cannot shake. To this
" man you may, on any occasion, safely
"commit your cause. He is incapable
" of betraying his trust, or deserting his
" fiiend, or denying his faith." Thus
hiis ighleoufiueJ conies Jorth as the light,
antl hisjudgenment as the noon-day.

It is, accordingly, this steady inflexible

virtue, this regard to principle, superior to
all custom and opinion, which peculiarly
marked the characters of those, in any
age, who have shone as faints or heroes;
and has consecrated their memory to all
posterity. It was this that obtained to
ancient Enoch the most singular tetlimo-
ny of honour from heaven. He conti-
nued to walk with God, when the world
apoflatifed from him. He pleated God,
and was beloved of him; so that, living

3 among

living among finners, he was translated to SERM,
heaven without feeing death; ea, jpecdily JX_
was he taken away,, left wickednels Jfhould
have altered his under/landing, or deceit be-
gulled Ihs /lOel . When Sodom could not
furnifli ten righteous men to save it, Lot
remained unspotted amidst the contagion.
He lived like an angel among spirits of
darkness; and the deltroying flame was not
permitted to go forth, till the good man
was called away by a heavenly metfenger
from his devoted city. When all fleJ/ h/ad
corrupted their way upon the earth, then li-
ved Noab, a righteous man, and a preach-
er of righteoufilefs. He flood alone, and
was scoffed by the profane crew. But
they by the deluge were swept away;
while on him, Providence conferred the
immortal honour, of being the reRorer of
a better race, and the father of a new
world. Such examples as these, and such
honours conferred by God on them who
withstood the multitude of evil doers,

VOL. IV. D d ihould

Wisdom of Solomon it. Ix.

SERM. should often be present to our minds.
XIX.

Let us oppose them to the numbers of
low and corrupt examples, which we be-
hold around us; and when we are in ha-
zard of being swayed by such, let us for-
tify our virtue, by thinking of those who,
in former times, flone like stars in the
midst of surrounding darkness, and are
now shining in the kingdom of heaven, as
the brightness of thefirmament, for ever and
ever.-As our honour is thus deeply con-
cerned in our acting a stedfast and virtu-
ous part, let us also confider,

IN the fifth place, How little, in point

ofintereft, can begained by the favour of
the multitude, and how much will cer-
tainly be loft, by following them to do e-
vil We may, thereby, render ourselves
more agreeable to some with whom we
are connected; and by artful complian-
ces, may please ourselves with the prospeCt
of promoting our fortune.. But there ad-
vantages, such as they are, remain doubt-
ful and uncertain, ,The wind of popular
opinion is ever shifting. It will often

2 leave

leave us at a loss what course to fleer; SERiM

XIX.

and, after all our trouble and anxiety to J
catch the favourable gale, it may on a fud-
den forsake us. For the versatility of cha-
racer, the meanness and inconsistency of
conduct, into which a dependent on the
multitude is betrayed, frequently ren-
der him, in the end, an object of con-
tempt to those whom he fought to please.
But supposing him successful in his views,
no worldly advantages, which are pur-
chased by dishonourable means, can be
either solid or lasting. They bring no ge-
nuine fatisfaftion to a man, who is con-
fcious to himself of having given up his
principles to serve the world. As long as
hd could be satisfied with his own conduct,
he might bear up under undeserved dif-
couragement; but when he becomes def-
picable in his own eyes, worldly honours
lose their luftre.-What can the multitude
do for you, after you have followed them
in evil? They cannot restore to you the
peace of an innocent mind, nor heal the
iorrows of a wounded spirit, nor shield
you from the displeasure of God. They

D dz can

SE k M. Can do little to support you in the hour of
XIX.
v J iaffliction, and nothing to deliver your

fouls in the day of death. Forsaken and
disconsolate, the world, for the most part,
casts off its votaries in the end ; and when
you compute the final amount, it will
prove a very small consolation, that, as you
have had fiarers in guilt, yau fllall have
companions also in punifhhment.

Look forward to the issue of things.

The multitude of men poflefs now, in a
great measure, the distribution of praise
and censure, of success and disappoint-
menr, according to their caprice. But this
confused and promiscuous distribution is
not always to fubfif. The day cometh,
when we all are to appear before a more
discerning Judge, and a more impartial
tribunal. The day cometh, when our
Lord Jesus Christ, shall descend from hea-
ven in all the glory of his Father, to un-
veil every character, and to render to every
man according to his works. At that day,
how shall he lift up his head, who hath
been all his life the slave of the world's

3 opinion;

opinion; who hath moulded his principles. S EIt r.
and his practice, solely to please the mul o--
titude; who hath been aJhaiimed o/ his Sa-
viour and his words ; and to gain favour
with men, hath apoaittifed from the na-
tive sentiments and diEtates of his healrt ?
-To fay all in one word; there is a con-
test now between God and the world.
There form the opposite fides which di-
vide mankind. Confider well, to which of
there you will chufe to adhere. On the one
fide, lie your allegiance, your honour, and
your interest; on the other, lie your
guilt and your fliame. For the one, con-
science and rcafon, for the other paflion,
and inclination, plead. On the one hand,
are the approbation of God, immortal ho-
nour, and divine rewards ; on the other,
-remember and beware,-are the flings
of conscience, endless punishment, and
endless infamy.

Dd3 SERMON

# SERMON XX. On the WISDOM of GOD*. I TIMOTHY i. 17. Now unto the King Eternal, immortal, invisible, the only Wise God, be honour and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

SERMON XX.
On the WISDOM of GOD *.

I TIMOTHY i. 17.
Now unto the King Eternal, immortal, in.

visible, the only Wife God, be honour and
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
SERM. 1T is of the highest importance to reli-

_J^ ] gious conduCt, that our minds be fill.

ed with suitable conceptions of the attri-

butes

This concluding discourse is chiefly intended, to be

a general recapitulation of instances of the wildom of
Providence, several of which have been more fully il.
lufirated in other discourses, contained in this, or in
some of the preceding volumes.

butes of God. They are the foundations s E R AI.
of our reverence for him; and reverence is xx.
the foundation of religion. All the di-
vine perfections are interesting to man.
Almighty power, in conjuniflon with E-
ternity and Omnipresence, naturally in-
spires solemn awe. Infinite Goodness re-
lieves the mind from that oppreflion which
Power alone would produce; and, from
our experience of present benefits, and our
remembrance of the pass, creates love, gra-
titude, and trust. In the middle between
these, stands the contemplation of divine
Wisdom, which conjoins impreflions of
awe with those of comfort; and while it
humbles us into profound fubmiflion, en-
courages, at the fame time our reliance on
that King eternal, immortal, and invfible,
who is justly ftiled in the text, the only wife
God.

Among men, wifdomr is a quality en-

tirely different from cunning or craft.
It always supposes good and fair inten-
tion in the person who possesses it; and

D d 4 imports,

SERM. imports, that laudable ends are pursued

by proper and jufifiable means. In like
manner, w;idom in the Supleme Being
cannot be separated from the rectitude of
his nature. It is, in him, an exertion of
benevolence; and imports, that the pur-
poses of justice and goodness are carried
on and accomplished, by means the most
effectual. To meditate on tome of those
inflances in which this divine wisdom is
displayed, cannot but be highly favour-
able to the imprefions both of piety, and
of virtue.

IT is difficult to fay, whether the natu-

rali or the moral, world, afford the most
conspicuous and itriking displays of the
wifdim of God. Not one, nor many dif-
courses, nor indeed the fludy and labour of
a whole life, were, in any degree, sufficient
to explore them. Of the proofs of wvif-
dom which the natural world affords, I
cannot attempt now to discourse. Any
illustration of these would lead to discus-
sions of a scientific kind, which more

properly

properly belong to the philosopher; and S E R M.

XX.

on which philofbphy has often employedti i;
itlelf, with much utility and honour. I
flall only take notice that, in proportion
as human knowledge hath enlarged its
sphere of research and difcovcry, in tho
fame proportion, hath the wisdom of the
Creator firuck the minds of all inquirers
anl observers, with the highefl admiration.
All nature is in truth a icene of wonders,
In the disposition of the heavenly bodies,
and the general arrangement of the Iyltemi
of the universe; in the firudure of the
earth; in the endless variety of living
creatures that fill it; and in the provision
made for them all, to enable them to fulfil
the ends of their being, it is not easy to
determine, whether power, wiildon, or
goodness be moil conspicuous. It belongs
not only to the heavens to de:lare the /lory
(j God, and to the firmament to Jhew jo, ih
bis han.Iy-tov k; in the finallelt and most
inconsiderable, as well as in the molt il-
lufirious works of God, equal marks ap-
pear of profound design and confnummate

art.

SERM. art. It has been justly said, that there is
xx. .o not a vegetable that grows, nor an infect

that moves, but what is sufficient to con-
found the atheist, and to afford the candid
observer endless materials of devout ado-
ration and praise,

WHEN we turn to the moral world,

the field of admiration which opens to us
is no less extensive and firiking. I can
only mention a few inflances of that ex-
quifite wisdom which everywhere meet
us.

In the Jirfl place, let us attend to the

constitution of human nature. Though we
are taught by revelation, to confider it as
now impaired by the fall, yet, as it stands,
we behold the traces of a noble ftrucdure,
planned and executed with the highest skill.
All the powers and faculties bellowed on
man are such, as perfectly suit his condition,
and adapt him to the purposes for which
be was defigned.-Senfes were given him,
that he might diflinguimh what is neceffa-
ry for the preservation and welfare of his

body.

body. Now, suppose that any one of sERM.
thole senses, the fight, for instance, or the ".j
hearing, or the touch, had been in a con-
fiderable degree either more blunt, or
more acute, than it is at present, what an
unhappy change would this have made
upon our slate ? On the one hand, greater
imperfecion of the organs, would have
deprived us of all the comfort and advan-
tage which we now enjoy from such
powers. On the other hand, a greater de-
gree of exquisite sensibility in them, would
have rendered life a burden to us. Our
senses, instead of being inlets to know-
ledge and pleasure, would then have be-
come constant avenues to uneasiness and
pain. Their powers, therefore, are fkil-
fully adjusted to that measure of flrength,
which allows them to anfiver the purposes
of health, safety, and comfort; without
either falling flort of this line of useful-
ness, or improperly, and hurtfully, firetch-
ing beyond it.

In the mind, appetites and paflions
were placed, as the moving powers of the

foul,

SERM. foul, to impel its acdivity. But as their
XX. xsJ impulse required regulation and reflraint,

reason was, at the fame time, conferred as
the direting power.-Of all' our passions,
felf-love, and the desire of felf-prefervation,
were, with the utmost propriety, made the
firongeft, for a reason which the meanest
capacity may comprehend. Every man
is most immediately committed by Provi-
dence to his own care and charge. He
knows his own situation best; and has
more opportunties of promoting his own
happiness, than he can have of advan-
cing the happiness of any other person.
It was therefore fit and wife, that, by
the strongest inftint, he should be prompt-
ed to attend to himfelf.-At the fame
time, as no man flanding alone is sus-
ficient for his own welfare, it was ne-
ceffary that, by mutual sympathy and
social infiinas, we mould be drawn to
give aid to one another. Here it deserves
our particular notice, that the force of
those social inftints is, with admirable
propriety, proportioned by Providence to

the

the degree of their ufefulncfs and impor- s] RiAr.

xx.

tance *. Thus, that parental affecion, x
which the helpless slate of infancy and
childhood renders so needful, is made the
strongest of them all. Next, come those ties
of blood, which prompt mutual kindness a-
mong those who are intimately joined to-
gether by brotherhood, and other family
connections. To there succeeds that va-
luable inftina of pity, which impels us to
affilt the distressed, wherever we behold
them. To take part with others in their
good fortune belongs to man's social na-
ture, and increases the fum of happiness.
At the fame time, to take part with the
prosperous is less necessary than to sym-.
pathife with the unhappy; and therefore
the principle which prompts us to rejoice
with them that rejoice, is made not to be
Co strong, as that which impels us to weep
with then that weep.

But they are not only the laudable and
important parts of our disposition, which

discover
' See Serm. II. Vol. iii.

SERM. discover the wisdom of the Author of oui

xX.
xxJ- frame; even our imperfetions and fol.

lies, are by him rendered subservient to
useful ends.-Amidft those inequalities
of condition, for instance, which the state
of human life required, where it was ne-
ceffary that some flould be rich, and o-
thers poor, that some flould be eminent
and diltinguifled, and others obscure and
mean, how seasonable is that good opinion
which every one entertains of himself;
that felf-complacency with which he com-
pares himself to others; and that fond
hope, which is ever pleasing him with the
profpec of future pleasures and advanta-
ges in life ? Without those flattering fen-
fations, vain as they often are, how totally
insupportable would this world become, to
many of its inhabitants? Whereas, by
means of them, Providence hath contrived
to balance, in a great measure, the inequa-
lities of condition among mankind. It hath
contrived to diffuse pleasure through all
ranks; and to bring the high and the low
nearer to a level witheach other, than might

at

at first be supposed. It hath smoothed the SE RM.
most rugged tracts of human life; and xx.
hath gilded with rays of borrowed light
its most dreary scenes.

One inflance of Divine wisdom, in

framing our nature, is so remarkable as
to demand particular attention; that is,
the measure according to which, God hath
dispensed knowledge and ignorance to
man. There is nothing of which we are
more ready to complain, than of our nar-
row and confined views of nature, aid of
Providence, and of all things around us:
And yet, upon examination, it will be
found, that our views extend, on every fide,
just as far as they ought; and that, to
fee and know more than is allowed us, in-
stead of bringing any advantage, would
produce certain misery *.- We pry, for
instance, with impatient curiosity, into
future events. Happily for us, they are
veiled and covered up; and one peep be-

hind
* See Senn. IV. Vol. i. and Serm. IX. Vol. iv.

SERM. hind that veil, were it permitted, would

xx. xj *be sufficient to poison the whole comfort

of our days. by the anticipation of sorrows
to come.-In like manner, we often wish
with eagerness to penetrate into the secrets
of nature, to look into the invisible world,
and to be made acquainted with the whole
destiny of man. Our with is denied;
we are environed on all hands with my-
itery ; and that mystery is our happiness,
For were those great'invifible objects fully
difcloled, the fight of them would con-
found and overwhelm us. It would ei-
ther totally derange our feeble faculties;
or would engross our attention to such
a degree, as to lay us aside from the bufi-
ness, and concerns of this world It would
have the fame effet, as if we were carried
away from the earth, and mingled among
the inhabitants of some other planet.--
The knowledge that is allowed to us, was
designed to fit us for acting our part in
our present Itate. At the exact point
therefore, where usefulness ends, know-
ledge flops, and ignorance commences

Light

Light lhines upon us, as long as it serves SEt RM.

XX.

to guide our path; but forsakes us, as foodan
as it becomes noxious to the eye; and
salutary darkness is appointed to close the
fcene.-Thoughtlefs anti supid mult that
man be, who, in all this furniture of the
human mind,, in this exact adjuflment of
its several powers to the great purposes. of
life, discerns not the hand of adorable
Wisdom, as well as of infinite Coodnefs.

INs the fecb;in place, Let us contemplate

the fame wisdom, as exhibiting ifelf to
us in the moral government of the world.
We are informed by ievelation, that this
life is designed by Providence to be an in-
trodu&ory part of exilence to intelligent
beings; a state of education and difci-
pline, where creatures fallen from their
original rank, may gradually recover their
rectitude and virtue. Under this view,
which is in itself perfe&ly consonant to
all that reason discovers, we fiall find the
general course of human affairs, confused
as it may sometimes appear, to have been

VOL, IV E e beer

SERM. been ordered with exquisite wifdom.--I

XX.
~./ i was necessary to such a state, that all the

active powers of man fliould be brought
forth into exercise, and completely tried.
It became proper, therefore, that there
hould be a mixture of characters in the
world; and that men should be Ihewn in
a variety of situations `. Hence that di-
verfity of tempers and dispositions which
are found in society; those inequalities in
rank and station, which we fee taking
place; and those different talents and in-
clinations, which prompt men to different
purfults. By these means, every depart-
ment in society is filled up; and every map
has some sphere prepared for him, in
which he can at. -le is brought forth
as on a busy stage, where opportunity
is given for his characer to display itself
fully.-I-lis life is, with great propriety,
varied by interchanges of prolperity and
adversity. Always prosperous, he would

--.. become
'See Serm. IV. Vol. iv.

become dissipated, indolent, and giddy: sERM.
Always afflicIed, he would be fretful, de- x,
je&ed, and fullen. There are few persons,
therefore; or none, whose lot {hares not of
both thelf flates; in order that every dil-
position of the heart may be explored,
and every mean of improvement afforded.
-As man is ultimately designed for a
higher ifate of exiflence than the present,
it was not proper that this world should
prove a paradise to him, or should afford
him that complete fatisfaftion which he
incessantly pursues. Disappointments,
therefore, ate often made to blast his
-.opes; and, even while the comforts of
life lald, they are always mixed with some
troubles; in order that an exceflive at-
tachment to this world may gradually be
loosened. 'The course of things is evi-
dently so ordered by Providence, that oc-
curences lhall be always happening, to
bring down the most prosperous to a le-
vel with the reit of his brethren, and to
raise up, in their turn, the low and the
di'stressld.

E e I:

SE R M. In the midst of those vicissitudes, which
xx.

are so obviously conducive to improve-
ment, both wisdom and goodness required,
that the supreme Governor of the world
should be seen to protec the interests, and
favour the fide of virtue. But in the de-
gree of evidence, with which this was to
be :hown, it was no less requisite, that a
proper temperament ihould be observed.
Had virtue been always completely re-
warded, and made happy on earth, men
would no longer have had a motive for
aspiring to a more blessed ;tate. In the
cafe of every crime, had divine juflice
interposed to bring complete punishment
on the head of the criminal; or had all
the felicity which is prepared for the just
in a future world, and all the misery which
there awaits the wicked, been already dif-
played to the view, and rendered sensible
to the feelings of men, there would have
been an end of thatftate of trial, for which
our whole condition on earth was intend-
td. It was necessary, therefore, that, at
present, we ihould fee through a gli

darkly,

darkily. A certain degree of myltcery and SERM.

XX.

obscurity was, with perfcdt wifdorm, left j
on the conduct of the Almighty .'.-But,
amidst that obscurity, sufficient cncou-
ragement and support is in the mean time
given to virtue ; sufficient ground is afford-
ed for the full belief, that it is what the
Deity loves, and will finally reward. His
approbation of it is signified to every man
by the voice of confcicnce. Inward satis-
fadion and peace are made always to be-
long to it; and general esteem and ho-
nour, for the most part, to attend it. On
the other hand, the wicked, in no fitua-
tion of life, are allowed to be truly happy.
Their vices and their paflions are made to
trouble fheir prosperity; and their pu-
nifhment to grow out of their crimes.
Let any one attentively recolled the ma-
terial incidents of his life; and he will,
for the most part, be able to trace the
chief misfortunes which have befallen

E e 3 him,
See Serm. IV. Vol, i,

SERM. him, to Come guilt he has contracted, or
XiX some folly he has committed *. Such

is the profound wisdom with which Pro-
vidence conducts its counsels, that, al-
though it does not appear to interpose,
men are made to reap from their actions,
the fruits which they had deserved; their
iniquities to corredt them, and their back-
Jlidings to reprove them; and while they
susser, they are forced to acknowledge the
justice of their punifhment.-Thefe are
not matters of rare or occasional obferva-
tion; but deeply interwoyen with the
texture of human affairs. They discover
a regular plan, a formed system, according
to which the whole train of Providence
proceeds; and which manifests to every
serious obferyer the consummate wisdom
of its Author.-As thus, in the conftitu-
tion of human nature, and in the moral
government of the world, divine wisdom
so remarkably appears, I must observe,

In
* See Serm. XIII. Vol. iv.

IN the third place, That in the redemp- s E R iM.

xx.

tion of the world, and in the ceconomy j
of grace, it fliines no less conspicuously.
The fubjcct which opens to us here is too
extensive to be fully illustrated at present;
but the great lines of it are obvious *.-
rn carrying on a plan, by which forgive-
ness was to be dispensed to an offending
race, wisdom required that the authority
of the legislator fiould be fully preserved,
and no such relaxation be introduced in-
to government, as might give licence or
encouragement to offenders. According-
ly, the most admirable provision was
made for these important purposes, by the
interposition of the Son of God suffering
and dying for finners. The sovereign
awe of justice is maintained, while jus-
tice is tempered with mercy. Men are
bound to righteousness, under the highelE
fanations; and ample security and con-

E e 4 folation

* See Serm. V. Vol. i.-Serm. V. Vol. ii.-Serm.
XV. Vol. iii.-Serm. V. Vol. iv.

SERM. folation are, at the fame time, afforded to
xx. y<J tthe penitent. By tile intfrucions, and

example, of their Saviour, they are in-
ftrufted in tleir duty; and through a
Mediator and Intcrccffor, they are en-
couraged to offer their wolrflip and pray-
ers to the Almighty. They are afuured
that, in whatever is too arduous for hu-
man nature to perform, they fliall be as-
fifled by a Divine Spirit; and under all
trials and difficulties, they are fupporte4
by the express promise of that eternal life,
which is brought to light by the gofpcl.
-It is not poflible for the underltanding
to conceive any method of salvation, plan-
ned with more goodness, and executed
with more wifdorn, than what is fhowi
in the gospel of Christ. The confidera-
tion of this conflitution alone, gives us
full reason to join in that exclamation of
the Apofile: 0 the depth of the r;ches both
of the uwiJdom and the knowuledge of God!
Hlow unsearchable are his judgements, and
his 'taj's pa/l finding out ! *

I Rom. ii. 3

FROM this flort survey which we have SE RM.

XX.

taken of Divine wisdom, as discovering x.
itself, in the whole complex fiame of the
moral world; in the constitution of hu-
man nature; in the government of hu-
man affairs; and in the redemption of
the human race; we cannot but perceive
how much reason we have to prostrate
ourselves before God, and with all humi-
lity to worlhip and adore.-When we
view that immense flruture of the uni-
verse in which we dwell; when we think
of Him, whose wisdom has planned the
whole s)ysem of being; whose mind comi
prehends, whose counsels diret, the whole
course of events, from the beginning to the
end of time; by whom nothing is so in-
considerable as to be overlooked, or so
transient as to be forgotten; who attends
to the concerns of the poor man in his
cottage, while he is fleering the fun and
the moon in their course through the
heavens; into what aftoniflment and
felf-annihilation do we fall! Before him
a1l our boasted knowledge is ignorance,

and

SE RM. and our wisdom is folly. Wherever we
XX.

J calf our eyes on his works and ways, we

find all things adjusted in number, weight,
and meajitre; and after all that we can
survey, Lo! there are but a part of his
ways; and how finall a portion is heard of
him !

It is the power of God, which produces

among the multitude of men any impref-
sions of religion. When thunder roars
in the heavens, or an earthquake shakes
the ground, they are struck with awe, and
disposed to worship an invisible power.
But such impressions of Deity are occa-
fional, and transitory. The lasting reve-
rence of a Supreme Being arises, in a well
informed mind, from the display of that
infinite wisdom which. all the universe
presents. Its operations are constantly,
though silently, going on around us.
We may view it in the peaceful and fe-
date state of the universe, as well as in its
greatest commotions; we behold it in e-
very infect that moves on the ground, at
the fame time that we admire it in the

a3 revolutions

revolutions of the celestial bodies. IHap- s ER M.
py for us, if the contemplation fliall nou-
rifli that temper of habitual devotion,
which so well becomes dependent beings,
and is so intimately connected with all
virtue *!

But the chief effect that ought to be

produced by meditation on the divine
wisdom, is perfect resignation to the Go.
vernor of the universe, and entire trust
in his administration. Our private mif-
fortunes and disappointments are too often
the subjec of querulous complaints, and
even of unjust suspicions of Providence.
But when in the whole natural and mo-
ral world, we behold an arrangement of
things which plainly discovers the most
consummate wisdom, can we believe, that
in the arrangement of our petty concerns,
this wifdomn is dormant and neglecful?
How much more reason is there to think,
that our ignorance of the divine plans
nifleads our judgement, than that the

wisdom
? See Sern. xix. vol. iii.

E . RM. wisdom of the Almighty has erred in di-
xx. xx- rc(ling our private affairs ?- Divine

wisdom, as I observed in the beginning,
is an exertion of divine benevolence. It
has, it can have, no other scope than to
accomplish the best ends, by the most
proper means. Let the Wisdom, there-
fore, and the Goodness, of the deity, be
ever conjoined in our idea. Let every
new discovery of divine wisdom, be a
new ground of hope, of joy, and of cor-
dial submission, to every virtuous man.
Let him be thankful that he lives in a
world, where nothing happens to him by
chance, or at random; but where a, great,
a wife, and beneficent Mind continually
superintends every event.

Under the faith of this great principle

of religion, let us proceed in the course
of our duty, with fledfaft and undifmay-
ed mind. Let us retain faithful allegi-
ance to our Creator and our Redeemer;
and then we may always hope the best;
and caJf our care upon him who careth for
us. Wail on thc Lord; be of good courage,

a!d

and He Jhall flrengthen your heart. Al- s E R .
though thou ri ,eft, thou calft not fee him, yet X-
judgeient is before him ; therefore trij thou
in him.- Let us begin every undertak-
ing, with humble dependence on his as-
fiiance for enabling us to prosecute it to
the end. When our undertakings are si-
niflied, and the close of life approaches,
with praise to him let us conclude all our
labours.

Unto the King Eternal, immortal, invifi

ble, the only Wife God, be honour and glory
for ever and ever. Anmen.

F I N I S.
