i· ~ ~ ~ t

SE R MON S,

B y

HUGH BLAIR, D.D.
One of the MINISTERS of the HIGH CHURCH,

AND
PROFESSOR of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTRES

in the University, of Edinburgh.
VOLUME THE SECOND.

LOND N:
Printed for W. STRAHAN; and T. CADELL, in the Strand;

and W. CREECH, Edinburgh.

MDCCLXXX.

# THE CONTENTS.

THE
CONTENTS.

Page

SERMON I.

On the Importance of Order in Condu&.
I CORINTH. xiv. 40. Letallthings be

done-in order.

SERMON II.

On the Government of the Heart.
PROVERBS iv. 23. Keep thy heart with

all diligence: for out of it are the
lies of life. 29

SERMON III.

The fame Subje& continued.
PROV. iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all

diligence; for out of it are the i/fes of
life. 54

A 2 ,

Page

SERMON IV.
On the Unchangeablenefs of the Di-

vine Nature.
JAMES i. 17. Every good and every

perfet gift is from above, and com-
eth down from the Father of Lights,
with whom is no variableness, nei-
therJhadow of turning. 85

SERMON V.

On the Compassion of Christ.
HEBREWS iv. 15. We have not an

high priefi which cannot be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities;
but was in all points tempted like as
we are, yet withoutfin. I17

SERMON VI.

On the Love of Praise.
JOHN xii. 43. For they loved the

prajfe of men more than the praise
of God. 48

Page

SERMON VII.
On the proper Estimate of Human

Life.
ECCLESIASTES xii. 8. VIanity of va-

nities, jaith the preacher, all is va-
nity. i78

S E R M O N VIII.

On Death.
PSALM xxiii. 4. Yea though I walk

through the valley cf the JhJadow of
death, I will fear no evil; for thou
art with me; tby rod and thJy Jss
they consort me. 213

SERMON IX.

On the Happiness of a Future State.
REVELAT. vii. 9. After this I beheld,

and lo ! a great multitude, which no
man could number, of all nations, and
kindreds, and people, and tongues,

Page

jood before the throne, and before
the Lamb, clothed with white robes,
andpalms in their hands. 246

SERMON X.

On Candour.
l CORINTH. xiii. 5. Charity-thflik-

eth no evil. 277

SERMON XI.

On the Chara&er of Joseph.
GENESIS xlv. 5. S. Now therefore be

not grieved nor angry with yourselves
that ye fold me hither; for God did
fend me before you topreferve life.
So now it was not you that sent me
hither, but God. 309

S E R M ON XII.

On the Charader of Hazael.

2 KINGS viii. 12, 13. And Hazael
Said, Why weepeth my Lord? And

Page

he answered, Becatfe I know the evil
that thou wilt do unto the children of
Israel. Their Jrong holds wilt thou
set on fire, and their young men wilt
thou flay with the sword, and wilt
daqh their children, and rip np their
women with child. And -Hazal!
said, But what, is thyfcrvant a dog,
that he Jhould do this great thing?
And EliYa atfwered, The Lord
hath shewed me that thou J7halt be
king over Syria. 335

S E R M ON XIII.
On the Benefits to be derived from

the House of Mourning.
ECCLESIASTES vii. 2, 3, 4 It is bet-

ter to go to the hoiLfe of mourning,
than to go to the hotfe of seasing;
for that is the end of all men, and the
living will lay it to his heart. Sor-
row is better than laughter; for by
thefadnefs of the countenance the heart
is made better. The heart of the wife
is in the house of mourning; but the
heart offools is in the house of mirth. 366

I

Page

SERMON XIV.
On the divine Government of the

Passions of Men.
PSALM lxxvi. IO. Surely, the wrath

of man /hallpraife thee; the remain-
der of wrath /halt thou refrain. 396

SERMON XV.
On the Importance of Religious Know-

ledge to Mankind.
ISAIAH xi. 9. 'heyJhallnot hurt nor

destroy in all my holy mountain; for
the earth hall be full of the knowledge
of the Lord, as the waters cover the
sea. 427

SE R-

# SERMON I. On the IMPORTANCE of ORDER in CONDUCT. 1 CORINTH. xiv. 40. Let all things be done — in order.

SERMON I.
On the IMPORTANCE of ORDER in

CONDUCT,

i CORINTH. Xiv. 40.

Let all things be done-in order.

S,I ELIGIO Nj like every regular and s ER M.
R
' weell-conineaed systems, is compos- I.

[AddJ. ed of a variety of parts; each of
which possesses its separate importance, and
contributes to the perfecion of the whole.
Some graces are essential to it; such as faith
and repentance, the love of God, and the
love of our neighbour; which, for that rea-.

VOL. II. B son,

SE R M. so . muit be often inculcated on men,.

There are other dispositions and habits
which though they hold not so high a rank,
yet are neceflary to the introducion and
support of the former; and therefore, in
religious exhortations these also justly claim
a place. Of this nature is that regard to
order, method and regularity, which the
apostle enjoins us in the text to carry
though the whole of life. Whether you,
confider it as, in itself, a moral duty, or
not, yet I hope soon to convince you that
it is cefential to the proper discharge of . i
most all duties,.and merits upon that ac-
count a greater degree of attention than is
commonly paid to it in a religious view.

If you look abroad into the world, you

may be satisfied, at the first glance, that a
vicious and libertine life is always a life of
confusion. Thence it is natural to infer
that order is friendly to religion. As the
neglec of it co-operates with vice, so the
preservation of it must alfift virtue. By the
appointment of providence, it is indifpen-
fablyrequifite to worldly prosperity. Thence

-5 . aisnes

arises a presumption that it is conneed SE R M.
also with spiritual improvement. When ,-
you behold a man's affairs, through ne-
gligence and mifcondut, involved in dif-
order, you naturally conclude that his ruin
approaches. You may at the fame time
justly fufped, that the causes which affect
his temporal welfare, operate also to the
prejudice of his moral interests. The apo-
file teaches us in this chapter, that God is
not the author of cotffion i. He is a lover
of order; and all his works are full of order.
But where co7fifion is, there is, its close
attendant, every evil work r. In the fe-
quel of this discourse I [hall point out some
of those parts of conduEc wherein it is most
material to virtue that order take place; and
then ihall conclude with, showing the high
advantages which attend it. Allow me to
recommend to you, order in the conduct of
your affairs; order in the distribution of
your time; order in the management of
your fortune; order in the regulation of

Ver. 33. t James iii. 16.

B 2 your

SE RM. your amusements; order in the arrange,

-i ment of your society. Thus let all things

be done in order.

L. MAINTAIN order in the conduct of

your worldly affairs. Every man, in every
station of life) has some concerns, private,
domeflic, or'public, which require fuccef-
five attention; he is placed in some sphere
of a&ive duty. Let the employments
vwhich belong to that sphere be so arranged,
that each may keep its place, without just-
ling another; and that what regards the
world'knay not interfere with what is due
to God. In proportion to the multiplicity
of affairs, the observance of order becomes
more indispensable. But fearcely is there
any train of life so simple and uniform but
what will susser through the neglect of it.
I- speak not now of suffering in point of
worldly interef. I call upon you to attend
to higher interests; to remember that the
orderly conduct of your temporal affairs
forms a great part of your duty as Chrifli-
ans.

Many,

Many, indeed, can hardly be persuaded s E'R M.

of this truth. A strong propensity has, in L-
every age, appeared among men to feque-
ftrate religion from the commerce of the
world. Seasons of retreat and devotion
they are willing to appropriate to God.
But the world they confider as their own
province. They carry on a fort of fepa-
rate interest there. Nay, by the refped
which, on particular occasions, they pay to
religion, they too often imagine that they
have acquired the liberty of acing in
worldly matters according to what plan
they chufe. How entirely do such persons
mistake the design of Chritianity !-In this
world you were placed by Providence as on
a great field of trial. By the necessities of
your nature you are called forth to differ-
ent employments. By many'ties you are
conneced with human society. From fu-
periours and inferiours, from neighbours
and equals, from friends and enemies, de.
mands arise, and obligations circulate
through all the ranks of life. This active
scene was contrived by the wisdom of hea-

B3 yen,

SE R M. yen, on purpose that it might bring into

' exercise all the virtues of the christian cha-

rader; your justice, candour and veracity
in dealing with one another; your fidelity
to every trust, and your conscientious dif-
charge of every office, which is committed
to you; your affeation for your friends;
your forgiveness of enemies; your charity
to the distressed; your attention to the in-
terests of your family. It is by fulfilling all
these obligations, in proper succession, that
you (how your cenverfation to be /ch as be-
omeeth the gospel of Chrit. It is thus you
makeyour light so tofhine before men, that
theyy mayeeyour good works, andglorifj your
Father which is in heaven. It is thus you
are rendered meet for the inheritance of the
faints in light.-But how can thole various
duties be discharged by persons who are
ever in that hurry and perplexity which
disorder creates? You wish, perhaps, to
perform what your characer and flation
require. But from the confusion in which
you have allowed yourselves to be involved,
you find it to have become impossible.

What

What was negleced to be done in its pro- s E R M.
per place, thrusts itielf forward at an incon- I_
venient season. A multitude of affairs
crowd upon you together. Different obli-
gations diftraa you; and this diftration
is Sometimes the cause, sometimes the pre-
tence, of equally negleding them all, or,
at least, of sacrificing the greater to the
lesser.

Hence arise so many inconsistent charac-

ters, and such frequent instances of partial
and divided goodness, as we find in the
world; appearances of generosity without
justice, honour without truth, probity to
men without reverence of God. He who
conducts his affairs with method and regu-
larity, meets every duty in its proper place,
and assigns it its due rank. But where there
is no order in condut, there can be no uni-
formity in character. The natural connex-
ion and arrangement of duties is loft. If
virtue appear at all, it will be only in fits
and starts. The authority of conscience
may occasionally operate, when our fitua-
tion affords it room for exertion. But in

B 4 other

SERM. other circumstances of equal importance,
Av-x every moral sentiment will be overpowered

by the tumultuous bustle of worldly affairs.
Fretfulness of temper too, will generally
characterize those who are negligent of or-
der. The hurry in which they live, and
the embarrassments with which they are
surrounded, keep their pirits. in perpetual
ferment. Conflicing with difficulties which
they are unable to overcome, conscious of
their own mifcondut, but ashamed to con-
fess it, they are engaged in many a secret
struggle; and the uneasiness which they
susser within, recoils in bad humour on all
who are around them. Hence the wretch-
ed resources to which, at last, they are obliged
to fly, in order to quiet their cares. In de-
fpair of being able to unravel what they
have suffered to become so perplexed, they
foimetimes fink into supine indolence, some-
times throw themselves into the arms of
intemperance and loose plcafure; by either
of which they aggravate their guilt, and ac-
celerate their ruin. To the end that order
may be maintained in your affairs, it is ne-
ceffary,

II. THAT

II. THAT you attend to order in the dif- s ER M.

tribution of your time. Time you ought to ;
confider as a sacred trust committed to you
by God; of which you are now the depo-
fitaries, and are to render account at the
last. That portion of it which he has al-
lotted you is intended partly for the con-
cerns of this world, partly for those of the
next. Let each of these occupy in the dif-
tribution of your time that space which
properly belongs to it. Let not the hours
of hospitality and pleasure interfere with
the discharge of your necessary affairs; and
let not what you call necessary affairs en-
croach upon the time which is due to de-
votion. To every thing there is afeafon, and
a time for every purpose under the heaven *.
If you delay till to-morrow what ought to
be done to-day, you overcharge the mor-
row with a burden which belongs not to it.
You load the wheels of time, and prevent
it from carrying you along smoothly. He
who every morning plans the tranfaaions

* Eccles. iii i,

of

S E R M. of the day, and follows out that plan, carries

I.
I- - on a thread which will guide him through

the labyrinth of the most busy life. The
orderly arrangement of his time is like a
ray of light which darts itself through all
his affairs. But where no plan is laid,
where the disposal of time is surrendered
merely to the chance of incidents, all things
lie huddled together in one chaos, which
admits neither of distribution nor review.

The first requisite for introducing order

into the management of time, is to be im-
pressed with a just sense of its value. Con-
iider well how much depends upon it, and
how fast it flies away. The bulk of men
are in nothing more capricious and inconT
fiftent than in their appretiation of time,
When they think of it as the measure of
their continuance on earth, they highly
prize it, and with the greatest anxiety seek
to lengthen it out. But when they view it
in separate parcels, they appear to hold it
in contempt, and squander it with incon-
fiderate profusion. While they complain
that life is short, they are often wishing its

different

different periods at an end. Covetous of SE R a
every other possession, of time only they are .-..-
prodigal. They allow every idle man to be
master of this property, and make every
frivolous occupation welcome that can help
them to consume it. Among those who are
so careless of time, it is not to be expeced
that order should be observed in its diftri-
bution. But by this fatal neglect, how
many materials of revere and lassing regret
are they laying up in fiore for themselves!
The time which they susser to pass away in
the midst of confusion, bitter repentance
seeks afterwards in vain to recal. What
was omitted to be done at its proper mo-
ment, arises to be the torment of some fu-
ture season. Manhood is disgraced by the
consequences of neglected youth. Old age,
oppressed by cares that belonged to a former
period, labours under a burden not its own.
At the close of life, the dying man be-
holds with anguish that his days are finifll-
ing, when his preparation for eternity is
hardly commenced. Such are the effects
of a disorderly waste of time, through not

attending

SE R M. attending to its value. Every thing in the
.-v -.. life of such persons is misplaced. Nothing

is performed aright, from not being per-
formed in due season.

But he who is orderly in the distribution

of his time, takes the proper method of
escaping those manifold evils. He is justly
said to redeem the time. By proper manage-
ment, he prolongs it. He lives much in
little space; more in a few years than
others do in many. He can live to God
and his own foul, and at the fame time at-
tend to all the lawful interests of the present
world. He looks back on the past, and
provides for the future. He catches and
arrests the hours as they fly. They are
marked down for useful purposes, and their
memory remains. Whereas those hours fleet
by the man of confusion like a shadow.
His days and years are either blanks of
which he has no remembrance, or they are
filled up with such a confused and irregular
fuccefion of unfinilhed tranfations, that
though he remembers he has been busy,
yet he can give no account of the business

which

which has employed him. Of him, more sE R M.
than of any other, it may with justice be j
pronounced, that he walketh in a vain jJew;
he is disquieted in vain.

II. hINTRODUCE order into the manage-

ment of your fortune. Whatever it be, let
the administration of it proceed with me-
thod and ceconomy. From time to time
examine your situation; and proportion
your expence to your growing or diminifi-
ing revenue. Provide what is necessary,
before you indulge in what is superfluous.
Study to do justice to all with whom you
deal, before you affe& the praise of libera-
lity. In a word, fix such a plan of living
as you find that your circumstances will
fairly admit, and adhere to it invariably
against every temptation to improper ex-
cess.

No admonition refpe&ing morals is more

necessary than this to the age in which we
live; an age manifestly distinguished by a
propensity to thoughtless profusion; wherein
all the different ranks of men are observed

to

SE R M. to press with forward vanity on those wlio
s- are above them; to vie with their fupe-

riours in every mode of luxury and oftenta-
tion; and to seek no farther argument for
justifying extravagance, than the fashion of
the times, and the supposed necessity of
living like others around them. This turn
of mind begets contempt for fober and or-i
derly plans of life. It overthrows all re-
gard to domeffic concerns and duties. It
pushes men on to hazardous and.vifionary
ichemes of gain; and unfortunately .unites
the two extremes, of grasping with rapaci-
oufnefs, and of squandering with profusion.
In the midst of such disorder no prosperity
can be of long continuance. While con-
fusion grows upon men's affairs, and pro-
digality at the fame time waftes their sub-
stance, poverty makes its advances like an
armed man. They tremble at the view of
the approaching evil; but have loft the
force of mind to make provision against it.
Accustomed to move in a round of society
and pleasures disproportioned to their con-
dition, they are unable to break through.

the

the enchantments of habit; and with their s E R MI
eyes open fink into the gulph which is be-
fore them. Poverty enforces dependance;
and dependance increases corruption. Ne-
ceffity first betrays them into mean com-
pliances; next, impels them to open crimes;
and beginning with ostentation and extra-
vagance, they end in infamy and guilt.
Such are the consequences of neglecting
order in our worldly circumstances. Such
is the circle in which the profuse and the
dissolute daily run.-- To what cause, so
much as to the want of order, can we attri-
bute those scenes of distress which so fre-
quently excite our pity; families that once
were flourishing reduced to ruin; and the
melancholy widow and neglected orphan
thrown forth, friendless, upon the world?
What cause has been more fruitful in en-
gendering those atrocious crimes which fill
society with disquiet and terrour; in train-
ing the gamester to fraud, the robber to
violence, and even the assassin to blood ?

Be assured, then, that order, frugality,
and oeconomy, are the necessary supports of

every

SERM. every personal and private virtue. Hovt.
4.'-r- humble soever these qualities may appear to

some, they are, nevertheless, the basis on
which liberty, independence, and true ho-
nour, must rife, He who has the steadiness.
to arrange his affairs with method and re-
gularity, and to condut his train of life
agreeably to his circumstances, can be master
of himfeif in every situation into which he.
may be thrown. He is under no neceflity
to flatter or to lie; to ltoop to what. is
mean, or to commit what is criminal. But
he who wants that firmness. of mind which
the observance of order requires, is held in
bondage to the world; he can neither ad
his part with courage. as a man, nor with
fidelity as a Christian; From .the moment
you have allowed yourselves to pass the line
of ceconomy, and to live beyond your for-
tune, you have entered on the path of
danger. Precipices surround you on all
fides. Every ftep which you take may
lead to mischiefs that, as yet, lie hidden;
and to crimes that will end in your ever-
lasting perdition.

IV. OBSERVE
4

IV. OBSERVE order in your amusements; s E R M.

that is, allow them no more than their pro- --
per place; study to keep them within due
bounds; mingle them in a temperate fuc-
cession with serious duties, and the higher
business of life. Human life cannot pro-
ceed to advantage without some measure of
relaxation and entertainment. We require
relief from care. We are not formed for a
perpetual stretch of serious thought. By
too intense and continued application, our
feeble powers would soon be worn out. At
the fame time, from our propensity to ease
and pleasure, amusement proves, among all
ranks of men, the most dangerous foe to
order. For it tends incessantly to usurp and
encroach, to widen its territories, to thrust
itself into the place of more important- con-
cerns, and thereby to disturb and counter-
aC the natural course of things. One fri-
volous amusement indulged out of season,
will often carry perplexity and confusion
through a long succession of affairs.

Amusements, therefore, though they be
of an innocent kind, require steady go-

VoL. II. C vernment,

S E R M. vernment, to keep them within a due and
*-e. limited province. But such as are of an

irregular and vicious nature, require not to
be governed, but to be banished from every
orderly society. As soon as a man seeks his
happiness from the gaming-table, the mid-
night-revel, and the other haunts of licen-
tioufnefs, confusion seizes upon him as its
own. There will no longer be order in his
family, nor order in his affairs, nor order
in his time. The most important concerns
of life are abandoned. Even the order of
nature is by such persons inverted; night
is changed into day, and day into night.
Chara&er, honour, and interest itself, are
trampled under foot. You may with cer-
tainty prognosticate the ruin of there men
to be just at hand. Disorder, arisen to its
height, has nearly accompliihed its work.
The spots of death are upon them. Let
every one who would escape the peftilen-
tial contagion fly with haste from their
company.

V. PRESERVE

V. PRESERVE order in the arrangement E R M.

of your society; that is, entangle not your- --
selves in a perpetual and promiscuous crowd;
felet with prudence and propriety those with
whom you chute to associate; let company
and retreat succeed each other at measured
intervals. There can be no order in his life
who allots not a due ihare of his time to
retirement and refleaion. He can neither
prudently arrange his temporal affairs, nor
properly attend to his spiritual interests.
He lives not to himself, but to the world.
By continual dissipation, he is rendered
giddy and thoughtless. He contracs un-
avoidably from the world that spirit of dif-
order and confusion which is so prevalent
in it.

It is not a sufficient preservative against

this evil, that the circles of society in which
you are engaged are not of a libertine and
vicious kind. If they withdraw you from
that attention to yourselves, and your do-
meftic concerns, which becomes a good man,
they are subversive of order, and incon-
fiftent with your duty. What is innocent

C 2 in

S E R M. ii itself, degenerates into crime from bemng
i....-. carried to excess; and idle, trifling society

is nearly a-kin to such as is corrupting. One
of the first principles of order is, to learn to
be happy at home. It is in domestic re-
treat that every wife and virtuous man finds
his chieffatisfadion. It is there he forms
the plans which regulate his public condu&.
He who knows not how to enjoy himself
when alone, can never be long happy
abroad. To his vacant mind, company
may afford a temporary relief; but when
forced to return to himself, he will be so
much more oppressed and languid. Where-
as, by a due mixture of public and private
life, we keep free of the snares of both, and
enjoy each to greater advantage.

WHEN we review those different parts of

behaviour to which I have shewn that order
is essential, it mufi naturally occur to you,
that they are all mutually conneced? and
hang upon each other. Throughout your
affairs, your time, your expence, your
amusements, your society, the principle of

order

order muff be equally carried, if you ex- S ER .
ped to reap any of its happy fruits. For
if into any one of those great departments
of life you susser disorder to enter, it will
spread through all the reft. In vain, for
instance, you purpose to be orderly in the
condua of your affairs, if you be irregular
in the difiribution of your time. In vain
you attempt to regulate your expence, if
into your amusements, or your society, dif-
order has crept. You have admitted a
principle of confusion which will defeat all
your plans; and perplex and entangle what
you fought to arrange. Uniformity is above
all things necessary to order. If you desire
that any thing should proceed according to
method and rule, let all things, as the text
exhorts, be done in order.

I muff also admonish you, that in small,

as well as in great affairs, a due regard to
order is requisite. I mean not that you
ought to look on those minute attentions
which are apt to occupy frivolous minds,
as connected either with virtue or wisdom.
3ut I exhort you to remember, that disorder,

C 3 like

S ER M. like other immoralities, frequently takes rife

-' from inconsiderable beginnings. They who,

in the lesser tranfations of life, are totally
negligent of rule, will be in hazard of ex-
tending that negligence by degrees to such
affairs and duties as will render them cri-
minal. Remissness grows on all who study
not to guard againit it; and it is only by
frequent exercise that the habits of order
and punctuality can be thoroughly con-
firmed.

FROM what has been said, the great im-

portance of this principle to moral and reli-
gious condut must already be evident.
Let us, however, conclude with taking a
summary view of the advantages which at-
tend it,

Sirss, the observance of order serves to

correct that negligence which makes you
omit some duties, and that hurry and pre-
cipitancy which makes you perform others
imperfecly. Your attention is thereby di-
rected to its proper objecs. You follow the
freight path which Providence has pointed

out

out to man; in the course of wh?ch all the S E R M.

I.

different business of life presents itself regu-
larly to him on every fide. God and man,
time and eternity, possess their proper fta-
tions, arise in succession to his view, and
attraA his care. Whereas he who runs on
in a disorderly course, speedily involves
himself in a labyrinth, where he is fur-
rounded with intricacy and darkness. The
crooked paths into which he strikes, turn
him aside from the proper line of human
pursuit; hide from his fight the objeats
which he ought chiefly to regard, and
bring others under his view, which serve
no purpose but to diftraa and mislead him.

Next, by attending to order, you avoid

idleness, that most fruitful source of crimes
and evils. Aaing upon a plan, meeting
every thing in its own place, you constantly
find innocent and useful employment for
time. You are never at a loss how to dif-
pose of your hours, or to fill up life agree-
ably, In the course of human aQion, there
are two extremes equally dangerous to vir-
tue; the multiplicity of affairs, and the

C 4 total

SE RM. total waant of them. The man of order

stands in the middle between these two ex-
tremes, and suffers from neither. He is
occupied, but not oppressed. Whereas the
disorderly, overloading one part of time,
and leaving another vacant, are at one pe-
riod overwhelmed with business, and at
another, either idle through want of em-
ployment, or indolent through perplexity.
Those seasons of indolence and idleneis,
which recur so often in their life, are their
most dangerous moments. The mind, un-
happy in its situation, and clinging to every
objecE which can occupy or amuse it, is
then apteft to throw itself into the arms of
every vice and every folly.

Farther, by the preservation of order,

you check inconstancy and levity. Fickle
by nature is the human heart. It is fond
of change; and perpetually tends to start
aside from the fireight line of conduct.
Hence arises the propriety of bringing our-
selves under fubjetion to method and rule;
which, though at first it may prove con-
fraining, yet by degrees, and from the ex-

perience

perience of its happy effects, becomes na- S E R M.
tural and agreeable. It redifies those irre-
gularities of temper and manners to which
we give the name of caprice; and which
are distinguishing charaaeriftics of a difor-
derly mind. It is the parent of steadiness
of condut. It forms consistency of cha-
rader. It is the ground of all the confi-
dence we repose in one another. For, the
disorderly we know not where to find. In
him only can we place any trust who is
uniform and regular; who lives by prin-
ciple, not by humour; who ads upon a
plan, and not by desultory motions.

The advantages of order hitherto men-

tioned belong to reditude of conduct.
Confider also how important it is to your
felf-enjoyment and felicity. Order is the
source of peace; and peace is the highest
of all temporal blessings. Order is indeed
the only region in which tranquillity dwells.
The very mention of confusion imports
disturbance and vexation. Is it possible
for that man to be happy who cannot look
into the state of his affairs, or the tenor of

his

SER M. his conduct, without discerning all to be
L--i embroiled; who is either in the midst of

remorse for what he has negleced to do,
or in the midst of hurry to overtake what
he finds, too late, was necessary to have
been done ? Such as live according to or-
der may be compared to the celestial bodies
which move in regular courses, and by ftat-
ed laws; whose influence is beneficent;
whose operations are quiet and tranquil.
The disorderly resemble those tumultuous
elements on earth which, by sudden and
violent irruptions, disturb the course of
nature. By mismanagement of affairs, by
cxcefs in expence, by irregularity in the
indulgence of company and amusement,
they are perpetually creating moleflation
both to themselves and others. They de-
part from their road to seek pleasure; and
instead of it, they every where raise up
sorrows. Being'always found out of their
properplace, they of course interfere and
jar with others. The disorders which they
raise never fail to spread beyond their own
line, and to involve many in confusion

3 and

and distress; whence they necessarily be- SE RM.
come the authors of tumult and conten- v
tion, of discord and enmity. Whereas or-
der is the foundation of union. It allows
every man to carry on his own affairs
without disturbing his neighbour. Itis the
golden chain which holds together the so-
cieties of men in friendship and peace.

In fine, the man of order is conneced

with all the higher powers and principles
in the universe. He is the follower of God.
He walks with him, and ads upon his plan.
His charader is formed on the spirit which
religion breathes. For religion in general,
and the religion of Christ in particular, may
be called the great discipline of order. To
walk sinfully, and to walk diorderl,, are
synonymous terms in Scripture. From
fich as walk disorderly we are commanded,
in the name of the Lord Jesus Chr/is, to
withdraw ourselves *. The kingdom of
Satan is the reign of disorder and darkness.
To restore order among the works of God,

* z Theff. iii. 6,

was

SE RM. was the end for which the Son of God de-

scended to the earth. He requires order to
be observed in his church. His undertak-
ing is to be consummated in that perfet
order which he shall introduce at the last
day. In the new earth and the new heavens,
undisturbed order ihall for ever prevail
among the Spirits of the jia made perfec;
and whatever farther preparation may be
requisite for our being admitted to join their
society, it is certain that we shall never
share in it, unless we make it now our
itudy to do all things decently and in order,

S E R-

# SERMON II. On the GOVERNMENT of the HEART. PROVERBS iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out of it are the issues of life.

[ 29 ]

SERMON IL
On the GOVERNMENT of the HEARTi

PROVERBS iv. 23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out of

it are the iffes of life.
A MONG the many wife counsels SE RM.

given by this inspired writer, there I

is none which deserves greater regard than
that contained in the text. Its importance,
however, is too seldom perceived by the
generality of men. They are apt to con-
fider the regulation of external conduct as
the chief object of religion. If they can
aCt their part with decency, and maintain a
fair charater, they conceive their duty to
be fulfilled. What pafles in the mean time
within their mind, they suppose to be of no

4 great

SE R M. great consequence either to themselves, or

IH.
- to the world. In opposition to this dan-

gerous plan of morality, the wife man ex-
horts us to keep the heart; that is, to attend
not only to our aaions, but to our thoughts
and desires; and to keep the heart with all
diligence, that is, with sedulous and unre-
mitting care; for which he assigns this
reason, that, out of the heart are the ifues
of life.-In discoursing of this subjeC I
purpose to confider, separately, the govern-
ment of the thoughts, of the passions, and
of the temper. But before entering on any
of these, let us begin with enquiring in
what sense the iues of life are said to be out
of the heart; that we mry discern the force
of the argument which the text suggests, to
recommend this great duty of keeping the
heart.

The Jfues of life are justly said to be out

of the heart, because the state of the heart
is what determines our moral character,
and what forms our chief happiness or mi-
fery.

FIRST,

FIRST, it is the state of the heart which SERMI.

determines our moral character. The te- '-,.,-
nor of our ations will always correspond
to the dispositions that prevail within.
To dissemble or to suppress them, is a fruit-
less attempt. In spite of our efforts, they
will perpetually break forth in our beha-
viour. On whatever fide the weight of
inclination hangs, it will draw the praaice
after it. In vain therefore you study to
preserve your hands clean, unless you re-
solve at the fame time to keep your heart
pure. Make the tree good, as our Saviour
direcs, and then its fruits will be good also.
For out of the heart proceed not only evil
tboughts, but murders, adulteries, fornica-
tions, theft, false witnffi, blasphemies *. If
that fountain be once poisoned, you can
never expea that salubrious streams will
flow from it. Throughout the whole of
their course, they will carry the taint of
the parent spring.

But it is not merely from its influence on
external aCtion that the importance of the

Matth. xv. 18.

heart

S E R M heart to our moral characer arises. Inde-
-C,-v- pendent of all action, it is, in truth, the

state of the heart itself which forms our
character in the fight of God; With our
fellow-creatures, aaions muff ever hold the
chief rank; because, by these only we can
judge of one another; by these we affe&
each other's welfare; and therefore to there
alone the regulation of human law extends.
But in the eye of that Supreme Being, to
whom our whole internal frame is unco-
vered, dispositions hold the place of aations;
and it is not so much what we perform, as
the motive which moves us to perform-
ance, that constitutes us good or evil in
his fight. Even among men, the mora-
lity of actions is estimated by the principle
from which they are judged to proceed;
and such as the principle is, such is the
man accounted to be. One, for instance,
may spend much of his fortune in chari-
table acions; and yet, if he is believed to be
influenced by mere ostentation, he is deem-
ed not charitable, but vain. He may la-
bour unweariedly to serve the public; but

if

' lie is prompted by the desire of rising SERM.
.. ipower, he is held not public spirited, -
but ambitious: And if he bestows a bene-
fit purely that he may receive a greater in
return, no man would reckon him gene-
rous, but selfish and interested. If reason
thus clearly teaches us to estimate the value
of actions by the dispositions which give
them birth, it is an obvious conclusion, that
according to those dispositions we are all
ranked and classed by him who feeth into
every heart. The rectification of our prin-
ciples of action is the primary objec of
religious discipline: and in proportion as
this is more or less advanced, we are more
or less religious. Accordingly, the rege-
neration of the heart is every where repre- -
sented in the Gospel as the most essential
requisite in the character of a Christian.

SECONDLY, the state of the heart not

only determines our moral character, but
forms our principal happiness or misery.
External situations of fortune are no far-
ther of consequence than as they operate on

VOL. II. D the

SE R M. the heart; and their operation there is far
»v_-- from corresponding to the degree of worldly

prosperity or adversity. If, from any in-
ternal cause a man's peace of mind be
disturbed, in vain you load him with all
the honours or riches which the world can
bestow. They remain without, like things
at a distance from him. They reach not
the source of enjoyment. Discomposed
thoughts, agitated passions, and a ruffled
temper, poison every ingredient of plea-
sure which the world holds out; and over-
cafft every objea which presents itself, with
a melancholy gloom. In order to acquire
a capacity for happiness, it mufl be our first
study to reCify such inward disorders,
Whatever discipline tends to accompliflh
this purpose, is of greater importance to
man than the acquisition of the advantages
of fortune. These are precarious and
doubtful in their effef; internal tranquil-
lity is a certain good. These are only
means; but that is the end. These. are no
more than inflruments of fatisfadion: that,
is iatisfaccion itflf.

Justly

Justly is it said by the Wife Man, that he s E R M.

who hatb no ride over his.fpirit, is like a city ,
that is broken down and without walls s. All
is waste; all is in diobrder and ruins within
him. He possesses no defence against dan-
gers of any fort. He lies open to every
infurretion of ill-humour, and every inva-
sion of distress. Whereas he who is em-
ployed in regulating his mind is making
provilion against all the accidents of life.
He is erecting a fortress into which, in the
day of danger, he can retreat with safety.
And hence, amidst those endeavours to fe-
cure happiness which incessantly employ
the life of man, the careful regulation, or
the improvident neglec of the inward
frame, forms the chief diftintion between
wisdom and folly.

THUS it appears with how much pro-

priety the isises oflife are said to be out of
the heart. Here rife those great springs of
human conduct whence the main currents

a Prov. xxv. zS.

D 2 fiow

S E R M. flow of our virtue, or our vice; of our hap-
;-__ piness, or our misery. Besides this power-

ful argument for keeping the heart with all
diligence, I muff mention another import-
ant consideration taken from the present i
state of human nature. Think what your
heart now is, and what muff be the confe-
quence of remitting your vigilance in watch- i
ing over it. With too much justice it is I
said in Scripture, to be deceitfil above all i
things, and desperately wicked. Its bias of '
innate corruption gives it a perpetual ten-
dency downwards into vice and disorder.
To direct and impel it upwards, requires a [
constant effort. Experience may convince
you, that almost every desire has a propen-
fity to wander into an improper direction;
that every pailion tends to excess; and that
around your imagination there perpetually
crowds a whole swarm of vain and cor-
rupting thoughts. After all the care that
can be bestowed by the best men on the|
regulation of the heart, it frequently bas-
fles their efforts to keep it under proper
discipline. Into what universal tumult

$ ~~5 ~then

then must it rife, if no vigilance be em- S ER M
ployed, and no government be exercised -
over it ? Inattention and i-emiffiefs is all
that the great adversary of mankind de-
fires, in order to gain full advantage.
While you sleep, he fiws his tares in the
field. The house which he finds vacant
and unguarded, he presently gairnl/es with
cvilfpirits.

Add to this, that the human temper is

to be confidered as a fyfliem, the parts of
which have a mutual dependance on each
other. Introduce disorder into any one
part, and you derange the whole. Suffer
but one passion to go out of its place, or
to acquire an unnatural force, and presently
the balance of the foul will be broken; its
powers will jar among themselves, and their
operations become difcordant.-Keep tZy
heart therefore with all diligence; for all
thy diligence is here required. And though
thine own keeping alone will not avail,
unless the assistance of a higher power con-
cur, yet of this be well assured, that no
aid from heaven is to be expeaed, if thou

D 3 shalt

SE R M. {halt neglec to exert thy self in perform-

II.
'-----' ing the part assigned thee.

HAVING now shown the importance of

exercising government over the heart, I
proceed to confider more particularly in
what that government consists, as it re-
speds the thoughts, the paflions, and the
temper.

I begin with the thoughts, which are the

prime movers of the whole human conduet.
All that makes a figure on the great theatre
of the world, the employments of the busy,
the enterprizes of the ambitious, and the
exploits of the warlike, the virtues which
form the happiness, and the crimes which
occasion the misery of mankind, originate
in that silent and secret recess of thought
vwhich is hidden from every human eye.
The fecrefy and silence which reign there
favour the prejudice entertained by too
many, that thought is exempted from all
controul. Passions, they perhaps admit,
require government and refiraint, becaufa
they are violent emotions and dil.irb so-

cizt-.

ciety. But with their thoughts, they plead, s E R M
no one is concerned. By thelC, as long as -
they remain in their bosom, no offence can
be given, and no injury committed. To
enjoy unrcftrained the full range of imagi-
nation, appears to them the native right
and privilege of man.

Had they to do with none but their

fellow-creatures, such reasoning might be
fpccious. But they ought to remember,
that in the fight of the Supreme Being,
thoughts bear the chara&ter of good or evil,
as much as adions; and that they are, in
especial manner, the fubjeas of divine ju-
rifidiion, because they are cognizable by
no other tribunal. The moral regulation
of our thoughts, is the particular test of our
reverence for God. If we restrain our pas-
sions from breaking forth into open difor-
ders, while we abandon our imagination
in secret to corruption, we show that virtue
refts with us upon regard to men; and
that however we may ac& a part in public
with propriety, there is before our eyes
no fear of that God who fiarchbeth the

D 4 hcr't,

SER M. heart, and requireth truth in the inward

parts.

But even abftrading from this awful

consideration, the government of our
thoughts must appear to be of high con-
sequence, from their direc influence on
condut. It is plain that thought gives the
first impulse to every principle of action.
Acions are, in truth, no other than thoughts
ripened into consistency and substance. So
certain is this, that to judge with precision
of the character of any man, and to foretell
with confidence what part he will act, no
more were requisite, than to be rendered
capable of viewing the current of thought
which passes most frequently within him.
Though by such a method we have no ac-
cess to judge of one another, yet thus it is
always in our power to judge of our selves.
Each of us, by impartially scrutinizing his
indulged and favourite thoughts, may dif-
cover the whole secret of his real character.
This consideration alone, is sufficient to
show of what importance the government
of thought is to the keeping of the heart.

BUT,

BUT, supposing us convinced of its im- SE RM.

portance, a quetfion may arise, How far it
is within our power, and in what degree
thoughts are subjeCt to the command of the
will ? It is plain that they are not always
the offspring of choice. Often they are in-
evitably impressed upon the mind by fur-
rounding objets. Often they start up, as
of themselves, without any principle of in-
troduaion which we are able to trace. ALs
the wind bloweth where it liteth, and 1hoi.
canlf not tell whence it cocthb, nor whither
it goeth, equally rapid in its transitions,
and inscrutable in its progress, is the course
of thought. Moving along a train of con-
necions which are too delicate for our ob-
servation, it defeats all endeavours either to
explore or to flop its path. Hence vain
and fantastic imaginations Sometimes break
in upon the most fettled attention, and dif-
turb even the devout exercises of pious
minds. Instances of this fort must be placed
to the account of human frailty. They are
misfortunes to be deplored, rather than
crimes to be condemned; and our gracious

Creator,

S ER M. Creator, who knows our fiame, and remem-
^-,'__ wbers we are dfji, will not be severe in mark-

ing every such error and wandering of the
mind. But, after these allowances are made,
still there remains much scope for the proper
government of thought; and a multitude of
cafes occur, in which we are no less ac-
countable for what we think, than for what
we do.

As, first, when the introducion of any

train of thought depends upon ourselves,
and is our voluntary aft; by turning our
attention towards such objects, awaken-
ing such passions, or engaging in such
employments as we know must give a pe-
culiar determination to our thoughts. Next,
when thoughts, by whatever accident they
may have been originally suggested, are in-
dulged with deliberation and complacency.
Though the mind has been palfive in their
reception, and, therefore, free of blame;
yet, if it be active in their continuance, the
guilt becomes its own. They may have
intruded at first, like unbidden guests; but
if, when entered, they are made welcome,

8 and

and kindly entertained, the cafe is the fame SE RM.
as'if they had been invited from the begin- -,-
ning. If we be thus accountable to God
for thoughts either voluntarily introduced,
or deliberatcly indulged, we are no less so,
in the last place, for those which find ad-
mittance into our hearts from supine negli-
gence, from total relaxation of attention,
fromn allowing our imagination to rove with
entire licence, like the eyes of the fool, to-
wards the eids of the earth. Our minds are,
in this cafe, thrown open to folly and va-
nity. They are proftituted to every evil
thing which pleases to take possession. The
conlequences must all be charged to our ac-
count; and in vain we plead excuse from
human infirmity. Hence it appears, that
the great objec at which we are to aim in
governing our thoughts, is, to take the most
effectual measures for preventing the intro-
ducnion of such as are sinful, and for haften-
ing their expulsion, if they shall have intro-
duced themselves without consent of the will.

But when we descend into our breafis,
and examine how far we have studied to

keep

S E R M. keep this object in view, who can tell how
a s-, oft he hath offended? In no article of reli-

gion or morals are men more culpably re-
miss than in the unrestrained indulgence
they give to fancy; and that too, for most
part, without remorse. Since the time that
Reason began to exert her powers, Thought,
during our waking hours, has been aaive
in every breast, without a moment's sus-
pension or pause. The current of ideas
has been always flowing. The wheels of
the spiritual engine have circulated with
perpetual motion. Let me ask, what has
been the fruit of this incessant acivity with
the greatest part of mankind ? Of the in-
numerable hours that have been employed
in thought, how few are marked with any
permanent or ufcful effed? How many
have either passed away in idle dreams; or
have been abandoned to anxious difcon-
tented musings, to unsocial and malignant
passions, or to irregular and criminal de-
fires ? Had I power to lay open that fiore-
house of iniquity which the hearts of too
many conceal; could I draw out and read

to

to them a lift of all the imaginations they SE RM.
have devised, and all the passions they have
indulged in secret; what a picture of men
would I present to themselves ? What crimes
would they appear to have perpetrated in
fancy, which to their most intimate com-
panions they durst not reveal ?

Even when men imagine their thoughts

to be innocently employed, they too com-
monly susser them to run out into extrava-
gant imaginations, and chimerical plans of
what they would with to attain, or chufe to
be, if they could frame the course of things
according to their desire. Though such
employments of fancy come not under the
fame description with those which are plainly
criminal, yet wholly unblameable they fel-
dom are. Besides the waste of time which
they occasion, and the misapplication which
they indicate of those intellectual powers
that were given to us for much nobler pur-
poses, such romantic speculations lead us
always into the neighbourhood of forbid-
den regions. They place us on dangerous
ground. They are for the most part con-

neced

SERM. neaed with some one bad paflon; and

' they always nourish a giddy and frivolous

turn of thought. They unfit the mind for
applying with vigour to rational pursuits,
or for acquiescing in fober plans of conduct.
From that ideal world in which it allows
itself to dwell, it returns to the commerce
of men, unbent and relaxed, sickly and
tainted, averse from discharging the duties,
and sometimes disqualified even for relish-
ing the pleasures of ordinary life. 0 eeru-
falem! waah thine heart from wickedness.
How longJiall thy vain thoughts lodge within
thee? -- In order to guard against all
such corruptions and abuses of thought as I
have mentioned, it may be profitable to at-
tend to the following rules.

IN the first place, study to acquire the

habit of attention to thought. No study is
more important; for in proportion to the
degree in which this habit is possessed, such
commonly is the degree of intelletual im-

+ Jerem. iv. 14.

provement.

provement. It is the power of attention S E R M.
which in a great measure diffinguifhes the
wife and the great from the vulgar and
trifling herd of men. The latter are ac-
customed to think, or rather to dream, with-
out knowing the subjet of their thoughts.
In their unconnected rovings, they pursue
no end; they follow no trad. Every thing
floats loose and disjointed on the surface of
their mind; like leaves scattered and blown
about on the face of the waters.

In order to lead your thoughts into any

useful direcion, your first care muff be, to
acquire the power of fixing them, and of
restraining their irregular motions. Inure
yourselves to form a plan of proper medi-
tation; to pursue it steadily; and with lfe
vere authority to keep the door ihut against
intrusions of wandering fancy. Let your
mind, for this purpose, become a frequent
object to itielf. Let your thoughts be made
the fiibjed of thought and review.-",To

what is my attention at present directed ?
Could I disclose it without a blufli to the
" world ? Were God inftintly to call me

'i into

SERM. , into judgment, what account could I give

" of it to him ? Shall I be the wiser or the
"better for dwelling on such thoughts as
"now fill my mind? Are they entirely
" consistent with my innocence, and with
"my present and future peace? If they
"are not, to what purpose do I indulge
"such unprofitable or dangerous musings?"
-By frequent exercise of this inward fcru-
tiny, we might gradually bring imagination
under discipline, and turn the powers of
thought to their proper use as means of im-
provement, instead of suffering them to be
only the instruments of vanity and guilt.

IN the second place, in order to the go-

vernment of thought, it is necessary to guard
against idleness. Idleness is the great so-
menter of all corruptions in the human
heart. In particular, it is the parent of
loose imaginations and inordinate desires.
The ever acive and reftlefspower of thought,
if not employed about what is good, will
naturally and unavoidably engender evil.
Imagine not that mere occupation, of what-

ever

ever kind it be, will exempt you from the s E R M.

II.

blame and danger of an idle life. Perhaps .--
the wornt species of idleness is a diflipated,
though seemingly busy life, spent in the
haunts of loose society, and in the chace of
perpetual amusement. Hence a giddy mind,
alternately elated and dejeEted with trifles,
occupied with no recollection of the past
but what is fruitless, and with no plans for
the future but what are either frivolous or
guilty.

As, therefore, you would govern your
thoughts, or indeed as you would have any
thoughts that are worthy of being governed,
provide honourable employment for the
native aativity of your minds. Keep know-
ledge, virtue, and usefulness, ever in view.
Let your life proceed in a train of such pur-
suits as are worthy of a Christian, of a ra-
tional and a social being. While these are
regularly carried on as the main business of
life, let amusement possess no more than its
proper place in the distribution of your time.
Take particular care that your amusements
be of an irreproachable kind, and that all

VOL. II. E your

E M. your society be either improving or inno-
I^ r _ cent. So mhall the stream of your thoughts

be made to run in a pure channel. Manly
occupations and virtuous principles will ex-
pel the taint which idleness never fails to
communicate to the vacant mind.

IN the third place, when criminal thoughts

arise, attend to all the proper methods of
speedily fupprefling them. Take example
from the unhappy industry which finners
discover in banishing good ones, when a
natural sense of religion forces them on their
conscience. How anxiously do they fly
from themselves? how studiously do they
drown the voice which upbraids them in
the noise of company or diversion ? what
numerous artifices do they employ to evade
the uneasiness which returns of reflexion
would produce?-Were we to use equal
diligence in preventing the entrance of vi-
cious suggestions, or in repelling them when
entered, why should we not be equally fuc-
ceisful in a much better cause ?-As soon as
you are sensible that any dangerous paflion

begins

begins to ferment, instantly call in other S E RM.
paflions, and other ideas, to your aid.
Hartcn to turn your thoughts into a differ-
ent diretion. Summon up whatever you
have found to be of power for composing
and harmonizing your mind. Fly for as-
fiftance to serious studies, to prayer and
devotion ; or even fly to business or inno-
cent society, if solitude be in hazard of fa-
vouring the fedution. By such means you
may stop the progress of the growing evil.
You may apply an antidote, before the
poison has had time to work its full effeat.

IN the fourth place, it will be particularly

useful to impress your minds with a habitual
sense of the presence of the Almighty. When
we reflea what a strong check the belief of
divine omniscience is calculated to give to
all criminal thoughts, we are tempted to
suspect, that even by Christians this article
of faith is not received with sincere convic-
tion. For who but muff confess, that if he
knew a parent, a friend, or a neighbour, to
have the power of looking into his heart,

E 2 he

SE RM. he-durif not allow himself that unbounded

IJ.
* Is ifcope which he now gives to his imagination

and desire ? Whence, then, comes it to pals,
that men, without fear or concern, bring into
the presence of the awful majesty of Heaven
that folly and licentiousness of thought
which would make them blush and tremble,
if one of their own fellow-creatures could
descry? At the fame time, no principle is
supported by clearer evidence than the om-
nifcience of God. All religious seCts have
admitted it. All societies of men, in their
oaths and covenants, appeal to it. The
fovercign of the universe cannot but know
what pases throughout his dominions. He
who supports all nature must needs pervade
and fill it. He who formed the heart is
certainly conscious to what passes within it.

Never let this great article of faith escape

from your view. In thinking, as well as
in acing, accustom yourselves to look up
with reverence to that piercing eye of di-
vine observation which never lumbers nor
sleeps. Behold a pen always writing over
your head, and making up that great re-

cord

cord of your thoughts, words, and acions, s E R M.
from which at last you are to be judged. -,-
Think that you are never less alone than
when by yourfeltes; for then is He still
with you, whose infpecion is of greater
consequence than that of all mankind.
Let these awful considerations not only
check the dissipation of corrupt fancy, but
infuse into your spirits that solemn com-
pofure which is the parent of meditation
and wisdom.' Let them not only expel
what is evil, but introduce in its fread what
is pure and-holy; elevating your thoughts
to divine and eternal objecs, and acting as
the counterpoise to those attractions of the
world, which would draw your whole at-
tention downwards to sense and vanity.

E 3 S E R-

# SERMON III. The same SUBJECT continued. PROV. iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence ; for out of it are the issues of life.

8 E R M O N III.
The fame SUBJECT continued.

P ROV. iv. 23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of

it are the ifes of life.
SERM. HAVING treated, in the foregoing

,_* 1 discourse, of the government of the
thoughts, I proceed to confider the govern-
ment of the paflions, as the next great duty
included-in the keeping of the heart,

Passions are strong emotions of the mind,

occasioned by the view of apprehended
good orevil. They are original parts of
the constitution of our nature; and there-
fore, to extirpate them is a mistaken aim.
Religion requires no more of us than to

moderate

moderate and rule them. When our blef- S E R ,
fed Lord assumed the nature, without the --,,.
corruption, of man, he was fubjeCd to like
passions with us. On some occasions he
felt the risings of anger. He was often
touched with pity. He was grieved in fpi-
rit; he sorrowed and he wept,

Passions, when properly direted, may

be subservient to very ufeful;ends. .They
rouze the dormant powers of the foul;
They are even found to exalt them. They
often raise a man above himself, and ren-
der him more penetrating, vigorous, and
masterly, than he is in his calmer hours.
Aduated by some high pafion, he conceives
great designs, and surmounts all difficulties
in the execution. He is inspired with more
lofty sentiments, and endowed with more
persuasive utterance, than he possesses at
any other time. Passions are the acive
forces of the foul. They are its highest
powers brought into movement and exer-
tion. But,- like all other great powers, they
are either useful or deftrutive, according to
!leir direEtion and degree: as wind. and

F. 4 fire

SB R M.i firre e ',mrftrumental in carrying on many
'uar.~ of the beneficent operations of nature; but

lh'en 'hey rife to undue violence, or devi-
ate fromi their proper course, their path is
marked with'ruin.
-X.t is'the -present infelicity of human na-
ture, that those strong emotions of the mind
are become too powerful for the principle
whici ought to regulate them. This is one
of-the unhappy consequences of our apof-
tacy from God, that the influence- of rea-
son', ,:weakened, and that of passion
strengthened, within the heart, When man
revolted from his Maker, his paffiins re-
bellted.againit himself; and from being
originally. the infiruments of reason, have
becetr:the.tyrants ds the foul. Hence, in
treing-of this fubjeca, two things may be
affuaed': as principles: first, that through
the:prefit weakness of the understanding,
ir'aEfIimns are 9fteii directed towards im-
prtVeriobjeBs ;- and next, that even when
their liretcion is just, and their objecs are
itnnmont;-they perpetually tend to run into
excei :;:they always' hurry us towards their

' 4 gratification

gratification with a blind and dangerous 'E RMI.
impetuosity. On there two points then
turns the whole government of our paflions:
first, to ascertain the proper objeds of their
pursuit; and next, to refirain them in that
pursuit when they would carry us beyond
the bounds of rcafon. If there be any pas-
sion which iritrtides itfelfunfeafonably into
our mind, which darkens and troubles our
judgment, or habitually discomposes our
temper; wllich unfits us for properly dif-
charging the duties, or disqualifies us for
cheerfully enjoying the comforts of life,
we may certainly conclude it to have gained
a dangerous ascendant. The great object
which we ought to propose to ourselves is,
to acquire a firm and fedfaft mind, which
the infatuation of passion shall not reduce,
nor its violence /hake; which, refting on
fixed principles, shall, in the midst of con-
tending emotions, remain free, ahd master
of itself; able to liften calmly to the voice
of conscience, and prepared to obey its dic-
?ates without hesitation.

To

E R M. To obtain, if possible, such command of
\- - pafilon, is one of the highefr attainments

of the rational nature. Arguments to show
its importance crowd upon us from every
quarter. If there be any fertile oiurce of
mischief to human life, it is, beyond doubt,
the mnilrule of pafion. It is this which
poiibns the enjoyment of individuals, over-
turns the order of society, and strews the
path of life with so many miseries, as to
render it indeed the valley of tears, All
those great scenes of public calamity, which
we behold with astonishment and horrour,
have originated from the source of violent
passions, These have pverfpread the earth
with bloodshed. These have pointed the
assassin's dagger, and filled the poisoned
bowl. These, in every age, have fur-
nifhed too copious materials for the orator's
pathetic declamation, and for the poet's tra,
gical song.

When from public life we descend to pri-

vate condu&c, though passion operate not
there in such a wide and delfrudive. sphere,
we shall find its influence to be no less bane-

full

ful. I need not mention the black and SERM.
fierce passions, such as envy, jealousy, and ,-
revenge, whose effets are obviously nox-
ious, and whose agitations are immediate
misery. But take any of the licentious and
sensual kind. Suppose it to have unlimited
scope; trace it throughout its course; and
you will find that gradually, as it rifes, it
taints the soundness, and troubles the peace
of his mind over whom it reigns; that in
its progress it engages him in pursuits which
are marked either with danger or with
ihame; that in the end it waftes his for-
tune, destroys his health, or debases his
charater; and aggravates all the miseries
in which it has involved him with the con-
cluding pangs of bitter remorse. Through
all the flages of this fatal course, how many
have heretofore run? What multitudes do
we daily behold pursuing it, with blind and
headlong steps?

But, on the evils which flow from unre-

strained paflions, it is needlcfs to enlarge.
Hardly are there any so ignorant or incon-
fiderate as not to admit, that where passion

is

s JR I. is allowed to reign, both happiness and vir,
t-e-- tue. must fiaffer. I proceed therefore to

what -is of more consequence, to suggest
some directions which may be useful in
aflifting us to preserve the government of
our paions,

IN the first place, we must fudy to ac-

quire just views of the comparative import-
,ance of those objeas that are most ready to
attrati desire. The erroneous opinions
which we form concerning happiness and
misery, give rife to all the mistaken and
dangerous paflions which embroil our life.
We iuffer ourselves to be dazzled by unreal
appearances of pleasure. We follow, with
precipitancy, whithersoever the crowd
leads. We admire, without examination,
what our predecessors have admired. We
fly from every shadow at which we fee
others tremble. Thus, agitated by vain
fears and deceitful hopes, we are hurried
into eager contests about objets which are
in themselves of no value. By recifying
our opinions, we would strike at the root

of

of the evil. If our vain imaginations were s E R M.
chastened, the tumult of our paflions would I
subside.

It is observed, that the young and the

ignorant are always the most violent in
pursuit. The knowledge which is forced
upon them by longer acquaintance with the
world, moderates their impetuosity. Study
then to anticipate, by reflexion, that know-
ledge which experience often purchases at
too dear a price. Inure yourselves to fre-
quent consideration of the emptiness of
those pleasures which excite so much strife
and commotion among mankind. Think
how much more of true enjoyment is loft
by the violence of pafllon, than by the want
of those things which give occasion to that
passion. Persuade yourselves that the fa-
vour of God and the possession of virtue
form the chief happiness of the rational
nature. Let a contented mind, and a
peaceful life, hold the next place in your
estimation. These are the conclusions
which the wife and thinking part of man-
kind have always formed. To these con-

clufions,

SE R M. clufions, after having run the race of pas-

III.
\- s anfion, you will probably come at the last.

By forming them betimes, you would make
a seasonable escape from that tempestuous
region, through which none can pass with-
out suffering misery, contrasting guilt, and
undergoing severe remorse.

IN the second place, in order to attain

the command of pafflon, it is requisite to
acquire the power of felf-denial. The self-
denial of a Christian consists not in perpe-
tual austerity of life, and universal renun-
ciation of the innocent comforts of the
world. Religion requires no such unne-
ceffary sacrifices, nor is any such foe to
present enjoyment. It consists in our being
ready, on proper occasions, to abstain from
pleasure, or to submit to suffering, for the
fake of duty and conscience, or from a view
to some higher and more extensive good.
If we possess not this power, we ihall be
the prey of every loose inclination that
chances to arise. Pampered by continual
indulgence, all our passions will become

mutinous

mutinous and headstrong. Desire, not rea- s E R M.

Ilr.

son, will be the ruling principle of our
conduet.

As, therefore, you would keep your pas-

sions within due bounds, you must betimes
accustom them to know the reins. You
must not wait till some critical occasion for
the exercise of felf-denial occur. In vain
you will attempt to ac with authority, if
your first essay be made when temptation
has inflamed the mind. In cooler hours,
you must sometimes abridge your enjoy-
ment even of what is innocent. In the
midst of lawful pleasure, you must main-
tain moderation, abftemioufnefs, and self-
command. The observance of this difci-
pline is the only method of supporting rea-
son in its proper ascendant. For if you
allow yourselves always to stretch to the
utmost point of innocence and safety, be-
yond that point you will infallibly be hur-
ried, when passion ihall arise in its might
to shake the heart.

IN the third place, jmprefs your minds
deeply with this persuasion, that nothing is

6 what

S E R IM. what it appears to be when you are under

IlL

_
-, the power of passion. Be assured, that no

judgment which you then form can be in
the least depended upon as found or true.
The fumes which ariie from a heart boiling
With violent passions, never fail to darken
and trouble the understanding. \When the
gourd withered, under the fliade of which
the prophet Jonah reposed, his mind, al-
ready ruffled by the disappointment of his
predicions, loft, on occasion of this flight
incident, all command of itself; and in the
midst of his impatience, he w/hjed to die
rather than to live. Instead of being calmed
by that expoftulating voice, Dofi thou well,
0 Jonlah ! to be angry becatfe of the gourd?
he replied with great emotion, I do well to
be angr1y even unto death. But did Jonah
think io when his passion had abated ? Do
there sentiments bear the least resemblance
to that humble and devout prayer which,
on another occasion, when in his calm mind,
he put up to God * ? No two persons can
differ more from each other, than the fame

· See Jonah ii.

person

person differs from himself, when agitated SEIRIM.
by paflion, and when miafter of his reason.
I do well to be angr,, is the language of
every man when his mind is inflamed.
Every passion justifies itself. It brings in a
thousand pretences to its aid. It borrows
many a falfei colour to hide its deformity.
It possesses a fort of magic, by which it can
magnify or diminish objeEts at pleasure,
and transform the appearance of every thing
within its sphere.

Let the knowledge of this imposture which

passion pratifes, place you continually on
your guard. Let the remembrance of it
be ever at hand, to check the extravagant
judgments which you are apt to pass in
those moments of delusion. Liften to no
suggestion which then arises. Form no
conclusions on which you are to at. As-
lure yourselves that every thing is beheld
through a sal'e medium. Have patience
for a little, and the illusion will vanif ;
the atmosphere will clear up around you,
and objets return to be viewed in their
native colours and just dimensions.

VoL II. F I>:

S E R M. IN the fourth place, oppose early the be-
L-v-i ginnings of passion. 'Avoid particularly all

such objets as are apt to excite passions
which you know to predominate within
you. As soon as you find the tempest rising,
have recourse to every proper method, ei-
ther of allaying its violence, or of escaping
to a calmer shore. Haften to call up emo-
tions of an opposite nature. Study to con-
quer one paflion by means of some other
which is of less dangerous tendency. Never
account any thing imall or trivial which is
in hazard of introducing disorder into your
heart. Never make light of any desire
which you feel gaining such progress as to
threaten entire dominion. Blandifing it
will appear at the firfi. As a gentle and
innocent emotion, it may iteal into the
heart; but as it advances, is likely to pierce
you r withrotgh wizt manyforrows. What you
indulged as a favourite amusement, will
shortly become a serious business; and in
the end may prove the burden of your life.
Most of our passions flatter us in their rife.
But their beginnings are treacherous; their

gro'thl

growth is imperceptible; and the evils which s R M.
they carry in their train lie concealed, until
their dominion is established. What Solo-
mon fays of one of them, holds true of them
all, that their beginning is as when one letteth
out water -. It issues from a finall chink,
which once might have been easily stopped;
but being negleaced, it is soon widened by
the stream; till the bank is at last totally
thrown down, and the flood is at liberty to
deluge the whole plain.

IN the fifth place, the excess of every

passion will be moderated by frequent me-
ditation on the vanity of the world, the
short continuance of life, the approach of
death, judgment, and eternity. The ima-
ginary degree of importance which the ne-
glect of such meditation suffers us to bestow
on temporal things, is one great cause of
our vehemence in desire, and our eagerness
in pursuit. We attach ourselves to the ob-
jects around us, as if we could enjoy them
for ever. Higher and more enlarged pro-

* Prov. xvii. 14.

F 2 fpeas

sE R M. speCs of the destination of man would na-

IH.

turally cool this misplaced ardour. For
what can appear so considerable in human
affairs, as to discompose or agitate the mind
of him to whose view eternity lies open, and
all the greatness of the universe of God?
How contemptible will seem to him this
hurry of spirits, this turmoil of passion,
about things which are so soon to end ?-
Where are they who once disturbed the
world with the violence of their contests,
and filled it with the renown of their ex-
ploits ? What now remains of their designs
and enterprises, of their passions and pur-
suits, of their triumphs and their glory?
The flood of time has passed over them,
and swept them away, as if they had never
been. The fan/ion of the world changes
continually around us. We succeed one
another in the human course, like troops
of pilgrims on their journey. Absurdly we
spend our time in contending about the
trifles of a day, while we ought to be pre-
paring for a higher existence. Eternity is
just at hand to close this introductory scene.

It

It is fast rolling towards us, like the tide SE R M.
of a vast ocean, ready to ifallow up all .'j
human concerns, and to leave no trace be-
hind it, except the consequences of our good
or bad deeds, which shall last for ever.-
Let such reflections allay the heat of paflion.
Let them reduce all human things to their
proper standard. From frivolous pursuits
let them recal our attention to objets of
real importance; to the proper business of
man; to the improvement of our nature,
the discharge of our duty, the rational and
religious conduct of human life.

IN the last place, to our own endeavours

for regulating our passions, let us join ear-
nest prayer to God. Here, if any where,
divine assistance is requisite. For such is
the present blindness and imperfection of
human nature, that even to discover all the
disorders of our heart is become difficult;
much more, to recifythem, is beyond cur
power. To that superior aid, then, v>hizll
is promised to the pious and upright, let us
look up with humble minds; bcfeeching

F 3 tile

S E R M. the Father of mercies, that, while we fludy

to aa our own part with resolution and
vigilance, he would forgive our returning
weakness; would strengthen our constancy
in refilling the assaults ofpaffion; and enable
us by his grace so to govern our minds, that
without considerable interruptions we may
proceed in a course of piety and virtue.

IT now remains to treat of the govern-

ment of temper, as included in the keeping
of thhe heart. Passions are quick and strong
emotions, which by degrees subside. Tem-
per' is the disposition which remains after
these emotions are pall, and which forms
the habitual propensity of the foul. The
one are like the fiream when it is fwoln by
the torrent, and ruffled by the winds. The
other resembles it when running within its
bed, with its natural velocity and force.
The influence of temper is more silent and
imperceptible than that of passion. It ope-
rates with less violence; but as its operation
is constant, it produces effeEts no less con-
fiderable. It is evident, therefore, that it

highly

highly deserves to be confidered in a reli- SEI R M.
gious view. -

Many, indeed, are averse to behold it in

this light. They place a good temper upon
the fame footing with a healthy conftitu-
tion of body. They confider it as a natural
felicity which some enjoy; but for the want
of which, others are not morally culpable,
nor accountable to God; and hence the
opinion has sometimes prevailed, that a bad
temper might be consistent with a state of
grace. If this were true, it would overturn
that whole doctrine, of which the gospel is
o full, that regeneration, or change of na-
ture, is the essential characeriftic of a Chrii-
tian. It would suppose that grace might
dwell amidst malevolence and rancour, and
that heaven might be enjoyed by such as
are strangers to charity and love.-It will
readily be admitted, that some, by the ori-
ginal frame of their mind, are more favour-
ably inclined than others towards certain
good dispositions and habits. But this as-
fords no justification to those who neglect
to oppose the corruptions to which they are

F 4 prone.

SE R M. prone. Let no man imagine that the hu"
L--..i man heart is a foil altogether unfufceptible

of culture; or that the worst temper may
not, through the assistance of grace, be re-
formed by attention and discipline. Settled
depravity of temper is always owing to our
own indulgence. If, in place of checking,
we nourish that malignity of disposition to
which we are inclind, all the consequences
will be placed to -our account, and every
excuse from natural conffitution be rejeted
at the tribunal of Heaven.

The proper regulation of temper assets

the character of man in every relation which
lie bears; and includes the whole circle of
religious and moral duties. This, therefore,
is a subjed of too great extent to be com-
prehended in one discourse. But it may be
ufefiu to take a general view of it; and, be-
fore we conclude the doftine of keeping the
heart, to shew what the habitual temper of
a good man ought to be, with respect to
God, to his neighbour, and to himself.

FIRST, with refpeet to God, what he
ought to cultivate is a devout temper. This

imports

imports more -than the care of perform- SERM.
ing the offices of religious worihip. It
denotes that sensibility of heart towards
the Supreme Being, which springs from
a deep impreff.on of his perfecions on
the foul. It flands opposed, not only
to that difiegard of God which forms
the defhription of the impious, but to
that ablence of religious affedions which
sometimes prevails among those who are
imperfedly good. They acknowledge, per-
haps, the obligations of duty. They feel
some concern to w orki o.zt their /alvation.
But they apply to their duty through mere
confiraint; and serve God without affection
or complacency. More liberal and gene-
rous sentiments animate the man who is of
devout temper. God dwells upon his
thoughts as a benefacor and a father, to
whose voice lie hearkens with joy. Amidst
the occurrences of life, his mind naturally
opens to the admiration of his wisdom, the
reverence of liis power-, the love of his
tranfeendent goodnels. All nature appears
to his view as fiamped with the impress of

8 thelb

S E R M. these perfecions. Habitual gratitude to
I~
_ his Maker for mercies past, and cheerful

resignation to his will in all time to come,
are the native effusions of his heart.

Such a temper as this deserves to be cul-

tivated with the utmost attention; for it
contributes, in a high degree, both to our
improvement and our happiness. It refines,
and it exalts human nature. It softens that
hardness which our hearts are ready to con-
trac from frequent intercourse with this
rugged world. It facilitates the discharge
of every duty towards God and man. At
the fame time it is a temper peaceful and
serene, elevated and rejoicing. It forms
the current of our affections to flow in a
placid tenour. It opens pleasing profpeds
to the mind. It banishes harsh and bitter
paflions; and places us above the reach of
many of the annoyances of worldly life.
When the temper is truly devout, the peace
of God which piA th uinderliandiig keepcth
the heart andfoul. I proceed,

SECONDLY, to point out the proper state
of our temper with refped to one another.

It

It is evident, in the general, that if we SERM.

II.

consult either public welfare or private
happiness, Christian charity ought to regu-
late our disposition in mutual intercourse.
But as this great principle admits of several
diversified appearances, let us confider some
of the chief forms under which it ought to
show itfelfin the usual tenour of life. Uni-
versal benevolence to mankind, when it
refits in the abftraf, is a loose indetermi-
nate idea,' rather than a principle of real
effet; and too often floats as an ufelels
speculation in the head, inflead of affecing
the temper and the heart.

What, first, presents itself to be recom-

mended is a peaceable temper; a difpofi-
tion averse to give offence, and desirous of
cultivating harmony, and amicable inter-
course in society. This supposes yielding
anid condescending manners, unwillingnets
to contend with others about trifles, and,
in contests that are unavoidable, proper
moderation of spirit. Such a temper is the
firit principle of felf-enjoyment. It is the
basis of all order and happiness among

mankind.

SERM. mankind. The positive and contentious,
'-a_ the rude and quarrelsome, are the bane of

society. They seem destined to blast the
small share of comfort which nature has
here allotted to man. But they cannot dif-
turb the peace of others, more than they
break their own. The hurricane rages first
in their own bfom, before it is let forth
upon the world. In the tempests which
they raise, they are always toft; and fre-
quently it is their lot to perish.

A peaceable temper must be supported by

a candid one, or a disposition to view the
conduct of others with fairness and impar-
tiality. This fiands opposed to a jealous
and suspicious temper, which ascribes every
acion to the worst motive, and throws a
black fllade over every charadter. As you
would be happy in yourselves, or in your
connetions with others, guard against this
malignant ipirit. Study that charity cvLric
thinkelh no evil; that temper which, with-
out degenerating into credulity, will difpole
you to be just; and which can allow you
to observe an error, without imputing it ai

a crii'c,

a crime. Thus you will be kept free from s E R M.
that continual irritation which imaginary ,_
injuries raise in a suspicious breast; and will
walk among men as your brethren, not
your enemies.

But to be peaceable, and to be candid,

is not all that is required. of a good man.
He must cultivate a kind, generous, and
sympathizing temper, which feels for dif-
trefs, wherever it is beheld; which enters
into the concerns of his friends with ar-
dour; and to all with whom he has inter-
tercourfe is gentle, obliging, and humane.
How amiable appears such a disposition,
when contrasted with a malicious or envi-
ous temper, which wraps itself up in its
own narrow interests, looks with an evil
eye on the success of others, and with an
unnatural fatisfadion feeds on their diifap-
pointments or miseries! How little does
he know of the true happinels of life, who
is a stranger to that intercourse of good
offices alid kind affections, which, by a
pleasing charm, attach men to one another,
and circulate jov from heart to heart!

You

SE R M. You are not to imagine that a benevo-

- lent temper finds no exercise, unleis when

opportunities offer of performing actions of
high generosity, or of extensive utility.
These may seldom occur. The condition
of the greater part of mankind, in a good
measure, precludes them. But in the or-
dinary round of human affairs, a thousand
occasions daily present themselves of miti-
gating the vexations which others susser, of
soothing their -minds, of aiding their in-
terest, of promoting their cheerfulness, or
ease. Such occasions may relate to the
smaller incidents of life. But let us re-
member that of small incidents the system
of human life is chiefly composed. The
attentions which refpeEt these, when fug-
gested by real benignity of temper, are
often more material to the happiness of
those around us, than actions which carry
the appearance of greater dignity and fplen-
dour. No wife or good man ought to ac-
count any rules of behaviour as below his
regard, which tend to cement the great
brotherhood of mankind in comfortable
union.

Particularly

Particularly in the course of that fami- S E M.

liar intercourse which belongs to domestic .-.
life, all the virtues of temper find an ample
range. It is very unfortunate, that within
that circle, men too often think themselves
at liberty to give unrestrained vent to the
caprice of passion and humour. Whereas
there, on the contrary, more than any
where, it concerns them to attend to the
government of their heart; to check what
is violent in their tempers, and to soften
what is harsh in their manners. For there
the temper is formed. There, the real
characer displays itself. The forms of the
world dilguife men when abroad. But
within his own family, every man is known
to be what he truly is.-In all our inter-
course, then, with others, particularly in
that which is closest and most intimate, let
us cultivate a peaceable, a candid, a gentle
and friendly temper. This is the temper
to which, by repeated injundions, our holy
religion ieeks to form us. This was the
temper of Christ. This is the temper of
Heaven.

WE

SERM. WV are now to confider, thirdly, the
v-iLl proper state of temper, as it refpeds the

individual himself. The basis of all the
good dispositions which belong to this head,
is humility. By this I understand, not that
meanness of spirit which leads a man to
undervalue himself, and to fink below his
rank and characer; but what the scripture
expresses with great propriety, when it ex-
horts every man, not to thin of hinfelf morc
highly than he ought thJiz,, but to think
soberly -. He who adopts all the flattering
suggestions of felf-love, and forms claims
upon the world proportioned to the ima-
ginary opinion which he has conceived of
his merit, is preparing for himself a thou-
sand mortifications. \Whercas by checking
the risings of ill-founded vanity, and re-
treating within tlofe bounds which a mo-
derate estimation of our characer pre-
icribes, we escape the miweries which always
pursue an arrogant mind, and recommend
ourselves to the favour both of God and
man.

* Rom. xii. 3.

TIence

Hence will naturally arise a contented SE R M.

temper, which is one of the greatest blef- --
sings that can be enjoyed by nian, and one
of the most material requisites to the pro-
per discharge of the duties of every station.
For a fretful and discontented temper ren-
ders one incapable of performing aright any
part in life. It is unthankful and impious
towards God; and towards men, provok-
ing and unjust, It is a gangrene which
preys on the vitals, and infects the whole
constitution with disease and putrefacion.
Subdue pride and vanity, and you will
take the most effetual method of eradicat-
ing this distemper. You will no longer
behold the objets around you with jaun-
diced eyes. You will take in good part
the blessings which Providence is pleated to
bestow, and the degree of favour which
your fellow-creatures are disposcd to grant
you. Viewing yourselves, with all your
imperfecions and failings, in a just light,
you will rather be surprised at your enjoy-
ing so many good things, than discontented
because there are any which you want.

VQL. II. G From

SE R . - From a humble and contented temper

will spring a cheerful one. This, if not
in itself a virtue, is at least the garb in
which virtue flhould be always arrayed.
Piety and goodness ought never to be mark-
ed with that dejection which sometimes
takes rife from ffiperftition, but which is
the proper portion only of guilt. At the
fame time, the cheerfulness belonging to
virtue is to be carefully diftinguiihed from
that light and giddy temper which charac-
terizes folly, and is so often found among
the dissipated and vicious part of mankind.
Their gaiety is owing to a total want of
reflexion; and brings with it the usual con-
sequences of an unthinking habit, fliamee,
remorse,. and heaviness of heart, in the end.
The cheerfulness of a well-regulated mind,
springs from a good conscience and the fa-
vour of heaven, and is bounded by ten-
perance and reason. It makes a man
happy in hlimfelf, and promotes the hap-
piness of all around him. It is the clear
and calm sunshine of a mind illuminated by
piety and virtue. It crowns all other good

dispositions,

dispositions, and comprehends the general SER'IM
effet which they ought to produce on the ,_._.
heart.

SUCH, on the whole, is the temper, or

habitual frame of mind, in a good man:
Devout towards God; towards men, peace-
able, candid, affectionate and humane;
within himself, humble, contented and
cheerful. To the eflablifhment of this hap-
py temper all the directions which I before
suggested for the due regulation of the
thoughts, and for the government of the
passions, naturally conduce; in this they
ought to issue; and when this temper is
thoroughly formed within us, then may
the heart be esteemed to have been kept
with all diligence. That we may be thus
enabled to keep it, for the fake both of pre-
sent enjoyment and of preparation for
greater happiness, let us earnestly pray to
Heaven. A greater blessing we cannot
implore of the Almighty, than that he
who made the human heart, and who
knows its frailties, would assist us to fib-

G 2 je

S ER M. jee it to that discipline which religion re-
L-.-yi quires, which reason approves, but which

his grace alone can enable us to main-
tain.

S E R-

# SERMON IV. On the UNCHANGEABLENESS of the DIVINE NATURE. JAMES i. 17. Every good and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither ...

[ 8s ]

SERMON IV.
On the UNCHANGEABLENESS of the

DIVINE NATURE.

--- -- "Z%05ww

JAMES i. 17.

Every good and every perfct gift is from

above, and cometh down from the Father
of Lights, with whom is no variableness,
* eitherJJhadow of turning.
T HE divine nature, in some views, sERM.

attraas our love; in others, corn-

mands our reverence; in all, is entitled to
the highest attention from the human mind.
We never elevate our thoughts, in a pro-
per manner, towards the Supreme Being,
without returning to our own sphere with
sentiments more improved; and if, at any
time, his greatness oppresses our thoughts,

G 3 his

SE R M. his moral perfecions always afford us re-

1V.
--rj lief. His almighty power, his infinite

wifdoin and supreme goodness, are founds
familiar to our ears. In his immutability
we are less accustomed to confider him;
and yet it is this perfecton which, perhaps,
more than any other distinguishes the di-
vine nature from the human; gives com-
plete energy to all its other attributes, and
entitles it to the highest adoration. For,
hence are derived the regular order of na-
ture and the ftedfaftnefs of the universe.
Hence sows the unchanging tenour of those
laws which, from age to age, regulate the
conduc of mankind. Hence the uniform-
ity of that government, and the certainty
of. those prdmifes, which are the ground of
our trust and security. Goodness could
produce no more than feeble and wavering
hopes, and power would command very
imperfet reverence, if we were left to
ftifped that the plans which goodness had
-fraited might alter, or that the power of
catiyiig them! into execution might de-
ereafe. The contemplation of God, there-

fore,

fore, as unchangeable in his nature and in s E R M.
all his perfeecions, mufi undoubtedly be ,--
fruitful both of infirucion and of conlbla-
tion to man. I lhall, fili, endeavour to
illustrate in some degree the nature of the
divine immutability; and then make ap-
plication of it to our own conduft.

EVERYT good and eve;y- peifect git

ccnmeth djown fromi the Faother of Lights.
The title which in the text is given to the
Deity, carries an elegant allusion to the Sun,
the source of light, the most universal be-
nefacor of nature, the mofi regular and
conflant of all the great bodies with which
we are acquainted in the universe. Yet
even with the Sun there are certain degrees
of variablelnefs. He apparently rites and
sets; he seems to approach nearer to us in
fummcr, and to retire farther off in win-
ter ; his influence is varied by the seasons,
and his lustre is affected by the clouds.
Whereas with him who is the Father of
Lights, of whose everlasting brightness the
0glor of the Sun is but a faint image,

G 4' there

S E R M. there is nojhadow of turning, not the most

'V. .-_- distant approach to change. In his being

or essence it is plain that alteration can ne-
ver take place. For as his exifrence is de-
rived from no prior cause, nor dependent
on any thing without himself, his nature
can be influenced by no power, can be
affeced by no accident, can be impaired
by no time. From everlasting to everlaft-
ing, he continues the fame. Hence it is
said, that he only hath immortality; that is,
he possesses it in a manner incommunicable
to all other beings. Eternity is described
as the high and holy place in which he
dwelleth; it is a habitation in which none
but the Father of Lights can enter. The
name which he taketh to himself is, I an.
Of other things, some have been and others
shall be; but this is he which is, which
was, and which is to come. All time is his;
it is measured out by him in limited por-
tions to the various orders of created beings;
but his own existence fills equally every
point of duration; the firJ and the laJi, the
beginling and the end, the fame y eerday, to-
day, and for ever.

As

As in his essence, so in his attributes and s E R M.

IV.

perfetions, it is impossible there can be any I
change. To imperfel natures only it be-
longs to improve and to decay. Every al-
teration which they undergo in their abili-
ties or difpoitions, flows either from inter-
nal defec, or from the influence of a superior
cause. But as no higher cause can bring
from without any) accession to the divine
nature, so within itfilf it contains no prin-
ciple of decay. For the fame reason that
the felf-exiftent Being was from the begin-
ning powerful and wife, just and good, he
must continue unalterably so for ever. Hence
with much propriety the divine perfections
are described in scripture by allusions to
those objects to which we ascribe the most
permanent flability. His righteotnlefs is
like Ithe jrong mountains. His mercy is in
the heavens; tnrl his fitlbfjllnefs reacheth
llnto the clonds. These perfecions of the
divine nature differ widely from the human
virtues, which are their faint shadows. The
justice of men is at one time revere, at an-
other time relenting; their goodness is some-

times

SE M. times confined to a partial fondness for a

IV.
Cy-_- few, sometimes runs out into a blind in-

dulgence towards all. But goodness and
justice are in the Supreme Being calm and
steady principles of action, which, enlight-
ened by perfect wisdom, and never either
warped by partiality, or disturbed by passion,
- persevere in one regular and constant tenor.
Among men they may sometimes break forth
with transient splendour, like those wan-
dering fires which illuminate for a little the
darkness of the night. But in God they
shine with that uniform brightness, which
we can liken to nothing so much as to the
untroubled, eternal lustre of the highest
heavens.

From this follows, what is chiefly mate-

rial for us to attend to, that in the cour-e
of his operations towards mankind, in his
counsels and decrees, in his laws, his pro-
riifes, and his threatenings, there is no va-
iriablnefs nor Jhadow of turning with the
Almighty. Kniown to him from the beg/l-
ilng were all his works. In the divine idea
the whole fyflem of nature existed, long

before

before the foundations of the earth were laid. S ER M.
When he said, Let there be light, he only
realized the great plan which from everlaft-
ing he had formed in his own mind. Fore-
seen by him was every revolution which
the course of ages was to produce. What-
ever the counsels of men can effect was
comprehendedin his decree. No new emer-
gency can arise to surprise him. No agita-
tions of anger or of sorrow, of fear or of
hope, can shake his mind or influence his
conduct. e refts in the eternal possession
of that supreme beatitude, which neither
the virtues nor the crimes of men can ift the
least affect. From a motive of overflowing
goodness, he reared up the universe. As
the eternal lover of righteousness, he rules it.
The whole system of his government is
fixed; his laws are irrevocable; and what
he once loveth, he loveth to the end. In
scripture, indeed, he is Sometimes said to
begrieved, and to repent, But such expref-
sions, it is obvious, are employed from ac-
commodation to common conception; in
the fame manner as when bodily organs are

in

SERM. in other passages ascribed to God. The

A , scripture, as a rule of life addressed to the

multitude, mufft make use of the language
of men. The divine nature, represented in
its native sublimity, would have transcended
all human conception. When, upon the
reformation of finners, God is said to repent
of the evil which he had threatened against
them, this intimates no more, than that he
suits his dispensations to the alterations which
take place in the characters of men. His
disposition towards good and evil continues
the fame,. but varies in its application as its
objecs vary; just as the laws themselves,
which are capable of no change of affetion,
bring rewards or punishments at different
times to the fame person, according as his
behaviour alters. Immutability is indeed so
closely conne&ed with the notion of supreme
perfeCtion, that wherever any rational con-
ceptions of a Deity have taken place, this
attribute has been ascribed to him. Reason
taught the wife and reflecing in every age
to believe, that, as what is eternal cannot
die, so what is perfeE can never vary, and

that

that the great Governor of the universe S E R .
could be no other than an unchangeable v
Being.

FROM the contemplation of this obvious,

but fundamental truth, let us proceed to
the practical improvement of it. Let us
confider what effect the serious consideration
of it ought to produce on our mind and be-
haviour.

It will be proper to begin this head of dif-

course by removing an objection which the
doctrine I have illufirated may appear to
form against religious services, and in par-
ticular against the duty of prayer. To what
purpose, it may be urged, is homage ad-
dressed to a Being whose purpose is unal-
terably fixed; to whom our rigbteoufiiefs
cxtendeth not; whom by no arguments we
can persuade, and by no supplications we
can mollify? The objetion would have
weight if our religious addresses were de-
signed to work any alteration on God; ei-
ther by giving him information of what he
did not know; or by exciting affecions

6 which

SERM. which he did not possess; or by inducing

I him to change measures which he had pre-

vioufly formed. But they are only crude
and imperfect notions of religion which can
suggest such ideas. The change which our
devotions are intended to make is upon our-
selves, not upon the Almighty. Their chief
efficacy is derived from the good dispositions
which they raise and cherish in the human
foul. By pouring out pious sentiments and
desires before God, by adoring his perfec-
tion and confefiing our own unworthiness,
by expressing our dependence on his aid,
our gratitude for his past favours, our sub-
miflion to his present will, our trust in his
future mercy, we cultivate such affections
as suit our place and fation in the universe,
and are thereby prepared for becoming ob-
jeets of the divine grace. Accordingly fre-
quent assurances are given us in Scripture,
that the prayers of sincere worthippers, pre-
ferred through the great Mediator, flhall be
produaive of the happiest effects, Whea
they atk, they Jhall receive; when fthey seek,
theyhal find; when they knock, it hall be

ope4ed

Dpened to them. Prayer is appointed to be s E R M.
the channel for conveying the divine grace -v
to mankind, because the wisdom of Heaven
saw it to be one of the most powerful means
of improving the human heart.

When religious homage is confidered in

this light, as a great instrument of spiritual
and moral improvement, all the objections
which fcepticifin can form from the divine
immutability, conclude with no more force
against prayer, than against every other
mean of improvement which reason has
suggested to man. If prayer be superfluous
because God is unchangeable, we might
upon similar grounds conclude, that it is
needless to labour the earth, to nourish our
bodies, or to cultivate our minds, because
the fertility of the ground, the continuance
of our life, and the degree of our under-
standing, depend upon an immutable So-
vereign, and were from all eternity fore-
seen by him. Such absurd conclusions rea-
son has ever repudiated. To every plain
and found understanding it has clearly dice
tated, that to explore the unknown purposes

of

S E R M. of Heaven belongs not to us; but that He

IV.
L-s.. who decrees the end, certainly requires the

means; and that in the diligent employment
of all the means which can advance either
our temporal or spiritual felicity, the chief
exertions of human wisdom and human
duty consist. Assuming it then for an un-
doubted principle, that religion is a reason-
able service, and that, though with the Fa-
ther of Lights there be no variableness, the
homage of his creatures is nevertheless for
the wisest reasons required by him, I pro-
ceed to ihew what sentiments the contem-
plation of divine immutability Ihould raise
in our minds, and what duties it fliould
chiefly enforce.

I. LET it excite us to admire and adore,

Filled with profound reverence, let us look
up to that Supreme Being who fits from
everlasting on the throne of the universe;
moving all things, but remaining immove-
able himself; directing every revolution of
the creation, but asseted by no revolutions
of events or of time. He beholds the heavens

and

and the earth wax old as a garment, and s E R M.

IV.

decay like a vcJlure. At their appointed pe-
riods he raises up, or he dissolves worlds.
But amidst all the convulsions of changing
and perishing nature, his glory and felicity
remain unaltered.-The view of great and
stupendous objets in the natural world
strikes the mind with solemn awe. What
veneration, then, ought to be inspired by
the contemplation of an objeat so sublime
as the eternal and unchangeable ruler of the
universe! The composure and stillness of
thought introduced by such a meditation has
a powerful tendency both to purify and to
elevate the heart. It effaces, for a time,
those trivial ideas, and extinguishes those
low passions, which arise from the circle of
vain and passing objeas around us. It opens
the mind to all the sentiments of devotion;
and accompanies devotion with that pro-
found reverence which guards it from every
improper excess. When we confider the
Supreme Being as employed in works of
love; when we think of his condescension
to the human race in fending his Son to

TOL. II.' H dwell

s E R M. dwell on the. earth; encouraged by favours
_-.,_ , and warmed by gratitude, we are sometimes

in danger of presuming too much on his
goodness, and of indulging a certain fond-
ness of affection, which is unsuitable to our
humble and dependent state. It is necef-
fary that He should frequently appear to
our minds in all that majesty with which
the immutability of his nature clothes him;
in order that reverence may be combined
with love, and that a mixture of sacred awe
may chasten the rapturous effusions of warm
devotion. Servile fear, indeed, would crush
the spirit of ingenuous and affetionate ho-
mage. But that reverence which springs
from elevated conceptions of the divine na-
ture, has a happy effe& in checking the
forwardness of imagination, restraining our
affecions within due bounds, and compo-
sing our thoughts at the fame time that it
exalts them.

When, from the adoration of the un-

changeable perfection of the Almighty, "c
return to the view of our own state, the sird
sentiment which ought naturally to arise, is

that

that of felf-abafement. We are too apt to S E R M.
be lifted up by any little diftincions which I-
we pofle's; and to fancy ourselves great,
only because there are others whom we con-
lider as less. But what is man with all his
advantages and boasted powers before the
eternal Father ofLights ? With God there
is no variableness; with man there is no
tlability. Virtue and vice divide the em-
pire of his mind; and wisdom and folly
alternately rule him. H-ence he is change-
able in his designs, fickle in his friendihips,
flucuating in his whole charater. His
life is a series of contradictions. He is one
thing to-day, and another to-morrow;
obmetimes obliged by experience to alter his
puLpofe, and often led to change it through
levity. Variable and unequal himself, he
is surrounded with fleeting objects. He is
placed as in the midst of a torrent, where all
things are rolling by, and nothing keeps its
place. He has hardly time to contemplate
this feene of vicifftude, before he too is
fiept away.-Thus circumstanced in him-
self, and in all the objecs with which he is

H 2 connected,

SE R M conneced, let him be admonished to be
Iv.

humble and modest. Let the contempla-
tion of the unchanging glory of his Creator
inspire him with sentiments of due fubmif-
sion. Let it teach him to know his proper
place; and check that vanity which is so
ready to betray him into guilt.

Let the fame meditation assea him with

a deep sense of what he owes to the good-
ness of the Deity. His goodness never ap-
pears in so striking a light, as when viewed
in connexion with his greatness. The de-
scription which is given of him in the text
calls, in this view, for our particular atten-
tion. It presents to us the most amiable
union of condescension with majesty, of the
moral with the natural perfections of God,
which can possibly be exhibited to the ima-
gination of man. From the Father of Lights,
'with whbom there is no variableness, neithcr
Jhadow of turning, cometh down every good
andperfet gift. The most independent of
all Beings is represented as the most benefi-
cent. He who is eternal and immutable,
exalted above all, and incapable of receiving

3 returns

returns from any, is the liberal and un- SERM.
wearied Giver of every thing that is good.
-Let such views of the divine nature not
only call forth gratitude and praise, but
prompt us to imitate what we adore. Let
them shew us that benevolence is divine;
that to tfoop from our fancied grandeur in
order to assist and relieve one another, is so
far from being any degradation of character,
that it is our truest honour, and our nearest
resemblance to the Father of Lights.

II. LET the consideration of the divine

immutability convince us, that the method
of attaining the favour of Heaven is one
and invariable. Were the Almighty a ca-
pricious and inconstant Being, like man,
we ihould be at a loss what tenour of con-
duct to hold. In order to conciliate his
grace, we might think of applying some-
tines to one supposed principle of his incli-
nation, sometimes to another; and bewil-
dered amidst various attempts, would be
overwhelmed with dismay. The guilty
would essay to flatter him. The timid,

H 3 Sometimes

S E R M. fometlmes by aufiere mortifications, some-

IV.
_ times by cosily gifts, sometimes by obfe-

quious rites, would try to appease him.
Hence, in fat, have arisen all the corrup-
tions of religious worflip among men;
from their forming the divine charadter
upon their own, and ascribing to the Sove-
reign of the Universe the mutability of hu-
man passions. God is represented by the
psalmist David as faying to the wicked, Ihou
thoughltcf2 that I was altogether fitch an onc
as tbhfelf*. This continues to be the de-
scription of all the superstitious and enthu-
fiaftic fe&s which, since the days of David,
have sprung up in the world.

It is our peculiar happiness under the go-

fpel to have God revealed to us in his ge-
nuine chara&er, as withoiut variableness or
Jhadow of turning. We know that at no
time there is any change, either in his as-
fetions, or in the plan of his adminilira-
tion. One light always shines upon us
from above. One clear and dired path is
always pointed out to man. The Supreme

* Pfiam 1. 21.

Being

Being is, and was, and ever will be, the SE R M.
ilpporter of order and virtue; ile rigIh)cos -
Lord lovilg righteo,'firs. The external
forms of religion may vary; but under all
dispensations which proceed from God, its
substance is the fame. It tends continually
to one point, the purification of man's heart
and life. This was the objecd of the origi-
nal law of nature. This was the scope of
the Mosaic iniiitution amidst all its sacrifices
and rites; and this is unqucflionably the
end of the gospel. So invariably conaflnt
is God to this purpose, that the diiipeniation
of mercy in Christ Jesus, which admits cf
the vicarious atonement and rilhteoufi-,fs
of a Redeemer, make;s no change in our
obligation to fulfil the duties of a good life.
The Redeemer limfnlf hath taught us, that
to the end of time the moral law continues
in its full force; and that till heaven a;,d
earth0 pass aa1, oie joit or little fiall in no

jwfass from it;:. This is the only inftitu-

tion known to men, .lhofe authority is un-
changing and contant. Human laws rife

* atth. v. 18.

H 4 and

S E RM. and fall with the empires that gave them
IV. A_^j birth. Systems of philosophy vary with the

progress of knowledge and light. Manners,
sentiments, and opinions, alter with the
course of time. But throughout all ages,
and amidst all revolutions, the rule of mo-
ral and religious condut is the fame. It
partakes of that immutability of the divine
nature, on which it is founded. Such as
it was delivered to the first worshippers of
God, it continues to be, at this day, to us;
and such it shall remain to our posterity for
ever.

III. LET the contemplation of this per-

feaion of the divine nature teach us to
imitate, as far as our frailty will permit,
that constancy and ftedfaftnefs which we
adore. All the moral attributes of the Su-
preme Being, are standards of character
towards which we ought to aspire. But
as in all these perfections there are proper-
ties peculiar to the divine nature, our endea-
vours to resemble them are laid under great
restrictions by the dissimilarity between our

nature

nature and the divine. With refpea to SERM.
that attribute which we now confider, the
circumstances are evident which preclude
improper imitation. To man it is fre-
quently necessary to correct his errours, and
to change his conduct. An attempt, there-
fore, to continue wholly invariable would,
in our situation, be no other than impru-
dent and criminal obstinacy. But withal,
the immutable rectitude of the Deity fliould
lead us to aspire after fixedness of principle
and uniformity in conduct, as the glory of
the rational nature. Impressed with the
sense of that supreme excellence which
results from unchanging goodfiefs, faith-
fulness and truth, let us become ashamed
of that levity which degrades the human
character. Let us polner our paths, at
upon a well-regulated plan, and remain
consistent with ourselves. Contemplating
the glory of the Father of Lights, let us
aim at being transformed, in some degree,
into the fame image from glory to glory. Si-
nally,

IV. LET

s E R M. IV. LET the divine immutability become
.»-^ the ground of confidence and trust to good

men, amidst all the revolutions of this un-
certain world. This is one of the chief im-
provements to be made of the fubje&, and
therefore requires full illufiration. There
are three lights in which we may view the
benefit redounding to us from that attribute
of God which we now confider. It assures
us of the conflancy of nature ; of the regu-
lar administration of Providence; of the
certain accomplishment of all the divine
promises.

First, it gives us ground to depend on the

constant and uniform course of nature. On
the unchangeablenefs of God refts the fta-
bility of the universe. What we call the
laws of nature are no other than the decrees
of the Supreme Being. It is because He is
without variableness or Jhadow of turning
that those laws have continued the fame
since the beginning of the world; that the
Sun so constantly observes his time ofrifing
and going down ; that the seasons annually
return; the tides periodically ebb and flow;

the

the earth yields its fruits at fated intervals; S E R .
and the human body a id mental pcowcrs --_,--
advance to maturity by a regular progres.
In all thlofe motions and operations which
arc incefantly going on throughout nature,
there is no stop nor interruption; no change
nor innovation; no decction from their
main scope. The fame powerful and steady
hand which gave te first impulle to the
powers of nature, rerains them from ever
exceeding their prrccribed line. Hence
arises the chief con:mfort of our present life.
We find ourfelvcs in a regular and orderly
wvorld. We look forward to a known fuc-
cession of events. We are enabled to form
plans of aation. From the cause we calcu-
late the effet; and from the pall, we rea-
son with confidence concerning the future.

Accustomed from our infancy to this con-

flancy in nature, we are hardly lenfible of
the blessing. Familiarity has the ihme es-
sea here, as in many other enjoyments, to
efface gratitude. But let us, fcr a moment,
take an opposite view of things. Let us
iuppofe, that we had any caunc to dread

capricioulhefs

S E R M. capriciousness or change in the power who

.--.. rules the course of nature; any ground to

fufped that, but for one day, the Sun
might not rife, nor the current of the wa-
ters hold their usual cours'e, nor the laws of
motion and vegetation proceed as we have
been accustomed to behold them. What
difinay would instantly fill all hearts!
what horror would seem to overspread the
whole face of Nature! What part could we
a&, or whither could we run, in the midst
of convulsions which overturned all the
measures we had formed for happiness, or
for safety? The present abode of man
would then become, as Job describes the
region of the grave, a land of darkness, as
darkness itself, and the Jhadow of death;
without any order; and where the light is as
darkness *. With what joy ought we then
to recognize an unvarying and stedfast ruler,
under whose dominion we have no iuch
disasters to dread; but can depend on the
course of Nature continuing to proceed as

* Job x. zz.

it

it has ever gone on, until the period flaIll S F R M.
arrive of its final dissolution!

BUT though the great laws of Nature be

constant like their Author, yet in the
affairs of men there is much variety and
change. All that regards our present pof-
feflions and enjoyments was, for wife rea-
sons, left, in a great mealire, uncertain;
and from this uncertainty arites the distress
of human life. Sensible of the changes to
which we lie open, vwe look round with
anxious eyes, and eagerly grasp at every
obje&t which appears to promise us fecu-
rity. But in vain is the whole circle of
human things explored with this view.
There is nothing on earth so flable as to
allure us of undisturbed reft, nor so power-
ful as to afford us constant protection.
Time, death, and change, triumph over all
the labours of men. What we build up,
they incessantly destroy. The public con-
dition of nations, and the private fortunes of
individuals, are alike subjea to reverse.
Life never retains long the fame form. Its

whole

SE R M. whole fccnery is continually Shifting around

IV.
J . us.- -Amid2L those endless vicissitudes,

what cal give any firm consolation, any
fatisfving re2l to the heart, except the domi-
nion of a wife and righteous sovereign,
with whoml there is no variablllefs nor Joa-
rdow of tztrnilg.r Though all things change,
and we ourfeives be involved in the general
mutability, yet as long as there is fixed and
permanent goodness at the head of the uni-
verse, we are afiured that the great interefRs
of all good men ihall be safe. That river
perpetually flows, the Jireamns whereof m1ake
glad the city of God. We know that the
Supreme Being loved righteoufniefs from
the beginning of days, and that he will
continue to love it to the last. Under his
government none of those revolutions hap-
pen which have place among the kingdoms
of the earth; where princes die and new
sovereigns ascend the throne; new minis-
ters and new counsels succeed; the whole
face of affairs is changed; and former plans
fall into oblivion. But the throne of the Lord
is eaflblised fr ever; and the thozughts of li

S heairt

heart endure to a/ll gen'ertions. We erve S E R -.
the fame God whom our fathers worship- -
ped, and whom our poferity fhali adore.
His unchanging dominion comprehends all
events and all ages; establishes a connei-
ing principle which holds together the past,
the present, and the future; gives stability
to things which in themselves are fluduat-
ing, and extracts order from those which
appear most confuied. Well may the earth
2o/ice, and the mu/ltit'de f /IeCS be glad,
because there reigneth over the universe such
an immutable Lord.

WVere you to unhinge this great article

of faith; were you either to fiy, with the
fiol, that there is no God, or to suppose with
the i;perftitious, that the God who rules
is variable and capricious; you would in-
deed lijy the axe to the root of the tree, and
cut dowsn, with one blow, the hope and
Iecurity of mankind. For you would then
leave nothing in the whole compass of na-
ture, but a round of casual and transitory
being; no foundation of trust, no protec-
tion to the righteous, no fcedfaft principle

to

SE R M. to uphold and to regulate the fucceflion of
k---j eexiflence. Instead of that magnificent ipec-

tacle which the world now exhibits, when
beheld in connexion with the divine go-
vernment, it would then only present to
view, a multitude of short-lived creatures
springing out of the dust, wandering on
the face of the earth without guide or pro-
teetor, struggling for a few years against
the torrent of uncertainty and change;
and then finking into utter oblivion, and
vanishing like visions of the night. Myf-
terious obscurity would involve the begin-
ning of things; disorder would mark their
progress; and the blackness of darkness
would cover their final result. Whereas,
when Faith enables us to discover an uni-
versal Sovereign, whose power never fails,
and whose wisdom and goodness never
change, the profped clears up on every
fide. A ray from the great source of light
seems to illuminate the whole creation.
Good men discover a parent and a friend.
They attain a fortress in every danger; a
refuge amidst all storms, a dwellilg-plact

is

in allgenerations. They are no longer afraid s E R M.

IV.

of evil tidings. Their heart is fixed, trufl- -
ing in/ the Lord.

THOUGH these reasonings from the un-

changing tenour of Divine government
cannot but afford much comfort to good
men, their satisfaction, however, becomes
still more complete, when they confider
the explicit promises which are given them
in the word of God. The immutability of
the divine purpose assures them most per-
feLly of those promises being fulfilled in
due time, how adverse soever circumstances
may at present appear to their accompliih--
ment. The firength of Israel is not a man
that heJflonld lie, nor the son of man that he
floidd repent. Hath he/faid it, andfJall he
not do it? Hath hefpoken, and Jhall he not
nake it good? Men have the command
only of the present time. When that is
suffered to pass, changes may befal, either
in their own state, or in the situation of
things around them, which shall defeat their
belt intentions in our behalf, and render all

VOL. II. I their

SE R M. their promises fruitless. Hence, even set-

IV.
_..-z ting aside the danger of human inconstancy,

the confidence which we can repose on any
earthly protetor is extremely imperfect.
Man, in his highest glory, is but a reed
floating on the stream of time, and forced
to follow every new direction of the cur-
rent. But God is the rock of ages. All
time is equally in his hands. Intervening
accidents cannot embarrass him; nor any
unforeseen obstacle retard the performance
of his most difcant promise. One day is wilil
the Lord as a thozfand years; and a thou-
sand years are as one day. There is no
vicissitude of the human state in which good
men cannot take fanauary with him as a
sure and abiding friend; the safe conducor
of their pilgrimage here, as well as the eter-
nal reft of their fouls hereafter. All their
patrons may desert them; and all their
friends may die: but the Lord fill lives,
who is their rock; and the nmof high God,
who is their redeemer. He hath promised
that he will not leave t hem when they are
eld, nr forsake tbhem when their jlrenSgt

faileib;

fileth; and that even when their heart Jhall SE R M.

'V.

fiint, and their fjejf fil!, he will be the *--
Jirength of their heart and their portion for
ever. His immutability is not only the
ground of trust in him during their own
abode on earth, but gives them the fatisfac-
tion of looking forward to the fame wife
and good administration as continued to the
end of time. When departing hence, and
bidding adieu to life, with all its changeful
scenes, they can with comfort and peace
leave their family, their friends, and their
dearest concerns, in the hands of that God
who reigneth for ever; and whose counte-
nance Jhall always behold the upright with
the fame complacency. My days are like a
Jhadow that declineth, and I am withered
like the grass. But thou, 0 Lord, lhalt en-
dure for ever; and thy remembrance t. all
generations. ·he children of thy firvants
hall continue; and their feed shall be eJa-
bljied before thee *.

SUCH are the benefits which good men
may derive from meditation on God as

Psalm cii. Ix, 12. z8.-

I 2 without

S E R M. without variableness or Jhadow of turning,

1V.
-, · It inspires them with sentiments of devout,

humble, and grateful adoration. It points
out to them the unvarying tenour of con-
duct which they ought to hold; checks their
fickleness and inconstancy; and amidif all
distresses and fears affords them comfort.
The immutability of God is the surest basis
on which their hopes can be built. It is
indeed the pillar on which the whole uni-
verse refts.-On such serious and solemn
meditations let our thoughts often dwell, in
order to corret that folly and levity which
are so apt to take possession of the human
heart. And if our minds be overawed, and
even depressed, with so high a view of the
divine nature, let them be relieved by the
refle&ion, that to this unchangeable God
we are permitted to look up through a gra-
cious Mediator, who, though pofleffed of
divine perfecion, is not unconscious of hu-
man distress and frailty.

i£R-

# SERMON V. On the COMPASSION of CHRIST. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. HEBREWS iv. 15. We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our ...

[ 117 ]

SERMON V.

On the COMPASSION of CHRIST.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.

HEBREWS iv. 15.
Te have not an high priejt which cannot be

touched with the feling of our infirmities;
but was in allpoints tempted like as we are,
yet without Jin.

HEN we compare the counsels of SERM.
Providence with the plans of men, .

we find a like difference obtain as in the
works of nature compared with those of art.
The works of art may, at first view, appear
the most finished and beautiful; but when

I 3 the

S E R M. the eye is assisted to pry into their contexture,

v-y- the nicest workmanship is discerned to be

rough and blemished. Whereas the works
of nature gain by the most accurate exami-
nation; and. those which on a superficial
survey appeared defecive or rude, the more
intimately they are infpeded, discover the
more exact conftrution and consummate
beauty. In the fame manner the systems
of worldly policy, though at firif they seem
plausible and profound, soon betray in their
progress the narrowness of the human un-
derftanding; while those dispensations of
Providence which appeared to furnish ob-
jections either againfl the goodness or the
wisdom of Heaven, have, upon a more ex-
tensive view of their consequences, fre-
quently afforded the most striking proofs of
both.

God manifeJAed in the fige was to the Jew's

a Jzqmbliirig-block, and to the Greeks foollj-
ness. It contradiced every prepoffefion
which their confined ideas of religion and
philosophy led them to entertain. If a fu-
periour Being was to interpose for the reftb-

ration

ration of a degenerate world, they concluded S E R M,
that he would certainly appear in celefiial .,-
majesty. But the thoughts of God are not
as the thoughts of men. The divine wifdiom
saw it to be fit that the Saviour of mankind
ihould in all things be made like unto those
whom he came to lave. Byliving as a man
among men, he dispensed inftrution in the
most winning manner. He added to in-
ftrution the grace and the force of his own
example. He accommodated that example
to the most trying and difficult situations of
human life; and by suffering a painful
death, he both taught men how to susser
and die, and in that nature which had of-
fended he offered a solemn expiation to God
for human guilt.

Besides these ends, so worthy of God,

which were accomplished by the incarna-
tion of Christ, another, of high importance,
is suggested in the text. Human life is to
good men, as well as to others, a state of
suffering and distress. To supply them
with proper consolation and encouragement
during such a itate, was one great purpose

4 . of

SERM. of the undertaking of Christ. With this

V.
-- view he assumed the office of their high

priest, or mediator with God; and the en-
couragement which this office affords them,
will be proportioned to their assured belief,
first of his power, and next of his com-
passion. His power is set forth in the verse
preceding the text, and the proper argu-
ment is founded upon it. Seeing that we
have a great high priest who is pased into
the heavens, Yefus the Son of God, let us hold
faf our profeion. But though it be en-
couraging to know that our high priest
is the Son of God, and that he is pajfed into
the heavens, yet these sacs alone are not
sufficient to render him the full object of
our confidence. For, as the Apostle after-
wards observes, it belongs to the characer
of a high priest to be taken from among men,
that he may have compafion on the ignoranit,
and them that are out of the way, feeing tb t
be himself is compafed with infirmity. In
order then to satisfy us of our high pries's
possessing also the qualifications of mercy
and compassion, we are told that he is touch-

ed

ed with the feeling of oar infirmities, and s E, Me
was in all points tempted like as we are.
The force of this consideration I purpose
now to illustrate. I shall first explain the
fads which are fated in the text, and then
show how from these our Saviour's com-
passion is to be inferred, and in what man-
ner it may be accommodated to the confo-
lation and hope of good men amidst various
exigencies of life.

THE aflertion in the text of Christ's be-

ing touched with the feeling of our infirmities,
plainly implies that he - had full experience
both of the external distresses, and of the
internal sorrows of human nature. Affum-
ing a body such as ours, he fubjeaed him-
self to all the natural consequences of cor-
poreal frailty. 'He did not chufe for him-
self an easy and opulent condition, in order
Ito glide through the world with the lealf
molestation. He did not suit his miion to
the upper ranks of mankind chiefly, by
assimilating his fiate to theirs. But, born
in meanness, and bred up to labour, he

submitted

SERM. Submitted to the inconveniencies of that

V.
uL X- poor and toilsome life which falls to the

share of the most numerous part of the hu-
man race. Whatever is severe in the dif-
regard of relations or the ingratitude of
friends, in the scorn of the proud or the
insults of the mean, in the virulence of
reproach or the sharpness of pain, was un-
dergone by Christ. Though his life was
short, he familiarized himself in it with a
wide compass of human woe, and there is
almost no distressful situation to which we
can be reduced, but what he has experi-
enced before us. There is not the least
reason to imagine that the eminence of his
nature raised him above the sensations of
trouble and grief. Had this been the cafe,
he would have been a sufferer in appear-
ance only, not in reality; there would have
been no merit in his patience, or in the re-
fignation which he expressed.. On the con-
trary, it appears from many circumstances,
that the sensibility of his nature was :ender
an1 exquisite. He affected none of that
hard indifference in which some ancient

philosophers

philosophers vainly gloried. He felt as a S E R M.
man, and he sympathized with the feelings _
of others. On different occasions we are
informed that he was tronubled inspirit, that
hegroaned, and that he wept. The relation
of his agony in the garden of Gethfemanc
exhibits a firiking picture of the sensations
of innocent nature oppressed with anguish.
It discovers all the conflit between the
dread of suffering on the one hand, and the
sense of duty on the other; the man firug-
gling for a while with human weakness,
and in the end recolle&ed in virtue, and
riling fuperiour to the objets of dismay
which were then in his view. Fathcr ! f
it bepofible, let this cup pass from ne. Ne-
verthele/s, not as I will, but as thou wilt.
7hy will be done. Thus was our Saviour
touched with the feeling of our ilfrmlaties.
He was a man of sorrows, and acquainted
with grief

It is added in the text, that he was in all

points tenmpted like as we are. To be tempt-
ed is, in the language of Scripture, to un-
dergo such trials of virtue as are accompa-

3 nied

SE R M. nied with difficulty and conflic. Though

V. v-__ our Lord was not liable to any temptations

from depravity of nature, yet he was per-
petually exposed to such as arise from fitua-
tions the most adverse to virtue. His whole
life was in this refped a course of tempta-
tion; that is, a severe trial of his constancy
by every discouragement. He suffered
repeated provocations both from friends
and foes. His endeavours to do good were
requited with the most obstinate and per-
verse opposition. Sometimes by the folici-
tations of ignorant multitudes he was tempt-
ed to accept the proffers of worldly greatness.
Oftener, by the insults of multitudes, more
blind and brutal, he was tempted to desert
an office which exposed him to so much
misery. Together with the world, the
powers of darkness also combined their
efforts against him. We are informed that
he was led int6 the wvildernefs, and amidst
the horrours of a wild and dreary solitude,
was tempted of the devil. The great adver-
fary of mankind seems to have been per-
mitted to exert unusual proofs of his power

~I ~ and

and malice, on purpose that the trial of s E R fM
our Saviour's constancy might be more .--.
complete, and his vitory over him more
illustrious and distinguished.

From all these circumfiances, the conclu-

sion is obvious, that our Lord knows from
personal experience, all the discouragements
and temptations which virtue can susser.
Though he participated not of the corrup-
tion, yet he felt the weakness of human
nature. He felt the strength of paflion.
He is no stranger to the disturbance and
commotion which either the attacks of the
world, or the powers of darkness, are able
to raise within the breast of man. One re-
markable difference, indeed, takes place
between our temptations and those of Christ.
Though he was terZped like as we are, jet
it was without fin. Though the conflict
was the fame, the issue was different.. We
are often foiled; He always overcame. But
his disconformity to us in this refpea is far
from weakening the strength of our present
argumrent. For fin contracts and hardens
the heart. Every degree of guilt incurred

by

SE R M. by yielding to temptation tends to debate

V.
'. the mind, land to weaken the generous and

benevolent principles in human nature. If
from our Lord's being tempted like as we are,
we have any ground to expect his fympa-
thy, from his being tempted, yet without
fin, we are entitled to hope that his sym-
pathy, unallayed and perfec, will operate
with more complete energy.

FROM this view of the sacs which are

stated in the text, I proceed to mhow how
justly we may infer our Saviour's compaf-
sion, and in what manner it is to be ac-
commodated to the consolation of good men.
amidtI various exigences of life.

It has been the universal opinion of man-

kind, that personal experience of suffering
humanizes the heart. In the school of as-
fliaion, companion is always supposed to
be most thoroughly learned: and hence in
the laws of Moses, when the Israelites are
commanded not to oppress the firanger, this
reason is given, for ye know the heart of a
firanger, feeing ye were .irangers yourselves

i,

in the land of Egypt : . The distressed, ac- S E R M.
cordingly, flie for consolation to those who
have been their companions in woe. They
decline the prosperous, and look up to
them with a suspicious eye. They confi-
der them as ignorant of their feelings, and
therefore regardless of their complaints.
Amidst the manifold sorrows of life, then,
how soothing is the thought that our great
intercessor with God was a fellow-fufferer
with ourselves, while he passed through
this valley of tears !

But was it necessary for Christ, it may

be said, to assume our nature in order to
acquire the knowledge of its infirmity and
distress? As a divine person, was he not
perfealy acquainted with our frame before
he descended to the earth ? Did he stand
in need of being prompted to companion
by the experience of our sorrows ? Could
his experimental knowledge of human weak-
ness increase the benevolence of a nature
which before was perfect ?- No: he sub-

Exod. xxiii. 9.

mitted

S ERM. mitted to be touched with the feeling of our

V.
-y.i Iinfirmities, and to be tempted like as we are;

not in order to become acquainted with
our nature, but to satisfy us that he knew
it perfectly; not in order to acquire any
new degree of goodness, but to give us the
firmer confidence in the goodness which he
pofleffed, and to convey the sense of it to
our hearts with greater force and effect.

Distrust is a weakness peculiarly incident

to the miserable. They are apt to reject
hope, to indulge fear, and to tinge with the
dark colour of their own minds every ob-
jec which is offered for their encourage-
ment. The representations given us of the
Deity in Scripture afford undoubtedly much
ground for trust in his goodness. But the
perfection of an Almighty Being, who
dwelleth in the secret place of eternity,
whom no man hath seen or can fee, is over-
whelming to a timid apprehension. The
goodness which it promises is a new and
unknown form of goodness. Whatever
proceeds from a nature so far fuperiour to
our own, is beheld with a degree of awe

which

which is ready to overpower hope. Upon s ER M.

V.

this account, under the Old Testament dif- I
penfation, the Supreme Being is often de-
fcribed with the attributes of a man, in order
to give a shade and softening to his great-
ness, and to accommodate his goodness
more to our capacity. The relentings of a
friend, the pity of a parent, and the sighs
of a mourner, are ascribed to the Almighty.
But we easily perceive such attributes to be
no more than figures and allusions. The
comfort which they afford is not definite
nor precise. They leave the mind under
an anxious uncertainty left it err in its in-
terpretation of those allegories of mercy.
In the person of Jesus Christ the object of
our trust is brought nearer to ourselves;
and of course adapted more effectually to
our encouragement. Those well-known
tender affecions, which are only figura-
tively ascribed to the Divinity, are in our
great Mediator thoroughly realized. His
goodness is the goodness of human nature
exalted and rendered perfect. It is that
species of goodness with which, of all others,

VOL. It. K we

E R M. we are best acquainted, compassion to the
V.
>.--' unhappy; and companinon cultivated by

.that discipline whichl we know to be the
*most powerful, the experience of sorrows.

For such reasons as these, becazfie the clil-

dren are partakcrs off ejl and blood, Chrifi
hinielf likewise took part of the fame. In all
things it behoved hint to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a mercifil, as well
as afaithful high priel. When we confider
Ihis assumption of our nature in this light,
*what a mild and amiable afpecd does it give
to the governnient of heaven! What atten-
tive solicitude of goodness is fliewn in car-
rying on the dispensation of our redemption
upon a plan so perfectly calculated to banish
all difiruft, and to revive the most timid
and dejected heart! How naturally does
that inference follow which the Apostle
makes in the verse immediately succeeding
the text; let us therefore come boldly to the
throne of grace, that we may obtain merc',
andfnad grace to help in time of need! Aore
particularly, in consequence of the doctrine
which I have illustrated, we are taught to
hope,

I. THAT

.. THAT under all our infirmities and SERM.

errors, regard will be had to human im-
perfection; that a merciful distinction will
be made between what is weak and what is
wilfully criminal in our conduct; and that
such measures of obedience only will be cx-
aced as are proportioned to our circum-
stances and powers. What can more en-
courage our religious services, than to be
aflured that the God whom we worfiip
knows our frame, and remembers weie are dt;
and that the Mediator, through whom we
worship him, is touched with the feeling of
our infirmities ? The most virtuous are the
most apt to be deje&ed with the sense of
their frailty. While vain and superficial
men are easily flattered with favourable
views of themselves, and fond hopes of
divine acceptance, the 'slightest apprehen-
sion of guilt is ready to alarm the humble
and delicate mind; just as on coarse bodies
an impression is not easily made, while
those of finer contexture are soon hurt; and
as on an exqtcifite polish the least speck is
visible. But though religion promotes great

K 2 sensibility

S E R M. ferfibility to all feelings of a moral nature,

yet it gives no countenance to excessive and
superstitious fears. That humility which
checks presumption, and that jealousy which
inspires vigilance, are favourable to piety;
while those suspicions which lead to de-
fpondency are injurious to God, hurtful to
ourselves, and repugnant to that whole sys-
tem of mercy which I have been illustrating.

You complain, that when you engage in

the solemn exercises of devotion, your fpi-
rits are depressed by a load of cares and
sorrows; that in your thoughts there is no
composure, and in your affcCtions no ele-
vation; that after your utmost eflays you
are incapable of fixing your attention ftea-
dily on God, or of fending up your prayers
to him with becoming warmth' and fulness
of heart. This debility and wandering of
mind you are apt to impute to some uncom-
mon degree of guilt. You confider it as
the symptom of incurable hardness of heart,
and as a melancholy proof of your being
abandoned by God.-Such fears as these in
a great measure refute themselves. If you

were

were really obdurate, you would be insen- S E R M.

V.

fible of guilt. Your complaints of hardness
of heart are an evidence of your heart being
at that moment contrite and acually relent-
ing.-Are there any circumstances of in-
ward discomposure and perplexity of which
He is unconscious who at a critical period
of his life was beavy andrfore amazed '; who
was obliged to complain that his foul was
troubled withilz him; and to acknowledge,
that though the spirit was willing, yet the
fleJ waas weak ? To a fuperiour nature,
untouched with human frailty, you might
in such situations look up with iome degree
of terrour. But He who remembers the
itruggles of his own foul, will not, surely,
judge yours like a hard and unfeeling maf-
ter. Acquainted with the inmost recesses of
human nature, he perceives the sincerity of
your intentions; he fees the combat you
maintain; he knows how much of your
present confusion and disorder is to be im-
puted, not to your inclination and will, but
to an infirm, an aged or diseased body, or

* Madk xiv. 33,

K3 to

S E R M. to a weak and wounded spirit; and there-
.-... fore will be far from rejecing your attempts

to serve him, on account of the infirmities
which you lament. He hears the voice of
those secret aspirations which you are unable
to express in words, or to form into prayer.
Every penitential tear which your contrition
fileds, pleads your cause more powerfully
with him, than all the arguments with which
you could fill your mouth.

II. FROM our Saviour's experience of

human misery, we may justly hope that he
will so compassionately regard our difireffed
estate, as to prevent us from being loaded
with unneceflary troubles. He will not
wantonly add affliction to the afflided; nor
willingly crufll what he fees to be already
broken. In the course of that high admi-
nifiration which he now exercises, he may
indeed judge certain intermixtures of ad-
verfity to be proper for our imp.rovement.
These are trials of virtue through which all,
without exception, must pass. Rugged was
the road by which our divine Mediator him-

self

self went before us to glory; and by be- s E R M.
coming our companion in distress, he meant -
to reconcile us to our lot. He ennobled
adversity, by sharing it with us. He raised
poverty from contempt, by assuming it for
his own condition. The severity of his
trials tends to lighten ours. When the ge-
neral of an army lies on the fame hard
ground, drinks of the fame cold stream,
carries the fame weight of armour with the
lowest centincl, can any of his soldiers re-
pine at what they endure ?

Whatever afflicions our Lord may judge

to be necessary for us, of this we may reft
aflured, that he will deal them forth, not
with harsh and imperious authority, but
with the tenderness of one who knows from
experience how deeply the human heart is
wounded by every llroke of adversity. He
will not lay inore upon us than he fees we
are able to bear. boigbh he canfe grief, Jet
will he have coGmpj(io,; according. to the nml-
tirade of his lender m'r''ic. He wijlfa' hbis
rough wind in fhi' day7 of the eafi wind ".

* Ifaial xxvii. 8.

IK 4 For

S E R M. For it is his Rfate, but not his nature, which

V. ,-_-' is now changed. Notwithstanding his high

exaltation, he still retains the compationate
sentiments of the man of sorrows. Still, we
are assured by an inspired writer, he is not
ajhamed to call us his brhrthren . And with
the heart of a brother he regards those few
and troubled days, such as his own once
were, which good men are doomed to pass
in this evil world.

From his compafnion, indeed, we are not

to exped that fond indulgence or unfeafon-
able relief by which the weak pity of men
frequently injures its objecs. It is to the
material interests, more than to the present
ease, of good men, that he attends. When
under the impatience of sorrow we exclaim,
Hath he fogotten to be gracious ? hath he
in anger Jhlt up his tender mercies ? we re-
collec not in whose hands we are. His
compassion is not diminished when its ope-
rations are most concealed. It continues
equally to flow, though the channels by
which it is conduted towards us lie too

Heb. ii. ii.

deep

deep for our observation. Amidst our pre- SE R M.

V.

sent ignorance of what is good or ill for us 4.-
in this life, it is sufficient for us to know,
that the immediate administration of uni-
versal government is placed in the hands of
the moi: attentive and compassionate friend
of mankind. How greatly does this confi-
deration alleviate the burden of human woe!
How happily does it connect with the awful
dispensations of religion the mildest ideas of
tenderness and humanity!

III. THE text leads us to hope that

amidst all the infirmities of our state, both
under the temptations and under the dif-
tresses of life, our blessed Lord will afford
us a proper measure of assistance and sup-
port. In that he bath jltered being tempted,
he is able to fJ;cour them who either susser,
or are teCmpted *; that is, he is perfectly
qualified for discharging this beneficent
office; he knows exatly where the wound
bleeds, where the burden prefles, what re-
lief will prove most seasonable, and how it

* Heb. ii. 18.

can

SE R M. can be most successfully applied. The

V. L.... manner in which it is conveyed by him to

the heart we may be at a loss to explain;
but no argument can be thence drawn
against the credibility of the faa. The
operations which the power of God car-
sies on in the natural world are no less
mysterious than those which we are taught
to believe that his lpirit performs in the
moral world. If we can give no account
of what is every day before our eyes, how
a feed becomes a tree, or how the child
rifes into a man, is it any wonder that we
should be unable to explain how virtue is
supported, and constancy strengthened, by
God within the heart? If men by their
counsels and suggestions can influence the
minds of one another, muftnot divine fug-
geltion a.d counsel produce a much greater
effec ? Surely, the Father of Spirits must,
by a thousand ways, have access to the fpi-
rits which he has made, so as to give them
what determination, or impart to them
what affiflance he thinks proper, without
injuring their frame, or disturbing their
rational powers,

Accordingly,

Accordingly, wherever any notions of S ER M.

religion have taken place among mankind, -
this belief has in some measure prevailed,
that to the virtuous under distress aid was
communicated from above. This senti-
ment is so congruous to our natural impref-
sions of the divine benignity, that both
among poets and philosophers of anticnt
times it was a favourite idea, and often
occurs in their writings. But what among
them was no more than loose conje&ure or
feeble hope has received full confirmation
from the gospel of Christ. Not only is the
promise of divine afliftance expressly given
to Christians, but their faith in that promise
is strengthened by an argument which must
carry conviction to every heart. If Christ
had full experience of the insufficiency of
human nature to overcome the difficulties
wherewith it is now surrounded, will he
withhold from his followers that grace
without which he fees they mufl perish in
the evil day? If in the season of his tempt-
ation and distress, an angel was sent from

heaven

SE R M. heaven toJfregthben him *, shall no celeflial
v-v_ messenger be employed by him on the like

kind errand to those whom he files his
brethren? Can we believe that he who once
bore our grief and carried our sorrows will,
from that height of glory to which he is
now exalted, look down upon us here con-
tending with the ftormn of adversity, la-
bouring to follow his steps through the
steep and difficult paths of virtue, exposed
on every fide to arrows aimed against us by
the powers of darkness; and that, feeing our
distress, and hearing our supplications, he
will remain an unconcerned fpetator,
without vouchsafing us either assistance to
support our frailty, or protection to screen
us amidst surrounding dangers? Where
were then the benevolence of a divine Na-
ture? Where, the compassion of that medi-
atcr who was trained to mercy in the school
of sorrow? Far from us be such ungrateful
suspicions of the generous friend of human
kind!-Let us exert ourselves as we can,

* uke xxii. 43.

and

and we shall be aflifted. Let us pray, and SE R M.
we shall be heard; for there is one to pre- i-J
sent our prayers whom the father heareth
always. These, will he fay, are my fol-
lowers on earth, paeing through that thorny
path of temptation and sorrow which I once
trode. Now I am no more in the world;
but these are in the world. Holy Father!
thine they were, and thou gaveJf them me.
Keep them through thine own name. Sanc-

tify t them o thro y

tl truth. Keep them

from the evil one; that they may be where I
am, and may behold the glory which thou
hajf given me '.

Such is 'the comfort which arises to us

from our Saviour's participation of the in-
firmities of human nature;. and thus it may
be applied to various situations of anxiety
and distress.

WHEN we review what has been said,

it is necessary that, in the first place, I
guard you against a certain milimprove-
ment which may be made of this doctrine.

* John xvii.

The

SER M. The amiable view which it gives of our

V.
--v Lord's clemency may flatter some men

with unwarrantable hopes, and lead them to
imagine that in his experience of human
weakness an apology is to be found for
every crime. Persons of this charater
nuft be taught that his compassion differs
widely from that undiftinguiuhing and ca-
pricious indulgence which is sometimes
found among men. It is the compaflion of
an impartial mind, enlightened by wis-
dom and guided by justice, extending to
the frailties of the sincere, but not to the
fins of the'prefumptuous, and least of all to
the crimes of those who encourage them-
selves in evil from the hope that they Ihall
meet with compassion.

A course of deliberate guilt admits of no

apology from the weakness of human na-
ture. For notwithflanding all the infirmi-
ties incident to it, no man is under a ne-
cefirty of being wicked. So far is our Sa-
viour's experience of our nature from
affording any ground of hope to prefunmp-
tuous offenders, that it ought to fill them

S .8 with
:,.',

with terrour. For it shows them how tho- s E R M.
roughly qualified he is to discriminate
accurately the charaaers of men, and to
mark the boundaries between frailty and
perverseness. He who from his own feel-
ings well knows all the workings of the hu-
man heart, clearly discerns how different
their temper is from what was once his own.
He perceives that vice, not virtue, is
their choice; and that, instead of resisting
temptatioii, they resist conscience. He fees
that infirmity affords them no excuse; and
that the real cause of their ading a criminal
part, is not because they cannot do better,
but, in truth, because theywill not. Hav-
ing forfeited every title to compassion, they
are left in the hands of justice; and ac-
cording as they have Jown, they must ex-
peL to reap.

BUT, in the next place, to such as arc

sincere and upright, the dotrine which I
have illustrated affords high encouragement,
and powerfully recommends the Christian
Religion. It places that-religion in its pro-

per

SE RM. per point of view, as a medicinal plan, in-
L-,-i tended both for the recovery of mankind

from guilt, and for their consolation under
trouble. The law was given 1y Moses; but
grace and truth came by yefis Chrit. The
law was a dispensation of mere authority.
The Gospel is a dispensation, not of autho-
rity only, but of relief. If it discovers new
duties, and imposes new obligations, it opens
also sources of comfort which were beforC
unknown to the world.

A Mediator between God and his crea-

tures was an objea after which men in all
nations, and under all forms of religion,
had long and anxiously fought. The follies
of superstition have served to disclose to us,
-in this instance, the sentiments of nature.
The whole religion of Paganism was a iyi-
tem of' mediation and intercession. De-
pressed by a conscious sense of guilt, nature
shrunk at the thought of adventuring on a
direc approach to the Sovereign of the uni-
verse; and laboured to find out some aufpi-
cious introduacor to that awful presence.
With blind and trembling eagerness, the

6 nations

nations fled to subordinate deities, to tutelar S E R M.
gods, and to departed spirits, as their pa-
trons and advocates above. Them they
ltudied to sooth with such cosily gifts, such
pompous rites, or such humble fupplica-
tions, as they thought might incline them
to favour their cause, and to support their
interest with the Supreme Divinity. While
mankind were bewildered in this darkness,
the Gospel not only revealed the true Me-
diator, who in this view may be justly
called the desire of all nations, but placed his
characer and office in a light most admirably
fitted, as has been shewn in this Discourse,
to support the interest of virtue in the world;
and to encourage the humble, without flat-
tering the presumptuous. What plan of
religion could be more suited to the circum-
stances of man, or more worthy of the
goodness of his Creator? What more ani-
mating to the pious worshipper in perform-
ing those solemn ads of devotion to which
we are called by the service of this day ?

I CANNOT conclude without taking no-
tice how remarkably this dispensation of

VOL. II. L religion

S E M. religion is calculated to promote a spirit of

AI- humanity and compassion among men, by

those very means which it employs for in-
spiring devotion towards God. We are
now drawing nigh to the Supreme Being
through a Mediator, for whose companfion
we pray on account of the experience which
he has had of our frailty. We trust, that
having been acquainted with distress, he
will not defp/ie nor abhor the affitionl of the
affliced. The argument by which we plead
for his compassion concludes fill more
ftiongly for mutual charity, and sympathy
with one another. He who, in the midst
of the common sufferings of life, feels not
for the distressed; he who relents not at his
neighbour's griefs, nor scans his failings
with the eye of a brother, must be sensible
that he excludes himself from the commi-
feration of Christ. He makes void the ar-
gument by which he pleads for his mercy;
nay he establishes a precedent against him-
self. Thus the Christian religion approves
itself as worthy of God, by conneting de-
votion in ftriC union with charity. As in

its

its precepts the love of God and the love of s E RM.

V.

man are joined, so in its institutions the I
exercise of both is called forth; and to wor-
lhip God through the mediation of a com-
passionate high priest, necessarily supposes
in the worshippers a spirit of compassion
towards their own brethren.

L 2 SE R-

# SERMON VI. On the LOVE of PRAISE. JOHN xii. 43. For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.

[ 148 3
SERMON VI.

On the LOVE of PRAISE,

JO H N xii. 43.
For they loved the praie of men more than

the pra'e of God.

SERM. r HE state of man on earth is mani-
. ..-v. . fefeftly designed for the trial of his

virtue. Temptations every where occur;
and perpetual vigilance and attention are
required. There is no passion, or principle
of ation in his nature, which may not, if
left to itfelfy betray him into some criminal
excess. Corruption gains entrance, not only
by those pafions which are apparently of
dangerous tendency, such as covetousness,
and love of pleasure; but by means of those

also

also which are seemingly the most fair and s E R M.
innocent, filch as the desire of esteem and --
praise. Of this the text fuggcts a remark-
able instance. When our Lord appeared
in the land of Judxa, the purity of his doc-
trine, and the evidence of his miracles, ac-
quired him a considerable number of fol-
lowers, chiefly among the lower classes of
men. But the Pharisees, who were the
leading and fashionable fee, galled with
the freedom of his reproofs, decried him as
an impostor. Hence it came to pass, that
thoughfome of the rulers believed in him, yet,
beca.fe of the Phariiesr, they did not coifefs
him. Rulers, persons who, by their rank and
education, ought to have been fuperiour to
any popular prejudice, were so far overawed
by the opinions of others, as to stifle their
conviction, to dissemble their faith, and to
join with the prevailing party in condemn-
ing one whom in their hearts they revered:
for which, this realbn is given, that they
loved the prase of men more than the pratij
of God. Since, then, the love of praise can
miilead men into fich culpable and dilho-

L 3 nest

SE R ,. nest conduct, let us, with some attention,

Vi.

' examine the nature of this pafion. Let us

confider how far it is an allowable principle
of action; when it begins to be criminal;
and upon what accounts we ought to guard
against its acquiring the entire ascendant.

WE are intended by Providence to be con-

neted with one another in society. Single
unassisted individuals could make finall ad-
vances towards any valuable improvement.
By means of society our wants are supplied,
and our lives rendered comfortable; our
capacities are enlarged, and our virtuous as-
seCtions called forth into proper exercise.
In order to confirm our mutual conneCtion,
it was necessary that some attracting power,
which had the effect of drawing men toge-
ther, and strengthening the social ties, should
pervade the human system. Nothing could
more happily fulfil this purpose, than our
being so formed as to desire the esteem, and
to delight in the good opinion, of each other.
Had such a propensity been wanting, and
selfish principles left to occupy its place, so-

-rl~~ X cicty

ciety must have proved an unharmonious S ERM.
and discordant state. Instead of mutual at-
tracion, a repulsive power would have pre-
vailed. Among men who had no regard
to the approbation of one another, all in-
tercourfe would have been jarring and of-
fenfive. For the wisest ends, therefore, the
desire of praise was made an original and
powerful principle in the human breast.

To a variety of good purposes it is sub-

servient, and on many occasions co-operates
with the principle of virtue. It awakens
us from sloth, invigorates acivity, and
stimulates our efforts to excel. It has given
rife to most of the splendid, and to many of
the useful enterprizes of men. It has ani-
mated the patriot, and fired the hero. Mag-
nanimity, generosity and fortitude are what
all mankind admire. Hence such as were
aduated by the desire of extensive fame,
have been prompted to deeds which either
participated of the spirit, or, at least, car-
ried the appearance of difinguifhed virtue.
The desire of praise is generally conneced
with all the finer sensibilities of human na-

L 4 turn,

s ER M. ture. It.affords a ground on which exhort-

VJ.

_--- ation, counsel and reproof can work a pro-

per effet. Whereas to be entirely destitute
of this paflion betokens an ignoble mind,
on which no moral impression is easily
made. Where there is no desire of praise,
there will be also no sense of reproach; and
if that be extinguished, one of the princi-
pal guards of virtue is removed, and the
mind thrown open to many opprobrious
pursuits. He whose countenance never
glowed with shame, and whose heart never
beat at the found of praise, is not destined
for any honourable diftinaion; is likely to
grovel in the fordid quest of gain, or to
slumber life away in the indolence of felfifli
pleasures.

Abftrading from the sentiments which

are connected with the love of praise as a
principle of acion, the esteem of our fel-
low-creatures is an objeft which, on ac-
count of the advantages it brings, may be
lawfully pursued. It is necessary to our
success in every fair and honest undertak-
ing. Not only our private interest, but our

pubici

public usefulness, depends in a great measure s E R M.

VI.

upon it. The sphere of our influence is *-r-
contraced or enlarged in proportion to the
degree in which we enjoy the good opinion
of the public. Men liften with an unwil-
ling ear to one whom they do not honour;
while a refpeted charater adds weight to
example, and authority to counsel. To
desire the esteem of others for the fake of
its effecs is not only allowable, but in ma-
ny cafes is our duty: and to be totally in-
different to praise or censure, is so far from
being a virtue, that it is a real defet in
characer.

BUT while the love of praise is admitted

to be in so many refpeds a natural and use-
ful principle of action, we are at the fame
time to observe that it is entitled to no more
than our secondary regard. It has its
boundaries set; by transgressing which, it is
at once transformed from an innocent into a
xnoft dangerous paflion. More sacred and
venerable principles claim the chief direc-
tion of human conduct. All the good es-

feEts

E R M. feds which we have ascribed to the desire
VI.
*- - ofpraife, are produced by it when remain-

ing in a Subordinate station. But when
passing its natural line, it becomes the ru-
ling spring of conduCt; when the regard
which we pay to the opinions of men, in-
croaches on that reverence which we owe
to the voice of conscience and the sense of
duty; the love of praise having then gone
out of its proper place, instead of improv-
ing, corrupts; and instead of elevating, de-
bases our nature. The proportion which this
paflion holds to other principles of acion is
what renders it either innocent or criminal.
The crime with which the Jewish rulers are
charged in the text, was not that they loved
the praise of men; but that they loved it
more than the praise of God.

Even in cafes where there is no direc

competition between our duty and our
fancied honour, between the praise of men
and the praise of God, the passion for ap-
plause may become criminal by occupying
the place of a better principle. When vain-
glory usurps the throne of virtue; when

ostentation

ostentation produces aaions which confci- S ER M.
ence ought to have ditated; such aaions,
however specious, have no claim to moral
or religious praise. We know that good
deeds done merely to be seen of men lose
their reward with God. If, on occasion of
some trying conjuncure which makes us
hesitate concerning our line of condut, the
first question which occurs to us be, not
whether an action is right in iffelf, and such
as a good man ought to perform, but whe-
ther it is such as will find acceptance with
the world, and be favourable to our fame,
the conclusion is too evident that the desire
ofapplaufe has obtained an undue ascendant.
What a wife and good man ought to study,
is to preserve his mind free from any such
solicitude concerning praise as may be in
hazard of overcoming his sense of duty.
The approbation of men he may wish to
obtain, as far as is confident with the ap-
probation of God. But when both cannot
be enjoyed together, there ought to be no
fufpence. He is to retire contented with
the testimony of a good conscience; and to

show

sE R M. show by the firmness of his behaviour, that,
k_ in the cause of truth and virtue, he is fupe-

riour to all opinion.-Let us now proceed
to confider the arguments which should
fipport such a spirit, and guard us against
the improper influence of praise or censure
in the course of our duty.

IN the first place, the praise of men is

not an objea of any fich value in itself as
to be entitled to be oome the leading princi-
ple of conduc. We degrade our charac-
ter when.we allow it more than iibordinate
regard. Like other worldly goods, it is
apt to dazzle us with a false lustre; but if
we would ascertain its true worth, let us
refle both on whom it is bestowed, and
from whom it proceeds. Were the applause
of the world always the reward of merit;
were it appropriated to fich alone as by real
abilities, or by worthy acions, are entitled
to rife above the crowd, we might justly
be flattered by poffelfing a rare and valuable
diftincion. But how far is this from be-
ing the cafe in fact ? How often have the

defijicable

despicable and the vile, by dexterously S E R M.

VI.

catching the favour of the multitude, soared ,_--
upon the wings of popular applause, while
the virtuous and the deserving have been
either buried in obscurity, or obliged to
encounter the attacks of unjust reproach ?
The laurels which human praise confers are
withered and blasted by the unworthiness
of those who wear them. Let the man
who is vain of public favour be humbled by
the refle&ion that, in the midfl of his fuc-
cess, he is mingled with a crowd of impof-
tors and deceivers, of hypocrites and en-
thufiafts, of ignorant pretenders and super-
ficial reasoners, who, by various arts, have
attained as high a rank as himself in tem-
porary fame.

We may easily be satisfied that applause

will be often flared by the undeferving, if
we allow ourselves to confider from whom
it proceeds. When it is the approbation of
the wife only and the good which is pur-
sued, the love of praise may then be ac-
counted to contain itself within just bounds,
and to run in its proper channel. But the

8 tetfitnony

s E R M. testimony of the discerning few, modest and

._ unafluming as they commonly are, forms

but a fmrall part of the public voice. It fel-
dom amounts to more than a whisper, which
amidst the general clamour is drowned.
When the love of praise has taken possession
of the mind, it confines not itself to an ob-
jet so limited. It grows into an appetite
for indiscriminate praise. And who are
they that confer this praise ? A mixed mul-
titude of men, who inl their whole conduct
are guided by humour and caprice, far more
than by reason; who admire false appear-
ances, and pursue false goods; who inquire
superficially, and judge rashly; whose senti-
ments are for the most part erroneous, always
changeable, and often inconsistent. Nor
let any one imagine, that by looking above
the crowd, and courting the praise of the
fashionable and the great, he makes sure of
true honour. There are a great vulgar, as
well as a small. Rank often makes no dif-
ference in the understandings of men, or in
theirjudicious diftributionofpraife. Luxury,
pride, and vanity, have frequently as much

influence
t,

influence in corrupting the sentiments of S E R M.
the great, as ignorance, bigotry, and pre- V_
judice, have in misleading the opinions of
the crowd.-And is it to such judges as
these that you submit the supreme direction
of your condut ? T)o you stoop to court
their favour as your chief distinction, when
an object of so much juster and higher am-
bition is presented to you in the praie of
God? God is the only unerring judge of
what is excellent. His approbation alone
is the fubflance, all other praise is but the
fladow, of honour. The character which
you bear in his fight is your only real one.
How contemptible does it render you to be
indifferent with refped to this, and to be
solicitous about a name alone, a fictitious,
imaginary character, which has no exist-
ence except in the opinions of a few weak
and credulous men around you ? They fee
no farther than the outside of things. They
can judge of you by actions only; and not
by the comprehensive view of all your ac-
tions, but by such merely as you have had
opportunity of bringing forth to public no-

tice.

s E R M tice. But the Sovereign of the world be-

VI.
, --- holds you in every light in which you can

be placed. The silent virtues of a 'generous
purpose and a pious heart attrac his notice
equally with the most splendid deeds. From
him you may reap the. raise of good ations
which you had no opportunity of perform-
ing. For he fees them in their principle;
he judges of you by your intentions; he
knows what you would have done. You
may be in his eyes a hero or a martyr,
without undergoing the labours of the one,
or the sufferings of the other. His infpec-
tion, therefore, opens a much wider field
for praise than what the world can afford
you; and for praise, too, certainly far more
illustrious in the eye of reason. Every real
artist studies to approve himself to such as
areknowing inhisart. To theirjudgment
he appeals. On their approbation he refts
his charaaer, and not on the praise of the
unskilled and rude. In the highest art of
all, that of life and conduct, ihall the opi-
nions of ignorant men come into the mofd
-distant competition with his approbation

who

who is the searcher of all hearts, and the S E R M.

VI.

standard of all perfetion ?-The testimony --
of his praise is not indeed, as yet, openly
bestowed. But though the voice of the Al-
mighty found not in your ears, yet by con-
science, his sacred vicegerent, it is capable
of being conveyed to your heart. The
softest whisper of divine approbation is
sweeter to the foul of a virtuous iman, than
the loudest shouts of that tumultuary ap-
plause which proceeds from the world.

Confider, farther, how narrow and cir-

cumfcribed in its limits that fame is which
the vain-glorious man so eagerly pursues.
In order to shew him this, I ihall not bid
him reflea that it is confined to a small
diftriat of the earth; and that when he looks
a little beyond the region which he inhabits,
he will find himself as much unknown as
the most obscure person around him. I
(hall not desire him to confider, that in the
gulph of oblivion, where all human me-
morials are swallowed up, his name and
fame must soon be inevitably loft. He may
imagine that ample honours remain to gra-

VOL. II. L tify

S E M. tify ambition, though his reputation extend
x-__L3 not over the whole globe, nor last till the

end of time. But let him calmly reflect,
that within the narrow boundaries of that
country to which he belongs, and during
that small portion of time which his life fills
up, his reputation, great as he may fancy
it to be, occupies no more than an incon-
fiderable corner. Let him think what mul-
titudes of those among whom he dwells are
totally ignorant of his name and characer;
how many imagine themselves too import-
ant to regard him; how many are too much
occupied with their own wants and pursuits
to pay him the least attention; and where
his reputation is in any degree spread, how
often it has been attacked, and how many
rivals are daily rising to abate it: Having
attended to these circumstances, he will find
sufficient materials for humiliation in the
midst of the highest applause.-- From all
these considerations it clearly appears, that
though the esteem of our fellow-creatures
be pleating, and the pursuit of it, in a mo-
derate degree, be fair and lawful, yet that

6 it

it affords no such object to desire as entitles s E M.
it to be a ruling principle. _

IN the second place, an excessive love of

praise never fails to undermine the regard
due to conscience, and to corrupt the heart.
It turns off the eye of the mind from the
ends which it ought chiefly to keep in view;
and sets up a false light for its guide. Its
influence is the more dangerous, as the co-
lour which it assumes is often fair; and its
garb and appearance are hearly allied to
that of virtue. The love of glory, I before
admitted, may give birth to adions which
are both splendid and useful. At a distance
they firike the eye with uncommon bright-
hess; but on a nearer and striaer survey,
their lustre is often tarnished They are
found to want that sacred and venerable dig-
nity which characterizes true virtue. Little
passions and selfish interests entered into the
motives of thofewho performed them. They
Were jealous of a competitor. They fought
to humble a rival. They looked round for
Ipectators to admire them. All is magna-

M 2 mnifrit,

SE RM. nimity, generosity, and courage, to public
- _--i view. But the ignoble source whence these

teeming virtues take their rife is hidden.
Without, appears the hero; within, is found
the man of dust and clay. Consult such as
have been intimately connected with the
followers of renown; and seldom or never
will you find that they held them in the
fame esteem with those who viewed them
from afar. There is nothing except fim-
plicity of intention, and purity of principle,
that can stand the test of near approach and
striCt examination.

But supposing the virtue of vain-glorious

men not to be always false, it certainly can-
not be depended upon as firm or sure. Con-
ftancy and steadiness are to be looked for
from him only whose conduct is regulated
by a sense of what is right; whose praie is
not of men, but of God; whose motive to dif-
charge his duty is always the fame. Change,
as much as you please, the, situation of such
a TIan; let applause or let censure be his
lot; let the public voice, which this day has
extolled him, to-itlorrow as loudly decry

1~~~~I. . him;

him; on the tenour of his behaviour these SE RM.

vI.

changes produce no effect. He moves in a
higher sphere. As the fun in his orbit is
not interrupted by the mists and storms of
the atmosphere below, so, regardlcfs of the
opinions of men, throgtgb honour and di-
honour, through good report and bad report,
he pursues the path which .conscience has
marked out. Whereas the apparent virtues
of that man whose eye is fixed on the world,
are precarious and temporary. Supported
only by circumstances, occasions, and par-
ticular regards, they fluctuate and fall with
these. Excited by public admiration, they
disappear when it is withdrawn; like those
exhalations which, raised by heat from the
earth, glitter in the air with momentary
splendour, and then fall back to the ground
from whence they sprung.

The intemperate love of praise not only

weakens the true principles of probity, by
substituting inferior motives in their tead,
but frequently also impels men -to aCions
which are direaly criminal. It obliges them
to follow the current of popular opinion

M 3 whither-

s E R M. whithersoever it may carry them; and hence

VI

. JJipwreck is often made both of sith and of

a good conscience. According as circum-
stances lead them to court the acclamations
of the multitude, or to pursue the applause
of the great, vices of different kinds will
Rain their character. In one situation they
will make hypocritical professions of reli-
gion. In another, they will be ashamed of
their Redeemer, and of his words. They
will be afraid to appear in their own form,
or to utter their genuine sentiments. Their
whole character will become ficitious; opi-
nions will be assumed, speech and behaviour
modelled, and even the countenance formed,
as prevailing taste exacs. From one who
has submitted to such prostitution for the
fake of praise, you can no longer expec
fidelity or attachment on any trying occa-
sion. In private life, he will be a timorous
and treacherous friend. In public conduct
he will be supple and versatile; ready to de-
fert the cause which he had espoused, and
to veer with every shifting wind of popular
favour. In fine, all becomes unsound and

hollow

hollow in that heart where, instead of re- S ER M.
gard to the divine approbation, there reigns
the fovercign desire of pleasing men.

IN the third place, this passion, when it

becomes predominant, most commonly de-
feats its own end, and deprives men of the
honour which they are so eager to gain.
Without preserving liberty and independ-
ence, we can never command refped.
That servility of spirit which fubjets us to
the opinions of others, and renders us tri-
butaries to the world for the fake of ap-
plause, is what all mankind despise. They
look up with reverence to one who, un-
awed by their censures, ads according to
his own sense of things, and follows the free
impulse of an honourable mind. But him
who hangs totally on their judgment, they
confider as their vassal. They even enjoy
a malignant pleasure in humbling his vanity,
and withholding that praise which he is seen
to court. By artifice and show he may
fline for a time in the public eye; but it is
only as long as he can support the belief of

M 4 acting

SE R M. acling from principle. When the incopn-

VI.
-,_ fiftencies into which he falls deteCt his cha-

racter, his reputation passes away, like the
pageant of a day. No man ever obtained
lasting fame who did not, on several occa-
sions, contradic the prejudices of popular
opinion.

There is no course of behaviour which

will at all times please all men. That which
pleases most universally, and which only
commands durable praise, is religion and
virtue. Sincere piety towards God, kind
affection to men, and fidelity in the dif-
charge of all the duties of life; a conscience
pure and undefiled; a heart firm to justice
and to truth, fuperiour to all terrours that
would shake, and insensible to all pleasures
that would betray it; unconquerable by the
opposition of the world, and resigned to
God alone; these are the qualities which
render a man truly refpedtable and great.
Such a character may, in evil times, incur
unjust reproach. But the clouds which envy
or prejudice has gathered around it will gra-
dually disperse; and its brightness will come

forth,

forth, in the end, as the noon day. As SE RRM
soon as it is thoroughly known, it finds a ---
witness in every breast. It forces approba-
tion even from the most degenerate. The
human heart is so formed as to be attuned,
if we may use the expression, to its praise.
In facd, it is this firm and inflexible virtue,
this determined regard to principle beyond
all opinion, which has crowned the charac-
ters of such as now stand highest in the rolls
of lasting fame. The truly illustrious are
they who did not court the praise of the
world, but who performed the attions which
deserved it. They were perhaps traduced,
in their lifetime, by those whom they op-
posed. But posterity has done them ample
justice; and they are the men whom the
voice of ages now concurs in celebrating.
The memorial of virtue is immortal; becaife
it is approved of Godad d of men. f'When it
is present, men take example at it; and whlcc
it is gone, they desire it. It weareth a cirowin,
and trizmnpheth for ever; having gotten Ihe
vic7ory ; Jlrivitgfor undefiled rewards '.

Wisdom of Solomon, iv. I, z.

IN

SE R M. IN the fourth place, as an immoderate

Vi.
AnJ passion for human praise is dangerous to vir-

tue, and unfavourable to true honour, so it
is deftrudivxe of felf-enjoyment and in-
ward peace. Regard to the praise of God
prescribes a simple and confitent tenour of
condut, which in all situations is the fame;
which engages us in no perplexities, and
requires no artful refinement. Walking
iprightly, we walkfirely, because we tread
an even and open path. But he who turns
aside from the straight road of duty in order
to gain applause, involves himself in an in-
tricate labyrinth. He will be often embar-
raffed concerning the course which he ought
to hold. His mind will be always on the
firetch. He will be obliged to liften with
anxious attention to every whisper of the
popular voice. The demands of those ma-
flers whom he has submitted to serve, will
,prove frequently contraditory and incon-
fiftent. He has prepared a yoke for his
neck which he must resolve to bear, how
much focvcr it may gall him.

The

The toils of virtue are honourable. The s ER M.

VI.

mind is supported under them by the con- _
fcioufnefs of ading a right and becoming
part. But the labours to which he is doom-
ed who is enslavcd to the desire of praise,
are aggravated by reflexion both on the un-
certainty of the recompence which he pur-
sues, and on the debasement to which he
submits. Conscience will from time to
time remind him of the improper sacrifices
which he has made, and of the forfeiture
which he has incurred of the praise of God
for the fake of praise from men. Suppose
him to receive all the rewards which the
mistaken opinion of the world can bestow,
its loudest applause will often be unable to
drown the upbraidings of an inward voice;
and if a man is reduced to be ashamed of
himself, what avails it him to be caressed by
others ?

But, in truth, the reward towards which

he looks who proposes human praise as his
ultimate objeEt, will be always flying, like
a shadow, before him. So capricious and
uncertain, so fickle and mutable is the fa-

vour

S ER M. vbir of the multitude; that it proves the
,_LC - mofl unfatisfaCory of all pursuits in which

men can be engaged. He who sets his
heart on it, is preparing for himself perpe-
tual mortifications. If the greatest and belt
can seldom retain it long, we may easily
believe that from the vain and undeferving
it will suddenly escape. There is no cha-
rader but what on some fide is vulnerable
by censure. He who lifts himself up to the
observation and notice of the world is, of
all men, the least likely to avoid it. For
he draws upon himself a thousand eyes that
will narrowly infpet him in every part.
Every opportunity will be watched of bring-
ing him down to the common level. His
errours will be more divulged, and his in-
firmities more magnified, than those of
others. In proportion to his eagerness for
praise will be his sensibility to reproach.
Nor is it reproach alone that will wound
him. He will be as much dejeaed by si-
lence and neglet. He puts himself under
the power of every one to humble him,
by with-holding expected praise. Even

when

when praise is beflowed, he is mortified SERM,

VI.

by its being either faint or trite. He pines
when his reputation stagnates. The degree
of applause to which he has been accustom-
ed grows insipid; and to be always praised
from the fame topics, becomes at last much
the fame with not being praised at all.

All these chagrins and disquietudes are

happily avoided by him who keeps so trou-
blefome a passion within its due bounds;
who is more desirous of being truly worthy
than of being thought so; who pursues the
praise of the world with manly temperance,
and in subordination to the praise of God.
He is neither made giddy by the intoxicat-
ing vapour of applause, nor humbled and
cast down by the unmerited attacks of cen-
sure. Refting on a higher approbation he
enjoys himself in peace, whether human
praise stays with him, or flies away. With
me it is afinall thing to bejudged of you, or of
,man's judgment. He that judgeth me is the
Lord. My witness is in Heaven, and my
record is on high.

I>

SER M. IN the fifth and last place, the advari-

VI.
_ ~J. tages which redound from the praise of men,

are not such as can bear to be put in com-
petition with those which flow from the
praise of God. The former are necessarily
confined within the verge of our present
existence. The latter follow us beyond
the grave, and extend through all eternity.
Not only is the praise of men limited in its
effects to this lifei but also to particular fitua-
tions of it. In the days of health and ease
it may brighten the funihine of prosperity.
It may then sooth the ear with pleasing ac-
cents, and gratify the imagination with fan-
cied triumphs. But when the distressful
seasons of life arrive, it will be found alto-
gether hollow and unsubstantial: And sure-
ly, the value of any pofleffion is to be chiefly
estimated by the relief which it can bring
us in the time of our greatest need. When
the mind is cast down with sorrow and
grief, when sickness spreads its gloom
around us, or death rites in awful profpeC
to our view, the opinions and the dif-
courses of the world will appear trifling and

infig.

insignificant. To one who is occupied s ER M
with nearer and more affecQing interests,
the praise or the censure of the world will
seem like the noise of dillant voices, in
which he has imnall concern. But then is
the season when the praise of God supports
and upholds the labouring foul. Brought
home to the heart by the testimony of a
good conscience, and by the divine fsSirit
bearing wiitnefS withJ our spirts, it inspires
fortitude, and produces a peace uwhich pajeth
w/iderJi??adiig.

At present we behold an irregular and

disordered state of'things. Virtue is often
deprived of its proper honours, and vice
usurps them in its stead. The charaters of
men are mistaken; and ignorance and folly
dispose of human applause. But the day
baftens apace which shall close this scene of
errours, and vindicate the rights of justice
and truth. Then Jhal be rendered to every
man according to his works. Envy shall no
longer have the power of obscuring merit,
nor popular prejudices be able to support
the undelerving. Hidden worth shall be

brought

E R M. brought to light, and secret crimes revealed.
.--v-' Many who passed through the world in the

silent obscurity of humble, but fReady good-
ness, shall be distinguished as the favourites
of Heaven; while the proud, the ambitious,
and the vain, are left to everlasting difho-
nour. The great Judge hath declared, that
whofJever has been aJIamed of him and of his
words, of that man faall he be anJamed when
he cometh in the glory of his Father, with all
the holy angels. Every departure from duty
shall at the period of final distribution ter-
minate in ignominy. True honour and true
virtue ihall be seen to coincide; and when
all human fame has passed away like finoke,
the only praise which flmal be for ever re-
membered is that divine testimony, Well
done, thou good and faitlful servant: enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord.

THESE arguments clearly flhow the im-

portance of preserving the love of praise
under proper subordination to the principle
of duty. In itself, it is an useful motive to
aCtion; but when allowed to extend its

influence

influence too far, it corrupts the whole S ERM.
character, and produces guilt, disgrace, and --
misery. To be entirely destitute of it, is
a defed. To be governed by it, is depra-
vity. The proper adjustment of the several
principles of ation in human nature is a
matter that deserves our highest attention.
For when any one of them becomes either
too weak or too strong, it endangers both
our virtue and our happiness. Keep thy
heart therefore with all diligence; pray that
Ga6 would enable thee to keep it with fuc-
cess; for out of the heart are the iffies of

fe. . N S R
VOL. II. N SER-

# SERMON VII. On the proper ESTIMATE of HUMAN LIFE. ECCLESIASTES xii. 8. Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher, all is vanity.

78 3

S E R M ON VII.
On the proper ESTIMATE of Hu IAN LIrE.

ECCLESIASTES xii. 8.
Vanity of vanities, faith the preacher, all is

vanity.

S E R M. T 0 serious maxim has been more ge-

. ._.
L 1. nerally adopted than that of the text.

In every age, the vanity of human life has
been the theme of declamation, and the fuib-
jea of complaint. It is a conclusion in which
men of all charaters and ranks, the high
and the low, the young and the old, the
religious and the worldly, have more fre-
quently concurred than in any other. But
how just soever the conclusion may be, the
premises from which it is drawn are often

sal'e.
II ,

false. For it is prompted by various mo- SER M-
tives, and derived from very different views _
of things. Sometimes the language of the
text is assumed by a sceptic who cavils at
Providence, and censures the constitution of
the world. Sometimes it is the complaint
of a peevish man who is discontented with
his station, and ruffled by the disappoint-
ment of unreasonable hopes. Sometimes it
is the flyle of the licentious, when groan-
ing under miseries in which their vices have
involved them. Invecives against the va-
nity of the world which come from any of
these quarters deserve no regard; as they
are the dicates of impiety, of spleen, or of
folly. The only cafe in which the senti-
ment of the text claims our attention, is
when uttered, not as an afperlion on Pro-
vidence, or a reflecion on human affairs in
general; not as th. language of private dil-
content, or the result of guilty fifferings;
but as the fober conclusion of a wife and
good man concerning the imperfeCtion of
that happiness which refts solely on worldly
pleasures. These, in their fairest form, are

N 2 not

S E RM. not what they seem to be. They never
A_. v-beftow that complete fatisfadion which they

promise; and therefore he who looks to
nothing beyond them shall have frequent
cause to deplore their vanity.

Nothing is of higher importance to us as

men and as Christians, than to form a proper
estimate of human life, without either load-
ing it with imaginary evils, or expefcing
from it greater advantages than it is able to
yield. It shall be my business, therefore,
in this Discourse, to distinguish a just and
religious sense of the vanity of the world
from the unreasonable complaints of it which
we often hear. I mflall endeavour, I. To
shew in what sense it is true that all earthly
pleasures are vanity. II. To inquire how
this vanity of the world can be reconciled
with the perfecions of its great Author.
III. To examine whether there are not
tome real and solid enjoyments in human
life which fall not under this general charge
of vanity. And, IV. To point out the
proper improvement to be made of such a
state as the life of man shall appear on the
whole to be.

I, I AM

I. I AM to shew in what sense it is true s ER ^M.

that all human pleasures are vanity. This -
is a topic which might be embelliihed with
the pomp of much description. But I shall
studiously avoid exaggeration, and only
point out a threefold vanity in human life
which every impartial observer cannot but
admit; disappointment in pursuit, difatif-
facion in enjoyment, uncertainty in pof-
feflion.

First, disappointment in pursuit. When

we look around us on the world, we every
where behold a busy multitude, intent on
the prosecution of various designs which
their wants or desires have fuggeiled. We
behold them employing every method which
ingenuity can devise, some the patience of
industry, Iome the boldness of enterprise,
others the dexterity of stratagem, in order
to compass their ends. Of this incessant stir
and activity, what is the fruit ? In compa-
riion of the crowd who have toiled in vain,
how finall is the number of the successful ?
Or rather, where is the man who will de-
clare that in every point he has completed

N 3 his

S E R nI. his plan, and attained his utmost wifi ? No

VII.
- extent of human abilities has been able to

discover a path which, in any line of life,
leads unerringly to success. The race is not
nzays o thi , nor the battl to

tthefirong,

nor riches to meC of Underfa1nd iin. We may
form our plans with the molt profound fa-
gacity, and with the most vigilant caution
may guard against dangers on every fide.
But some unforefcen occurrence comes across
which baffles our wisdom, and lays ou; la-
bours in the dust.

Were such disappointments confined to

those who aspire at engrossing the higher
departments of life, the misfortune were
less. The humiliation of the mighty, and
the fall of ambition from its towering height,
little concern the bulk of mankind. Thcfe
are objeCts on which, as on distant meteors,
they gaze from afar, without drawing per-
fonal infiruction from events so much at)ovc
them. But, alas! when we descend into
the regions of private life, we find dilap-
pointment and blasted hope cqually preva-
lent there. Neither the moderation of our

\icvs,

views, nor the juflice of our prcenfions, can s E P M.
ensure iuccefs. But tiim and chaice hajeri -c--
to all. Against the stream of events both
the worthy and the undeferving are obliged
to struggle; and both are frequently over-
born alike by the current.

BESIDES disappointment in pursuit, dif-

fatisfation in enjoyment is a farther vanity
to which the human state is fubjert. This
is the severest of all mortifications, after
having been successful in the pursuit, to be
baffled in the enjoyment iticlf. Yet this is
found to be an evil still more general than
the former. Some may be so fortunate as
to attain what they have pursued; but none
are rendered completely happy by what they
have attained. Disappointed hope is mi-
fery; and yet successful hope is only im-
perfet bliss, Look through all the ranks
of mankind. Examine the condition of
those who appear most prosperous; and yout
will find that they are never just what they
desire to be. If retired, they languish for
aftion; if busy, they complain of fatigue,

N4 If

S ER M. If in middle life, they are impatient for dif-
i-,-i jtindion; if in high stations, they sigh after

freedom and ease. Something is still want-
ing to that plenitude of fatisfadion which
they expeced to acquire. Together with
every wiih that is gratified, a new demand
arises. One void opens in the heart, as
another is filled. On wiihes, withes grow;
and to the end, it is rather the expectation
of what they have not, than the enjoyment
of what they have, which occupies and in-
tereits the most successful.

This diffatisfaaion in the midst of hu-

man pleasure springs partly from the nature
of our enjoyments themselves, and partly
from circumstances which corrupt them.
No worldly enjoyments are adequate to the
high desires and powers of an immortal fpi-
rit. Fancy paints them at a distance with
splendid colours; but possession unveils the
fallacy. The eagerness of passion bestows
upon them at first a brisk and lively reliflh.
But it is their fate always to pall by fami-
liarity, and sometimes to pass from satiety
into disgust. Happy would the poor man

think

think himself if he could enter on all the SERM.
treasures of the rich ; and happy for a short
while he might be. But before he had long
contemplated and admired his state, his pof-
sessions would seem to lessen, and his cares
would grow.

Add to the unsatisfying nature of our

pleasures the attending circumstances which
never fail to corrupt them. For, such as
they are, they are at no time pofiefled un-
mixed. To human lips it is not given to
taste the cup of pure joy. When external
circumstances show fairest to the world, the
envied man groans in private under his own
burden. Some vexation disquiets, some pai-
sion corrodes him; some diftreis, either felt
or feared, gnaws, like a worm, the root of
his felicity. When there is nothing from
without to dilfurb the prosperous, a secret
poison operates within. For worldly hap-
piness ever tends to destroy itself, by cor-
rupting the heart. It softers the loose and the
violent paflions. It engenders noxious habits;
and taints the mind with a false delicacy,
which makes it feel a thoulfnd unreal evils.

BUT

S ER M BUT put the cafe in the most favourable
i-f-_' light. Lay aside from human pleafires

both disappointment in pursuit, and deceit-
fulness in enjoyment; suppose them to be
fully attainable, and completely fatisfatory;
fill there remains to be confidered the va-
nity of uncertain pofilefion and short dura-
tion. Were there in worldly things any
fixcd point of security which we could gain,
the mind would then have fomne basis on
which to reft. But our condition is such,
that every thing wavers and totters around
us. BoaJi not thfelf of to-morrow; for
thou. kizowefi not what a day y bring forth.
It is much if, during its course, thou hearest
not of somewhat to disquiet or alarm thee.
For life never proceeds long in an uniform
train. It is continually varied by unex-
pcted events. The feeds of alteration are
every where sown; and the funrhine of
prosperity commonly accelerates their
growth. If your enjoyments be numerous,
you lie more open on different fides to be
wounded. If you have possessed them long,
you have greater cause to dread an ap-

proachilg

proaching change. By flow degrees pro- s E RM.
fpcrity rifes; but rapid is the progress of ..-,
evil. It requires no preparation to bring
it forward. The edifice which it cofl much
time and labour to erec, one inauspicious
event, one sudden blow, can level with the
dust. Even supposing the accidents of life
to leave us untouched, human bliss muii
still be transitory; for man changes of him-
self. No course of enjoyment can delight
us long. What anused our youth Joses its
charm in maturer age. As years advance,
our powers are blunted, and our pleasurable
feelings decline. The silent lapse of time
is ever carrying somewhat from us, till at
length the period comes when all must be
swept away. The profpet of this termina-
tion of our labours and pursuits is fufficicnt
to mark our state with vanity. Our days
are a hnad-breadth, and our age is as no-
thi;Ng. Within that little space is all our
enterprise bounded. We crowd it with
toils and cares, with contention and firife.
We projed great designs, entertain high
hopes, and then leave our plans unfinifled,
and fink into oblivion. T

this
3

E R M. This much let it suffice to have said con-
VII. -,_- cerning the vanity of the world. That

too much has not been said, must appear
to every one who confiders how generally
mankind lean to the opposite fide; and how
often by undue attachment to the present
tate, they both feed the most sinful pas-
sions, and fierce thenfelves through with malnyv
sorrows. Let us proceed to enquire,

II. How this Vanity of the world can be

reconciled with the perfections of its divine
Author. This enquiry involves that great
difficulty which has perplexed the thought-
ful and serious in every age; If God be
good, whence the evil that fills the earth ?
In answer to this interesting question, let us
observe,

In the first place, that the present condi-

tion of man was not his original or primary
state. We are informed by divine revela-
tion, that it is the consequence of his volun-
tary apoftacy from God and a state of inno-
cence. By this, his nature was corrupted;
his powers were enfeebled; and vanity and

vexation
i

vexation introduced into his life. All na- SE R M,
ture became involved in the condemnation
of man. The earth was cursed upon his
account, and the whole creation made to
groan and travail in pain.

How mysterious soever the account of

this fall may appear to us, many circum-
stances concur to authenticate the sac, and
to show that human nature and the human
rtate have undergone an unhappy change.
The belief of this has obtained in almoit all
nations and religions. It can be traced
through all the fables of antiquity. An ob-
fcure tradition appears to have pervaded
the whole earth, that man is not now what
he was at first; but that, in consequence of
some tranigreffion against his great Lord,
a state of degradation and exile succeeded
to a condition that was more flourishing and
happy. As our nature carries plain marks
of perversion and disorder, so the world
which we inhabit bears the fymptomis of
having been convulsed in all its frame.
Naturalists point out to us every where the
traces of some violent change which it has

suffered.

SE R M, suffered. Illands torn from the continent,
VII.

burning mountains, shattered precipices, un-
inhabitable waftes, give it all the appearance
of a mighty ruin. The physical and moral
state of man in this world mutually sym-
pathize and correspond. They indicate not
a regular and orderly ftruaure either of
matter or of mind, but the remains of fomc-
what that once was more fair and magnifi-
cent. Let us observe,

IN the second place, that as this was not

the original, so it is not intended to be the
final state of man. Though in conle-
quence of the abuse of the human powers, fin
and vanity were introduced into this region
of the universe, it was not the purpose of
the Creator that they should be permitted
to reign for ever.. He hath made ample
provision for the recovery of the penitent
and faithful part of his fubjeds, by the
merciful undertaking of that great restorer
of the world, our Lord Jesus Christ. By
him life and immortality were both purchaf-
ed and brought to light. The new heavens

and

ulNd the new earth are discovered, wsbcre;n S ER M.
dwcllcth 'ighteozfnclfs; where, through the -,-
divine grace, human nature shall regain its
original honours, and man shall return to
be what once he was in Paradise. Through
those high discoveries of the Gospel, this
life appears to good men only in the light
of an intermediate and preparatory slate.
Its vanity and misery, in a manner, difap-
pear. They have every reason to submit
without complaint to its laws, and to wait
in patience till the appointed time come for
the rcfittion of all things. Let us take no-
tice

IN the third place, that, a future state

being made known, we can account in a
Satisfying manner for the present distress of
human life, without the imalleft impeach-
ment of divine goodness. The sufferings
we here undergo are converted into difci-
pline and improvement. Through the
blessing of Heaven, good is extracted from
apparent evil; and the very misery which
originated from fin is rendered the means

of

SE R M. of correding sinful passions, and preparing
VII.

us for felicity. There is much reason to
believe that creatures as imperfect as we
are, require some such preliminary fRate of
experience before they can recover the per-
fetion of their nature. It is in the midst
of disappointments and trials that we learn
the insufficiency of temporal things to hap-
piness, and are taught to seek it from God
and Virtue. By these the violence of our
paflions is tamed, and our minds are form-
ed to sobriety and reflection. In the varie-
ties of life, occasioned by the vicissitude of
worldly fortune, we are inured to habits
both of the aaive and the suffering virtues.
How much soever we complain-of the va-
nity of the world, sacs plainly show, that
if its vanity were less, it could not answer
the purpose of salutary discipline. Unfa-
tisfadory as it is, its pleasures are still too
apt to corrupt our hearts. How fatal then
must the consequences have been, had it
yielded us more complete enjoyment ? If,
with all its troubles, we are in danger of
being too much attached to it, how entirely

would
d

would it have reduced our affeaions, if no S E M.
troubles had been mingled with its plea- -
fures ?

These observations serve in a great mea-

sure to obviate the difficulties which arise
from the apparent vanity of the human
state, by ihowing how, upon the Christian
system, that vanity may be reconciled with
the infinite goodness of the Sovereign of the
Universe. The present condition of man
is not that for which he was originally de-
signed; it is not to be his final state; and
during his passage through the world, the
distresses which he undergoes are rendered
medicinal and improving. After having
taken this view of things, the cloud which,
in the preceding part of the discourse, ap-
peared to fit so thick upon human life be-
gins to be dissipated. We now perceive that
man is not abandoned by his Creator. We
discern great and good designs going on in
his behalf. We are allowed to entertain
better hopes; and are encouraged to en-
quire, as was proposed for the

VOL. . II. II.

S E V M. III. HEAD of discourse, Whether there
_,_i- be not in the present condition of human

life some real and solid enjoyments which
come not under the general charge of vanity
ijf vanities. The do&rine of the text is to
be confidered as chiefly addressed to worldly
men. Them Solomon means to teach that
all expectations of blils which reft solely on
earthly possessions and pleasures, shall end
in ditappointment. But surely he did not
intend to assert that there is no material
difference in the pursuits of men, or that
no real happiness of any kind could now be
attained by the virtuous. For besides the
unanwverable objecion which this would
form against the divine administration, it
would direaly contradiac what he elsewhere
aflerts, that while God giveth ore travail to
t.hefilner, he giveth to the man that is good
'in bisfight wvfdoiiz, and knowledge, andjoy '.
It may, it must indeed be admitted, that
unmixed and complete happiness is un-
known on earth. No regulation of con-
du'L can altogether prevent passions from

Eccles, ii, z6.

disturbing

disturbing our peace, and misfortunes from E R M.
wounding our heart. But after this con- i,
ceflion is made, will it follow that there is
no object on earth which deserves our
pursuit, or that all enjoyment becomes
contemptible which is not perfect? Let
us survey our Rate with an impartial
eye, and be just to the various gifts of
Heaven. How vain soever this life, con-
fidered in itself, may be, the comforts
and hopes of religion are sufficient to give
solidity to the enjoyments of the righ-
teous. In the exercise of good affecions,
and the testimony of an upright conscience;
in the sense of peace and reconciliation with
God through the great Redeemer of Man-
kind; in the firm confidence of being con-
duCed through all the trials of life by infi-
nite wisdom and goodness; and in thejoyful
profpe&t of arriving in the end at immortal
felicity, they possess a happiness which,
descending from a purer and more perfec
region than this world, partakes not of its
vanity.

Betides the enjoyments peculiar to reli-
gion, there are other pleasures of our pre-

0 2 sent

SERM. sent state which, though of an inferiour
L -j order, must not be overlooked in the efti-

mate of human life. It is necessary to call
attention to these, in order to check that
repining and unthankful spirit to which
man is.always.too prone. Some degree of
importance must be allowed to the corn-.
forts of health, to the innocent gratifications.
of sense, and to the entertainment afforded
us by all the beautiful scenes. of nature;
some to the pursuits and amusements of
social life; and nore to the internal enjoy-
ments of thought and reflexion, and to the
pleasures of affedtiomate intercourse with
those whom we love. These comforts are
often held in too low estimation, merely.
because they are ordinary and. common;
although that be the circumstance which
ought, in reason, to enhance their value.
They lie open, in some degree, to all; ex-
tend through every rank of life, and fill up
agreeably many of those spaces in our pre-
sent existence, which are not occupied with
'higher objeas, or with serious cares.

We, are in several refpeas unjust to Pro-
vidence in the computation of our pleasures.

6 and

and our pains. We number the hours SEIRM.
which are spent in distress or sorrow; but
we forget those which have passed away, if
not in high enjoyment, yet in the midit of
those gentle fatisfafions, and placid emo-
tions, which make life glide smoothly along.
We complain of the frequent disappoint-
ments which we susser in our pursuits. But
we recollec not that it is in pursuit, more
than in attainment, that our pleasure now
consists. In the present state of human na-
ture, man derives more enjoyment from the
exertion of his ative powers in the midst of
toils and efforts, than he could receive from
a still and uniform possession of the obje&t
which he itrives to gain. The solace of the
mind under all its labours, is hope; and
there are few situations which entirely ex-
clude it. Forms of expeced bliss are often
gleaming upon us through a cloud, to re-
vive and exhilarate the most distressed. If
pains be fcattcred through all the conditions
of life, so also are pleasures. Happiness,
as far as life affords it, can be engrossed by no
rank of men to the exclusion of the reft; on

03 the

SERM. the contrary, it is often found where, at

first view, it would have been least expea-
ed. When the human condition appears
most depressed, the feelings of men, through
the gracious appointment of Providence,
adjust themselves wonderfully to their state,
and enable them to extrat fatisfaaion from
sources that are totally unknown to others.
Were the great body of men fairly to com-
pute the hours which they pass in ease, and
even with some degree of pleasure, they
would be found far to exceed the number
of those which are spent in absolute pain
either of body or mind.-But in order to
make a itill more accurate estimation of
the degree of fatisfadion which, in the midit
of earthly vanity, man is permitted to enjoy,
the three following observations claim our
attention,

THE first is, that many of the evils which

occasion our complaints of the world are
wholly imaginary. They derive their ex-
iftence from fancy and humour, and child-
ith fubje&ion to the opinions of others.

The

The difrcefs which they produce, I adm;t, s FERM.
is real; but its reality arises not from the --
nature of things, but from that difordcr of
imagination which a miall mcafure of re-
fleEtion might rectify. In proof of this we
may obfcrve, that the persons who live moit
limply, and follow the diaates of plain un-
adulterated nature, are most exempted from
this class of evils. It is among the higher
ranks of mankind that they chiefly abound;
where fantastic refinements, sickly delicacy,
and eager emulation, open a thousand
sources of vexation peculiar to themselves.
Life cannot but prove vain to them who
affefc a difreliffi of every pleasure that is
not both exquisite and new; who measure
enjoyment, not by their own feelings, but
by the standard of fashion; who think
themselves miserable if others do not ad-
mire their state. It is not from wants or
sorrows that their complaints arise; but;
though it may appear a paradox, from too
much freedom from sorrow and want; from
the languor of vacant life, and the irritation
occasioned by those stagnating humours

0 4 which

SE R M. which ease and indulgence have bred within
vL. A_- them. In their cafe, therefore, it is not the

vanity of the world, but the vanity of their
minds, which is to be accused. Fancy has
raised up the speCtres which haunt them.
Fancy has formed the cloud which hangs
over their life. Did they allow the light
of reason to break forth, the speares would
vanish, and the cloud be dispelled.

THE second observation on this head is,

that of those evils which may be called real,
because they owe not their existence to
fancy, nor can be removed by reaifying
opinion, a great proportion is brought upon
us by our own mifcondut. Diseases, po-
verty, disappointment and flame are far
from being, in every instance, the unavoid-
able doom of men. They are much more
frequently the offspring of their own mif-
guided choice. Intemperance engenders
disease, sloth produces poverty, pride cre-
ates disappointments, and difhonefly exposes
to ihame. The ungoverned passions of men
betray them into a thousand follies; their

follies

follies into crimes; and their crimes into S ERM.
misfortunes. Yet nothing is more corn- I
mon than for such as have been the authors
of their own misery, to make loud com-
plaints of the hard fate of man, and to take
revenge upon the human condition by ar-
raigning its supposed vanity. Thefool/J-
nles of iiiainifJlpcriverlth his way, and thJen
his heart freticth aga,:l; the Lord.

I do not, however, maintain that it is

within our power to be altogether free of
those felf-procured evils. For perfecion of
any kind is beyond the reach of man.
Where is the wisdom that never errs?
Where the just man that offendeth not ?
Nevertheiefs, much is here left to our-
selves; and, imperfect as we are, the con-
sequences of right or of wrong condut
make a wide difference in the happiness of
men. Experience every day shows that a
found, a well-governed, and virtuous mind
contributes greatly to finooth the path of
life; and that wafdom excclc/tb folly as far
as light excelleth darkness. The way of the
wicked i; as darkncfs; they know ntot at what

they

S ER M. they Jumble. But the rigiteofziefs of the

perfet JJhall direRf his way; and he that
walketb uptrightlj,, walketbh firely. The
tendency of the one is towards a plain and
safe region. The course of the other leads
him amidst snares and precipices. The one
occasionally may, the other unavoidably
must, incur much trouble. Let us not
then confound, under one general charge,
those evils of the world which belong to the
lot of humanity, and those which, through
divine assistance, a wife and good man may,
in a great measure, escape.

THE third observation which I make re-

speds those evils which are both real' and
unavoidable; from which neither wisdom
nor goodness can procure our exemption.
Under these this comfort remains, that if
they cannot be prevented, there are means,
however, by which they may be much al-
leviated. Religion is the great principle
which ads, under Ilch circumstances, as the
correcive of human vanity. It infpircs
fortitude, supports patience, and by its

profpees

profpets and promises darts a cheering ray s E R M.

VII,

into the darkest fliade of human life. If it
cannot secure the virtuous from disappoint-
ment in their pursuits, it forms them to such
a temper as renders their disappointments
more light and easy than those of other men.
If it does not banih diflttisfaction from
their worldly pleasures, it confers spiritual
pleasures in their Read. If it ensures them
not the possession of what they love, it fur-
nifhes comfort under the loss. As far as it
eftabliihes a contented frame of mind, it
supplies the want of all that worldly men
covet to possess. Compare the behaviour
of the sensual and corrupted with that of the
upright and holy, when both are feeling the
effe&s of human vanity, and the difference
of their situation will be manifest. Among
the former you are likely to find a querulous
and dejeaed, among the latter, a composed
and manly spirit. The lamentations of the
one excite a mixture of pity and contempt;
while the dignity which the other maintain
in distress commands refpeEt. The susser-
ings of the former fettle into a peeviffh and

fretful

s E R M. fretful disposition; those of the latter soften

..-i. the temper and improve the heart. These

consequences extend so far as to give ground
for aflerting, that a good man enjoys more
happiness in the courie of a seemingly un-
prosperous life, than a bad man does in the
midst of affluence and luxury. What a
conspicuous proof of this is afforded by the
Apostle Paul, who from the very depth of
afflicEion could fend forth such a triumphant
voice as proclaims the complete viEtory
which he had gained over the evils of life ?
Troubled on every fide, yet not diref'ed;
perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but
not forsaken; caJt down, but not defroyed.
For though our outward man periJ/, our in-
ward man is rcnewed, day by day q . Such,
though perhaps in an inferior degree, will
be the influence of a genuine religious prin-
ciple upon all true Christians. It begins to
perform that office to them here, which here-
after it will more completely discharge, of
'wiping away the tears from their eyes.

z Corinth. iv. 8, 9. i6.

SUCH,

SUCH, upon the whole, is the estimate SERM..

VII.

which we are to form of human life. Much _.J
vanity will always belong to it; though the
degree of its vanity will depend, in a great
measure, on our own characer and con-
dut. To the vicious, it presents nothing
but a continued scene of disappointment and'
difiatisfation. To the good, it is a mixed
state of things; where many real comforts
may be enjoyed; where many resources
under trouble may be obtained; but where
trouble, in one form or other, is to be ex-
peaed as the lot of man. From this view
of human life,

THE first pracical conclusion which we

are to draw is, that it highly concerns us
not to be unreasonable in our expectations
of worldly felicity. Let us always remem-
ber where we are; from what causes then
human state has become fubje& to depref-
sion; and upon what accounts it must re-
main under its present law. Such is the
infatuation of felf-love, that though in the
general dotrine of the vanity of the world

all

SE R M. all men agree, yet almost every one flatters
i-^i himself that his own cafe is to be an excep-

tion from the common rule. He refts on
expecations which he thinks cannot fail
him; and though the present be not altoge-
ther according to his with, yet with the
confidence of certain hope he anticipates
futurity. Hence the anguish of disappoint-
ment fills the world; and evils, which are
of themselves sufficiently revere, oppress with
double force the unprepared and unfufpet-
ing mind. Nothing therefore is of greater
consequence to our peace, than to have al-
ways before our eyes such views of the
world as shall prevent our expecing more
from it than it is destined to afford. We
destroy our joys by devouring them before-
hand with too eager expectation. We ruin
the happiness of life when we attempt to
raise it too high. A tolerable and comfort-
able state is all that we can propose to our-
selves on earth. Peace and contentment,
not bliss nor transport, is the full portion of
man. Perfet joy is reserved for heaven.

BUT

BUT while we repress too sanguine hopes SE R M.

formed upon human life, let us, in the fe- .
cond place, guard against the other extreme
of repining and discontent. Enough has
been already said to shew, that notwith-
standing the vanity of the world, a confi-
derable degree of comfort is attainable in the
present state. Let the recolletion of this
serve to reconcile us to our condition, and
to check the arrogance of complaints and
murmurs.-What art thou, 0 son of man!
who having sprung but yesterday out of the
dust, dareft to lift up thy voice against thy
Maker, and to arraign his providence, be-
cause all things are not ordered according
to thy wish ? What title haft thou to find
fault with the order of the universe, whose
lot is so much beyond what thy virtue or
merit gave thee ground to claim ? Is it no-
thing to thee to have been introduced into
this magnificent world; to have been ad-
mitted as a fpetator of the divine wisdom
and works; and to have had access to all
the comforts which nature, with a bountiful
hand, has poured forth around thee ? Are

J~s~~~~~ ~~all

E R M. all the hours forgotten which thou haft passed
v in ease, in complacency, or joy ? Is it a

small favour in thy eyes, that the hand of
divine mercy has been fretched forth to aid
thee, and, if thou rejec not its proffered
assistance, is ready to conduc thee into a
happier Rtate of existence ? When thou com-
pareft thy condition with thy desert, blufi,
and be aihamed of thy complaints. Be silent,
be grateful, and adore. Receive with thank-
fulness the blessings which are allowed thee.
Revere that government which at present
refuses thee more. Reft in this conclusion,
that though there be evils in the world, its
Creator is wife and good, and has been
bountiful to thee.

IN the third place, the view which we

have taken of human life should naturally
diret us to such pursuits as may have most
influence for correding its vanity. There
are two great lines of conduct which offer
themflves to our choice. The one leads
towards the goods of the mind; the other
towards those of fortune. The former,

which

which is adopted only by the few, engages s E R M.
us hiefly in forming our principles, regu- --
lating our dispositions, improving all our
inward powers. The latter, which in every
age has been followed by the multitude,
points at no other end but attaining the
conveniencies and pleasures of external life.
It is obvious that, in this last pursuit, the
vanity of the world will encounter us at
every ftep. For this is the region in which
it reigns, and where it chiefly displays its
power. At the fame time, to lay the world
totally out of view is a vain attempt. The
numberless ties by which we are connced
with external things, put it out of our power
to behold them with indifference. But
though we cannot wrap ourselves tp en-
tirely in the care of the mind, yet the more
we make its welfare our chief object, the
nearer shall we approach to that happy in-
dependence on the world which places us
beyond the reach of suffering from its
vanity.

That discipline, therefore, which correCts
the eagerness of worldly passions, which

VOL. II. P fortifies

S E R M. fortifies the heart with virtuous principlcs,

which enlightens the mind with uleful
knowledge, and furnifles to it matter of
enjoyment from within itself, is of more
consequence to real felicity, than all the pro-
vision which we can make of the goods of
fortune. To this let us bend our chief at-
tention. Let us keep the heart with all di-
ligence, feeinlg cot of it are the ftes of lfie.
Let us account our mind the most important
province which is committed to our care;
and if we cannot rule fortune, study at least
to rule ourselves. Let us propose for our
objet, not worldly success, which it de-
pends not on us to obtain; but that upright
and honourable discharge of our duty in
every conjuncture, which, through the di-
vine assistance, is always within our power.
Let our happiness be fought where our pro-
per praise is found; and that be accounted
our only real evil, which is the evil of our
nature; not that, which is either the ap-
pointment of Providence, or which arises
from the evil of others.

BUT

BUT in order to carry on with success SERRM.

this rational and manly plan of conduct, it - -
is nececfiry, in the lafi place, that to moral,
we join religious discipline. Under the
present imperfection of our minds, and
amidfi the frequent shocks which we receive
from human evils, much do we stand in
need of every assistance for supporting our
constancy. Of all assistance to which we
can have recourse, none is so powerful as
what may be derived from the principles of
the Christian faith. He who builds on any
other foundation will find, in the day of
trial, that he had built his house on the sand.
Man is formed by his nature to look up to
a fuperiour Being, and to lean upon a strength
that is greater than his own. All the con-
fiderations which we can offer for confirm-
ing his mind, presuppose this resource, and
derive from it their principal efficacy.

Never then let us lose fight of those great

objects which religion brings under our
view, if we hope to stand firm and erec
amidst the dangers and distresses of our pre-
sent Rate. Let us cultivate all that con-

P 2 neftion

SE R M. nedtion with the great Father of Spirits

-- which our condition admits; by piety and

prayer; by dependence on his aid, and trust
in his promises; by a devout sense of his
pretence, and a continual endeavour to ac-
quire his grace and favour. Let us, with
humble faith and reverence, commit our-
selves to the blefled Redeemer of the world;
encouraged by the discoveries which he has
made to us of the divine mercy, and by the
hopes which he has afforded us of being
raised to a nobler and happier station in the
kingdom of God. So shall virtue, grounded
upon piety, attain its full ftrcngth. Inspired
with a religious spirit, and guided by ra-
tional principles, we liall be enabled to
hold a steady course through this mixed
region of pleatire and pain, of hopes and
fears; until the period arrive when that
cloud which the present vanity of the world
throws over human affairs shall entirely dif-
appear, and eternal light be diffuted over all
the works and ways of God.

S E R-

# SERMON VIII. ON DEATH. PSALM xxiii. 4. Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil ; for thou art with me ; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

[ 213 ]
SERMON VIII.

ON DEATH.

PSALM xxiii. 4.

Yea though I walk through the valley of the

Jhadow of death, I willfear no evil; for
thou art with mne; thy rod and thy jlaf
they comfort me.

HIS Psalm exhibits the pleasing pic- SERM.
ture of a pious man rejoicing in the

goodness of Heaven. He looks around him
on his state, and his heart overflows with
gratitude. When he reviews the past part
of his life, he contemplates God as his
Jhepherd who hath made him lie down in
green paJfures, and led him beside the fJill
waters. When he confiders the present, he

P 3 beholds

S E R t. beholds his divine benefacor preptrling a

- table for him in the presence of his enemies,

and making his cutp run over. When he
looks forward to the future, he confides in
the fame goodness, as continuing tofollow
him all the days of his life, and bri-igiirg him
to 'well in thje Jhofi' of the Lor-' for ever.
Amidst these images of tranquillity and hap-
piness, one object presents itself, which is
fifficient to ovcrcaft the minds and to damp
the joy of the greatest part of men; that is,
the approach of death. But on the Pfilmift
it produced no such efife. With perfec
composure and serenity he looks forward to
the time when he is to pass through the val-
ley of the Jhadow of death. The profpcc&,
instead of dej eting him, appears to heighten
his triumph, by that security which the pre-
fence of his almighty guardian afforded him.
I will fear no evil, for ihol art zwith me:
and pursuing the alluilon with which he
had begun, exults in the hope that the shep-
herd who had hitherto conduced him would
support him with his-.fafq, while he pafled
through that dark and perilous region, and

3 with

with his rod, or pastoral crook, would guard s E R M.
him from every danger.

Such is the happy diftinifon which

good men enjoy, in a Situation the most
formidable to human nature. That threat-
ening fpeEtre which appalls others, carries
no terrour to them. While worldly men
are justly said through fear of death to be
all their life-time fiJbjcc to bondage, to the
nrghteous only it belongs to look on death,
and smile. Since then it is in the power
of religion to confer upon us so high a
privilege, let us adventure to contemplate
steadily this last foe whom we must all en-
counter. Let us confider what death is in
itself, and by what means good men are
enabled to meet it with fortitude. Though
the subjet may be reckoned gloomy, it
must be admitted to be interesting. The
close of life is a solemn and important
event, to which every wife man will have
regard in the general tenour of his conduct.
No one can a& his part with propriety,
who confiders not how it is to terminate;
and to exclude from our thoughts what we

P 4 cannot

s F. R M. cannot prevent from actually taking place,

is the refuge of none but the timorous and
weak. We are more encouraged to enter
on this meditation by reflecting on the fu-
periour advantages which, as Chriftiitns,
we enjoy for overcoming the fear of death,
beyond that holy man whose sentiment is
now before us. Those great objects, which
he beheld through the medium of types
and figures, are clearly revealed to us. That
dispensation of grace, which in his days
began to open, is now completed. That
life and immortality, which then only dawn-
ed on the world, have now shone forth
with full light and splendour.

DEATH may be confidered in three

views; as the separation of the foul from
the body; as the conclusion of the present
life; as the entrance into a new state of
existence. In the first view, it is regarded
as painful and agonizing. In the second,
it is melancholy and dejeding. In the
third, it is awful and alarming. One of the
first enquiries which occurs concerning it is,

for

for what purposes it was clothed with all S . R M.
these terrours? Why, under the govern- --
ment of a gracious Being, the termination
of life was loaded with so much sorrow and
distress ? We know that, in consequence of
the fall, death was inflicted as punishment
upon the human race. But no unneceflary
ieverities are ever exercised by God; and
the wildom and goodness of the divine plan
will be much iliufirated, by observing that
all the formidable circumstances which at-
tend death are, in the present situation of
mankind, absolutely requisite to the pro-
per government of the world. The ter-
rours of death are, in fat, the great guar-
dians of life. They excite in every indivi-
dual that desire of felf-prefervation, which
is nature's first law. They reconcile him
to bearing the difirelies of life with patience.
They prompt him to undergo its useful
and neceflary labours with alacrity; and
they restrain him from many of those evil
courses by which his iafety would be en-
dangered. While they are in so many re-
speds beneficial to the individual, they are

at

S ER . at the fame time, the safeguard of society.
.-,-_ If death were not dreaded and abhorred as

it is by men, no public order could be pre-
served in the world. The sword of autho-
rity were lifted up in vain. The sanCtions
of law would lose their effec. The fcaf-
fold and the executioner would be derided;
and the violent left to trample unreffrained
on the rights of the peaceful. If, notwith-
tfanding the reftiraints which felf-preferva-
tion imposes, society is so often disturbed
by the crimes of the wicked, what a scene
of confusion would it become, if capital
punishments, which are the las rcfource
of government, were of no influence to
deter offenders ?

For such important ends the conclusion

of life has, by the appointment of Provi-
dence, been made an awful objet. The
valley of death has been planted vwith ter-
rours to the apprehension of men. Here,
as in many other instances, what seemed
at first to arraign the goodness of the Deity,
is upon enquiry found to confirm it.. But
though, for the most salutary purposes, it

was

was requisite that the fear of death fihould s E R M.

Vii[.

be a powerful principle in human nature,
yet, like our other propensities, it is apt,
when left to itself, to run into exccfe. Over
many it ufirps such al ascendant as to de-
base their charaecr, and to defeat the
chief ends of living. To preserve it within
such bounds that it flall not interrupt us in
performing the proper offices and duties
of life, is the diftindion of the brave man.
above the coward; and to ilurmount it in
such a degree that it shall not, even in near
prospect, deje& our spirit, or trouble our
peace, is the great preference iwhich virtue
enjoys above guilt. It has been the study
of the wife and reflecing, in every age, to
attain this steadiness of mind. Philosophy
pursued it as its chief object; and profefled
that the great end of its discipline was, to
enable its votaries to conquer the fear of
death. Let us then, before we have re-
course to the more powerful aid of religion,
hearken for a little to what reason has fug-
gested on this subjed. Her assistance may,
perhaps, be not entirely despicable; and

though

S E R M. though the armour which she offers be not
VIII. vy^ completely of proof, it may serve, how-

ever, to turn aside, or to blunt some of
the shafts which are aimed againtf us by
the last foe.

AFTER this manner she may be supposed

to address mankind, in order to reconcile
them to their fate. Children of men!
it is well known to you that you are a
mortal race. Death is the law of your
nature, the tribute of your being, the debt
which all are bound to pay. On these
terms you received life, that you should be
ready to give it up when Providence calls
you to make room for others, who in like
manner, when their time is come, shall
follow you. He who is unwilling to sub-
mit to death when heaven decrees it, de-
serves not to have lived. You might as
reasonably complain that you did not live
before the time appointed for your coming
into the world, as lament that you are not
to live longer when the period of your
quitting it is arrived, What divine Provi-

dence

decnce hath made neceflfry, human pru- E R M.
dence ought to comply with cheerfully. -
Submit at any rate you muit; and is it not
much better to follow of-your own accord,
than to be dragged reluctantly, and by
force ? What privilege have you to plead,
or what reason to urge, why you should
poflefs an exemption from the common
doom ? All things around you are mortal
and perilhing. Cities, fiates, and empires
have their period set. The proudest monu-
ments of human art moulder into dust.
Even the works of nature wax old and
decay. In the midst of this universal ten-
dency to change, could you exped that to
your frame alone a permanent duration
ihould be given ? All who have gone be-
fore you have fiubmitted to the itroke of
death. All who are to come after you
shall undergo the fame fate. The great
and the good, the prince and the peasant,
the renowned and the obscure, travel alike
the road which leads to the grave. At the
moment when you expire, thousands
throughout the world ihall, together with

you,

SERM. you, be yielding up their breath. Can
'--- that be held a great calamity which is com-

mon to you with every thing that lives on
earth; which is an event as much accord-
ing to the course of nature as it is that
leaves should fall in autumn, or that fruit
should drop from the tree when it is fully
ripe ?

The pain of death cannot be very long,

and is probably less revere than what you
have at other times experienced. The pomp
of death is more terr' ving than death itself.
It is to the weakness .' glnation that it
owes its chief power of -. ting your fpi-
rits; for when the force of the mind is
rouzed, there is almost no passion in our
nature but what has showed itself able to
overcome the fear of death. Honour has
defied death; love has despised it; ihame
has ruffed upon it; revenge has disregarded
it; grief a thousand times has wished for it.
Is it not strange that reason and virtue can-
not give you strength to surmount that fear,
which, even in feeble minds, so many pas-
sions have conquered ? What inconsistency

is

is there in complaining so much of the evils S E R .'-
of life, and being at the iame time io afraid -
of what is to terminate them all ? Who can
tell wiether his future life might not teem
with dillfters and miserics, as yet unknown,
were it to be prolnged according to his
with ? At any rate, is it defireable to draw
life out to the last dregs, and to wait till old
age pour upon you its whole store of diseases
and sorrows ? You lament that you are to
die; but did you view your situation pro-
perly, you would have much greater cause
to lament if you were chained to this life
for two or three hundred years, without
poiibility of rcleafe. Expec therefore
calmly that which is natural in itself, and
which must be fit, becauie it is the ap-
pointment of heaven. Perform your duty
as a good iubje of the Deity, during the
time allotted you; and rejoice that a
period is fixed for your' difiniflon from the
present warfare. Remember that the fla-
vifh dread of death deltroys all the comfort
of that life which you seek to preserve.
Better to undergo the firoke of death at

once,

S E R M. once, than to live in perpetual misery friom

VIII.
A_-y-i the fear of dying.

SUCH discourses as these are specious at

least, and plausible. The arguments are not
without strength, and ought to produce some
effect on a considerate reflecting mind. But
it is to be suspected that their effeCt will be
chiefly felt when the mind is calm and at
cafe; rather when speculating upon death
at a distance, than when beholding it at
hand. When the critical moment arrives
which places the anxious, trembling foul on
the borders of an unknown world, reason-
ings drawn from necessity and propriety
will be of small avail to quiet its alarms. In
order to afford relief, you must give it hope;
you mufft promise it protection; you must
offer somewhat on which it can lay hold for
support, amidst the struggles of labouring
nature. Hence the great importance of
those discoveries which revelation has made,
and of those principles with which it fortifies
the heart. To the consideration of there let
us next proceed, and observe their fuperiour

~~~~I ~cfficacy

efficacy for surmounting the fear of death. s R M.
In order to judge of their importance, it -.-
will be proper to take a view of death in
each of those lights in which it appears most
formidable to mankind.

IT may be confidered, first, as the ter-

mination of our present existence; the final
period of all its joys and hopes. The con-
cluding scene of any course of acion in
which we have been engaged with pleasure,
even the last fight of objects which we have
been long accustomed to behold, seldom
fails of striking the mind with painful re-
gret. How many circumfiances will concur
to heighten that regret, when the time comes
of our bidding an eternal adieu to the light
of day; to every pursuit which had occu-
pied our attention as citizens of the world;
and to every friend and relation who had
attached our hearts ? How dejeaing is the
thought to the greatest part of mcn, that
the fun fhall.rife, and the seasons ihall re-
turn to others, but no more to them; and
that while their neighbours are engaged in

VOL. II. Q the

SE R M. the usual affairs of life, they fhail be flhn

_y- up in a dark and lonelbme manlion, for-

gotten, and cut off from among men, as
though they had never been ! If/id, in the
cutting off of mny days, If/Jill go to the gates
of the grave. Iamn deprived of the refidiue of
m)y years. IJhall not fee the Lord again in.
the land of the living. IJhall behold man no
more with the inhabitants of the world*.

Let us now observe, that the dejedion

into which we are apt to fink at such a
juncure, will bear proportion to the degree
of our attachment to the objects which we
leave, and to the importance of those re-
sources which remain with us when they
are gone. He who is taking farewel of a
country through which he had travelled
with fatisfadtion, and he who is driven from
his native land, with which he had con-
neted every idea of settlement and com-
fort, will have very different feelings at the
time of departure. Such is the difference
which, at the hour of death, takes place be-
tween the righteous and the ungodly. The

Isaiah xxviii. 10, I,.

latter

laiter knows nothing higher or better than S E R M.
the present ftlte of existence. His interelts, --
his pleasures, his expecations, all centered
here. He lived solely for the enjoyments
of this world. Dreadful, therefore, and in-
fipportable muin be that event which fepa-
rates him from these for ever. Whereas the
culture of religion had previously formed
the mind of a Christian for a calm and easy
transition from this life. It had intiruaed
him in the proper estimate of fuiblunary
happiness. It had let higher profpecs be-
fore him. It had formed him to a more
refined taste of enjoyment than what the
common round of worldly amusements
could gratify. It gave him conneaions
and alliances with fiiritual objects, which
are unknown to the men of the world.
Hence, though he le attached to life by the
natural feelings of humanity, he is raised
above the weak and unlanly regret of part-
ing with it. He kneaw ihat it was intended
as preparatory only to a succeeding state.
As soon as the season of preparation Ihould
be finished, he expeeed a removal; and

Q2 when

SER M. when Providence gives the signal, he bids
VIII. DVJo adieu to the world with composed refolu-

tion, and undisturbed heart.-What though
death interrupt him in the middle of his
designs, and break off the plans which he
had formed of being useful to his family
and the world ? All these he leaves with
tranquillity in the hands of that Providence
to which he has ever been accustomed to
look up with resignation; which governed
the world wifely and graciously before he
existed; and which he knows will continue
to govern it with equal wisdom and benig-
nity, when he shall be in it no more. The
time of his departure was not left to his
own choice; but he believes it to be the
moit proper, because it is the time chosen
by Him who cannot err. Honourable age
is not that which flandeth in length of time,
nor that vwhich is meafnired by number
of years. But wvifdom is the grey hair to
nan; and an i/fpotted lfe is old age .
When he beholds his friends and relations
mourning around him, his heart may melt,

WVifd. of Solomon, iv. 8, 9.

but

but will not be overpowered; for it is re- s ER M.
lieved by the thought that he is bidding
them only a temporary, not an eternal fare-
wel. He commends them, in the mean
time, to the blefling of that God whom he
has served; and while he is parting from
them, he hears a voice which sooths his
spirit with those comforting words, Leave
thy fatherless children; I will preJErve them
alive; and let thy widow trigf in we '.

BUT death is more than the conclusion

of human life. It is the gate which, at the
fame time that it clofcs on this world, opens
into eternity. Under this view, it has often
been the subjed of terrour to the serious
and reflcing. The transition they were
about to make was awful. Before them lay
a vast undiscovered region, from whose
bounds no traveller ever returned to bring
information of the reception which he found,
or of the objets which he met. with there.
The firfl conception which suggests itself is,
that the disembodied ipirit is to appear be-

* Jerem. xlix. II.

Q.3 fore

E R M. fore its Creator, who is then to ad as its
-,_ ' judge. The ftriEt inquisition which it must

undergo, the impartial doom which it must
hear pronounced, and the unalterable state
to which it shall be afligned, are awful
forms rising before the imagination. They
are ideas which conscience forces upon all.
Mankind can neither avoid confidering
themselves as accountable creatures, nor
avoid viewing death as the season rhen
their account is to be given. Such a senti-
ment is with most men the source of dread;
with all men, of anxiety. To a ccrtain de-
gree a good conscience will convey comfort.
The reflecion on a wcll-i cnt life makes a
wide difference between the last moments of
the righteous and the finner. But whose
conscience is so clear as to strike him- with
no remorse ? XWhofe righteouf;efs is so un-
blemished as to abide the scrutiny of the
great searcher of hearts r Who dares reft his
everlasting fate upon his perfect conformity
to the rule of duty throughout the whole of
his life ?

We must not judge of the sentiments of
men at the approach of death by their or-

3 dinary

dinary train of thought in the days of health S E R M.
and ease. Their views of moral condu&t a
are then, too generally, superficial; flight ex-
cufes satisfy their minds, and the avocations
of life prevent their attention from dwelling
long on disagreeable fubjets. But when
altogether withdrawn from the affairs of the
world, they are left to their own reflecions
on past conduct; with their spirits enfeebled
by disease, and their minds imprefled with
the terrours of an invisible region; the most
resolute are apt to despond, and even the
virtuous are in danger of finking under the
remembrance of their errours and frailties.
The trembling mind casts every where
around an anxious exploring eye after any
power that can uphold, any mercy that will
ihield and save it. And accordingly we fee
how eagerly every device has been embraced
which superstition could invent in various
countries, for quieting the alarms of the de-
parting spirit.

Here appears the great importance of

those discoveries which Chriflianityhas made
concerning the government of the universe.

Q-4 It

SS R M. It displays the ensigns of grace and cle-
VIII. <v-i~ mency. It reveals the Almighty not as a

creator only and a judge, but as a compaf-
fionate parent, who knows our frame, who
rcmemebers we are difl, whopities is as afa-
ther pitieth his children; and with whom there
is forgiveness, that he may be loved as well
as feared. These general views, however,
of the divine administration, would not
have been sufficient to give full relief, if
they had not been confirmed by certain de-
cifive fads, to which the mind can appeal
amidst all its doubts and fears. Two such
fats the Gospel holds forth to us, particu-
larly adapted to the situation of human na-
ture in its greatest extremity; the atone-
ment, and the intercession of Christ. There
is no sentiment more natural to men than
.this, that guilt muff be expiated by susser-
ing. All government is founded on the
principle, that public justice requires com-
penfation for crimes; and all religions pro-
ceed upon the belief, that, in order to the
pardon of the finner, atonement mufft be
made to the justice of heaven. Hence the

6 endlscf

endless variety of sacrifices, viEtims, and SERM.

VIIL,

expiations which have filled the earth. The
great sacrifice which our Redeemer offered
for guilt, coincides with these natural fen-
timents of mankind in giving ease to the
heart. It thows us the forfeit of guilt paid
by a divine personage in our behalf; and
allows us to look up to the Governour of
the world, as merciful to the guilty in con-
fiftency with justice and order. But fill
some anxiety might remain concerning the
extension of that mercy to our own cafe in
particular. An invisible sovereign is an
awful idea; almighty, unknown power is
always formidable, and would be ready to
overwhelm the spirit of the feeble, were not
an intercessor with that sovereign revealed.
This intercelfor is one who lived and aded
in"our own nature; who not only knows
but who experienced our frailty; who has
all the feelings of a brother for human in-
firmity and distress; who himself passed
through that valley of the fJadow of death
which is now opening on us; to whose
iowelrft:l mediation with his father we have

every

s E R M. every encouragement to commit the charge
VIII.

of our departing fpirit.-Such is the provi-
sion which Christianity has made for com-
forting the last hours of man. The atone-
ment, and the intercession of Christ, are the
refuge of the penitent finner, and the con-
folation of the faint. By their means the
throne of the universe is encircled with
mercy. The cloud which hung over the
invisible world, begins to be dispersed; and
hope brightens through the gloom.

BUT what completes the triumph of good

men over death is, the profpea of eternal
felicity. This was the great object after
which all nations have sighed, as the only
complete remedy both of the miseries of life
and the fears of death. On this, the learned
and the ignorant, the civilized and the fa-
vage tribes of mankind bent their longing
eyes; eagerly grasping at every argument,
and fondly indulging every hope, that could
promise them a propitious Deity, and the
prolongation of existence in a happier slate.
But beyond wishes and feeble expetations,

the

the light of nature could hardly reach. S ERIM.

VIII.

Eventhe most cultivated, philosophical mind -
was, at the hour of dissolution, left in pain-
ful suspense. Christianity has put an end
to all hesitation and doubt on this important
subjee. It has drawn aside the veil through
which reason essayed to penetrate; and has
displayed to full view the future dwellings
of the spirits of the jut-, the mansions of
everlasting reft, the city of the livinG God.
Not only has it informed us that a flatc of
perfect felicity is prepared for the righteous,
but it has added to this information a variety
of circumstances which render that fiate
sensible to ourimagination, and encouraging
to our hopes. It represents it as fully fe-
cured by the gracious undertaking of the
Saviour of the world. It describes it as an
inheritance, to which he has given his fol-
lowers a right and title. H-e is said to have
taken poffefiion of it in their name. He
rose from the grave as the fJir-fr its of hem
thatcJeep; and under the characer of their
fore-;ra:ner, entered into the heavenly re-
gions. I am the refil-reSlion and the Iife.

HIe

SE R II He that believeth on me, though he were deaCd

VI I.
--d-- yetJhall be live. Igive unto my Jheep eter-

nal life. I afend to my Father and your
Father, to my God and your God .

Hence, to those who have lived a vir-

tuous life, and who die in the faith of
Christ, the whole afpe& of death is changed.
Death is to them no longer the tyrant who
approaches with his iron rod, but the melf
fenger who brings the tidings of life and
liberty. The profpets which open to them
cheer their minds. Even in the valley of
death's shade, green paflures appear to rife.
They view themselves as going forth, not
to lie silent and solitary in the darkness of
the grave, not to wander forsaken in the
wide deserts of the universe, not even to
pass into a region where they are altogether
frangers and unknown; but to enter on a
laud, new indeed to fight, but by faith and
hope frequented long before; where they
ihall continue to be under the charge of him
who hath hitherto been their guardian, be
re-united to many of their ancient and be?

John xi. 25, xx. 17.

loved

loved friends, and admitted to join the in- S E R M.
!ilmerable nmultittnde, gathered out of all
7nations and tongues and people, wlho J and
before the throne of God. They leave be-
hind the dregs of their nature; and ex-
change this confined and gloomy apartment
of the universe, for the glorious mansions
of their Father's house. Blessed ftlrely are
the dying in this hope, and blf'ed the /deadl
in this fruition, reftiig from their labours
and followed bly their works. Good men
are detained at present in the outer court of
the temple: Death admits them into the
holy place. As yet they sojourn in the
territories of pilgrimage and exile: Death
brings them home to the native land of
Spirits. In this world they are divided
from one another, and mingled with the
worthless and the vile : Death unites in one
afiembly all the pure and tlhe just. il the
fight of the uii'vetrf they fcelied to die, and
their departure wias taken for utter dt'flrc-
tion. But they, are inl peacc. their re-ward
anl/ is with the Lord, and the care of tbhem
with the mos7 igh
i : .- 0 Death ! wiher

Wiflom of Solomon iii. 2. 3.-v. I;.

is

SER M. is now thJ'fing ? 0 Grave! where is t'hy

vilsor' ? Where are the terrours with
which thou haft so long affrighted the na-
tions ? Where are thy dreary and desolate
domains, the haunts of spectres and shades,
the abhorred dwellings of darkness and
corruption? At the touch of the divine
rod, thy visionary horrours have fled. The
spell is broken. The dawn of the celestial
morning has dispelled thy dismal gloom;
and instead of the habitation of dragons, ap-
pears the paradise of God.

BUT supposing both the regret of quit-

ting life, and the dread of entering into a
future state to be overcome, there is still
one circumstance which renders death form-
idable to many, that is, the shock which
nature is apprehended to sustain at the fe-
paration of the foul from the body.
Formidable, I admit, this may justly ren-
der it to them whose languishing spirits
have no inward fund whence they can then
draw relief. Firmness and strength of
mind is peculiarly requisite for the support
of nature in its last extremity; and that

strength

lerength is lupplied by rliigion. The teill- s i R M.
mony of a good conscience, and the re-
membrancc of a virtuous life, a well-
grounded trust in the divine acceptance, and
a firm hope of future felicity, are principles
ilfficient to give composure and fortitude
to the heart, even in the midst of agony.
In what a high degree they can suspend or
alleviate the feelings of pain, has been fully
demonstrated by the magnanimous beha-
viour of such as have suffered death in the
cause of conscience and religion. How
often has the world beheld them advancing
to meet that fiippofed king of terrours, not
with calmrcfs only, but with joy; raised
by divine profpeds and hopes into an en-
tire negled and contempt of bodily susser-
ing?

It is not without reason that a peculiar

afliftance from heaven is looked for by good
men, at the hour of death. As they are
taught to believe, that in all the emergen-
cies of their life divine goodness has watched
over them, they have ground to conclude,
that at the last it will not forsake them; but

that

SERM. that at the season when its aid is mofl
'VIII.

needed, it ihall be most liberally commu-
nicated. Accordingly, a persuasion so con-
gruous to the benignity and compassion of
the Father of mercies has been the comfort
of pious men in every, age. ljy siej7 and
my heart faileth; but God is the fJrength of
my heart. In the valley of the Ihadow of
death I will fear no evil, for thou art with
me. When the rod andJla, of this shepherd
of Israel are held forth to his expiring ser-
vants, declining nature needs no other sup-
port. The secret influence of his reviving
spirit is sufficient for their consolation and
strength, while the painful firuggle with
mortality lafls; till at length, when the
moment arrives that the flver cord mif/ be
loosed, and the golden bowl be broken, their
Almighty Protetor carries off the immortal
spirit unhurt by the fall of its earthly taber-
nacle, and places it in a better mansion.-
How refpecable and happy is such a con-
clufion of human life, when one in this
manner quits the stage of time, honoured
and supported with the presence of his

Creator,

Creator, and enjoying, till the last moment S ERM.

VIII.

of reflection, the pleasing thought, that he
has not lived in vain I have fought a good
fight; I have fiTijcd mny conrfe; I have kept
the faith. Henceforth there is laid p for me
a crown ofrighteoiinefs, which the Lord the
righteous judge fJall give me at that day

AFTER the view which we have taken

of the advantages possessed by good men for
overcoming the fears of death, the first fen-
timent which flould arise in our minds is
gratitude to Heaven for the hopes which
we enjoy by means of the Christian reli-
gion. How depressed and calamitous was
the human condition, as long as the terrour
of death hung, like a dark cloud, over the
inhabitants of the earth; when, after all the
toils of life, the melancholy silence of the
grave appeared finally to close the scene of
existence; or, if a future slate opened be-
hind it, that slate teemed with all those
forms of horrour which confclous guilt
could suggest to a terrified imagination!

: Tim. iv. 7, 8.
VOL. II. R 'The

S ER M. The happiest change which ever took place
VIII. ,.-.. in the circumstances of the human race, is

that produced by the discoveries with which
we are blessed concerning the government
of the universe, the redemption of the world,
and the future destination of man. How
much dignity is thereby added to the hu-
man character and state? What light and
cheerfulness is introduced into our abode?
What eternal praise is due to Him who,
according to his abundant mercy, hath begot-
ten us again into a lively hope, by, the refiir-
reciion of Jesus Chrit from the dead, to an
inheritance incorruptible, undefied, and that
fJideth not away, reserved in heaven ?

THE next effec which the subjea we

have confidered should produce, is an ear-
nest desire to acquire those advantages which
good men enjoy at their death. The road
which leads to them is plain and obvious,
A peaceful and happy death is, by the ap-
pointment of Heaven, conneced with a
holy and virtuous life. Let us renounce
criminal pursuits and pleasures; let us fear

3
8 God

Cod and keep his commandments; let us s E R M.

VIII.

hold faith and a good cofcience, if we hope
for comfort at our last hour. To prepare
for this last hour, every wife man should
confider as his most important concern.
Death may justly be held the test of life.
Let a man have supported his character
with esteem and applause, as long as he
acted on the busy stage of the world, if at
the end he finks into dejetion and terrour,
all his former honour is effaced; he departs
under the imputation of either a guilty con-
science, or a pusillanimous mind. In the
other parts of human conduct, disguise and
subtlety may impose on the world; but
seldom can artifice be supported in the hour
of death. The mask most commonly falls
off, and the genuine character appears.
When we behold the scene of life closed
with proper composure and dignity, we na-
turally infer integrity and fortitude. We
are led to believe that divine assistance sup-
ports the foul, and we presage its transition
into a happier mansion. Mark the peyfca

R 2 man

s E R M. mian and behold the nupright; for the eid of
VIII. --0-.J that man is peace .

THt last inftrudion which our fubjedt

points out, respeCts the manner in which a
wife and good man ought to stand affected
towards life and death. He ought not to
be servilely attached to the one. He has
no reason abjectly to dread the other. Life
is the gift of God, which he may justly
cherish and hold dear. Nay, he is bound
by all fair means to guard and prefcrve it,
that he may continue to be useful in that
post of duty where Providence has placed
him. But there are higher principles to
which the love of life ihould remain sub-
ordinate. Wherever religion, virtue, or
true honour, call him forth to danger, life
ought to be hazarded without fear. There
is a generous contempt of death which
should distinguish those who live and walk
by the faith of immortality. This is the
source of courage in a Christian. His be-

* Psalm xxxvii. 37.

l':.'ic',',

haviour ought to shew the elevation of his SERM.
foul above the present world; ought to dif- .'-
cover the liberty which he poffefics of fol-
lowing the native sentiments of his mind,
without any of those restraints and fetters
which the fear of death impofcs on vicious
men.

At the fame time, this rational contempt

of death must carefully be diftinguifihed
from that inconsiderate and thoughtlcfs in-
difference, with which tome have affeced to
treat it. This is what cannot be justified
on any principle of rcafon. Human life is
no trifle, which men may play away at their
pleasure. Death, in every view, is an im-
portant event. It is the most solemn crisis
of the human existence. A good man has
reason to meet it with a calm and firm mind.
But no man is entitled to treat it with often-
tatious levity. It calls for manly serious-
ness of thought. It requires all the recol-
lection of which we are capable; that with
the proper disposition of dependent beings,
when the dust is about to rc/irtz to its dzii,
we may deliver up the spirit to IHim who
gave it.

R 3 SER-

# SERMON IX. On the HAPPINESS of a FUTURE STATE. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. REVELAT. vii. 9. After this I beheld, and, lo ! a great multitude, which no man could ...

[ 246 ]

S E R M ON IX.

On the HAPPINESS of a FUTURE STATE,
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.

REVELAT. Vii. 9.
After this I beheld, and, lo ! a great multi-

tude, which no man could number, of all
nations, and kindreds, and people, and
tongues, flood before the throne, and before
the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and
palms in their hands.
S E R M. T N this mysterious book of Scripture many

_ revolutions are foretold which were to
take place in the church of God. They
are not indeed so foretold as to afford clear
and precise information concerning the time

of

of their coming to pass. It would have S ERM.

Ix.

been, on many accounts, improper to have
lifted up too far that awful veil which covers
futurity. The intention of the Spirit of
God was not to gratify the curiosity of the
learned, by disclosing to them the fate of
monarchies and nations, but to satisfy the
serious concerning the general plan, and final
iflue, of the divine government. Amidst
those diitreffes which besel Chriflians during
the first ages, the discoveries made in this
book were peculiarly seasonable; as they
shewed that there was an Almighty Guar-
dian, who watched with particular attention
over the interests of the church which he
had formed; who foresaw all the commo-
tions which were to happen among the
kingdoms of the earth, and would so over-
rule them as to promote in the end the
cause of truth. This is the chief scope of
those mystic visions with which the Apostle
John was favoured; of teals opened in
heaven; of trumpets founding; and vials
poured forth. The kingdom of darkness
was to maintain for a while a violent struggle

R 4 against

S E R M. against the kingdom of light. But at the

lx. s_. ' conclusion, a voice was to be heard, as the

voice of many waters and of mighty thunder-
ings, faSing, Alleluiab, for the Lord God
omnipotent reigneth. The kingdoms of this
world are become the kingdoms of our Lord,
and of his Chri?, and befaall reign for ever *.
Such is the profpea with which the divine
Spirit at intervals enlightens, and with which
he finally terminates, the many dark and
direful scenes that are exhibited in this book.
In closing the canon of Scripture, he, with
great propriety, leaves upon our mind deep
impressions of the triumphs of righteous-
ness, and of the blessedness of the redeemed.
After this I beheld, and, lo ! a great multi-
tude, which no man could number, of all na-
tions, and kindreds, andpeople, and tongues,
flood before the throne and before the Lamb,
clothed with white robes, and palms in their
bands.

These words present a beautiful defcrip-

tion of the happiness of faints in heaven;
, subjed on which it is, at all times, both

* Revel. xix. 6,-xi. 15.

comfortable

comfortable and improving to meditate. E R M.
On this day, in particular, when we are to ' .
commemorate the dying love of our Savi-
our, we cannot be better employed than in
contemplating what his love hath purchaf-
ed; in order both to awaken our gratitude,
and to confirm our attachment to him. The
sacrament of the supper is the oath of our
fidelity. Let us dispose ourselves for cele-
brating it, by taking a view of the rewards
which await the faithful. I shall, for this
end, in several observations from the words
of the text, taken in connetion with the
context, endeavour to illustrate, in some
imperfect degree, the profped which is
here afforded us of a state of future felicity;
and then {hall make practical improvement
of the subjet.

I. WHAT the words of the text most

obviously suggest is, that heaven is to be
confidered as a state of blessed society. A
multitude, a numerous assembly, are here
represented as sharing together the fame
felicity and honour. Without society, it is

impossible

S E R M. impossible for man to be happy. Place

Ix.
L-v-*i him in a region where he was surrounded

with every pleasure; yet there, if he found
himself a solitary individual, he would pine
and languish. They are not merely our
wants, and our mutual dependence, but
our native inftincs also, which impel us to
associate together. The intercourse which
we here maintain with our fellows, is a
source of our chief enjoyments. But, alas!
how much are these allayed by a variety of
disagreeable circumstances that enter into all
our connexions! Sometimes we susser
from the distresses of those whom we love;
and Sometimes from their vices or frailties.
Where friendship is cordial, it is exposed to
the wounds of painful sympathy, and to
the anguish of violent separation. Where
it is so cool as not to occasion sympathetic
pains, it is never producive of much plea-
sure. The ordinary commerce of the world
consists in a circulation of frivolous inter-
course, in which the heart has no concern.
It is generally insipid, and often foured
by the slightest difference in humour, or op-

position

ofition of interest. We fly to company in s E R M.

Ix.

order to be relieved from wearisome corre- .-,-
fpondence with ourselves; and the vexations
which we meet with in society, drive us
back again into solitude. Even among the
virtuous, dissensions arise; and disagree-
ment in opinion too often produces aliena-
tion of heart. We form few connexions
where somewhat does not occur to difap-
point our hopes. The beginnings are often
pleasing. We flatter ourselves with having
found those who will never give us any
disgust. But weaknesses are too soon dif-
covered. Sulpicions arise; and love waxes
cold. We are jealous of one another, and
accustomed to live in disguise. A studied
civility assumes the name without the plea-
sure of friendihip; and secret animosity and
envy are often concealed under the caresses
of dissembled affecion.

Hence the pleasure of earthly fcciety,

like all our other pleasures, is extremely im-
perse&; and can give us a very faint con-
ception of the joy that must arise from the
foeiety ofperfed spirits in a happier world.

Here,

SE R M.. Here, it is with difficulty that we can fe-
i_,
_ lecf from the corrupted crowd a few with

whom we wish to associate in stria union.
There, are assembled all the wife, the holy,
and the just who ever existed in the uni-
verse of God; without any distress to trou-
ble their mutual bliss, or any source of dif-
agreement to interrupt their perpetual
harmony. Artifice and concealment are
unknown there. There, no competitors
firuggle; no facions contend; no rivals
supplant each other. The voice of discord
never rites, the whisper of suspicion never
circulates, among those innocent and be-
nevolent spirits. Each, happy in himself,
participates in the happiness of all the reft;
and by reciprocal communications of love
and friendship, at once receives from, and
adds to the fum of general felicity. Re-
new the memory of the most affectionate
friends with whom you were blest in any
period of your life. Divest them of all
those infirmities which adhere to the hu-
man charater. Recal the most pleaing
and tender moments which you ever en-

joyed

joyed in their society; And the remcm- SE i.

IX.

brance of those sensations may assist you .-.
in conceiving that felicity which is poi-
esed by the faints above. The happiness
of brethren dwelling together in !znity, is,
with great justice and beauty, compared by
the Psalmist to such things as are most re-
frefling to the heart of man; to the fra-
grancy of the richest odours, and to the
reviving influence of soft aTtherial dews.
It is like the precious ointment poured on the
head of Aaron; and like the dew of HIcrnmon,
even the dew that dcficedeth on the moaun-
tains of Zion, where the Lord commandeth
the blefing, even lifiefor evei-rore .

Besides the felicitywhich springs from per-
sect love, there are two circumstances which
particularly enhance the blessedness of that
multitude who Jland before the throne; these
are, access to the most exalted society, and
renewal of the most tender connexions.
The former is pointed out in the Scripture
byjoining the innnmerable con7pany of a7gcZr,
and the general ajzenibl, and chur;, of the

* Pr, cxxxlii. I.

s E R M. ji f-born; by fitting down with Abraham,
-^- and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of

heaven t; a promise which opens the fu-
blimeft profpeds to the human mind. It
allows good men to entertain the hope, that,
separated from all the dregs of the human
mass, from that mixed and polluted crowd
in midst of which they now dwell, they
shall be permitted to mingle with prophets,
patriarchs and apostles, with legislators and
heroes, with all those great and illustrious
spirits, who have shone in former ages as
the servants of God, or the benefators of
men; whole deeds we are accustomed to
celebrate; whose steps we now follow at a
distance; and whose names we pronounce
with veneration.

United to this high aflembly, the bless-

ed at the fame time renew those ancient
connexions with virtuous friends which had
been dissolved by death. The profped of
this awakens in the heart the most pleasing
and tender ientiment which perhaps can fill
it, in this mortal irate. l:or of all the for-

t Heb . xii. 2:, 23. M iatt!. viii. 11.

rows

rows which we are here doomed to endure, S E R M.

lX,

none is so bitter as that occasioned by the
fatal stroke which separates us, in appear-
ance, for ever, from those to whom either
nature or friendihip had intimately joined
our hearts. Memory, from time to time,
renews the anguish; opens the wound
which seemed once to have been closed;
and by recalling joys that are past and gone,
touches every spring of painful feniibility,
In these agonizing moments) how relieving
the thought, that the separation is only
temporary, not eternal; that there is a time
to come of re-union with those with whom
our happiest days were spent; whose joys
and sorrows once were ours; and from
whom, after we shall have landed on the
peaceful shore where they dwell, no revo-
lutions of nature shall ever be able to part
us more !-Such is the society of the blessed
above. Offuch are the multitude comptoed
who fJand before the throne. Let us now
observe,

II. THAT this is not only a blessed but
a numerous society. It is called a mul-

titude..

SE R M. titude, a great multitude, a great multititd,

,
"_ which no man could number. These expref-

sions convey the most enlarged views of the
kingdom of glory. Dismay not yourselves
with the apprehension of heaven being a
confined and almost inaccessible region, into
which it is barely possible for a small hand-
ful to gain admission, after making their
escape from the general wreck of the human
race. In my Father's hotfe, said our Sa-
viour, there are many mansions. That city
of the living God towards which you profess
to bend your course, is prepared for the
reception of citizens innumerable. It
already abounds with inhabitants; and
more and more shall be added to it, until
the end of time. Whatever difficulties
there are in the way which leads to it, they
have been often surmounted. The path,
though narrow, is neither impassable, nor
untrodden. Though the gate stands not
so wide as that which opens into hell, yet
through the narrow gate multitudes have
entered, and been crowned.

It is much to be lamented that among all
denominations of Christians, the unchari-

2 table

table spirit has prevailed of unwarrantably s E R

1

circumscribing the terms of divine grace -.
within a narrow circle of their own draw-
ing. The one half of the Christian world
has often doomed the other, without mercy,
to eternal perdition. Without the pale of
that church to which each feet belongs, they
teem to hold it impofible for salvation to be
attained. But is this the genuine spirit of
the Gospel ? Can a Chriflian believe the
effecs of the sufferings of Christ, to be no
greater than these ? For this did the Son-
of God descend from the highest heavens,
and pour out his foul unto the death, that
only a few who adopt the fame modes of
exprefion, and join in the fame forms of
worship with us, might be brought to the
kingdom of heaven Is this all the deli-
verance he has wrought tpco the earth ? He
was with child; he was in pain; and fliall
he not sec of the ravail of his fo:l, and be
satisfied? Surely, the Scripture has given
us full ground to conclude that the trophies
of our Redeemer's grace shall correspond to
the greatness of his pbwer. The-captain of

VOL. II. S u

SE R M.- ourfalvation Jhall bring many flns with
- -.- himself to glory. The pleasure of the Lord

fJall prosper in his hand. He fJall fee his
feed: He Jfall jitjlify many. Men JJall be
bleed in him, and all nations Jhall call him
blefed. For our farther encouragement,
let us observe,

III. THAT the heavenly society is repre-

sented in the text, as gathered out of all the
varieties of the human race. This is inti-
mated by the remarkable expressions of a
multitude which no 2man could nizniber, of all
nations and kindreds and people and tongues;
as if designed on purpose to correct our
narrow notions of the extent, and power of
divine grace. They whom distant seas and
regions now divide, whose languages and
manners are at present strange to one an-
other, ihall then mingle in the fame assem-
bly. No situation is so remote, and no
Rfation so unfavourable as to preclude access
to the heavenly felicity. A road is opened
by the divine spirit to those blissful habita-
tionsj from all corners of the earth, and

from

fi'r6 all conditions of human life; from s E R M.
the peopled city, and from the solitary de-
fert; from the cottages of the poor, and
from the palaces of kings; from the dwell-
ings of ignorance and simplicity, and from
the regions of science and improvement.
TheysjIall come, fays our blessed Lord him-
self, from the ea/ and from the weft, from
the north and from the Sfoth, andfit down in
the kingdom of God2 .

Such discoveries serve both to enlarge our

conceptions of the extent of divine good-
ness, and to remove those fears which are
ready to arise from particular situations in
life. Were you permitted to draw aside the
veil, and to view that diversified assembly
of the blessld who surround the throne, you
would behold among them numbers who
have overcome the fame difficulties which
encounter you, and which you dread as
insuperable. You would behold there, the
uninfirucded, with whom an upright inten-
tion supplied the place of knowledge; the

Luke xiii. 29.

S 2 feeble,

SE R M. feeble, whom divine grace had strength-

Ix.
-_i ened; and the milled, whom it had brought

back into the right path. You would be-
hold the young who had surmounted the
allurements of youthful pleasure, and the
old who had born the distresses of age with
undecayed constancy; many whom want
could not tempt to dishonesty; many whom
riches did not seduce into pride or impiety;
many who in the most difficult and enfnar-
ing circumstances, in the midit of camps
and armies and corrupted courts, had pre-
served unfullied integrity. In a word,
from all kindreds and people, that is, from
all ranks of life, and all tribes of men, even
from among 'publicans and finners, you
would behold those whom divine assistance
had conduaed to future glory.-And is
not the fame assistance, in its full extent,
offered also to us? Encompassed, while
we run the Christian race with this cloud of
witne]Jes who have finished their course
with success; animated, while wefight the
good fight, with the flouts of those who
have overcome and are crowned, shall de-

z~~I *~ i~fpair

fpair enervate or dejec2 our minds ? From S E R M.
the happy multitude above, there issues a
voice which ought to found perpetually in
the ear of faith, b]e ye faithful unto the
death, and yeJhall receive the crown of lie;
Be Jl rong in the Lord and in the power of
his might; Be follo-wrs of us who through
fiith and patience are now inheriting the
promises. Confider,

IV. T-E description given in the text

of the happiness and glory of the heavenly
society. They were beheld by the apostle
sanding befor e he throne, and before the
lamb, cloathed with white robes and palms
in their hands. All that these palms and
white robes import, it is not given us now to
understand. We know that among all na- -
tions they have been used as ensigns of joy
and victory; and are undoubtedly employed
here to represent that distinguished felicity
and honour, to which human nature shall be
then advanced. But we mufft be endowed
with the faculties of the blefled, in order to
comprehend their employments and plea-

S 3 fures;

SER M. fures; and. therefore on this part of the
<L.-.J subjed I ihall not attempt to enlarge. The

silence of humble and refpeLtful hope, bet-
ter becomes us than the indulgence of those
excursions of fancy, which degrade the sub-
jea they endeavour to exalt.

One circumfiance only cannot fail to at-

tract particular attention; that the blessed
are here described as alanding before the
throne and before the lamb; that is, enjoy-
ing the immediate presence of the great
Creator, and of the merciful Redeemer of
the world. The unhappy distance at which
we are now removed from God, is the
source of all our woes. Those territories
which we inhabit, are not His abode. They
are regions of exile. They are the dwell-
ings of a fallen race; and are condemned
to be invested with clouds and darkness.
Here, God standeth afar off. In vain we
often pursue his pretence through his works,
his ways, and his religious institutions. He
is said to be a God that hideth hizflf. Hle
dweileth, as to us, in the secret place of
thunder. lHe holdeth back the face of his

6 throne,

throne, and fprealelth a thick cloud upon it. SE R .M.

Ix.

The manifestation of his presence flall be
the signal for the renovation of all things.
When that Sun of righteolzfnef breaks forth
from the cloud which now conceals him,
sorrow and fin, and every evil thing shall
fly away before the brightness of his face.
For neither guilt nor misery can remain
where God dwells. As the rising of the
fun transforms at once the face of nature,
and converts the whole extent of space.
over which his beams are spread, into a
region of light, so flall the divine presence,
as soon as it is revealed, diffuse universal
bliss over all who behold it. It imports
fullness of joy, and pleafiute for evermore.
The inspired writer of this book thus de-
scribes its effeds: There Jhall be no more
death, neither foriow, nor crying nor pain;
fir the former things are paned awray. He
that pt npon the thronefaid, Behold I make
all. things new. T'heyJhall hunger no more,
neither thirj any more. But the Lamb
which is in the midfi of the throneJhallfeed
them, ands l.all.lead them unto living foun-

S 4 tans

SERIM. tins of water. GodJall r lse a `w.9 ll/

lx. a-Y_ tears from their eyes. But, descending from

this too sublime theme, let us

V. TURN our attention to a circum-

stance in the state of future happiness, more
commensurate to our present conceptions,
which is suggested by the commentary upon
the words of the text given in the sequel of
the chapter. And one of the elders anfwiered,
faying unto me, Wthat are these which are ar-
rayed in white robes; and whence came they ?
And Ifaid unto him, Sir, thou kncwifs. And
be said unto me, These are they which ca;: c
out of great tribulation '*. This explanatory
circumitance may relate particularly to the
cafe of those primitive sufferers, who en-
dured severe persecution in the cause of the
gofgel. But, in general, it presents this na-
tural and beautiful view of the future feli-
citX of good men, that it is their reft from
the troubles and toils of life. For, to all,
even to the happiefi, human life is tribula-
tion and conflict. No man is thoroughly

t Rev. viii. 13, 14.

at

at cafe in his condition. Pursuits succeed- s R M.
ing to pursuits keep us in constant agitation; a
while frequent returns of disappointment
break our plans, and oppress our spirits.
Fatigued by such a variety of toils, mankind
have ever looked forward to reft as their
favourite objec. Throughout all their
ranks, from the highef to the lowest, they
are in perpetual chace of it; and it perpe-
tually flies before them. It is an objct
which here they are doomed always to seek,
and never to enjoy.

The nature and laws of our present state

admit not the gratification of this favourite
wish. For, betides the ncceffity of trouble
in order to fulfil the purposes of discipline
and improvement, our very happiness, fich
as it is in this world, requires a circulation
of labours. Our enjoyment consists in pur-
suit, not in attainment. Attainment is with
us, for m6ft part, the grave of pleasure.
Had we no objct to excite fresh activity,
and to impel us to new toils, human life
would quickly stagnate in melancholy indo-
lence. At the fame time, the current of all

our

SERM. our wishes tends to repose. Imaginary
Ix. .---. forms float incessantly before our view, of

the happiness which is to be enjoyed in reft:
And from this confliE between our wishes
on the one hand, and our atual situation
on the other, arise much of the disquiet,
and much of the infelicity, of human life.
It is only in heaven that the tranquil re-
pose, which on earth is no more than a
pleasing phantom, shall be fully realized.
There, remaineth at last a resd for the people
of God; reft from the disturbance of paflion,
the vanity of pursuit, and the vexation of
disappointment; reft from all the fins and
the sorrows of this miserable world; reft,
which shall not be merely an indolent cef-
fation from labour, but a full and iatisfying
enjoyment. Good men shall reJffrom their
labours, and their works ihall follow them.
They have come out of great tribulation.
They have fulfilled, with honour, their ap-
pointed course of trial. They have fat
down on the feat of the conqueror; and of
palt labours nothing remains but the pleasing

review,

review, and the happy fruits. There is still S E R M.
to be confidered, ,_

VI. ONE very material circumstance,

descriptive both of the charaCer, and of the
happiness, of those who enjoy the heavenly
bliss. Not only have they come out of great
tribulation, but, as the Spirit of God adds
in explaining the text, they have wajfed
their robes, and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb *!. Two things are here
suggested; the fantity of the blessed, and
the means by which it is attained.

First, their fanitity or purity is emblema-

tically dccr-ibcd, by their being clothed in
robes which are w,/ied and made white.
In order to qualify human nature for the
i enjoyment of such happiness as I have en-

o

deavoured to describe, it must undergo a

. change so great as to receive in Scripture the

appellation of a new birth; a change to
vhich all the institutions of religion, and
all the operations of grace, contribute in this
life, but which is not completed till the next.

* Rev. viii. i+.

In

S E R M. In this fandity, or regeneration, conlifis not
, ..__, only the neceflary preparation for future fe-

licity, but, which is not so commonly at-
tended to, consists an essential part of that
felicity itself. For, whence arises the mi-
fery of this present world ? It is not owing
to our cloudy atmosphere, our changing sea-
sons, and inclement {kies. It is not owing
to the debility of our bodies, or to the un-
equal distribution of the goods of fortune.
Amidfi all disadvantages of this kind, a pure,
a stedfast, and enlightened mind, possesscd
of exalted virtue, could enjoy itelf in peace,
and finile at the impotent aflaults of fortune
and the elements. It is within ourselves,
that misery has fixed its feat. Our difor-
dered hearts, our guilty passions, our vio-
lent prejudices and misplaced desires, are
the instruments of the torment which we
endure. These sharpen the darts which
adversity would otherwise point in vain
against us. These are the vi/ls of wratb
which pour forth plagues on the inhabitants
of the earth; and make the dwellings of
nations become the abodes of woe. Thence

discontent,

discontent, and remorle, gnaw the hearts of s E RM
individuals. Thence society is torn by open
violence, or undermined by i;ecret treachcrv;
and man is transformed into a savage to
man.

But suppose fin to be ba:ifihed from the

world; flpppofe perfect purity and charity
to dcefend from heaven, and to animate
every human breast ; and you would be-
hold the present habitation of men changed
into the paradise of God. The undisturbed
e:njoyment of a holy mind, and of a blissful
union with one another, would scarcely a!-
low us to feel thole external evils, of which

i we now so loudly complain. All nature
: would assume a different appearance around

us. That golden age which was so long
the subjed of the philosopher's dream, and
of the poet's song, would in fad take place.
According to the beautiful language of an-
cient prophecy, fpSrigs would then rS-fc il

c

te defiri, and rivers be opened i1 the tbirj'v
land, The wildernfi' and the foliltay place
woulld be glad. The wolf would dwell wivii
the lamb, and the leopard lie down with the

'id,

SERM . hid. Judgnment would dwell in the wilder'

IX.

\ nefi, and r-igbteo/ifeefs remain in, tbe frnliful
field. The desert weaold rejoice, and blofin
asthe rofe.-If such, even in this world,
would be the effects of innocence and virtue
completely restored, how much greater mull
they be in that new earth and thof newz
heavens, where retitude of nature ihall be
combined with every circumstance of ex-
ternal felicity? It is the present imperfe&
state of human virtue that hinders us from
conceiving fully the influence of righteous-
ness upon happiness. The robes in which
the best men are now clothed, to uie the
language of the text, are i.llicd with ib
many stains, as to convey no adequate idea
of the original beauty which belongs to the
garb of righteoufines. But when thcfe
stains shall be wafled away, when thelsc
robes Ihall be made perfediy white and
pure, a lustre will flow from themi of which
we can, as yet, form no conception.

But how are the robes of the blesscd thus

washed? Whence is derived that'i potlels
purity in which they are arrayed? The

Spirit

Spirit of God hath answered us, J;-oze the S E R M.
blcod of the Lan6b; leading our thoughts to .--v
that high dispensation of mercy, to which
the faints above owe their eftablilhment,
firit in grace, and then in glory. From
that blood which was Jed for the reminjfon
offifs, flow both the atonement of human
guilt, and the regeneration of human na-
ture. Human nature had fallen too low to
be capable of retrieving itself. It could not

! regain its primitive innocence, and still less

was capable of raising itself so high in the
k cale of existence as to mingle with angels.
| We had neither sufficient knowledge to dif-

cover, nor virtue to merit, nor ability to
qualify ourselves for enjoying, celestial glory.
Heaven must have been either covered from
our view by perpetual darkness, or only
beheld from afar as an inaccefible region,
if Christ had not interposed to openJ br us a
:lcw and living .Oway within the veil. The
obligations which his generous undertaking
has conferred upon the human race will tend
highly to increase the felicity of the blefled.
The sense of being diftinguifihed by so il-

lufitious

S E R M. luflrious a benefactor, and the correspond-

IX. >L i ing returns of gratitude and love to him,

form some of the most pleasing of those
emotions which shall continue to delight
them through all eternity.

FROM those views of a slate of future

happiness which the text has suggested, va-
rious inftrudions relating to life and prac-
tice naturally arise. We are taught to recify
our notions of felicity; to look for it, not
in what is external, but in what relates to
the mind and heart; in good dispositions
and a purified foul; in unity and friendship
with one another, and in the divine pre-
fence and favour. If such things form the
principal articles of future bliss, they cannot
but be essential to our happiness in the more
early periods of existence; and he who
seeks his chief enjoyments from an opposite
quarter, is erring widely from the path
which conduts to felicity.

We are farther taught whence to derive

constancy and perseverance, amidst the pre-
sent discouragements of a virtuous life. In

this

this world, we often behold good men de- s E R M.
pressed, and the wicked prospering around
us. Our best deeds meet with unjust re-
turns from an ungrateful world. Sincerity
is over-reached by craft, and innocence falls
a vietim to power. But let us not on such
occasions fay within ourselves, that in vain
we have cleanled our hearts, and wr/ihed our
hands in i.nnocency. Let us reft on the as-
lurance, that these disorders extend not far
in the kingdom of God. They affect only
the first stage of existence. They relate to
discipline and trial, which will soon be
finished. In that permanent state which is
about to open, a new and better order of
things shall arise. When dejeded with the
evils of life, let us look upward to that happy
multitude whbo have come out of great tribu-
lation, and now jfand before the throne.
Until the day arrive which shall join us to
that blessed assembly, let us shew ourselves
worthy of the hope that is before us, by
fulpporting with a constant mind the trials of
our fidelity. Bepalient; JlablJiJyour hearts.
The coming of the Lord driawfth nigbh,
VOL, II. T From

SE R M. From the profpefs which the text has

Ix. i-,_ afforded, we may likewise learn what the

spirit is which should regulate our life.
Santity of conduct, dignity of chara&er,
elevation of affefions, become those who
expect to mingle with angels, andSpirits of
jflt men madeperfe,7. I mean not that such
profpeds should carry away our whole at-
tention from the present world, where un-
doubtedly lies the chief scene of human ac-
tion, and human duty. But while we ad
as inhabitants of the earth, we ought at the
fame time so to remember our connetion
with a better world, as not to debate our-
selves with what is mean, not to defile our-
selves with what is impure, not to entangle
ourselves among what is ennharing, in the
present state. Let neither its advantages
elate, nor its disappointments dejed us;
but with an equal spirit, with a mind full
of immortality, let us pass through all the
changes of this mortal life.

Finally, let the discoveries of future hap-

piness inspire us with suitable gratitude to
God and Christ; to the eternal Father, who

originally

originally decreed such rewards for the SE RM.
righteous; and to the Son, who ads in the
high charater of the dispenser of the divine
mercies, and the great restorer of the fallen
race of men. Particularly, when approach-
ing to God in solemn aas of devotion, such
as we are this day to perform, let gratitude
be alive and ardent in our heart. The com-
memoration of our Saviour's death is in a
high degree suited to awaken every emotion
of tenderness and love. It brings before us,
under one view, all the obligations which
we lie under to this great benefacor of man-
kind. When just ready to susser for our
fake, he instituted this holy sacrament, and
laid, Do this in reemebrance of me.-Whom,
0 blessed Jesus ! ihall we ever remember, if
we are capable of forgetting Thee ? Thee,
to whom we owe the forgiveness of fin, and
the restoration of divine favour ; our victory
over death, and our hope of life eternal!
Thou haft enlarged our views beyond these
territories of disorder and darkness. Thou
haft discovered to us the city of the living
Cod. Thou fetteft open the gates of that

T 2 ne'e

S E R M. newy Jrtrflem; - and leadet us into the path
\-AJ of life. Thou from age to age gathered out

of every nation, and kindred, and people, that
multitude which jfand before the throne. Thou
bringeft them out ofgreat tribulation. Thine
are the white robes with which they are in-
vetled; thine, the palms which they bear;
and by Thee they are placed under the light
of the divine countenance for ever.

S E R-

# SERMON X. ON CANDOUR. 1 CORINTH. xiii. 5. Charity — thinketh no evil.

[ 277 ]
SERMON X.

ON CANDOUR.

I CORINTH. xiii. S.

Charity-thinketh no evil.
R ELIGION and Government are the s R M.

two great foundations of order and X.

comfort among mankind. Government re-
frains the outrages and crimes which would
be subversive of society, secures the pro-
perty, and defends the lives of its fubjecs.
But the defect of government is, that hu-
man laws can extend no farther than to the
aaions of men. Though they protet us
from external violence, they leave us open
on different fides to be wounded. By the
vices which prevail in society, our tran-

T 3 quillity

E R M. quillity may be disturbed, and our lives in
aL,_ various ways embittered, while government

can give us no redress. Religion supplies
the insufficiency of law, by striking at the
root of those disorders which occasion so
much misery in the world. Its professed
scope is to regulate, not actions alone, but
the temper and inclinations. By this means
it ascends to the sources of conduc; and
very ineffetual would the wisest system of
legislation prove for the happiness of man-
kind, if it did not derive aid from religion,
in softening the dispositions of men, and
checking many of those evil passions towhich
the influence of law cannot possibly reach.

We are led to this reflection by the dc-

scription given in the context of charity,
that great principle in the Christian system.
The Apostle places it in a variety of lights,
and under each of them, explains its opera-
tion by its internal effects; not by the actions
to which it gives rife, but by the dispositions
which it produces in the heart. He justly
supposes, that if the temper be duly regu-
lated, propriety of acion will follow, and

6 good

good order take place in external behaviour. s E R M.

X.

Of those charaters of charity I have chosen -
one for the fubje& of this discourse, which
leads to the consideration of a virtue highly
important to us, both as Christians, and as
members of society. I shall endeavour, first,
to explain the temper here pointed out, by
ihewing what this description of charity im-
ports, that it tbinkcth no evil; and then to
recommend fuich a disposition, and to dif-
play the bad effeas of an opposite turn of
mind.

I. LET us confider what this description

of charity imports. You will easily perceive
that the expression in the text is not to be
underRfood in a sense altogether unlimited;
as if there were no occasion on which we
are to think unfavourably of others. To
view all the acions of men with the fame
degree of complacency, would be contrary
both to common niderftanding, and to
many express precepts of religion. In a
word, where ib much depravity abounds,
were we to think and speak equally well of

T 4 all,

S ER M. all, we inuft either be insensible of the dif-

_-y- tindion between right and wrong, or be

indifferent to that diftinftion when we per-
ceived it. Religion renders it our duty to
abhor that which is evil; and, on many oc-
caiions, to express our indignation openly
against it. But the Apostle, with great pro-
priety, describes the temper which he is re-
commending in finch strong and general
terms, as might guard us against that ex-
treme to which we are naturally most prone,
of rafl and unjust suspicion. The virtue
which he means to inculcate is that which
is known by the name of Candour; a vir-
tue, which, as soon as it is mentioned,
every one will acknowledge to be essential
to the character of a worthy man; a virtue
which we seldom fail of ascribing to any
person whom we seek to recommend to the
esteem of others; but which, I am afraid,
when we examine our own conduct in a
religious view, is seldom the fubjeEt of in-
qulry.

It is'neceffary to observe, that true can-
dour is altogether different from that guard-

cd,

ed, inoffensive language, and that studied S E R VT.

X.

openness of behaviour, which we so fre-
quently meet with among men of the world.
Smiling, very often, is the aspec, and
finooth are the words of those who in-
wardly are the most ready to think evil of
others. That candour which is a Chriffian
virtue confiffs, not in fairness of speech,
but in fairness of heart. It may want the
blandishment of external courtesy, but lup-
plies its place with humane and generous
liberality of sentiment. Its manners arc
unaffEted, and its professions cordial.
Exempt, on one hand, from the dark jea-
lousy of a suspicious mind; it is no lceS
removed, on the other, from that easy cre-
dulity which is imposed on by every ipe-
cious pretence. It is perfectly consistent
with extensive knowledge of the world,
and with due attention to our own safety.
In that various intercourse which we are
obliged to carry on with persons of every
different character, suspicion, to a certain
degree, is a necessary guard. It is only
when it exceeds the bounds of prudent cau-

3 tionw

s ER M. tion, that it degenerates into vice. There is

X.
<i:L^ a proper mean between undiftinguifling

credulity, and universal jealousy, which a
found understanding discerns, and which
the man of candour studies to preserve.

He makes allowance for the mixture of

evil with good, which is to be found in every
human character. He expects none to be
faultless; and he is unwilling to believe that
there is any without some commendable
quality. In the midst of many defects, he
can discover a virtue. In the midst of per-
fonal resentment, he can be just to the me-
rit of an enemy. He never lends an open
ear to those defamatory reports and dark
suggestions, which, among the tribes of
the censorious, circulate with so much ra-
pidity, and meet with such ready acceptance.
He is not hasty to judge; and he requires
full evidence before he will condemn. As
long as an ation can be ascribed to different
motives, he holds it as no mark of sagacity
to impute it always to the worst. Where
there is just ground for doubt, he keeps his
judgment undecided; and during the pe-

riod

riod of fufpence, leans to the most chari- S ERM.

X.

table conftruCion which an adion can bear. ,
When he must condemn, he condemns with
regret; and without those aggravations
which the severity of others adds to the
crime. He liflens calmly to the apology
of the offender, and readily admits every
extenuating circumllance which equity can
suggest. How much soever he may blame
the principles of any feet or party, he ne-
ver confounds under one general censure
all who belong to that party or fed. He
charges them not with such consequences
of their tenets, as they refute and disavow.
From one wrong opinion, he does not in-
ser the subversion of all found principles;
nor from one bad adtion, conclude that all

! regard to conscience is overthrown. When
? he beholds the e

ol in his brother's eye, he
s remembers the beam in his own. He com-

miferates human frailty; and judges of
others according to the principles by which
he would think it reasonable that they
ihould judge of him. In a word, he views
men and adions in the clear sunshine of

charity

SE R M. charity and good-nature; and not in that
l-,.-r dark and fullen shade which jealousy and

party spirit throw over all charaaers.-
Such being in general the spirit of that
charity which thilneth no evil, I proceed,

II. To recommend, by various argu-

ments, this important branch of Christian
virtue.

Let us begin with observing what a ne-

ceffary requisite it is to the proper discharge
of all the social duties. I need not spend
time in showing that these hold a very
high rank in the Christian system. The
encomium which the Apostle in this chap-
ter bestows upon charity, is alone sufficient
to prove it. He places this grace at the
head of all the gifts, and endowments, which
can be possessed by man; and asures us
that thozlgh we had all faith so that we
could remove mountains, yet if we be deli-
ftute of charity, it will profit us nothing.
Accordingly, love, gentleines, meekness and
long Jfl'ering, are enumerated as diftin-
guiihingfruits ofthe spirit of Christ I. But

Galat. v. 2s, 23,

it

it is impoflible for such virtues as these to s I R M
find place in a breast, where the propensity _-
to think evil of others is predominant.
Charitable and candid thoughts of men are
the necessary introduction to ail good-will
and kindness. They form, if we may
speak so, the only climate in which love
can grow up, and flourish. A suspicious
temper checks in the bud every kind assec-
tion. It hardens the heart, and estranges
man from man. What friendship or gra-
titude can you expec& from him, who views
all your conduEt with distrustful eyes, and
ascribes every benefit you confer to artifice
and stratagem? The utmost which you
can hope from one of this charater, is
justice in his dealings; nor even that can
you be assured of; as the suspicions to
which he is a prey will afford him frequent
pretexts for departing from truth, and for
defending himself with the fame arms which
he conceives to be employed against him.
Unhappy will they be who are joined with
him by any cloe connexion; exposed to
every malignant suspicion which arises in

his

8 R M. his own mind, and to every unjust fugge-

X.
,_G-^ stion which the malice of others may infi-

nuate against them. That store of poison
which is collected within him frequently
throws out its venom on all who are within
its reach. As a companion, he will be fe-
vere and satirical; as a friend, captious and
dangerous; in his domestic sphere, harsh,
jealous and irascible; in his civil capacity,
Seditious and turbulent, prone to impute
the condua of his fuperiours to improper
motives, and upon loose information to
condemn their conduct.

The contrary of all this may be expected

from a candid temper. Whatever is ami-
able in manners, or useful in society, na-
turally and easily ingrafts itself upon it.
Gentleness, humanity and compafison flow
from it, as their native spring. Open and
cheerful in itself, it diffuses cheerfulness ant
good-humour over all who are under its
influence. It is the chief ground of mu-
tual confidence and union among men.
It prevents those animofities from arising
which are the offspring of groundless pre-

judice;

jiulice; or, by its benign interposition, al- SERM.
lays them when arisen. In the magistrate,
it tempers justice with lenity. Among
f!ibjets it promotes good order and sub-
miflion. It connets humanity with piety.
For he who is not given to think evil of
his fellow-creatures, will not be ready to
censure the dispensations of his Creator.
; Whereas the famc turn of mind which ren-
uders one jealous and unjust towards men,
will incline him to be querulous and impi-
i ous towards God.

IN the second place, as a suspicious, un-

charitable spirit is inconsistent with all
iocial virtue and happiness, so, in itself,
it is unreasonable and unjust. In order to
form found opinions concerning characters
and actions, two things are especially re-
quifite, information and impartiality. But
filch as are most forward to decide unfa-
vourably, are commonly destitute of both.
Instead of poffefling, or even requiring, full
niformation, the grounds on which they
proceed are frequently the most flight and

frivolous.

S E R . frivolous. A tale, perhaps, which the idic

X. Lt--- have invented, the inquisitive have lifened

to, and the credulous have propagated; or
a real incident which rumour, in carrying
it along, has exaggerated and disguised,
supplies them with materials of confident
aflertion, and decisive judgment. From an
ation they presently look into the heart,
and infer the motive. This supposed mo-
tive, they conclude to be the ruling prin-
ciple; and pronounce at once concerning
the whole character.

Nothing can be more contrary both to

equity and to found reason, than such pre-
cipitate judgments. Any man who attends
to what passes within himself, may easily
discern what a complicated system the hu-
man charater is, and what a variety of
circumstances must be taken into the ac-
count, in order to estimate it truly. No
single instance of conduc whatever, is Jif-
ficient to determine it. As from one wor-
thy action, it were credulity, not charity,
to conclude a person to be free from all
vice; so from one which is censurable, it

is

ia per-ecly unjuf' to infer that 'he author s F: R .
ofit is without con:icince, and wd ithot me- I.,.-
rit. ;Did vyo know all tihe attendin cir-
clinftances, it 'mii;t a;pear i n an ¢eccifab!:
linht; nay, perhap., under a commendable
form. The motives of the a lOor may have
Lbeen entircly (dif_-'elt ir.m thoie vw'hich
you alcrel) to hiil; and wheicre you ihpoal
him impelled by L:id deliign, he may hlave
been prompted by conlcience and mi'iakien
principle. Admitting the action to have
been in every view criminal, he may have
been hurried into it through iadvcrtency
and surpril'e. He may have sincerely re-
pented; and the virtuous principle may
have now regained its full vigour. Perhaps
this was the corner of frailty; the quarter
on which he lay open to the incursions of
temptation; while the other avenues of his
heart were firmly guarded by coniiculce.

No error is more palpable than to look

for uniformity from human nature; though
it is commonly on this supposition that our
general conclusions concerning charater are
formed. Mankind are consistent neither in

VOL. II. U good

s E M. good, nor in evil. In the present state of
--.-. frailty, all is mixed and blended. The

ftrongefi contrarieties of piety and hypo-
crify, of generosity and avarice, of truth
and duplicity, often meet in one chara&cr.
The purest human virtue is consistent with
some vice; and in the midst of much vice
and disorder, amiable, nay respectable, qua-
lities may be found. There are few cafes
in which we have ground to conclude that
all goodness is loft. At the bottom of the
characer there may lie some sparks of piety
and virtue, suppressed, but not extinguifll-
ed; which kept alive by the breath of hea-
ven, and gathering strength in fccret from
refledion, may, on the first favourable
opening which is afforded them, be ready
to break forth with splendour and force.-
Placed, then, in a situation of so much un-
certainty and darkness, where our know-
ledge of the hearts and characers of men is
so limited, and our judgments concerning
them are so apt to err, what a continual
call do we receive either to suspend our
judgment, or to give it on the favourable

fide?

fide ? especially when we confider that, as S E R .
through imperfed information we are un- _
qualified for deciding soundly, so through
want of impartiality we are often tempted
to decide wrong. How much this enforces
the argument for candour, will appear by
confidering,

IN the third place, what the sources are

of those severe and uncharitable opinions
which we are so ready to form. Were the
mind altogether free from prepossession and
bias, it might avail itself to more advan-
tage of the scanty knowledge which it pof-
fesses. But this is so far from being the
cafe, that on every fide we are encumbered
with prejudices, and warped by passions,
which exert their influence in nothing more
than in leading us to think evil of others.
At all times we are justly said tofec throulgh
a glass, darkly; but passion and prejudice,
looking through a glass which distorts the
form of the objeds, make us also fee falsely.

It is one of the misfortunes of our present
situation, that some of the good dispositions

U 2 of

S E R 1. of human nature are apt to betray us into

X.
_-.- frailties and vices. Thus, it often happens

that the laudable attachment which we con-
trac for the country, or the church, to
which we belong, or for some political de-
nomination under which we clas ourselves,
both confines our affections within too nar-
row a sphere, and gives rife to violent
prejudices against such as come under an
opposite description. Not contented with
being in the right ourselves, we must find
all others in the wrong. We claim an ex-
clufive possession of goodness and wildom;
and from approving warmly of those who
join us, we proceed to condemn, with much
acrimony, not the principles only, but the
characters of those from whom we differ.
Hence persons of well-difpofed minds are
too often, through the strength of partial
good affection, involved in the crime of
uncharitable judgment. They rashly extnd
to every individual the severe opinion
which they have unwarrantably conceived
of the whole body.-This man is of a party
whose principles we reckon slavish; and

~~~~~2 ~therefore

thercfore hiswole sentiments are c-rrupted. s E R M.
That man belongs to a religious !sec, which
we are accustomed to deem bigoctted; and
therefore he is incapable of anv generous
or liberal thought. Another is conneCted
with a ied, which we have been tau!ght to
account relaxed; and therefore le can have
no ianflity.-Are these the jucgments of
candour and clariy ? Is true piety or
virtue it very limited in its natlure, as to be
confined to such aloae as I'e every thing
with our eyes, and ifllow exactly the train
of our ideas ? Was there ever any great
community to corruit as not to include
w'ithin it individuals of real worth ?

Besides prepoflffions of this nature, which
sometimes mislead tle honest mind, there
are othler, and much more culpable caufcs
of uncharitable judgment. Pride is hurt
and wounded by every excellence in whIich
it can claim no fharc; and from cagerneis
to discover a blemith, reits upon the flight-
cie appearance of one, as a ittisfying proof.
WThen rival'ry and competition concur with
pride, our detire to cfpy dcfects increases,

tr , and
3~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1

s E M. and, by consequence, the grounds of censure

X.
A__- multiply. Where no opposition of interests

takes place, envy has too much influence
in warping the judgment of many. Even
when none of these causes operate, the in-
ward consciousness of depravity is sufficient
to fill the mind with evil thoughts of others.
Whence should a man so readily draw his
opinions of men as from that characer with
which he is best acquainted, because it is
his own A person of low and base mind
naturally imputes to others the sentiments
which he finds congenial to himself; and is
incredulous of every excellency which to
him is totally unknown. He enjoys, be-
fides, consolation in the thought that others
are no better than himself; that his weak-
neffes and crimes are those of all men; and
that such as appear most distinguished for
virtue possess no real superiority, except
greater dexterity in concealing their vices.
Soothing themselves with this doctrine in
secret, too many softer and strengthen the
bad opinion which they entertain of all
mankind. Rarely, if ever, have you ground

to

to think well of that man's heart who is s F R N.
on every occasion given to think the worst
of others. Let us observe,

IN the fourth place, that suitable to the

sources whence a jealous and fulpicious tem-
per proceeds, are the effeds which it pro-
duces in the world, the crimes and mischiefs
with which it fills society. It pofleffes this
unhappy ditfinEtion beyond the other fail-
ings of the human heart, that while it im-
pels men to violent deeds, itjufifies to their
own apprehension the excesses which they
commit. Amidst the uproar of other bad
pafiTons, conscience ads as a restraining
power. As soon as the tumult fubfidcs, re-
morse exerts its influence, and renders the
finner sensible of the evil which he has done.
But the uncharitable man is unfortunately
set loose from any such check or controul.
Through the infatuation of prejudice, his
judgment is perverted; conscience is milled;
the light within him is turned into dari.fls.
Viewing the objecs of his displeasure as evil
men, he thinks himself entitled to give that

U 4 displeasure

S E R M!. Tifpleafure full vent; and in committing

X.

the most inhuman acLions, may ometiines
imagine that he is doing good service to
God.

The first fruits of an evil-thinking spirit

are calumny and difiradion, by which so-
cicty is so often embroiled, and men are set
at variance ,-ith one another. But did it pro-
ceed no farther than cenfirious speech, the
mischief would be less. Much greater and
more serious evils frequently ensue. What
direful effects, for instance, have often flow-
ed frcm ralh and ill-founded jealousy in
private life ? No iooner has one allowed
that damon to take possession of his mind,
than it perverts his understanding, and taints
all his faculties. Haunting him by night
and by day, bringing perpetually before
him the odious and disquieting forms which
it has raised up, it blackens every appear-
ance to his view; gives to trifles which
are in themselves light as air, the weight of
full confirmation; till what was at lirft a
dubious furmiie, or a flight displeasure, rifes
at length into full belief and implacable

.lu'}..

f;ry. Hence, families torn with the most s E R M.
violent convullions; the husband armcd --.-..
againa thie wife, the father ag-ainf the oln,
the friend against the friend; the plan of
treachery and affiffination contrived, and
t!e dagger plunged into the bosom of the
inmoceit.--In public life, how ofen have
kingdomsr been ihaken with all the violence
of war and rebellion, from the u;njrl ii:f-
picions which fubjeEts had conceived of
their rulers; or the ranl jealousy which
princes had entertained of their people ?-
But it is in religious dissensions chiefly, that
the miichievous power of uncharitable pre-
judice has difiilayed its full atrocity. Re-
ligion is always found to heighten every
pafilon oil which it ads, and to render
cvery contest into which it enters, uncom-
monly ardent; because the objess which it
prcfients are of such a nature as itrongly to
icize and engage the human mind. When
zeal for their own principles has prompted
mcn to view thole of a different persuasion
in the odious lights which bigotry suggests,
every sentiment of humanity has too often

been

E R M. been extinguished. The mild influence of
X. _.. that religion which breathes nothing but

gentleness, has proved too feeble to refirain
the violent and bloody hand of persecution;
and the uncharitable spirit, raging among
contending parties, has filled the world with
fach calamities and crimes as have brought
disgrace on the Christian name.

Let us attend particularly to one awful

instance of the guilt which men may con-
traaC, and of the ruin which they may bring
upon themselves, through the want of fair-
ness and candour. The nation of the Jews
were always noted for a narrow and un-
charitable spirit. When John the Baptist,
and our blefied Lord, appeared among them,
because the former was austere in his tem-
per and retired in his life, they pronounced
of him that he had an evil spirit: And be-
cause the latter was open and sociable in his
manners, they held him to be destitute of
that san&ity which became a prophet. Their
prejudice against our Lord took its first rife
from a most frivolous and contemptible cause.
Is not this the foil of the carpenter ? Can an t

3 . gcod

good thing come out of Nazarelh ? When his S E R M.
miracles repelled this reproach, and fufi- _-
ciently proved the eminence of his character,
still they softered their prejudices by this
most futile reasoning, Have any of the rulers
believed on him ? Obstinate in their attach-
ment to a temporal M\essiah, and continuing
to view all our Saviour's conduc with an
evil eye, when he converged with bad men
in order to reclaim them, they treated him
as a conipanion of publicanls andfiierts. Be-
cause he disallowed their groundless tradi-
tions, they held him to be a breaker of the
Sabbath, and a contemner of religion. Be-
cause he prophesied the deftiution of their
temple, they accused him of being an enemy
to his own nation. Till at las, through
their perpetual mifconftrutiol of his ac-
tions, their passions became so inflamed as
to make them cry out with one voice, iAway
with this man to the death, and give Us Ba-
rabbas the robber.- Viewing in this dread-
ful event the consequences of want of can-
dour, let every man tremble to think evil
rashly of his brother. No one can tell how

far

S ER M. f£r uncharitable prejudices may carry him

X.
i_-^ in guilt, if he aliows them to harbour and

gather ilrength within his breast. The
cloud whici r/ifc froon thef 'a, no big-ger than
a man's ,band, may ibon swell and spread, till
it cover the whole horizon, and diflcharge
with most delfrudive violence the gathered
storm.

TI the fifth place, as a futpicious spirit

is the source of so many crimes and cala-
mities in the world, so it is the spring of
certain misery to the person who indulges
it. His friends will he few; and finall will
be his comfort in thoie whlom he poffcffes.
Believing others to be his enemies, he will
of course make them such. Let his caution
be ever so great, the asperity of his thoughts
will often break out in his behaviour; and
in return for fufpe&ing and hating, he will
incur suspicion and hatred, Besides the ex-
ternal evils which he draws upon himself,
arising from alienated friendship, broken
confidence, and open enmity; the suspicious
temper itself is one of the worst evils which

any

lorimeit, hown mi:'rable ' mi. be l'iC t'le who, -
])y living in perpetual je.! ou, lives in per-
petual dread ? Lo ing, u.on himifif to be
lirrounded w'i' lni enenies, and design-
ing men, he is a i'anger to reliance and
trust. He knows not to whom to open
himself. -eI drceics lis countenance in
forced fini!es, wv.liIe his lIh'.rt throbs within
from apprehenifons of i-ret treachery.
Hence fretfulincl and ill-hlumol-, diifuft
at the world, and ail the p'ainfil fenalltions
of an irritated and embittered mind.

So numerous and great are the evils arising

from a suspicious dilpolition, that of the two
extremes it is more eligible to expose our-
lelves to occasional disadvantage from think-
ing too well of others, than to susser con-
tinual misery by thinking always ill of them.
It is better to be sometimes imposed upon,
than never to trust. Safety is purchased at
too dear a rate, when, in order to secure it,
we are obliged to be always clad in armour,
and to live in perpetual hostility with our
fellows. This is, for the fake of living, to

t~i~~~~ d~deprive
I

S Eg M. deprive ourselves of the comfort of life.

X.
_, The man of candour enjoys his situation,

whatever it is, with cheerfulness and peace.
Prudence direcs his intercourse with the
world; but no black suspicions haunt his
hours of reft. Accustomed to view the cha-
radters of his neighbours in the most fa-
vourable light, he is like one who dwells
amidst those beautiful scenes of nature, on
which the eye refts with pleafire. Whereas
the suspicious man, having his imagination
filled with all the shocking forms of human
falsehood, deceit, and treachery, resembles
the traveller in the wilderness, who discerns
no objects around him but what are either
dreary or terrible; caverns that open, ser-
pents that hiss, and beasts of prey that howl,
Hence in him are verified those descriptions
which the Spirit of God has given us of
the misery of the wicked. TheyJhall have
no peace. Thcey7Jall be like the troubled ia
when it cannot reYf. The Lord Jhall give
them a trembling heart, and failing of eyes,
and sorrow of mind: And theyJhoallfear day
and night, and have none afurance of heart.
I add,

IKx'

IN the sixth and laif place, that there is s E R M.

X.

nothing which exposes men in a more L-
marked and diret manner to the difplea-
sure of the Almighty, than a malignant and
censorious spirit. I insist not now on the
general denunciations of divine wrath against
malice and hatred. Let us only confider
under what particular description the Spirit
of God brings this crime of uncharitable
judgment. It is declared to be an impious
invasion of the prerogative of God, to whoni
alone it belongs to search all hearts, and to
determine concerning all characters. This
privilege He often appropriates expressly to
himself, on purpose to restrain the rashness
of censure among men; requiring us to
leave the judging of others to Him, and to
attend, each of us, to our own business and
duty. Who art thout thatjudgcff another man's
servant? lo his own mqaler, he JiandcthJ r
falleth. leJdge nothing before the time; until
the Lord come, who shall make manifef the
connfels of the heart '!.

It deserves our most serious attention, that,
in several passages of Scripture, the great

Rom. xir. 4. X Corinth. iv. 5.

Judge

SERM. Judge of the world is represented, at tihe

X.
A,_- day of final retribution, as proceeding upc;i

this principle, of rendering to men according
to the manner in which they have adedl
towards their brethren. With the mcrcifij,
thou wilit Jihow thbf ilf merc/ifl; and wii.iJ
the froward, thou wilt Jhow thlifeffi^oward.
WitJh what judgmtent ye judge, ye Jfall ie
judged; and with what neaJfiie ye mecfe, it
JiJal be meafilred to you again 1-. It i ism-
possible to form an argument of more force
than this, to restrain all severity ofjudgment
among such as look forward to the tribunal
of God. The argument extends not in-
deed so far, as to represent our acceptance
with the Deity as entirely suspended upon
the candour which we show in forming our
sentiments of others. We know that other
graces besides this are requisite in order to
fit us for heaven; and that without piety
towards God, and faith, in the Lord Jefiis
Chrifl, all our charity to men will be found
defective and vain. But this we know
also, that in the heart which is destitute of

t Psalm xviii. z, 26. Matth. rii,. .

fairneis

fairness and candour, the Spirit of God S F R M.

X.

certainly dwells not; and that whatever "-_
appearances of religion the unchatitable man
may affulne, on him the Sovereign of the
universe looks with no favour. - Thou
who art a man full of frailties, who ftandeft
in need, not merely of impartiality in thy
divine Judge, but of indulgence and inercy;
Thou who imploreft daily this mercy from
him, and prayeft that He would rememnbe
thou art dill, and not be ftric to mark ini-
quity agaistl thee; dareft thou, with those
very prayers in thy mouthli proceed to judge
without candour of thy brethren, and upon
the slightest grounds to reprobate and con-
demn them ? 0 thou hypocrite! (for by
what other name can we call thee ?) vain
are all thy pretensions to piety. Ineffeaual
is every plea which thou canst form for
mercy from heaven. The precedent which
thou haft established against thyself is de-
eifive. Thou haft dictated the sentence of
thine own condemnation.

ON the whole, it clearly appears that no
part of the government of temper deserves

VOL. II. X attention

S ER M. attention more, than to keep our minds pur:

X. A-_-i from uncharitable prejudices, and open to

candour and humanity in judging of others.
The wor!t consequences, both to ourlclves
and to society, follow from the opposite
lp1irit. Let us beware of encouraging a habit
of fulpicion, by forming too severe and harsh
opinions concerning human nature in gene-
ral. A great proportion of infirmity and
corruption, doubtless, adheres to it; yet
tempered allb it is with various mixtures of
virtue and good affecion. Darkened as the
divine image now is among mankind, it is
not wholly effaced. Much piety and good-
ness may lie hidden in hearts that are un-
known to us. Vice is glaring and loud.
The crimes of the wicked make a noise in
the world, and alarm society. True worth
is retired and modest, and requires parti-
cular situations to bring it forth to public
notice. The prophet Elijah, in a time of
prevailing corruption, imagined that all true
religion had forsaken the land. I, even I
only, said he to the Lord, am left to fJrve
thce. But the Almighty, who discerned

what

ixhat was concealed from his imperfed view S E R -.

X.

replied, Yet have I left me seven thoizfiad
mien in Israel who have not bowed the ikee to
Baal `.

The aged, and the unfortunate, who have

toiled through an ullulccefsful life with long
experience of the falsehood and fraud of evil
men, are apt to be the moit revere in the
opinions which they entertain of others.
For such, their circumstances may be al-
i lowed to form some degree of apology. But

if, in youth and prosperity, the fame hard

: suspicious spirit prevail; if they who are

beginning the career of life fct out with all
the Scruples of distrust; if, before they have
! had reason to complain of the world, they
3. betray the diffidence of a jealous, and the

n malignity of a censorious mind, fad is the
presage which may thence be drawn of their
future dishonour. From such, you have
nothing to look for that shall be either en-
gaging in private life, or refpeaable in pub-
lic characer. To youth it particularly be-
longs to be generous in sentiment, candid

1 lKings xix. 14. iS.

X 2 in
t

S E R M. in opinion, undesigning in behaviour, open

x.

_-s-,i to the most favourable conftrudion of ac-

tions and conduc. Throughout all the
stages of life, candour and fairness is one of
the most honourable diftintions of the hu-
man characer. It is connected with mag-
nanimity; it is justified by wisdom; it is
suitable to the relation in which we stand to
one another. But if reason and humanity
be insufficient to restrain us from rash and
uncharitable judgments, let that awful de-
nunciation frequently resound in our ears,
He Jhall have judgment without mercy who
hath fJowed no mercy.

SE R-

# SERMON XI. On the CHARACTER of JOSEPH. GENESIS xlv. 5. 8. Now therefore be not grieved nor angry with yourselves that ye sold me hither ; for God did send me before you to preserve life. — So now it ...

[ 309 3

SERMON XI.
On the CHARACTER of JOSEPH.

GENESIS xlv. 5. 8.

Now therefo re be not grieved nor angry with

yourselves that yefold me hither; for God
did fend me before you to preserve life.-
So now it was not you that fient me hither,
but God.

N this generous manner, Joseph frames SER.M.
an apology for the unnatural behaviour X-I

of his brethren. He extenuates the atro-
city of their crime, by representing the happy
effects which it had produced. He looks
beyond all second causes; and recognizes,
in the wonderful events of his life, the hand
of the Almighty.- No human chara&er

X 3 exhibited

S E R M. exhibited in the records of Scripture is more
I-_-* remarkable, or inflrufcive, than that of this

patriarch. He is one whom we behold
tried in all the viciflitudes of fortune; from
the condition of a slave, rising to be ruler of
the land of Egypt; and in every station
acquiring, by his virtue and wisdom, favour
with God and man. When overseer of
Potiphar's house, his fidelity was proved by
strong temptations, which he honourably
refif'ed. When thrown into prison by the
artifice of a false woman, his integrity and
prudence soon rendered him conspicuous,
even in that dark mansion. When called
into the pretence of Pharaoh, the wife and
extensive plan ,which he formed for saving
the kingdom from the miseries of impend-
ing famine, justly raised him to a high fta-
tion, wherein his abilities were eminently
displayed in the public service. But in his
whole history there is no circumstance so
striking and interesting, as his behaviour to
his brethren who had fold him into slavery.
The moment in which he made himself
known to them, that moment at which we

are

are now to contemplate him, was the mofl s E R M.

XI.

critical one of his life, and the mors decilive _
of his charader. It is fich as rarely occurs
in the course of human events; and is cal-
culated to draw the highest attention of all
who are endowed with any degree of fen-
fibility of heart. Let us confider the senti-
mcnt which Jofcpil utters in the text under
two views, each of which is very instructive
to all Christians. 1. As a discovery of his
cordial forgiveness of his brethren; and, II.
as an instance of his dutifull attention to the
Providence of God.

I. TIi most cordial forgiveness is here

displaycd. I shall not recapitulate all the
preceding history refpecing Joseph and his
brethren; as it is well known by every one
who has the least acquaintance with the fa-
cred writings. From the whole tenour of
the narration it appears, that though Jo-
feph, upon the arrival of his brethren in
Egypt, made himself strange to them, yet
from the beginning he intended to discover
himnfelf; and studied so to conduat the dif-

X 4 covery

SERM. covery as might render the surprise of joy

XI.

complete. For this end, by affeated feve-
rity, he took measures for bringing down
into Egypt all his father's children. They
were now arrived there; and Benjamin
among the reft, who was his younger bro-
ther by the fame mother, and was particu-
larly beloved by Joseph. Him he threat-
ened to detain; and seemed willing to al-
low the reft to depart. This incident re-
newed their distress. They all knew their
father's extreme anxiety about the safety of
Benjamin, and with what difficulty he had
yielded to his undertaking this journey.
Should he be prevented from returning,
they dreaded that grief would overpower
the old man's spirits, and prove fatal to his
life. Judah, therefore, who had particu-
larly urged the necessity of Benjamin's ac-
companying his brothers, and had Solemnly
pledged himself to their father for his safe
return, craved, upon this occasion, an, au-
dience of the governour; and gave him a
full account of the circumstances of Jacob's
family.

Nothing

Nothing can be more interesting and pa- s E R M.

XI.

thetic than this discourse of Judah, as it is _-
recorded in the preceding chapter. Little
knowing to whom he spoke, he paints, in
all the colours of simple and natural elo-
quence, the distressed situation of the aged
patriarch, hastening to the close of life;
long afflided for the loss of a favourite oln,
whom he supposed to have been torn in
pieces by a beast of prey; labouring now
under anxious concern about his youngest
son, the child of his old age, who alone
was left alive of his mother, and whom
nothing but the calamities of severe famine
could have moved a tender father to fend
from home, and expose to the dangers of a
foreign land. If we bring him not back
with us, we fiall bring down the grey hairs
of thyfervant our father, with sorrow, to the
grave. Ipray thee therefore let thy servant
abide it/lead of the young man, a bondman to
our lord. For how fall I go up to zmy fa-
ther, and Benjamin not with mne ? les Ifee
the evil thatflail come on my sither.

Upon

E R M. Upon this relation, Joseph could no
L-_--i longer restrain himself. The tender ideas

of his father and his father's house, of his
ancient home, his country and his kindred,
of the diltrefs of his family, and his own ex-
altation, all rushed too ttrongly upon his
mind to bear any farther concealment. He
cried, caiifr cvc;y man to go out fron me;
and be wept aloud. The tears which he
shed were not the tears of grief. They
were the burf of affection. They were the
effusions of a heart overflowing with all the
tender sensibilities of nature. Formerly he
had been moved in the fame manner, when
he first law his brethren before him. His
bowels yearned uplon them; he fought for a
place where to weep. He went into his
chamber; and thcn waJIed his fice, and re-
turned to them. At that period his gene-
rous plans were not completed. But now,
when there was no farther occasion for con-
straining himself, he gave free vent to the
itrong emotions of his heart. The first
miniftcr to the king of Egypt was not

ashamed

assamed to ihow, that he felt as a man, and S E R M.

XL.

a brother. lie wept alol.d; and lhe Egjp2 - ,
imas, and the hoife of Pharaoh heard hiim.

The first words which his swelling heart

allowed him to pronounce, are the most
fiitable to such an affeding situation which
were ever uttered.-I am yofiph; doth myz
sither yet live ?-What could he, what
ought he, in that impassioned moment, to
have said more ? This is the voice of na-
ture herself, speaking her own language;
and it penetrates the heart: No pomp of
expression; no parade of kindness; but
trong a.rffeion hastening to utter what it
strongly felt. His brethren could not an-
fwer him; for they were iroubled at his pre-
fience. Their silence is as exprefive of those
emotions of repentance, and shame, which,
on this amazing discover, filled their
brcafts, and stopped their utterance, as the
few words which Joseph speaks are expref-
five of the generous agitations which ftrug-
gled for vent within him. No painter could
seize a more striking moment for displaying
the charadcerifeical features of the human

heart,

S E R M. heart, than what is here presented. Never

XI. AG-. was there a situation of more tender and

virtuous joy, on the one hand; nor, on
the other, of more overwhelming confusion
and conscious guilt. In the simple narra-
tion of the sacred historian, it is set before
us with greater energy and higher effect,
than if it had been wrought up with all the
colouring of the most admired modern elo-
quence.

When Joseph had a little recovered him-

self from the first transports of emotion, he
proceeds to explain his situation to his
brethren, and to show them the beneficent
purposes for which he conceived himfeif to
be raised by Providence into power. The
apology which he makes in the text for their
former cruelty is uncommon and remark-
able. Now therefore be not grieved nor an-
gry with yourselves that ye fold me hither;
for God did find me before you to preserve you
apoJterity in the earth, and tofave your lives
by a great deliverance. So now it was not
Jou that sent me hither but God; and he
hath made me afather to Pharaob, and Lord

t'

Ps all his holo, and a ruler throughout all the S E M.
land of Egyt. This apology was, in truth, --
no 1atisfactory excuse for their crime. For
though the over-ruling providence of Hea-
ven had so directed the course of events, as
to render their bad intentions fihbfervient to
a happy issue; yet the badness of the inten-
tion originated entirely from themselves.
The envy and jealousy which they enter-
tained against their brother, led them to
the commission of an atrocious deed. The
deed was voluntary; the crime was all their
own; and the interposition of Providence
in making unforeseen consequences follow
from that crime, did not, could not, excul-
pate them from guilt. It were an impious
conclusion, that because God extracts good
from our evil, we are not anfiverable for
the evil which we perpetrate. God cannot
be tempted with evil, neither temptelh he any
man a. But the sentiment in the text is to
he confidered, as a colour which the gene-
rous humanity of Joseph prompted him to
throw on the conduct of his brethren. He

James i. 13.

saw

SERM. saw the confusion with which they were

overwhelmed in his presence. He diverts
their attention from the remembrance of a
crime which was now wringing their hearts
with anguish, by representing to them the
happy effecs which that crime had pro-
duced. He sets them free from all uncafi-
ness on his account. He calls upon them
to rejoice in his prosperity; and instead of
dwelling on a painful recolledion of their
own conduct, to join with him in ac-
knowledging and adoring the hand of the
Almighty.

How different is this amiable spirit which

Joseph discovers, from that harsh and often-
tatious superiority which too often accom-
panies the pretended forgiveness of injuries,
among those who call themselves Christians!
They are ready to fay that, for their part,
they pardon the wrongs which have been
done them; they wish that the persons who
have committed them may be able to for-
give themselves; they leave them to God
and to their own conscience. By the revere
suggestions which they throw out, they

discover

discover the inward bitterness of their fpi- E R iM.
rit; and artfully gratify resentment, at the a
time when they profe's to exercile forgive-
ness. Whereas the great and good man
whose character we now confider, effaces
all memory of the crimes which he par-
dons. He seeks to alleviate the rcmorfe
of his brethren by an extenuation of their
guilt; and while he is preparing to make
their circumstances comfortable, itudics at
the iame time to render their minds easy
and tranquil.

This was not merely a transient emotion

with Joseph, owing to the first burit of as-
feftion on discovering himself to his bre-
thren. We have a clear proof, from a re-
markable transaction which pafled many
syears after this period, of his disposition
continuing the fame to the end of life. It
is recorded in the last chapter of this book,
that when Jacob died, his sons began to be
seized with fear concerning the. treatment
which they might receive from their bro-
ther. The guilty are always suspicious.
Conicious of their own baseness, they are

i 5 incapable
'

SEXRM. incapable of conceiving the magnanimity of

others. They saw the bond which held
the family together, now broken by their
father's death. They dreaded that the re-
fentment of Joseph against them had hi.
therto been only suppressed, or concealed.
fTheyfaid among thenfelves, peradventure he
'will niw hate us, and requite all the evil which
we did unto him. Under this apprehension,
they first sent a humble message to depre-
cate his displeasure by the memory of their
common father; and then appearing in his
presence, they fell down before his face,
profefling themselves to be his servants, and
praying him to forgive the trcfpafs which
they had committed against him. But no
such hidden resentment as they dreaded had
ever lurked in the obul of Joseph. On the
contrary, when he beheld his brethren in
this asseting situation, bereaved of their
ancient protetor, and reduced, as they
imagined, to the necessity of holding up
their hands to him for mercy, he was over-
powered by a tide of tender emotions. Jo-
feph wept, while his brethrenfpake unto himi

r These

These affefionate tears alone were sufficient S E R M.

XI.

to have ensured their forgiveness. But ha- L. - _
tfening also by words to dispel their alarms,
he presently added, Fear not; for though ye
thought evil againjl me, God meant it unto
good, Now therefore fear ye not; I will
noriijh you and your little ones. And he
consorted them; and/pake kindly wito them *.

Such was the last incident that is record-

ed in-the life of this eminent personage,

i than whom you will find few more diftin-
i guifhed by an assemblage of illustrious vir-
i tues; in the lowest adversity, patient and

i faithful; in the highest prosperity, benefi-
cent and generous; dutiful and affecionate,
as a son; kind and forgiving, as a brother;
accomplished, as a statesman; wife and pro-
vident, as a ruler of the land. In such a
character you behold human nature possess-
ing its highest honours. The sentiments
which it inspires, tend to ennoble our minds;.
and to prevent their imbibing the spirit of
those hard, interested, and felf-feeking men
iwith whom the world abounds.

* Genes. 1. 2.
VOL. II. Y THE

SERM. TnHE iriking example of forgiveness,

XI.

which the text displays, ought frequently
to occur to our thoughts, amidst the various
occasions of provocation and offence which
arise in our intercourse with the world. If
one so worthy and amiable, in the days too
of his youth and innocence, suffered such
cruel treatment from his brothers, ought
we to be surprised if, even from our nearest
relations, we meet with injustice or ingra-
titude ? Wrongs and injuries are, more or
less, the portion of all. Like Death, they
are an evil unavoidable. No flation is so
high, no power so great, no charader so
unblemished, as to exempt us from them.
In the world, ungrateful men, false friends,
and violent enemies abound. Every wife
man ought to prepare himself for what he
is to encounter, in passing through this
thorny region. He is not to expect that
he can gather grapes from tbhfles; nor to
lose the government of his mind, because,
in the midst of evil men, he is not allowed
to remain, like a sacred and inviolable per-
son, untouched and uninjured.

As

As this view of our situation ought to FR M.

blunt the edge of paflion and impatience, '--
so the alleviating circumstances which rea-
son will suggest ought to mollify resent-
ment. Think of the various constructions
which the acions of men will bear. Con-
fider how different the motives of him who
hath given us offence, may have been from
those which in the heat ofpaffion we ascribe
to him; how apt all men are to be seduced
by mistaken views of interest; and how
little ground we have to complain if, upon
a supposed interfering of interests, we susser
by others preferring their own to ours.
Remember that no opinions which you
form under the power of resentment can
be depended upon as juRf; and that every
one loads the intentions of his enemy with
imaginary degrees of malice.

But admitting the injury you have re-

ceived to be ever so atrocious in its nature,
and aggravated in its circumfiances; sup-
posing it to be even parallel to that which
Joseph suffered; look up, like him, to that
divine government under which we are all

Y 2 placed.

SE R M. placed. If forgiveness be a duty which

XL.

we know God to have required under the
most awful fantions, dare we draw upon
ourselves the merited vengeance of that fu-
periour, to whose clemency we are obliged
daily to fly ? When, with hard and unre-
lenting dispositions towards our brethren,
we fend up to Heaven prayers for mercy to
ourselves, those prayers return like impre-
cations upon our heads; and our very de-
votions feal our condemnation.

The most plain and natural sentiments of

equity concur with divine authority to
enforce the duty which I now recommend.
Let him who has never in his life done
wrong, be allowed the privilege of re-
maining inexorable. But let such as are
conscious of frailties and crimes, confider
forgiveness as a debt which they owe to
others. - Common failings are the strongest
leflon of mutual forbearance. Were this
virtue unknown among men, order and
comfort, peace and repose would be itran-
gers to human life. Injuries retaliated ac-
cording to the exorbitant measure which

passion

paflion prescribes, would jufify resentment s E R M.
in return. The injured person would be- -
come the injurer; and thus wrongs, reta-
liations, and fresh injuries, would circulate
in endless succession, till the world was
rendered a field of blood. Of all the pas-
sions which invade the human breast, re-
venge is the most direful. When allowed
to reign with full dominion, it is more than
sufficient to poison the few pleasures which
remain to man in his present state. How
much soever a person may susser from in-
justice, he is always in hazard of suffering
more from the prosecution of revenge.
The violence of an enemy cannot infliac
what is equal to the torment he creates to
himself, by means of the fierce and desperate
passions which he allows to rage in his
foul.

Those evil spirits who inhabit the regions

of misery, are represented as delighting in
' revenge and cruelty. But all that is great

aad good in the universe, is on the fide of
clemency and mercy. The almighty Ruler
i of the world, though for ages offended by

3
Y the

SExR M. the unrighteousness, and insulted by the
<---.. impiety of men, is long fiffeing and flow

to anger. His Son, when he appeared in
our nature, exhibited both in his life and
his death, the most illustrious example of
forgiveness which the world ever beheld.
If you look into the history of mankind,
you will find that in every age, those who
have been refpe&ed as worthy, or admired
as great, have been diftinguiihed for this
virtue. Revenge dwells in little minds,
A noble and magnanimous spirit is always
fuperiour to it. It fufters not from the inju-
ries of men those revere shocks which others
feel. Colleded within itself, it stands un-
moved by their impotent assaults; and with
generous pity, rather than with anger, looks
down on their unworthy conduc. It has
been truly said, that the greatest man on
earth can no sooner commit an injury, than
a good man can make himself greater, by
forgiving it. Joseph, at the moment when
we now contemplate him, had entirely uil-
der his power all those unnatural brethren
who had been guilty towards him of the

mofit

mloft cruel outrage which men could per- s E R M.

XI.

petrate. He could have retained them for A
ever in that Egyptian bondage to which
they had once consigned him; and have
gratified revenge by every accumulation of
disgrace which despotic power enabled him
to inflict. Had he aded this part, he
might for a while have been soothed by the
pleasures of his high station. But remorse,
in the end, would have stung his foul.
Cruelty would have rendered him unhappy
within himself, as well as odious to others:
And his name would have perished among
the crowd of those contemptible itatefinen,
whose actions slain the annals of history.
Whereas now, his character flands among
the foremost in the ranks of spotless fame.
His memory is blessed to all generations.
His example continues to edify the world;
and he himself shines in the celeflial re-
gions as the brightness of the firmament, and
as theJfarsfor ever and ever, Let us now,

II. CONSIDER the sentiment contained
in the text, not only as a discovery of cor-

Y 4 dial

SE RM. dial forgiveness, but as an expression of
L- devout attention to the condua of Provi-

dence. So now. it was not you that sent me
hither, but God. Remark how beautifully
piety and humanity are, in this instance,
conneced together. As we are told of
Cornelius, the good Centurion, that his
prayers and his alms, his devotion and his
good works, came up together in memorial
-before God, so here we perceive fraternal
affection and religious reverence, mingling
in one emotion within the patriarch's heart.
In a person of low and vulgar mind, the
sensations on such an occasion would have
been extremely different. Looking back
on the past events of his life, he would
have ascribed all the adversity which he had
suffered, to the perverse treatment of his
brothers; and all the prosperity which he
afterwards attained, to his own good conduc
and wisdom; and by consequence would
have remained embittered againif the inftru-
ments of the one, and filled with pride and
felf-fufficiency 'on account of the other.
But the elevated and noble mind of Joseph

rejected

rejeaed such unworthy sentiments. Con- SERM.

XI,

templating the hand of God in all that had
befallen him, he effaced the remembrance
of those evil deeds which had produced his
adversity; and for his prosperity he affect-
ed no praise to himself, but ascribed it en-
tirely to the will of Heaven. Let us take
notice that this is not the refleCtion of a
private, retired man; whose situation might
be supposed to favour such devout medita-.
tions. It is the reflection of one, who was
leading a busy and a seducing life, in the
midst of a court; the favourite of the
greatest monarch who was then known in
the world. Yet him you behold, amidst
the submission and adulation which was
paid to him, preserving the moderation and
imnplicity of a virtuous mind; and amidst
the idolatry and false philosophy of the
Egyptians, maintaining the principles of true
religion, and giving glory to the God of
Israel.

From this union of piety with humanity,

which is io conspicuous in the sentiments of
Jofcph, there arises one very important in-

6 firution;

S E R M. fhrudion; That a devout regard to the hand

XI.
&- J of God in the various events of life tends

to promote good dispositions and affections
towards men. It will be found by those
who attend to the workings of human na-
ture, that a great proportion of those ma-
lignant passions which break out in the in-
tercourfe of men, arises fiom confining their
attention wholly to second causes, and over-
looking the first cause of all. Hence, they
are insolent in prosperity, because they dif-
cern nothing higher than their own abili-
ties; and in adversity they are peevish and
unforgiving, because they have no object
on which to fix their view, but the conduc
of men who have ated as their enemies.
They behold no plan of wisdom or goodness
carried on throughout nature, which can
allay the discomposure of their mind. As
soon as their temper is ruffled, the world
appears to them to be a continued scene of
disasters and injuries, of confused events
and of unreasonable men. Whereas to the
pious man, the contemplation of the uni-
verse exhibits a very different fpedacle. In

the

the midif of teeming confusion he traces a S E R M.

XI.

principle of order; and by attention to that '-r-
order, his mind is harmonized and calmed.
He beholds a wife and righteous Governour
presiding over all the commotions which
are raised by the tumult of conflicting pas-
sions and interests; guiding, with imper-
ceptible influence, the hand of the violent to
beneficent purposes; accomplishing unex-
peded ends by the most improbable means;
obliging the wrath of man to praie him;
Sometimes humbling the mighty, sometimes
exalting the low; often finaring the wicked
in the devices which their hands have wrought.
Refpedful acknowledgment of this divine
government, controuls the disorders of infe-
riour passions. Reverence for the decrees
of Heaven inspires patience and modera-
tion. Trust in that perfet wisdom and
goodness which direts all for the belt, di-
minifhes the shock which worldly disasters
occasion. The irritation of pafion and re-
fentment, will always bear proportion to the
agitation which we susser from the changes
of fortune. One who connects himself

4 with

S ER M. with nothing but second causes, partakes of

.-.-- the violence and irregularity of all the in-

feriour movements belonging to this great
machine. He who refers all to God, dwells,
if we may speak so, in that higher sphere
where motion begins; he is fubjeet to fewer
fiocks and concuflions, and is only carried
along by the motion of the universe.

How can mildness or forgiveness gain

place in the temper of that man who, on
occasion of every calamity which he suffers
from the ill usage of others, has no fanduary
within his own breast to which he can make
retreat from their vexations; who is pof-
sessed of no principle which is of sufficient
power to bear down the rising tide of peevish
and angry passions? The violence of an
enemy, or the ingratitude of a friend, the
injustice of one man, and the treachery of
another, perpetually dwell and rankle in
his thoughts. The part which they have
aaed in bringing on his distress, is frequently
more grating to him than the distress itself.
Whereas he who in every event looks up to
God, has always in his view a great and ele-

vating

vating objeCt, which inspires him with mag- s E R M-
nanimity. His mind lies open to every -
relieving thought, and is inclined to every
suggestion. of generosity. He is disposed to
fay with Joseph, it was not you thatfent me
hither, but God; with David, it is the Lord;
let him do what feemeth good in his eyes; and
with a greater personage than either of these,
the cup which my Father hath given me to
drink, JJall I not drink it ? Hence arises
superiority to many of the ordinary provo-
cations of the world. For he looks upon
the whole of his present life as part of a
great plan, which is carried on under the
direcion of Heaven. In this plan, he views
men as aaing their several parts, and con-
tributing to his good or evil. But their
parts he confiders as subordinate ones;
which, though they may justly merit his
affetion, and may occasionally call forth
his resentment, yet afford no proper foun-
ldation to violent or malignant paflion. He
looks upon bad men as only the rod with
which the Almighty chastens; like the
pestilence, the earthquake, or the storm.

In

E R M. In the midst of their injutice and violence
XL

he can pity their blindness; and imitate our
blefieed Lord in praying, Father, forgive
them; for they know not what they do.

SE R-

# SERMON XII. On the CHARACTER of HAZAEL. 2 KINGS viii. 12, 13. And Hazael said, Why weepeth my Lord? And he answered, Because I know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of Israel. Their strong ...

[ 335 1

S E R M ON XII.
On the CHARACTER of HAZAEL.

---------

2 KINGS Niii. 2, 13.

And Hazaclfaid, Why weepeth nmy Lord?
And he anwered, Becafe I know the evil
that thou wilt do unto the children of Israel.
Their frong holds wilt thouJfet onfre, and
their young men wilt thou flay with the
sword, and wilt daJ7 their children, and
rip up their women with child. And
Hazaelfaid, But what, is thy frvant a
dog, that he hfould do this great thing ?
And Elytha answered, The Lord hath
Jhewed me that thou J.halt be king over
Syria.

N the days of Joram king bs Israel flou- s ER M.
rifhed the prophet Elisha. His charadter xII.

was so eminent, and his fame so widely
spread, that Benhadad the king of Syria,

though

SER M. though an idolater, sent to consult him con-
XI.

cerning the issue of a distemper which
threatened his life. The messenger em-
ployed on this occasion was Hazael, who
appears to have been one of the princes, or
chief men, of the Syrian court. Charged
with rich gifts from the king, he presents
himself before the prophet; and accofis him
in terms of the highest refpec. During the
conference which they held together, Eliha
fixed his eye ftedfaftly on the countenance
of Hazael; and discerning, by a prophetic
spirit, his future tyranny and cruelty, he
could not contain himself from bursting into
a flood of tears. When Hazael, in furprifc,
inquired into the cause of this sudden emo-
tion, the prophet plainly informs him of the
crimes and barbarities which he foresaw
that hereafter he should commit. The Ibul
of Hazael abhorred, at this time, the thoughts
of cruelty. Uncorrupted, as yet, by am-
bition or greatness, his indignation arose at
being thought capable of such savage actions
as the prophet had mentioned; and, ~with
much warmth, he replies, Bat what ? in

t!9'

thyfervant a dog, that hefJhold d o this great s E R M
thing? Elifia makes no retufn but to point
out a remarkable change which was to take
place in his condition; The Lord hath
fiewed me that thozi Jhalt be king over Syria.
In course of time, all that had been pre-
diaed came to pass. Hazael ascended the
throne; and ambition took possession of his
heart. He fnote the children of Ifirae in all
their coafs. He opprefi'd thim during all
the days of King yehoahaz ; and, from
what is left on record of his acions, plainly
appears to have proved what the prophet
foresaw him to be, a man of violence~
cruelty, and blood.

In this passage of history, an object is

presented which deserves our serious atten-
tion. We behold a man who, in one state
of lifej could not look upon certain crimes
without surprise and horrour; who knew
so little of himself as to believe it impossible
for him ever to be concerned in commit-
ting them; that fame man, by a change of
condition, transformed in all his sentiments,

* 2 Kings xiii. 22.
VOL. II. Z and

SE RM. and as he rose in greatnes, rising also ill
xI. guilt; till at last he completed that whole

charaaer of iniquity which he once de-
tested. Hence the following observations
naturally arise. I. That to a mind not
entirely corrupted, sentiments of abhorrence
at guilt are natural. II. That notwith-
standing those sentiments, the mind may
be brought under the dominion of the vices
which it had most abhorred. III. That
this unhappy revolution is frequently owing
to a change of men's external circumstances
and condition in the world. These obfer-
vations are to make the subjea of the pre-
sent discourse; and will lead us to such a
view of human nature as, it is hoped, may
be of general use.

I. SENTIME NTS of abhorrence. at guilt

are natural to the human mind. Hazael's
reply to the prophet flhews how strongly he
felt them. Is thy servant a dog, that h1
J]ould do this great thing ? Is he, or can he
ever be, so base and wretched as to perpe-
trate crimes, which would render him un-

worthy

worthy of bearing the name of a man? SERM.

XII.

This is the voice of human nature, while
it is not as yet hardened in iniquity. Some
vices are indeed more odious to the mind
than others. Providence has wifely pointed
the sharpest edge of this natural aversion
against the crines which are of most perni-
cious and deftrudive nature; such as trea-
chery, oppreflion, and cruelty. But, in ge-
neral, the diftinEtion between moral good
and evil is so strongly marked, as to ac-
company almost every vice with sensible
(lifapprobation. Present to any man, even
the most ignorant and untutored, an ob-
vious instance of injustice, falsehood, or im-
piety; let him view it in a cool moment,
when no pafion blinds, and no interest
Wali)ps him ; and you will find that his mind
immediately revolts against it, as shameful
and bale, nay as deserving punishment.
Hence, in reasoning on the chara&ers of
others, however men may mistake as to
sacs, yet they generally praise and blame
according to the principles of found mo-
rality.

Z 2 WVith

S E R. With reipea to their own characer, a

XII.
a-_--' notorious partiality too generally misleads

their judgment. But it is remarkable, that
no finner ever avows directly to himself
that he has been guilty of gross and down-
right iniquity. Even when engaged by his
patfions in the commission of the greatest
crimes, he always palliates them to his own
mind by some extenuation or apology, some
pretended necessity, or some borrowed co-
lour of innocence. Such power the unde-
niable dignity of virtue, and the acknow-
ledged turpitude of vice, possess over every
human heart. These sentiments are the re-
maining impressions of that law, which was
originally written on the mind of man.
They are gleams of that light which once
ihone clear and strong within us; and which,
though it be now greatly obscured, yet con-
tinues to ihoot a feeble ray athwart the
darkness of human nature.-But what-
ever sentiments of abhorrence at vice we
may at any time entertain, we have no
reason to build upon these a presumptuous
confidence of our continuance in virtue.

For

For the next inftrudion which the text SERM.

XII.
suggests is, __,

II. THAT such is man's ignorance of his

own charater, such the frailty of his na-
ture, that he may one day become infa-
mous for those very crimes which at present
he holds in detestation. This obkervation
is too well verified by the history of Hazael;
and a thousand other instances might be
brought to confirm it. Though there is
nothing which every person ought to know
so thoroughly as his own heart, yet from
the conduc of men it appears, that there is
nothing with which they are lels acquainted.
Always more prone to flatter themselves
than desirous to discover the truth, they
trust to their being pofleffcd of every virtue
which has not been put to the trial; and
reckon themselves secure against every vice
to which they have not hitherto been
tempted. As long as their duty hangs in
Speculation, it appears so plain, and so eli-
gible, that they cannot doubt of performing
it. The suspicion never enters their mirnd,

Z 3 tlh:t

s ERM. that in the hour of speculation, and in the
i-c- Xhour of pracice, their ientiments may differ

widely. Their present disposition they ea-
fily persuade themselves will ever continue
the fame; and yet that disposition is chan-
ging with circumltances every moment.

The man who glows with the warm feel-

ings of devotion, imagines it impossible for
him to lose that sense of the divine good-
ness which at present melts his heart. He
whom his friend has lately saved from ruin
is confident that, if some trying emergency
ihall put his gratitude to proof, he will ra-
ther die than abandon his benefator. He
who lives happy and contented in frugal
industry, wonders how any man can give
himself up to dissolute pleasure. Were any
of those persons informed by a fuperiour
spirit, that the time was shortly to come
when the one should prove an example of
scandalous impiety, the other of treachery
to his friend, and the third of all that ex-
travagant luxury which disgraces a growing
fortune; each of them would testify as much
surprise and abhorrence as Hazael did, upon

hearing

hearing the preditions of the prophet. Sin- SE R M.

XII.

cere they might very poflibly be in their ---
expressions of indignation; for hypocrisy
is not always to be charged on men whole
conduCt is inconsistent. Hazael was in
earnest, when he resented with such ardour
the imputation of cruelty. The Apostle
Peter was lincere, when he made the zealous
profession, that though he filould go to
prison and to death with his master, he
would never deny him. They were fin-
cere; that is, they spoke from the fulncfs
of their hearts, and from the warmth of the
present moment; but they did not know
themselves, as the events which followed
plainly showed. So false to its principles,
too frequently, is the heart of man; so
weak is the foundation of human virtue; so
much reason there is for what the gospel
perpetually inculcates concerning the necef-
fity of difrufting ourselves, and depending
on divine aid. MIortifying, I confess, is
this view of human nature; yet proper to
be attended to by all, in order to escape the
Ioft fatal dangers. For, merely through

.Z 4 unguarded

SER M. unguarded conduc, and from the want of

this prudent suspicion of their own weak-
ness, how many, after the most promising
beginnings, have gradually apostatized from
every principle of virtue; until, at last, it
has become as difficult for one to believe
that they ever had any love of goodness, as
it would have been once to have persuaded
themselves that they were to advance to
such a height in wickedness?

IN such cafes as I have described, what

has become, it may be enquired, of those
sentiments of abhorrence at guilt which
were once felt so strongly ? Are they to-
tally erased ? or, if in any degree they re-
main, how do such persons contrive to
satisfy themselves in acing a part which
their minds condemn?-Here, there is a
mystery of iniquity which requires to be
unfolded. Latent and secret is the progress
of corruption within the foul; and the
more latent, the more dangerous is its
growth. No man becomes of a sudden
Completely wicked, Guilt never shows its

whole

whole deformity at once; but by gradual s E R .

XII,

acquaintance reconciles us to its appearance, .
and imperceptibly diffuses its poison through
all the powers of the mind. Every man
has some darling palfion which generally
affords the first introduction to vice. The
irregular gratifications into which it occa-
fionally reduces him, appear under the form
of venial weaknesses; and are indulged, in
the beginning, with scrupulousness and re-
serve. But by longer praCtice these re-
ftraints weaken, and the power of habit
grows. One vice brings in another to its
aid. By a fort of natural affinity they con-
net and entwine themselves together; till
their roots come to be spread wide and deep
over all the foul. When guilt rites to be
glaring, conscience endeavours to remon-
ftrate. But conscience is a calm principle.
Passion is loud and impetuous; and creates
a tumult which drowns the voice of reason.
It joins, besides, artifice to violence; and
leduces at the fime time that it impels.
For it employs the underfianding to impose
i1Pon the conscience, It devises reasons

and

S E R M. and arguments to jullify the corruptions of
m--.. the heart. The common practice of the

world is appealed to. Nice diftindions are
made. Men are found to be circumftaiced
in so peculiar a manner, as to render cer-
tain actions excusable, if not blamelels,
which, in another situation, it is confessed
would have been criminal. By ifuch a pro-
cess as this, there is reason to believe that
a great part of mankind advance from siep
to flep in fin, partly hurried by passion,
and partly blinded by felf-deceit, without
any just sense of the degree of guilt which
they contrat. By inveterate habits their
judgment is, at length, perverted, and their
moral feelings are deadened. They fee
now with other eyes; and can look with-
out pain on evil actions which they for-
merly abhorred.

It is proper, however, to oblerve, that

though our native fcntiments of abhorrence
at guilt may be so born down, or so eluded
as to lose their influence on conduct, yet
those sentiments belonging originally to our
frame, and being never totally eradicated

from

from the foul, will still retain so much au- SER T.
thority, as if not to reform, at leaf on some vy
occasions, to chaflen the finner. It is only
during a course of proiperity, that vice is
able to carry on its delusions without dif-
turbance. But, ainidft the dark and
thoughtful situations of life, conscience re-
gains its rights; and pours the whole bit-
tcrnefs of remorse on his heart who has
apostatized from his original principles.
We may well believe that, before the end
of his days, Hazaei's first impressions would
be made to return. In the hour of adver-
fity, the remembrance of his conference
with the venerable Prophet would fling hi3
heart. Comparing the sentiments which,
in those his better days, he felt, with the
atrocious cruelties which he had afterwards
committed, all the honours of royalty would
be unable to save him from the inward sense
of baseness and infam.

FROM this view which has been exhi-

bited of the progress of corruption, and of
the danger to which we are cxpofed of

falling

F R M. falling from principles which once appeared
.-y-. firmly established, let us receive useful ad-

monition for cur own conduc. Let not
him that girdeth on his harniefs, boast like hint
that putteth it of. Let no man place a rahl
and dangerous confidence in his virtue.
But let him that thinketh he Jfandeth, take
heed lo hefdll. Never adventure on too
near an approach to what is evil. Fami-
liarize not yourselves with it, in the flight-
eft instances, without fear. Liften with
reverence to every reprehension of con-
science; and preserve the most quick and
accurate sensibility to right and wrong. If
ever your moral imprefions begin to de-
cay, and your natural abhorrence of guilt
to leflen, you have ground to dread that
the ruin of virtue is fast approaching.
While you employ all the circumfpedion
and vigilance which reason can suggest, let
your prayers, at the fame time, continually
ascend to God for support and aid. Re-
member that from him decendeth every good
and perfect gift; and that to him only it
belongs to keep you from falling, and topre-

sint

Jfnt yiot fauiltlfs before th7e p,,refcc S/s

his S E RM.

glory wi'th exceedirg joy. I proceed now to -
the

III. OBSERVATION from the text, That

flie power which corruption acquires to
pervert the original principles of men, is
firequently owing to a change of their cir-
cumftances and condition in the world.
How different was Hazael the messenger
of Benhadad, from H-azael the king; he
who started at the mention of cruelty, from
him who waded in blood! Of this fad
and surprising revolution, the Prophet em-
phatically assigns the cause in these few
words; The Lord hathbJhcwed me that thou
shalt be king over Syria. That crown, that
fatal crown, which is to be set upon thy
head, shall shed a malignant influence over
thy nature; and shall produce that change
in thy characer which now thou canst
not believe.--.Whofe experience of the
world is so narrow, as not to furnish him
with instances similar to this, in much
humbler conditions of life ? So great is

the

s E R M. the influence of a new situation of external
XII.

-- fortune; such a different turn it gives to

our temper and affetions, to our views
and desires, that no man can foretell what
his charaaerwould prove, flould Providence
either raise or depress his circumstances in
a remarkable degree, or throw him into
some sphere of aion widely different from
that to which he has been accustomed in
former life.

The feeds of various qualities, good and

bad, lie in all our hearts. But until pro-
per occasions ripen, and bring them for-
ward, they lie there inactive and dead.
They are covered up and concealed within
the recefles of our nature: or, if they spring
up at all, it is under such an appearance as
is frequently mistaken, even by ourselves.
Pride, for instance, in certain situations,
has no opportunity of displaying itself, but
as magnanimity, or sense of honour. Ava-
rice appears as necessary and laudable ceco-
nomy. What in one station of life would
discover itself to be cowardice and baseness
of mind, passes in another for prudent cir-

cumfpedion.

cumfpeaion. W\hat in the fulness of power S E R M.
would prove to be cruelty and oppression,
is reputed, in a ifbordinate rank, no more
than the exercise of proper diicilpline. For
a while, the man is known neither by tile
world, nor by himself, to be what he truly-
is. But bring him into a new situation of
life, which accords with his predominant
difpolition; which strikes on certain latent
qualities of his foul, and awakens them into
adion; and, as the leaves of a flower gra-
dually unfold to the fun, so shall all his
true characer open full to view.

This may, in one light, be accounted

not so much an alteration of chara:ccr pro--
duced by a change of circumstances, as a
discovery brought forth of the real character,
which formerly lay concealed. Yet, at the
fame time, it is true that the man himielf
undergoes a change. For opportunity being
given for certain dispositions, which had
been dormant, to exert themselves without
restraint, they of course gather ftrcngth.
By means of the acfendency which they
gain, other parts of the temper are borne

I down;

SE R M. down; and thus an alteration is made iit

XII.
Am_^ the whole ftruture and system of the foul;

He is a truly wife and good man who,
through divine affitance, remains fuperi-
our to this influence of fortune on his cha-
racter; who having once imbibed worthy
sentiments, and established proper principles
of acion, continues constant to there,
whatever his circumitancesbe; mailitains,
throughout all the changes of his life, one
uniform and supported tenour of condut;
and what he abhorred as evil and wicked in
the beginning of his days, continues to ab-
hor to the end. But how rare is it to meet
with this honourable consistency among
men, while they are passing through the
different flations and periods of life! When
they are setting out in the world, before
their minds have been greatly milled or
debased, they glow with generous emotions,
and look with contempt on what is fordid
and guilty. But advancing farther in life,
and inured by degrees to the crooked ways
of men; prefiing through the crowd, and
the bustle of the world; obliged to contend

2 ~~3 ~ with

w;th this man's craft, and that man's scorn; s E R M.
accustomed, sometimes, to conceal their j
sentiments, and often to stifle their feelings,
they became at last hardened in heart, and
familiar with corruption. Who would not
drop a tear over this fad, but frequent fall of
human probity and honour! Who is not
humbled, when he beholds the refined fen-
timents and high principles on which we
are so ready to value ourselves, brought to
such a shameful issue; and man, with all
his boasted attainments of reason, discover-
ed so often to be the creature of his exter-
nal fortune, moulded and formed by the
incidents of his life!

THE instance of Hazael's degeneracy

leads us to refle&, in particular, on the dan-
gers which arise from flations of power and
greatness; especially, when the elevation of
men to these has been rapid and sudden.
Few have the strength of mind which is re-
quifite for bearing such a change with tem-
perance, and felf-command. The refpe&
which is paid to the great, and the scope

TOL. II. A a which

S E R M. which their condition affords for the indul-

XII.
L_-~ gence of pleasure, are perilous circumstances

to virtue. When men live among their
equals, and are accustomed to encounter the
hardihips of life, they are of course remind-
ed of their mutual dependence on each
other, and of the dependence of all upon
God. But when they are highly exalted
above their fellows, they meet with few
objecs to awaken serious reflection, but
with many to feed and inflame their pas-
sions. They are apt to separate their in-
terest from that of all around them; to
wrap themselves up in theirvain grandeur;
and in the lap of indolence and selfish plea-
sure, to acquire a cold indifference to the
concerns even of those whom they call their
friends. The fancied independence-into which
they are lifted up, is adverse to sentiments
of piety, as well as of humanity, in thei"
heart. 'aking the timbrel and the ha7p, and
rejoicing at the Juwnd of the organ, theyfJa
unto God, Departfrom us, for we defre not
the knowledge of thy wlrs. What is the
Almighty that we Jljulld serve him ? or uwhat

152oof

profit JJould 'we have, if .we jr7' utlo S E R M.
him ?

But we are not to imagine, that elevated

stations in the world furnilh the only formi-
dable trials to which our virtue is exposcd.
It will'be found, that we are liable to no
fewer nor less dangerous temptations, from
the opposite extreme of poverty and depref-
iion. When men who have known better
days are thrown down into abjec situations
of fortune, their spirits are broken and their
tempers foured. Envy rankles in their
breast at such as are more successful. The
providence of Heaven is accused in secret
murmurs; and the sense of misery is ready
to push them into atrocious crimes, in order
to better their fiate. Among the inferiour
classes of mankind, craft and dishonesty are
too often found to prevail; Low and pe-
nurious circumstances depress the human
powers. They deprive men of the proper
means of knowledge and improvement; and
where ignorance is gross, it is always in
hazard of engendering profligacy.

A a 2 Hence

SE R M Hence it has been, generally, the opi-
XII.

nion of wife men in all ages, that there is
a certain middle condition of life, equally
remote from either of those extremes of
fortune, which, though it want not also its
own dangers, yet is, on the whole, the
state most favourable both to virtue and to
happiness. For there, luxury and pride on
the one hand, have not opportunity to ener-
vate or intoxicate the mind, nor want and
dependence on the other, to' fink and de-
bafe'it; there, all the native affections of
the foul have the freest and fairest exercise,
the equality of men is felt, friendships are
formed, and improvements of every fort are
pursued with most success; there, men are
prompted to industry without being over-
come by toil, and their powers called forth
into exertion, without being either super-
feded by too much abundance, or baffled
by insuperable difficulties; there, a mixture
of comforts and of wants, at once awakens
their gratitude to God, and reminds them
of their dependence on his aid; -and there-
fore, in this state, men seem to enjoy life to

4 molt

most advantage, and to be least exposed to s E R M,.
the snares of vice. Such a condition is re- '
corded, in the book of Proverbs, to have
been the wish and choice of one who was
eminent for wisdom. Remove far fromn me
vanity and lies. Give me neither poverty nor
riches. Feed me with food convenient for
me. Left I be fill and deny thee, and Jay,
Wrbo is the Lord ? or left I be poor and Jteal,
and take the name of my God in vain *.

FROM the whole view which we have

now taken of the subjed, we may, in the
firtt place, learn the reasons for which a
variety of conditions and ranks was efta-
blithed by Providence among mankind.
This life is obviously intended to be a Rate
of probation and trial. No trial of charac-
ters is requisite with refped to God, who
fees what is in every heart, and perfectly
knows what part each man would ad, in all
the poiTible situations of fortune. But on
accoint of men themselves, and of the

* Prov. xxx. 8, 9.

A a 3 world

S ER M. world around them, it was neceflary that

-' trial ihould take place, and a discrimination

of charaters be made; in order that true
virtue might be separated from false appear-
ances of it, and the justice of Heaven be
displayed in its final retributions; in order
that the failings of men might be so dif-
covered to themselves, as to afford them
proper inftruaion, and promote their amend-
ment; and in order that their characers
might be shown to the world in every
point of view, which could furnish either
examples for imitation, or admonitions of
danger. The accomplishment of these im-
portant purposes required, that human life
should not always proceed in one tenour;
but that it should both be chequered with
many revolutions, and diversified by a va-
riety of employments and ranks; in pass-
ing through which, the touchstone might
be applied to the characers of men, and
their hidden virtues or vices explored.
Hazael might have appeared in history with
a degree of reputation to which he was not
entitled, had he continued to aa in a fiub-

ordinate

ordinate station. At bottom, he was false SERM.

XIL.

and unsound. When raised higher in life,
the corruption of his heart iifcovered itself;
and he is now held forth with deserved in-
famy, as a warning to succeeding ages.

IN the second place we learn, from what

has been said, the importance of attending
with the utmost care to the choice which we
make of our employment and condition in
life. It has been shown, that our external
situation frequently operates powerfully on
our moral characer; and by consequence
that it is ftridly conneaced, not only with
our temporal welfare, but with our ever-
lasting happiness or misery. He who might
have passed unblamed, and upright, through
certain walks of life, by unhappily chufing
a road where he meets with temptations too
strong for his virtue, precipitates himself
into shame here, and into endless ruin here-
after. Yet how Often is the determination
of this most important article left to the
chance of accidental connecions, or ilb-
mitted to the option of youthful- fancy and

A a 4 humour

S EIR . humour ? When it is made the subjea of
--r... serious deliberation, how seldom have they,

on whom the decision of it depends, any
further view than so to dispose of one who
is coming out into life, as that he may the
soonest become rich, or, as it is expressed,
make his way to most advantage in the
world ? Are there no other objeCs than
this to be attended to, in fixing the plan of
life? Are there no more sacred and im-
portant interests which deserve to be con-
fulted ?-You would not willingly place
one for whose welfare you was interested, in
a situation for which you were convinced
that his abilities were unequal. These,
therefore, you examine with care; and on
them you reft the ground of your decision.
Be persuaded that not abilities merely, but
the turn of the temper and the heart, require
to be examined with equal attention, in
forming the plan of future establishment.
Every one has some peculiar weakness,
some predominant passion, which exposes
him to temptations of one kind more than
of another. Early this may be discerned

to

to shoot; and from its first rilings its fu- s E R M.
ture growth may be inferred. Anticipate _
its progress. Confider how it is likely to
be asseted, by succeeding occurrences in
life. If you bring one whom you are rear-
ing up into a situation, where all the fur-
rounding circumstances shall cherish and
mature this fatal principle in his nature,
you become, in a great measure, answerable
for the consequences that follow. In vain
you trust to his abilities and powers. Vice
and corruption, when they have tainted the
heart, are sufficient to overset the greatest
abilities. Nay, too frequently they turn
them against the possessor; and render
them the instruments of his more speedy
ruin.

IN the third place, we learn from the

history which has been illuitrated, never to
judge of true happiness, merely from the
degree of men's advancement in the world.
Always betrayed by appearances, the mul-
titude are caught by nothing so much as by
the show and pomp of life. They think

every

s ERt. everyone bleft,v'ho is raited far above others
XII.

in rank. From their earliest years they are
taught to fix their views upon worldly ele-
vation, as the ultimate object of their aims;
and of all the sources of error in condud,
this is the most general.-Hazael on the
throne of Syria would, doubtless, be more
envied, and esteemed by the multitude a
far happier man than, when yet a subjed,
he was employed by Benhadad to carry his
message to Elisha. Yet, O Hazael! how
much better had it been for thee never to
have known the name or honour of a king,
than to have purchased it at the expence of
so much guilt; forfeiting thy first and belt
characer; ruihing into crimes which were
once thine abhorrence; and becoming a
traitor to the native sentiments and dictates
of thy heart! How fatal to thy repoic
proved that coveted purple, which was
drenched by thee in so much innocent blood!
How much more cheerful were thy days,
and how much calmer thy nights, in the
former periods of thy life, than, when
placed on a throne; thy cars were invaded

by

by day with the cries of the miserable whom s ERM.

XIL.

thou hadst ruined; and thy lumbers broken -
by night with the shocking remembrance of
thy cruelties and crimes !- Never let us
judge by the outside of things; nor con-
elude a man to be happy, solely because he
is encompafled with wealth or grandeur.
Much miifry often lurks where it is little
f ufpeted by the world. The material en-
quiries refpeding felicity are, not what a
man's external condition is, but with what
disposition of mind he bears it; whether he
be corrupted or improved by it; whether
he conducts himself so as to be acceptable
to God, and approved of by good men.
For these are the circumstances which make
the real and important diftindions among
the conditions of men. The effets of these
are to last for ever, when all worldly dif-
tinflions shall be forgotten.

IN the fourth place, from all that has

been laid, we should learn never to be im-
moderately anxious about our external situ-
ation, but to submit our let with cheerful-
pess to the disposal of Heaven. To make

the

SERM. the best and most prudent arrangements

XIL.
.~-v-. which we can, refpeaing our condition in

life, is matter of high duty. But let us
remember, that all the plans which we form
are precarious and uncertain. After the
utmost precautions taken by human wis-
dom, no man can foresee the hidden dan-
gers which may await him in that path of
life on which he has pitched. Providence
chufes for us much more. wifely than we
can chufe for ourselves; and, from circum-
stances that appeared at first most unpro-
mifing and adverse, often brings forth in
the issue both temporal and spiritual felicity.

1Who knoweth what is good for man in this
life, all the days of his vain life, which he
fpendeth as a Jhadovw When we confider
the darkness of our present state, the im-
becility of human nature, and the doubtful
and ambiguous value of all that we call
prosperity, the exhortation of the Psalmist
comes home with great force on every re-
fle&ing mind, Commit thy way unto the
Lord *. Form thy measures with prudence;

c Psalm xxxvii. 5.

but

but diver thyself of anxiety about the issue. s E R I
Inflead of seeking to order thine own lot, A---
acquiesce in the appointment of Heaven,
and follow without hesitation the call of
Providence, and of duty. In whatever situ-
ation of life God shall place thee, look up
devoutly to Him for grace and afliftance;
and study to ad the part assigned thee with
a faithful and upright heart. Thus shalt
thou have peace within thyself, while thy
course is going on; and when it draws to-
wards a close, with fatisfation thou Ihalt
review thy conduct. For, after all the toils
and labours of life, and all the vain itruggles
which we maintain for pre-eminence and
diftinCion, we shall find at the conclusion
of the whole scene, that to fear God and
keep his commandmentis is the zeole of mnanl

S E R-

# SERMON XIII. On the BENEFITS to be derived from the HOUSE of MOURNING. ECCLESIASTES vii. 2, 3, 4. It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting ; for that is the end ...

[ 366 ]

E R M N XIIt.
On the BENEFITS to be derived from the

HOUSE of MOURNING.

ECCLE S AST ES vii. 2, 3, 4.
It is better to go to the hose of zmourni/ig,

than to go to the hozife offeaJling; for thar
is the end of all men, and the living will
lay it to his heart. Sorrow is better than
laughter; for by the sadness of the coun-
tenance the heart is made better. Tbh
heart of the wife is in the hoife of mourn.
ing; but the heart of fools is in the hofic
of mirth.

SERM. ' M ANY of the maxims contained in
XIII. lV[ this book of Ecclesiastes will appear

strange sayings to the men of the world.
But when they reflect on the character of

him

him who delivers them, they cannot but SER M.
admit that his tenets delerve a serious and
attentive examination. For they are not
the dodrines of a pedant, who, from an
obscure retirement, declaims againit plea-
fures which he never knew. They are'not
the invedtives of a dilappointed man, who
takes revenge upon the world, by satirizing
those enjoyments, which he fought in vain to
obtain. They are the conclusions of a great
and profperons prince, who had once given
full scope to his desires; who was thoroughly
acquainted with life in its most flattering
scenes; and who now, reviewing all that
he had enjoyed, delivers to us the result of
long experience, and tried wisdom. None
of his principles seem, at firit view, more
dubious and exceptionable than those which
the text presents. To assert that sorrow is
preferable to mirth, and the Hofie of mourn-
ing to the botfe of feaJfitig; to advise men
to chute mortification and sadness when it
is in their power to indulge in joy, may
appear harsh and unreasonable doctrines.
They may, perhaps, be accounted enemies

to

S E R M. .to the innocent enjoyment of life who give
XIII.

countenance to so severe a system, and
thereby increase the gloom which already
fits sufficiently heavy on the condition of
man. But let this censure be suspended,
until we examine with care into the spirit
and meaning of the sentiments here de-
livered.

It is evident that the wife man does not

prefer sorrow, upon its own account, to
mirth; or represent sadness as a state more
eligible than joy. He confiders it in the
light of discipline only. He views it with
reference to an end. He compares it with
certain improvements which he supposes it
to produce; when the heart is made better
by the sadness of the countenance, and the
living to lay to heart what is the end of all
men. Now, if great and lasting benefits
are found to result from occasional sadness,
these, sure, may be capable of giving it the
preference to some fleeting sensations of joy.
The means which he recommends in order
to our obtaining those benefits are to be ex-
plained according to the principles of found

reason;

reason; and to be understood with those SERM,
limitations which the eastern style, in de- .--
livering moral precepts, frequently requires.
He bids us go to the hoic of mourning ; but
he does not command us to dwell there.
When he prefers sorrow to laughter, he is
not to be understood as prohibiting all mirth;
as requiring us to wear a perpetual cloud on
our brow, and to sequestrate ourselves from
every cheerful entertainment of social life.
Such an interpretation would be inconsistent
swith many other exhortations in his own
writings, which recommend temperate and
innocent joy. It would not suit with the
proper discharge of the duties which be-
long to us as members of society; and
would be most opposite to the goodness and
benignity of our Creator. The true scope
of his dodrine in this passage is, that there
is a certain temper and slate of heart, which
is of far greater consequence to real happi-
ness, than the habitual indulgence of giddy
and thoughtless mirth; that for the attain-
ment and cultivation of this temper, fre-
quent returns of grave refle&ion are necef-
VOL. II. B b far;

s E R M. fury ; that, upon this account, it is profit-
'--- ' able to give admission to those views of hu-

man distress which tend to awaken such
reflection in the mind; and that thus, from
the vicissitudes of sorrow, which we either
experience in our own lot, or sympathize
with in the lot of others, much wisdom and
improvement may be derived. These are
the sentiments which I purpose at present
to justify and recommend, as most suitable
to the charader of men and of Chriflians;
and not ini the least inconfifent with plea-
iure, rightly understood.

Among the variety of dispositions which

are to be found in the world, some indeed
require less of this discipline than others.
There are persons whose tender and deli-
cate sensibility, either derived from nature,
or brought on by repeated afflitions, ren-
ders them too deeply susceptible of every
mournful impression; whose spirits stand
more in need of being supported and cheer-
ed, than of being faddened by the dark
views of human life. In such cafes, we are
commanded to lift up the hands which ha/lg

t ..ll

<Zcd2, and to cot'frm the feeble knees *. But s E R M

Bu I` ' ,XIIIM

this is far from being the common difplofi- *.
tion of men. Their minds are in general
inclined to levity, much more than to
thoughtful melancholy; and their hearts
more apt to be contracted and hardened,
than to relent with too much facility. I
shall therefore endeavour to shew them, what
bad inclinations their compliance with So-
lomon's advice would correc; iWhat good
dispositions with refpeSt to God, their neigh-
bours, and themfclvcs, it would improve;
and how, upon the whole, his docrine is
verified, that by the fdiiefs f the countenance
the heart is made beltcr,

I BEGIN by obferviig, that the temper

recommended in the text suits the present
constitution of things in this world. Had
man been destined for a course of undif-
turbed enjoyment, perpetual gaiety would
then have corresponded to his fiate; and
pensive thought have been an unnatural
intruficn. But in a Rate where all is che-

Isaiah xxxv. 3. Heb. xil. 12.

B b 2 quered

SER M. quered and mixed, lwhere there is no pro-

XIII.
A-,- fperity without a revcrie, and no joy with-

out its attending griefs; where from the
house of feasting all must, at one time or
other, pass into the house of mourning, it
were equally unnatural if no admiflion was
given to grave refletion. The mind of
man must be attempered to his condition.
Providence, whose wisdom is conspicuous
in all its works, has adjusted with exad
proportion the inward powers to the out-
ward state of every rational being. It has
for this purpose implanted the serious andt
sympathetic feelings in our nature, that they
might correspond with the vicissitudes of
sorrow in our lot. He who endeavours to
repel their influence, or to stifle them in
unseasonable mirth, ads a violent and un-
natural part. He firives with vain effort
against the current of things; contradics
the intentions of his Maker, and counter-
adts the original impulses of his own heart.

It is proper also to observe, that as the

fadnejs of the countenance has, in our present
situation, a proper and natural place; so it

* is

is requisite to the true cnjoyment of plea- S RM
ilre. Worldly and sensual men often re- -
mark not, till it be too late, that, by the
tfudied efforts ofconfiant repetition, all their
pleasures fail. They draw them off ib close
to the dregs, that they become insipid and
nauseous. Hence even in/ lagll e/cr their
heart isforrowfil, and the end of th'i/' mll/h
is heaviness t. It is only the interpofal of
serious and thoughtful hours, that can give
any lively sensation to the returns of joy.
I speak not of those thoughtful hours, too
well known to finners, which proceed from
guilty remorse; and which, instead of pre-
paring for future pleasure, damp and sicken
the moment of enjoyment; but of those
which take rife from the mind retreating
into itself, and opening to the sentiments of
religion and humanity. Such hours of
virtuous sadness brighten the gleams of ituc-
ceeding joy. They give 'o the temperate
enjoyments of the pious and humane a re-
fined and delicate relish, to which the hard-
ened and insensible are entire firangcrs.

i Prov. xiv. 13.

B 1
b 3 For

SE RlM. For it will be found, that in proportion as
:i_. the tender affections of the foul are kept

awake, how much soever they may some-
times diflrefs the heart, they prefcrve it open
likewise to the most sgreeal;ne sensations.
He who never knew the sorrows of friend-
ship, never also knew its joys. He whose
heart cannot relent in the house of mourn-
ing, will, in the most social hour of the
house of feasting, partake of no more than
the lowest part of animal pleasure.-
Having premised these observations, I prc-
ceed to point out the diret effects of a
proper attention to the distresses of life upon
our moral and religious charaaer.

IN the first place, the house of mourn-

ing is calculated to give a proper check to
our natural thoughtleffnels and levity. The
indolence of mankind, and their love of
pleasure, spread through all characers and
ranks some degree of aversion to what
is grave and serious. They grasp at any
objed, either of business or amusement,
'which makes the present moment pals

fmootliy

fnioothly away; which carries their theughts S E R M.
abroad, and saves them from the trouble of --
refleting on themielves. With too many,
this passes into a habit of conflant diffiipa-
tion. If their fortune and rank allow them
to indulge their inclinations, they devote
themselves to the puruiit of amuemrent
through all its different forms. The flilfui
arrangement of its inccclive icenes, and the
preparatory study for flining in each, are
the only exertions in which their under-
itanding is employed. Such a mode of life
may keep alive, for a while, a frivolous vi-
vacity. It may improve men in some of
thole exteriour accompliihments, which
sparkle in the eyes of the giddy and the
vain; but it must fink them in the esteem
of all the wile. It renders them firangers
to themselves; and uielcfs, if not perni-
cious, to the world. They lose every manly
principle. Their minds become relaxed
a!nd effeminate. All that is great or re-
ipetaable in the human character is buried
pnder a nuisf of trifles and follies.

B 4 If

SER M. If some measures ought to be taken for

XIII'
LyJ- rescuing the mind from this disgraceful le-

vity; if some principles must be acquired
which may give more dignity and fteadi-
ness to conduct, where, I pray you, are
there to be looked for ? Not surely in the
house of feasting, where every obje& flat-
ters the senses, and strengthens the feduc-
tions to which we are already prone; where
the spirit of dissipation circulates from heart
to heart; and the children of folly mutually
admire, and are admired. It is in the fober
and serious house of mourning that the tide
of vanity is made to turn, and a new di-
redion given to the current of thought.
When some affeaing incident presents a
strong discovery of the deceitfulncfs.of all
worldly joy, and rouses our sensibility to
human woe; when we behold those with
whom we had lately mingled in the houlf
of feasting, funk by some of the fuddcn
vicissitudes of life into the vale of misery;
or when, in fad silence, we stand by the
friend whom we had loved as our own foul,
£fretched on the bed of death; then is the

season

season when the world begins to appear in a s E R M.
new light; when the heart opens to virtu- ,-
ous sentiments, and is led into that train of
refledion which ought to direct life. He
who before knew not what it was to com-
mune with his heart on any serious subjec,
now puts the question to himself, for what
purpose he was sent forth into this mortal,
transitory state; what his fate is likely to
be when it concludes; and what judgment
he ought to form of those pleasures which
amuse for a little, but which, he now fees,
cannot save the heart from anguish in the
evil day. Touched by the hand of thought-
ful melancholy, that airy edifice of bliss
which fancy had raised up for him, vaniflhes
away. He beholds in the place of it, the
lonely and barren desert, in which, fur-
rounded with many a disagreeable object,
he is left muting upon himself. The tiine
which he has mif-fpent, and the faculties
which he has misemployed, his foolish le-
vity and his criminal pursuits, all rife in
painful profpe& before him. That un-
known state of existence into which, race

after

S E R M. after race, the children of men pass, strikes

XII'.
,_ his mind with solemn awe.-Is there no

course by which he can retrieve his past er-
rours? Is there no iuperiour power to
which he can look up for aid ? Is there no
plan of conduQ which, if it exempt him
not from sorrow, can at least procure him
consolation amidst the diirefsful exigencies
of life ?-Such meditations as these, fug-
gested by the house of mourning, fre-
quently produce a change on the whole
characer. They revive 'those sparks of
goodness which were nigh being quite ex-
tinguifhed in the dissipated mind; and give
rife to principles of conduc more rational
in themselves, and more suitable to the hu-
man state.

IN the second place, impressions of this

nature not only produce moral ferioufnefi,
but awaken sentiments of piety, and bring
men into the fanatuary of religion. One
might, indeed, imagine that the bleflings
of a prosperous condition would prove the
most natural incitements to devotion; and

that

that when men were happy in themselves, s E R M,

XIII.

and law nothing but happiness around them,
they could not fail gratefully to acknow-
ledge that God who giveth them all thibns
richly to ejoy. Yet such is their corruption,
that they are never more ready to forget
their benefaaor, than when loaded with his
benefits. The giver is concealed from their
careless and inattentive view, by the cloud
of his own gifts, When their life conti-
nues to flow in one finooth current, un-
ruffled by any griefs; when they neither
receive in their own circumstances, nor al-
low themselves to receive from the circum-
stances of others, any admonitions of hu-
man instability, they not only become
regardless of Providence, but are in hazard
of contemning it. Glorying intheir strength,
and lifted up by the pride of life into sup-
posed independence, that impious senti-
ment, if not uttered by the mouth, yet too
often lurks in the hearts of many, during
their flourifning periods, Wdhat is the Al-
imighty that we jf7oldd frve him, and what
P,'fiJofiln wLe

d have

i Cc fepjray 17

u to him ?
j| 2 ~If

SE R M. If such be the tendency of the house of
'-v-- feasting, how necessary is it that, by some

change in their Situation, men should be
obliged to enter into the house of mourn-
ing, in order to recover a proper sense of
their dependent slate ? It is there, when
forsaken by the gaieties of the world, and
left alone with God, that we are made to
perceive how awful his government is; how
easily human greatness bends before him;
and how quickly all our designs and mea-
fures, at his interpofal, vanish into no-
thing. There, when the countenance is
fad, and the affecions are softened by grief;
when we fit apart, involved in serious
thought, looking down as from some emi-
nence on those dark clouds that hang over
the life of man, the arrogance of prosperity
is humbled, and the heart melts under the
impreflions of religion. Formerly we were
taught, but now we fee, we feel, how
much we stand in need of an Almighty
protector, amidst the changes of this vain
world. Our foul cleaves to him who de-
fiyfes not, nor abhors the nffiyi0l' of tihe

nffiie!d.

aflitucd. Prayer flows forth of its own ac- s , R M.
cord from the relenting heart, that he may
be our God, and the God of our friends in
distress; that he may never forsake us while
we are sojourning in this land of pilgrim-
age; may strengthen us under its cala-
mities, and bring us hereafter to those ha-
bitations of reft, where we, and they whom
we love, may be delivered from the trials
which all are now doomed to endure. The
discoveries of his mercy which he has made
in the gospel of Chrifl, are viewed with
joy, as so many rays of light sent down
from above to dispel, in some degree, the
surrounding gloom. A mediator and in-
terceflor with the S6vereign of the Uni-
verse, appear comfortable names; and the
refurreaion of the just becomes the power-
ful cordial of grief. In fuich moments as
these, which we may justly call happy mo-
ments, the foul participates of all the plea-
hlres of devotion. It feels the power of
religion to support and relieve. It is soft-
ened, without being broken. It is fill,
and it pours itself forth ; pours itself forth,

3 if

s E R M. if we may be allowed to use the expreflfonj
t.-. .. into the boibm of its merciful Creator.

IN the third place, fucl serious senti-

inents produce the happiest effed upon our
disposition towards our fellow-creatures, as
well as towards God. It is a common and
just obfenration, that theye who have lived
always in affluence and ease, strangers to
the miseries of life, are liable to contract
hardness of heart with refpeEt to all the
concerns of-others. Wrapped up in them-
selves, and their own pleasures, they be-
hold with indifference the most affecing
scenes of distress. Habituated to indulge
all their desires without controul, they be-
come impatient of the least provocation or
offence; and are ready to trample on their
inferiours, as if they were creatures of a
different fpccies from themselves. Is this
an amiable temper, or such as becomes a
man ? When appearing in others, do we
not view it with much displeasure? When
imputed to ourselves, can we avoid account-
ing it a severe reproach ?

By

By the experience of diftreis, this arro- s ERM.

gant insensibility of temper is most esec- _,_
tually correced; as the remembrance of
eur own sufferings naturally prompts us to
feel for others when they ihffer. But if
Providence has been -o kind as not to sub-
ied us to much of this discipline in our own
lot, let us draw improvement from the
harder lot of others. Let us sometimes flep
alide from the smooth and flowery paths
in which we are permitted to walk, in
order to view the toilsome march of our
fellows through the thorny desert. By vo-
luntarily going into the house of mourning;
by yielding to the sentiments which it ex-
cites, and mingling our tears with those of
the affliaed, we shall acquire that humane
sensibility, which is one of the highest orna-
ments of the nature of man. Perceiving
how much the common diftrefles of life
place us all on a level, and render the high
and the low, the rich and the poor, com-
panions in misfortune and mortality, we
flhall learn to set no man at nought, and,
least of any, our affiCted brother. Preju-

dices

SER M. dices will be extinguiihed, and benevo-
XIII.

lence opened and enlarged, when looking,
around on the multitude of men, we con-
fider them as a band of fellow-travellers
in the valley of woe, where it ought to be
the office of every one to alleviate, as much
as possible, the common burden.-While
the vain and the licentious are revelling in
the midst of extravagance and riot, how
little do they think of those scenes of fore
distress which are going on at that moment
throughout the world; multitudes ftrug-
gling for a poor subsistence to support the
wife and the children whom they love, and
who look up to them with eager eyes for
that bread which they can hardly procure
multitudes groaning under iickneis in de-
solate cottages, untended and unmourned;
many, apparently in a better situation of
life, pining away in secret with concealed
griefs; families weeping over the beloved
friends whom they have loft, or, in all the
bitterness of anguish, bidding those who
are just expiring the last adieu !

hMay

May we not appeal to the heart of every s E R MI.

good man, nay almost to the heart of every
man who has not divested himself of his
natural feelings, Whether the admifizon of
such views of human life might not, some-
times at least, furhih a moreworthy employ-
Iment to the mind, than that mirth offools,
which Solomon compares to the crnackling
if thorns under a pot *; the transient burlt
of unmeaning joy; the empty explosion
of giddiness and levity? Those sallies of
jollity in the house of feaRing are often
forced from a troubled mind; like flashes
from the black cloud, which, after a mo-
mentary effulgence, are succeeded by thicker
l darkness. Whereas compailonate assec-
tions, even at the time when they draw

I tears from our eyes for human misery,

convey fatisfadion to the heart. The gra-
cious appointment of Heaven has ordained
that sympathetic pains should always be
accompanied with a certain degree of plea-
sure; on purpose that we might be more

Eccles vii. 6.
VOL. I, C c interested

S E R M. interested in the cafe of the diflreffcd, and
XIII. _-_-^ that by this mysterious bond, man might

be linked closer to man. The inward fa-
tisfacion which belongs to the compaffi-
onate affections is, at the fame time, height-
ened by the approbation which they receive
from our reason; and by the consciousness
which they afford us of feeling what men
and Chriftiaps ought to feel.

IN the fourth place, the disposition. rc-

commended in the text, not only improves
us in piety and humanity, but likewise
assists us in felf-government, and the due
moderation of our desires. The houfc of
mourning is the fctiool of temperance and
sobriety. Every wife man will find it for
his interelf to enter into it sometimes of his
own accord, left otherwise he be compelled
to take up his dwelling there. Seasonable in-
terruptions of our pleasures are necessary to
their prolongation. For, continued fcenec
of luxury and indulgence haften to a mec
lancholy issue. The house of feasting too
often becomes an avenue to the house to

3 mourning.

mourning. Short, to the licentious, is the S E RM.
interval between them ; and speedy the
transition from the one to the other,

But supposing that, by prudent manage-

ment, the men of pleasure could avoid the
pernicious effects which intemperance and
dissoluteness are likely to produce on their
health, or their fortune, can they also pre-
vent those disorders which such habits will
introduce into their minds? Can they
escape that wrath of the Almighty, which
will infallibly pursue them for their fins
both here and hereafter ? For whence, so
much as from the unchecked pursuit of
pleasure, do all those crimes arise which
stain the characters of men with the deepest
guilt, and expose them to the severest judg-
ments of Heaven ? Whence, then, is the
corretive of those mischiefs to be fought,
but from such a discipline as shall moderate
that intemperate admiration of the world
which gave rife to the evil ? By repairing
sometimes to the house of mourning, you
would chasten the looseness of fancy, abate
the eagerness of passion, and afford scope to

C c - reafoa

S E R M: reason for exerting her restraining powers,
I-,-. You would behold this world stripped of

its false colours, and reduced to its proper
level. Many an important inftruaion you
would receive from the humiliation of the
proud, the mortification of the vain, and
the sufferings of the voluptuous, which you
would fee exemplified before you, in the
chambers of sorrow, of fickneis, and of
death. You would then be taught to re-
joice as though you rejoiced not, and to weep
as though you weeped not; that is, neither
in joy, nor in grief, to run to excess; but
to zfe thJis world so as not to abife it; con-
templating the fizqion thereof as pasing
awa2y.

Moreover, you would there learn the

important Ieflon of suiting your mind, be-
fore-hand, to what you had reason to ex-
pet from the world; a lefron too seldom
studied by mankind, and to the neglet of
which, much of their misery, and much of
their guilt, is to be charged. By turning
away their eyes from the dark fide. of life;
by looking at the world only in one light,

and

and that a flattering one, they form their SERIIM.
measures on a false plan, and are ncceffa- -
rily deceived and betrayed. Hence, the
vexation of succeeding disappointment and
blasted hope. Hence, their criminal impa-
tience of life, and their bitter acculhtions of
God and man; when, in truth, they have
reason to accuse only their own folly.-
Thou who wouldst at like a wife man, and
build thy houle on the rock, and not on the
sand, contemplate human life not only in
the sunshine, but in the shade. Frequent
the house of mourning, as well as the house
of mirth. Study the nature of that state in
which thou art placed; and balance its joys
with its obrrows. Thou feelt that the cup
which is held forth to the whole human
race, is mixed. Of its hitter ingredients,
expet that thou art to drink thy portion.
Thou feeft the storm hovering every where
in the clouds around thee. Be not surprised
if on thy head it lhall break. Lower, there-
fore, thy fails. Dismiss thy florid hopes;
and come forth prepared either to act or to
susser, according as Heaven shall decree.

C c 3 Thus

S E RM. Thus ihalt thou be e:cited to take the pro,
Ay-_* pereft measures for defence, by endeavour-

ing to secure an interest in His favour, who,
in the time of trouble, can hide thee in his
pavilion. Thy mind ihall adjust itself to
follow the order of his providence. Thou
shalt be enabled, with equanimity and ftea-
diness, to hold thy course through life. Si-
pally,

IN the fifth place, by accustoming our-

selves to such serious views of life, our ex-
ceffive fondness for life itself will be mo-
derated, and our minds gradually formed
to wish and to long for a better world. If
we know that our continuance here is to be
ihort, and that we are intended by our
Maker for a more lasting state, and for em-
ployments of a nature altogether different
from those which now occupy the busy, or
amuse the vain, we must surely be con-
vinced, that it is of the highest consequence
to prepare ourselves for so important a
change. This view, of our duty is fre-
quently held up to us in the sacred writingsi

and

and hence religion becomes, though not a S E R M.

XII.

morose, yet a grave and solemn principle, _
calling off the attention of men from light
pursuits, to those which are of eternal mo-
ment. What is a man1 profited if he shall
gain the whole world, and los his own foul;
if he shall lead a life of thoughtless mirte
on earth, and exclude himself from eternal
felicityin heaven? Worldly affection, and
sensual pleasure, depress all our higher powers.
They form an unnatural union between the
human foul and this earth, which was only
designed for its temporary abode. They
attach it too strongly to objeds from which
it must shortly part. They alienate its de-
fires from God and heaven, and deject it
with slavish and unmanly fears of death.
Whereas, by the discipline of religious fe-
rioufnefs, it is gradually loosened from the
fetters of sense. Assisted to discover the
vanity of this world, it rifes above it; and
in the hours offober thought, cultivates con-
nedion with those divine and immortal ob-
jeas, among which it is designed to dwell.

C c 4 ENOUGHI

SERM. ENOUOGI has now been said to convince

any thinking person of the justice, and rea-
fonablenefs, of the maxims in the text; and
to {how, that, on various occasions, sorrow
may be better than laughter. Wouldst thou
acquire the habit of recolletion, and fix the
,pnciples of thy conduct; wouldst thou be
Il up to thy Creator and Redeemer, aid
be formed to sentiments of piety and devo-
tion; wouldst thou be acquainted with those
mild and tender affections which delight the
compassionate and humane; wouldst thou
have the power of sensual appetites tamed
and correced, and thy foul raised above the
ignoble love of life, and fear of death ? Go,
my brother, go-not to scenes of pleasure
and riot, not to the house of feasting and
mirth-but to the silent house of mourn-
ing; and adventure to dwell for a while
among objecs that will soften thy heart.
Contemplate the lifeless remains of what
once was fair and flouriffing. Bring home
to thyself the vicissitudes of life. Recal the
remembrance of the friend, the parent, or
the child, whom thou tenderly lovedft. Look

back

back on the days of former years; and think S E R M..

XIII.

on the companions of thy youth, who now _
ileep in the dust. Let the vanity, the mu-
tability, and the sorrows of the human estate,
rife in full profpet before thee; and though
thy countenance may be made fad, thy heart
Jhall be made better. This iadnefs, though
for the present it dejets, yet shall in the
end fortify thy spirit; inipiring thee with
such sentiments, and prompting such rebo-
lutions, as shall enable thee to enjoy, with
more real advantage, the reft of life. Dif-
positions of this nature form one part of
the character of those mourners whom our
Saviour hath pronounced blefed; and of
those to whom it Is promised, that sowing
in tears they /hall reap in joy j-. A great
difference there is between being serious
and melancholy; and a melancholy too
there is of that kind which deserves to be
sometimes indulged.

Religion hath, on the whole, provided

for every good man abundant materials of
consolation and relief. How dark soever

t Matth. v. 4, Pfislm cxxii. 5,

the

SE R M. the present face of nature may appear, it

XIII.
A-_v- dispels the darkness, when it brings into

view the entire system of things, and ex-
tends our survey to the whole kingdom of
God. It represents what we now behold
as only a part, and a small part, of the ge-
neral order. It assures us, that though here,
for wife ends, misery and sorrow are per-
mitted to have place, these temporary evils
hall, in the end, advance the happiness of
all who love God, and are faithful to their
duty. It shows them this mixed and con-
fused scene vanishing by degrees away, and
preparing the introduction ofthat state, where
the house of mourning (hall be fliut up for
ever, where no tears are seen, and no
groans heard; where no hopes are fruf-
trated, and no virtuous connetions dif-
solved; but where, under the light of the
divine countenance, goodness shall flourish
in perpetual felicity. Thus, though reli-
gion may occasionally chasten our mirth
with sadness of countenance, yet under that
sadness it allows not the hearts of good men
to fink. It calls upon them to rejoice, be-

(aii/e

caien the Lord reigneth who is their rock, and S ER M .
the mnof high God who is tbeir Redeemner. I,-j
Reason likewise joins her voice with that of
religion; forbidding us to make peevish and
unreasonable complaints of human life, or
injuriously to ascribe to it more evil than it
contains. Mixed as the present state is,
the pronounces, that generally, if not al-
ways, there is more happiness than misery,
more pleafgre than pain, in the condition
of man.

S E I-

# SERMON XIV. On the divine GOVERNMENT of the PASSIONS of MEN. PSALM lxxvi. 10. Surely, the wrath of man shall praise thee ; the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain.

[ 396 ]

SERMON XIV.
On the divine GOVERNMENT of the

PASSIONS of MEN.

PSALM Ixxvi. IO.
Surely, the wrath of man Jfall praise thee;

the remainder of wrath Jhalt thou refrain.

SE R M. r- HIS Psalm appears to have been
,-c_ ., composed on occasion of some re-

markable deliverance obtained by the Jewish
nation. It is generally understood to have
been written in the reign of Hezekiah, and
to refer to the formidable invasion of Judea
by Sennacherib; when the angel of the
Lord, in one night, discomfited the whole
Assyrian host, and finote them with sudden
deftruaion. To this interposition of the

divine

divine arm, those expressions in the context s E R M.
may naturally be applied; Then brake be I
the arrows of the bow, theJhJield, thef word,
and the battle. The font-hearted arefpolled;
they have Jlept their Jleep; and none of the
men of might have found their hands. lit
thy rebuke, 0 God of Jacob, both the chariot
and the horse are cajl into a dead Jeep. In
the text, we have the wife and religious
refledion of the Psalmist upon the violent
designs which had been carried on by the
enemies of his country, and upon the issue
to which Providence had brought them.
Surel,, the wrath of man fnall praise thee.
By the wrath of man, we are to understand
I all that the impetuosity of human passions
can devise or execute; the projects of am-
* bition and resentment, the rage of perfecu-
| tion, the fury of war; the disorders which
violence produces in private life, and the
i public commotions which it excites in the
i world. All these shall prase God, not with
their intention and design, nor by their na-
tive tendency; but by those wife and good
purposes, which his providence makes them

accompliih;

S E RM. accomplish; from their poison extracting

LV. health, and converting things which in

themselves are pernicious, into instruments
of his glory, and of public benefit: So that,
though the wrath of man worketh not the
righteourfefs of God, it is nevertheless forced
and compelled to minister to his praise.
The Psalmist adds, the remainder of wrath
Jhalt thou restrain; that is, God will allow
scope to the wrath of man as far as it an-
fwers his good purposes, and is subservient
to his praise; the relt of it shall be curbed
and bound up. When it would attempt to
go beyond its prescribed limit, he fays to it,
as to the waters of the ocean, Hithertofialt
thou come, but no ftrther; and here /hall thy
proud waves beJ fayed.

All this ihall be fully verified and de-

clared by the last issue of things ; when we
{hall be able mote clearly to trace the di-
vine administration through its several steps,
by feeing the consummation of the whole.
In some cafes, it may be reserved for this
period, to unfold the mysterious wisdom
of Heaven. But in general, as much of

the

the divine conduc is at present manifest, S ERM.
as gives just ground for the assertion in the -
text. In the sequel of this discourse, I shall
endeavour to illustrate and confirm it. I
shall show in what manner the wrath of
man is made to praise the power, the wis-
dom, the justice, and the goodness of God.

I BEGIN with this observation, That in

order to accomplish the great purposes car-
ried on by the Government of the Universe,
it is necessary that the divine perfetions be
displayed before mankind, in a sensible and
striking manner. We are not to conceive
the Supreme Being as hereby seeking praise
to himself, from a principle of ostentation or
vain glory. Independent and felf-fufficient,
he refts in the enjoyment of his own beati-
tude. His praise consists in the general
order and welfare of his creation. This
end cannot be attained, unless mankind be
made to feel the subjeCtion under which
they are placed. They mufft be taught to
admire and adore their Sovereign. They
must be overawed by the view of a high

hand,

E R M. hand, which can at pleasure controul thei

actions, and render them subservient to
purposes which they neither foresaw nor
intended. Hence the propriety of God's
making the vwrath of man to pra/c' himn
We easily conceive in what manner the
heavens and the earth are said to praiie
God, as they are standing monuments of
that supreme perfetion which is displayed
in their creation. The virtues of good
men obviously praise him, by exhibiting
his image, and reflecing back his glory.
But when even the vices and inordinate
palfions of bad men are made to praise him,
in consequence of the useful purposes which
they are compelled to accomplish, this, in
particular manner, distinguishes and fig-
nalizes a divine hand; this opens a more
wonderful proipedt of the administration of
Heaven, than if all its fubjets had been
loyal and willingly obedient, and the course
of human affairs had proceeded in a quiet
and regular tenour.

}:r I. THn

I. THE wrath of mnan redounds to the SERM,

praise of divine power. It brings it forth -
with full and awful lustre, to the view of
mankind. To reign with sovereign com-
mand amidff the most turbulent and difor-
dered state of things, both in the natural
and moral world, is the peculiar glory of
omnipotence. Hence God is described in
Scripture asfitting on theflood, riding on the
wings of the wind, dwelling in the darkness
and the tenmpifl; that is, making the most
violent powers in the universe minister to
his will, giving thecn scope, or restraining
them, according as flits the purposes of his
dominion. As heJfills, at his pleasure, the
raging of the fens, a!d the noft of their
waves, in like manner, heJfills the tumults
ofthe people. When the passions of men
are molt inflamed, and their designs just
ripe for burfling into execution, often, by
!ome unexpeced interposition, he calls
upon the world to observe that there is one
higher than the highest on earth, who can
frustrate their devices in a moment, ana
rommand the earth to be fill before hinm.

VOL. II. D d Proud

S R M. Proud fleets, destined to carry denfruEtio

to neighbouring kingdoms, may cover the
ocean. He blows with his wind, and they
are scattered. Mighty armies may go forth
to the field in all the glory of human
strength; but the issues of battle are with
him. He suspends on high the invisible
balance which weighs the fate of nations.
According as the scale inclines, he gives to
tome flight event the power of deciding the
contest. He clouds the sky with darkneis,
or opens the windows of heaven to let
forth their flood. He dejecs the hearts of
the brave with sudden terrour, and renders
the hands of the fProng weak and unper-
forming, at the critical moment. A thou-
land unseen ministers stand ready to be the
instruments of his power, in humbling the
pride, and checking the efforts of the wrath
of man. Thus, in the instance of haughty
Sennacherib, and that boasted tempest of
wrath which he threatened to pour upon
all the Jewish nation; I will pui m,' book,
fays the Almighty, in thy nose, and myj bridle
in thjt lips, and I will turn thee back b3' tie

r* rt',y

wa y by which thoJ cameft '!. In that night s E RM.
the destroying angel smote the host, and *
he departed with JJamne of face to his own
land. W7hen the heathen rage, and the peo-
ple imagine a vain thing ; when the kings of
the earth Jet the7felves, and its rulers take
counsel together; He that fitteth in the Ilea-
vensfJall laugh; tbe Lord fljall hold them in
del-Tfon t.

II. THE wrath of man is made to praise

the wisdom as well as the power of God.
Nothing difpiays more remarkably the ad-
mirable counsel of heaven, than its arrang-
ing the train of events in such a manner,
that the unruly palilons of the wicked shall
contribute to overthrow their own designs.
Hifitory abounds with examples of their
being rendered the unconscious ministers of
Providence, to accomplish purposes diretIly
opposite to those which they had in view.
Thus the cruelty of the sons of Jacob, in
pursuing the. deftrution of their brother

2 Kings xix. 28. Psalm ii. i, 2, 3.

D d 2 Joseph,

s E RM. Jbfeph, became the means of effeeting his
.- .--- high advancement. Thus the wrath of

Pharaoh against the Israelites, and his un-
just attempts to detain them in bondage,
proved the occasion of bringing them forth
from the land of slavery, with signal marks
of the favour of Heaven. Thus the inhu-
man plan which Haman had formed for
ruining Mordecai, and extirpating the
whole Jewish nation, paved the way for
Mordecai's high promotion, and for the
triumph of the Jews over all their ene-
mies.

After this manner the Almighty fiareth

the wicked in the works of their hands; and
creas his own counsel upon the ruin of
theirs. Those events which, viewed apart,
appear as ipots in the divine administration,
when contidered in connetion with all
their consequences, are often found to give
it additional lustre. The beauty and mag-
nificence of the universe are much height-
ened, by its being an extensive and compli-
cated system; in which a variety of springs
arc made to play, and a multitude of dif-

ferent

ferent movements are, with most admirable E R ?;.
art, regulated and kept in order. Inter- -
fering interests, and jarring passions, are in
iuch manner balanced against one another;
iuch proper checks are placed on the vio-
lence of human pursuits; and the wrath of
man is made so to hold its course, that how
opposite soever the several motions seem to.
be, yet they concur and meet at last in-
one direcion. While, among the multi-
tudes that dwell on the face of the earth,
some are submissive to the divine. authority;
some rife up in rebellion against it; others,
absorbed in their pleasures and pursuits, are
totally inattentive to it; they are all so
moved by an imperceptible influence fiom'
above, that the zeal of the dutiful, the.
wrath of the rebellious, and the indifference'
of the careless, contribute finally to the.
glory of God. All are governed in. such a
wvay as suits their powers, and is confident
with rational freedom, yet all are fubjeAed
to the necefity of fulfilling the eternal
purposes of Heaven. This depth of di-
vine wisdom in the adminiitration of the-

D d 3 univerfc,

S E RM. universe, exceeds all human comprehen-
XIV. _-- sion, and affords everlasting subjet of ado-

ration and praise.

II. TIHE wrath es nman pralfes thejuftice

of God, by being employed as the inftru-
ment of infliting punfhmnent upon finners.
Did bad men trace the course of events in
their life with attentive eye, they might
eafily.difcover the greatest part of the dif-
afters which they susser to be brought upon
them by their own ungoverned paflions.
The fuceeffon of causes and effecs is so
contrived by Providence, that the wrath
which they meant to pour forth on others,
frequently recoils, by its effecs, upon them-
selves. But supposing them to efeape those
external mischiefs which violent passions na-
turally occasion, they cannot evade the in-
ternal misery which they produce. The
constitution of things is framed with such
profound wisdom, that the divine laws, in
every event, execute themselves againit
the finner, and carry their fandion in their
own bosom. The Supreme Being has no

occasion

occasion to unlock the prisons of the deep, S E R M.
or to call down tile thunder fiom heaven, ---
in order to' punish the lwrat of man. He
carries on the administration of justice with
more simplicity, and digniiy. It is sufficient
that he allow those fierce' pafl.ons which
render bad men the disturbers of others, to
operate on their own hearts. He delivers
them up to themtelves, and they become
their own tormentors. Before the world
they may disguise their funirings ; but it is
well known, that to be inwardly torn with
despite, revenge and wrathful passions, is
the most intense of all misery. In thus con-
neding the punishment with the crime,
making their own 'wicCedilfs to reprove
tbem, and tIbcir l'acfr7liii s to corrcc7 then,
the avenging hand of a righteous Gover-
nour is conspicuous; and thus the obfetva-
tion of the Pfalmif- is fully verified; tfh
:wickcd have tdraw, out theijr frord and
bent thcir bow,%, to cijj do.n te poor and
ncdy ; b:. fiheir cfw;'.rd fija7i Cl tr ilot it'cir
\own bcaf "he .

Pfilrn xxxvii. t.t, i5.

1) d 4 The

S ER M1. The wrath of man also praises the justice

XIV.
t,.-..Y of God in the punishment of other crimi-

nals, as well as of the wrathful themselves.
Ambitious and lawless men are let loose
upon each other, that without any super-
natural interposition, they may fulfil the
just vengeance of heaven in their mutual
deftruaion. They may occasionally be
cemented together by conspiracy against
the just; but as no firm nor lasting bond
can unite them, they become at last the
prey of mutual jealousy, strife and fraud.
For a time they may go on, and seem to
prosper. The justice of Heaven may ap-
pear to slumber; but it is awake; and only
waits till the measure of their iniquity be
full. God represents himself in Scripture
as sometimes permitting wickedness to arise
to an overgrown height, on purpose that
its ruin may be greater, and more exem-
plary. He fays to the tyrant of Egypt,
that for this camfe be had raised him iu, that
is, had allowed him to prosper and be ex-
alted, that he mightJhew in him his power;
and that his name might be declred through-

Olut

ont all the earth `. The divine adminiftra- s E R M.

XIV.

tion is glorified in the punishment contrived
for the workers of iniquity, as well as in
the reward prepared for the righteous. This
is the purpose which the Lord hath purposed
upon all the earth; and this is the hand that
is fretched forth over all the nations t.

IV. THE vwrath of man is made to pralfe

the goodness of God. This is the most
unexpected of its effeds; and therefore
requires to be the most fully illustrated.
All the operations of the government of the
Deity may be ultimately resolved into good-
ness. His power, and wisdom, and justice,
all conduce to general happiness and order.
Among the means which he uses for ac-
complifhing this end, it will be found that
the wrath of man, through his over-ruling
direction, possesses a considerable place.

Firfi, it is employed by God as an useful

instrument of discipline and correction to
the virtuous. The storms which ambition
and pride raise among mankind, he permits

* Exod. ix. 16. I Isaiah iv. 26.

with

SER M. with the fame intention that he fends forth
XIV.

tempests among the elements; to clear the
atmosphere of noxious vapours, and to pu-
rify it from that corruption which all things
contrat by too much reft. When wicked
men prevail in their designs, and exercise
the power which they have gained with a
heavy and oppressive hand, the virtuous arc
apt to exclaim, in bitterness of foul, Where
is the Lord? and where the sceptre of
righteousness and truth? Hath Godforgotten
to be gracious ? or doth he indeed fee, and
is there knowlcdge in the nmoJ high?-
Their oppressors are, in truth, no more
than the ministers of God to them for good.
He fees that they stand in need of correction,
and therefore raises up enemies against them,
in order to cure the intemperance of pro-
fperity; and to produce, in the serious
hours of affliction, proper reflections upon
their duty, and their past errours.

In this light the disturbers of the earth

are often represented in Scripture; as
scourges in the hand of God, employed to
inflia chastisement upon a degenerating

people.

people. They are commissioned for the S E R M.

XIV.

execution of righteous and wife purposes,
concealed from themselves; and when their
commiliuon is fulfilled, they arc recalled, and
destroyed. Of this we have a remarkable
example in the use which God made of the
king of Assyria, with refped to the people
of Israel. I willfend him agaijnt an hjpo-
critical nation, and agail/I the people of 7y
wrath will I give him a charge, to take the
spoil, and to take the prey. lHowbeit, he
ncaneth not so; neither doth his heart think
Jo; but it is in his heart to deflroy, and cut
fs nations not a few. PW'erefore it JIall
come to pars, that when the Lord hath per-
formcd his whole work upon monnt Zion and
en Jerzfalem, I will pnniJ/ the fruit of the
floutt heart of the king of ilyria, and the glory
?f his high looks *. In vain, then, doth the
wirath of man lift itself up against God. He
filth, by the fircngth of my hand I have done
it, and by my wildoim, for I am pr:udent.
Shall the ax bonft itself againl him that hew-
Cdh therewith ? or yjall the fJaw magnify it-

' Isaiah x, 6, 7. IZ.

fef

'

E R v' fef agnil im -that sjakeh it ? All things,
'W-,- whether they will it or not, must work to-

gether for good to them'that love God. The
wratb of man, among the reft, fills up the
place assigned to it by the ordination of
Heaven. The violent enemy, the proud
conqueror, and the oppressive tyrant, poffels
only the fame flation with the famine, the
pestilence, and the flood. Their triumphs
are no more than the accomplishment of
God's corretion; and the remzainder of their
wrath flall be ref'rain.

SECONDLY, God makes the wrath of

man contribute to the benefit of the vir-
tuous, by rendering it the means of im-
proving and signalizing their graces; and of
raiting them, thereby, to higher honour and
glory. Had human affairs proceeded in an
orderly train, and no opposition been made
to religion and virtue by the violence of the
;wicked, what room would have been left
for some of the highest and most generous
exertions of the foul of man ? How many
Ihining examples of fortitude, confancy,

and.

and patience, would have been loft to the S E '

XIV.

world ? What a field of virtues peculiar to --.-,
a state of discipline had lain uncultivated ?
Spirits of a higher order possess a Rate of
established virtue, that flands in need of no
f!ch trials and improvements. But to us,
who are only under education for such a
state, it belongs to pals through the furnace,
that our fouls may be tried, refined, and
brightened. We muff stand the conflict:,
that we may be graced and crowned as con-
querors. The wrath of man opens the field
to glory; calls us forth to the most diftin-
guifhed exercise of ative virtue, and forms
us to all those suffering graces which are
among the highest ornaments of the human
foul. It is thus, that the illustrious band of
true patriots and heroes, of confessors and
martyrs, have been set forth to the admira-
tion of all ages, as lights of the world;
while the rage and fury of enemies, instead
of bearing them down, have only served to
exalt and dignify them more.

TIIIRDLY, the wrath of man is often
miade to advance the temporal prosperity of

4 the

s E R M. righteous. The occasional distresses which

X- it brings upon them frequently lay the foun-

dation of their future success. The vio-
lence with which wicked men pursue their
resentment, defeats its own purpose; and
engages the world on the-fide of the vir-
tuous, whom they persecute. The attempts
of malice to blacken and defame them,
bring forth their characters with more ad-
vantage, to the view of impartial beholders.
The extremities to which they are reduced
by injustice and oppression, rouze their cou-
rage and afivity; and often give occasion
to such vigorous efforts in their just defence,
as overcome all opposition, and terminate
in prosperity and success. Even in cafes
where the wrath of man appears to prevail
over the peaceable and the just, it is fre-
quently, in its issue, converted into a blef-
sing. How many have had reason to be
thankful, for being disappointed by their
enemies in designs which they earnestly
pursued, but which, if successfully accom-
plifhed, they have afterwards seen, would
have occasioned their ruin? Whoso is wi

2 alld

'and will obfJrve t3efe things, even be shall S E R M.

XIV.
unzderJalnd the lfviig-.'iidllJ of tJhe Lord i. - _

While the wrath of man thus praises God

by the advantages which it is made to bring
to good men, as individuals, the divine hand
is equally apparent in the similar effects
which it is appointed to produce to nations
and societies. When wars and commo-
tions hake the earth, when fations rage,
and intestine divisions embroil kingdoms
that before were flourishing, Providence
seems, at firit view, to have abandoned
public affairs to the mifiule of human pas-
lions. Yet from the midst of this conflfion
order is often made to spring; and from
these mischiefs lasting advantages to arise.
By such convulsions, nations are rouzed
from that dangerous lethargy into which
flowing wealth, long peace, and growing
effeminacy of manners had funk them.
They are awakened to discern their true
interests; and taught to take proper mea-
fures for security and defence against all
their foes. Inveterate prejudices are cor-

* Psalm cvii. 34.

reeced;

E R M. reEed; and latent sources of danger are
XIV. a__j discovered. Public spirit is called forth;

and larger views of national happiness are
formed. The corruptions to which every
government is liable, are often recified by
a ferment in the political body, as noxious
humours in the animal frame are carried off
by the shock of a disease. Attempts made
against a wife and well established civil con-
ftitution, tend in the issue to strengthen it;
and the disorders of licentiousness and sac-
tion, teach men more highly to prize the
blessings of tranquillity and legal protection.

FOURTHLY, the wrath of mani, when it

breaks forth in the persecution of religion,
praises the divine goodness, by being ren-
dered conducive to the advancement of truth
and propagation of religion in the world.
The church of God, since the days of its
infancy, hath never been entirely exempted
from the wrath of the world ; and in those
ages, during which it was most exposed to
that wrath, it hath always flourished the
most. In vain the policy and the rage of

nlen

men united their efforts to extinguish this S E R M.
divine light. Though all the four winds
blew against it, it only shone brighter,
and flamed higher. iMany waters coald
not quench it, nor all the foods drown it.
The constancy and fortitude of those who
suffered for the truth, had a much greater
effeat in increasing the number of converts,
than all the terror and cruelty of perfecu-
tors, in diminifhing-it. By this means, the
wrath of man was made to turn against it-
lelf, to the deftrution of its own purpose;
like waves, which assaulting a rock with
impotent fury, discover its immoveable fta-
bility, while they daih themselves in pieces
at its feet.

I SHALL only add one other instance of

the wrath of man praising God, by accom-
plilhing ends of most extensive benefit to
mankind. Never did the rage and malice
of the wicked imagine that they had ob-
tained a more complete triumph, than in
the death of Jesus Christ. When they had
executed their purpose of making him susser

VOL. II 1 e as

SE p M. as a malefactor, they were confident that

XIV.
»i_-^. they had extinguished his name, and dif-

comfited his followers for ever. Behold
how feeble are the efforts" of the wrath -of
man against the decree of Heaven! All
that they intended to overthrow, they most
effe&ually established. The death of Christ
was, in the counsels of Heaven, the spring
of everlasting life to the faithful. The cross
on which he suffered with apparent igno-
miny, became the standard of eternal honour
to'him; the ensign under which his fol-
lowers'affembled, and triumphed. He who,
at his pleasure, rejrailis the remainder of
wrath, suffered the rage of our Saviour's
enemies to suggest no other things to them
than what, long before, He had determined,
and his prophets had foretold. They all
conspired to render the whole scene of
Christ's sufferings exacly conformable to
the original, predicted plan of divine mercy
and goodness; and each of them contri-
buted his share to accomplifl that great un-
dertaking, which none of them in the least
understood, nor meant to promote.---So

remarkable

remarkable an inftanee as this, fully afcer- s E RVM
tained in Scripture, of the wrath of mar --
minificring to the designs of Heaven, ought
to be frequently in our eye; as an exem-
plification of the condua of Providence in
many other cafes, where we have not so
much light afforded us for tracing its ways.

By this indution of particulars, the doc-

trine contained in the text is plainly and
fully verified. We have feerin that the dif-
orders which the pride and passions of men
occasion in the world, though they take rife
from the corruption of human nature in
this fallen fiate, yet are so overruled by Pro-
vidence, as to redound to His honour and
glory who governs all. They illustrate be-
fore the world the divine perfedions in the
adminlftratiori of the universe. They serve
the purposes of moral and religious im-
provement to the fouls of men. By a secret
tendency, they advance the welfare of those
whom they appear to threaten with ev;l.
Surel,, 0 God! the wrath of manJhallprajfr
thee; the remainder of wrath Jfidt thou re-

E e 2 j.rainA.

s E R M. Jfrain.-In thy hand it is; and thou never
v-,_ letteft it forth but in weight and measure.

It is wild and intracable in its nature; but
Thou tamest it. It is blind and headlong
in its impulse; but Thou direaeft it. It
ftriggles 6continually to break its chain; but
Thou corifineft it; Thou retrenchet all the
superfluity of its fury.- Let us now con-
fider,'whit improvement is to be made of this
meditation on the ways of Providence.

IN the first place, let it lead us to a reli-

gious contemplation of the hand of God
in all the transactions of the world. In the
ordinary-courfe of human affairs, we be-
hold a very mixed and busy scene; the
passions of men variously agitated, and new
changes daily taking place upon this stage
of time. We behold peace and war alter-
nately returning; the fortunes of private
men rising and falling; and fiates and na-
tions partaking of the fame vicissitude. In
all this, if we attend only to the operation
of external causes, and to the mere rotation
'of events, we view no more than the ina-

nirate

nimate part of nature; we stop at the fur- s ERM.
face of things; we contemplate the great
fpeftacle which is presented to us, not with
the eyes of rational and intelligent beings.
The life and beauty of the universe arises
from the view of that wifdoin and goodness
which animates and condudts the whole,
and unites all the parts in one great de-
sign. There is an eternal mind who puts
all those wheels in motion; himself remain-
ing for ever at reft. Nothing is void of
God. Even in the passions and ragings of
men, He is to be found; and where they
imagine they guide themselves, they are
guided and controuled by his hand. What
Iblemn thoughts and devout affections ought
this meditation to inspire; when in view-
ing the affairs of the world, we attend not
merely to the atings of men, but to the
ways of God; and confider ourselves, and
all our concerns, as included in his high
administration!

IN the second place, the docrine which
has been illutrated should prevent us from

e 3 censuring

s ERvM censuring Providence, on account of any
t, -v~j seeming disorders and evils which at present

take place in the world. The various in-
stances which have been pointed out in this
discourse, of human pailion and wickedness
rendered subservient to wife and useful ends,
give us the highest reason to conclude that,
in all other cafes of seeming evil, the like
ends are carried on. This ought to satisfy
our mind, even when the profpe&t is most
dark and discouraging. The plans of di-
vine wisdom are too large and comprehen-
five to be discerned by us in all their extent;
and where we fee only by parts, we must
frequently be at a loss in judging of the
whole. The way of God is in the sea 'ad
his path in the great waters; hisfootleps are
Not known *. But although thcu fayeJi tho;
calfl not fee him, yet judgment is before him;
therefore tris/ thou in him t. As in the
natural world, no real deformity is found,
nothing but what has either some orna-
ment, or some use; fq in the moral world,

' Psalm lxxvii. 19. - tJob, xxxv, 14.

the. most irregular and deformed appear- SE RM.
ances contribute in one way or other to the -,--
order of the whole. The Supreme Being,
from the most opposite and disagreeing
principles, forms uhiverfal concord; and
adapts-even the most harfl and dissonant
notes'to the harniony of his praise. As he
hath reared the goodly frame of nature
from' various 'and jarring elements, and
hath fettled it in peace; so he hath formed
such an union by lis providence of the
more various 'interests, and more jarring
pitlons of iien, tthat they all conspire to
his. glory, and co-operate-for general good.
-How amazing i" that wiifdom, which
comprehends such infinite diversities, and
contrarieties, within its scheme! How pow-
erful that hand, which bends to its own
purpose the good and the bad, the busy
and the idle, the friends and the foes of
truth; which obliges them all to hold on
their course to his glory, though divided
from one another by a multiplicity of pur-
suits, and differing often from themselves;
and while they all move at their own free-

E e 4 domn

s E R M. dom, yet by a secret influence, winds and
XIV.

_-c- turns them at his will! 0 the depth of the

riches, both of the wIrdonr and knowledge of
God! How unfearcbable are his judgments,
and his ways paqi finding out *!

IN the third place, we fee, from what

has been said, how much reason there is
for. submission to the decrees of Heaven.
Whatever difireffes we susser from the
wrath of man, we have ground to believe
that they befall not in vain. In the midst
of human violence, or oppression, we are
not left to be the sport of fortune. Higher
counsels are concerned. Wife and good
designs are going on. God is always car-
.rying forward his own purposes; and if
there terminate in his glory, which is ever
the fame with the felicity of the righteous,
is not this a fulficient reason for our calm
and chearful acquiescence?

Hence also, to conclude, arises the most

powerful argument.for studying, with zeal-
ous assiduity, to gain the favour and pro-

* Rom. xi. 33. .

tecion

teEion of the Almighty. If his displeasure SE R M.
hang over our heads, all things around us
may be just objecs of terrour. For against
him, there is no defence. The most violent
powers in nature are ministers to him.
Formidable, indeed, may prove the wrath
of man, if he be pleased to let it forth
against us. To him, but not to us, it be-
longs to restrain it at pleasure. Whereas,
when we are placed under his protetion,
all human wrath is divecfed of its terrours.
If he be for us, who or what can be agaiij
us ? Let us pursue the meafurcs which he
hath appointed for obtaining his grace by
faith, repentance and a holy life, and we
shall have no reason to be afraid of evil
tidings; our hearts will be fxcd truifing in
the Lord. When the religious fear of God
possesses the heart, it expels the ignoble
fear of man; and becomes the principle of
courage and magnanimity. The Lord is
a buckler and a Jhield to them that feive
him. 4When he arifeth, his enemies JJall be
scattered, asfmnoke is driven away, and as
chaff before the wind. He giveth Jlrength

and

S E RM. and victory to his people; he cloatheth them
Iy_ with salvation. The wrath of man fJall

praffe him; and the remainder of wrathJhall
be restrain.

S E R-

# SERMON XV. On the IMPORTANCE of RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE to MANKIND. Preached before the Society in Scotland for propagating Christian Knowledge. ISAIAH xi. 9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my ...

[ 427

SERMON XV.
On the IMPORTANCE of RELIGIOUS

KNOWLEDGE to MANKIND.
Preached before the Society in Scotland for propagating

Chriflian Knowledge,

ISAIAH xi. 9.

obeysJall not hurt nor destroy in all my, holy

mountain; for the earth j'all be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters co-
ver thefea.
T HIS paflage of Scripture is under- SERM.

flood, by all Christian interpreters, to

refer to the days of the Gospel. The Pro-
phet describes, in the context, the aufpi-
cious influence of the Mefliah's reign, as

extending

5ERRv. extending over all nature, and producing

.--.. universal felicity. The full accompliih-
ment of this prediction is yet future, and
refpees some more advanced period of the
kingdom of God, when true religion {hall
universally prevail, and the native tendency
of the Gospel attain its entire effect In
the profpe& of this event, the Prophet
seems to rife above himself, and celebrates
that happy age in the most sublime strain
of eastern poetry. He opens a beautiful
view of the state of the world, as a sLate of
returning innocence. He represents all
nature flourishing in peace; discord and
guile abolished; the most hostile natures
reconciled, and the most savage, reformed
and tamed. iThe wolfbhall dwell with the
lamb, and the leopard lie down -with the
kid; and the calf, and the young lion, and the
fatling together, and a little child Jhall lead
them. The lion Jhall eat Jtrawv like the or;
and the sicking clildJhallpltay on the bole of
tbe asp,. and the w'eaned child Jhall put his
band on the cockatrice den. They Jhall not
hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain;

fr.

for the earth jhall befill of the knowledge of E R M.
the Lord, as the waters cover thefea.

Upon reading these words, we must im-

mediately perceive the great encouragement
which they give to all good designs for pro-
moting religion in the world. When we
engage in these, we have the comfort of
being engaged, not only in a good cause,
but also in one that shall undoubtedly be
successful. For we are here assured by the
divine promise, that truth and righteousness
shall at length prevail, and that the in-
creasing influence of religion ihall introduce
general happiness. It is a pleasing and ani-
mating reflection, that in carrying on such
designs, we ac upon the divine plan; and
co-operate with God for advancing the
kingdom of the Messiah. We have no rea-
son to be discouraged by any unfavourable
circuinftances which at present oppose our
pious endeavours. Though the ignorance,
superstition, and corruption, which now fill
so great a part of the world, have a dark
and mysterious asped, it is not beyond the
power of that Supreme Being who brings

light
i

SE R M. light out of darkness, to clear up those peri
XV.

plexing appearances, and gradually to ex-
tricate mankind from the labyrinth of ig-
norance and errour. Let us confider how
improbable it seemed, when the gospel was
first published, that it ihould extend so far,
and overthrow so much eftabliihed fuperfti-
tion, as it has already done. There is no-
thing, in the present state of the world, to
render it more unlikely that it shall one day
be universally received, and prevail in its
full influence. At the rife of Christianity,
the disproportion was, at least, as great,
between the apparent human causes, and
the effec which has actually been produced,
as there is, in our age, between the circum-
fiances of religion in the world, and the
effec which we farther expec. 2The Sun
of righteousness having already exerted its
influence in breaking through the thickest
darkness, we may justly hope, that it is
powerful enough to dispel all remaining
obscurity; and that it will ascend by de-
grees to that perfea day, when bealiing jall
be under its wings to all the nations. '

3 littl

little one dhall become a thousand; and afmzall S E R M.
one, afirong nation. I the Lord will hafien
it in its time .

BESIDES the prediction which the text

contains of the future success of religion,
it points out also a precise connexion be-
tween the increase of religious knowledge,
and the happiness of mankind. The know-
ledge of the Lord filing the earth, is assigned
as the cause why they Jhall not hurt nor de-
Jiroy in all the holy mountain of God. To
this I am now to lead your thoughts; as
a futbjet both suited to the occasion of the
present meeting, and proper to be illustrated
in times, wherein total indifference to reli-
gious principles appears to gain ground.
Whether Christianity shall be propagated
farther or not, is treated as a matter of no
great concern to mankind. The opinion
prevails among many, that moral virtue
may subsist, with equal advantage, in-
dependent of religion. For moral princi-
ples, great regard is professed; but articles

* Isaiah Ix. 22.

of

SER M. of religious belief are held to be abfirad

xv.
.-,-j tenets, remote from life; points of mere

Speculation and debate, the influence of
which is very inconsiderable on the ations
of men. Their general condu&, it is con-
tended, will always proceed upon views
and principles which have more relation to
the present state of things; and religious
knowledge can therefore sand in no necef-
fary connection with their happiness and
prosperity.- How adverse such opinions
are both to the profeflion and pracice of
religion, is abundantly evident. How ad-
verse they are to the general welfare and
real interests of mankind, I hope to make
appear to candid .minds.

By the knowledge of the Lord in the text,

is not to be understood the natural know-
ledge of God only. It is plain, that the
Prophet speaks of the age of the Messiah,
when more enlarged discoveries should be
made to mankind of the divine perfedions
and government, than unassisted reason
could attain. The knowledge of the Lord,
therefore, comprehends the principles of

Christianity,

Christianity, as well as of natural religion. S R M.

XV.

In order to discern the importance of such
knowledge to general happiness, we shall
confider man, I. as an individual; II. as a
member of society.

I. CONSIDERING man as an individual,

let us inquire, how far the knowledge of
true religion is important, first, to his im-
provement; next, to his consolation.

FIRST, with refpea to the improvement
of man; the advancement of his nature in
what is valuable and useful, the acquisition
of such dispositions and habits as fit him for
asing his part with propriety on this stages
and prepare him for a higher state of aftion
hereafter; what benefit does he receive, in
these refpeets, from religious knowledge and
belief? It is obvious, that all increase of
knowledge is improvement to the under-
standing. The more that its sphere is en-
larged, the greater number of objects that
are submitted to its view, especially when
these objeEs are of intrinsic excellence, the

VOL. II. F f more

S E RM. more mull those rational powers, which are
-v__ the glory of man, be in the course of attain-

ing their proper strength and maturity.
But were the knowledge of religion merely
speculative, though the speculation muff be
admitted to be noble, yet less could be said
of its importance. We recommend it to
mankind, as forming the heart, and dired-
ing the life. Those pure and exalted con-
ceptions which the Christian religion has
taught us to entertain of the Deity, as the
universal Father and righteous Governour
of the universe, the standard of unspotted
perfection, and the author of eve)y good and
perfet gift; conducting his whole admini-
firation with an eternal regard to order,
virtue, and truth; ever favouring the cause
and supporting the interests of righteous
men; and applying, in this direction, the
whole might of omnipotence, and the whole
counsel of unerring wisdom, from the be-
ginning to the end of things; such con-
ceptions both kindle devotion,and ftrengthell
virtue. They give fortitude to the mind in
the pracice of righteoufaefs, and eftablif

th'e

the persuasion of its being our highest in- s ER M.
terest. -^

All the dodrines peculiar to the Gospel

are great improvements on what the light
of nature had imperfectly suggested. A
high dispensation of Providence is made
known, particularly suited to the exigencies
of man; calculated for recovering him from
that corrupted state into which experience
bears witness that he is fallen, and for re-
storing him to integrity, and favour with his
Creator. The method of carrying on this
great plan is such as gives us the most
ftrikingviews of the importance ofrighteouf-
ness or virtue, and of the high account in
which it stands with God. The Son of
God appeared on the earth, and suffered as
a propitiation for the fins of the world,
with this express intention, that he might
bring in everlating righteofnefs; that he
might purge our cofcietlces from dead works
to serve the living God; that he might re-
deem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
hinlfe!f a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. Such a merciful interposition of

F f 2 the

SERM. the Creator of the world, while it illus-
'---v-' trioufly displays his goodness, and signalizes

his concern for the moral intereits of man-
kind, affords us, at the fame time, the most
satisfying ground of confidence and trufr.
It offers an object to the mind, on which it
can lay hold for the security of its future
hopes; when, with a certainty far beyond
what any abfirad argument could yield, it
appeals to a diftinguiffied fad; and is
enabled to fay, He that pared not his o-wt
Son, but delivered him up for us all, how
Jhall he not with him ayo freely give us all
things* ?

While the divine Government is thus

placed in a light the most amiable, and most
encouraging to every virtuous mind, there
is, at the fame time, something extremely
awful and solemn in the whole doEtrine of
redemption. It is calculatedcto firike the
mind with reverence for the divine admi-
niftration. It points at some deep malignity
in fin, at some dreadful consequences flow-
ing from guilt, unknown in their causes

* Rom. viii. 32.

and

and in their whole effecs to us, which SE R M.

XV.

moved the Sovereign of the World to de- '--
part from the ordinary course of Providence,
and to bring about the restoration of his
fallen creatures by a method" so astonishing.
Mankind are hereby awakened to the moit
serious reflecions. -Such views are opened
of the fandity of the divine laws, of the
ftri&nefs of the divine justice, of the im-
portance of the part which is assigned them
to at, as serve to prevent their trifling with
human life, and add dignity and solemnity
to virtue. Theie great purposes are farther
carried on, by the discovery which is made
of the fixed connetion in which this life
stands with a future eternal tfate. We are
represented as fowwing n2ow, what we are to
reap hereafter; undergoing a course of pro-
bation and trial, which, according as it ter-
minates in our improvement, or leaves us
unreformed and corrupted, will dismiss us
to lasting abodes, either of punishment or
reward. Such a discovery rites far above
the dubious conjetures, and uncertain rea-
fonings, which mere natural light figgefts

F f 3 concerning

SERM. concerning the future condition of man-

xv.
*_ kind. Here we find, what alone can pro-

duce any considerable influence on practice,
explicit promise and threatening; an autho-
ritative fantion given to a law; the Gover-
nour and Judge revealed; and all the mo-
tives which can operate on hope and fear,
brought home to the heart, with Thus faith
the Lord of HoJts. In a word, a great and
magnificent plan of divine administration is
opened to us, in the Gospel of Christ; and
nothing is omitted that can impress man-
kind with the perfuaiion of their being all,
in the ftriteft sense, fubjeds of the moral
government of God.

THOUGH the hounds of this Discourse

allow us to take only an imperfeA view of
the principles of Christian docrine, yet the
hints which have been given lay a fuffi-
cient foundation for appealing to every im-
partial mind, whether the knowledge and
belief of such principles be not intimately
connected with the improvemcnt, and, by
consequence, with the happiness of man.

I reason

I reason now with such as admit, that virtue S E R M.

Xv.

is the great source both of improvement
and happiness. Let them lay what stress
they please upon the authority of conscience,
and upon the force and evidence of its dic-
tates; can they refute to allow, that the
natural tendency of the principles which I
have mentioned, is to support those ditates,
and to confirm that authority; to excite,
on various occasions, the most useful senti-
ments; to provide additional restraints from
vice, and additional motives to every virtue?
Who dares pronounce, that there is no cafe
in which conscience flands in need of such
assistance, to dire&, where there is so much
uncertainty and darkness; and to prompt,
where there is so much feebleness and irre-
solution, and such a fatal proneness to vice
and folly?

But how good soever the tendency of

religious principles may be, some will fiill
call in question their atual significancy,
and influence on life. This tendency is
by various causes defeated. Between the
belief of religious principles and a corre-

F f 4 fpondent

SERM. fpondent pracice, it will be alleged that
xv.

frequent experience thews there is no ne-
ceffary connecion; and that therefore the
propagation of the one, cannot give us any
assurance of proportionable improvements
following in the other.-This, in part, is
granted to be true; as we admit that reli-
gious knowledge and belief are susceptible
of various degrees, before they arrive at that
real Christian Faith which the Scripture re-
presents as pirfing the heart. But though
the connetion between principle and prac-
tice be not necessary and invariable, it will
not, I filppofe, be denied that there is some
connection. Here then one avenue to the
heart is opened. If the tendency of reli-
gious knowledge be good, wisdom must
direCt, and duty oblige us to cultivate it.
For tendency will, at least in some cafes,
rife into effect; and, probably, in more
cafcs than are known and observed by the
world. Besides the distinguished examples
of true religion and virtue which have, more
or less, adorned every age of the Christian
era, what numbers may there be, in the

Imore

more silent and private fccnes of life, over- s E R M.

xv.

looked by superficial obhervers of mankind, ---
on whose hearts and lives religious princi-
ples have the most happy influence? Even
on loose and giddy minds, where they are
far from operating their full effeQ, their
influence is, frequently, not altogether loft.
Impressions of religion often check vice in
its career. They prevent it from proceed-
ing its utmost length; and though they do
not entirely reform the offender, they serve
to maintain order in society. Persons who
are now bad, might probably have been
worse without them, and the world have
suffered more from unrestrained licentious-
ness. They often sow latent feeds of good-
ness in the heart, which proper circum-
itances and occalions afterwards ripen;
though the reformation of the offender may
not be so conspicuous, as his former enor-
mities have been. From the native ten-
dency of religious belief, there is reason to
conclude, that those good effets of it are
not so rare as some would represent them.
By its nature and tendency, we can better

judge

SER M. judge of its effets, than by observations
Xv.

drawn from a supposed experience, which
often is narrow in its compass, and falla-
cious in its conclusions.

The actual influence of principle and be-

lief on mankind, admits of clear illustration
from uncontested matter of sac. They
who hold the good effecs of Christian prin-
ciples to be so inconsiderable, as to render
the propagation of them of finall import-
ance, will be at no loss to give us instances
of corrupt principles of belief having had
the most powerful influence on the world.
Loud complaints we hear from this quarter,
of the direful effeas which superstition and
enthusiasm have produced; of their having
poisoned the tempers, and transformed the
manners of men; of their having over-
come the strongest restraints of law, of rea-
son, and humanity. Is this then the cafe
that all principles, except good ones, are of
such mighty energy ?-Strange ! that false
religion Ihould be able to do so much, and
true religion so little; that belief, so pow-
erful in the one cafe, should be so impo-

tent

tent in the other.-No impartial enquirer, S E R M.

xv.

surely, can entertain this opinion. The i
whole history of mankind shows that their
religious tenets and principles, of whatever
nature they be, are of great influence in
forming their characer, and directing their
conduct. The mischief which false prin-
ciples have done, affords a good argument
to guard carefully against errour; but as it
is a proof of what belief can do, it gives
ground to hope the more from it, when
rightly directed. The fame torrent which,
when it is put out of its natural course,
overflows and lays waste a country, adorns
and enriches it, when running in its pro-
per channel. If it be alleged that super-
ftition is likely to be more powerful in its
effets than truth, because it agrees better
with the follies and corruptions of the
world, we may oppose to this on the other
hand, that truth has the divine blefling and
the countenance of Heaven on its fide.
Let us always hope well of a cause that is
good in itself, and beneficial to mankind.
Trutth is mighty, and will prevail. Let us

spread

SEXRM spread the incorruptible feed as widely as

we can, and trust in God that he will give
the increase. Having thus ihown the im-
portance of religious knowledge to man-
kind in the way of improvement, let us,

IN the second place, confider it in the

light of consolation; as bringing aid and
relief to us amidst the distresses of life.
Here religion incontestably triumphs; and
its happy effeas in this refpef, furnifl a
strong argument to every benevolent mind
for wifling them to be farther diffused
throughout the world. For without the
belief and hope afforded by divine Reve-
lation, the circumstances of man are ex-
tremely forlorn. He finds himself placed
here as a stranger in a vast universe, where
the powers and operations of nature are
very imperfectly known; where both the
beginnings and the issues of things are in-
volved in mysterious darkness; where he
is unable to discover, with any certainty,
whence he sprung, or for what purpose he
was brought into this state of exiflence;

whether

whether he be fubjeded to the government s E R M,

xV.

of a mild, or of a wrathful ruler; what con- A-
ftrution he is to put on many of the dif-
penfations of his providence ; and what his
fate is to be when he departs hencc. What
a dilconfolate situation, to a serious enquir-
ing mind! The greater degree of virtue it
poifeffes, its sensibility is likely to be the
more oppressed by this burden of labouring
thought. Even though it were in one's
power to banish all uneasy thought, and to
fill up the hours of life with perpetual
amusement, life so filled up would, upon
reflection, appear poor and trivial. But
these are far from being the terms upon
which man is brought into this world. He
is conscious that his being is frail and fee-
ble; he fees himself beset with various
dangers; and is exposed to many a me-
lancholy apprehension, from the evils
which he may have to encounter, before he
arrives at the close of life. In this distressed
condition, to reveal to him such discoveries
of the Supreme Being as the Christian reli-
gion affords, is to reveal to him a Father

and

SEXR M. and a Friend; is to let in a ray of the rnoif
xv. TV-_ cheering light upon the darkness of the hu-

man estate. He who was before a defti-
tute orphan, wandering in the inhofpitablc
desert, has now gained a flhelter from the
bitter and inclement blast. He now knows
to whom to pray, and in whom to trust;
where to unbosom his sorrows; and fiom
what hand to look for relief.

It is certain, that when the heart bleeds

from some wound of recent misfortune,
nothing is of equal efficacy with religious
comfort. It is of power to enlighten the
darkest hour, and to affwage the fevered
woe, by the belief of divine favour, and
the profped of a blessed immortality. In
such hopes, the mind expatiates with joy;
and when bereaved of its earthly friends,
solaces itself with the thoughts of one friend
who will never forsake it. Refined rca-
fonings concerning the nature of the hu-
man condition, and the improvement which
philosophy teaches us to make of every
event, may entertain the mind when it is
at ease; may perhaps contribute to fbotl

it,

it, when slightly touched with sorrow. S E R I.

XV.

But when it is torn with any fore distress,
they are cold and feeble, compared with a
direct: promise from the word of God.
This is an anchor to the foul both sure and
fledfaqf. This has given consolation and
refuge to many a virtuous heart, at a time
when the most cogent reasonings would
have proved utterly unavailing.

Upon the approach of death, especially,

when if a man thinks at all, his anxiety
about his future interests must naturally in-
crease, the power of religious consolation is
sensibly felt. Then appears, in the most
striking light, the high value of the disco-
veries made by the Gospel; not only life
and immortality revealed, but a mediator
with God discovered; mercy proclaimed,
through him, to the frailties of the penitent
and the humble; and his presence pro-
mifed to be with them when they are pass-
ing through the valley of the Jhadow of
death, in order to bring them safe into un-
seen habitations of reft and joy. Here is
ground for their leaving the world with

comfort

SE R M. comfort and peace. But in this severe and

xv.
»-~v,- trying period, this labouring hour of na-

ture, how shall the unhappy man support
himself, who knows not, or believes not,
the hope of religion? Secretly conscious
to himself ttht he has not aced his part as
he ought to have done, the fins of his past
life arise before him in fad remembrance.
He wilhes to exist after death, and yet
dreads that existence. The Governour of
the world is unknown. He cannot tell
whether every endeavour to obtain his
mercy may not be in vain. All is awful
obscurity around him; and in the midst of
endless doubts and perplexities, the trem-
bling, reluctant foul, is forced away from
the body. As the misfortunes of life must,
to such a man, have been most oppressive,
so its end is bitter. His fun sets in a dark
cloud; and the night of death closes over
his head, full of mifery.-Having now
shewn how important the knowledge of the
Lord is, both to the improvement and the
consolation of man, confidered as an indi-
vidual, I am next to shew,

II. How
5

II. How important this knowledge is to s E R M.

XV.

him as a member of fcciety. This branch
of the subjea is in part anticipated by what
has been said. For all the improvement
which man receives as an individual, re-
dounds to the benefit of the public. Society
reaps the fruit of the virtues of all the
members who compose it; and in propor-
tion as each, apart, is made better, the
whole must flourish.

But besides this effet, religious know-

ledge has a direct tendency to improve the
social intercourse of men, and to assist them
in co-operating for common good. It is
the great instrument of civilizing the mul-
titude, and forming them to union. It
tames the fierceness of their palions, and
softens the rudeness of their manners.
There is much reason to doubt whether
any regular society ever subsisted, or could
subsist, in the world, deflitute of all reli-
gious ideas and principles. They who, in
early times, attempted to bring the wander-
ing and scattered tribes of men from the
woods, and to unite them in cities and

VOL. II. G g com-

S E R M. communities, always found it necessary to
xv.

_ begin with some institution of religion.

The wisest legislators of old, through the
whole progress of their systems of govern-
ment, confidered religion as essential to civil
polity. If even those imperfea forms of
it, loaded with so much superstition and
errour, were important to the welfare of
society, how much more that reasonable
worship of the true God, which is taught
by the Gospel ? True religion introduces
the idea of regular fubjeftion, by accuf-
toming mankind to the awe of fuperiour
power in the Deity, joined with the vene-
ration of fuperiour wisdom and goodness.
It is by its nature an associating principle;
and creates new and sacred bonds of union
among men. Common assemblies for reli-
gious worihip, and joint homage offered
up to one God; the sense of being all de-
pendent on the fame protedion, and bound
to duty by the fame ties, sharers in the
fame benefits of heaven, and expetants of
the fame reward, tend to awaken the fen-
timents of friendly relation, and to con-

firm

firm and strengthen our mutual connexion. s E R M.

XV.

The doctrine of Christianity is most adverse
to all tyranny and opprefion, but highly
favourable to the interests of good govern-
ment among men. It represses the spirit
of licentiousness and sedition. It inculcates
the duty of subordination to lawful fupe-
riours. It requires us to fear God, to ho-
nour the king, and not to meddle with them
that are given to change.

Religious knowledge forwards all useful

and ornamental improvements in society.
Experience ihows, that in proportion as it
diffuses its light, learning flourishes, and
liberal arts are cultivated and advanced.
Just conceptions of religion promote a free
and manly spirit. They lead men to think
for themselves; to form their principles
upon fair inquiry, and not to resign their
conscience to the ditates of men. Hence
they naturally inspire aversion to slavery of
every kind; and promote a taste for liberty
and laws. Despotic governments have ge-
nerally taken the firmest root among nations
that were blinded by Mahometan or Pagan

G g 2 darkness;

s i. R M. darkness; where the throne of violence has

xv.
---- been supported by ignorance and false reli-

gion. In the Christian world, during those
centuries in which gross superstition held its
reign undisturbed, oppression and slavery
were in its train. The cloud of ignorance
fat thick and deep over the nations; and
the world was threatened with a relapse into
ancient barbarity. As soon as the true
kznowledge of the Lord revived, at the aufpi-
cious ara of the Reformation, learning, li-
berty, and arts, began to rhine forth with it,
and to resume their lustre.

But the happy influence which religion

exerts on society, extends much farther than
to effeas of this kind. It is not only sub-
fidiary to the improvement, but necessary to
the preservation of society. It is the very
basis on which it refis. Religious prin-
ciple is what gives men the surest hold of
one another. That last and greatest pledge
of veracity, an oath, without which no so-
ciety could subsist, derives its whole autho-
rity from an established reverence of God,
to whom it is a solemn appeal. Banish re-

4 ligious

ligious principle, and you loosen all the E R M.
bonds which conned mankind together;
you fliake the fundamental pillar of mutual
confidence and trust ; you render the fecu-
rity arising from laws, in a great measure,
void and ineffectual. For human laws, and
human fandions, cannot extend to number-
less cafes, in which the fifety of mankind
is deeply concerned. They would prove
very feeble instruments of order and peace,
if there were no checks upon the condudt of
men from the sense of divine legislation; if
no belief of future rewards and punishments
were to overawe conscience, and to supply
the defects of human government.

Indeed, the belief of religion is of such

importance to public welfare, that the molt
expressive description we could give of a
society of men in the utmost disorder, would
be to fay, that there was no fear of God
left among them. Imagination would im-
mediately conceive of them as abandoned to
rapine and violence, to perfidy and treachery;
as deceiving and deceived, oppressing and
opprcffed; consumed by intestine broils,

Gg 3 anQ

SE R M. and ripe for becoming a prey to the first
XV.

-- invader. On the other hand, in order to

form the idea of a society flouriihing in its
highest glory, we need only conceive the
belief of Chriflian principles exerting its full
influence on the hearts and lives of all the
members. Instantly, the most amiable scene
would open to our view. We should fee
the causes of public disunion removed, when
men were animated with that noble spirit of
love and charity which our religion breathes;
and formed to the pursuit of those higher
interests, which give no occasion to compe-
tition and jealousy. We should fee families,
neighbourhoods, and communities, living in
unbroken amity, and purfiling, with one
heart and mind, the common interest; so-
briety of manners, and simplicity of life,
restored; virtuous industry carrying on its
useful labours, and cheerful contentment
every where reigning. Politicians may lay
down what plans they please for advancing
public prosperity; but, in truth, it is the
prevalency of such principles of religion and
virtue, which forms the strength and glory

3 of

of a nation. When thcfe are totally want- s ER M.
ing, no measures contrived by human wis-
dom can supply the defect. In proportion
as they prevail, they raise the state of society
from that fad degeneracy into which it is at
present funk; and carry it forward,- under
the blessing of Heaven, towards that happy
period, when nation fJall not lift up their
sword againfl nation, nor learn war any
more.

In order to prove the importance of reli-

gious knowledge to the interest of society,
one consideration more, deserving particu-
lar attention, remains to be mentioned. It
is, that if goodfeed be not sown in the field,
tares will infallibly spring up. The pro-
pension towards religion is strong in the
human heart. There is a natural prepa-
ration in our minds, for receiving some im-
preflions of supernatural belief. Upon
these, among ignorant and uncultivated
men, superstition or enthufiafi never fail
to graft themselves. Into what monstrous
forms these have ihot forth, and what va-
rious mischiefs they have produced to so-

G g 4 ciety,

SS R M. ciety, is too well known. Nor is this the
xv.

whole of the danger. Designing men are
always ready to take advantage of this po-
pular weakness, and to direc the fuperfti-
tious bias of the multitude to their own am-
bitious and interested ends. Superfition,
in itself a formidable evil, threatens confe-
quences still more formidable, when it is
rendered the tool ofdefign and craft. Hence
arises one of the molt powerful arguments
for propagating with zeal, as far as our in-
fluence can extend, the pure and undefiled
doctrines of the Gospel of Christ; in order
that just and rational principles of religion
may fill up that room in the minds of men,
which dangerous fanaticism will othervife
usurp.

This consideration alone is sufficient to

ihow the high utility of the design under-
taken by the Society for propagating Chris-
tian Knowledge. With great propriety,
they have bestowed their chief attention on
a remote quarter of our own country, where,
from a variety of causes, ignorance and fu-
perftition had gained more ground, than in

any

any other corner of the land; where the SERM.

XV.

inhabitants, by their local situation, were v_
more imperfetly supplied with the means
of proper education and inftruCion; and at
the fame time exposed to the fedudions of
such as fought to pervert them from the
truth. The laudable endeavours of the
Society in diffusing religious and useful
knowledge through this part of the country,
have already been crowned with much fuc-
cess; and more is still to be expeaed from
the continuance of their pious and well-
direced attention.

With such good designs, it becomes all

to co-operate, who are lovers of mankind.
Thus shall they show their just sense of the
value of that blessing which they enjoy, in
the knowledge of the Gospel of Christ;
and their gratitude to Heaven for confer-
ring it upon them. Thus ihalI they make
the blessings of those who are now ready
to pe-rri thr;ough lack of knowledge, descend
upon their heads. Thus ihall they contri-
bute their endeavours for bringing forward
that happy period foretold by ancient pro-

phecy;

S ER M. phecy; when there Jhall be one Lord over

XV.
A all the earth, and his name one; when that

namejhall be greatfrom the rifng to thefet-
tingifm; when there Jall be nothing to hurt
nor detroy in all the holy mountain of God;
but judgment Jhall dwell in the wilderness,
and righteousness remain in the fruitfil field;
the defertJJall rejoice, and blofom as the rose;
and the earth Jhall be full of the knowledge
of the Lord as the waters cover thefea *.

Zechar.. xiv. 9Malachi i. nI. Iaiah xxxii. 16.
XXXV. 1. .

BR IT.A
F I N I S.
