THE COMPASSION AND BENEFICENCE OF THE DEITY.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE SOCIETY INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER FOR THE BENIFIT OF THE SONS OF THE CLERGY OF THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH OF SCOTLAND, IN THE TRON CHURCH OF EDINBURGH, MAY, 20. 1796.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, AN ACCOUNT OF THE OBJECTS AND CONSTITUTION OF THE SOCIETY.

THE COMPASSION AND BENEFICENCE OF THE DEITY, A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE SOCIETY, &c.
JEREMIAH xlix. 11. Leave thy fatherless children; I will preserve them alive; and let thy widows trust in me.

NO subject is more open to general observation, or more confirmed by manifold experience, than the goodness of God. The contemplation of the uni­verse in which we dwell presentsit per­petually to our view. Amidst the vast  extent of creation, we discover no in­stance of mere pomp, or useless grandeur, but behold every thing contributing to the general good, and rendered subser­vient to the welfare of the rational or sensible world. In the administration of Providence, the same principle of bene­ficence is conspicuous. The seasons are made regularly to return, and the earth to flourish; supply is bountifully provi­ded for the wants of all creatures; and numberless comforts are prepared to sweet­en human life. Most justly is he who hath established, and who upholds, this admirable order of things, to be esteemed the Father of mercies: and, accordingly, in this view, he is often celebrated in scrip­ture. The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. His tender mercies are over all his works. His mercy is great unto the heavens; and it endureth for ever.

It appears worthy of particular obser­vation that there is one light, in which  more frequently than in any other, the goodness of God is presented to us in the sacred writings, namely, the light of com­passion to the distresses of mankind. Most of the situations are mentioned in which men are considered as most forlorn; and in some passage of scripture, God is re­presented as interesting himself, in a pe­culiar manner, for those who are in such situations. Particular emphasis is always laid upon this circumstance, in the gene­ral views which are given of his goodness. He is the Hearer of prayer, unto whom all flesh shall come. But he is describ­ed as listening with particular attention to the cry of the poor; and regarding the prayer of the destitute: He will prepare their heart, and cause his ear to hear. All creatures are the objects of his providen­tial care. But the widow and the father­less, the bowed down and the broken in heart, are particularly attended to, and commi­serated by him. The Lord executeth judgement  for the oppressed; the Lord preserv­eth the stranger; he looseth the prisoner, and giveth food to the hungry. He hath not despised nor abborred the affliction of the afflicted; nor hides he his face from them, but hears when they cry unto him *. In short, when we are deprived of all hu­man consolation and aid, the Almighty is represented as then most accessible to our prayers, and most disposed to help and relieve us.

The words which I have chosen for the text afford a very amiable view of that compassion which scripture so often ascribes to the Supreme Being. The con­text in which they stand contains much dark and mysterious prophecy relating to nations in the neighbourhood of Ju­dea, but leads to no particular illustration of the text. The words of it, taken by  themselves, are plainly to be understood as spoken by God to an aged parent, who in the view of approaching dissolution, is anxious about the future condition of his family in the world; and they present a most affecting display of God's compas­sionate regard to the children of those who have been his faithful servants on earth. Leave thy fatherless children; I will preserve them alive; and let thy wi­dows trust in me. ”It will be worthy of our attention at present, to enquire into the reasons why the Almighty is pleased to represent himself so often to us under this view; not only as the just and good Ruler of the universe, which is the first and leading idea we naturally form of him, but as the Patron and Friend of the distressed part of mankind.

It will be found that there are two ve­ry important purposes which such disco­veries of the divine nature serve. First, they furnish particular ground for trust  in God, amidst all the vicissitudes of hu­man life; and next, they exhibit the pat­tern of that disposition, which we ought, in our measure, humbly to follow and i­mitate.

I. THE discoveries of divine compassion were purposely intended to furnish to us particular ground for trust in God, amidst all the vicissitudes of human life. Man, during his abode on earth, is exposed to various distresses. Even in his most flou­rishing state, his condition is extremely precarious. Prosperous as he may at one time seem to be, he cannot tell how soon, by some unforeseen vicissitude, he may be humbled to the dust; and still less can he tell what may in future befal his chil­dren, to whose fortunes he often looks with anxious solicitude. In the moments when his mind is oppressed, either by the immediate feeling of sorrows or by the dread of impending evils, it is natural  for him to fly to that Supreme Being, under whose direction all human events are placed, and earnestly to implore pro­tection, from him. ”But though he hold the belief that justice and goodness are e­ver to be found at the throne of the Al­mighty, yet, even there, particular dis­couragements meet him. For that Su­preme Being to whom he looks up is a great and an awful Being. His nature is, to us, unknown. He dwells in the secret place of Eternity; and is surrounded with clouds and darkness. We hear his tre­mendous voice in the thunder; and in e­very commotion of the elements we be­hold the irresistible hand of his power. A nature so infinitely superior to our own cannot be looked up to without some mea­sure of dismay. It is overwhelming to the timid apprehension of the distressed. It is contemplated with that awful and mysterious reverence which overpowers confidence and trust.

 It is for this reason that, in condescen­sion to human weakness, God has been pleased so often to represent himself as ac­tuated by a principle of compassion and pity. This gives a shade and soften­ing to the awful greatness of the Divinity. It brings down his goodness to the level of our conception, and fits it to be the object of our trust. Compassion is a principle which we all feel and know. We know that it is the strongest of all the be­nevolent instincts in our nature, and that it tends directly to interest us in behalf of those who need our aid. We are taught to believe that a similar attribute belongs to the divine nature; in order that, from that species of goodness which we are best acquainted with, and which we can most rely upon, we may be trained both to love our almighty Benefactor, and as long as we are in the practice of our duty, to trust to his protection, amidst every distress.  When we hear such a voice of ten­derness, as that which my text utters, pro­ceeding from the Almighty, our hearts are comforted. Distrust and dismay are re­moved. We are no longer oppressed by his greatness. We can draw near to him as to a Father in heaven, before whom we can, with humble confidence, pour out our sorrows; and can trust that, though all our earthly friends should neglect us, our prayers will attract his compassionate re­gard.

Compassion, to the unfortunate, as it is exerted among men, is indeed accompa­nied with certain disturbed and painful feelings, arising from sympathy with those whom we pity. But every such feeling we must remove from our thoughts, when we ascribe an affection of this nature to the Deity. It is true, that, in scripture language, the divine compassion is some­times figured by strong allusions to the relenting struggles and passionate meltings  of the human heart. But we easily per­ceive that such representations are to be understood with the allowances which fi­gurative language requires. All that is amiable in compassion belongs to God; but all that is imperfect in it must be left to man. In the Supreme Being there can be no perturbation or uneasiness; no con­trast of feelings, nor fluctuation of pur­pose. His compassion imports a kind re­gard to the circumstances of the unhappy. But still it is such a regard as suits the perfection of the great Governor of the universe; whose benignity, undisturbed by any violent emotion, ever maintains the same tranquil tenor, like the unruffled and uninterrupted serenity of the highest heavens.

It is important to observe, that this pity and compassion of our heavenly Fa­ther extends itself to our moral and spiri­tual concerns, in like manner as to our natural and external distresses. In that  great dispensation of the redemption of the world by his Son Jesus Christ, he is al­ways represented in scripture as moved by pity for our fallen and wretched estate. The same principle which leads him to regard with compassion the widow and the fatherless, led him to look down with compassion on an helpless and forlorn race, degraded from their original honour. From infinite mercy he sent his Son to seek and to save that which was lost. According to the prophetical language of the Old Testament, He looked upon us; and his time was a time of love. He saw that there was no man; He be­held that there was no intercessor, and his own arm brought salvation. He laid his help on one who was mighty to save. He saw us in our blood, and said, Live ”Agreeable to this spirit of compassion, dis­played in our redemption, is the whole dispensation  of divine grace towards man in his present state of infirmity. It speaks continually the doctrine of consolation and merciful aid; grace to be sufficient for us, and strength to be made perfect in our weakness. As a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him; for he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust *.

I cannot conclude this head without observing how much it adds to the value of the Christian religion, that it hath dis­covered the Deity to us in a light so amia­ble. When the nations of the earth wor­shipped a God unknown, or one whom they arrayed in nothing but vengeful thunders, the true God hath come forth from behind the cloud, and made him­self known to us; known, not only as a just and good Ruler, but as a compassion­ate Father, in whom, amidst all their distresses,  the virtuous may trust and hope. I now proceed to observe,

II. THAT such discoveries of the di­vine nature were designed, not only to ad­minister encouragement and consolation, but also to exhibit the pattern of that dis­position which we are bound, in our mea­sure, to imitate and follow. To this pur­pose tend the repeated exhortations of scripture, to be followers of God, as dear children; to be merciful as our Father in heaven is merciful. That hardness of heart which renders men insensible to the dis­tresses of their brethren, that insolence of prosperity which inspires them with con­tempt of those who are fallen below them, are always represented in scripture as dis­positions most opposite to the nature of God, and most hateful in his sight. In order to make this appear in the strongest light, he hath turned his goodness chiefly into the channel of compassionate regard  to those whom the selfish and the proud despise. He hath avowedly taken up their cause, that he might state himself as an antagonist to such as would bear them down; that he might confound and put to the blush that arrogance of men which makes them slight any of their own bre­thren. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, saith the Lord, to set them in safety from him that puffeth at them *. Lord, says the Psalmist, thou hast heard the desire of the humble; thou wilt arise to judge the father­less, and the oppressed, that the man of earth may oppress no more   .

Consider, I beseech you, whether any virtue can admit of a higher recommenda­tion than its being that disposition under the character of which the Almighty chu­ses to be peculiarly known to us? How can we claim any relation to the Father of  mercies, or how look up to him for com­passion and grace, if we show no bowels of mercy, gentleness, and kindness, to one another? ”The whole plan, indeed, on which he hath formed human nature, and all the circumstances in which he hath placed us on earth, are plainly contrived to excite affections of benevolence, and to enforce works of mercy. Not only hath he planted compassion in the human breast, as one of the strongest instincts there, but he hath so connected us in society, as ne­cessarily to require that our benevolent in­stincts should be brought into exercise. For it is apparent that no man, in any rank of life, even the highest, is sufficient for his own well-being. He can neither supply his own wants, nor provide for his own comforts, without the co-operation of others. The dependence here is mu­tual between the high and the low, the rich and the poor. Each, in one way or other, calls on each for aid. All are so  linked together, as to be impelled by a thousand motives to assist one another in the time of need. This is what nature, what society, what providence, all speak with a loud voice; a voice which may be said to have gone forth even to the ends of the earth, and to have been heard and un­derstood by the most barbarous tribes of men. For among savage and uncultivat­ed nations, no less than among the most civilized and polished, the energy of com­passion is felt, and its claims are recognis­ed and obeyed.

In the course of human life, innumera­ble occasions present themselves for all the exercises of that humanity and benignity, to which we are so powerfully prompted. The diversities of rank among men, the changes of fortune to which all, in every rank, are liable, the necessities of the poor, the wants of helpless youth, the infirmi­ties of declining age, are always giving op­portunities for the display of humane affections.  There is perhaps no form in which benevolence appears more interest­ing, than when it is employed in providing relief for the families and children of those who stand in need of aid, in order that the young may be trained up by proper edu­cation for acting an useful part in the world. Benefits conveyed by this chan­nel are often more important than any o­ther acts of liberality. Besides the great advantage which they bring to society, they have the pleasing effect of awakening all the virtuous sensibilities of the heart, both in those who confer, and in those who receive them. They are often felt with a warmer relish by a family in distress, and productive of more tender gratitude, than could have been raised by any other mode of beneficence. This is rendered sensible to every heart by that beautiful ex­pression of the divine compassion in the text; Leave thy fatherless children; I will  preserve them alive; and let thy widows trust in me.

BY the train of sentiment we have pur­sued, your thoughts, my brethren, will now be naturally led to the consideration of that institution which has given occa­sion to the meeting of this day; The Society formed for the benefit of the Sons of the Clergy of the Established church of Scotland.

In entering on this part of the subject, I trust that I may be permitted to say a few words concerning that order of men, in behalf of whose descendents the favour of the public is now requested. Though belonging myself to that order, yet as my advanced age and long experience may reasonably be supposed to have corrected the prejudices and cooled the ardour of partiality, some weight, I hope, will be al­lowed to my testimony; when now, in the fifty-fourth year of my ministry, after hav­ing seen successions of ministers, in various  parts of the country rise and fall, and af­ter long acquaintance with many, of di­vided sentiments, among my brethren, I can with confidence declare it as my opi­nion, that there exists not any where a more respectable and useful class of men than the Clergy of the Church of Scot­land. Among such a numerous body, I readily admit that some exceptions will be found to the character which I now give of them. Considering human frailty, this is no more than was naturally to be expected. But, taking the ministers of this church in general, I can venture to as­sert that they are a well-informed and en­lightened set of men; decent and irre­proachable in their behaviour, conscien­tious in the discharge of their pastoral du­ties, and very generally esteemed by the people under their care. There was a time, when the Presbyterian clergy lay un­der the imputation of being sour in their tempers, narrow in their opinions, severe  and intolerant in their principles. But as, together with the diffusion of know­ledge, a more liberal spirit has pervaded the clerical order in this part of Britain, it will be found that their manners now are conciliating; that they study to pro­mote harmony and good order in their parishes; that they have shown themselves addicted to useful literature, and in several branches of it have eminently distinguish­ed themselves; and that while they are e­difying and consolatory to the lowest, they have acquired just respect from the higher classes of men.

As long, therefore, as this country shall be preserved from the contagion of that false philosophy which, by overthrowing all religious establishments, has engender­ed so much impiety, and wrought so much mischief, in a neighbouring land; as long as the existence of Christian faith, and of religious principles, shall be considered as essential to the welfare of a nation, it may  reasonably, I think, be expected, that such a body of men as I have mentioned shall be held entitled to the regard and good will of their fellow citizens and country­men.

Circumstances there are, which give par­ticular occasion for this regard and good will to be called forth. You all know the nature of that provision which is made by the public for the established clergy of this country. It is such as is suited to that so­ber and frugal manner of living which is expected from ministers of the gospel. Though, in consideration of the growing prosperity of the country, and of its natu­ral consequence, the increased rate of every expence, it has been found reasonable that, of late years, some addition should be made to the provision of many of the mi­nisters, yet still their condition approaches not to what can be termed opulence in any degree. It is such as to raise them a­bove contempt; such as to afford a decent  subsistence for themselves and their fami­milies; but such as seldom or never can enable them, without some other sources of revenue, to make provision for their children when going forth into the world, especially if their family be numerous.

It was the consideration of this circum­stance that lately gave rise to the Society in favour of the Sons of the Clergy. Ma­ny a minister who, for a tract of years, has faithfully laboured in the discharge of every duty to his flock, has felt, towards the close of his days, what a blessing it would have proved to him, if such a so­ciety had existed in his time, to which he could have looked for aid ”Represent to yourselves, my friends, one of this cha­racter, ”and the representation which I am now to give is not the work of fancy, but founded upon what often in fact takes place. ”Figure, I say, a worthy clergy­man, now in the decline of life, foreseeing the end of his labours drawing near, surrounded  with a family of children, to whom his chief care had been devoted, and and in whom his heart had long been bound up. Their education, from their earliest years, he had conducted, or at least superintended himself, with paternal fond­ness. Whatever his scanty stores could afford he had cheerfully expended, in giv­ing all the advantage to their education which his own village, or which the near­est county town could yield. He had made every preparation that was in his power to make, for their acting a proper part in future life. But the time of pre­paration is finished. The gay season of childhood is over. The period is arrived when they must go forth; must leave that paternal mansion where, in the midst of their youthful companions, they had spent many happy days; must go to provide for themselves, the best they can, in a world which to them is unknown. And whether are they to go? ”Of the few  friends their father ever had, some are now gone gone down to the dust. Others, with whom he once lived in familiar inti­macy, lifted up now with the pride of o­pulence, have forgotten him and his fa­mily. One of his sons, at least, he fondly wished to have educated for that profession to which he himself had been so long at­tached. But, living at a distance from a­ny of the seats of learning, and having no protector to whose assistance he could look, he feels with regret that he is unable for the attempt. Some of his children he must send away to seek their fortune in a distant land. Others must be consigned to the dangers of the ocean, or be reduced to gain their bread by following some of the mean and laborious occupations of life. Viewing the dark and discouraging pro­spect that is before them, the father's heart is sore, when he bids adieu to his children. With tears in his eyes, he gives them his blessing as they depart. Little more it is in  his power to give them; but he commits them to the protection of their Father's God. ”How happy, if, in these mourn­ful moments, a voice of such a nature as this could reach his ears; Leave thy fa­therless children; I will preserve them alive; and let thy widows trust in me!

ANIMATED by the desire of imitating that spirit of divine compassion which breathes in these words, a few respectable gentlemen in this city formed, six years ago, the plan of a Society for assisting the Sons of the Clergy. The institution, as soon as it was known, met with public approbation and favour. It was early distinguished, and amply assisted by Roy­al munificence. It was incorporated by Royal charter; and through the genero­sity of the public, has prospered so far, that the Society has already been enabled to give aid to a considerable number of the sons of clergymen of this church.  The aid which the Society, in an infant state, could as yet give, has been small; as it is confined to what the interest of their capital allows them to bestow. They ear­nestly wish to become more effectually useful, by enlarging their provi [...]ion for the education of Sons; and hope to be ena­bled, in due time, to give assistance to the Daughters as well as to the Sons of mini­sters; so as to afford comfort to a widowed mother, and to the whole of a disconsolate family. For, it is to be observed, that it is not merely to a literary education, or to preparation for the church, that the in­tentions of the Society are directed. They mean so to apply their beneficence, that the families of ministers may be assisted to ac­quire the necessary qualifications for pur­suing any useful employment in the world, for which they appear to be most fitted.

Among other inducements which may encourage the public to promote this bene­ficent plan, there is one which I cannot, on  this occasion, omit to mention; that is, the signal success with which many sons of Scots clergymen have been blessed, in fill­ing with honour several of the important departments of Society. As I have not myself the honour of belonging to that class, I can speak with more freedom on this topic than some other of my brethren. Not to mention the well known and dis­tinguished names of several who at pre­sent possess, with much dignity, stations in the church, and chairs in the universi­ties, and some, now gone, who will be long remembered as having done no small ho­nour, by their literary productions, to this part of the island; let me desire you to look round on the most respectable stations of busy life, and to consider how many of those who now make a high figure at the bar, some on the bench, many in the commer­cial, the military, and the naval professions, were born and bred under the humble roof of a minister. ”Nor is this success  to be ascribed to any favourable coinci­dence of circumstances at this time more than any other. It is the natural result of the manner in which they were brought up. Educated in good principles, and formed to sober manners, by pious and vir­tuous parents, they enter on the world less tainted than others by fashionable vices and follies. By the situation of their pa­rents they were inured, from their earliest youth, to temperance and habits of appli­cation. They come forward, not altoge­ther ignorant and unlettered, like the chil­dren of the meaner classes of men, but with the foundations of good education and useful knowledge. At the same time, they see and know that it is not to fortune and to friends, but to their own industry and exertions, they must trust for future success; and that only according to the opinion entertained of their merit, they can hope to be patronized by others. Hence it comes to pass that young persons  of this description often advance them­selves more quickly, and act their part more successfully than others who, from their birth and fortune, have enjoyed the benefits of a more improved and orna­mented education; but whose opulence sometimes supersedes labour, encourages indolence, and perhaps fosters dissipation and love of pleasure.

These are considerations which tend to bespeak public favour in behalf of the in­stitution which I now recommend. Con­sider, my friends, that by befriending and assisting it, you contribute to bring for­ward a new race, who, like those of the same rank that have gone before them, may come, in their day, to be beneficial to their country and to the world. It must not be forgotten, that assistance to bring them forward becomes now more neces­sary than it was to the former race, in consequence of the great additional ex­pence which is well known now to attend  every part of education. By seasonable generosity, on this occasion, you may be ripening in secret the seeds of future ge­nius; you may be bringing forward to maturity those young plants which shall flourish hereafter in the land; and which may perhaps attain such strength, and rise to such a height, as to protect others under their shade.

To the honour of the present age, it must be acknowledged not to be deficient in a spirit of humanity. Frequent instan­ces both of public and private beneficence come forth on every proper occasion. In this city, many a noble monument appears of charitable foundations and institutions; some destined to educate the children of the needy; others to furnish maintenance for the poor, to provide for the aged, or to receive and relieve the sick and the dis­tressed. By their means much timely succour is given, and many a distress is mi­tigated. The institution for the sake of  which we are now assembled, partaking of the same benevolent spirit with the others, reaches to a more respectable class of men, and aims at a more extensive object. Its purpose is, to prevent those evils which would arise to the public, from the children of worthy parents being left to languish in that hopeless indigence which throws them first as a burden on society, and may afterwards render them a dangerous nu­sance to it. Instead of this, it aims at bringing them into such a state as affords a reasonable prospect of their proving use­ful members of the community, and per­haps of their ranking among its ornaments and supports.

So good a design Providence has alrea­dy begun to favour, and we hope will continue to bless. After we are laid in the dust, the generation that succeeds us may experience its happy effects. They who now contribute by their generosity to carry it forward will, in the mean time,  enjoy the satisfaction of having adopted the benevolent spirit of the Christian reli­gion. They will enjoy the satisfaction of having imitated, as they could, that com­passion of our heavenly Father which, in so affecting a manner, is expressed by the words of the text; words, which I hope will continue to dwell, with a lasting and tender impression, on all our hearts; Leave thy fatherless children; I will preserve them alive; and let thy widows trust in me!
FINIS.
