, C.R I T i C::A' ; - ,
D IS S E R T A TI .

ON T HE
POEMS of OSSIAN,

T HE
SON of F I N G A L.

THE SECOND EDITION.

To whiah is added,
An APPENDIX, containing a variety of undoubted

TESTIMONIES establishing their Authenticity.

By HUGH BLAIR D. D. //
One of the Miniiters of the High Church, and Professor

of Rhetorick and Belles-Lettres, in the University

of Edinburgh.

'L O'N D 0 N:
Printed for T. BECKET and P. A. DE HONDT, at

Tully's Head, near Surry Street in the Strand.

iMDCCLXV., I

A CRITICAL
DISSERTATION

ON THE
POEMS OF OSSIAN,

THE

SON OF FINGAL.

MO NG the monuments remaining of the
ancient state of nations, few are more

valuable than their poems or songs. History,
when it treats of remote and dark ages, is seldom
very inftruaive. The beginnings of society, in
every country, are involved in fabulous confusion;
and though they were not, they would furnish few
events worth recording. But, in every period of
society, human manners are a curious fpe&acle;
and the most natural pitures of ancient manners
are exhibited in. the ancient poems of nations.
These present to us, what is much more valuable
than the history of such transactions as a rude age
can afford, The history of human imagination and
paflion. They make us acquainted with the no-
tions and feelings of our fellow-creatures in the
most artless ages; discovering what objects they

B admired,

admired, and what pleasures they ptifued, before
those refinements of society had taken place, which
enlarge indeed, and diversify the tranfa&ions, but
diguife the manners of mankind.

Besides this merit, which ancient poems have

with philosophical observers of human nature, they
have another with persons of taste. They promise
some of the highest beauties of poetical writing.
Irregular and unpolifhed we may expet the pro-
dutions of uncultivated ages to be; but abound-
ing, at the fame time, with that enthusiasm, that
vehemence and fire, which are the foul of poetry.
For many circumstances of those times which we
call barbarous, are favourable to the poetical spirit.
That ltate, in which human nature shoots wild and
free, though unfit for other improvements, cer-
uainly encourages the high exertions of fancy and
passion.

In the infancy of societies, men live scattered

and dispersed, in the midst of solitary rural scenes,
where the beauties of nature are their chief enter-
tainment. They meet with many objects, to them
new and ifrange; their wonder and furprize are fre-
quently excited; and by the sudden changes offor-
tune occurring in their unsettled state of life, their
passions are raised to the utmost. Their passions
have nothing to restrain them: their imagination
has nothing to check it. They display themselves
to one another without disguise: and converse and
act in the uncovered simplicity of nature. As
their feelings are strong, so their language, of it-
'ls, assumes a portical :urn. Prone to exaggerate,

they

they describe every thing in the strongest colours;
which of course renders their speech piturefque
and figurative. Figurative language owes its rife
chiefly to two causes; to the want of proper names
for objecs, and to the influence of imagination
and passion over the form of expression. Both
these causes concur in the infancy of society.
Figures are commonly confidered as artificial mo'des
of speech, devised by orators and poets, after the
world had advanced to a refined state. The con-
trary of this is the truth. Men never have used so
many figures of style, as in those rude ages, when,
besides the power of a warm imagination to fug-
gest lively images, the want of proper and precise
terms for the ideas they would express, obliged
them to have recourse to circumlocution, meta-
phor, comparison, and all those substituted forms
of expression, which give a poetical air to lan-
guage. An American chief, at this day, haran.
gues at the head of his tribe, in a more bold me-
taphorical style, than a modern European would
adventure to use in an Epic poem.

In the progress of society, the genius and man-

ners of men undergo a change more favourable to
accuracy than to sprightliness and sublimity. As
the world advances, the understanding gains ground
upon the imagination; the understanding is more
exercised; the imagination, less. Fewer objects
occur that are new or furprizing. Men apply
themselves to trace the causes of things; they cor-
re& and refine one another; they subdue or dif-
guise their passions; they form their exterior man-

B 2 ners

ners upon one uniform standard of politeness and
civility. Human nature is pruned according to
method and rule. Language advances from
sterility to copiousness, and at the fame time,
from fervour and enthusiasm, to corretnefs and
precision. Style becomes more chaste; but less
animated. The progress of the world in this re-
fpe& resembles the progress of age in man. The
powers of imagination are most vigorous and pre-
dominant in youth; those of the underfianding
ripen more slowly, and often attain not their ma-
turity, till the imagination begin to flag. Hence,
poetry, which is the child of imagination, is-fre-
quently most glowing and animated in- the first
ages of society. As the ideas of our youth are
remembered with a peculiar pleasure on account
of their liveliness and vivacity: so the most an-
cient poems have often proved the greatest favour-
ites of nations.

Poetry has been said to be more ancient than

prose: and however paradoxical such an assertion
may seem, yet, in a qualified sense, it is true.
Men certainly never converted with one another
in regular numbers; but even their ordinary lan-
guage would, in ancient times, for the reasons be-
fore assigned, approach to a poetical fyle; and
the first compositions transmitted to posterity, be-
yond doubt, were, in a literal sense, poems; that
is, compositions in which imagination had the
chief hand, formed into tome kind of numbers,
and pronounced with a musical modulation or
tone. Mufick or songs has been found coeval

with

with society among the most barbarous nations.
The only fubjeAs which could prompt men, in
their firR rude state, to utter their thoughts in
compositions of any length, were such asnaturally
assumed the tone of poetry; praises of their gods,
or of their ancestors; commemorations of their
own warlike exploits; or lamentations over their
misfortunes. And before writing was invented, no
other compositions, except songs or poems, could
take such hold'of the imagination and memory,
as to be preserved by oral tradition, and handed
down from one race to another.

Hence we may expec to find poems among the

antiquities of all nations. It is probable too,
that an extensive search would discover a certain
degree of resemblance among all the most ancient
poetical produ&ions, from whatever country they
have proceeded. In a similar state of manners,
similar objets and paflions operating upon the
imaginations of men, will Rtamp their productions
with the fame general charater. Some diversity
will; no doubt, be occasioned by climate and
genius. But mankind never bear such resembling
features, as they do in the beginnings of society.
Its subsequent revolutions give rife to the prin-
cipal diftincions among nations; and divert, into
channels widely separated, that current of human
genius and manners, which descends originally
from one spring. What we have been long
accustomed to call the oriental vein of poetry, be-
cause rome of the earliest poetical productions have
come to us from the East, is probably no more

7 oriental

oriental than occidental; it is characderiftical of
an age rather than a country; and belongs, in
some measure, to all nations at a certain period.
Of this the works of Oflian seem to furnilh a re-
markable proof.

Our present fubje& leads us to inveffigate the

ancient poetical remains, not so much of the east,
or of the Greeks and Romans, as of the northern
nations; in order to discover whether the Gothic
poetry has any resemblance to the Celtic or Galic,
which we are about to confider. Though the
Goths, under which name we usually comprehend
all the Scandinavian tribes, were a people alto-
gether fierce and martial, and noted, to a proverb,
for their ignorance of the liberal arts, yet they
too, from the earliest times, had their poets and
their songs. Their poets were diftinguilhed by the
title of Scaders, and their songs were termed Vyfes. *

Saxo

* Olaus Wormius, in the appendix to his Treatise de

Literatura Runica, has given a particular account of the
Gothic poetry, commonly called Runic, from Runes,
which signifies the Gothic letters. He informs us that
there were no fewer than 136 different kinds of measure
or verse used in their )seis; and though we are accustomed
to call rhyme a Gothic invention, he fays exprefly, that
among all these measures, rhyme, or correspondence of
firal syllables, was never employed. He analyses the
firuaure of one of these kinds of verse, that in which the
poem of Lodbrog, afterwards quoted, is written; which
exhibits a very singular species of harmony, if it can be
allowed that name, depending neither upon rhyme nor
upon metrical feet, or quantity of syllables, but chiefly
u;on the number of the syllable-, and the disposition of

the

Saxo Grammaticus, a Danilh Historian of con-
fiderable note, who flourished in the thirteenth

century,

the letters. In every fanza was an equal number of lines:
in every line fix syllables. In each difich, it was requisite
that three words should begin with the fame letter; two
of the corresponding words placed in the first line of the
diflich, the third, in the second line. In each line were
also required two syllables, but never the final ones,
formed either of the fame consonants, or fame vowels.
As an example of this measure, Olaus gives us there two
Latin lines conftruaed exactly according to the above rules
of Runic verse;

Chriftus caput nofRrum
Coronet te bonis.

The initial letters of Chriflus, Caput and Coronet, make
the three corresponding letters of the distich. In the first
line, the first syllables of Chriflus and of nofrum; in the
second line, the on in coronet and in bonis make the re-
quifite correspondence of syllables. Frequent inverllons and
transpositions were permitted in this poetry; which would
naturally follow from such laborious attention to the
collocation of words.

The curious cn this fubje& may consult likewise Dr.

Hicks's Thesaurus Linguarum Septcntrionalium; particu-
larly the 23d chapter of his Grammatica Anglo Saxonica
& Mafo Gothica; where they will find a full account of
the ftruaure of the Anglo-Saxon verse, which nearly re-
fembled the Gothic. They will find also some specimens
both of Gothic and Saxon poetry. An extraA, which
Dr. Hicks has given from the work of one of the Danish

Scalders,

century, informs us that very many of these
songs, containing the ancient traditionary stories
of the country, were found engraven upon rocks
in the old Runic chara&er; several of which he
has translated into Latin, and inserted into his
liftory. But his versions are plainly so para-
phraftical, and forced into such an imitation of the
style and the measures of the Roman poets, that one
can form nojudgment from them of the native fpi-
rit of the original. A more curious monument of
the true Gothic poetry is preserved by Olaus Wor-
mius in his book de Literatura Runica. It is an
Epicedium, or funeral song, composed by Regner
Lodbrog; and translated by Olaus, word for word,
from the original. This Lodbrog was a king of
Denmark, who lived in the eighth century, famous
for his wars and victories; and at the fame time an
eminent Scalder or poet. It was his misfortune to
fall at last into the hands of one of his enemies, by
whom he was thrown into prison, and condemned
to be destroyed by serpents. In this situation he
solaced himself with rehearmng all the exploits of
his life. The poem is divided into twenty-nine
stanzas, of ten lines each; and every stanza be-
gins with these words, Pugnavimus Enfibus, We
have fought with our swords. Olaus's version is
in many places so obscure as to be hardly
intelligible. I have subjoined the whole below,
exatly as he has publifled it; and shall translate as

Scalders entitled, Hervarer Saga, containing an evocation
from the dead, may be found in the 6th volume of Mif-
celliny goenms, publi:eihd by 'Ir. Dryden.

much

much as may give the, Englifh,reader, an idea of,
the spirit and strain of this kind of poetry. * .

",We have fought with our fwords.--I was.
" young, when, towards the east, in the bay of

,, ~.~ " Oreon,

Pugnavimus Enfibus .
Haud polf longum tempus
Cum in Gotlandia accelfimus
An ferpentis immenfi neccm
Tune impetravimus Thoram. ..
Ex hoc vocarunt me virum
Quod serpentem transfodi
Hirfutam braccam ob illam cedem
Cufpide iAum intuli in colubrum
Ferro lucidorum flipendiorum.

2.

Multum juvenis fui quando acquiflivimus
Orientem versus in Oreonico freto
Vulnerum amnes avide ferae
Et flavipedi avi
Accepimus ibidem fonuerunt
Ad sublimes galeas
Dura serra magnam efcam
Omnis erat oceanus vulnus
Vadavit corvus in sanguine Caforum.

3.

Alte tulimus tune lanceas
Quando viginti annos numeravimus
Et celebrem laudem comparavimus palsim
Vicimus oslo barones
In oriente ante Dimini portum
Aquilx impetravimus tune sufficientem
Hofpitii fumptum in illa firage
Sudor decidit in vulnerum
Oceao perdidit exercitus aetatem.

4.

Pugnar faaa copia
Cunm Hclfingianos poftulavimus

B Ad

"Oreon, we made torrents of blood flow, to
" gorge the ravenous beast of prey, and the
" yellow-footed bird. There resounded the hard
" iteel upon the lofty helmets of men. The whole

" ocean

Ad aulam Odini
Naves direximus in oflium Vifluli
Mucro potuit turn mordere
Omnis erat vulnus unda
Terra rubefafta Calido
Frendebat gladius in loricas
Gladius findebat Clypeos.

5.

Memini neminem tune fugiffe
Priu'quam in oavibus
Heraudus in bello caderct
Non findit nrvibus
Alius baro praefatior
Mare =d porturn
In navibus longis Soft ilium
Sic attulit princeps pafim
Alicre in bel:um cor.

6.

Exercitus abiecit clypeos
Cum hafra vjlavit
Ardua ad %irorum peclora
Momordit Scarforum cautes
Gladius in pugna
Sanguineus erat Clypeus
Antequam Rafno rex caderet
Fluxit ex virorum capitibus
Ca!idus in loricas sudor.

7-

Habcre potuerunt turn corvi
Ante Indirorum infulas
Suficientern praedam diania.-dani
Acquilvimus feris carnivori;

Pienum

't bcean was ode woudi.; The cro6'* *ade in
' tfiie blood of the fairi. When we had nUm-
t' bered twerity yda's, we lifted our fpeair on
" high; and everiy *h&6 spread du'r reiidiWnv

"Eight

Plenum prandiuthi ulico aAu
Difficile erat bnius facere tentionem
Oriente sole
Spicula vidi pungere
Propufetunt arcus ex s serra.

8.

Altum rmugierunt enries
Antequam in Laneo canipd
Eiflinus rex cecidit
Proceflimus aiiir ditati
Ad terram proltratorum dimicaridufi'
Gladius fecuit Clypeoruti
Piauras in galeat0im tnventt
Cervicum muflum ex vulnetibus
Diffufum per cetebrum fiffum.

9.

Tenuimus Clypeos in fanguini
Cum haftani unximus
Ante Boring holhumn
Telorum nubes difrumpunt clypeum
E*trufit arcus ex fe metallum
Volnir cecidit in confliau
Nori erat illo rex major
Cafi difperfi late per littora
Ferae ampleaebantur efcair.

10.

Pugna manifefte crefcebat
Antequam Freyr reX cadeiet
Ih Flandrorum terra
Cxepit caruleus ad incidendum
Sanguine illitus in adrearh
Loricam in pugna

B DurCs

Eight barons. we overcame in the east,. be-

" fore.the port of Diminum; and plentifully
" we feasted the eagle in that slaughter. The
" warm itream of wounds ran into the ocean.

"The

Durus armorum mucro olim
Virgo deploravit matutinam lanienam
Multa preda dabatur feris.

II.

Centies centenos vidi jacere
In navibus
Ubi nEnglanes vocatur
Navigavimus ad pugnam
Per sex dies antequam exercitus caderet.
Tranfegimus mucronum miflam
In exortu solis
Coaflus eft pro nofiris gladiis ::
Valdiofur in bello occumbere.

1i.

Ruit pluvia fanguinis de gladiis
Przceps in Bardafyrde
Pallidum corpus pro accipitribus
Murmuravit arcus ubi mucro
Acriter mordebat Loricas
In conflifu
Odini Pileus Galea
Cucurrit arcus ad vulnus
Venenate acutus confperfus fudore fanguineo.

'3·

Tenuimus nagica scuta
Alte in pugne ludo
Ante Hiadningum finum
Videre licuit turn viros
Qui gladiis lacerarunt Clypcos
In gladiatorio murmure
Galee attrita virorum

Erat

" The army fell before us. When we fteeredour
" lips into the mouth of the Vifula, we sent the
" Helfingians to the Hall-of-Odin. Theh 'did

" the

Erat ficut fplendidam virginem
In leclo juxta fe collocare.

14.

Dura venit tempeftas Clypeis
Cadaver cecidit in terrain
In Nortumbria
Erat circa matutinum tempus
Hominibus neceffum erat fugere
Ex prelio ubi acute
Caflidis campos mordebant gladii
Erat hoc veluti Juvenem viduam.
In primaria fede ofculari.

1'5

Herthiofe evafit fortunatus
In Aufiralibus Orcadibus ipfe
Viaoria in noftris hominibus
Cogebatur in armorum nimbo
Rogvaldus occumbere
Ifre venit fummus super accipitres
Lutus in gladiorum ludo
Strenue jaaabat concuflor
Galese fanguinis teli.

16.

Quilibet jacebat tranfverfim supra alium
Gaudebat pugna setus
Accipiter ob gladiorum ludum
Non fecit aquilam aut aprum
Qui Irlandiam gubernavit
Conventus fiebat ferri & Clypei
MarfRanus rex jejunis

B 3 Fiebat

the sword bite. The waters were 1 oneevound.

" The earth was dye red with the warm ftraro,
!' The fwor4 rgng yo1 the coats of mail, an4

" clove

Fiebat in vedre finu.
Prada data corvis.

17·

Bellatorem multum vidi cadere
Mane ante machtaram
Virum in mucronum diffidio
Filio meo incidit mature
Gladiusjuxta cor
Egillus fecit Agnerum fpoliatum
Impertertitum virum vita
Sonuit lancea prope Hamdi
Grifeam loricam fplendebaat vexil/a,

18.

Verborum tenaces vidi diffecare
Haut minutim gro lupis
Endili maris enfibus
Erat per Hebdomadz fpacium
Quasi mulieres vinum apportarent
Rubefaa; erant naves
Valde in ftrepitu armorum
Sciffla eratlorica
In Scioldungorum pralio.

19.

Pulchricomum vidi crepufculafcere
Virginis amatorem circa matutinum
Et confabulationis apmicum viduarum
Erat ficut caidum balneum
Vinei vafis nympba portaret
Nos in 11e freto
Antiquam Orn rex cad.ect

vFl-

4 clove the bucklers in twain. None fled on
'" that day, till among his ships Heraudus fell.
"Than him no braver baron cleaves the sea with

" sips;

Sanguineum Clypeum vidi ruptym
Hoc invertit virorum vitam.

20.

Egimus gladiorum ad cedem
Ludum in Lindis infula
Cum regibus tribus
Pauci potuerunt inde letari
Cecidit multus in rifum ferarum
Accipiter dilaniavit carnem cqm lupo
Ut fatur inde difcederet
Hybernorum fanguis in oceapum
Copiofe decidit per mafsationis tcmpus.

21.

Alte gladius mordebat Clypeos
Tunc cum aurei coloris
Hafta fricabat loricas
Videre licuit in Onlugs infula
Per fecula multum post
Ibi suit ad gladiorum ludos
Reges procelferunt
Rubicundum erat circa infulam
Ar volans Draco vulnerum.

22.

Quid eft viro forti morte certius
Etfi ipfe in armorum nimbo
Adverfus collocatus fit
Szpe deplorat etatem
Qui nunquam premitur
Malum ferunt timidum incitare
Aquilam ad gladiorum ludum

B 4 Meti-

' ships; a chearful heart did he ever bring to
"the combat. Then the host threw away their
" lhields, when the uplifted spear flew at the

"breasts

Meticulofus venit nufpiam
Cordi suo ufui.

23.

Hoc numero aquum ut procedat
In contaSu gladiorum
Juvenis unus contra alterum
Non retrocedat vir a viro.
Hoc suit viri fortis nobilitas diu
Semper debet amoris amicus virginum
Audax efie in fremitu armorum.

24.

Hoc videtur mihi re vera
Quod fata fequimur
Rarus tranfgreditur fata Parcarum
Non deftinavi Ella
De vitz exitu meze
Cum ego fanguinem femimortuus tegerem
Et naves in aquas protrufi
Passim impetravimis turn feri
Efcam in Scotia finubus.

25.

Hoc ridere me facit semper
Quod Balderi patris fcamna
Parata fcio in aula
Bibemus cerevifiam brevi
Ex concavis crateribus craniorum
Non gemit vir fortis contra mortem
Magnifici in Odini domibus
Non venio defperabundis
Verbis ad cdini aulam.

2ó.

' breasts of heroes. The sword bit the Scarfian
' rocks; bloody was the shield in battle, until
' Rafno the king was slain. From the heads of
' warriors the warm sweat streamed down their
' armour. The crows around the Indirian iaands

" had

26.

Hic vellent nunc omnes
Filii Aflauge gladiis
Amarum bellum excitare
Si exaae £cirent
Calamitates noflras
Quem non pauci angues
Venenati me difcerpunt
Matrem accepi meis
Filiis ita ut corda valeant.

27.

Valde inclinatur ad haereditatem
Crudele flat nocumentum a vipera
Anguis inhabitat aulam cordis
Speramus alterius ad Othini
Virgam in Elle sanguine
Filiis meis livefcet
Sua ira rubefcet
Non acres juvenes
Seflionem tranquillam facient.

28.

Habeo quinquagies
Prelia sub fignis faca
Ex belli invitatione & femel
Minime putavi hominum
Quod me futurus effet
Juvenis didici mucronem rubefacere
Alius rex prafiantior
Nos Afe invitabunt
Non efi lugenda mors.

Fert

" had an ample prey. It were difficult to single
'" out one among so many deaths. At the rising
" of the fun I beheld the Ipears piercing the bo-
"dies of foes, and the bows throwing forth their
" fteel-pointed arrows. Loud roared the swords

in the plains of Lano.--The virgin long be-

" wailed the daughter of that morning."-.-In this
firain the poet continues to describe several other
military exploits. The images are not much vari-
ed; the noise of arms, the streaming of blood,
and the feasting the birds of prey, often recurring.
He mentions the death of two of his sons in battle;
and the lamentation he describes as made for one
of them is very singular. A Grecian or Roman
poet would have introduced the virgins or nymphs
of the wood, bewailing the untimely fall of a
young hero. But, fays our Gothic poet, '" when
" Rogvaldus was slain, for him mourned all the
-" hawks of heaven,"as lamenting a benefator who
had so liberally supplied them with prey; " for
' boldly," as he adds, " in the strife of swords,
" did the breaker of helmets throw the spear of
' blood."

The poems conclude with sentiments of the
highest bravery and contempt of death. " What

29.

Fert animus finire
Invitant me Dyfe
Q_.a cx Othini Aula
(,thinus mihi mifit
Lxetus ccrevifiam cum Afis
In summa fede bibam
Vite elapfz funt hors
Ridens moriar.

" ii

" is more certain to th brave man than death,
9s though arpidft thp fRtol of swords, he tand al.
" ways ready go opQfe it HIe only regrets this
" life who hath nevev knQwn ditrefs. The timo-
" rps man allures the devouring eagle to the

field qs battle. The coward, wherever he

c comes, is useless to himself. This X esteem
' honourable, that the youth flould advance to

the combat fairly matched one against another;
', nor Tan retreat from man. Long was this the

warrior's highest glory. He who aspires to the
a love of virgins, ought always to be foremost in
"the roar of arms. It appears to me of truth,
"that we are led by the Fates. Seldom can any

overcome the appointment of destiny. Little

" did I foresee that Ella * was to have my life in
5s his hands, in that day when fainting I conceal-

ed my blood, and puffied forth my ships into

>' the waves; after we had spread a repast for the
' beafs of prey throughout the Scottifi bays. But
" this makes me always rejoice that in the halls of

our father Balder [or Odin] I know there are
s' feats prepared, where, in a short time, we lhall
1' be drinking ale out of the hollow skulls of our
" enemies. In the house of the mighty Odin,
" no brave man laments death. I come not with
" the voice of despair to Odin's hall. How eager-
" ly would all the sons of Afauga now rush to

war, did they know the distress of their father,

" whom a multitude of venomous serpents tear!

* This was the name of his enemy who had condemned
him to death.

6 ' I haye

" I have given to my children a mother who hath
· filled their hearts with valour. I am fall ap-
" proaching to my end. A cruel death awaits me

from the viper's bite. A snake dwells in the

C' midst of my heart. I hope that the sword of
" some of my sons shall yet be stained with the
" blood of Ella. The valiant youths will wax red
" with anger, and will not fit in peace. Fifty and
' one times have I reared the standard in battle.
"In my youth I learned to dye the sword in blood:
c my hope was then, that no king among men
" would be more renowned than me. The god-
" defies of death will now soon call me;' I muf not
c' mourn my death. Now I end my song. The
; goddefies invite me away; they whom Odin has
" sent to me from his hall. I will fit upon a lofty
, feat, and drink ale joyfully with the goddefies of
" death. The hours of my life are run out. I
"will smile when I die."

This is such poetry as we might expet from a

barbarous nation. It breathes a most ferocious
spirit. It is wild, harlh and irregular; but at the
lame time animated and Rfrong; the style, in the
original, full of inversions, and, as we learn from
some of Olaus's notes, highly metaphorical and
figured.

But when we open the'works of Ossian, a very

different scene presents itself. There we find the
fire and the enthusiasm of the most early times,
combined with an amazing degree of regularity
and art. We find tenderness, and even delicacy
of fentimentr greatly predominant over fierceness
and barbarity. Our hearts are melted with the

fofreit

. softef feelings, and at the fame time elevated with
' the highest ideas of magnanimity, generosity, and

true heroiin. When we turn from the poetry of
Lodbrog to that of Ofian, t is like pasing from
a savage defart, into a fertile and cultivated coun-
try. How is this to be accounted for ? 'Or by
what means to be. reconciled with the remote anti-
quity attributed to these poems ? This is a curious
point; and requires to be illultrated.,

That thie ancient Scots were of:Celtic original

is pall all doubt. Their conformity with the Cel-
tic nations in language, manners and religion,
proves it to a full demonstration.. The Celte;
a great and mighty' people, altogether ditinct
from the Goths and Teutohes, once extended their
dominion over all the weft of Europe; but seem
to have had their mofl full and compleat eftablifli
ment in Gaul. Wherever the Celts or Gauls are
mentioned by ancient writers, we'feldom 'fail to
hear of their Druids and their Bards; the'inftitu-
tion of which two orders, was the capital diltinc-
tion of their manners and policy. The Druids
were their philosophers and priests; the Bards,
their poets and recorders of heroic ations: And
both these orders of men, seem to have fubfilted
among them, as chief members of the state, from
time immemorial'. We mull not therefore ima-

gine

* Tui'na A TIu 71iJpEtMEV YWV eSeovrTS Elf'. BaR .rE

xaR YOTEris x; le tii&aI. BaO{oi ,*v VIU|riTt;9 T wcr,Tai.
Strabo. lib. 4.

E'w hTI 'rap' RJTO; xa D ior.iTi EXAWvc, P.( 3aeas VOpCO-
,,,;;y. TOI & MZET OP.YWV, TaOi Avoals oiaol.;, d. Uy.
»,uVVT;, Y( 5i ;3>.Córliba . Diodor. Sicul. 1. 5.

TX

gifin the Celta: to have been altogether a gro's
and rude nation. The) Possessed Prodm vily re-
mote ages a formed fylremr of discipline and man-
ners, which appears to have had a deep and lait-
ing influence. Arimianus Marcellinus gives them
this express testimony, that there flourished among
them the study of the most laudable arts; introduced
by the Bards, whose office it was to sing in heroic
verse, the gallant a&tions of illuftriods men; and
by the Druids, who lived together in colleges or
societies, after the Pythagorean manner, and phi-
lofophizing upon the highest fubjeds, aflerted the
immortality of the human foul *. Though Julius
Csfar in his account of Gaul, does not exprefly
mention the Bards, yet it is plain that under the
title of Druids, he comprehends that whole college
or order; of which the Bards, who, it is probable,
were the disciples of the Druids, undoubtedly
made a part. It deserves remark, that according

Tin aE a.'awslg~ra e UTU7 glCT'J 01 xaAs'rEa, ,Boio, OCI rxt
'g7os TOurXO''~I x rtr~l' o;,{ ITrIe AE^T *rT;F. Pofidonius ap;
At'lehnum, 1. 6.

* Per hac loca (speaking of Gaul) hominibus paulatini

excultis, vig;ureJ 7Idia laud(ibiliurnim ndr.arnm; in'choatr
per Bardos & Euhages & Druidas. Et Bardi quidem sos-
tia virorum illuflrium facia heroicis compofita verfibus
cum dulcibus lyre modulis cantitarunt. lEu.ages veto
fcrutantes feriem & fublimia naturx pandere conabantur;
Jnter hos, Druids ingeniis relfiores, ut aufloritas Pytha-
gors decrevit, fodalitiis adflriAi confortiis, quftionibus
altarum occultarumque rerum creri fulnt, & defpecRantes
humaria pronuntiaru!nt animas immortalcs. Anim. Mar-
ccllilius, . 5, cap. o.

td

to his account, the Druidical inftitutiidh firtf took
rife in Britain, and passed from thence into Gail;
so that they who aspired to be thorough rhaifs of
that learning were wont to resort to Biitain. Ht
adds too, that such as were to be initiated amohg
the Druids, were obliged to commit to their me-
mory a great number of verses, infonmuch that
some employed twenty years in this course of edu-
cation; and that they didnot think it lawful to re-
cbrd there poems in writing, but sacredly handed
them down by tradition from race to race*.

So strong was the attachment of the Celtic na-

tions to their poetry and their Bards, that amidst
all the changes of their governments and manners,
even long after the order of the Druids was extint,
and the national religion altered, the Bards con-
tinued to flouriih; not as a set of firolling song-
fters, like the Greek 'Aoiotl or Rhapsodists, in.
Homer's time, but as an order of men highly re-
spe&ed in the state, and supported by a public
establishment. We find them according to the
testimonies of Strabo and Diodorus, before the
age of Augustus Cafar; and we find them remain-
ing under the fame name, and exercising the fame
funtions as of old, in Ireland, and in the north of
Scotland, almost down to our own times. It is
well known that in both these countries, every
Regilus or chief had his own Bard, who was con,
fidered as an officer of rank in his court; and had
lands assigned him, which descended to his family.
Of the honour in which the Bards were held, many
4 Vid. C.far de bello Gall. lib, 6.

instances

instances occur in Olflan's poems. On all impor-
tant occasions, they were the ambassadors between
contending chiefs; and their persons were held
ficred. " Cairbar feared to firetch his sword to
" the bards, though his foul was dark.-Loofe
" the bards, said his brother Cathmor, they are
" the sons of other times. Their voice shall be
" heard in other ages, when the kings of Temora
" have failed '."

From all this, the Celtic tribes clearly appear to

have been addited in so high a degree to poetry,
and to have made it so much their itudy from the
earliest times, as may remove our wonder at meet-
ing with a vein of higher poetical refiriement
among them, than was at first fight to have been
expected among nations, whom we are accustomed
to call barbarous. Barbarity, I must observe, is
a very equivocal term; it admits of many different
forms and degrees; and though, in all of them,
it exclude polished manners, it is however, not
inconsistent with generous sentiments and tender
affetlons -. What degrees of friendlhip, love

and

Vol. i. p. 263.

t Surely among the wild Laplanders, if any where,

barbarity is in its most pertet lfate. Yet their love songs
which Scheffer has given us in his Lapponia, are a proof
that natural tenderness of sentiment may be found in a
country, into which the leai gnlilmering of science has
ne'er penetrated. To molt Engntll readers there songs
are wi:i known by the e!egant tranlations of them in the
Siel2ator, N0. 355 and :36. I hall irbjoii Scheffer's

Latin

and heroism, may possibly be found to prevail in
a rude tate of society, no one can fay. Aftonifi-
ing irftances of them We know, from history,
have sometimes appeared: and a few chara&ters
difinguiihed by those high qualities, might lay a
foundation for a set of manners being introduced
into the songs of the Bards, more refined, it
is probable, and exalted, according to the usual
poetical licence, than the real manners of the
country. In particular, with refpecf to heroism;
the great employment of the Celtic bards, was to
delineate the characters, and sing the praises of
heroes. So Lucan:

Latin version of one of them, which has the appearance
of being ftrialy literal.

Sol, clariffimum emitte lumen in paludem Orra. Si

enifus in summa picearum cacumina fcirem me vifurum
Orra paludem, in ea eniterer, ut viderem inter quos amica,
mea eflet flores; omnes fufcinderem frutices ibl enatos,
omnes ramos praefecarem, hos virentes ramos. Curruni
nubium esem recutus, quae iter fuum iflituunt versus palu.
dem Orra, si ad te volarepoffem alis, cornicum alis. Sed
mihi defunt ale, ala querquedulae, pedefque, anferum
pedes planteve bone, que deferre me valeant ad te. Satis
cxpeAafli diu; per tot dies, tot dies tuos optimos, oculis
tuis jucundiffimis, corde tuo amiciffimo. Quod si longif.
fime velles efFugere, cito tamen te confequerer. Quid
firmius validiufve effe poteft quam contorti nervi, catenave
ferree, quae duriffime ligant ? Sic amor contorquet caput
nofirum, mutat cogitationes & sententias. Puerorum volun.
tas, voluntas venti; juvenum cogitationes, longe cogita-
tiones. Quos si audirem omnes, a via, a via jufta decli.
narem. Unum eft confilium quod capiam; ita fcio viam
reaiorem me reperturum. Schefferi Lapponia, Cap. 25.

C Vos

Vos quoque qui fortes animos, belloque per-

emptos,

Laddibus in longum vates diffunditis zvum
Plurima fecuri fudiftis carmina Bardi.

Pharf . 1.

Now whenwe confider a college or order of men,

who, cultivating poetry throughout a long series of
ages, had their imaginations continually employed
on the ideas of heroism; who had all the poems
and panegyricks, which were composed by their
predecessors, handed down to them with"care;
who rivalled and endeavoured to outstrip those who
had gone before them, each in the celebration of
his particular hero; is it not naturail to think, that
at length the characer of a hero would appear in
their songs with the highest lustre, and be adorned
with qualities truly noble ? Some of the qua-
lities indeed which distinguish a Fingal, modera-
tion, humanity, and clemency, would not proba-
bly be the sirs ideas of heroism occurring to a bar-
barous people: But no sooner had such ideas be.
gun to dawn on the minds of poets, than as the
human mind easily opens to the native reprefenta-
tions of human perfection, they would be seized
and embraced; they would enter into their pane-
gyricks; they would afford materials for succeed-
ing bards to work upon, and improve; they would
contribute not a little to exalt the public manners.
For such songs as these, familiar to the Celtic
warriors from their childhood, and throughout
their whole life, both in war and in peace, their
principal entertainment, must have had. a very
considerable influence in propagating among them

real

teal manners nearly approaching to the poetical
and in forming even such a herio s Fingal. Efpe.
cially when we confider that among their limnited
objects of ambition, among the few advantages
which in a savage state,' man could obtain over
itan, the chief was Fame, and that Immortality
which they expected to receive from their virtues
and exploits, in the songs of bards *.

Having made there remarks on the Celtic

.oetry and Bards in general, I shall next confider
the particular advantages which Oflian poflefled.
He appears clearly to have lived in a period which
enjoyed all the benefit I jit now mentioned of
traditionary poetry. The exploits of Trathal,
Trenmor, and the other ancestors of Fingal, are
spoken of as familiarly known. Ancient bards a.e
frequently alluded to. In one remarkablepaffage,
Olmlan describes himself as living in a fort of claf-
fical age, enlightened by the memorials of former
times, which were conveyed in the songs of bards;
and points at a period of darkness and ignorance
which lay beyond the reach of tradition. " His
" words," fays he, " came only by halves to our
"ears; they were dark as the tales of other times,
" before the light of the song arose t." Ossian,
hinfelf, appears to have been endowed by nature

* When Edward I. conquered Wales, he put to death

all the Welch bards. This cruel policy plainly shews,
how great an influence he imagined the songs of there
bards to have over the minds of the people; and of what
nature he judged that influence to be. The Welch bards
were of the fame Celtic race with the Scottish and Irilh.

' Vol. i. p. 144.

C 2 with

with an exquisite sensibility of heart; prone to
that tender melancholy which is so often an atten-
dant on great genius; and susceptible equally of
trong and of soft emotions. He was not only a
professed bard, educated with care, as we may
easily believe, to all the poetical art then known,
and conneced, as he shews us himself, in intimate
'friendflip with the other contemporary bards, but
a warrior also; and the son of the most renowned
hero and prince of his age. This formed a con-
jlinction of circumflances, uncommonly favour-
able towards exalting the imagination of a poet.
He relates expeditions in which he had been en-
gaged; he sings of battles in which he had fought
and overcome; he had beheld the most illutrious
scenes which that age could exhibit, both of
heroism in war, and magnificence in peace. For
however rude the magnificence of those times may
seem to us, we muff remember that all ideas of
magnificence are comparative; and that the age
of Fingal was an ara of distinguished splendor in
that part of the world. Finga' reigned over a
considerable territory; he was enriched with the
spoils of the Roman province; he was ennobled
by his vi&ories and great actions; and was in all
refpecs a personage of much higher dignity than
any of the chieftains, or heads of Clans, who
lived in the fame country, after a more extenlive
monarchy was efftablilhed.

The manners of Ossian's age, so far as we can

gather them from his writings, were abundantly
favourable to a poetical genius. The two dif-
piriting vices, to which Longinus imputes the

decline

decline of poetry, covetousness and effeminacy,.
were as yet unknown. The cares of men were:
few. They lived a roving indolent life; hunting,
and war their principal employments; and their
chief amusements, the mufick of bards and " the'
" feait of ihells." The great objec pursued by.
heroic spirits was " to receive their fame," that
is, to become worthy of being celebrated in the
songs of bards; and " to have their name on
' the four gray stones." To die, unlamented by a
bard, was deemed so great a misfortune, as even
to disturb their ghosts in another state. " They
" wander in thick mills beside the reedy lake; but
" never shall they rife, without the song, to

the dwelling of winds." After death, they

expected to follow employments of the fame na-
ture with those which had amused them on earth;
to fly with their friends on clouds, to pursue airy
deer, and to liften to their praise in the mouths of
bards. In such times as these, in a country where
poetry had been so long cultivated, and so highly
honoured, is it any wonder that among the race
and succession of bards, one Homer should arise;
a man who, endowed with a natural happy genius,
favoured by peculiar advantages of birth and
condition, and meeting in the course of his life,
with a variety of incidents proper to fire his ima-
gination, and to touch his heart, should attain a
degree of eminence in poetry, worthy to draw
the admiration of more refined ages?

The compositions ofOflian are so strongly marked
with chara&ers of antiquity, that although there

C 3 were

were no external proof to support that antiquity,
hardly any reader of judgmenit and taife, could
hesitate in referring them to a very remote era.
There are four great stages through which men
fuccefilvely pass in the progress of society. The
first and earliest is the life of hunters; paflurage
succeeds to this, as the ideas of property begin to
take root; next agriculture; and lastly, com-
merce. Throughout Oflian's poems, we plainly
find ourselves in the firt of these periods of foci-
ety; during which, hunting was the chief em-
ployment of men, and the principal method of
their procuring subsistence. Pasturage was not
indeed wholly unknown; for we hear of dividing
the herd in the cafe of a divorce*; but the al-
lusions to herds and to cattle are rot many; and
of agriculture, we find no traces. No cities ap-
pear to have been built in the territories of Fin-
gal. No arts are mentioned except that of naviga-
tion and of working in iron . Every thing presents

to

Vol. i. p. 44.

t Their fiill in navigation need not atall furprize us;

Living in the weflern islands, along the coast, or in a
country which is every where interfeled 'with arms of
the sea, one of the firfi objets of their attention, from
the earliest time, muf have been how to traverse the waters.
Hence that knowledge of the flars, so necefiary for guiding
them by night, of which we find several traces in Of-
sian's works; particularly in the beautiful description of
Cathmor's shield, in the 7th book of Temora. Among
all the northern maritime nations, navigation was very
early fludied. Piratical incursions were the chief means

they

to us the most simple and unimproved manners.
At their feasts, the heroes prepared their own re-
past; they fat round the light of the burning oak .
the wind lifted their locks, and whistled through
their open halls. Whatever was beyond the ne-
celfaries of life, was known to them only as the
spoil of the Roman province; " the gold of the
" stranger; the lights of the stranger; the steeds
" of the stranger, the children of the rein,"

This representation of Ossian's times, mut strike

us the more, as geniune and authentick, when it is
compared with a poem of later date, which Mr.
Macpherson has preserved in one of his notes. It
is that wherein five bards are represented as pafiing
the evening in the house of a chief, and each of
them separately giving his description of the
night*. The night scenery is beautiful; and the
author has plainly imitated the style and manner of
Ossian: But he has allowed some images to appear
which betray a later period of society. For we

they employed for acquiring booty; and were among the
first exploits which distinguished them in the world. Even
the savage Americans were at their first discovery found to
possess the most furprizing skill and dexterity in navigating
their immene lakes and rivers.

The description of Cuchullin's chariot, in the ift book

of Fingal, has been objeaed to by some, as representing
greater magnificence than is confident with the supposed
poverty of that age. But this chariot is plainly only a
horfe-litter; and the gems mentioned in the description, are
no other than the shining flones or pebbles, known to be
frequently found along the weflern coast of Scotland.

Vol. i. p. 350.

C 4 meet

meet with windows clapping, the herds.of goats
and cows seeking shelter, the ihepherd wandering,
corn on the plain, and the wakeful hind rebuilding
the bocks of corn which had been overturned by
the tempest Whereas in Ossian's works, from
beginning to end, all is confiflent; no modern al-
lullon drops from him; but every where, the fame
face of rude nature appears s a country wholly
uncultivated, thinly inhabited, and recently peo-.
pled, The grass of the rock, the flower of the
heath, the thistle with its beard, are the chief
ornaments of his landscapes. " The defart,"
fays Fingal, "is enough to me, with all its woods
.' and deer *,"

The circle of ideas and tranfations, is no wider

than suits such an age: Nor any greater diveriity
introduced into charaters, than the events of
that period would naturally display. Valour and
bodily trength are theadmired qualities. Conten.
tions arise, as is usual among savage nations, from
the flightet causes. To be affronted at a tourna-
ment, or to be omitted in the invitation to a feast,
kindles a war. Women are often carried away by
force; and the whole tribe, as in the Homeric
times, rife to avenge the wrong. The heroes show
refinement of sentiment indeed on several oc-
cafions, but nope of manners. They speak of
Ibeir past a&ions with freedom, boast of their ex,
ploits, and sing their own praise. In their battles,
it is evident that drums, trumpets, or bagpipes,
were not known or used. They had no expedient

Vol. i. . 16,

for

for giving the military alarms but striking a ihidd,
or raising a loud cry: And hence the loud
and terrible voice of Fingal is often men.
tioned, as a necessary qualification of a great
general; like the 3iv ayaoor MAxtos of Homer.
Of military discipline or fiill, they appear to have
been entirely destitute. Their armies seem not
to have been numerous; their battles were dif.
orderly; and terminated, for the nmot part, by a
personal combat, or wreftling-of the two chiefs;
after which, " the bard sung the long of peace,
" and the battle ceased along the field*."

The manner of composition bears all the marks

of the greatest antiquity. No artful tranlitions;
nor full and extended connetion of parts; such
as we find among the poets of later times, when
order and regularity of composition were more
studied and known; but a style always rapid and
vehement; in narration concise even to abruptness,
and leaving several circumstances to be supplied by
the reader's imagination. The language has all
that figurative cast, which, as I before ihewed,
partly a glowing and undisciplined imagination,
partly the sterility of language and the want of
proper terms, have always introduced into the
early speech of nations; and in several re-.
specs, it carries a remarkable resemblance to the
style of the Old Testament. It deserves particular
notice, as one of the most geniune and decisive
characters of antiquity, that very few 'general
terms or abitra& ideas, are to be met with in the

Vol. i. p. 197.

whole

whole colBecion of Ossian's works. The ideas
of men, at first, were all' particular. They had
not words to express generalconceptions. These
were the consequence of more profound reflection
and longer acquaintance with the arts of thought
and of speech. Oflan, accordingly, almost ne-
ver exprefes himself in the abftra&. His ideas
extended little farther than to the objects he saw
around him. A public, a community, the uni-
verse, were conceptions beyond his sphere. Even a
mountain, a sea, or a lake, which he has occasion
to mention, though only in a simile, are for the most'
part particularized; it is the hill of Cronila, the
storm of the sea of Malmor, or the reeds of the
lake of Lego. A mode of expreflion, which
whilst it is chara&eriftical of ancient ages, is at
the fame time highly favourable to descriptive
poetry. For the fame reasons, personification is
a. poetical figure not very common with Ossian.
Inanimate objects, such as winds, trees, flowers,
he sometimes personifies with great beauty. But
the personifications which are so familiar to later
poets of Fame, Time, Terror, Virtue, and the
reft of that class, were unknown to our Celtic bard.
These were modes of conception too abftra& for
his age.

'All these are marks so undoubted, and some of
them too, so nice and delicate, of the most early
times, as put the high antiquity of there poems
out of question. Especially when we confider,
that if there had been any imposture in this cafe,
it must have been contrived and executed in the

Highlands

Highlands of Scotlanc two. or, three centuries.,
ago; as up to this period, both by. manuscripts,
and by the testimony of a. multitude.of living
witnesses, concerning the uncontrovertible tradi-
tion of these poems, they can clearly be traced.
Now this is a period when that country enjoyed no
advantages fo'a compoftion of this kind, which
it may riot be supposed to have enjoyed in as great,
if not in a greater degree, a thousand years be-
fore. To suppose that two or three hundred years
ago, when we well know the Highlands to have
been in a state of gross ignorance and barbarity,
there ihould have arisen in that country a poet, of
such exquisite genius, and of such deep knowledge
of mankind, and of history, as to divest himself
of the ideas and manners of his own age, and to
give us ajuft and natural piture of a state offociety
ancienter by a thousand years; one who could sup?
port this counterfeited antiquity through such a
large collection of poems, without the least incon-
fiftency; and who possessed of all this genius and
art, had at the fame time the felf-denial of con-
cealing himself, and of ascribing his own works
to an antiquated bard, without the imposture be-
ing detected; is a supposition that transcends all
bounds of credibility.

There are, besides, two other circumstances to

be attended to, still of greater weight, if possible,
against this hypothesis. One is the total absence
of religious ideas from this work; for which the
translator has, in his preface, given a very pro-
bable account, on the footing of its being the work
of Ofian. The druidical fuperfitiion was, in the

days

days of Ossian, on the point of its final extinction;
and for particular reasons, odious to the family of
Fingal; whilst the Christian faith was not yet efta-
blilhed. But had it been the work of one, to
whom the ideas of chriflianity were familiar from
his infancy; and who had superadded to them also
the bigotted superstition of a dark age and country;
it is impoflible but in some paflage or other, the
traces of them would have appeared. The other
circumstance is, the entire silence which reigns with
efpe& to all the great dans or families, which are
now eftablifled in the Highlands. The origin of
these several clans is known to be very -ancient:
And it is as well known, that there is no pafion
by which a native Highlanderis more distinguished,
than by attachment to his clan, and jealousy for
its honour. That a Highland bard, in forging a
work relating to the antiquities of his country,
ihould have inserted no circumstance which pointed
out the rife of his own clan, which ascertained its
antiquity, or increased its glory, is of all fuppo-
fitions that can be formed, the most improbable;
and the silence on this head, amounts to a demon-
ftration that the author lived before any of the
present great clans were formed or known.

Assuming it then, as we well may, for certain,

that the poems now under consideration, are ge-
nuine venerable monuments of very remote anti-
quity; I proceed to make some remarks upon
their general spirit and strain. The two great
chara&eriftics of Ossian's poetry are, tenderness
and sublimity. It breathes nothing of the gay

and

and chearful kind; an air of solemnity and feri-
oufnefs is diffused over the whole. Ossian is per-
haps the only poet who: never relaxes, or lets him-
self down into the light and amusing strain; which
I readily admit to be no small disadvantage to.him,
with the bulk of readers. :He moves perpetually
in the high region of the grand and the pathetick.
One key note is struck at the beginning, and sup-
ported to the end; nor is any ornament introduced,
but what is perfe&ly'concordant with the general
tone or melody. The events recorded, are all fe-
rious and grave-; the scenery throughout,' wild and
romantic. The extended heath by the sea ihore;
the mountain lhaded with mist; the torrent rushing
through a solitary valley; the scattered oaks, and
the tombs of warriors overgrown with moss; all
produce a solemn attention in the mind, and pre-
pare it for great and extraordinary events. We
find not in Ossian, an imagination that sports itself,
and dresses out gay trifles to please the fancy. His
poetry, more perhaps than that of any other wri-
ter, deserves to be ftiled, The Poetry of the Heart.
It is a heart penetrated with noble sentiments, and
with sublime and tender pallions; a heart that
glows, and kindles the fancy; a heart that is full,
and pours itself forth. Oflian did not write, like
modern poets, to please readers and critics: He
sung from the love of poetry and song. His de-
light was to think of the heroes among whom he
had flourished; to recall the affecing incidents of
his life; to dwell upon his pafl wars and loves-
and friendships; till, as he expresses it himself,

" there

" there comes a Yoike to Offlan and awakes his
a foul. It is the voice of years that are gone;

they roll before mte with all their deeds;" and

under this true poetic inspiration, giving vent to
his genius, no wonder we iould so often hear,
and acknowledge in his trains, the powerful and
ever-plekaing voice of nature.

-Arte, natura p6tentior omni.-
Eft Deus in nobis, agitante calefcimus illo.

It is necessary here to observe, that the beauties

of Ossian's writings cannot be felt by those who
have given them only a single or a halfy perusal.
His manner is so different from that of the poets,
to whom we are most accustomed; his style is
so concise, and so much crowded with imagery;
the mind is kept at fi-ch a Stretch in accompanying
the author; that an ordinary reader is at first apt
to be dazzled and fatigued, rather than pleated.
His poems require to be taken up at intervals, and
to be frequently reviewed; and then it is impossible
but his beauties must opento every readerwho is ca-
pable of sensibility. Those who have the highest
degree of it, will relish them the most.

As Homer is of all the great poets, the one

whose manner, and whose times come the nearest
to Ossian's, we are naturally led to run a parallel
in some instances, between the Greek and the
Celtic bard. For though Homer lived more than
a thousand years before Ossian, it is not from the
age of the world, but from the rtate of fociety,.that
we are tojudge of refembhng times. The Greek
has, in several points, a manifest superiority. He

3 introduces

introduces a greater variety of incidents; he
posseses. a larger conpafs of ideas; has more
diverlity in his characters; and a much deeper
knowledge of human .,nature. It was not to be
expeted, that in any of these particulars Onfin
could equal Homer. For Homer lived in a coun-
try' where society was much farther, advanced;
he had beheld many more objets; cities built
and fiourithing; laws instituted; order, discipline,
and arts begun. His field of observation was
much larger. and more splendid; his knowledge,
of course, more extensive; his mind also, it Ihall
be granted, more penetrating. .ut if Ofljan's
ideas and obje&s be less diverlified than those of
Homer, they are all, however, of .the kind fittest
for.pqetry: The bravery and generosity of heroes,
the teidirnefs of lovers, the attachments of friends,
parents, and children. In a rude age and country,
though the events that happen be few, the undiffi-
pated mind broods over them more; they strike the
imagination, and fire the'palions in a higher de-
gree; and of consequence become happier materials -
to a'poetical genius, than the fame events when
Scattered through the wide circle of more varied
a&ion, and'cultivated life.

Homer is:a more chearful and sprightly poet

than Ossian. You discern in him all the Greek
vivacity; whereas Oman uniformly maintains the
gravity and solemnity of a Celtic hero. This too
is in a great measure to be accounted for from the
different situations in which they lived, partly per-
'fonal, and partly national. Ossian had survived all
his friends, and was disposed to melancholy by;the

incidents

incidents of his life. But besides this, chearfulnefs
is one of the many blessings which we owe to
formed society. The solitary wild fate is always a
farious one. Bating the sudden and violent burpts
0 mirth, which sometimes break forth at their
dances and feaits; -the savage American tribes
have been noted by all travellers for their gravity
and taciturnity. Somewhat of this taciturnity
may be also remarked in Olfian. On all occasions
he is frugal of his words; and never gives you more
of an image ora description, than is just sufficient
to place it before you in one clear point of view.
It is a blaze of lightning, which flashes and va-
nilies. Homer is more extended inhis descriptions;
and fills them up with a greater variety of circum-
ltances. Both the poets are dramatick; that is,
they introduce their personages frequently speak-
ing before us. But Ossian is concise and rapid in
his speeches, as he is in every other thing. Homer,
with the Greek vivacity, had also some portion
of the Greek loquacity. His speeches indeed are
highly charafterifticai; and to them we are much
indebted for that admirable display he has given of
human nature. Yet if he be tedious any where,
it is in these; some of them trifling; and some of
them plainly unseasonable. Both poets are emi-
nently ublime; but a difference may be remarked
.in the species of their sublimity. Homer's sub-
limity is accompained with more impetuosity and
fire; Ossian's with more of a solemn and awful
grandeur. Homer hurries you along; Oiflan ele-
vates, and fixes you in aitonilhment. Homer is

most

most sublime in aftions and battles; Ossian, in
description and sentiment. In the pathetick, Ho-
mer, when he chtlfes to exert it, has great power;
but Ossian exerts that power much oftener, and
has the characer of tenderness far more deeply im-
printed on his works. No poet knew better how
to seize and melt the heart. With regard to dig-
nity of sentiment, the pre-eminence must clearly
be given to Ossian. This is indeed a surprising
circumitance, that in point of humanity, magna-
nimity, virtuous feelings of every kind, our rude
Celtic bard should be distinguished to such a de-
gree, that not only the heroes of Homer, but even
those of the polite and refined Virgil, are left far
behind by those of Ossian.

After there general observations on the genius

and spirit of our author, I now proceed to a nearer
view, and more accurate examination of his
works: and as Fingal is the first great poem in
this collection, it is proper to begin with it. To
refute the title of an epic poem to Fingal, because
it is not in every little particular, exactly confor-
mable to the praaice of Homer and Virgil, were
the mere squeamishness and pedantry of criticism.
Examined even according to Aristotle's rules, it
will be found to have all the essential requisites of
a true and regular epic; and to have several of
them in so high a degree, as at first view to raise
our astonishment on finding Ossian's composition so
agreeable to rules of which he was entirely igno-
rant. But our astonishment will cease, when we
confider from what source Aristotle drew those

D rules.

rules. Homer knew no more of the lawspf cri-
ticism than Offlan. But guided by nature, he
composed in verie a regular flory, founded on
heroic a&ions, which all posterity admired. Ari-
ftotle, with great sagacity and penetration, traced
the causes of this general admiration. He obferv-
ed what it was in Homer's composition, and in the
conductof his story, which gave it such power to
pkafe; from this observation he deduced the rules
which poets ought to follow, who would write and
please like Homer; and to a composition formed
according to such rules, he gave the name of an
epic poem. Hence his whole fyftemarofe. Ari-
ftotle studied nature in Homer, Homer and Of-
fian both wrote from nature. No wonder that
among all the three, there ihould be such agree-
ment and conformity.

The fundamental rules delivered by Arifotle

concerning an epic poem, are these: That the
action which is the ground work of the poem,
should be one, compleat, and great; that it should
be feigned, not merely historical; that it should
be enlivened with characters and manners; and
heightened by the marvellous.

But before entering on any of there, it may

perhaps be asked, what is the moral of Fingal?
For, according to M. Boffu, an epic poem is no
other than an allegory contrived to illustrate some
moral truth. The poet, fays this critic, muff be-
gin with fixing on some maxim, or inftru&ion,
which he intends to inculcate on mankind. He
next forms a fable, like one of Efop's, wholly with

a view

a view to the moral; and having thus fettled and ar-
ranged his plan, he then looks into traditionary his-
tory for names and incidents, to give his fable some
air of probability. Never did a more frigid, pedan-
tic notion, enter into the mind of.a critic. We may
safely pronounce, that he who fmould compose an
epic poem after this manner, who should firit lay.
down a motal and contrive a plan, before he had
thought of his personages and aflors, might de-
liver indeed very found inftrucion, but would find
few readers. There cannot be the least doubt
that the sirs object which strikes an epic poet,
which fires his genius, and gives him any idea of
his work, is the ation or subjec he is to celebrate.
Hardly is there any tale, any subject a poet can
chufe for such a work, but will afford some general
moral initrution. An epic poem is by its nature
one of the most moral of all poetical compositions:
But its moral tendency is by no means to be limit-
ed to some common-place maxim, which may be
gathered from the itory. It arises from the ad-
miration of heroic actions, which such a compofi-
tion is peculiarly calculated to produce; from the
virtuous emotions which the characters and in-
cidents raise, whilftwe read it; from the happy im-
rtelffon which all the parts separately, as well as
the whole taken together, leave upon the mind.
However, if a general moral be still infitled on,
Fingal obviously furnifies one, not inferior to
that of any other Poet, viz. That Wisdom and
Bravery always triumph over brutal force; or an-
other nobler still; That the most compleat victory

D 2 over

over an enemy is obtained by that moderation and
generosity which convert him into a friend.

The unity of the Epic acion, which, of all

Aristotle's rules, is the chief and most material, is
ib ftriEtly preserved in Fingal, that it mutt be per-
ceived by every reader. It is a more compleat
unity than what arises from relating the a&ions of
one man, which the Greek criticjuftly censures as
imperfect; it is the unity of one enterprise, the
deliverance of Ireland from the invalion of Swa-
ran: An enterprise, which has surely the full
Heroic dignity. All the incidents recorded bear a
constant reference to one end; no double plot is
carried on; but the parts unite into a regular
whole: And as the action is one and great, so it is
an entire or compleat action. For we find, as the
Critic farther requires, a beginning, a middle, and
an end; a Nodus, or intrigue in the Poem ; Dif-
ficulties occuring through Cuchullin's rashness and
bad success; those difficulties gradually surmount-
ed; and at last the work conducted to that happy
conclusion which is held essential to Epic Poetry.
Unity is indeed observed with greater exactness in
Fingal, than in almost any other Epic composition.
For not only is unity of subjet maintained, but
that of rime and place also. The Autumn is
clearly pointed out as the season of the action; and
from beginning to end the scene is never shifted
from the heath of Lena, along the sea-shore. The
duration of the action in Fingal, is much shorter
than in the Iliad or IEneid. But sure, there may
be shorter as well as longer Heroic Poems; and if

the

the authority of Aristotle be also required for this,
he fays exprefly that the Epic .composition is in-
definite as to the time of its duration. Ac-
cordingly the Ation of the Iliad lasts only forty-
seven days, whilit that of the 2Eneid is continued
for more than a year.

Throughout the whole of Fingal, there reigns

that grandeur of sentiment, flyle and imagery,
which ought ever to distinguish this high species of
poetry. The story is conducted with no small
art. The. Poet goes not back to a tedious recital
of the beginning of the war with Swaran; but
hastening to the main aCtion, he falls in exactly,
by a most happy coincidence of thought, with the
rule of Horace.

Semper ad eventum feftinat, & in medias res,
Non fecus ac notas, auditorem rapit--
Nec gemino bellum Trojanum orditur abovo.

De Arte Poet.

He invokes no muse, for he acknowledged

none; but his occasional addresses to Malvina,
have a finer effe& than the invocation of any muse.
He sets out with no formal proposition of his sub-
jeC; but the subject naturally and easily unfolds
itself; the poem opening in an animated manner,
with the situation of Cuchullin, and the arrival of
a scout who informs him of 'Swaran's landing.
Mention is presently made of Fingal, and of the
expected assistance from the-hips of the lonely isle,
in order to give further light to the subject. For
the poet often shows his address in gradually pre-
paring us for the events he is to introduce; and

D 3 in

in particular the preparation for the appearance of
Fingal, the previous expectations that are raised,
and the extreme magnificence fully answering these
expectations, with which the hero is at length pre-
sented to us, are all worked up with such flillful
conduc as would do honour to any poet of the
mos refined times. Homer's art in magnifying
the character of Achilles has been universally
admired. Ossian certainly shows no less art in
aggrandizing Fingal. Nothing could be more
happily imagined for this purpose than the whole
management of the last battle, wherein Gaul the
son of Momi, had besought Fingal to retire, and
to leave to him and his other chiefs the honour of
the day. The generosity of the King in agreeing
to this proposal; the majesty with which he retreats
to the hill, from whence he was to behold the en-
gagemenr, attended by his Bards, and waving the
lightning of his sword; his perceiving the chiefs
overpowered by numbers, but from unwillingness
to deprive them of the glory of vitory by coming
in person to their affiltance, first fending Ullin, the
Bard, to animate their courage; and at last, when
the danger becomes more pressing, his riling in his
r.ight, and interposing, like a divinity, to decide
the doubtful fate of the day; are all circumstances
contrived with so much art as plainly discover the
Celtic Bards to have been not unpractised in Heroic
poetry.

The story which is the foundation of the Iliad

is in itself as simple as that of Fingal. A quarrel
arises between Achilles and Agamemnon concern-
ing a female save; on which, Achilles, apprehend-

-~~5 "~ing

ing himself to be injured, withdraws his affitance
from the reft of the Greeks. The Greeks fall in-
to great distress, and beseech him to be-reconciled
to them. He refuses to fight for them in person,
but fends his friend Patroclus; and upon his be-
ing slain, goes forth to revenge his death, apd
kills He&or. The fubje& of Fingal is this:
Swaran comes to invade Ireland: Cuchullin, the
guardian of the young King, had applied for affif-
tance to Fingal, who reigned in the opposite coast
of Scotland. But before Fingal's arrival, he is
hurried by rath counsel to encounter Swaran. He
is defeated; he retreats; and desponds. Fingal ar-
rives in this conjuncture. The battle is for some
time dubious; but in the end he conquers Swaran;
and the remembrance of Swaran's being the bro-
ther of Agandecca, who had once saved his life,
makes him dismiss him honourably. Homer it is
true has filled up his story with a much greater va-
riety of particulars than Ossian; and in this has
shown a compass of invention superior to that of the
other poet. But it must not be forgotten, that
though Homer be more circumstantial, his inci-
dents however are less diverGfied in kind than those
of Ossian. War and bloodlhed reign throughout
the Iliad; and notwithstanding all ,the fertility of
Homer's invention, there is so much uniformity
in his subje&s, that there are few readers, who be-
fore the close, are not tired of perpetual fighting.
Whereas in Ossian, the mind is relieved by a more
agreeable diversity. There is a finer mixture of
wr and heroism, with love and friendship, of

D 4 martial,

martial, with tender scenes, than is to be met with,
perhaps, in any other poet. The Episodes too,
have great propriety; as natural, and proper to tiat
age and country: confifring of the songs of Bards,
which are known to have been the great entertain-
ment of the Celtic heroes in war, as well as in peace.
There songs are not introduced at random; if you
except the Episode of Duchommar and Morna, in
the firit book, which though beautiful, is more
unartful, than any of the reit; they have always
fomr particular relation to the actor who is interest-
ed, or to the events which are going on; and,
whilst they vary the scene, they preserve a fuffi-
cient conneftion with the main fubje&, by the
fitness and propriety of their introduction.

As Fingal's love to Agandecca, influences some

circumstances of the Poem, particularly the
honourable difmiflion of Swaran at the end, it
was necessary that we should be let into this part
of the hero's story. But as it lay without the
compass of the present acAion, it could be regular-
ly introduced no where, except in an Episode.
Accordingly the poet, with as much propriety,
as if Aristotle himself had directed the plan, has
contrived an Episode for this purpose in the song
of Carril, at the beginning of the third book.

The conclusion of the poem is ftricly accord-

ing to rule; and is every way noble and plearing.
The reconciliation of the contending heroes, the
consolation of Cuchullin, and the general felicity
that crowns the aEtion, tooth the mind in a very
2grecodle manner, and form that passage from

agitation

agitation and trouble, to perse& quiet and repose,
which critics require as the proper termination of
the Epic work.. " Thus they passed the night in

song, and brought back the morning with joy.
Fingal arose on the heath; and Ihook his
glittering spear in his hand. He moved first to-
wards the plains of Lena; and we followed like
a ridge of fire. Spread the fail, said the King of

" Morven, and catch the winds that pour fron
" Lena.-We role on the wave with songs; and
" rushed with joy through the foam of the ocean."
-So much for the unity and general conduct of
the Epic action in Fingal.

With regard to that property of the subjec which

Aristotle requires that it ihould be feigned not his-
torical, he must not be understood so strictly, as if
he meant to exclude all fubjets which have any
foundation in truth. For such exclusion would
both be unreasonable in itself; and what is more,
would be contrary to the practice of Homer, who
is known to have founded his Iliad on historical
fa&s concerning the war of Troy, which was fa-
mous throughout all Greece. Aristotle means no
more than that it is the business of a poet not to
be a mere annalist of Sacs, but to embellilh truth
with beautiful, probable, and useful fictions; to
copy nature, as he himself explains it, like pain-
ters, who preserve a likeness, but exhibit their
objects more grand and beautiful than they are in
reality. That Ossian has followed this course, and
building upon true history, has sufficiently adorned
it with poetical fiction for aggrandizing his charac-

ters

ters and fa&s, will not, I believe, be queRioned by
most readers. At the fame time, the foundation
which those fa&s and chara&ers had in truth, and the
share which the poet himfelfhad in the tranfations
which he records, mutl be confidered as no small
advantage to his work. For truth makes an im-
pression on the mind far beyond any fi&ion; and
no man, let his imagination be ever so strong, re-
lates any events so feelingly as those in which he
has been interested; paints any scene so naturally as
one which he has seen; or draws any chara&ers in
such strong colours as those which he has personal-
ly known. It is confidered as an advantage of
the Epic subjec to be taken from a period so dif-
tant, as by being involved in the darkness of
tradition, may give licence to fable. Though
Ossian's subjec may at first view appear unfavour-
able in this refpe&, as being taken from his own
times, yet when we refle& that he lived to an ex-
treme old age; that he relates what had been
tranfa&ed in another country, at the distance of
many years, and after all that race of men who had
been the actors were gone off the stage; we shall
find the obje&ion in a great measure obviated. In
so rude an age, when no written records were
known, when tradition was loose, and accuracyof
any kind little attended to, what was great and
heroic in one generation, easily ripened into the
marvellous in the next.

The natural representation of human characters

in an Epic Poem is highly essential to its merit:
And in respect of this there can be no doubt of
Homer's excelling all the heroic poets who have

ever

ever wrote. But thoughOffian be much inferior
to Homer in this article, he will be found to be
equal at leaf, if not superior, to Virgil; and has
indeed given all the display of human nature
which the simple occurrences of his times could
be expe&ed to furnish. No dead uniformity of
chara&er prevails in Fingal; but on the contrary
the principal characters are not only clearly diftin-
guilhed, but sometimes artfully contrasted so as
to illustrate each other. Omlan's heroes are like
Homer's, all brave; but their bravery, like those of
Homer's too, is of different kinds. For instance;
the prudent, the sedate, the modes and circum-
fpef Connal, is finely opposed to the presumptuous,
rath, overbearing, but gallant and generous Cal-
mar. Calmar hurries Cuchullin into a&ion by his
temerity; and when he fees the bad effet of his
counsels, he will not survive the disgrace. Connal,
like another Ulysses, attends Cuchullin to his re-
treat, counsels, and comforts him under his misfor-
tune. The fierce, the proud, and high spirited
Swaran is admirably contrasted with the calm, the
moderate, and generous Fingal. The characer
of Oscar is a favourite one throughout the whole
Poems. The amiable warmth of the young war-
rior; his eager impetuosity in the day of action;
his paifion for fame; his submission to his fa-
ther; his tenderaefs for Malvina; are the strokes of
a masterly pencil the strokes are few; but it is the
hand of nature, and attracs the heart. Ofian't
own charater, the old man, the hero, and the
bard, all in one, presents to us through the whole

work

work a most refpe&able and venerable figure,
which we always contemplate with pleasure.
Cuchullin is a hero of the highest class; daring,
magnanimous, and exquisitely sensible to honour.
We become attached to his interest, and are deeply
touched with his distress; and after the admiration
raiied for him in the first part of the Poem, it is a
strong proof of Ossian's masterly genius that he
durst adventure to produce to us another hero,
compared with whom, even the great Cuchullin,
lhould be only an inferior personage; and who
should rife as far above him, as Cuchullin riles a-
bove the reft.

Here indeed, in the chara&er and description of

Fingal, Ossian triumphs almost unrivalled: For
we may boldly defy all antiquity to ihews us any
hero equal to Fingal. Homer's Hecor pofleffes
several great and amiable qualities; but He&or is
a secondary personage in the Iliad, not the hero of
the work. We fee him only occasionally; we
know much less of him than we do of Fingal; who
not only in this Epic Poem, but in Temora, and
throughout the reft of Oflian's works, is presented
in all that variety of lights, which give the full
display of a character. And though Hetor faith-
fully discharges his duty to his country, his friends,
and his family, he is tin&ured, however, with a
degree of the fame savage ferocity, which prevails
among all the Homeric heroes. For we find him
insulting over the fallen Patroclus, with the most
cruel taunts, and telling him when he lies in the
gony of death, that Achilles cannot help him now;

and

and that in a short tinie his body, stripped nak-
ed, and deprived of funeral honours, shall be de-
voured by the Vulturs*. Whereas in the charac-
ter of Fingal, concur almost all the qualities that
can ennoble human nature; that can either make
us admire the hero, or love the man. He is not
only unconquerable in war, but he makes his peo-
ple happy by his wisdom in the days of peace t.
He is truly the fatherof his people. He is known
by the epithet of " Fingal of the mildest look;"
and diftinguiflied on every occasion, by humanity
and generosity. He is merciful to his foes t; full
of affetion to his children; full of concern about
his friends; and never mentions Agandecca, his
first love, without the utmost tenderness. He is
the universal protector of the distressed; " None
" ever went fad from Fingal 1."-- " 0 Oscar!
" bend the strong in arms; but spare the feeble
" hand. Be thou a stream of many tides against
" the foes of thy people; but like the gale that

Iliad 16. 830, 11. 17. 127.

t Vol. i. p. 92.
: When he commands his sons, after Swaran is taken

prisoner, to " pursue the ref of Lochlin, over the heath
cc of Lena; that no vessel may hereafter bound on the
,c dark-rolling waves of Inifltre ;" he means not alfured-
ly, as some have misrepresented him, to order a general
slaughter of the foes, and to prevent their saving themselves
by flight; but, like a wife general, he commands his
chiefs to render the viflory compleat, by a total rout of
the enemy; that they might adventure no more for the
future, to fit out any fleet against him or his allies.

Vol. i. p. I 1.

" moves

"moves the grass, to those who afe thine aid.

So Trcnmor lived; such Trathal was; and
such has Fingal been. My arm was the support
of the injured; the weak refted behind the light-

" ning of my steel ."-These were the maxims of
true heroism, to which he formed his grandson.
His fame is represented as every where spread; the
greatest heroes acknowledge his superiority; his
enemies tremble at his name; and the highest en-
comium that can be bellowed on one whom the
poet would most exalt, is to fay, that his foul was
like the foul of Fingal.

To do justice to the poet's merit, in supporting

such a charaaer as this, I must observe, what is
not commonly attended to, that there is no part
of poetical execution more difficult, than to draw
a perfec character in such a manner, as to render
it diitinand asseting to the mind. Some strokes
of human imperfection and frailty, are what usual-
ly give us the most clear view, and the most fen-
fible imprefflon of a chara&er; because they pre-
sent to us a man, such as we have seen; they re-
call knownfeatures of human nature. When poets
attempt to go beyond this range, and describe a
fauldefs hero, they, for the mot part, set before
us, a fort of vague undiftinguifhable charater, such
as the imagination cannot lay hold of, or realize
to itself, as the object of affection. We know
how much Virgil has failed in this particular.
His perfec hero, JEneas, is an unanimated, in-
sipid personage, whom we may pretend to admire,

Vol. i. p. 64.

but

but whom no one can heartily love. But what
Virgil has failed in, Offlan, to our aftonilhment,
has successfully executed. His Fingal, though
exhibited without any of the common human fail-
ings, is nevertheless a real man; a character which
touches and interelts every reader. To this it has
much contributed, that the poet has represented
him as an old man; and by this has gained the ad-
vantage of throwing around him a great many
circumRtances, peculiar to that age, which paint
him to the fancy in a more diftint light. He is
surrounded with his family; he inftruts his child-
ren in the principles of virtue; he is narrative of
his patl exploits; he is venerable with the grey
locks of age; he is frequently disposed to moralize,
like an old man, on human vanity and the prof-
pect of death. There is more art, at leaf more
felicity, in this, than may at first be imagined.
For youth and old age, are the two states of hu-
man life, capable of being placed in the most
piturefque lights. Middle age is more general
and vague; and has fewer circumtances peculiar
Io the idea of it. And when any objet is in a
situation, that admits it to be rendered particular,
and to be cloathed with a variety of circumstances,
it always stands out more clear and full in poetical
description.

Betides human personages, divine or fupernatu-

ral agents are often introduced into epic poetry;
forming what is called the machinery of it; which
motl critics hold to be an essential part. The
marvellous, it must be admitted, has always a

great

great charm for the bulk of readers. It gratifie»
the imagination, and affords room for striking arid
sublime description. No wonder therefore, that
all poets Ihould have a strong propensity towards
it. But I must observe, that nothing is more
difficult, than to adjust properly the marvellous
with the probable. If a poet sacrifice probability,
and fill his work with extravagant supernatural
scenes, he spreads over it an appearance of ro-
mance and childiih fic&ion; he transports his rea-
ders from this world, into a phantaftick, visionary
region; and loses that weight and dignity which
should reign in epic poetry. No work, from
which probability is altogether banilhed, canmake
a lasting or deep impression. Human a&ions and
manners, are always the most interesting objeas
which can be presented to a human mind. All
machinery, therefore, is faulty which withdraws
these too much from view; or obscures them un-
der a cloud of incredible fi&ions. Besides being
temperately employed, machinery ought always to
have some foundation in popular belief. A poet
is by no means at liberty to invent what system of
the marvellous he pleases: He must avail himself
either of tlhe religious faith, or the superstitious
credulity of the country wherein he lives; so as
to give an air of probability to events which are
most contrary to the common course of nature.

In these refpets, Ossian appears to me to have

been remarkably happy. He has indeed followed
the fame course with Homer. For it is perfe&cly
absurd to imagine, as some critics have done, that

Homer's
7

Homer's mythology was invented by him, in con-
tquence of profound refleions on the benefit it
would yield to poetry. Homer was no such resin-
ing genius. He found the traditionary ftoties on
which he built his Iliad, mingled with popular le-
gends, concerning the intervention of the gods and
he adopted these, because they amused the fancy.
Ofian, in like manner, found the tales of his coun-
try full of ghosts and spirits: It is likely he believed
them himself; and he introduced them, because
they gave his poems that solemn and marvellous
cast, which suited his genius. This was the only
machinery he could employ with propriety; because
it was the only intervention of supernatural beings,
which agreed with the common belief of the coun-
try. It was happy; because it did not interfere
in the least, with the proper dilplay of human
chara&ers and a&ions; because it had less of the
incredible, than most other kinds of poetical ma-
chinery; and because it served to diversify the
scene, and to heighten the fubjeft by an awful
grandeur, which is the great design of machinery.

As Ollian's mythology is peculiar to himself,

and makes a considerable figure in his other poems,
as well as in Fingal, it may be proper to make
fore observations on it, independent of its subser-
viency to epic composition. It turns for the most
part on theappearances of departed spirits. These,
consonantly to the notions of every rude age, are
represented not as purely immaterial, but as thin
airy forms, which can be visible or invisible at plea-
sure; their voice is feeble; their arm is weak; but

they

they are endowed with knowledge more than hu-
man. In a separate state, they retain the fame dif-
positions which animated them in this life. They
ride on the wind, they bend their airy bows; and
pursue deer formed of clouds. The ghosts of
departed bards continue to sing. The ghosts of
departed heroes frequent the fields of their former
fame. " They reft together in their caves, and
"talk of mortal men. Their songs are of other
"worlds. They come sometimes to the earofreft,
" and raise theirfeeble voice*." All this presents
to us much the fame set of ideas, concerning spirits,
as we find in the eleventh book of the Odyssey,
where Ulysses visits the regions of the dead: And
in the twenty-third book of the Iliad, the ghost of
Patroclus, after appearing to Achilles, vanilhes
precisely like one of Ofian's, emitting a shrill,
feeble cry, and melting away like smoke.

But though Homer's and Ossian's ideas concern-

ing ghots were of the fame nature, we cannot but
observe, that Ollian's ghosts are drawn with much
tronger and livelier colours than those of Homer.
Ossian describes ghotls with all the particularity of
one who had ieen and conversed with them, and
whole imagination was full of the impression they
had left upon it. He calls up those awful and tre-
mendous ideas which the

- Simulacra modis pallentia miris,

are fitted to raise in the human mind; and which,
in Shakefpear's ltyle, " harrow up the foul."
* See Vol. i. p. 3;, 40, 147, 15j, 303, 353.

Crugal's

Crugal's ghost, in particular, in the beginning of
the second book of Fingal, may vie with any ap.
pearance of this kind, described by any epic or
tragic poet whatever. Most poets would have
contented themselves with telling us, that he re-
fembled, in every particular, the living Crugal;
that his form and dress were the fame, only his
face more pale and fad; and that he bore the mark
of the wound by which he fell. But Ossian sets
before our eyes a spirit from the invisible world,
diftinguilhed by all those features, which a strong
aRtonilhed imagination would give to a ghost. "A
" dark-red stream of fire comes down from the hill.
" Crugal fat upon the beam i he that lately fell by
" the hand of Swaran, Driving in the battle of he-
" roes. His face is like the beam of the fetring
" moon. His robes are of the clouds of the hill.
" His eyes ire like'two decaying flames. Dark
' is the wound of his breast.- The stars dim-
" twinkled through his form; and his voice was like
" the foundofadiftant stream." The circumstance
of the stars being beheld, "dim-twinkling through
" his form," is wonderfully pi&urefque; and con-
veys the nmoft lively impreflion of his thin and
shadowy substance. The attitude in which he is
afterwards placed, and the speech put into bis
mouth, are full of that solemn and awful sub-
limity, which suits the fubje&. " Dim, and in
"tears, he stood and stretched his pale hand over
,' the hero. Faintly he raised his feeble voice,
"like the gale of the reedy Lego.---My ghost,
" Connal! is on my native hills; but my corse

E 2 is

"is on the sands of Ullin. Thou shalt never
" talk with Crugal, or find his lone steps in the
"heath. I am light as the blast of Cromla; and
"I move like the lhadow of mist. Connal, son
" of Colgar! I fee the dark cloud of death. It
"hovers over the plains of Lena. The sons of
"green Erin shall fall. Remove from the field of
" ghofts.-Like the darkened moon he retired in
' the midst of the whiffling blat.'"

Several other appearances of spirits might be

pointed out, as among the most sublime paflages
of Ossian's poetry. The circumstances of them
are considerably diversified; and the scenery always
suited to the occalion. " Oscar slowly ascends
" the hill. The meteors of night let on the heath
" before him. A distant torrent faintly roars.
" Unfrequent blasts rulh through aged oaks.
" The half-enlightened moon finks dim and red
" behind her hill. Feeble voices are heard on
" the heath. Oscar drew his sword." - No-
thing can prepare the fancy more happily for
the awful scene that is to follow. " Trenmor-
" came from his hill, at the voice of his mighty

son. A cloud, like the feed of the stranger,

" supported his airy limbs. His robe is of the mist
" of Lano, that brings death to the people. His
, sword is a green meteor, half-extinguifhed.
" His face is without form, and dark. He sigh-

ed thrice overthe.hero: And thrice, the winds
of the night roared around. Many were his
words to Oicar- He slowly vanished, like a

"mist

" mift.that melts on the funnyhill*." Toappear-
ances of this kind, we can find no parallel among
the Greek or Roman poets. They bring to mind
that noble description in the book of Job: " In

thoughts from the visions of the night, when
deep seep falleth on men, fear came upon me,
and trembling, which made all my bones to

" hake. Then a spirit paiTed before my face.
"The hair of my flelh stood up. It stood still;
" but I could not discern the form thereof. An

image was before mine eyes. There was fit

"lence; and I heard a voice---Shall mortal man
" be more just than God t?"

As Offlan's supernatural beings are described

with a furprizing force of imagination, so they are
introduced with propriety. We have only three
ghosts in Fingal: That of Crugal, which comes
to warn the host of impending deftrution, and
to advise them to save themselves by retreat; that
of Evirallin, the spouse of Ossian, which calls
him to rife and rescue their son from danger; and
that of Agandecca, which, just before the last en-
gagement with Swaran, moves Fingal to pity, by
mourning for the approaching destruction of her
kinsmen and people. In the other poems, ghosts
sometimes appear when invoked to foretell futu-
rity; frequently, according tothe notions of these
times, they come as fore-runners of misfortune or
death, to those whom they visit; sometimes they
inform their friends at a distance, of their own
death; and sometimes they are introduced to
* Vol. i. p, 143, 14. t Job iv. 13-17.

E 3 heighten

heighten the scenery on some great and solemn
occasion. " A hundred oaks burn to the wind;
"and faint light gleams aver the heath. The
" ghots of Ardven pass through the beam; and
" hew their dim and distant forms. Comala
"is half-unfeen on her meteor; and Hidallan is
' fullen and dim*." - " The awful faces of
"other times, looked from the clouds of Cro-
" nat." " Fercuth! I saw the ghost of

night. Silent he flood on that bank; his robe

" of mif flew on the wind. I could behold his
" tears. An aged man he seemed, and full of
"thought."

The ghosts of strangers mingle not with those
of the natives. " She is fern; bpt not like the

daughters of the hill. Her robes are from the
fitrangers land i and she is still alone §." When

the ghost of one whom we had formerly known is
introduced, the propriety of the living characer
is fll prefSved. This is remarkable in the appear-
ance of Calrnar's ghost, in the poem entitled The
Death of Cuchullin. He seems to forebode Cuch-
ullin's death, and to beckon him to his cave.
Cuchullin reproaches him for supposing that he
could be intimidated by such prognostics. " Why
" dost thou bend thy dark eyes on me, ghost of
" the car-borne Caimar! Would'st thou frighten

me, O Matha's son! from the battles of Cor.
; mac? Thy hand was not feeble in war; neither
I' was thy voice for peace. How art thou chang,

*Vol. i. p. 138. t Vol. i. p. 126. t Vol. i,
' 173. § Vol. i. p. 198.

*r ed

" ed, chief of Lara! if now thou doff advise to

fly!---Retire thou to thy cave: Thou art not
"Calmar's ghost: He delighted in battle; and

his arm was like the thunder of heaven." Cal-

mar makes no return to this teeming reproach:
But, " He retired in his blast with joy; for he
" had heard the voice of his praise*." This is
precisely the ghof of Achilles in Homer; who,
notwithstanding all the diffatisfa&ion he exprefles
with his state in the region of the dead, as soon
as he had heard his son Neoptolemus praised for
his gallant behaviour, strode away with silent joy
to rejoin the reft of the fhadest.

It is a great advantage of Ossian's mythology,

that it is not local and temporary, like that of
most other ancient poets; which of course is apt
to seem ridiculous, after the fuperilitions have
passcd away on which it was founded. Ossian's
mythology is, to speak so, the mythology of hu-
man nature; for it is founded on what has been
the popular belief, in all ages and countries, and
under all forms of religion, concerning the ap-
pearances of departed spirits. Homer's machine-
ry is always lively and amusing; but far from be-
ing always supported with proper dignity. The
indecent squabbles among his gods, surely do no
honour to epic poetry. Whereas Ossian's machine-
ry has dignity upon all occasions. It is indeed a
dignity of the dark and awful kind; but this is
proper; because coincident with the strain and
spirit of the poetry. A light and gay mythology,
* Vol. i. p. 212. t Odyff. Lib. ir.

E 4 like

like Homer's, would have been perfe'tly unfuit-
able to the fubjefts on which Oflian's genius was
employed. But though his machinery be always
solemn, it is not, however, always dreary or dif.
mal; it is enlivened, as much as the fubjeft would
permit, bythoe pleasant and beautiful appearances,
which he sometimes introduces, of the spirits of
the hill. There are gentle spirits; descending on
sun-beams; fair-moving on the plain; their forms
white and bright; their voices sweet; and their
viits to men propitious. The greatest praise that
can be given, to the beauty of a living woman, is
to fay, "She is fair as the ghost of the hill; when
" it moves in a sun-beam at noon, over the silence
C of Morven '."-- The hunter shall hear my
"' voice from his booth. He hall fear, but love
" my voice. For sweet shall my voice be for my

friends; for pleasant were they to me t."
Besides ghosts, or the spirits of departed men,

we find in Olfian foime instances of other kinds of
machinery. Spirits of a superior nature to ghosts
are sometimes alluded to, which have power to
embroil the deep; to call forth winds and storms,
and pour them on the land of the stranger; to
overturn forests, and to fend death among the
people:. We have prodigies too; a lhower of
blood; and when fore disaster is befalling at a dif,
tance, the found of death heard on the strings of
Ofiian's harp§: all perfectly consonant, not only
to the peculiar ideas of nothern nations, but to

Vol. i. p. 2T. t Vol. i. p. 295. Vid. Vol. i.
p. 56, 163, 19, 145, 252. Vol. i. p. 88, 2;6.

6 the

the general current of a superstitious imagination
in all countries. The dffcription of Fingals airy
hall, in the poem called Berrathon, and of the a;
cent of Malvina into it, defervs particular notice,
as remarkably noble and magnificent. But above
all, the engagement of Fingal with the spirit of
Loda, in Carric-thura, cannot be mentioned with.
out admiration. I forbear transcribing the pas
sage, as it must have drawn the attention of every
one who has read the works of Oflian. The un-
daunted courage of Fingal, opposed to all the ter-
rors of the Scandinavian God; the appearance and
the speech of that awful spirit; the wound which
he receives, and the shriek which he fends forth,
" as rolled into himself, he rose upon the wind ;"
are full of the most amazing and terrible majesty.
I know no passage more sublime in the writings of
any uninspired author. The fiction is calculated
to aggrandize the hero; which it does to a high
degree; nor is it so unnatural or wild a fition, as
might at first be thought. According to the no-
tions of those times, supernatural beings were
material, and consequently, vulnerable. The
spirit of Loda was not acknowledged as a deity by
Fingal; he did not worlhip at the stone of his
power; he plainly confidered him as the God of
his enemies only; as a local deity, whose domi-
nion extended no farther than to the regions where
he was worlhiped; who had, therefore, no title to
threaten him, and. no claim to his fubmiflion,
We know there are poetical precedents of great
authority, for fictions fully as extravagant; and if

Homer

Homer be forgiven for makingDiomed attack and
wound in battle, the gods whom that chief him-
self worlhiped, Ossian surely is pardonable for
making his hero superior to the god of a foreign
territory*.

Notwithstanding the poetical advantages which

I have ascribed to Ossian's machinery, I acknow-
ledge it would have been much more beautiful
and perse&, had the author discovered some know-
ledge of a fupream Being. Although his silence
on this head has been accounted for by the learn-

The scene of this encounter of Fingal with the spirit

of Loda is laid in IniRore, or the ifands of. Orkney and
in the description of Fingal's landing there, it is said, p. 276.
" A rock bends along the coaf with all its echoing wood.
" On the top is the circle of Loda, with the mofly sone of
a power." In confirmation of Oflian's topography, it
is proper to accquaint the reader that in these ifands, as
I have been well informed, there are many pillars, and
circles of flones, till remaining, known by the name of
the stones and circles of Loda, or Loden; to which some
degree of fuperflitious regard is annexed to this day.
These illands, until the year 1468, made a part of the
Danish dominions. Their ancient language, of which
there are yet some remains among the natives, is called the
Jorfe; and is a dialec, not of the Celtic, but of the Scan.
dinavian tongue. The manners and the fuperflitions of
the inhabitants, are quite difinA from those of the Highlands
and weflern isles of Scotland. Their ancient songs too,
are of a different itrain and characer, turning upon magi-
cal incantations and evocations from the dead, which were
the favourite subje&s of the old Runic poetry. They
have many traditions among them of wars in former times
with the inhabitants of the weflern islands,

cd

ed and ingenious translator in a very probable man-
ner, yet still it mulf be held a considerable difad-
vantage to the poetry. For the most august and
lofty ideas that can embellish poetry are derived
from the belief of a divine administration of the
universe: And hence the invocation of a fupream
Being, or at least of some superior powers who are
conceived as presiding over human affairs, the so-
lemnities of religious worlhip, prayers preferred,
and assistance implored on critical occasions, appear
with great dignity in the works of almost all poets
as chief ornaments of their compositions. The ab-
fence of all such religious ideas from Osman's poetry,
is a sensible blank in it; the more to be regretted, as
we can easily imagine what an illustrious figure
they would have made under the management of
such a genius as his; and how finely they would
have been adapted to many situations which occur
in his works.

After so particular an examination of Fingal, it

were needless to enter into as full a difcuflion of
the conduc of Temora, the other Epic Poem.
Many of the fame observations, eipecially with re-
gard to the great characteristics of heroic poetry,
apply to both. The high merit, however, of Te-
mora, requires that we should not pass it by with-
out some remarks.

The scene of Temora, as of Fingal, is laid in

Ireland; and the acion is of a posterior date. The
fubje& is, an expedition of the hero, to dethrone
and punish a bloody usurper, and to restore the
poffl0ion of the kingdom to the posterity of the

lawful

lawful prince; an undertaking worthy of the justice
and heroism of the great Fingal. The action is
one, and compleat. The poem opens with the
descent of Fingal on the coast, and the confulta-
tion held among the chiefs of the enemy. The
murder of the young prince Cormac, which was
the cause of the war, being antecedent to the epic
ation, is introduced with great propriety as an
episode in the first book. In the progress of the
poem, three battles are described, which rife in
their importance above one another; the success is
various, and the issue for some time doubtful; till
at last, Fingal brought into distress, by the wound
of his great general Gaul, and the death of his
son Fillan, assumes the command himself, and hav-
ing slain the Irish king in single combat, restores
the rightful heir to his throne.

Temora has perhaps less fire than the other epic

poem; but in return it has more variety, more
tenderness, and more magnificence. The reign.
ing idea, so often presented to us of " Fingal in
' the last of his fields," is venerable and affecing;
nor could any more noble conclusion be thought
of, than the aged hero, after so many successful
atchievements, taking his leave of battles, and with
all the folemnities of thole times resigning his spear
to his son. The events are less crouded in Te-
nora than in Fingal; actions and characters are
more particularly dilplayed; we are let into the
transactions of both hofs; and informed of the ad-
ventures of the night as well as of the day. The
ffill pathetic, and the romantic scenery of several

of

of the night adventures, so remarkably suited to
Oflian's genius, occasion a fine diversity in the
poem; and are happily contrasted with the mili-
tary operations of the day.

In most of our author's poems, the horrors of

war are softened by intermixed scenes of love and
friendship. In Fingal, these are introduced as
episodes; in Temora, we have an incident of this
nature wrought into the body of the piece; in the
adventure of Cathmor and Stllmalla. This forms
one of the most conspicuous beauties of that poem.
The distress of Sulmalla, disguised and unknown
among strangers, her tender and anxious concern
for the safety of Cathmor, her dream, and her
melting remembrance of the land of her fathers;
Cathmor's emotion when he first discovers her, his
struggles to conceal and suppress his paillon, left
it should unman him in the midst of war, though
" his foul poured forth in secret when he be-
" held her fearful eye ;" and the last interview be.
tween them, when overcome by her tenderness,
he lets her know he had discovered her, and con-
fesses his paflion; are all wrought up with the most
exquisite sensibility and delicacy.

Besides the characers which appeared in Fingal,

several new ones are here introduced; and though,
as they are all the charaters of warriors, bravery
is the predominant feature, they are nevertheless
diversified in a sensible and striking manner. Fol-
dath, for instance, the general of Cathmor, ex-
hibits the perfeCt picture of a savage chieftain:
Bold, and daring, but presumptuous, cruel, and

ove:-

overbearing. He is diftinguithed, on his firt ap-
pearance, as the friend of the tyrant Cairbar;
"His stride is haughty; his red eye rolls in wrath."
In his person and whole deportment, he is con-
traited with the mild and wife Hidalla, another
leader of the fame army, on whose humanity and
gentleness he looks with great contempt. He pro-
feffedly delights in strife and blood. He insults
over the fallen. He is imperious in his counsels,
and factious when they are not followed. He is
unrelenting in all his schemes of revenge, even to
the length of denying the funeral song to the dead;
which, from the injury thereby done to their
ghosts, was in those days confidered as the greatest
barbarity. Fierce to the last, he comforts himself
in his dying moments with thinking that lis ghost
shall often leave its blast to rejoice over the graves
of those he had slain. Yet Ossian, ever prone to
the pathetic, has contrived to throw into his ac-
count of the death, even of this man, some tender
circumstances; by the moving description of his
daughter Dardulena, the last of his race.

The characer of Foldath tends much to exalt

that of Cathmor, the chief commander, which is
distinguished by the mot humane virtues. He
abhors all fraud and cruelty, is famous for his hof-
pitality to strangers; open to every generous fen-
timent, and to evenr soft and compaflionate feel-
ing. He is so amiable as to divide the reader's at-
tachment between him and the hero of the poem;
though our author has artfully managed it so, as
to make Cathmor himself indiretly acknowledge

Fingal's

Fingal's'fuperiority, and to'appear somewhat ap-
prehenfive of the event, after the death'of Fillan,
which he, knew would call forth Fingal in all his
might. It is very remarkable, that although Oflian
has introduced into his poems three compleat
heroes, Cuchullin, Cathmor, and Fingal, he has,
however, sensibly distinguished each. of their cha-
racers. Cuchullin is particularly honourable;
Cathmor particularly amiable; Fingal wife and
great, retaining an ascendant peculiar to himself
in whatever light he is viewed.

But the favourite figure in Temora, and the one

most highly finilhed, is Fillan. His charater is
of that fort, for which Ossian mfews a particular
fondness; an eager, fervent young warrior, fired
with all the impatient enthufiafin for military glory,
peculiar to that time of life; He had sketched
this in the description of his own fon'Ofcar; but
as he has extendedit more fully in Fillan, and as
the character is so consonant to the epic firain,
though so far as I remember, not placed in such a
conspicuous light by any other epic poet, it may
be worth while to attend a little to Offlian's manage-
ment of it in this instance.

Fillan was the youngest of all the sons of Fin-

gal; younger, it is plain, than his nephew Oscar,
by whose fame and great deeds in war, we may
naturally suppose his ambition to have been highly
Sfimulated. Withal, as he is younger, he is de-
fcribed as more rash and fiery. His first appearance
is soon after Oscar's death, when he was employed to
watch the motions of the foe by night. In a con-

verfation

veriaHionwith his brother Ossian, on that occa&fti,
we larn that it as not bog ine he began to lift
the spear. " Few are the marks of my sword in
" battle; but my foul is fire*." He is with some
difficulty refrnined by Ossian fol going to attack
the enemy; and complains to him, that his fater
had never allowed him any opportunity of figna-
lizing his valour. "The king hath not remarked
" my sword; I go forth with the croud; I return
" without my fame." Soon after, when Fingal
according to custom was to appoint one of his
chiefs Do command the army, and each was fiand-
ing forth, and putting in his claim to this honour,
Fillan is presented in the following molf pictu-
refque and natural attitude. " On his spear Rood
" the son of Clatho, in the wandering of his locks.
" Thrice he railed his eyes to Fingal: his voice
" thrice failed him as he fpoke.-.Fillan could not
c boast of battles-at once he firode away. Bent
" over a distant fiream he stood; .the tear hung in
" his eye. He firuck, at times, the thiffle's head,
" with his inverted spear f." No left natural and
beautiful is the description of Fingal's paternal
emotion on this occasion. " Nor is he unseen of
" Fingal. Side-long he beheld his son. He be-
" held him with burfling joy. He hid the big
" tear with his locks, and turned arnidi his
·' crouded foul." The command, for that day,
being given to Gaul, Fillan ruflhes amidit the
thickest of the foe, saves Gaul's life, who is wound-
ed by a random arrow, and distinguishes himself so
* Vol. ii. p. 30. t Vol. ii. p. 49.

in

bn-battle, that" the days of old return on Fingal's
·' mind, as he beholds the renown of his son, As
" the fun rejoices from the cloud, over the tree
" his beams have railed, whilst it shakes its lonely
*" head on the heath, so joyful is the king over
"Fillan *." Sedate however and wife, he mixes
the praise. which he bestows on him with some re-
prehension 'of his ralhnefs, " My son, I saw thy
" deeds; and my foul was glad. Thou art brave,

f on of Clatho, but headlong in the strife. So

" did not Fingal advance, though he never feared
" a foe. Let thy people be a ridge behind thee;
" they are thy strength in the field. Then flialt

thou be long renowned, and behold the tombs
" of thy fatherst."

On the next day, the greatest and the last of Fil-

lan's life, the charge is committed to him of lead-
ing on the host to battle. Fingal's speech to his
troops on this occasion is full of noble sentiment;
and where he recommends his son to their care,
extremely touching. " A young beam is before
" you; few are his steps to war, They are few,
" but he is valiant; defend my dark-haired son.
" Bring him back with joy; hereafter he may stand
" alone. His form is like his fathers; his foul is
" a flame of their fireS." When the battle be-
gins, the poet puts forth his strength to describe
the exploits of the young hero; who, at last en-
countering and killing with his own hand Foldath
the opposite general, attains the pinnacle of glory,

* Vol. ii. p. 74. Vol. ii. p. 82. V Vol.

ii .
p. 3.

F In

In what follows, when the fate of Fillan is dtaw-
ing near, Ossian, if any where, excells hinfelf.
Foldath being lain, and a general rout begun,
there was no resource left to the enemy but in the
great Cathmor himself, who in this extremity de-
scends from the hill, where, according tathe cultoin
of thole princes, he surveyed the battle. Observe
how this critical event is wrought up by the poet.
"Wide spreading over echoing Lubar, the flight
' of Bolga is rolled along. Fillan hung forward
" on their steps, and strewed the heath with dead.
" Fingal rejoiced over his son.-- Blue-lfielded
· Cathmor rofe.--Son of Alpin, bring the harp!

Give Fillan's praise to the wind; raise high his

" praise in my hall, while yet he shines in. war.
" Leave, blue-eyed Clatho! leave thy hall! be-
" hold that early, beam of thine! The host is
" withered in its course. No farther look---it is
c dark-light-trembling from the harp, trike,
,C virgins! strike the founds." The sudden in-
terruption, and suspense of the narration on Cath-
mor's riling from his hill, the abrupt bursting into
the praise of Fillan, and the passionate apostrophe
to his mother Clatho, are admirable efforts of poe-
tical art, in order to interest us in Fillan's danger;
and the whole is heightened by the immediately
following rimile, one of the most magnificent and
sublime that is to be met with in any poet, and
which if it had been found in Homer, would have
been the frequent lubje&c of admiration to critics;

Fillan is like a spirit of heaven, that descends

Voli. iip. 126.

"from

' from the skirt of his blast. The troubled 0dcan
"feels his steps, as he firides from wave to wave.
" His path kiddles behind him; ifands shake'
" their heads on the heaving seas."

But the poet's art is not yet exhausted. The fall

of this noble young warrior, or in Ofifan's stile,
the extinEtion of this beam of heaven, could not
be rendered too intereffing and affecting. Our at-
tention is naturally drawn towards Fingal. He be-
holds from his hill the rising of Cathmor, and the
danger of his son. But what flall he do? " Shall
" Fingal rife to his aid, and take the fvord ot
"Luno ? What then Ihould become of thy fame,
" son of white-bofomed Clatho ? Turn not thine
" eyes from Fingal, daughter of Iniftore! I shall

not quench thy early beam.---No cloud of mine

" hall rife, my son, upon thy foul of fire*."
Struggling between concern for the fame, and fear
for the safety of his son, he withdraws from the
fight of the engagement; and dispatches Offan in
haste to the field, with this affe&ionate and deli-
cate injun&ion. " Father of Oscar !" addressing
him by a title which on this occasion has the
highest propriety. " Father of Oscar! lift the
" spear; defend the young in arms. But conceal

thy Rfeps from Fillan's eyes: He must not know

" that I doubt his steel."- Ossian arrived too
late.---But unwilling to describe Fillan vanquished,
the poet suppresses all the circumstances of the
combat with Cathmor; and only thews us the
dying hero. We fee him animated to the end

Vol.'ii p. 131.

F 2 with

with the fame martial and ardent spirit; breathing
his last in bitter regret for being so early cut off
from the field of glory. " Olfian, lay me in that
" hollow rock. Raise no stone above me; least
"one should ask about my fame. I am fallen in
"the first of my fields; fallen without renown.
"Let thy voice alone, fend joy to my flying foul.
" Why ihould the bard know where dwells the
" early-fallen Fillan ? *"--He who after tracing
the circumstances of this story, ihall deny that our
bard is poffefled of high sentiment and high art,
must be strangely prejudiced indeed. Let him
read the story of Pallas in Virgil, which is of a si-
milar kind; and after all the praise he may justly
bestow on the elegant and finished description of
that amiable author, let him fay, which of the two
poets unfold most of the human foul.- I wave
insisting on any more of the particulars in Temora;
as my aim is rather to lead the reader into the
genius and spirit of Ossian's poetry, than to dwell
on all his beauties.

The judgment and art discovered in condu&ing

works of such length as Fingal and Temora, dif-
tinguifh them from the other poems in this collec-
tion. The smaller pieces, however, contain par-
ticular beauties no less eminent. They are hiftori-
cal poems, generally of the elegiac kind; and
plainly discover themselves to be the work of the
fame author. One consistent face of manners is
every where presented to us; one spirit of poetry
reigns; the masterly hand of Ossian appears through-

* Vol. ii, p. 137.

out;

out; the fame rapid and animated style; the fame
strong colouring of imagination, and the fame glow-
ing sensibility of heart. Besides the unity which
belongs to the compositions of one man, there is
moreover a certain unity of fubje& which very
happily connets all there poems. They f6rm the
poetical history of the age of Fingal. The fame
race of heroes whom we had met with in the grea-
ter poems, Cuchullin, Oscar, Connal and Gaul
return again upon the stage; and Fingal himself
is always the principal figure, presented on every
occalion, with equal magnificence, nay rising upon
us to the last. The circumstances of Ossian's old
age and blindness, his surviving all his friends,
and his relating their great exploits to Malvina,
the spouse or mistress of his beloved son Oscar,
furnilh the finest poetical situations that fancy
could devise for that tender pathetic which reigns
in Ossian's poetry.

On each of these poems, there might be room

for separate observations, with regard to the con-
du& and disposition of the incidents, as well as to
the beauty ofthe descriptions and sentiments. Car-
thon is a regular and highly finished piece. The
main fory is very properly introduced by Cleffam-
mor's relation of the adventure of his youth; and
this introducion is finely heightened by Fingal's
song of mourning over Moina; in which Ofian, ever
fond of doing honour to his father, has contrived
to distinguish him, for being an eminent poet, as
well as warrior. Fingal's song upon this occasion,
when " his thousand Bards leaned forwards from

F 3 " their

" their feats, to hear the voice of the Kirig," is
inferior to no passage in the whole book; and with
great judgment put in his mouth, as the serious-
ness, no less than the sublimity of the firain, is
peculiarly suited to the Hero's character. In Dar-
thula, are assembled almost all the tender images
that can touch the heart of man; Friendship, lqve,
the affiEions of parents, ions, and brothers, the
di;frefs of the aged, arid the unavailing bravery of
the young. The beautiful address to the moon,
with which the poem opens, and the transition
from thence to the subject, most happily prepare
the mind for that train of affecting events that isto
follow. The ltory is regular, dramatic, interesting
to the iaf. He who can read it without emotion
may congratulate himself, if he pleases, upon be.
ing completely armed against Sympathetic sorrow,
As Fingal had no occasion of appearing in the ac-
tion of this poem, Ossian makes a very artful tran-
fiion from his narration, to what was passing in
the halls of Selma. The found heard there on
the firings of his harp, the concern which Fingal
ihows on hearing it, and the invocation of the
ghosts of their fathers, to receive the Heroes fall.
ing in a distant land, are introduced with great
beauty of imagination to increase the solemnity,
and to diversify the scenery of the poem.

Carric-thura is full of the most sublime dignity;

and has this advantage of being more chearful in
the fubje&, and more happy in the catastrophe
than molt of the other poems: Though tempered
at the fame time with episodes in that strain of ten-

der

der. melancholy, which seems to have been the
great delight of Oflian and the Bards of his age.
Lathtnon is peculiarly distinguished, by high ge-
nerofity of sentiment. This is carried so far, par-
ticularly in the refusal of Gaul, on one fide, to
take the advantage of a sleeping foe; and of
Lathmon, on the other, to overpower by numbers
the two young warriors$ as to recall into one's
mind the manners of Chivalry; some resemblance
to which may perhaps be suggested by other inci-
dents in this colletion of Poems. Chivalry, how-
ever, took rife in an age and country too remote
from those of Ossian to admit the suspicion that
the one could have borrowed any thing from
the other. So far as Chivalry had any real exif-
tence, the fame. military'enthufiafm, which gave
birth to it in the'feudal times, might, in the days
of Offlan, that is; in the infancy of a rising state,
through the operation of the fame cause, very
naturally produce effecs of the fame kind on the
minds and manners of men. So far as Chivalry
was an ideal system existing only in romance, it
will not be thought surprising, when we reflec on
the account before given of the Celtic Bards, that
this imaginary refinement of heroic manners should
be found among them, as much, at least, as a-
mong the frobadores, or strolling Provencal Bards,
in the loth or lith century; whose songs, it is
said, first gave rife to those romantic ideas of hero-
ism, which for so long a time enchanted Europe*.
Offiar's heroes have all the gallantry and generofi-
* Vid. Huetius de origine fabularum Romanenfium.

F 4 ty

ty of those fabulous knights, without their extra-
vagance; and his love scenes have native tender,
ness, without any mixture of those forced and un-
natural conceits which abound in tne old roman.
ces. The adventures related by ourpoet which re-
femble the most those of romance, concern women
who follow their lovers to war disguised in the ar-
mour of men; and these are so managed as to
produce, in the discovery, several of the most in-.
teresting situations; one beautiful instance of which
may be seen in Carric-thura, and another in Cal-
thon and Colma.

Oithona presents a situation of a different -na-

ture. In the absence of her lover Gaul; the had
been carried off and ravilhed by Dunrommath.
Gaul discovers the place where she is kept con-
cealed, and comes to revenge her, The meeting
of the two lovers, the sentiments and the beha-
viour of Oithona on that occasion, are described
with such tender and exquisite propriety, as does
the greatest honour both to the art and to the de,
licacy of our author: and would have been ad.
mired in any poet of the most refined age., The
conduc of Croma must strike every reader as re-
markably judicious and beautifiul We are to be
prepared for the death of Malvina, which is re-
lated in the succeeding Poem. She is therefore
introduced in person; s, the has heard a voice in
" a dream; the feels the fluttering of her foul;"
and in a most moving lamentation addressed to her
beloved Oscar, file sings her own Death Song.
Nothing could be calculated with more art

.k

to fboth and comfort her, than the story which
Ossian relates. In the young and brave Fovar-
gormo, another Oscar is introduced; his praises.
are sung; and the happiness is set before her of
those who die in their youth, " when their re-
" nown is around them; before the feeble behold
" them in the hall, and smile at their trembling
" hands."

But no where does Ossian's genius appear to

greater advantage, than in Berrathon, which is
reckoned the conclusion of his songs, " The last
"' found of the Voice of Cona."

Qualis olor noto pofiturus littore vitam,
Ingemit, et maftis mulcens concentibus auras
Prefago queritur venientia funera cantu.
The whole train of ideas is admirably suited to

the fubje&. Every thing is full of that invisible
world, into which the aged Bard believes himself
now ready to enter. The airy hall of Fingal pre-
sents itself to his view; " he fees the cloud that
;" shall receive his ghost; he beholds the mist that
" lhall form his robe when he appears or his hill "
and all the natural objects round him seem to carry
the presages of death. " The thistle shakes its
" beard to the wind. The flower hangs its heavy
"' head---it seems to fay, I am covered with the

drops of heaven; the time of my departure is

" near, and the blast that shall scatter my leaves."
Malvina's death is hinted to him in the most de-
licate manner by the son of Alpin. His lamenta.
tion over her, her apotheosis, or ascent to the
habitation of heroes, and the introducion to the

story

ftcry which follows from the mention which Offi-
an fuppoes the father of Malvina to make of him
in the hall of Fingal, are all in the highest fpiritof
Poetry. " And dost thou remember Oflian, O
"Tofcar son of Comloch ? The battles of our
"youth were many; our swords went together
" to the field"- Nothing could be more proper
than to end his songs with recording an exploit
of the father of that Malvina, of whom his heart
was now so full; and who, from firfr to last, had
been such a favourite objet throughout all his
poems.

The scene of most of Ossians poems is laid in

Scotland, or in the coast of Ireland opposite to
the territories of Fingal. When the scene is in
Ireland, we perceive no change of manners from
those of Ossian's native county. For as Ireland
was undoubtedly peopled with Celtic tribes, the
language, customs, and religion of both nations
were the fame. They had been feparared from
one another by migration, only a few generations,
as it Ihould seer, before our poets age; and they
still maintained a close and frequent intercourse.
But when the poet relates the expeditions of any
of his heroes to the Scandinavian coast, or to the
islands of Orkney, which were then part of the
Scandinavian territory, as he does in Carric-thura,
Sulmalla of Lumon, and Cathloda, the cafe is quite
altered. Those countries were inhabited by na-
tions of the Teutonic descent, who in their man-
ners and religious rites differed widely from the
Celte; and it is curious and remarkable, to find

~~~~~I ~ this

this difference clearly pointed out in the poems of
Offlan. His descriptions bear the native marks
of one who was present in the expeditions which
he relates, and who describes what he had seen
with his own eyes. No sooner are we carried to'
Lochlin, or the islands of Iniftore, than we per-
ceive that we are in a foreign region. New ob-
jects begin to appear. We meet every where with
the stones and circles of Loda, that is, Odin, the
great Scandinavian deity. We meet with the di-
vinations and inchantments, for which it is well
known those northern nations were early famous.
"There, mixed with the murmur of waters, rose
"the voice of aged men, who called the forms of
" night to aid them in their war* * whilst the
Caledonian chiefs who assisted them, are described
as standing at a distance, heedless of their rites.
That ferocity of manners which diftinguified those
nations, also becomes conspicuous. In the com-
bats of their chiefs there is a peculiar savageness;
even their women are bloody and fierce t. The
spirit, and the very ideas of Regner Lodbrog,
that northern scalder whom I formerly quoted, oc-
cur to us again. " The hawks," Ossian makes
one of the Scandinavian chiefs fay, " rush from all
" their winds; they are wont to trace my course.
" -We rejoiced three days above.the dead, and
" called the hawks of heaven. They came from
' all their winds, to feast on the foes of Annirl."

* See Vol. ii. p. 229. t Vol. ii. p. 230-232.
t Vol. ii. p. 270.

Dif-

Difrniling now the separate consideration of any

of our author's works, I proceed to make some
observations on his manner of writing, under the
general heads of Description, Imagery, and Sen-
timent.

A poet of original genius is always distinguished

by his talent for description*. A second rate
wrter discerns nothing new or peculiar in the ob-
je& he means to describe. His conceptions of it
are vague and loose; his expressions feeble; and of
course the objec is presented to us indiftintly and
as through a cloud. But a true Poet makes us
imagine that we fee it before our eyes: he catches-
the diftinguilhing features; he gives it the colours
of life and reality; he places it in such a light that
a painter could copy after him. This happy talent
is chiefly owing to a lively imagination, which
firt receives a strong imprefflon of the obje&t; and
then, by a proper felefion of capital piturefque
circumstances employed in describing it, transmits
that impreflion in its full force to the imaginations
of others. That Ossian possesses this descriptive
power in a high degree, we have a clear proof
from the effe& which his descriptions produce upon
the imaginations of those who read him with any
degree of attention and taste. Few poets are more
interesting. We contrac an intimate acquaintance
with his principal heroes. The characters, the
manners, the face of the country become familiar;

* See the rules of poetical description excellently illus-

trated by lord Kaims, in his Elements of Criticifim, vol.
iii. chap. 21. Ot narration and description.

we

we even think we could draw the figure of his
ghosts: In a word, whilst reading him, we are
transported as into a new region, and dwell among
his obje&s as if they were all real.

It were easy to point out several ioftances of

exquisite painting in the works of our author.
Such, for instance, as the scenery with which Te-
mora opens, and the attitude in which Cairbar is
there presented to us *; the description of the
young prince Cormac, in the fame book -; and
the ruins of Balclutha in Carthon:. " I have
" seen the walls of Balclutha, but they were de-
" solate. The fire had resounded in the halls;
' and the voice of the people is heard no more.
" The stream of Clutha was removed from its

place by the fall of the walls. The thistle
s"hook there its lonely head: The moss whistled
t" o the wind. The fox looked out from the
windows; the rank grass of the wall waved

" round his head. Desolate is the dwelling of
" Moina; silence is in the house of her fathers."
Nothing also can be more natural and lively than
the manner in which Carthon afterwards describes
how the conflagration of his city affie&ed him when
a child: " Have not seen the fallen Balclutha?

And ihall I feast with Comhal's son? Comhal

"who threw his fire in the midst of my father's
, hall! I was young, and knew not the cause

why the virgins wept. The columns of smoke
pleased mine eye, when they rose above my

Vol. i. p. 241, 242, 243. t Vol. i. p. 258.
Vol. i. p. I86.

" walls:

"walls: I often looked back with gladness, when
*' my friends fled above the hill. But when the
"years of my youth came on, I beheld the mess

of my fallen walls. My figharofe withthemorn-
ing; and my tears defcendedwith night. Shall

" I not fight, I said to my foul, againf the chil-
" dren of my foes? And I will fight, O Bard

I feel the strength of my foul*." In the fame

poem, the aflembling of the chiefs round Fingal,
who had been warned of some impending danger
by the appearance of a prodigy, is described
with so many piturefque circumstances, that one
imagines himself present in the assembly. " The
" king alone beheld the terrible fight, and he fore-
" saw the death of his people. He came in si-
" lence to his hall, and took his father's spear; the
"mail rattled on his breast. The heroes rose a-

round. They looked in silence on each other,
marking the eyes of Fingal. They saw the

; battle in his face.- A thousand Ihields are
" placed at once on their arms; and they drew
"a thousand swords. The hallofSelmabrighten-
"ed around. The clang of arms ascends. The

grey dogs howl in their place. No word is

" among the mighty chiefs. Each marked the
· eyes of the King; and half assumed his spear t±"

It has been objected to Ossian, that his defcrip-

tions of military ations are imperfe&, and much
less diverfited by circumstances than those of Ho-
mer. This is in some measure true. The amaz-
ing fertility cf Homer's invention is no where
* Vo!. i. p. 1g. + Vol. i. p. ISS.

so

fo.mxuch displayed asintht incidents of his batles;
(dj if the li~tle hiitQrypieces he: gives of the per-
ions 4iii Nor indexk with regard to the talent
of d4fciiption3 can tOO much be said in praise of
Hsiner. Every th!ig is alive in his wriiiogs.
Thc9..ours with which he paints are those of nl-
tu l8ut Ossian's genius was of a different kind
ftsH Homner's. It led himn to hurry towards grand
objects rather ,han. o amr9fe himself with particu-
lars of less importance. He could dwell on the
death of a favorite hero: but tht of a private
manifeldom stopped his rapid course. Homer's
genius was more comprehensive than OQian's. . It
included a wider circle of objects, and could work
up any incident into description. Oflian's was
more limited; but the region within which it
chiefly exerted itself was the highest of all, the re-
gion of the pathetic and sublime.

We must not imagine, however, that Ossian's

battles cqnfirt only of general indittinct description.
Such beautiful incidents are sometimes introduced,
and the circumstances of the persons slain so much
diversified, as show that he could have embellilhed
his military scenes with an abundant variety of
particulars, if his genius had led him to dwell
upon them. One man ". is stretched in the dust
" of his native land ; he fell, where often he had
" spread the feast, and often raised the voice of
" the harp*." The maid of Iniltore is introdu-
ced, in a moving apostrophe, as weeping for an-
other t; and a third, " as rolled in the dust he
* Vol. i. p. 40. t Vol. i p. 21.

" lifted

a lifted his faint eyes to the king," is remember-
ed and mourned by Fingal as the friend of
Agandecca*. The blood pouring from the
wound of one who is slain by night, is heard
" hissing on the half extinguished oak," which
had been kindled for giving light: Another,
climbing a tree to escape from his foe, is pierced
by his spear from behind; " hrieking, panting
" he fell; whilst mofsand withered branches purr
" sue his fall, and strew the blue arms of Gault."
Never was a finer picure drawn of the ardour of
two youthful warriors than the following: " I far
,' Gaul in his armour, and my foul was mixed
,c with his: For the fire of the battle was in his
"c eyes; helooked tothe foe withjoy. Wefpoke
" the words of friendship in secret; and the light-
" ening of our swords poured together. We
" drew them behind the wood, and tried the

ft rength of our arms on the empty air t."
Ossian is always concise in his descriptions,

which adds much to their beauty and force. For
it is a great mistake to imagine, that a crowd of
particulars, or a very full and extended style, is
of advantage to description. On the contrary,
such a diffuse manner for the moss part weakens it.
Any one redundant circumstance is a nuisance. It
encumbers and loads the fancy, and renders the
main image indiftinc. " Obtat," as Quintilian
fays with regard to style, "quicquid non adjuvat."
To be concise in description, is one thing; and to

Vol. i. p. 35. t Vol. i. p. 327. t Vol. i.
321.

be

be general, is another. No description that refti
in generals cah poflibly be good; it can convey no
lively idea; for it is of particulars only that we
have a diftint conception. But at the fame time,
no strong imagination dwells long upon any one
particular; or heaps together a mass of trivial
ones. By the happy choice of some one, or of a
few that are the most striking, it presents the image
more compleat, shows us more at one glance,
than a feeble imagination is able to do, by turning
its object round and round into a variety of lights.
Tacitus is of all prose writers the most concise.
He has even a degree of abruptneis resembling our
author: Yet no writer is more eminent for lively
description. When Fingal; after having conquer-
ed the haughty Swaran, proposes to dismiss him
with honour: " Raise to-morrow thy white fails
" to the wind, thou brother of Agandecca *!"
he conveys, by thus addrelling his enemy, a
stronger impreflion of the emotions then pafling
within his mind, than if whole paragraphs had
been spent in describing the confli& between re-
fentment against Swaran and the tender remem-
bance of his ancient love. No amplification is
needed to give us the most full idea of a hardy
veteran, after the few following words: " His
" shield is marked with the firokes of battle; his
" red eye despises danger t." When Oscar, left
alone, was surrounded by foes, " he stood," it is
said, " growing in his place, like the flood of the
' narrow vale ;" a happy representation of one,

Vol. i. p. 115. t Vol. i. p. 244. Vd. i.
P. 146.

G who,

who, by daring intrepidity in the midst of danger,
fecms to increase in his appearance, and becomes
more formidable every moment, like the sudden
rising of the torrent hemmed in by the valley.
And a whole crowd of ideas, concerning the cir-
cumftances of domefic sorrow occasioned by a
young warrior's firt going forth to battle, is poured
upon the mind by these words; " Calmar leaned
"on his father's spear; that spear which he brought
" from Lara's hall, when the foul of his mother
" was fad ."

The conciseness of Ollian's descriptions is the

more proper on account of his fubjcs. Defcrip-
tions of gay and smiling scenes may, without
any difidvantage, be amplified and prolonged.
Force is not the predominant quality expected in
these. The description may be weakened by be-
ing diffuse, yet notwithtanding, may be beauti-
ful still. Whereas, with refpe& to grand, solemn
and patheticfubjets, which are Offlan's chief field,
the cafe is very different. In there, energy is
above all things required. The imagination must
be seized at once, or not at all; and is far more
deeply imprefled by one trong and ardent image,
than by the anxious minuteness of laboured illus-
tration.

But Olfian's genius, though ch;efly turned to-

wards the sublime and pathetic, was not confined
to it: In fubjeas also of grace and delicacy, he
discovers the hand of a malfer. Take for an ex-
ample the following elegant description of Agan-

Vol. i. p. 5 .

decca.

decca, wherein the tenderness of Tibullus feeims
united wilh the majesty of Virgil. "The daughter
"of the snow overheard, and left the hall of her
" Sfcret sigh. She came in all her beauty; like
*' the moon from the cloud of the East. Love-
"liners was around her as light. Her iteps 'were

like the music of songs. She saw the youth
" and loved him. He was the stolen sigh of. her

foul. Her blue eyes rolled on him in secret:

" And she blest the chief of Morven," Several
other instances might be produced of the feelings
of love and friendlhip painted by our author with
a most natural and happy delicacy.

The simplicity of Oflian's manner adds great

beauty to his descriptions, and indeed to his whole
Poetry. We meet with no asseted ornaments; no
forced refinement; no marks either in tfyle or
thought of a studied endeavour to Ihine and sparkle.
Ossian appears every where to be prompted by
his feelings;' and to speak from the abundance of
his heart. I remember no more than one instance
of what can be called quaint thought in this whole
collection of his works. It is in the first book
of Fingal, where from the tombs of two lovers
two lonely yews are mentioned to have sprung,
" whose branches wished to meet on high t."
This sympathy of the trees with the lovers, may
be reckoned to border on an Italian conceit; and
it is somewhat curious to find this single instance
of that fort of wit in our Celtic poetry.

ol. i. p. 53. t Vol, i p. 27.

G The

The "joy of grief," is one of Oflian's remark-

able expressions, several times repeated. If any one
shall think that it needs to be justified by a prece-
dent, he may find it twice used by Homeri in the
Iliad, when Achilles is visited by the ghost of
Patroclus; and in the Odyssey, when O(lyfes
meets his mother in the ihades. On both these
occalions, the heroes, melted with tenderness, la-
ment their not having it in their power to throw
their arms round the ghost, " that we might," fay
they, " in a. mutualembrace, enjoy the delight of
" grief."

--- xp'JE o T(ira,92 ycOa *.v .e

But in truth the expression stands in need of no

defence from authority; for it is a natural and just
expreflfion; and conveys a clear idea of that gra-
tification, which a virtuous heart often feels in the
indulgence of a tender melancholy. Ollian makes
a ver: proper diftinaion between this gratification,
and the deftruc'ive effect of overpowering grief.
" There is a joy in grief, when peace dwells in

the breasts of the fad. But sorrow waftes the

" mournful, 0 daughter of Tofcar, and their
-' days are few±t." To " give the joy of grief,"
generally signifies to raise the strain of soft and
grave mufick; and finely charatcerifes the taste of
Ossian's age and country. In those days, when
the longs of bards were the great delight of heroes,
*the tragic mule was held in chief honour, 'gallant
aEtions, and virtuous sufferings, were the chosen

* Odyltr. . 211. Iliad 23.. s. t Vol. i.
p. 346.

theme;

theme; preferably to that light and trifling ttrain
of poetry and music, which promotes light and tris-
ling manners, and serves to. emasculate the mind.
" Strike thelharp in my hall;" said the great Fin-
gal, in the midst of youth and vitory, " Strike
"the harp in my hall, and let Fingal hear the song:
"Pleasant is the joy of grief! It is'like the shower
"of spring, when it softens the branch of the oak;
" and the young leaf lifts its green head. Sing
" on, O bards! To-morrow we lift the fail*."

Personal epithets have been much used by all

the poets of the moti ancient ages: and when well
phofen, not general and unmeaning, they contri-
bute not a little-to render the style descriptive and
animated. Besides epithets founded on bodily dif-
tintions, akin to many of Homer's, we find in Of-
fian several which are remarkably beautiful and po-
etical. Such as, Oscar of the future fights, Fin-
gal of the mildest look, Carril of other times, the
mildly blushing Evirallin; Bragela, the lonely
sun-beam of Dunfcaich; a Culdee, the son of the
secret cell.

But of all the ornaments employed in defcrip-

tive poetry, comparisons or similes are the most
splendid. These chiefly form what is called the
imagery of a poem: And as they abound so much
in the works of OfIian, and are commonly among
the favourite passages of all poets, it may be ex-
pe&ed that I should be somewhat particular in my
remarks upon them.

r Carric-thura, p. 270.

G 3 A poetical

A poetical simile always supposes two objecs

brought together, between which there is some
near relation or co~nneion in the fancy. What
that relation ought to be, cannot be precisely de-
fined. For various, almot numberless, are the
analogies sorned among objects, by a sprightly
imagination. The relation of actual similitude,
or likeness of appearance, is far from being the
only foundation of poetical comparison. Some.
times a resemblance in the effec produced by two
objecs, is made the connecting principle: Somer
ti;me a resemblance in one distinguishing property
or circumstance. Very often two objects are
brought together in a simile, though they. resemble
one another, striCtly fpeaing, in nothing, only be-
cause they raise in the mind a train of timilar, and
what may be called, concordant ideas; so that the
remembrance of the one, when recalled, serves to
quicken and heighten the impression made by the
other. Thus, to give an instance from our poet,
the pleasure with which an old man looks back on
the exploits of his youth, has certainly no direEt
resemblance to the beauty of a fine evening; far-
ther than that both agree in producing a certain
calm, placid joy. Yet Offlan has founded upon
this, one of the most beautiful comparisons that is
to be met with in any poet. " Wilt thou not

liften, son of the rock, to the song of Ossian ?

" My foul is full of other times -the joy of my
' youth returns, Thus, the fun appears in the
" wef:, after the steps of his brightness have moved

behind a storm. The green hills lift their dewy
" heads. The blue f:ear.s rejoice in the vale.

At "'.t

, The aged hero comes forth on his ftaf; and his
"grey hair glitters in the beam ." Never was
there a finer group of objects. It faifes a strong
conception of the old man's joy and elation of heart,
by displaying a scene, which produces in every
fpeetatbr, a corresponding train of pleating emo-
tions; the declining fun looking forth in his bright-
ness after a storm; the chearful face of all nature;
and the fill life finely animated by the circumstance
of the aged hero, with his staff and his grey locks;
a circumstance both extremely pi&urefque in itself,
and peculiarly suited to the main obje& of the
comparison. Such analogies and associations of
ideas as these, are highly pleating to the fancy.
They give opportunity for introducing many a
fine poetical picture. 'They diversify the kcne;
they aggrandiEe the subjec 3: they keep the imagi-
hation awake and sprightly. For as the judgment
is principally exercised in diitinguilhing objects,
and remarking the differences among those which
seem like; so the highest amufiment of the imagi-
nation is to trace likenesses and agreements among
those which seem different.

The principal rules which refpe& poetical com-

parisons are, that they be introduced on proper oc-
cafions, when the mind is disposed to relilh them;
and not in the midst of some severe and agitating
paflion, which cannot admit this play of fancy;
that they be founded on a resemblance neither too
near and-obvious, so as to give little amusement to
the imagination in tracing it, nor too faint and re-

' Vol. i. p. 305.

G 4 mote,

mote, so as to be, apprehended with difficulty; that.
they serve either to illustrate the principal object,
and to.render the coceprion of it, more, clear and.
distinct; or at leaf, to heighten aud embellish it,.
by a suitable affociation.of images *

Every country has a s£cenery peculiar to itwlfl

and the imagery of.a good poet. will exhibit it.
For as he copies after nature, his alluilons will of
course be taken from those objects which he fees.
around him, and which have often struck his fancy.
For this reason, in order to judge of the propriety
of poetical imagery, .we ought to be, in some
measure, acquainted with the natural history of
the country where the scene of the poem is laid,
The introdu&ion of foreign images betrays a poet,
copying not from, nature, but from other writers,
Hence so many Lions, and Tygers, and Eagles
and Serpents, which we meet with in the similes of
nmodern poets as if these animals had acquire4
some right to a place in poetical comparisons for
ever, because employed by ancient authors. They
employed them with propriet.y, as obje&s generally
known in their country but they are absurdly used
for illuftratipn by us, who know them only at fe-
cond hand, or by defcripion. To most readers gs
modern poetry, it were more to the purpose to de-
scribe Lions or Tygers by similes taken from men,
than to compare men to Lions. Olian is very cor-
re&. in this particular. His imagery is, without
exception, -copied from that face of nature, which
he saw before his eyes; and by confequepce may.

See Elemennts ps Criticifn, ch, 19. vol. 3.

L_

be expected to be. lively. We meet with norGre-
cian -or Italian scenery; but with the mists, and
clouds, and storms of a northern mountainous re.
gion.

No poet abounds more in similes than Olfian.

There are in this colletion as many, at least, as
in the whole Iliad and Odyssey of Homer. I am
indeed inclined to think, that the works of both
poets are too much crowded with them. Similes
are sparkling ornaments; and like all things that
Iparkle, are apt to dazzle and tire us by their
lustre. But if Ofilan's similes be too frequent,
they have this advantage of being commonly.
florter than Homer's; they interrupt his narration
less; he just glances aside to some resembling
objet, and instantly returns to his former track.
Homer's similes include a wider range of objects.
But in return, Ossian's are, without exception,
taken from objects of dignity, which cannot be
said for all those which Homer employs. The Sun,
the Moon, and the Stars, Clouds and Meteors,
Lightning and Thunder, Seas and Whales, Ri.
vers, Torrents, Winds, Ice, Rain, Snow, Dews,
Mist, Fire and Smoke, Trees and Forests, Heatl)
and Grass and Flowers, Rocks and Mountains,
Music and Songs, Light and Darkness, Spirits and
Ghosts; these form the circle, within which Of-
sian's comparisons generally run. Some, not many,
are taken from Birds and Beats; as Eagles, Sea
Fowl, the Horse, the Deer, and the Mountain
Bee; and a very few from such operations of art
as were then known. Homer has diversified his

imagery

imagery by many more allusions to the animal
*world; to Lions, Bulls, Goats, Herds of Cattle,
Serpents, Infeis; and to the various occupations
of rural and pastoral life. Oflian's defect in this
article, is plainly owing to the desert, unculti-
vated tate of his country, which suggestcd to him
few images beyond natural inanimate objecs, in
their rudest form. The birds and animals of the
country were probably not numerous; and his ac-
quaintance with them was slender, as they were
little fubje&ed to the uses of man.

The great objection made to Offlian's imagery,

is its uniformity, and the too frequent repetition
of the fame comparisons. In a work so thick
sown with similes, one could not but expect to find
images of the fame kind Sometimes suggested to
the poet by resembling objects; especially to a poet
like Oflan, who wrote from the immediate im-
pulse of poetical enthusiasm, and without much
preparation of study or labour. Fertile as Ho-
mer's imagination is acknowledged to be, who
does not know how often his Lions and Bulls and
Flocks of Sheep, recur with little or no variation
nay, sometimes in the very fame words? The objec-
tion made to Oflian is, however, founded, in a great
measure, upon a mistake. It has been supposed
by inattentive readers, that wherever the Moon,
the Cloud, or the Thunder, returns in a simile, it is
the fame simile, and the fame Moon, or Cloud, or
Thunder, which they had met with a few pages
before. Whereas very often the similes are wide-
ly different. The objet, whence they are taken,
is indeed in substance the fame; but the image is

new;

new; for the appearance of the objeft is changed;
itisprefehted to the fancy in another attitude; and
eloathed with new circumftahces, to make it suit
the different illustration for which it is employed.
In this, lies Oflian's great art; in so happily vary.
ing the form of tie .few nattural ppstarances with
which he was acquainted, as to make them corret
fpond to a great many diffeirent objects.

Let us take for one infiance the -Moon, which

is very frequently introduced into his comparisons;
as in northern cliniates, where the nights are long,:
the Moon is a greater object of attention, than in
the climate of Homer; and let us view how much
our poet has diversified its appearance. The shield
of a warrior is like " the darkened moon when it
" moves a dun circle through the heavens *."
The face of a ghost, wan and pale, is like " the
'" beam of the setting moon t." And a different
appearance of a ghost, thin and indiftint, is like
" the'new moon seen through the gathered mrit,
" when the {ky pouis down its flaky snow, and
"' the world is silent and dark ;" or in a dif-
ferent form Rill, it is like " the watry beam of the
(' moon, when it rushes from between two clouds,
"( and the midnight Ihower is on the field §." A
very opposite use is made of the moon in the de-
scription of Agandecca: " She came in all her
" beauty, like the moon from. the cloud of the
" Ealt |I." Hope, succeeded by disappointment,
is " joy rising on her face, and sorrow returning

Vol. i. p. 42. t Vol. i. p. 32. :1: Vol.
i, p. 185. § Vol. i. p. 169. 1| Vol. i. p. 54.

6 " again,

" again; like a thin cloud on the moon *." Bur
when Swaran after his defeat, is cheared by Fin-
gal's geneofity, " His: facebrightened like the
c-full moon:of heaven, when the clouds vanilh
, away, ad- leave her calm and broad in the
CC midst of the sky t." Venvela is " bright as the
u moon when it trembles o'er the western wave ; "
but the foul of the guilty Uthal is " dark as the
:, troubled face of the moon, when it foretels the
, storm §.'-' And by a very fanciful and uncom-
mon allusion, it is said of Cormac, who was to die
in his early years, " Nor long mhalt thou lift the
" spear, mildly ihining beam of youth !- Death
" stands dim behind thee, like the darkened half of

the moon behind its growing light ll."
Another instance of the fame nature may be

taken from miR, which, as being a very familiar
appearance in the country of Ossian, he applies to
a variety of purposes, and pursues through a great
many forms. Sometimes, which one would hard-
ly expe&t he employs it to heighten the appear-
ance of a beautiful obje&. The hair of Morna is
"like the mist of Cromla, when it curls on the
" rock, and shines to the beam of the welft ."-
" The song comes with its mufick to melt and

please the ear. It is like soft mist, that riling

i, from a lake pours on the silent vale. The
, green flowers are filled with dew. The fun re-

Vol. i.p. 169. t V 11.

i.p. i 7. t Vol.

i. p. 272. § Vol. i. p. 365. 11 Vol. i. p, 206.
g Vol. i.p. 12.

" turns

turns in its strength, and the mist is gone *."a

But, for the most part, mist is employed as a
similitude of some disagreeable or terrible obje&.
" The foul of Nathos ivas fad, like the fun in tht
" day of mist, when his face is watery and dim t."
s' The darkness of old age comes like the mifl of
" the desert'." The face of a ghost is" pale as
" the mist of Cromla ." " The gloom of bat.
"tie is rolled along as mist that is poured on the
"valley, when storms invade the silent fu-fhine
" of heaven I." Fame suddenly departing, is
likened to " mist that flies away before the rust.
" ling wind of the vale ¶." A ghost, slowly va-
nifhing, to " mist that melts by degrees on the

funny hill*." Cairbar, after his treacherous

afaffination of Oscar, is compared to a pestilential
fog. "I love a foe like'Cathmor," fays Fingal,

* Vol. i. p. 299. There is a remarkable propriety in this

comparison. It is intended to explain the effect of soft and
mournful mufick. Armin appears diflurbed at a perfor-
mance of this kind. Carmor fays to him, " Why burfit
" the sigh of Armin ? Is there a cause to mourn ? The
" ong comes with its mufick to melt and please the ear.
"It is like soft mist, &c." that is, such mournful songs
have a happy effe&t to soften the heart, and to improve it
by tender emotions, as the moiflure of the mifl refreshes
and nourishes the flowers; whilst the sadness they cckfion
is only transient, and soon dispelled by the succeeding oc-
cupations and amusements of life: " The fun returns in
" its firengtl, and the mill is gone."

t Vol. i. p. 224. t Vol. i. p. 227. § Vol.

i p. 75. 11 Vol. i. p. 39. I Vol i. p. 17.
r Vol. i. p 144.

" his

"his Rfaa is gret; his arm is frong; his battles

are full of fame. But the little foui is like a

"vapour that hovers round the marfiy lake. It
" never rifes on the green hill, left the winds meet
· it there. Its dwelling is in the cave; andit
" fends forth the dart of death ." This is a
simile highly finilhfed. But there is another which
is still more striking, founded also on mist, in the
4th book of Temora. Two factious chiefs are
contending; Cathmor the king interposes, rebukes
and silences them. The poet intends to give us
the highest idea of Cathmor's superiority; and
most effetually accomplilhes his intentioni by the
following happy image. " They funk from the
" king on either fide; like two columns of morn-
" ing mist, when the fun rifes between them, on
{' his glittering rocks. Dark is their rolling on
" either fide; each towards its reedy pool."
These instances may sufficiently ihew with what
richness of imagination OTffan's comparisons a-
bound, and at the fame time, with what propriety
of judgment they are employed. If his field was
narrow, it muff be admitted to have been as well
cultivated as its extent would allow.

As it is usual tojudge of poets from a compari-

son of their fimilesmore than of other passages, it
will perhaps be agreeable to the reader, to fee how
Homer and Ossian have conducted some images of
the fame kind. This might be shewn in many in-
stances. For as the great objects of nature are
common to the poets of all nations, and make the

Vol. i. p. 264.

general

general store-house of all imagery, the ground-
work of their comparisons must of course be fre-
quently the fame. I ihall felet only a few of the
molt considerable from both poets. Mr. Pope's
tranhlation of Homer can be of no use to us here.
The parallel is altogether unfair between prose,
and the imposing harmony of flowing numbers.
It is only by viewing Homer in the simplicity of a
prose translation, that we can form any comparison
'between the two bards.

The mhock of two encountering armies, the

noise and the tumult of battle, afford one of the
most grand and awful subje&s of description; on
which all epic poets have exerted their strength.
Let us first hear Homer. The following defcrip.
tion is a favourite one, for we find it twice repeated
in the fame words*. " When now the confli&ing
"hols joined in the field of battle, then were
" mutually opposed shields, and swords, and the
"strength of armed men. The bofly bucklers
" were dalhed against each other. The universal

tumult rose. There were mingled the trium-

" phant Ihouts and the dying groans of the vic-
"tors and the vanquished. The earth streamed
" with blood. As when winter torrents, rulhing
' from the mountains, pour into a narrow valley,
" their violent waters. They issue from a thou-

sand springs, and mix in the hollowed channel.

" The distant shepherd hears on the mountain,
" their roar from afar. Such was the terror and the

shout of the engaging armies." In another pas-

* ilad iv. 446. and II. viii. 60.

sage,

sage, the poet, much in the manner of Oflan,
heaps simile on simile, to express the vastness of
the idea, with which his imagination seems to la-
bour. " With a mighty fhour the hosts engage.
" Notfo loud roars the wave of ocean, when dri-
" ven against the shore by the whole force of the
" boisterous north; not so loud in the woods of
"the mountain, the noise of the flame, when
" riling in its fury to consume the forest; not so
" loud the wind among the lofty oaks, when the
" wrath of the storm rages; as was the clamour
"of the Greeks and Trojans, when, roaring
" terrible, they ruffed againit each other *."

To these descriptions and similes, we may oppose

the following from Oflian, and leave the reader
to judge between them. He will find images
of the fame kind employed; commonly less ex-
tended; but thrown forth with a glowing rapidity
which chara&erifes our poet. "As autumn's dark
" forms pour from two echoing hills, towards
"each other, approached the heroes. As two
" dark streams from high rocks meet, and mix, and
" roar on the plain; loud, rough, and dark in bat-
" tle, meet Lochlin and Inisfail. Chief mixed his
" strokes with chief, and man with man. Steel

clanging, founded on steel. Helmets are cleft

"on high; blood bursts and fmoaks around.-
"As the troubled noise of the ocean, when roll
" the waves on high; as the last peal of the thun-
"der of heaven, such is the noifr of battle t.-
" As roll a thousand waves to the rock, so Swa-

* Iliad xiv. 393. t Vol. i. p. 18.

"ran's

" ran's host came on; as meets a rock a thousand
" waves, so Inisfail met Swaran. Death raises
" all his voices around, and mixes with the found
" oflhields.--The field echoes from wing to wing,
" as a hundred hammers that rife by turns on the
" red son of the furnace*. As a hundred
" winds on Morven; as the streams of a hundred
"hills; as clouds fly successive over heaven; or
" as the dark ocean assaults the shore of the dePart;

so roaring, so vast, so terrible, the armies mix-

" ed on Lena's echoing heath-," In several of
these images, there is a remarkable similarity to
Homer's; but what follows is superior to any com-
parison that Homer uses on this fubje&. " The
" groan of the people spread over the hills; it
" was like the thunder of night, when the cloud

burits on Cona; and a thousand ghosts Shriek at

" once on the hollow windS." Never was an im-
age of more awful sublimity employed to heighten
the terror of battle.

Both poets compare the appearance of an army

approaching, to the gathering of dark clouds.
' As when a shepherd," fays Homer, " beholds

from the rock a cloud borne along the sea by the
"western wind; black as pitch it appears from

afar, failing over the ocean, and carrying the

" dreadful form. He ihrinks at the fight, and
" drives his flock into the cave: Such, under the
"Ajaces, moved on, the dark, the thickened

phalanx to the war §."-" They came," fays

* Vol. i. p. 21. t Vol. i. p. 62. X Ibid.
§ Iliad iv. 27;.

H JOffian,

Ofllan, " over the desert like stormy clouds, when
" the winds roll them over the heath; their edges
" are tinged with lightening; and the echoing

groves foresee the storm *." The edges of the

cloud tinged with lightning, is a sublime idea; but
the shepherd and his flock, render Homer's simile
more pi&urefque. This is frequently the differ-
ence between the two poets. Ofian gives no
more than the main image, strong and full. Ho-
mer adds circurftances and appendages, which
amuse the fancy by enlivening the scenery.

Homer compares the regular appearance of an
army, to " clouds that are fettled on the moun-

tain top, in the day of calmness, when the
ftreng:h of the north wind seeps ." Ossian,

with full as much propriety, compares the ap-
pearance of a disordered army, to " the moun-

tain cloud, when the blast hath entered its

i' womb; and scatters the curling gloom on every
, fide ." Offan's clouds assume a great many
forms; and, as we might expec from his climate,
are a fertile source of imagery to him. " The
" warriors followed their chiefs, like the gather-
" ing of the rainy clouds, behind the red meteors
" of heaven §." An army retreating without
coming to acion, is likened to " clouds, that
" having long threatened rain, retire slowly behind
' the hills I." The piaure of Oithona, after
fle had determined to die, is lively and delicate.
" Her foul was resolved, and the tear was dried

* Vo!. i. p. 55. + Iliad, v. 522. t Vol. i.
p. 311. § Vol i. p. 7. U Vol. i. p. 233.

" from

" from her wildly-looking eye. A troubled joy rote
"on her mind, like the red path of the lightning
"on a stormy cloud '." The image alio of the
gloomy Cairbar, meditating, in silence, the afailfi-
nation of Oscar, until the moment came when his
designs were ripe for execution, is extremely noble,
and complete in all its parts. " Cairbar heard
" their words in silence, like the cloud of a flower;
"it stands dark on Cromla, till the lightning burIts
"its fide. The valley gleams with red light
" the spirits of the itorm rejoice. So stood the
" silent king of Temora; at length his words are
" heard-t."

Homer's comparison of Achilles to the Dog.

Star, is very sublime. " Priam beheld him rufl-
" ing along the plain, fllining in his armour, like
" the star of autumn; bright are its beams, dif-
' tinguifhed amidst the multitude of liars in the
' dark hour of night. It rites in its splendor;
"but its splendor is fatal; bctoken:ng to milerable
" men, the destroying hcat:. ' The firlt ap
pearance of Fingal, is, in like manner, con mpred
by Ossian, to a itar or meteor. " Fingal, tall in
" his flip, stretched his bright lance before hpm.
" Terrible was the gleam of his heel; it was like
" the grccn meteor or death, setting in the heath
" of Malmor, when the traveller is alone, and the
C( broad moon is darkened in heaven §." The
hero's appearance in 1 lomer, is more magnificent;
in Ossian, mote terrible.

* Vol. i. p. 340. f Vol. p. 2417. t Iliad,
xxii. 26. § Vol. i. p. 60.

H z A tree

A tree cut down, or overthrown by a storm, is

a fimiitude frequent among poets for describing
the fall of a warrior in battle. Homer employs it
often. But the most beautiful, by far, of his
comparisons, founded on this object, indeed one
of the most beautiful in the whole Iliad, is that
on the death of Euphorbus. " As the young
"and verdant olive, which a man hath reared
" with care in a lonely field, where the springs of
" water bubble around it; it is fair and'fourilhing;
" it is fanned by the breath of all the winds, and
" loaded with white blossoms; when the sudden
" blast of a whirlwind descending, roots it-out

from its bed, and stretches it on the dust ."

To this, elegant as it is, we may oppose the fol-
lowing simile of Ossian's, relating to the death of
the three Cons of Ufnoth. " They fell, like
" three young oaks which flood alone on the hill.
"The traveller saw the lovely trees, and wondered
"how they grew so lonely. The blast of the
" desert came by night, and laid their green heads
" low. Next day he returned; but they were
· withered, and the heath was baret." Malvina's
allusion to the fame obje&, in her lamentation over
Oscar, is so exquisitely tender, that I cannot forbear
giving it aplace also. " I was alovely tree in thy
"presence, Oscar! with all my branches round
"me. But thy death came, like a blast from the
" desert, and laid my green head low. The spring

returned with its showers; but no leaf of mine
Iliad, xvii. 53. t Vol. i, p. 238.

"arose."

" arose*." Several of Offlan's similes taken from
trees, are remarkably beautiful, and diversified
with well chosen circumstances; such as that upon
the death of Ryno and Orla: " They have fallen
"like the oak of the defart; when it lies across a
" stream, and withers in the wind of the moun-
" tainst:" Or that which Ossian applies to him-
self; " I, like an ancient oak in Morven, moul-
" der alone in my place; the blast hath lopped
" my branches away; and I tremble at the wings
" of the north ."

As Homer exalts his heroes by comparing them

to gods, Ossian makes the fame use of comparisons
taken from spirits and ghosts. Swaran " roared

in battle, like the shrill spirit of a storm that fits

" dim on the clouds of Gormal, and enjoys the
" death of the mariner §." His people gathered
around Erragon, " like storms around the ghost

of night, when he calls them from the top of

"Morven, and prepares to pour them on the land
"of the firanger 1I." - " They fell before my
" son, like groves in the desert, when an angry
"ghost ruffes through night, and takes their
" green heads in his hand5." In such images,
Ossian appears in his strength; for very feldoml
have supernatural beings been painted with so much
sublimity, and such force of imagination, as by
this poet. Even Homer, great as he is, must
yield to him in similes formed upon these. Take,

* Vol. i. p. 345. t Vol. i. p. 103.. $ Vol.

i. p. 266. Vol.i. p. 20. 11 Vol. i. p. 162.
Vol. i. p. 252.

H 3 for

for instance, the following, which is the moil re-
markal le of this kind in the Iliad. " Meriones

ollowed Idomeneus to battle, like Mars the

"deftrover of men, when he rushes to war.
"Terror, his beloved son, firong and fierce, at-
" tends him; who fills with dismay, the mofl
"valiant hero. They come from Thrace, armed

againfi the Ephyrians and Phlegyans; nor do
"they regard the prayers of either; but dispose of

success at their will *." The idea here, is un-

dcubtedly nible: bur obfcrve what a figure Offan
sets before the aftonilhed imagination, and with
what fublimelry rcrrible circumitances he has
he'g-ten-d it. " He rushed in the f6und of his
' arms, like the dreadcicl spirit of Loda, when
" he com.es in the ro;r cf a thouflnd forms, and
"scatters battles from hiseycs. He fits on a cloud
" over Lcch!in's leas. His mighty hand is on
"his sword. The winds lift his flaming locks.

So terrible was Cuchullin in the day of his

' fane ."

Homer's ccmpnrifons relate chiefly to martial

fubitc&, t3 the apFearances and motions of armies,
the coagcmcn ..r.d death of heroes, and the va-
rious i:ncients of war. In Ossian, we find a grea-.
ter variery of oher fubFjes illustrated by similes
particul.;ir, the fcngs of bards, the beauty of
women, th:e ci.rent circumstances of old age,
sorrow, ard private diflrcfs; which give occasion
to much bcau;iful i-age-)-. What, for inflance,
can be mo-e delicate and moving, than the fol-

Iia:d xiii. 298. t Vel. i. p 213.

lowing

lowing simile of Oithona's, in her lamentation
over the dilhonour she had suffered ? " Chief of
C Strumon, replied the sighing maid, why didft
" thou come over the dark blue wave to Nuath's

mournful daughter? Why did not I pass away in
" secret, like the flower of the rock, that lifts its fair

head unseen, and (trews its withered leaves on
the blast* ?" The mufick of bards, a favourite

objeEt with Ossian, is illustrated by a variety of
the most beautiful appearances that are to be found
in nature. It is coinpared to the calmn iower of
spring; to the dews of the morning on the hill of
rocs; to thi- face of the blue and (till lake t. Two
similes on this fubjcct, I flall quote, because they
would do honour to any of the most celebrated
clafilis. The one is; " Sit thou on the heath, O
"bard! and let us hear thy voice; it is pleasant

as the gale of the spring that sighs on the hun-
ter's ear, when he wakens from dreams of joy,
and has heard the music of the tpirits of the hill t.'

The other contains a florr, but exquifiely tender
image, accompained with the finet poetical paint-
ing. " The music of Carryl was like the memory

ofjoys that are past, pleasant and mournful to the
foul. The gholts of departed bards heard it from
" Slimora's fide. Soft founds fprcad along the

wood; and the silent valleys of night rc joice ."

What a figure would such imagery and fucil Icenery
lave made, had they been prcfinted to us, adorned

* Vol. i. p. 338. 1t Vid. p. 299, 27, si, 270.
f Vol. i. p. io6. § Vol. i. p. 203.

II . with

with the sweetness and harmony of the Virgilian
numbers!

I have chosen all along to compare Oflian with

Homer, rather than Virgil, for an obvious reafron,
There is a much nearer correspondence between the
times and manners of the two former poets. Both
wrote in an early period of society; both are ori-
ginals; both are diflinguifhed by simplicity, sub-
limity, and fire. The corre& elegance of Virgil,
his artful imitation of Homer, the Roman state-
liness which he every where maintains, admit no
parallel with the abrupt boldness, and enthufiaftick
warmth of the Celtic bard. In onearticle, indeed,
there is a resemblance. Virgilis more tender than
Homer; and thereby agrees more with Ossian;
with this difference, that the feelings of the one
are more gentle and poliflied, those of the other
more strong; the tenderness of Virgil softens,
that of Ossian diflolves and overcomes the heart.

A resemblance may be Sometimes observed be-

tween Ofian's comparisons, and those employed
by the sacred writers. They abound much in this
figure, and they use it with the utmof propriety *.
The imagery of Scripture exhibits a foil and cli-
mate altogether different from those of Offlan; a
warmer country, a more smiling face of nature, the
arts of agriculture and of rural life much farther
advanced. The wine press, and the threlhing
floor, are often presented to us, the Cedar and
the Palm-tree, the fragrance of perfumes, the
voice of the Tur:le, and the beds of Lillies. The

S* Se Dr. Lowth de Sacra Poefi Hebrzorum.

similes

similes are, like Ossian's, generally short, touching
on one point of resemblance, rather than spread
out into little episodes, In the following example
may be perceived what inexprelfible grandeur
poetry receives from the intervention of the Deity.
" The nations shall ruh like the rushings of many
" waters; but God lhall rebuke them, and they
" hall fly far off, and shall be chased as the chaff
" of the mountains before the wind, and like
" the down of the thistle before the whirlwind*.",

Besides formal comparisons, the poetry of Ossian

is embellilhed with many beautiful metaphors:
Such as that remarkably fine one applied to Deu-
gala; " She was covered with the light of beauty;
" but her heart was the house of pride t." This
mode of expression, which suppresses the mark of
comparison, and substitutes a figured description
in room of the obje& described, is a great enli-
vener of style. It denotes that glow and rapidity
of fancy, which without pausing to form a regu-
lar simile, paints the objet at one froke. "Thou
" art to me the beam of the east, rising in a land
" unknown :."-" In peace, thou art the gale of
" spring; in war, the mountain storm§."-
"Pleasant be thy reft, O lovely beam, soon haft
" thou set on our hills ! The steps of thy depar-
" ture were Qtately, like the moon on the blue
"trembling wave. But thou haft left us in dark-
" ness, first of the maids of Lutha !-Soon haft
4' thou set Malvina! but thou rifeft, like the beam

* Isaiah xvii. 13. t Vol. i. p. 44. : Vol.
, p. 338.- Vol. i. p. I16,

' of

C" of the east, among the spirits. of thy friends,
" where they fit in their stormy halls, the cham-
" bers of the thunder*." This is correct and
finely supported. Bui in the following initance,
the metaphor, though very beautiful at the begin-
ning, becomes imperifet before it closes, by being
improperly mixed with the-literal sense. " Trathal
" went forth with the fiream of his people; but
" they met a rock; Fingal stood unmoved; bro-
' ken they roiled back from his fide. Nor did
·' they roll in farety; the spear of the king pur-
': sued their fight ,."

The hyperbole is a figure which we might ex-

pec? to find often employed by Ossian; as the un-
disciplined imagination of early ages generally
prompts exagg:ration, and carries its obje&s to ex-
cess; whereas longer experience, and farther pro-
gre-s in the arts of life, chasten mens ideas and
expressions. Yet Oflian's hyperboles appear not
to me, either so frequent or so harsh as might at
iiril have been looked for; an advantage owing
no doubt to the mope cultivated state, in which,
as was before if.ewn, poetry subsisted among the
ancient Celte, than among most other barbarous
nations. One of the moit exaggerated descriptions
in the whole work, is what meets us at the begin-
ning of Fingal, where the scout makes his report
to Cuchullin of the landing of the foe. But this
is fu far from deserving censure that it merits praise,
as bt.in, on that occasion, natural and proper.
The fcou: arr,;' s, trembling ard full of fears;

* Vol. i.
p. 5.?. -* \'!. i. p a.

and

and it is well known, that no passion disposes men
to hyperbolize morethanterror. Itboth annihi-
lates themselves in their own apprehension, and
magnifies every obje& which they view through
the medium of a troubled imagination. Hence
allnthofe indiftin& images ds formidable greatnels,
the natural marks of a disturbed and confuied
mind, which occur in Moran's description of Swa-
ran's appearance, and in his relation of the conte-
rence which they held together; not unlike the re-
port, which the affrighted Jewish spies made to their
leader of the land of Canaan. " The land through
' which we have gone to search it, is a land that
"' eateth up the inhabitants thereof; and all the
" people that we saw in it, are men ofagreat ia-
" ture: and there law we giants, the sons of Anak,
' which come of the giants; and we were in our
c" own fight as grasshoppers, and so were we in
,' their fight*."

With regard to personifications, I formerly ob-

served that Ossian was sparing, and I accounted for
his being so. Allegorical personages he has none;
and their absence is not to be regretted. For the
intermixture of thole shadowy Beings, which have
not the support even of mythological or legendary
belief, with human ators, seldom produces a good
effec. The ficion becomes too visible and phan-
taftick; and overthrows that impression of reality,
which the probable recital of human a&ions is cal-
culatcd to make upon the mind. In the serious
and pathetick fcencs of Ossian especially, allego-

* Numbers xiii. 32, 33.

rical

rieal chara&crs would have been as much out of
place, as in Tragedy; serving only unseasonably
to amuse the fancy, whilst they flopped the current,
and weakened the force of palfion.

With apostrophes, or addresses to peribns absent

or dead, which have been, in all ages, the lan-
guage of paflion, our poet abounds; and they are
among his highest beauties. Witness the apof-
trophe, in the first book of Fingal, to the maid
of Iniftore, whose lover had fallen in battle; and
that inimitably fine one of Cuchullin to Bragela at
the concufion of the fame book. He commands
the harp to be struck in her praise; and the
mention of Bragela's name, immediately suggest.
ing to him a crowd of tender ideas; " Dolt thou
" raie thy fair face from the rocks," he exclaims,
"' to find the fails of Cuchullin? The sea is rolling
" far distant, and its white foam Ihall deceive thee
" for my fails." And now his imagination being
wrought up to conceive her as, at that moment,
really in this situation, he becomes afraid of the
harm ihe may receive from the inclemency of the
night; and with an enthusiasm, happy and asset-
ing, though beyond the cautious firain of modern
poetry, " Retire," he proceeds, " retire, for it is
" night, my love, and the dark winds sigh in thy
"hair. Retire to the hall of my feasts, and think.
"of the times that are past; for I will not return

till the storm of war has ceased. O Connal, speak

; of wars and arms, and fend her from my mind;
"for lovely with her raven hair is the white-bofom-
c' ed daughter of Sorglan*." This breathes all
the native spirit of paflion and tenderners.

Vol. i. p. 27.

The

The addresses to the fun*, to the moont, and

to the evening tar $, must draw the attention of
every reader of taste, as among the most splendid
ornaments of this collection. The beauties of
each are too great, and too obvious to need any
particular comment. In one passage only of
the address to the moon, there appears some ob-
fcurity. " Whither dost thou retire from thy

course, when the darkness of thy countenance

"grows ? Haft thou thy hall like Ofian ? Dwelleft
"thou in the shadow of grief? Have thy lifters fal-
" len from heaven ? Are they who rejoiced with
"thee at night, no more? Yes, they have fallen,
"fair light! and thou dost often retire to mourn."
We may be at a loss to comprehend, at first view,
the ground of there speculations of Oflian, con-
cerning the moon; but when all the circumstances
are attended to, they will appear to flow naturally
from the present situation of his mind. A mind
under the dominion of any strong passion, tinc-
tures with its own disposition, every objec which
it beholds. The old bard, with his heart bleeding
for the loss of all his friends, is meditating on the
different phases of the moon. Her waning and
darkness, presents to his melancholy imagination,
the image of sorrow; and presently the idea arises,
and is indulged, that, like himself, the retires to
mourn over the loss of other moons, or of stars,
whom he calls her sifters, and fancies to have once
rejoiced with her at night, now fallen from heaven.

* Vol. i. p. 200. t Vol. i. p. 218. t Vol.
i. p. 291.

Darkness

Darkness suggested the idea of mourning, and
mourning suggested nothing so naturally to -Offan,
as the death of beloved friends. An instance pre-
cifely fimilarof this influence of pallion, may be
seen in a pafIage which has always been admired of
Shakefpear's King Lear. The old man on the point
of distraction, through the inhumanity of his
. daughters, fees Edgar appear disguised like a beg-

gar and a madman.
Lear. Didft thou give all to thy daughters ? And

art thou come to this?
Couldest thou leave nothing ? Didft thou give them

all?

Kent. He hath no daughters, Sir.
Lear. Death, traitor! nothing could have sub-

dued nature,
To such a lowness, but his unkind daughters.

King Lear, As 3. Scene 5.

The apostrophe to the winds, in theopening of

Darthula, is in the highest spirit of poetry. " But
" the winds deceive thee, O Darthula: and deny
" the woody Etha to thy fails. These are not thy
" mountains, Nathos, nor is that the roar of thy
"climbing waves. The halls of Cairbar are near,
" and the towers of the foe lift their head.-
" Where have ye been, ye southern winds; when
" the sons of my love were deceived ? But ye
" have been sporting on plains, and pursuing
"the thift!e's beard. O that ye had been rust-
" ling in the fails of Nathos, till the hills of Etha
" rose! till they ro:f in their clouds, and law their
" coming cl;ief."' This passage is remarkable

* AVl. i. p. 220.

for
3

for the resemblance it bears to an expostulation
with the wood nymphs, on their absence at i
critical time; which, as a favourite poetical idea,
Virgil has copied from Theocritus, and Milton has
very happily imitated from both.

Where were ye, nymphs! when the remorfclefs

deep

Clos'd o'er the head of your lov'd Lycidas?
For neither were ye playing on the fieep
Where your old bards, the famous Druids, lie;
Nor on the (haggy top of Mona, high,
Nor yet where Deva spreads her wizard fiream *

Having now treated fully of Ossian's talents,

with refpe& to description and imagery, it only re-
mains to make some obefrvations on his fentimcnts.
No sentiments can be beautiful without being pro-
per; that is, suited to the character and situation
of those who utter them. In this repe&, Ofian
is as correc as most writers. His characers, as
above observed, are in general well supported;
which could not have been the cafe, had the fen-
timents been unnatural or outof place. A variety
of personages of different ages, sexes, and con-
ditions, are introduced into his poems; and they
speak and a& with a propriety of sentiment and
behaviour, which it is surprising to find in so rude
an age. Let the poem of Darthula, throughout)
be taken as an example.

* Milton's Lycidas. See Theocrit. Idyll. I.

nO ' dp oW'Kxa apxez

s 'ctxsro;
wro . AaXx, Nusapal, ac.

And Virg. Eclog. to.
Q ue nemora, aut qui vos saltus habuere, puelhe, &c.

But

But it is not enough that feritimerifs be natural

and proper. In order to acquire any high degree
of poetical merit, they muff also be sublime and
pathetick.

The sublime is not confined to sentiment alone.

It belongs to description also; and whether in de-
scription or in sentiment, imports such ideas pre-
sented to the mind, as raise it to an uncommon
degree of elevation, and fill it with admiration and
astonishment. This is the highest effect either of
eloquence or poetry: And to produce this effect,
requires a genius glowing with the strongest and
warmest conception of some obje& awful, great
or magnificent. That this charater of genius be-
longs to Ofiian, may, I think, sufficiently appear
from many of the passages I have already had oc-
cafion to quote. To produce more instances, were
superfluous. If the engagement of Fingal with
the spirit of Loda, in Carric-thura; if the encoun-
ters of the armies, in Fingal; if the address to
the fun, in Carthon; if the similes founded up-
on ghofRs and spirits of the night, all formerly
mentioned, be not admitted as examples, and il-
luftrious ones too, of the true poetical sublime, I
confess myself entirely ignorant of this quality in
writing.

All thecircumftances, indeed, of Ossian's com-

position, are favourable to the sublime, more per-
haps than to any other species of beauty. Accu-
racy and corre&nefs; artfully conneted narration;
exat method and proportion of parts, we may
look for in polished times. The gay and the beau-
tiful, will appear to more advantage in the midst
of fmri!lng fcenerv and pleasurable themes. But

8 amidst

amidst the rude scenes of nature, amidst rocks
ind torrents and whirlwinds and battles, dwells
the sublime. It is the thunder and the lightning of
genius. It is the offspring of nature, not of art.
It is negligent of all the lesser graces, and perfecly
consistent with a certain noble disorder. It affoci-
ates naturally with that grave and solemn fpirir,
which diftinguilhes our author. For the fublimei
is an awful and serious emotion; and is heightened
by all the images of Trouble, and Terror, and
Darkness.

Ipfe pater, media nimborurh in no&e, corufca
Fulmina molitur dextra; quo maxima motu
Terra tremit; fugere ferae; & mortalia corda
Per gentes, humilis fravit pavor; ille, flagranti
Aut Atho, aut Rhodopen, aut alta Ceraunia telo
Dejicit.-- VIR. Georg. I.
Simplicity and conciseness, are never-failing

chara&eriftics of the stile of a fublinme writer.
He refts on the majesty of his sentiments, not on
the pomp of his exprefflons. The main secret of
being sublime, is to fay great things in few, and
in plain words: For every superfluous decoration
degrades a sublime idea. The mind rifes and swells,
when a lofty description or sentiment is presented
to it, in its ntive form. But no sooner does the
poet attempt to spread out this sentiment or de-
scription, and to deck it round and round with
glittering ornaments, than the mind begins to fall
from its high elevation; the transport is over;
the beautiful may remain, but the sublime is gone.
Hence the concise and simple style of Olfian, gives

i great

great advantage to. his sublime conceptions; and
assists them in seizing the imagination with full
power *.

Sublimity as belonging to sentiment, coincides

in a great measure with magnanimity, heroism,
and generosity of sentiment. Whatever discovers
human nature in its greatelt elevation; whatever
bespeaks a high effort of foul; or Ihews a mind fu-
perior to pleaiures, to dangers, and to death, forms
what may be called the moral or sentimental sub-
lime. For this, Oflian is eminently distinguished.
No poet maintains a higher tone of virtuous and
noble sentiment, throughout all his works. - Par-
ticularly in all the sentiments of Fingal; there is a
grandeur and loftiness proper to swell the mind

* The noted faying of Julius Casefr, to the pilot in a

form; " Quid times Caesarem vehis ;" is magnanimous
and sublime. Lucan, not satisfied with this simple concise-
ness, resolved to amplify and improve the thought. Ob-
fcrve, how every ;ime he twifis it round, it departs farther
from the sublime, till, at lafl, it ends in tumid declamation.

Sperne minas, inquit, Pelagi, ventoque furenti
Trade finum. 'Italiam, si ccelo ausore, recufas,
Me, pete. Sola tibi caufa hec eftjufta timoris
Vecorem non noffe tuum; quem numina nunquam
Dellituunt; de quo male tune fortuna meretur,
Cum poul vcla venit; medias perrump: procellas
Tutel frcure mei. Coeli ifre fretique,
?on puppis nofIra, laor eft. Hanc CTfare preffam
A Puaui dcfcndit onus.
- Quid tintr firageparatur,
lrgno.a s Qs arit pel2gi calique tumultu
!id prEfrt.t forturna r.hi.-

PiHAS\SAL. V. 57S.

with

with the highest ideas of human perfection.
Wherever he appears, we behold the hero. The
objects which he pursues, are always truly great;
to bend the proud; to protect the injured; to de-
fend his friends; to overcome his enemies by gene-
rofity more than by force. A portion of the fame
spirit actuates all the other heroes. Valour reigns;
but it is a generous valour, void of cruelty, ani-
mated by honour, not by hatred. We behold
no debating passions among Fingal's warriors; no
spirit of avarice or of insult; but a perpetual con-
tention for fame; a desire of being difftinguiflhed
and remembered for gallant acions; a love ofjuf-
tice; and a zealous attachment to their friends and
their country. Such is the strain of sentiment in
the works of Ossian.

But the sublimity of moral sentiments, if they

wanted the softening of the tender, would be in
hazard of giving a hard and stiff air to poetry. It
is not enough to admire. Admiration is a cold
feeling, in comparison of that deep interctl, which
the heart takes in tender and pathetick scenes;
where, by a mysterious attachment to the objets of
compassion, we are pleased and delighted, even
whilst we mourn. With scenes of this kind, Of-
fian abounds; and his high merit in these, is incon-
testable. He may be blamed for drawing tears too
often from our eyes; but that he has the power
of commanding them, I believe no man, who has
the least sensibility, will question. The general
character of his poetry, is the heroic mixed with
the elegiac strain; admiration tempered with pity.

I 2 Ever

Ever fond of giving, as heexpreffes it, " the joy
"of grief," it is visible, that on all moving sub-
jecs, he delights to exert his genius; and accord-
ingly, never were there finer pathetick situations,
than what his works present. His great art in ma-
naging them lies in giving vent to the simple and
natural emotions of the heart. We meet with no
exaggerated declamation; no subtile refinements on
sorrow; no substitution of description in place of
passion. Ossian felt trongly himself; and the heart
when uttering its native language never fails, by
powerful sympathy, to affect the heart. A great va-
riety of examples might be produced. We needon-
ly open the book to find them every where. What,
for inflance, can be more moving, than the lamen-
tations of Oithona, after her misfortune ? Gaul, the
son of Morni, her lover, ignorant of what she had
suffered, comes to her rescue. Their meeting is
tender in the highest degree. He proposes to en-
gage her foe, in fingli combat, and gives her in
charge what ihe is to do, if he himself shall fall.

And Ihall the daughter of Nuath live, she replied
" with a bursting sigh ? Shall I live in Tromathon

and the son of Morni low ? My heart is not of

"that rock; nor my foul careless as that sea, which
,' lifts its blue waves to every wind, and rolls be-

neath the storm. The blast, which ihall lay thee
low, ihall spread the branches of Oithona on
' earth. We shall wither together, son of car-

borne Morni! The narrow house is pleasant to

" me; and the grey stone of the dead; for never
"more will I leave thy rocks, fea-furrounded

"Troma-

" Tromathon!- Chief of Strumon, why ca-
"met thou over the waves to Nuath's mournful
"daughter ? Why did not I pass away in secret,
" like the flower of the rock, that lifts its fair
" head unseen, and strews its withered leaves on
"the blast Why didft thou come, O Gaul! to
" hear my departing sigh ? - 0 had I dwelt at
" Duvranna, in the bright beams of my fame!
" Then had my years come on with joy; and the
" virginswould bless myfteps. But I fall in youth,
" son of Morni, and my father shall blush in his
" hall*."

Oithona mourns like a woman; in Cuchullin's

expressions of grief after his defeat, we behold the
sentiments of a hero, generous but desponding.
The situation is remarkably fine. Cuchullin, rouz-
ed from his cave, by the noise of battle, fees Firigal
victorious in the field. He is described as kindling
at the fight. " His hand is on the sword of his
" fathers; his red-rolling eyes on the foe. He
" thrice attempted to rush to battle; and thrice

did Connal flop him;" fuggefling, that Fin-

gal was routing the foe; and that he ought not,
by the lhow of superfluous aid, to deprive the
king of any part of the honour of a vi&coiy,
which was owing to him alone. Cuchullin yields
to this generous sentiment; but we fee it flinging
him to the heart with the sense of his own dif-
grace. " Then, Carril, go, replied the chief,

and greet the king of Morven. When Lochlin
falls away like a stream after rain, and the noise
" of the battle is over, then be thy voice fIeet in

0 Voli. p. 338, 339, 343,

I 3 " his

"his ear, to praise the king offwords. Give him
" the sword of Caithbat; for Cuchullin'is worthy
"no more to lift the arms of his fathers. But,

0 ye ghosts of the lonely Cromla! Ye fouls of

"chiefs that are no more! Be ye the companions
" of Cuchullin, and talk to him in the cave of his
" sorrow. For never more ihall I be renowned
"among the mighty in the land. I am like a

beam that has ihone: Like a mist that has fled

" away; when the blast of the morning came,
"and brightened the shaggy fide of the hill.
"Connal! talk of arms no more: Departed is
"my fame. My sighs hall be on Cromla's wind
" till my footfReps cease to be seen. And thou,
" white-boilmed Bragela! mourn over the fall of
" my fame; for vanquished, I will never return
"to thee, thou sun-beam of Dunfcaich *!"

ir--uat Ingens

Uno in corde pudor, luturque, & confcia virtus.

Besides such extended pathetick scenes, Ossian

frequently pierces the heart by a tingle unexpeced
stroke. When Oscar fell in battle, " No father
" mourned hs son lain in youth; no brother, his
" brother of love; they fell without tears, forthe
"chief of the people was low t." In the adimi-
rable interview of Hetor with 'Andromache, in
the sixth Iliad, the circumstance of the child in his
nurse's arms, has often been remarked,, as adding
much to rhe tenderness of the scene. In the follow-
ing paraTc relating to I;;c death of Cuchullin, wc

a
d a cincumftance that nt muftiLrike the imlagination

- VLI. i. n.. X+
. Ai. p. 254.

tv·!

with still greater force. " And is the son of Semo
, fallen ? said Carril with a sigh. Mournful are

Tura's walls, and sorrow dwells at Dunfcaich.

"Thy spouse is left alone in her youth; the son
" of thy love is alone. He (hall come to Bragela,

and ask her why lie weeps. He (hall lift his eyes

"to the wall, and fee his father's sword. Whose
" sword is that ? he will fay; and the foul of his
"mother is fad*." Soon after Fingal had hewn
all the grief of a father's heart for Ryno, one of
his tons, fallen in battle, he is calling, after his
accustomed manner, his sons to the chafe. " Call,"
fays he, " Fillan and Ryno-But he is not here-
" My son refts on the bed of death t."-This
unexpeted itart of anguifi, is worthy of the
highest tragic poet,

If she come in, she'll sure speak to my wife-
IvMy wife !-my wife-What wife ?-I have no

wife-
Oh insupportable ! Oh heavy hour!

Othello, At 5. Scene 7.

The contrivance of the incident in both poets

is similar; but the circumilances are varied with
judgment. Othello dwells upon the name of wife,
when it had fallen from him, with the confusion
and horror of one tortured' with guilt. Fingal,
with the dignity of a hero, correas himself, and
suppresses his rising grief.

The contrast which Ossian frequently makes be-

tween his present and his former tate, diffuses over
his whole poetry, a solemn pathetick air, which
cannot fail to make impression on every heart. The
* Vol. i. p. 214. f Vol. i. p. 119.

I 4 con-

conclusion of the songs of Selma, is particularly
calculated for this purpose. Nothing can be more
poetical and tender, or can leave upon the mind,
a stronger, and more affecting idea of the vene-
rable aged bard. " Such were the words of the

bards in the days of the song; when the king
"heard the music of harps, and the tales of other

times. The chiefs gathered from all their hills,

" and heard the lovely found. They praised the
" voiceofConal; the first amonga thousand bards.

But age is now on my tongue, and my foul has
failed. I hear, fomerimes, the ghosts of bards,
and learn their pleasant song. But memory fails
on my mind; I hear the call of years.. They
fay, as they pass along; Why does Ossian sing ?
"Soon fiall he lie in the narrow house, and no

bard shall raise his fame. Roll on, ye'dark-brown
years! for ye bring no joy in your course. Let
the tomb open to Ofilan, for his strength has.
failed. The sons of the song are gone to reft.
"My voice remains, like a.blaft, that roars lonely

ion a fea-furrounded rock, after the winds are
laid. The dark moss whistles there, and the
" difant mariner fees the waving trees -."

Upon the whole; if to feel strongly, and to de-

scribe naturally, be the two chief ingredients in
poetical genius, Offlan must, after fair examination,
be held to pofftfs that genius in a high degree.
The question is not, whether.a few improprieties
may be pointed out in his works; whether this, or
that paflage, might not have been worked up with

* Cian hilrfelf is pcc:ica!ly czlcd :!:c voce of Cona.
f V(l. i. p. 32.

more

more art and skill, by some writer of happier times
A thousand such cold and frivolous criticisms, are
altogether indecisive as to his genuine merit. But,
has he the spirit, the fire, the inspiration of apoet ?
Does he utter the voice of nature ? Does he elevate
by his sentiments ? Does he interest by his defcrip-
tions ? Does he paint to the heart as well as to the
fancy ? Does he make his readers glow, and trem-
ble, and weep ? These are the great chara&erifticks
of true poetry. Where these are found, he mut
be a minute critic indeed, who can dwell upon
flight defeas. A few beauties of this high kind,
transcend whole volumes' of faultless mediocrity.
Uncouth and abrupt, Ossian may sometimes appear
by reason of his conciseness. But he is sublime,
he is pathetick, in an eminent degree. If he has
not the extenTive knowledge, the regular dignity
of narration, the fulness and accuracy of defcrip-
tion, which we find in Homer and Virgil, yet in
strength of imagination, in grandeur of sentiment,
in native majesty of passion, he ih fully their equal.
If he flows not always like a clear stream, yet he
breaks forth often like a torrent of fire. Of art
too, he is far from being destitute; and his imagi-
nation is remarkable for delicacy as well as strength.
Seldom or never is he either trifling ot tedious;
and if he be thought too melancholy, yet he is
always moral. Though his merit were in other
refpe&s much less than. it is, this alone ought to
entitle him to high regard, that his writings are
remarkably favourable to virtue. They awake the
tendereft sympathies, and inspire the most generous

emotions.

emotions. No reader can rife from him, without
being warmed with the sentiments of humanity,
virtue and honour.

Though unacquainted with the original language,
there is no one but must judge the translation to
deserve the highest praise, on account of its beau-
ty and elegance. Of its faithfulness and accuracy,
I have been aTfured by persons skilled in the Galic
tongue, who, from their youth, were acquainted
with many of there poems of Offlan. To transfuse
such spirited and fervid ideas from one language
into another; to translate literally, and yet with
such a glow of poetry; to keep alive so much
patfion, and support so much dignity throughout,
is one of the most difficult works of genius, and
proves the translator to have been animated with
no finall portion of Ossian's spirit.

The measured prose which he has employed,

possesses considerable advantages above any fort of
versification he could have chosen. Whilst it
pleases and fills the ear with a variety of harmoni-
ous cadences, being, at the fame time, freer from
confsraint in the choice and arrangement of words,
it allows the spirit of the original to be exhibited
with morejuftnefs, force, and simplicity. Elegant
however, and masterly as Mr. Macpherson's tranf-
lation is, we must never forget, whilst we read it,
that we are putting the merit of the original to a
severe test. For, we are examining a poet strip-
ped of his native dress: diverted of the harmony
of his own numbers. We know how much grace
and energy the works of the Greek and Latin poets

receive

receive from the charm of versification in their
original languages. If then, destitute of this ad-
vantage, exhibited in a literal version, Offlan fill
has power to please as a poet; and not to please
only, but often to command, to transport, to melt
the heart; we may very safely infer, that his pro-
ducions are the offspring of true and uncommon
genius; and we may boldly assign him a place
among those, whose works are to last for ages.

A P P E N.

# APPENDIX.

A P P E N D IX.

HE substance of the preceding Dissertation
was originally delivered, soon after the first

publication of Fingal, in the course of my lec-
tures in the university of Edinburgh; and, at the
deire of several of the hearers, was afterwards
enlarged and given to the publick.

As the degree of antiquity belonging to the

poems of Olflan, appeared to be a point which
might bear dispute, I endeavoured, from internal
evidence, to ihow that these poems must be re-
ferred to a very remote period; without pretend-
ing to ascertain precisely the date of their compo-
fition. I had not the least suspicion, when this
Dissertation was first published, that there was any
occasion for supporting their authenticity, as ge-
nuine produ&ions of the Highlands of Scotland,
as translations from the Galic language; not for-
geries of a supposed translator. In Scotland, their
authenticity was never called in question. I my-
self had particular reasons to be fully satisfied con-
cerning it. My knowledge of Mr. Macpherson's
personal honour and integrity, gave me full affu-
rance of his being incapable of putting such a
gross imposition, first, upon his friends, and then
upon the publick; and if this had not been fuffi-

cicnt,

cient, I knew, besides, that the manner in which
these poems were brought to light, was entirely in-
consistent with any fraud. An accidental conver-
fation with a gentleman distinguished in the literary
world, gave occasion to Mr. Macpherson's tranf-
lating literally one or two small pieces of the old
Galic poetry. These being flown to me and some
others rendered us very desirous of becoming more
acquainted with that poetry. Mr. Macpherson,
afraid of not doing justice to compositions which
he admired in the original, was very backward to
undertake the talk of translating; and the publi-
cation of The fragments of ancient pcems, was with
no small importunity extorted from him. The
high reputation which these presently acquired,
made it he thought unjust that the world should
be deprived of the possession of more, if more of
the fame kind could be recovered: And Mr. Mac-
pherfon was warmly urged by several gentlemen
of rank and taste, to disengage himself from other
occupations, and to undertake a journey through
the Highlands and Islands, on purpose to make a
colle&tion of those curious remains of ancient ge-
nius. He complied with their desire, and spent fe-
veral months in visiting those remote parts of the
country; during which time he corresponded fre-
quently with his friends in Edinburgh, informed
them of his progress, of the applications which he
made in different quarters, and of the luccefs which
he met with; several letters of his, and of those who
aflifted him in making discoveries passed through
my hands; his undertaking was the object of con-

fiderable

fiderable attention; and returning at last, fraught
with the poetical treasures of the north, he let him-
self to translate under the eye of some who were
acquainted with the Galic language, and looked
into his manuscripts; and by a large publication
made an appeal to all the natives of the Highlands
and Islands of Scotland, whether he had been faith-
ful to his charge, and done justice to their well
known and favourite poems.

Such a tranfa&ipn certainly did not afford any

favourable opportunity for carrying on an impof-
ture. Yet in England, it seems, an opinion has
prevailed with some, that an imposture has been
carried on; that the poems which have been given
to the world are not translations of the works of
any old Galic Bard, but modern compositions,
formed, as it is laid, upon a higher plan of poetry
and sentiment than could belong to an age and a
country reputed barbarous: And 1 have been called
upon and urged to produce some evidence for
satisfying the world that they are not the compofi-
tions of Mr. Macpherson himself, under the bor-
rowed name of Ossian.

If the question had been concerning manuscripts

brought from some distant or unknown region,
with which we had no intercourse; or concerning
translations from an Ariatic or American language
which scarce any body underflood, suspicions might
naturally have arifcn, and an author's assertions
have been anxiously and scrupulously weighed.
But in the cafe of a literal translation, profeted to
be given of old traditionary poems of our own
country; of poems aflerted to be known in the

original
7

original to many thousand inhabitants of Geat
Britain, and illustrated too by many of their cur-
rent tales and stories concerning them, such ex-
treme scepticism is altogether out of place. For
who would have been either so hardy or so stupid,
as to attempt a forgery which could not have failed
of being immediately detected ? Either the author
must have had the influence to engage, as confe-
derates in the fraud, all the natives of the High-
lands and Ifiands, disperscd as they are throughout
every corner of the Britifl dominions; or, we
should, long ere this time, have heard their united
voice exclaiming, " These are not our poems, nor
" what we were ever accustomed to hear from our -
" bards or our fathers." Such remonstrances
would, at least, have reached those who dwell in
a part of the country which is adjacent to the
Highlands; and must have come loud to the ears
of such, especially, as were known to be the pro-
moters of Mr. Macpherson's undertaking. The
silence of a whole country in this cafe, and of a
country, whose inhabitants are well known to be
attached, in a remarkable degree, to all their own
antiquities, is of as much weight as a thousand
positive reftimonies. And surely, no person of
common understanding would have adventured,
as Mr. Macpherson has done in his dissertation on
Temora, to engage in a controversy with the whole
Irish nation concerning there poems, and to infifb
upon the honour of them being due to Scotland,
if they had been mere forgeries of his own; which
the Scots, in place of Supporting so ridiculous
a claim, must have instantly rejected.

8 -But

iut as reasoning alone is apt not to make much

irnpreffion, where suspicions have been entertained
concerning a matter of face, it. was thought pro-
per to have recotirfe to express tefitnodiies. I
have accordingly applied to several persons of cre-
dit and honour, both gentlemen of fortune, and
clergymen of the established church, who are na-
tives of the Highlands or Islands of Scotland, and
well acquainted with the language of the country,
desiring to know their real opinion of the tranfla-
tions published by Mr. Macpherson. Their ori-
ginal letters to meiin return, are in my possession.
I shall give a fair and faithful account of the result
of their testimony: And I have full authority to
use the names of those gentlemen for what I now
advance.

I must begin with affirming) that though

among those with whom I have corresponded,
some have had it in their power to be more par-
ticular and explicit in their testimony than others;
there is not, however, one person, who insinuates
the most remote suspicion that Mr. Macpherforn
has either forged, or adulterated any one of the
Poems he has publiihed. If they make any com-
plaints of him, it is on account of his having
omitted other poems which they think of equal
merit with any which he has published. They all,
without exception, concur in holding his tranfla-
tions to be genuine, and proceed upon their au-
thenticity as a fa& acknowledged throughout all
those Northern Provinces; afturing me that any
one would be exposed to ridicule among them,
who should call it in question. I mull observe.

K that

that I had no motive to direc my choice of the
persons to whom I applied for information prefera-
,bly to others, except their being pointed out to
me, as the persons in their different counties who
were most likely to give light on this head.

With regard to the manner in which the origi-

nals of there poems have been preserved and tranf-
mitted, which has been represented as so myfteri-
ous and inexplicable, I have received the following
plain account: That until the present century, al-
most every great family in the Highlands had their
own bard, to whose office it belonged to be master
of all the poems and songs of the country;_that
among theie poems the works. of Ossian are easily
distinguished from those of later bards by several
peculiarities in his style and manner; that Ossian
has been always reputed the Homer of the High-
lands, and all his compositions held in fingulai
esteem and veneration; that the whole country is
full of traditionary (tories derived from his poems,
concerning Fingal and his race of heroes, of whom
there is not a child but has heard, and not a diftri&
in which there are not placespointed out famous for
being the scene of forne of their feats of arms;
that it was wont to be the great entertainment of
the Highlanders, to pass the winter evenings in
discoursing of the times of Fingal, and rehearsing
these old poems, of which they have been all along
cnthufiaftically fond; that when assembled at their
eilivals, or on any of their publick occasions,
wagers were often laid who could repeat most of
them, and to have store of them in their memo-
ries, was both an honourable and a profitable ac-

quifition,

quifition, as it procured them access into the fa-
milies of their great men; that with regard to
their antiquity, they are beyond all memory or
tradition; insomuch that there is a word common,
ly used in the Highlands to this day, when they
would express any thing which is of the most ref
mote or unknown antiquity, importing, that it be-
longs to the age of Fingal.

I am farther informed, that after the use of let-

ters was introduced into that part of the country,
the bards and others began early to commit feve-
ral of these poems to writing; that old manuscripts
of them, many of which are now destroyed or loft,
are known and attested to have been in the posies-
sion of some great families; that the most valuable
of those which remained, were colleced by Mr.
Macpherson during his journey through that coun-
try; that though the poems of Offan, so far as
they were handed down by oral tradition, were no
doubt liable to be interpolated, and to have their
parts disjoined and put out of their natural order,
yet by comparing together the different oral edi-
tions of them (if we may use that phrase) in dif-
ferent corners of the country, and by comparing
these also with the manuscripts which he obtained,
Mr. Macpherson had it in his power to ascertain,
in a great measure, the genuine original, to restore
the parts to their proper order, and to give the
whole to the publick in that degree of correctneis,
in which it now appears.

I am also acquainted, that if enquiries had been
nade fifty or threescore years ago, many more par-
ticulars concerning thete poems might have beei

K 2 learned,

learned, and many more living witnesses have been
produced for attesting their authenticity; but that
the manners of the inhabitants of the Highland
counties have of late undergone a great change.
Agriculture, trades, and manufacures, begin to
take place of hunting, and the shepherd's life.
The introduction of the busy and laborious arts
has considerably abated that poetical enthusiasm
*which is better suited to a vacant and indolent
state. The fondness of reciting their old poems
decays; the custom of teaching them to their
children is fallen into desuetude; and few are now
to be found, except old men, who can rehearse
from memonr any considerable parts of them.-

For these particulars, concerning the state of the

Highlands and the tranfmiflion of Oliian's poems,
I am indebted to the reverend and very learned
and ingenious Mr. John Macpherson, minister of
Slate in the Island of Sky, and to the reverend Mr.
Donald Macqueen minister of Kilmuir in Sky,
Mr. Donald Macleod minister of Glene!g in Inver-
nefsfhire, Mr. Lewis Grant minister of Duthel in
Invernefsfhire, Mr.. Angus Macneil minister of the
Iland of South Uift, Mr. Neil Macleod minister of
Ross, in the Island of Mull, and Mr. Alexander
Macaulay chaplain to the 88th Regiment.

The honourable colonel Hugh Mackay of Big-

house in the Shire of Sutherland, Donald Camp-
bell of Airds in Argylefhire, Efq; F-neas Mack-
intofh of Mackintosh in Invernefsfhire, Efq; and
Ronald Macdonell of Keappoch in Lochaber, Efq;
captain in the S7th regiment commanded by
colonel Fraser, all concur in teltifying that Mr.

Macpher-

Macpherion's collecion consists of genuine High-
land poems; known to them to be such, both
from the general report of the country where they
live, and from their own remembrance of the ori-
ginals. Colonel Mackay aflerts very positively,
upon personal knowledge, that many of the poems
published by Mr. Macpherson are true and faithful
translations. Mr. Campbell declares that he has
heard many of them, and captain Macdonell that
he has heard parts of every one of them, recited
in the original language.

James Grant of Rothiemurchus, Efq; and Alex-

ander Grant, of Delrachny, Efq; both in the Shire
of Inverness, desire to be named as vouchers for
the poem of Fingal in particular. They remem-
ber to have heard it often in their younger days,
and are positive that Mr. Macpherson has given a
just translation of it.

Lauchlan Macpherson of Strathmafhie in In.

vernefsflire, Efq; gives a very full and explicit
testimony, from particular knowledge, in the fol-
lowing words: That in the year 1760, he accom-
panied Mr. Macpherson during some part of his
journey through the Highlands in search of the
poems of Ossian; that he assisted him in collecing
them; that he took down from oral tradition, and
transcribed from old manuscripts by far the great.
eft part of those pieces Mr. Macpherson has pub-
lifhed; that since the publication he has carefully
compared the translation with the copies of the ori-
ginals in his hands; and that he finds it amazingly
literal, even to such a degree as often to preserve
the cadence of the Galic versification. He affirms,

K 3 that

that among the manuscripts which were at that
time in Mr. Macpherson's pofieffion, he saw one
of as old a date as the year I4Io.

Sir James Macdonald of Macdonald, in the

Island of Sky, Baronet, assured me, that after hav-
ing made, at my desire, all the enquires he could
in his part of the country, he entertained no doubt
that Mr. Macpherson's colletion consisted entirely
of authentick Highland poems; that he had lately
heard several parts of them repeated in the origi-
nal, in the island of Sky, with some variations
from the printed tranfation, such as might natur-
ally be expected from the circumRtances of oral
tradition; and some parts, in particular the episode
of Fairafolis in the third book of Fingal, which
agree literall; wiih the translation; and added,
tl:at he had heard rec:itrilns of other poems not
translated by Mr. 'acphcrfon, but generally re-
puted to be of Cfian's composition, which were of
the fame ipirit and lirain with such as are translated,
anad hich he efteco:el not inferiour to any of them
in fiulimity of deicrip ion, dignity of sentiment,
or any other of the beauties of poetry. This last
particular mu2t have great weight; as it is well
known how much the judgment of Sir James Mac-
donald deserves to be relied upon, in every thing
that relates to lierature and taste.

The late reverend Mr. Alexander Macfarlane,

minister of Arrachar in Dumbartonihire, who was
rema-k;ably eminent for his profound knowledge
in Galic learning and antiquities, wrote to me loon
after the publication of Mr. Macpherson's work,
terming it, a masterly translation; informing me

that

that he had often heard several of these poems in
the original, and remarked many passages so par-
ticularly striking beyond any thing he had ever
read in any human composition, that he never ex-
peted to fee a strength of genius able to do them
that justice in a translation, which Mr. Macpher-
son has done.

Norman Macleod of Macleod, in the Island of

Sky, Efq; Walter Macfarlane of Macfarlane in
Dumbartonfhire, Efq; Mr. Alexander Macmillan,
deputy keeper of his Majesty's signet, Mr, Adam
Ferguffon, professor of moral philosophy in the
University of Edinburgh, and many other gentle-
men natives of the Highland counties, whom I
had occafioni to converse with upon this ftbjet,
declare, that though they cannot now repeat from
memory any of there poems in the original, yet
from what they have heard in their youth, and
from the impression of the subjet still remaining
on their minds, they firmly believe those which
Mr. Macpherson has published, to be the old
poems of Ollan current in the country.

Delirous, however, to have this translation par-

ticularly compared with the oral editions of any
who had parts of the original diftinaly on their
memory, I applied to several clergymen to make
enquiry in their refpeftive parishes concerning such
Ferfons; and to compare what they rehearsed with
the printed version. Accordingly, from the reve-
rend Mr. John Macpherson minister of Slate in
Sky, Mr. Ncil Macleod minister of Ross in Mull,
Mr. Angus Macneil minister of South Uift,
Mr. Donald Macqueen minister of Kilmuir in

K 4 Sky,

Sky, and Mr. Donald Macleod minister of Gle-
nelg, I have had reports on this head, containing
diftina and explicit testimonies to almost the whole
epic poem of Fingal, from beginning to end, and
to several also of the lesser ppemns as rehearsed in
the original, in their presence, by persons whose
names and places of abode they mention, and
compared by themselves with the printed tranfa-
tion. They affirm that in many places, what was
rehearsed in their presence agreed literally and ex-
actly with the translation. In some places they
found variations from it, and variations even
among different rehearsers of the fame poem-in
the original; as words and stanzas omitted-by some
which others repeated, and the order and connec-
tion in some places changed. But they remark,
that these variations are on the whole not very
material; and that Mr. Macpherson seemed to
them to follow the mos just and authentic copy of
the sense of his author. Some of these clergymen,
particularly Mr. Neil Macleod, can themselves re-
peat from memory several passages of Fingal; the
tranlarion of which they afTure me is exac. Mr.
Donald Macleod acquaints me, that it was in his
house Mr. Macpherson had the description of
Cuchullin's horses and chariot, in the first book of
of Fingal, given him by Allan Macaskill school-
malter. Mr. Angus Macneil writes, that Mr.
Macdonald, a parilhioner of his, declares, that he
has often seen and read a great part of an ancient
rnanufcript, once in the poffeflion of the family of
Clanronald, and afterwards carried to Ireland, con-
taniLng many of these poems; and that he rehearsed

before

before him several passages out of Fingal, which
agreed exatly with Mr. Macpherson's translation
that Neil Macmurrich, whose predecessors had fqr
many generations been bards to the family of Clan-
ronald, declared also in his presence, that he had
often seen and read the fame old manuscript; that
he himself, gave to Mr. Macpherson a manuscript
containing some of the poems which are now tranf-
lated and published, and rehearsed before Mr..
Macneil, in the original, the whole of the poem
entitled Dar-thula, with very little variation from
the printed translation. I have received the fame
teflimony concerning this poem, Dar-thula, from
Mr. Macpherson minister of Slate and in a letter
communicated to me from Lieutenant Duncan
Macnicol, of the 88th regiment, informing me of
its being recited in the original, in their pretence,
from beginning to end: On which I lay the more
stress, as any person of taste who turns to that
poem will fee, that it is one of the most highly
finished in the whole collecion, and most diftin,
guilhed for poetical and sentimental beauties; info.
much, that whatever geniuscould produce Dar-thu-
la, must be judged fully equal to any performance
contained in Mr. Macpherlbn's publication. I must
add here, that though they who have compared
the translation with what they have heard rehearsed
of the original, bestow high praises both upon My.
Macpherson's genius and his fidelity; yet I find it
to be their general opinion, that in many places he
has not been able to attain to the strength and sub-
limity of the original which he copied.

I have

I have authority to fay, in the name of Lieu-

tenant Colonel Archibald Macnab of the 88th
regiment, or regiment of Highland Voluntiers
commanded by colonel Campbell, that he has un-
doubted evidence of Mr. Macpherson's collection
being genuine, both from what he well remembers
to have heard in his youth, and from his having
heard very lately a considerable part of the poem
of Temora rehearied in the original, which agreed
exactly with the printed version.

By the reverend Mr. Alexander Pope minister

of Reay, in the lhire of Caithness, I am informed,
that twenty-four years ago, he had begun to make a
collection of some of the old poems current in his
part of the country; on comparing which, with
Mr. blacpherfon's work, he found in his collection
the poem intitled, the battle of Lora, some parts of
Lathmon, and the account of the death of Oscar.
From the above mentioned Lieutenant Duncan
Macnicol, teftimonies-have been also received to a
great part of Fingal, to part of Temora, and Car-
ric-thura, as well as to the whole of Dar-thula, as
-recited in his pretence in the original, compared,
; and found to agree with the translation.

I myself read over the greatest partoftheEngliih

version of the fix books of Fingal, to Mr. Kenneth
Macpherson of Stornoway in the Island of Lewis,
rrerchant, in presence of the reverend Mr. Alexan-
der Macaulay chaplain to the SSth regiment. In go-
ing along Mr. Macpherson vouched what was read
to be well known to him in the original, both the
descriptions and the fentimnents. In some places,

though

though he remembred'the story, he did not remem-
ber the words of the original; in other places, he
remembered and repeated the Galic lines them-
selves, which, being interpreted to me by.Mr. Ma-
caulay, were found, upon comparison, to agree
often literally with the printed version, and some-
times with flight variations of a word or an epithet
This testimony carried to me, and must have car-
ried to any other who had been present, the highest
conviction; being precisely a testimony of that
nature which an Englilhman well acquainted
with Milton, or any favourite author, would give
to a foreigner, who fliewed him a version of this
author into his own language, and wanted to be
satisfied from what the Englishman could recolle&
of the original, whether it was really a translation
of Paradise Loft, or a spurious work under that
title which had been put into his hands.

The above-mentioned Mr. Alexander Macaulay,

Mr. Adam Ferguffon professor of moral philofo-
phy, and Mr. Alexander Fraser, governor to
Francis Stuart, Efq; inform me, that at several dif-
ferent times they were with Mr. Macpherson, after
he had returned from his journey through the
Highlands, and whilst he was employed in the work
of translating; that they looked into his manu-
scripts, several of which had the appearance of
being old; that they were fully satisfied of their
being genuine Highland poems; that they com-
pared the translation in many places with the ori-
ginal; and they attest it to be very just and faith-
ful, and remarkably literal.

It

It has been thought worth while to bellow this

attention on eftablithing the authenticity of the
works of Ofian, now in poffefflon of the publick:
Because whatever rank they are allowed to hold
as works of genius; whatever different opinions
may be entertained concerning their poetical merit,
they are unquestionably valuable in another view;
as monuments of the taste and manners of an an-
cient age, as useful materials for enlarging our
knowledge of the human mind and character;
and muf, beyond all dispute, be held as at least,
one of the greatef curiosities, which have at any
time enriched the republick of letters. More tef-.
timonies to them might have been produced by a
more enlarged correspondence with the Highland
counties: But I apprehend, if any apology is ne-
cefary, it is for producing so many names, in a
question, where the consenting silence of a whole
country, was to every unprejudiced person, the
strongest proof, that spurious compositions, in the
name of that country, had not been obtruded
upon the world,

F I N I S.

# BOOKS printed for T. BECKET and P. A. DE HONDT, at Tully's Head, near Surry - street, in the Strand.

BOOKS prfited for T;. B c K E T and P. A.

D i H o N D T, at truly's Head, near Surry-Jtreet,
in the Strand.

F INGAL. An Antient Epic Poem. 4to. 0os.

Fbound. Temora. An Antient Epic Poem. 4to. 1os. 6d.
bound.

A Critical Dissertation on the Poems of Fingal. 4to.

2 s. 6d. fewed.

Mr. R o s s E A U'S Eloifa, in 4 Vol. 3d Edit. with 4

fine Copper Plates. The Italian Verses are also tranf.
lated into English. The whole revised and correed.

-Emilius and Sophia. 4 Vol. Illustrated with

Six Copper Plates, finely engraved. 2d Edition. 12s.
bound.

--Expolfulatory Letter to the Arch-bilhop of Paris,

with the Mandate of the said Prelate, and also the Pro-
ceedings of the Parliament of Paris relative to the above
Book. 2 s. fewed.

- Treatise on the Social Compact: or the Princi-
ples of Politic Laws. 3s. bound.

** -- Miscellaneous Pieces are preparing for the

Press, by the Translator of ELOISA and his other Works.

A Treatise on Religious Toleration. Tranfated from

the French of Mr. Voltaire, by the Trannator of Elo-
ifa, &c. 3s. 6d. boards.

An Essay on the Study of Literature. Written origi-

nally in French, by EDWARD GIBBON, junior, Efq;
Now firfi translated into Engliih. 3s. bound.

Letters of the Right Honourable Lady M. W. M-e:

Written during her Travels in Europe, Asia, and Africa,
to Persons of Diffin&ion, Men of Letters, &c. in dif-
ferent Parts of Europe. Which contain, among other
curious Relations, Accounts of the Policy and Mannero
of the TURKS; drawn from Sources that have been in-
acceflible to other Travellers. The 3d Edition in 3 Vol.
6s. fewed, or 7s. 6d. bound.

Letters concerning the Spanish Nation. Written at

Madrid during the years 1760, and 1761. By the
Reverend EDWARD CLARKE, A. M. Chaplain to ,his

Excellency

Excellency the Earl of Bristol. In which is an authen-
tic Account of the Spanish Army and Navy, and the
MLanners of the People as they are at present, with many
curious Particulars relative to that Nation. In one Vol.
4t0. 12 s. fewed.

The History of Louisiana. 2 Vols. 6s. bound.
Sermons on various pracical Subjelcs, by the Rev.

John Young, D. D. 2 Vols. i2nro.

MARMOITEL'S Moral Tales. Elegantly tranfated

ftom the French. 2 Vols. 6s. bound.

The Loves of Chareas and Callirrhoe. Translated

from the Greek of Chariton of Aphrodifios. 2 Vol.
6s. bound.

The Letters that pafled between Theodosius and Con-

flantia after she had taken the Veil. The 3d. Edit. with
a beautiful Frontispiece. 2s. 6d. fewed.

Sermons. 2 Vols. 6s. bound.
The Effusions of Friendship and Fancy. In several -

letters to and from fele& Friends. 2 Vols. 4s. fewed.

Solyman and Almena. A Tale. 2d. Edit. 2s. fewed.
Letters on Religious Retirement, Enthusiasm, and

Melancholy. is. od.

%* These last five by the Reverend Mr. J. LANG-
HORNE.

Dr. BROCKLESBY'S medical Observations. 5s. bound.
The King of Prussia's Campaigns. 3s. bound.
The Deuce is in Him. A Farce. s.
Polly Honeycomb. A Farce. s.
The Musical Lady. A Farce. Is.
The Jealous Wife. A Comedy. Is. 6d.
The Death of Adam. A Tragedy. s.
Love at first Sight. A Ballad Farce. i s.
FRESNOY'S Chronological Tables. 2 Vols. 8vo.

l2s. bound.

Discourses on several public Occasions, preached in

America. By W. SMITH, D. DD. s. bound.

Rural Poems. From the German of Mr. GESNER.

2s. fewed.

RoderickRandom. 2Vols. New Edit. 6s.bour.d.
Ralbler. 4 Vols. New Edit. ] s. bound.
Baily's Diaionarv, Svo. New Edit. 6s. bound.
3Boer's Dicticnary. New Edit. 4to. 18s. bound.

Ditto.

Ditto. 8vo, 6s. bound.
Cunn's Euclid. 6s. bound.
The Trial of Abraham. 2 s. fewcd.
A Philofbohical Difcoirfe on Dream'; Is. 6d. fewed.
India Trasts. By Mr. HILWELL and Friends. 4to.

6s. bound.

History of St. Iilda. 4s. bound.
A Treatise on the Culture of Hcmp. s. 6 d.
An Efay on the Trade of our Northern Colonies. is.
An Essay on the more Common Weft India Difealeb.

Is. 6d.

An Essay on the lfual Diseases in Voyages to the Weft

Indies. 3s. fewed.

Dr. GREY'S Hl'dibrafs. 2 Vols. I4s. bound.
D'ALEMBERT'S Miscellaneous Essays. 3s. bound.
Dr. STORCK'S Treatise on Hemlock. 3s. 6d. fewed.
---on the Thorn Apple. I s.

.-----on the Meadow Saffron. i s.

Dr. FLEMYNG on the Adhesions of the Lungs to the

Pleura. i s.

VOLTAIRE'S Candide. Part 2. is. 6d.
VAN. SWIETEN on the Diseases of the Army,

is. 6d.

Life and Opinions of TRISTR AM SHANDY. Vols. 5,

and 6. 4s. fewed.

CHIPPENDALE'S Designs for Houfhold Furniture. Con-
sifting of 200 Copper Plates, in one large Volume So-
lio. 31. bound,

Lex Coronatoria: or the Office and Duty of Coro.

ners, by E. UMFREVILLE. 2 Vols. Jos. bound.

WESTON'S Book-keeping. 2d. Edit. 5 . bound.
Inltitutes of Health. is. 6d.
FABRICIUS'S Letters relating to CIIARLES XII. of

SWEDEN. 5s. bound.

VICTOR'S HiRory of the Stage. 2 Vols. 6s. bound.
Chryfal: or the Adventures of a Guinea. 4th. Edit.

2 Vols. 6 s. bound.

The Reverie:,or a Flight to the Paradise of Fools.

2 Vols. 6s. bound.

The Secret History of COL. HOOK'S Negotiatigns in

Scotland in favour of the Pretender, in 10o7. 3 '6d.
Twed.

The

Ti e ProceediRg of the Dutch, concerning Hoftiitite

cc-rmittedin the River of Bengal. Wto. 2s. 6d. fewed:

A Fresh Complaint by the Dutch E. I. Company

a; intRlbe Endilih E. I. Company inBengal. 4to. Is.

An Hiltorical iemo:ial of th: Negotiation of France
rsnd Enalz.d, from the 26th o March, 17.61, to the
2:h of Sct. of the lame Ytr. W ith the Vouchies
.:;. O.-^insa Lette:. to. 2z. 6d. fewcd.
