SERMONS,

BY

HUGH BLAIR, D.D.

One of the MINISTERS of the HIGH CHURCH,

AND

PROFESSOR Of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTRES

in the University, of Edinburgh.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

'* [

. . : '

THE ELEVE NTH EDITION.

) ', S I

LOND ON:

Printed for W. S TRAHAN ; and T. CADELL, in the Strand;

and W. CREECU, Edinburgh.

MDCC LXXXI.

@r»

.i .· ~:

c ;

r- ··

cS i;L.·''

t

d

s · C

~RR i'''J r

: ( r I ~ I: a
rr re 1

r c

r I
r I (,I I

" ,

J)rl (··

( ? )

C

1 V

r? : I t I

: I ~O

c oil

r · ne i

r ~te r

u i~C(

# THE CONTENTS

THE

C O N T E N T S.

Page

SERMON I.

On the Union of Piety and Morality.

ACTS x. 4. Thy prayers and thine alms

are come up for a memorial before
God. x

SERMON II.

On the Influence of Religion upon

Adversity.

PSAL. xxVii. 5. In the time of trou-

ble, he jball hide me in his pavilion ;
in the secret of his tabernacle Jbhall he
hide me; he Jhall set me up upon a

rock. "2

A

Page

S E RMON III.

On the Influence of Religion upon

Prosperity.

PSAL. i. 3. He Jjall be like a tree

planted by the rivers of water, that
bringcth forth his fruit in hisfeafon;
his leaf also fall not wither, and
whatsoever he doth flalalprofper. 58

SERMON IV.

On our imperfed Knowledge of a

Future State.

1 CORINTH. xiii. 12. For not we
fee through a glass, darkly- 85

SERMON V.

On the Death of Christ.

JOHNu xvii. I. Jes/s lift up his eyes

to bcaven, and said, Father! the
hour is come;- 115

Page

SERMON VI.

On Gentleness.

.JAMES Hin. 17. The wisdom that is

from above, is-gentle-- 145

SERMON VII.

On the Disorders of the Passions.

ESTHER V. 13. Yet all this availeth

me nothing, so long as I fee Mordecai
the Jew fitting at the King's gate. k 73

SE RM ON VIII.

'On our Ignorance of Good and Evil

in this Life.

ECCLESIAST. vi. 12. Who knoweth

what is good for man in this life, all
the days of his vain life, which he
fpendeth as ajhadow ? 204

Page

SERMON IX.

On Religious Retirement.

PS AL. iv. 4. Commune with your own

heart, upon your bed, and beftill. 234

SERMON X.

On Devotion.

ACTS x. 2. Cornelius-a devout man. 264

SERMON XI.

On the Duties of the Young.

TITUs ii. 6. Young men likewise ex-

hort, to be fober-minded. 306

SERMON XII.

On the Duties and Consolations of

the Aged.

PROV. xvi. 31. The hoary head is a

crown of glory, if it be found in the
way of rigbteoufnefs. 341

Pag

SERMON XIII.

On the Power of Conscience.

GENESIS xlii. 21, 22. And they said

one to another, We are verily guilty
concerning our brother, in that we
Jaw the angui/h of his foul, when
he besought us; and we would not
hear: Therefore is this difrefs come
upon us. And Reuben answered them
saying, Spake I not unto you, saying,
Do not ]in against the child; and ye
iwould not hear ? Therefore, behold
also his blood is required. 375

SERMON XIV.

On the Mixture of Joy and Fear in

Religion.

PJAL. ii. I I. Rejoice with trembling. 412

Page

SERMON XV.

On the Motives to Constancy in

Virtue.

GAL. vi. 9. And let us not be weary

in well-doing ; for in due season we
jhall reap, if we faint not. 439

# SERMON I. On the Union of Piety and Morality. Acts x. 4. Thy Prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorail before God.

SERMON I.

On the Union of PIETY and MORALITYk

ACTS x. 4.

Thy prayers and thine ahns are come up for

a memorial before God.

Ie'fM IE High and Lofty .One who SERM.

S inhabiteth eternity, dwelleth also

kL Ajr with him that is of humble
and contrite heart. In the midst of
his glory, the Almighty is not inatten-
tive to the meanest of his fubjeas. Nei-
ther obscurity of station, nor imperfec-
tion of knowledge, sinks those below his

VOL. I. B rcgard,

S E R M. regard, who worship and obey him. Every
»---' prayer which they fend up from their fe-

cret retirements, is listened to by him;
and every work of charity which they per-
form, how unknown soever to the world,
attrads his notice. The text presents a
signal inifance of this comfortable truth.
In the city of Cxfarea, there dwelt a
Roman centurion, a military officer of
inferiour rank, a Gentile, neither by
birth nor religion entitled to the privi-
leges of the Jewish nation. But he was a
devout and a benevolent man; who, ac-
cording to his measure of religious know-
ledge, studied to perform his duty, prayed
to God always, and gave much alms to the
people. Such a charader passed not un-
observed by God. So highly was it ho-
noured, that to this good centurion arn
Angel was tent from heaven, in order to
diret him to the means of full inftrudion
in the truth. The Angel accofis him
with this salutation, Cornelius, Thy prayers
and thine alhns are come up for a memorial
before God. 6

. Ett

It is to the conjundion of prayers and S E R M.

I.

alms, that I purpose now to dired your L
thoughts, as describing the refpe&able
and amiable charader of a man, as form-
ing the honour and the blessedness of a
true Christian; piety joined with charity,
faith with good works, devotion with mo-
rality. These are things which God hath
conneded, and which it is impious in
man to separate. It is only when they
remain united, that they can come up as
a grateful memorial before God. 1 shall first
endeavour to shew you, That alms with-
out prayers, or prayers without alms, mo-
rality without devotion, or devotion with-
out morality, are extremely defedive; and
then shall point out the happy effeds of
their mutual union.

LET us begin with considering the cafe

of alms without prayers; that is, of good
works without piety, or a proper sense
of God and religion. Examples of this
are not uncommon in the world. With
many, Virtue is, or at least is pretended

B 2 to

SERM. to be, a refpedable and an honoured
L- name, while Piety founds meanly in their

ears. They are men of the world, and
they claim to be men of honour. They
reft upon their humanity, their public
spirit, their probity, and their truth.
They arrogate to themselves all the manly
and the adive virtues. But devout affec-
tions, and religious duties, they treat with
contempt, as founded on ihadowy fpe-
culations, and fit to employ the attention
only of weak and fuperfiitious minds.
Now, in opposition to finch persons, I
contend, That this neglea of piety ar-
gues depravity of heart; and that it in-
fers an irregular discharge of the duties of
moralityb

FIRST, it argues internal depravity;

for it discovers a cold and a hard heart.
If there be any impression which man is
formed by nature to receive, it is a sense
of religion. As soon as his mind opens
to observation and refleaion, he discerns
innumerable marks of his dependent state.

He

He finds himself placed, by Tome fupcriour S E R M.
power, in a vast world; where the wisdom -
and goodness of the Creator are 'confpicu-
ous on every fide. The magnificence, the
beauty and order of nature, excite him to
admire and adore. When he looks up
to that omnipotent hand which operates
throughout the universe, he is impressed
with reverence. When he receives bless-
ings which he cannot avoid ascribing to
divine goodness, he is prompted to grati-
tude. The expreflions of those affeaions
under the various forms of religious wor-
Ihip are no other than native effulions of
the human heart. Ignorance may mislead,
and superstition may corrupt them; but
their origin is derived from sentiments that
are essential to man.

Cast your eyes over the whole earth.

Explore the most remote quarters of the
eaRs or the weft. You may discover tribes
of men, without policy, or laws, or cities,
or any of the arts of life: But no where
will you find them without some form of
yeligion. In every region you behold the

B 3 prostrate

SER M. prostrate worshipper, the temple, the al-

I.

t.,-v, tar, and the offering. Wherever men have

existed, they have been sensible that some
acknowledgment was due, on their part,
to the Sovereign of the world. If, in their
rudest and most ignorant state, this obli-
gation has been felt, what additional force
muff it acquire by the improvements of
human knowledge, but especially by the
great discoveries of the Christian revela-
tion? Whatever, either from reverence or
from gratitude, can excite men to the
worship of God, is by this revelation
placed in such a light, as one should
think were fufficient to over-awe the most
thoughtless, and to melt the most obdurate
gnind.

Canst thou, then, pretend to be a man

of reason, nay, a man of virtue, and yet
continue regardless of one of the first and
chief diaates of human nature? Where
is thy sensibility to what is right and fit,
if that loud voice which calls all nations
throughout the earth to religious homage,
has never been heard by thee? Or, if it

has

&.

.

has been heard, by what strange and false SER M.

I.

refinements haft thou ftiflcd those natural s
sentiments which it tends to awaken?
Calling thyself a son, a citizen, a friend;
claiming to be faithful and affeionate
in these relations; haft thou no sense of
what thou oweft to thy first Parent, thy
highest Sovereign, thy greatest Benefac-
tor? Can it be consistent with true virtue
or honour, to value thyself upon thy re-
gard to inferiour obligations, and yet to
violate that which is the most sacred and
the most ancient of all? When simple in-
stint teaches the Tartar and the Indian,
together with his alms and good works to
join his prayers to that Power whom he
considers as tlhe source of good, faall it be
no reproach, in the most enlightened state
of human nature, and under the purest
dispensation of religion, to have extin-
guilfhed the sense of gratitude to Heaven,
and to flight all acknowledgment of the
great and the true God? What does such
eonduQ imply, but either an entire want,
pr a wilful fuppreflion, of some of the befl

8 4 and

S E R M. and most generous affeaions belonging tq
i human. nature?--Surely, there muff be

an effenlii l defeat in that heart which re-
mains cold and insensible, where it ought
to be affeaed most warmly. Surely, such
a degree of depravity muff be lodged there,
as is fufficient to taint all the other springs
of pretendeds virtue.

BUT besides this, I must contend, iiq

the second place, That where religion is
negleded, there can be no regular iror
steady pradice of the duties of morality.
The charataer will be often irconfifient;
and Virtue, placed on a basis too narrow
to support it, will be always loose and
tottering. For such is the propensity of
our nature to vice, so numerous are the
temptations to a relaxed and immoral
conduct, that fironger restraints than
those of mere reason, are necessary to be
imposed on man. The sense of right and
wrong, the principle of honour, or the
inftin& of benevolence, are barriers too
feeble to withstand the strength of passion.

In the tranquil seasons of life, these natu- S E J M.
ral principles may, perhaps, carry on the ^
prdinary course of social duties with some
regularity. But wait until some trying
emergence come. Let the confli& of pas-
fions arise. Let the heart be either wound-
ed by fore distress, or agitated by violent
emotions; and you shall presently fee, that
virtue without religion is inadequate to the
government of life. It is destitute of its
proper guard, of its firmest support, of its
chief encouragement. It will fink under
the weight of misfortune; or will yield to
the solicitation of guilt.

The great motives that produce con-

ftancy and firmness of adion, must be of
a palpable and striking kind. A divine Le-
gillator, uttering his voice from heaven;
an omniscient Witness, beholding us in
all our retreats; an almighty Governour,
stretching forth his arm to punish or re-
ward, difilofing the secrets of the invisible
world, informing us of perpetual reft pre-
pared hereafter for the righteous, and of
i'ndignation and wrath awaiting the wicked:

These

SER M. These are the considerations which over-

I.

S- awe the world, which support integrity,

and check guilt. They add to virtue that
solemnity which should ever charaaerize
it. To the admonitions of conscience they
give the authority of a law. Co-operating
with all the good dispositions of a pious
man, they strengthen and insure their in-
fluence. On his alms you can haVe no
certain dependence, who thinks not of
God, nor has joined prayer to his chari-
table deeds. But when humanity is fe-
conded by piety, the spring from which
it flows is rendered, of course, more re-
gular and conftant.-In Ihort, withdraw
religion, and you thake all the pillars of
morality. In every heart you weaken the
influence of virtue: And among the mul-
titude, the bulk of mankind, you over-
throw its power.

HAVING thus ihewn that morality with-,

out devotion is both defedive and unstable,
I proceed to confider the other extreme,
of prayers without alms, devotion without
morality.

In

In every age the pradice has prevailed, S E R M.

I.

of substituting certain appearances of piety -
in the place of the great duties of huma-
nity and mercy. Too many there have
always been, who flatter themselves with
the hope of obtaining the friendihip of
their Creator, though they negled to do
justice to their fellow-creatures. But such
persons may be assured, that their supposed
piety is altogether of a spurious kind. It
is an invention of their own, unknown to
reason, unknown in the word of God. In
scripture we are ever direded to try our
faith by our works, our love of God by our
love of men. We are direced to confider
piety as a principle which regenerates the
heart, and forms it to goodness. We are
taught, that in vain we address any ads of
homage to Christ, unless we do the things
which he faith; and that love, peace, gen-
tlenefs, goodness, meekness, and temperance
are not only the injundions of his law, but
the native fruits of his Spirit". If there-

3 Lukevi. 46. Gal. v. 22.

fore,

SE M. fore, while piety seems ardent, morality

' shall decline, you have full reason to be-

lieve, that into that piety some corrupting
ingredients have entered. And if ever
your regard to morality Ihall totally fail;
if, while you make many prayers, you
give no alms; if, while you appear to be
zealous for God, you are false or unjust to'
men; if you are hard or contraaed in
heart, severe in your censures, and oppref-
five in your conduct; then conclude with
certainty, that what you had termed piety
was no more than an empty name. For
as soon, according to the scripture fimili-
tudc, will bitter waters flow from a sweet
fountain, as such effeds be produced by
genuine piety.

What you have called by that name,

resolves itself into one or other of three
things. Either it is a hypocritical form
of godliness, assumed in order to impose
on the world; or, which is the most fa-
vourable supposition, it is a transient im-
pression of seriousness, an accidental melt-
ing of the heart, which fpfes away like

2 t/2

the morning cloud and the early dew; ori, ERM.
which I am afraid is too often the cafe, .:
it is the deliberate refuge of a deluded
and fuperfiitious, but at the fame time
a corrupted mind. For all men, even the
most depraved, arc fubjea2, more or lets,
to compunaions of conscience. It has
*never been in their power to withdraw
totally beyond the reach of that warning
voice, which tells them that something is
necessary to be done, in order to make
their peace with the Ruler of the world.
But, backward at the fame time to resign
the gains of dishonesty, or the pleasures
of vice; averse from fubmiflion to that
sacred law which enjoins righteousness
in its whole extent, they have often at-
tempted to make a fort of composition
with Heaven; a composition, which,
though they dare not avow it in words,
lurks in secret at the bottom of many a
heart. If God will only dispense with
some articles of obedience, they will re-
pay him with abundant homage. If they
fail in good pradice, they will study to

be

S E R M. be found in belief; and, by the number of
...... their prayers, will atone, in some measure,

for their deficiency in charitable deeds.

But the attempt is as vain; as it is im-

pious. From the simplest and plainest
principles of reason it muff appear, that
religious worship, disjoined from justice
and virtue, can upon no account what-
ever find acceptance with the Supreme
Being. To what purpose is the multitude
of your sacrifices unto me.? fJith the Lord.
Bring no more vain oblations. Incense is an
abomination unto me. The new moons and
fabbaths, the calling of aflemblies, I cannot
away with; it is iniquity, even the solemn
meetings*.-- Cease, foolish and impious
man! Cease to confider the Almighty as a
weak or vain-glorious being, who is to
be appeased by thy devout profirations,
and thy humble words; or to be gratified
by the parade and ostentation of external
worship. What is all thy worship to him?
Will he eat the flejs of thy Jficrifces, or
drink the blood of offered goats ? Was wor-

* Ifa. i. ii. 14.

p.

ship required of thee, dost thou think, SER M.

I.

upon his account, that thou mighteft
bring any incrcafe to his glory and feli-
city by thy weak and insignificant praises?
Sooner mighteft thou increase the fplen-
dour of the fun by a lighted taper, or add
to the thunder by thy voice. No: It is
for the fake of man, not of God, that
worship and prayers are required; not that
God may be rendered more glorious, but
that man may be made better; that he may
be confirmed in a proper sense of his de-
pendent state, and acquire those pious and
virtuous dispositions in which his highest
improvement consists.

Of all the principles in religion, one

thould take this to be the most evident;
and yet frequent admonitions are needed,
to renew the imprefflon of it upon man-
kind. For vhat purpose did thy Creator
place thee in this world, in the midst of
human society, but that as a man among
men thou mighteft cultivate humanity;
that each in his place might contribute to
the general welfare; that as a spouse, a

brother,

SERM. brother, a son, or a friend, thou mighteif

I. aif thy part with an upright, and a tender

heart; and thus aspire to resemble Him
who ever consults the good of his crea-
tures, and whose tender mercies art over
all his works? And dareft thou, who haft
been sacrificing unfufpicious innocence to
thy loose pleasures; thon, who haft been
disturbing the repose of society by thine
ambition or craft; thou, who, to increase
thy treasures, haft been making the wi-
dow and the orphan weep; dareft thou
approach God with thy worship and thy
prayers, and entertain the hope that he
will look down upon thee in peace? Will
the God of order and justice accept such
poor compensation for his violated lawvs?
Will the God of love regard the services
of one who is an enemy to his creatures?
Shall a corrupter of the society of men
aspire to the habitations of pure and blef-
fed fpirits?-Believe it, He that faith he
loveth God munl love his brother also. Cease
to do evil; learn to do well. Seek judg-
ment; relieve the oppre9fed, judge the fa-

therlefs,

therlks, plead for the widow : And then, SER M.
Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh
to thee ; call upon him in the day of trouble,
and he will alfwer thee. Thy prayers
and thine alms ihall then ascend, in joint
memorial, before the Most High.

I HAVE now shewn the evil of maiming

and splitting religion; of dividing asunder
two things, which though in theory they
may be separated, yet in pradice muff al-
ways co-exist, if either of them be real, De-
votion to God and Charity to men. Let
us confider next the happy effeas of their
union.

Their union forms the confitent, the

graceful, the refpeaable charaaer of the
real Christian~ the man of true worth.
If you leave either of them out of your
system, even though you excel in the
other, you can stand trial only in one
point of view. It is only on one fide
your chara&er is fair; on the other, it
will always be open to much reproach.
And as you dishonour yourselves, so you

VOL. I. C do

S ER M. do great injustice to religion. For, by
...., dividing its parts from one another, you

never fail to expose it to the censure of
the world: And perhaps, by this fort of
partial and divided goodness, religion has
fuffered more in the esteem of mankind,
than by open profligacy. The unbeliever
will fcoff at your piety, when he fees you
negligent of moral duties. The bigot will
decry all morality, when he fees you pre-
tending to be a follower of virtue, though
you be a despiser of God. Whereas he
who fears God, and is at the fame time
just and beneficent to men, exhibits reli-
gion to the world with full propriety. It
thines in his condua with its native fplen-
dour; and its rays throw a glory roundt
him. His charaaer is above reproach.
It is at once amiable and venerable. Ma-
lice itself is afraid to attack him; and even
the worit men refped and honour him in
their hearts.

This too is the man whose life will be

most peaceful and happy. He who fails
materially either in piety or in virtue, is.

4 always

always obnoxious to the anguish of re- SER M.,
morse. His partial goodness may flatter him L
in the day of superficial observation; but
when solitude or diflrefs awakens the powers
of refleation, he shall be made to feel, that
one part of duty performed, atones not for
another which is negleaed. - In the midst
of his prayers, the remembrance of injustice
will upbraid him with hypocrisy; and in
the distribution of his alms, the prayers
which the poor put up for him, will make
him blush for his neglet of God. Con-
science will supply the place of the hand
coming forth to write over against him on
the wall, Thou art weighed in the balance,
and art found wanting *. Whereas he who
holds both faith and a good conscience, who
attends equally to the discharge of his duty
towards God and towards man, enjoys, as
far as human imperfeaion allows, the sense
of fairness and consistency in condua, of
integrity and soundness of heart.

The man of mere morality, is a fitranger

to all the delicate and refined pleasures of

* Dan. v. 27.

C 2 devotion.

SER M. devotion. In works of beneficence and

I. v-.- mercy, he may enjoy fatisfafion. But

his fatisfadion is destitute of that glow of-
affection, which enlivens the feelings of
one who lifts his heart at the fame time
to the Father of the Universe, and confi-
ders himself as imitating God. The man
again who rests solely on devotion, if that
devotion open not his heart to humanity,
not only remains a firanger to the plea-
fures of beneficence, but muff often un-
dergo the pain arising from bad pafflions.
But when beneficence and devotion are
united, they pour upon the man in whom
they meet, the full pleasures of a good
and pure heart. "His alms conneaed him
with men; his prayers with God. He
looks without dismay on both worlds.
All nature has to him a benign afpe&.
If engaged in adive life, he is the
friend of men; and he is happy in the
exertions of that friendship. If left in
retirement, he walks among the works of
n-ature, as with God. Every objeat is en-
livened to him by the sense of the Divine

presence.

presence. Every where he traces the be- S E R M.
neficent hand of the Author of nature; J
and every where, with glowing heart, he
hears and anftvers his secret voice. When
he looks up to heaven, he rejoices in the
thought that there dwells that God whom
he serves and honours; that Saviour in
whom lie trusts ; that Spirit of grace from
whose inspiration his piety and his charity
flow. When he looks around him on the
world, lie is soothed with the pleasing re-
membrance of good offices which he has
done, or at least has studied to do, to many
who dwell there. How comfortable the
refleaion, that him no poor man can up-
braid for having with-held his due; him
no unfortunate man can reproach for hav-
ing seen and despised his sorrows; but that
on his head are descending the prayers of
the needy and the aged; and that the hands
of those whom his proteaion has supported,
or his bounty has fed, are lifted up in secret
to bless him!

Life passed under the influence of such

dispositions, naturally leads to a happy

C 3 end.

SE RM. end. It is not enough to fay, that faith

I.

j and piety, joined with a&ive virtue, con-

ftitute the requisite preparation for hea-
ven. They in truth begin the enjoyment
of heaven, In every slate of our existence,
they form the chief ingredients of felicity.
Hence they are the great marks of Chri-
-ftian regeneration. They are the figna-
ture of that Holy Spirit, by which good
men are said to be sealed unto the day of
redemption.--The text affords a striking
proof of the estimation in which they are
held by God, Amidst that infinite va-
riety of human events which pass under
his eye, the prayers and the alms of Cor-
nelius attraaed his particular notice. He
remarked the amiable dispositions which
rose in the heart of this good man. But
he saw that they were yet imperfe&, while
he remained unenlightened by the prin-
ciples of the Christian religion. In order
to remove this obftruaion to his rising
graces, and to bring him to the full know-
ledge of that God whom he fought to
honour, he was favoured with a super-

natural

natural message from heaven. While the s E R M.

I.

princes of the earth were left to aa by the .-
counsels of their own wisdom; while, with-
out interposition from above, Generals con-
quered or fell, according to the vicissitude
of human things; to this good Centurion
an angel was commiiiffioned from the throne
of God.

What can I fay more or higher in praise

of this blessed character, than that it is
what God delights to honour? Men tingle
out as the objeas of diftinCton, the great,
the brave, or the renowned. But he who
feetb not as man fieth, pafring by those
qualities which often ihine with false fplen.
dour to human observation, looks to the
inward principles of adion; to those prin-
ciples which form the essence of a worthy
chara&er; and which, if called forth, would
give birth to whatever is laudable or excel-
lent in condua.-Is there one, though in
humble station or obscure life, who feareth
God and worketh righteouflefs; whose pray-
ers and alms, proceeding in regular unaf-
feted tenour, bespeak the upright, the ten-

C 4 der,

SE R M der, the devout heart ?--Those alms and

I.
- prayers come up in memorial before that

God who is no refpeEler of persons. The
Almighty beholds him from his throne with
complacency. Divine illumination is ready
to inftrua him. Angels minister to him.
They now mark him out oft earth as their
future associate; and for him they make
ready in paradise, the white robes, the pal/s,
and the sceptres of the just.

To this honour, to this blessedness, let

our hearts continually aspire; and through-
out the whole of life, let those solemn and
sacred words, with which I conclude, found
in your ears, and be the great diredory of
our condu&t: * He hath Jhewed thee, 0 man,
what is good; and what doth the Lord thy
God require of thee, but-to doji'/ly, and love
mercy-and to walk humbly with thy God?

* Micah vi. 8.

# SERMON II. On the Influence of Religion upon Adverfity. PSAL. xxvii. 5. In the time of trouble, he shall hide me in his pavilion; in the secret of his tabernacle shall be hide me; he shall set me up upon 

[ 25 j

SERMON II.

On the Influence of RELIGION upon

ADVERSITY.

PSALM xxvii. 5.

In the time of trouble, be Jall bide me in his

pavilion; in the secret of his tabernacle
/hall be hide me; be JJall set me upon
a rock.

T HE life of man has always been a SER M.

very mixed ifate, full of uncertain- *

ty and viciflitude, of anxieties and fears.
In every religious audience, there are many
who fall under the denomination of the
unfortunate; and the reft are ignorant how
soon they may be called to join them. For
the prosperity of no man on earth is stable
and assured. Dark clouds may soon gather

7 over

SERM. over the heads of those whose sky is now

II.
". _ most bright. In the midRt of the deceit-

ful calm which they enjoy, the form that
is to overwhelm them has perhaps already
begun to ferment. If a man live many
years, and rejoice in them all; yet let himt
remember the days of darkness, for they jhall
be many *.

Hence, to a thoughtful mind, no study

can appear more important, than how to
be suitably prepared for the Thisfortunes of
life; so as to contemplate them in proc
fpe& without difinay, and, if they must
befal, to bear them without dejeaion.
Throughout every age, the wisdom of the
wife, the treasures of the ridi, and the
power of the mighty, have been employ-
ed, either in guarding their fiate against
the approach of distress, or in rendering
themselves less vulnerable by its attacks.
Power has endeavoured to remove adver-
fity to a distance. Philosophy has studied,
when it drew nigh, to conquer it by pa.
tience; and Wealth has fought out every

* Eccles. xi. 8.

pleasure

pleasure that can compensate or alleviate SE R M.
pain.

While the wisdom of the world is thus

occupied, religion has been no less atten-
tive .to the fame important objea. It in-
forms us in the text, of a pavilion which
God ereas to shelter his servants in the
time of trouble, of a fcret place in his taber-
nacle into which he brings them, of a
rock on which he sets them up; and else-
ivhere he tells us, of a jbield and a buckler
which he spreads before them, to cover
them from the terrour by night, and the ar-
row that flieth by day. Now, of what
nature are those infitruments of defence,
which God is represented as providing
with such solicitous care for those who
fear him? Has he reared up any bul-
warks, impregnable by misfortune, in
order to separate the pious and virtuous
from the reft of mankind, and to screen
them from the common disasters of life ?
No: To those disasters we behold them
liable no less than others. The defence
which religion provides, is altogether of

an

SER M. an internal kind. It is the heart, not the

II.

'-1-' outward state, which it profeffes to guard.

When the time of trouble comes, as come it
must to all, it places good men under the
pavilion of the Almighty, by affording
them that security and peace which arise
from the belief of divine proteftion. It
brings them into the f'crct of his taberlnacle,
by opening to them sources of consolation
which are hidden from others. By that
strength of mind with which it endows
them, it fits them up upon a rock, against
which the tempest may violently beat, but
which it cannot ihake.

How far the comforts proceeding from

religion merit those high titles under
which they are here figuratively described,
I shall in this discourse endeavour to
show. I shall for this end compare toge-
ther the situation of bad men, and that of
the good, when both are fuffering the
misfortunes of life; and then make such
improvement as the fubjed will naturally
suggest.

I. RELIGION

I. RELIGION prepares the mind for en- SER M.

II.

countering, with fortitude, the most severe
thocks of adversity; whereas vice, by its
natural influence on the temper, tends to
produce dejeaion under the Ilighteft trials.
While worldly men enlarge their posses-
fions, and extend their conneaions, they
imagine that they are strengthening them-
selves against all the possible viciflitudes of
life. They fay in their hearts, My moun-
tain flands lrong, and I fJall never be mov-
ed. But so fatal is their delusion, that, in-
flead of strengthening, they are weakening
that which only can support them when
those vicissitudes come. It is their mind
which muff then support them; and their
mind, by their sensual attachments, is cor-
rupted and enfeebled. AddiAed with in-
temperate fondness to the pleasures of the
world, they incur two great and certain
evils; they both exclude themselves from
every resource except the world; and they
increase their sensibility to every blow which
comes upon them from that quarter.

They

SE RM. They have neither principles nor tem-

II
..' ..., per which can fland the assault of trouble.

They have no principles which lead them
to look beyond the ordinary rotation of
events; and therefore, when misfortunes
involve them, the profpet muff be com-
fortlefs on every fide. Their crimes have
disqualified them for looking up to the
afliftance of any higher power than their
own ability, or for relying on any better
guide than their own wisdom. And as
from principle they can derive no sup-
port, so in a temper corrupted by pro-
fperity they find no relief. They have
loft that moderation of mind which en-
ables a wife man to accommodate himself
to his situation. Long fed with false
hopes, they are exasperated and flung by
every disappointment. Luxurious and es-
feminate, they can bear no uneasiness.
Proud and presumptuous, they can brook
no opposition. By nourishing dispositions
which so little suit this uncertain state,
they have infuled a double portion of bit-
terncfs into the cup of woe; they have

sharpened

sharpened the edge of that sword which is S E R M.
lifted up to finite them. Strangers to all .
the temperate fatisfaaions of a good and a
pure mind; itrangers to every pleasure ex-
cept what was seasoned by vice or vanity,
their adversity is to the last degree difcon-
solate. Health and opulence were the two
pillars on which they rested. Shake either
of them; and their whole edifice of hope
and comfort falls. Prostrate and forlorn,
they are left on the ground; obliged to
join with the man of Ephraim in his ab-
jea lamentation, They have taken away my
gods, which I have made, and what have I
mo rc \-Such are the causes to which we
must ascribe the broken spirits, the peevish
temper, and impatient paflions, that ib often
attend the declining age, or falling fortunes
of vicious men.

But how different is the condition of a

truly good man in those trying situations
of life! Religion had gradually prepared
his mind for all the events of this incon-
slant state. It had inftruded him in the

* Judges xviii. 24.

nature

$ ER M. nature of true happiness. It had early
#... weaned him from the undue love of the

world, by discovering to him its vanity,
and by setting higher profpeds in his
view. Afflidions do not attack him by
surprise, and therefore do not overwhelm
him. He was equipped for the storm, as
well as the calm, in this dubious naviga-
tion of life. Under those conditions he
knew himself to be btought hither, that
he was not to retain always the enjoy-
ment of what he loved: And therefore he
is not overcome by disappointment, when
that which is mortal, dies; when that
which is mutable, begins to change; and
when that which he knew to be transient,
passes away.

All the principles which religion teaches,

and all the habits which it forms, are fa.
vourable to strength of mind. It will be
found, that whatever purifies, fortifies
also the heart. In the course of living
righteotfly, soberly, and godly, a good man
acquires a steady and well-governed fpi-
rit. Trained, by Divine grace, to enjoy

with

with moderation the advantages of the SER M.
World, neither lifted up by success, nor
enervated with sensuality, he meets the
changes in his lot without unmanly de.
je&ion. He is inured to temperance and
restraint. He has learned firmness and
felf-command. He is accustomed to
look up to that Supreme Providence,
which disposes of human affairs, not
with reverence only, but with trust and
hope.

The time of prosperity was to him not

merely a season of barren joy, but pro-
du&ive of much useful improvement.
He had cultivated his mind. He had
flored it with useful knowledge, with
good principles, and virtuous difpofi-
tions. These resources remain entire,
when the days of trouble come. They
remain with him in sickness, as in
health; in poverty, as in the midit of
riches; in his dark and solitary hours,
no less than when surrounded with
friends and gay society. From the glare
of prosperity, he can, without deje&ion,

VOL. I. D withdraw

SER M. withdraw into the slade.

" Exeluded from

II.

LA..- several advantages of the world, :he may

be obliged to retreat into a narrower
circle; but within that circle he will find
many comforts left. His chief pleasures
were always of the calm, innocent, and
temperate kind; and over these, the
changes of the world have the least power.
His mind is a kingdcom to him; and he
can still enjoy it. The world did not
bellow upon him all his enjoyments; and
therefore it is not in the power of the
world, by its most cruel attacks, to carry
them all away. "

II. THE distresses of life are alleviated

to good men, by refletions on their-paft
condua; while, by such refle&ions, they
are highly aggravated to the bad. Dftring
the gay and adive periods of life, sinners
elode, in: some measure, the forte of con-
science. Carried round in the- whirl of
affairs and pleasures; intent on contriv-.
ance,' or eager in purfiit; amused by hope,
or elated by enjoyment; they are-fbeltered,

S 0 by

by that crowd of trifles which surrounds SE R M.

. II.

tldem, from serious thought. But con-
science is too great a power to remain
always suppressed. There is in every
man's life, a period when he shall be
made to fland forth as a real objea to
his own view: And when that period
comes, Wo to him who is galled by the
fight! In the dark and solitary liour of
distress, with a mind hurt and fore from
some recent wound of fortune, how shall
he bear to have his chara6ter for the first
time disclosed to him, in that humiliating
light under which guilt will necessarily
present it? Then, the recolledion of the
past becomes dreadful. It exhibits to him
a: life thrown away on vanities and follies,
or consumed in flagitioufnefs and fin; no
flation properly supported; no material
duties fulfilled. Crimes which once had
been easily palliated, rife before him in
their native deformity. The sense of guilt
mixes itself with all that has befallen him.
.He beholds, or thinks that he beholds,
the hand of the God whom he hath of-

D 2 fended,

s E R M. fended, openly stretched out against himtn

S' '--At a season when a man stands most irl

need of support, how intolerable is the
weight of this additional load, aggravat'
ing the depreflion of disease, disappoint-
ment, or old age! How miserable his
state, who is condemned to endure at once
the pangs of guilt, and the vexations of
calamity! The spirit of a man may fujfain
his infirmities; but a wounded spirit, who
can bear?

Whereas, he who is blessed with a clear

conscience, enjoys, in the w6rit cOnjunc-
tures of human life, a peace, a dignity,
an elevation of mind peculiar to virtue.
The testimony of a gjood conscience is
indeed to be always diftinguilhed from
that presumptuous boast of innocence,
which every good Christian totally dif-
claims. The better he is, he will be the
more humble, and sensible of his failings.
But though he acknowledge that he can
claim nothing from God upon the foot-.
inig of desert, yet he can trust in his mer-
ciful acceptance through Jcfus Christ, ac-

cording

cording to the terms of the gospel. He S E R M.
can hope that his prayers and his alms -..
have come up in memorial before God. The
piety and virtue of his former life were
as feeds sown in his prosperous state, of
which he reaps the fruits in the season of
adversity. The riches, the pleasures, and
the friends of the world, may have made
wings to themselves, and flown away. But
the improvement which he made of those
advantages while they lasted, the tempe-
rate spirit with which he enjoyed them,
the beneficent a&ions which he perform-'
ed, and the good example which he set to
ethers, remain behind. By the memory
of these, he enjoys his prosperity a fe--
cond time in reflecion; and perhaps this
second and refleaed enjoyment is not in-i
feriour to the firif. It arrives at a more
critical and needful time. It affords him
the high fatisfation of having extraced
lasting pleasure from that which is fhert;
and of having fixed that which by its
nature was changing.--" If my race be
" now about to end, I have this com-

D

3 < fort,

S E R M. " fort, that it has not been run in vain.

SIL. " I have fought the good fght; I have kept

" the faith. Myxmind has no load. Fu-
", turity has no tetrours. I have endea-
<L,voured, to do my duty, and to make
" my peace, with God. I leave the reft
'- to Heaven."., These are the refledions
which to the upright make light arise in
darkness; refledions which cheer the
lonely house of virtuous poverty, and at-
tend, the conscientious fufferer into prison
or e'xile; which sooth the complaints of
grief, lighten the pressure of old age, and
furnish to the bed of sickness, a cordial
of more grateful relish, and more fove-
reign virtue, than any which the world
can afford.

Look abroad into life, and you will

find the general sense of mankind bearing
witness to this important truth, that mind
is fuperiour to fortune; that whati one
feels within, is of much greater importance
than all that befals him without. Let a
man be brought into some such severe
gnd trying situation, as fixes the attention

of

of- the public oon, olis behaviour. The'firft S ER M.
question, which w. ,put concerning him, i
is not, What does he fuffer? but, How
does. he .bear Jit?, Has he a quiet mind;
or, Does he appear to be unhappy within?
,If .we judge him to be composed and
,firm, refigncd to Providence, and* sup-
:portge4Ady-confcious integrity, his charac-
ter::rifes, and his misery leflens in our
.view.' We cfteem-.and admire, rather than
pity.hi.L Recollc&t what holy men have
endured. for the fake of conlcience, and
with, what cheerfulness they have. fuffered.
On the other hand, when confeience has
.concurred with outward misfortunes in di-
fitreffing the guilty, think of the dreadful
consequences which have ensued. How
often, upon a reverse of fortune, :fear
abused prosperity, have they madly hur-
ried themselves ovor that precipice from
which there is no return; and, in what
nature most abhors, the voluntary extinc-
tion of life, have fought relief from that
torment of refledion, which was become
too great for them to bear?

D 4 * Never

s E R M. Never then allow yourselves to imagine,
^ .i that misfortunes alone form the chief

misery of man. None but the guilty are
completely miserable. The misgiving and
distrust, the accusations and reproaches of
their minds, the sense of having drawn
down upon their heads the evils which
they fuffer, and the terrifying expe&ation
of more and worse evils to come; these
are the essential ingredients of human
misery. They not only whet the edge,
but they envenom the darts of affliaion,
and add poison to the wound. Whereas,
when misfortunes assail a good man, they
carry no such fatal auxiliaries in their
train. They may ruffle the surface of
his foul; but there is a flrength within,
which resists their farther impreflion, The
constitution of his mind is found. The
world can inflia upon it no wounds, but
what admit of cure.

III. ILL men, in the time of trouble,

can look up to no proteaor; while good
men commit themselves, with trust and

hope,

'hope, to the care of Heaven. The hu- SE RM.
man mind, naturally feeble, is made to ,
feel all its weakness by the pressure of
adversity. Dejeaed with evils which
overpower its strength, it relies no longer
on itself. It casts every where around, a
wishing, exploring eye, for some felter to
screen, some power to uphold it; and if,
when abandoned by the world, it can
find nothing to which it nay fly in the
room of the world, its fiate is truly for-
lorn.. Now, whither should the ungodly,
in this situation, turn for aid? After hav-
ing contended with the storms of adverse
fortune till their spirits are exhausted,
gladly would they retreat at last to the
fanauary of religion. But that fanauary
is shut against them; nay, it is environed
with terrours. They behold there, not a
Proteaor to whom they can fly, but a
Judge whom they dread; and in those
moments when they need his friendihip
the most, they are reduced to deprecate
his wrath. If he once talled when they
refu/ed, and, Jretched out his hands when

they

SERM. fhey would not regard, how much reason
»; have they to fear that he will leave them

now to eat the fruit of their own ways,
,and to be filed with 'their own devices;
that he will laugh at their calamity, and
.mock when their fear cometh? -

But of all the thoughts which can enter

into the mind, in the season of distress,
the belief of an interest in his favour
who rules the world is the most soothing.
Every form of religion has afforded to
virtuous men some degree of this confola-
tion. But' it was reserved for the Chri-
ftian revelation, to carry it to its highest
point. For it is the dieea scope of that
revelation, to accommodate itself to the
circumstances of man, under two main
views; as guilty in the fight of God,
and as struggling with the evils of the
world. Under the former, it discovers
to him a Mediator and an atonement;
under the latter, it promises him the
Spirit of grace and consolation. It is a
system of complete relief, extending from
our spiritual to our temporal distresses.

The

The 'faine hand Which holds- out forgive- SER M.
'nefs'tO. the 'penitent, and affitance to tht - -
'frail, dispenses comfort and hope to the
afflided.
, It deserves your particular notice, in
this view, that there is no chara&er
which God more frequently assumes to
himself in the sacred writings, than that
of the Patron of the distressed. Compa-
sion is that attribute of his hature which
he has chosen to place in the greatest va-
riety of lights, on purpose that he might
accommodate his majesty to our -weaki-
ness, and provide a cordial for human
griefs. ',Hei is the hearer of all prayers;
but with particular attention he is repre-
fented as listening to the cry of the poor,
and regarding the prayer of the destitute.
All his creatures he governs with justice
and wisdom; but he takes to himself, in
a special manner, the charge of executing
judgment for the oppressed, of protefling the
Jfranger, of delivering him who hath no
helper from the hand of the spoiler. For the
Ppprefon of the poor, and for the fghing of

the

SERM. the needy, will I arise, faith the Lord, to

i-

- set him in safety from him that plrfetb at

him. He is the Father of the fatberlefs, and
the Judge of the widow, in his holy babi.
tation. He raJfetb them up that are bowed
don, Hlie dwelleth with the contrite. He
healeth the broken in heart. For he know-
eth our frame; he remembereth that we
are duff*.-If the wisdom of his provi-
dence saw it necessary to place so many
of his creatures in an afflicted state, that
slate, however, he commiserates. He
disdains not to point out himself as the
refuge of the virtuous and pious; and to
invite them, amidst all their troubles, to
pour out their hearts before him, Those
circumstances which estrange others from
them, interest him the more in their situ,
ation. The neglet or scorn of the world
exposes them not to any contempt in his
fight. No obscurity conceals them from
his notice; and though they should be
forgotten by every friend on earth, they

0 Pfal. iv. S.-cii. 17.-- lvi. 7.-Ixviii. 5.-cxvii. 3,

--cilii, 14. :'r

are

are remembered by the God of heaven. SE RM.
That sigh, heaved from the afflited bo- -. .
fomn, which is heard by no human ear, is
listened to by him; and that tear is re-
marked, which falls unnoticed or despised
by the world.

Such views of the Supreme Being im-

part the most sensible consolation to every
pious heart. They present his admini-
fitration under an afpe& to mild and be-
nign, as in a great measure to disperse
the gloom which hangs over human life.
A good man acts with a vigour, and sus-
fers with a patience more than human,
when he believes himfeif countenanced
by the Almighty. Injured or oppressed
by the world, he looks up to a Judge
who will vindicate his cause; he appeals
to a Witness who knows his integrity;
he commits himself to a Friend who will
never forsake him. When tired with the
vexations of life devotion opens to him
its quiet retreat, where the tumults of the
world are hushed, and its cares are loft in
happy oblivion; where the wicked cease

8 from

SE R M. from troubling, and the weary are at refl.,
.-a..J. There his mind regains its serenity; the

agitation of passion is calmed; and a
softening balm is infused into the wounds
of .the spirit. Disclosing to an invisible.
Friend those secret griefs which he has
no encouragement to make known to the
world, his heart is lightened. He does
not feel himself solitary or forsaken. He
believes God to be present with him, and
the Holy Ghost to be the inspirer of his
consolations. From that ficret place of
the divine tabernacle, into which the Text
represents him as admitted, he hears this
voice issue, .Call upon me in the day of
trouble, and I will answer thee. ' Fear not;
for I am with thee. Be not dismayed; for
I am thy God. And as. he hears a voice
which speaks to none but the pure in
heart, so he beholds a hand-which finnerg
cannot fee. He beholds the hand of
Providence conduaing all, the hidden
springs and movements of the universe;
and with a secret, but unerring operation,
direaing every event' towards the happi-

I ness

ness of the righteous. Those affliaions S'E R M.

II.

which appear to others the messengers of

_

the wrath of Heaven, appear to him the
Rninifters of fandification and wisdom.
Where they discern nothing but the hor-
rours of the tempest which surrounds
them, his more enlightened eye beholds
the Angel who rides in the whirlwind,
and direcs the florm. Hence a peace
keeping the mind and heart, which is no
where to be found but under the pavilion of
the Almighty.

IV. GOOD men are comforted under

their troubles by the hope of Heaven;
while bad men are not only deprived of
this hope, but diftrefTed with fears arising
from a future state. The foul of man
can never divest itself wholly of anxiety
about its' fate hereafter. There are hours
when even to the prosperous, in the midst
of their pleasures, eternity is an awful
thought. But much more when those
pleasures, one after another, begin to
withdraw; when life alters its forms, and

' becomes

SER M. becomes dark and cheerless; when kS
.4. changes warn the most inconfiderat, that

what is so mutable will soon pass entirely
away; then with pungent earnestness
comes home that question to the heart,
Into what world are we next to go?--
How miserable the man, who, under the
diftraaions of calamity, hangs doubtful
about an event which so nearly concerns
him; who, in the midit of doubts and
anxieties, approaching to that awful
boundary which separates this world from.
the next, shudders at the dark profpeat
before him; withing to exist after death,
and yet afraid of that existence; catching
at every feeble hope which superstition
can afford him, and trembling, in the
fame moment, from refleation upon his
crimes!

But blessed be God who hath brought

life and immortality to libht; who hath not
only brought them to light, but secured
them to good men; and by the death and
refurreaion of Jesus Christ, hath begotte*
them unto the lively hope of an inheritance

incorruptible,

ncbrryptible, undefiled, and that fadelh not S E R M.

II.

awa , Jufftly is this hope styled in scrip- -
ture, ;he anchor of the foul, both sure and
Ifedfl. For what an anchor is to a ihip
in a datrk night, on an unknown coast,
and amidif a boisterous ocean, that is
this hope to the foul when diftraded by
the confusions of the world. In danger,
it gives security; amidst general fltuaa-
tion, it affords one fixed point of reft. It
is indeed the most eminent of all the
.advantages which religion now confers.
:For, confider the mighty power of hope
over the human mind. It is the univer-
fal comforter. It is the spring of all hu-
man adivity. Upon futurity, men are
constantly suspended. Animated by the
profped of some distant good, they toil
and fuffer through the whole course of
life; and it is not so much what they are
at present, as what they hope to be in
some after-time, that enlivens their mo-
tions, fixes attention, and ifimulates in-
duftry. Now, if, in the common affairs
of life, such is the energy of hope, even

VOL. I. E when

SERM. when its objea is neither very confider-

1I.
- able, nor very certain; what effeds may

it not be expeCted to produce, when it
rests upon an obje o

ib splendid as a life

of immortal felicity ? Were this hope en-
tertained with that full pcrfuafion which
Christian faith demands, it would, in
truth, not merely alleviate, but totally
annihilate, all human miseries. It would
banish discontent, extinguish grief, and
suspend the very feeling of pain.

But allowing for the mixture of hu-

man frailty; admitting those abatements
which our imperfeaion makes upon the
effeCt of every religious principle, still
you will find, that, in proportion to the
degree in which the hope of Heaven
operates upon good men, they will be
tranquil under fufferings; nay, they will
be happy, in comparison of those who
enjoy no such relief. What indeed, in
the course of human affairs, is fufficient
to distress, far less to overwhelm, the
mind of that man who can look down
on all human things from an elevation so

much

much above them ? He is only a passenger S E R M.
through this world. He is travelling to a
happier country. How disagreeable soever
the occurrences of his journey may be, yet,
at every stage of that journey, he receives
the assurance that he is drawing nearer
and nearer to the period of reft and fe-
licity.-Endure, and thou shalt overcome.
Persevere, and thou shalt be fuccefsful,
The time of trial hastens to a close. Thy
mansion is prepared above; thy reft re-
maineth among the people of God. The
disorders which vice has introduced into
the works of God, are about to terminate;
and all tears are soon to be wiped away
from the eyes of the juft.-The firm as-
furance of this happy conclusion to the
vexations and the vanities of life, works a
greater effed on the sincere illiterate Chri-
ftian, than all the refinements of philofo-
phy can work on the most learned Infidel.
These may gratify the mind that is at
ease; may sooth the heart when slightly
discomposed; but when it is fore and
deeply torn, when bereaved of its best

E 2 and

S E R M. and most beloved comforts, the only con-

II.

uy~ E folations that can then find access, arise

from the hope of a better world; where
those comforts ihall be again restored;
and all the virtuous shall be assembled,
in the presence of him who made them.
Such hopes banish that despair which over-
whelms, and leave only that tender me-
lancholy which softens the heart, and often
renders the whole charaaer more gentle
and amiable.

OF this nature are the resources which

religion provides for good men. By its
previous discipline, it trains them to for-
titude; by the refleaions of a good con-
science it fooths, by the sense of Divine
favour it supports them; and when every
comfort fails them on earth, it cheers
them with the hope of heaven. Diftin-
guifhing his servants with such advantages,
God is justly laid to ered his pavilion over
them in the evil time. He not onlyfpreads
a tent for them in the wilderness, but he
transforms in some measure the itate of

nature

nature around them. To use the beautiful s E R M.
language of ancient prophecy; hi the de- .
firt, the thirj/I laknd, where no water is,
he opencth springs. I/ji/ed of the thorn,
he makcth the fr-tree to come up ; i~jlead
of the briar, the myrtle to spring. In midjf
rs the habitation of dragons, he maketh
green prij/ures rif, and Jlill waters flow
around his people.

THE improvement to be made of these

truths is as obvious as it is important.
Let us study so to conduct our lives, that
we may be qualified for deriving fuich con-
folations from religion. To their reality,
and their importance, all mankind bear
witness. For no sooner are they overtaken
by distress, than to religion they fly.
This, throughout every age, has been the
universal shelter which thle young and the
old, the high and the low, the giddy and
the serious, have fought to gain, as soon
as they found that reft could be no where
else procured for the weary head, or the
aching heart, But amidst those multitudes

E 3 that

S E R M. that crowd to religion for relief, how few

1I.

c "_,-. are entitled to approach that sacred source

of comfort ? On what feeble props do their
hopes and pretensions reft! How much
superstition mingles with that religion to
which men are driven by distress and fear ?
--You must first apply to it as the guide of
life, before you can have recourse to it as
the refuge of sorrow. You muff submit
to its legislative authority, and experience
its renewing influence, before you can look
for its consolatory effed. You muff secure
the testimony of a good conscience, and
peace with God through Jesus Christ;
otherwise, when the floods JTall come, and
the rains defccnd, and the winds blow, the
house which you had proposed for your
retreat, flall prove the horfi founded on the
sand, not on the rock.

There are two plans, and there are but

two, on which any man can propose to
conduc himself through the dangers and
distresses of human life. The one is the
plan of worldly wisdom; the other, that
of determined adherence to conscience.

He

He who ads upon the former, lays prin- S E R M.
ciple aside, and trufis his defence to his art -
and ability. He avails himfclf of every
advantage which his knowledge of the world
ihggefts. He attends to nothing but what
he considers as his interest; and, uncon-
fined by conscience, pursues it by every
course which promises him success. This
plan, though too often adopted, will be
found, on trial, ineffecual and deceitful.
For human ability is an unequal match for
the violent and unforeseen vicifihtudes of the
world. When these torrents rife in their
might, they sweep away in a moment the
banks which worldly wiidom had reared
for defence, and overwhelm alike the crafty
and the artless. In the mean time, per-
sons of this charaCer condemn themselves
to live a most unquiet life. They pass their
days in perpetual anxiety, listening to every
motion; startled by every alarm; changing
their measures on every new occurrence;
and when distress breaks in over all their
defences, they are left under it, hopeless
and disconsolate.

E 4 The

SER M. The plan which, in opposition to this,

Sreligion recommends, as both more ho-
nourable in itself, and more effeaual for
security, is, at all hazards, to do your
duty, and to leave the consequences to
God. Let him who would at upon this
plan, adopt for the rule of his condut
that maxim of the Pfalmift's, lTruJ in the
Lord, and do good*. To firm integrity,
let him join a humble reliance on God.
Let his adherence to duty encourage his
religious trust. Let his religious trust
infpirc him with fortitude in the perform-
ance of his duty. Let him know no
path but the straight and dired one. In
the most critical moments of adtion, let
him ask no further questions, than What
is the right, the fit, the worthy part?
How as a man, and as a Christian, it be-
comes him to ad? Having received the
decision of conscience, let him commit his
wuay unto the Lord. Let him, without
trepidation or wavering, proceed in dif-
charging his duty; resolved, that though

* Pfilnm xxxvii. 3,

thet

the world may make him unfortunate, it SE R M.'
ihall never make him base; and confiding,
that in what God and his conscience re-
quire him to ad or fuffer, God and a good.
conscience will support him.--- Such prin-
ciples as these, are the belt preparation for
the vicissitudes of the human lot. They
are the flhield of inward peace. He who
thinks and ads thus, thall be exposed to
no wounds but what religion can cure.
He may feel the blows of adversity; but
he shall not know the wounds of the
heart,

# SERMON III. On the Influence of Religion upon Prosperity. PSAL. i. 3. He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither, 

[ s8 ]

S E R M O N III.

On the Influence of RELIGION upon

PROSPERITY.

PSALM i. 3.

Hejhall be like a tree planted by the rivers

of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in
his season; his leaf also ]jall not wither,
and whatfoevcr he doth jhall prosper.

SE1R 1M. jHE happy influence of religion

_upon human life, in the time of
adversity, has been considered in the pre-
ceding discourse. Concerning this the fen-
timents of men are more generally agreed,
than with refpet to some other preroga-
tives which religion claims. They very
readily aflign to it the office of a Comfort-
er. But as long as their state is prosper-
ous, they are apt to account it an unnecef-

fary

fary guest, perhaps an unwelcome intruder. s E R M.
Let us not be thus unjust to religion, nor
confine its importance to one period only
in the life of man. It was never intended
to be merely the nurse of sickness, and the
ftaff of old age. I purpose now to ihow
you, That it is no le cf efential to the en-
joyment of prosperity, than to the comfort
of adversity: That prosperity is prosperous,
if we may be allowed the expression, to a
good man only; and that to every other
person, it will prove, notwithstanding its fair
appearance, a barren and joyless state.

The Psalmist, in the Text, by an image

taken from one of the most beautiful ob-
jeds in nature, describes a man who flou-
rithes in full prosperity. But to whom is
the description limited? To him, as the
preceding verses inform us, that walketh
not in the council of the ungodly, nor Jland-
eth in the way of sinners, nor Jitteth in the
feat of the fcortfiil, but hath his delight in
the law of God. He only is like the tree
planted by the rivers of water; whilst the
unigodly, as he adds, are not so; but how

prolperous

S E R M. prosperous soever they may appear to the
Ly world, are in truth but like the chaff which

the wind drivcth away. In confirmation
of this dodrine, I shall lay before you,
some of those circumstances which diftin-
guifh the profpcrity of the good man be-
yond that of the finner; and Ihall conclude,
with pointing cut the dangers and miseries,
into which the latter is apt to be betrayed,
by his favourable situation in the world.

I. PIETY, and gratitude to God, con-

tribute in a high degree to enliven pro-
fperity. Gratitude is a pleating emotion.
The tinfe of being distinguished by the
kindness of another, gladdens the heart,
warms it with reciprocal affedion, and
gives to any poficflion which is agreeable
in itself, a double rclih, from its being
the gift of a friend. Favours conferred
by men, I acknowledge, may prove bur-
denfome. For human virtue is never per-
fed; and sometimes unreaibnable expeda-
tions on the one fide, fomctimes a morti-
fying sense of dependence on the other,

6 corrode

corrode in secret the pleasure of benefits, S E R M.

III.

and convert the obligations of fiiendflhip L
into grounds of jealousy. But nothing of
this kind can affedt the intercoufe of gra-
titude with heaven. Its favours are wholly
difinterefied; and with a gratitude the
most cordial and unfufpicious, a good man
looks up to that Almighty Bencfador, who
aims at no end but the happiness of those
whom he blefles, and who desires no re-
turn from them but a devout and thankful
heart. While others can trace their pro-

fperity to no higher source than a concur-
rence of worldly causes, and, often, of
mean or trifling incidents, which occasion-
ally favoured their designs; with what
fuperiour fatisfadion does the servant of
God remark the hand of that gracious
Power, which hath raised him up; which
hath happily conduaed him through the
various steps of life, and crowned him with
the most favourable diftindion beyond his
equals?

Let us farther confider, that not only

gratitude for the past, but a cheering sense

of

SE R M. of God's favour at the present, enters into

- the pious emotion. They are only the

virtuous, who in their prosperous days
hear this voice addressed to them, Go thy
wtay, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy
wine with a merry heart; for God now
accepteth thy works*. He who is the
Author of their prosperity, gives them a
title to enjoy, with complacency, his own
gift. While bad men snatch the pleasures
of the world as by stealth, without counte-
nance from God the proprietor of the
world; the righteous fit openly down to
the feast of life, under the smile of ap-
proving Heaven. No guilty fears damp
their joys. The blessing of God rests upon
all that they possess; his protedion fur-
rounds them; and hence,, in the habita-
tions of the righteous., is found the voice of
rejoicing and salvation. A lustre unknown
to others, inverts, in their fight, the whole
face of nature. Their piety refleas a fun-
shine from heaven upon the prosperity of
the world; unites in one point of view,

* Eccles. ix. 7.

the

the smiling afpe&, both of the powers SERM.
above, and of the objeas below. Not. I_..
only have they as full a relifih as others, of
the innocent pleasures of life, but, more-
over, in these they hold communion with
God. In all that is good or fair, they trace
his liand. From the beauties of nature,
from the improvements of art, from the
enjoyments of social life, they raise their
affetion to the source of all the happiness
which surrounds them; and thus widen
the sphere of their pleasures, by adding in-
telleaual, and spiritual, to earthly joys.

For illufitration of what I have said on

this head, remark that cheerful enjoyment
of a prosperous state which King David
had, when he wrote the twenty-third
Psalm; and compare the highest pleasures
of the riotous finner, with the happy and
satisfied spirit which breathes throughout
that Pfalm.-In the midst of the splendour
of royalty, with what amiable simplicity
of gratitude does he look up to the Lord as
his Shepherd; happier in ascribing all his
success to divine favour, than to the policy

x of

SER IM. of his counsels, or to the force of hh

-~ arms? How many instances of divine

goodness arose before him in pleasing re-
membrance, when with such relish he
speaks of the green paflures and fill waters
beside which God bad led him; of his cup
ewhich he bath made to overflow; and of
the table which he bath prepared for him
in presence of his enemies! With what per-
feEt tranquillity does he look forward to
the time of his pafflng through the valley
of the /fadow of death; unappalled by
that Spetre, whose most difitant appear-
ance blaits the prosperity of sinners! He
fears no evil, as long as the rod and the
flaf of his Divine Shepherd are with him;
and, through all the unknown periods of
this and of future existence, commits
himself to his guidance with secure and
triumphant hope. Surely goodness and
mercy fiJall follow me all the days of my
life; and I will dwell in the house of the
Lord for ever.-What a purified, senti-
mental enjoyment of prosperity is here
exhibited! How different from that gross

reli~h

relilh of worldly pleasures, which belongs S E R M.
to those who behold only the terrefrial f
fide of things; who raise their views to
no higher objeas than the succession of
human contingencies, and the weak efforts
of human ability; who have no protetor
or patron in the heavens, to enliven their
prosperity, or to warm their hearts with
gratitude and trust !

II. RELIGION affords to good men pe-

culiar security in the enjoyment of their
prosperity. One of the first refle&ions
which muff strike every thinking man, as-
ter his situation in the world has become
agreeable, is, That the continuance of such
a situation is most uncertain, From a va-
riety of causes, he lies open to change.
On many sides he fees that he may be
pierced; and the wider his comforts ex-
tend, the broader is the mark which he
spreads to the arrows of misfortune. Hence
many a fecra alarm to the refleaing mind;
and to those who rejeat all such alarms,
the real danger increases, in proportion to
their improvident security.

VOL. I. F By

S E R M. By worldly affitance it is vain to think

I .4. of providing any effeAual defence, feeing

the world's mutability is the very cause of
our terrour. It is from a higher principle,
from a power fuperiour to the world, that
relief mull be fought, amidift such difquie-
tudes of the heart. He who in his pro-
fperity can look up to One who is witness
to his moderation, humanity and charity;
he who can appeal to Heaven, that he has
not been elated by pride, nor overcome
by pleasure, but has studied to employ its
gifts to the honour of the Giver; this
man, if there be any truth in religion, if
there be any benignity or goodness in the
administration of the universe, has just
cause for encouragement and hope. Not
that an Interest in the Divine grace will

perpetuate to a good man, more than to
others, a life of unruffled prosperity.
Change and alteration form the very es-
feiice of the world. But let the world
change around him at pleasure, he has
ground to hope that it thall not be able to
make him unhappy. Whatever may vary,

6 God's

God's ,providence. is still the fame; and his s E R M.
love tq the righteous remains unaltered.

-

If jt (hall be the Divinge .yij to remove one
comfort, he trusts that some other (hall 14
given. Whatever is given, whatever is
taken away, he confides, that in the last
result allJ fall work for his good.

Hence he is not difiurbed, like bad

men, by the instability of the world.
Dangers, which overcome others, (hake
not his more steady mind. He enjoys the
pleasures of life pure and unallayed, be-
cause he enjoys them, as long as they 14at,
without anxious terrours. They are not
his all, his only good. He welcomes
them when they arrive; and vyhen they
pass away, he can eye them, as they de-
part,, without agony or despair. His pro-
fperity strikes a deeper and firmer root
than that of the ungodly. And for this
reason he is compared, in the Text? to a
tree planted by the rivers of water; a ,tyee,
whose branches the tempest may indeed
bend, but whose roots it cannot touch;
a tree, which may occasionally be stripped

F 2 of

S E R M. of its leaves and blossoms, but which still

- maintains its place, and in due season flou-

rifles anew. Whereas the finner in his
prosperity, according to the allufibn in the
book of Job, resembles the ruJ~J that grow-
etb up in the mire*; a slender reed, that
may flourish green for a while by the fide
of the brook, as long as it is cherished by
the fun, and fanned by the breeze; till the
first bitter blast breaks its feeble stem,
roots it out from its bed, and lays it in the
dufi. Lo! such is the prosperity of them
that forget God; and thus their hope Jhall
perlj.

III. RELIGION forms good men to the

most proper temper for the enjoyment of
prosperity. A little reflection may satisfy
us, that mere poffeflion, even granting it
to be secure, does not constitute enjoyment.
Give a man all that is in the power of the
world to bestow; furrourid him with riches;
crown him with honours; invest him, if
you will, with absolute dominion; but

* Job viii. ii.

leave

leave him at the fame time under some fe- s R M.

III.

cret oppreflion or heaviness of heart; you 1
bestow indeed the materials of enjoyment,
but you deprive him of ability to extra&
it. You set a feast before him, but he
wants the power of tasting it. Hence pro-
fperity is so often an equivocal word, de-
noting merely affluence of poffleflion, but
unjustly applied to the miserable poffeffor.

We all know the effedts which any in-

disposition of the body, even though flight,
produces on external prosperity. Visit the
gayefR and moR fortunate man on earth,
only with sleepless nights; disorder any
single organ of his senses; corrode but one
of his smallest nerves; and you shall pre-
fently fee all his gaiety vanish; and you
shall hear him complain, that he is a mi-
ferable creature, and express his envy of
the peasant and the cottager.-And can
you believe, that a disease in the foul is
less fatal to enjoyment, than a disease in
the animal frame; or that a found mind
is not as eflential as-a found body, to the
prosperity of man?-Let us rate sensual

F 3 gratifications

sE M'. gratifications as high as we please, we shall
-- be made to feel that the feat of enjoyment

is in the foul. The corrupted temper, and
the guilty passions of the bad, ftruiftite the
effea of every advantage which the world
confers on them. The world may call
them men of pleasure; buit' of all men they
are the greatest foes to pleasure. From
their eagerness to grasp, they itrangle and
destroy it. None but the temperate, the
regular, and the virtuous, know how to
enjoy prosperity. They bring to its cornm-
forts the manly relish of a found uncorrupt-
ed mind. They flop at the proper point,
before enjoyment degenerates into difgult,
arnd pleasure is converted into pain. They
are strangers to those complaints which flow
:from spleen, caprice, and all the fantastical
distresses of a vitiated mind. While riot-
ouis indulgence enervates both the body
and the inind, purity, and virtue heighten
all the o6wers of human 'fruition. Mode-
'rate and simple plea'fiires relish high with
'the' temipeate; in themidft of his ifudied
refinemiets, the voluptuary languiihes.

SWherever

Wherever guilt mingles with prosperity, S E R M.

a certain gloom and heaviness enter along -
with it. Vitious intrigues never fail to
entangle and cmbarrafs those who engage
in them. But innocence confers ease and
freedom on the mind; leaves it open to
every pleasing sensation; give a lightness
to the spirits, similar to the native gaiety of
youth and health; ill imitated, and ill sup-
plied, by that forced levity of the vitious,
.which arises not from the health, but from
the drunkenness of the mind.

Feeble are all pleasures in which the

heart has no part. The felfifh gratifica-
tions of the bad, are both narrow in their
circle, and short in their duration. But
prosperity is redoubled to a good man, by
his generous use of it. It is refleaed back
upon him from every one whom he makes
happy. In the intercourse of domeflick
affeaion, in the attachment of friends,
the gratitude of dependents, the esteem
and good will of all who know him, he
fees blessings multiplied round him, on
every fide. When the ear heard me, then

F 4 ir

SE R M. it blefed me; and when the eye saw me, it
vY gave witnefi to me: Because I delivered the

poor that cried, the fatherless, and him that
bad none to help him. The blefing of him
that was ready to peri/h came upon me, and
I caused the widow's heart tojing with joy.
I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to
the lame: I was a father to the poor; and
the cause which I knew not, Ifearchedout *.
-Thus, while the righteousJlouri/heth like
a tree planted by the rivers of water, he
bringeth forth also his fruit in his season:
And that fruit, to pursue the allusion of
the Text, he brings forth, not for himself
alone. He flourishes, not like a tree in
some solitary defart, which scatters its blof-
foms to the wind, and communicates nei-
ther fruit nor shade to any living thing:
but like a tree in the midst of an inhabited
country, which to some affords friendly
shelter, to others, fruit; which is not only
admired by all for its beauty, but blessed
by 'the traveller for the shade, and by the
hungry for the sustenance it hath given.

* Job xxix. 11-17.

IV.

IV. RELIGION heightens the profpe- SERM.

rity of good men, by the profpea which ~
it affords 'them of greater happiness to
come in another world. I showed, in the
foregoing discourse, the mighty effct of
the hope of Heaven, in relieving the mind
under the troubles of life. And sure, if
this hope be able to support the falling, it
cannot but improve the flouriflhing state
of man; if it can dispel the thickeR gloom
of adversity, it must needs enliven profpe-
rity, by the additional lufire which it
throws upon it. What is present, is never
fufficient to give us full fatisfadion. To
the present we muR always join some
agreeable anticipations of futurity, in or-
der to complete our pleasure. What an
-adceffion then must the prosperity of the
righteous man receive, when, born with a
tfmboth and gentle gale along the current
of life, and looking round on all the'
bleflings of his state, he can confider these
as no more than an introduaion to higher
scenes which are hereafter to open; he
can view his present life, as only the

porch

SE R M. porch through which he is to pas. into the

n >. palace of bliss; and his present joys, as

but a feeble fitream, dispensed for his occa-
fional refreshment, until he arrive at that
river of life, which flows at, God's right
hand!---Such profpeas purify the mind,
at the fame time that they ,gladden it.
They prevent the good man from setting
too high a value on his present poffeflons,;
and thereby assist him in maintaining,
amidst the temptations of worldly plea-
sure, that command of himself which is
so essential to the wife and temperate en-
joyment;of prosperity.

It is the fate of all human pleasures, by

continuance, to fade; of most of them,
to cloy. Hence, in the most prosperous
slate, there are frequent intervals of lan-
guor, and even of dejedion. There are
vacuities in the happiest life, which it is
not in the power of the world to fill up.
What relief so adapted to those vacant or
dejeated periods, as the pleating hopes
which arise from immortality? How bar-
* ren and imperfea that prosperity, which

can

can have recourse to no such subsidiary SER M.

III.

comfort, in order to animate the ifagnation
of vulgar life, 'dnd tot supply the infuffici-
ency of worldly pleasures!

WVoridly prosperity declines with de-

e!ining life. In youth its tdiffh was
brisk and poignant. It becomes more
sober as life advances; and flattens as
life descends. He who lately overflowed
tSith Cheerful spirits and high hopes, be-
gins to look back with heaviness on the
days of former years. He thinks of his
old companions who are gone; and re-
views past scenes, more agreeable thari'any
which are likely td return. The a&ivity
of pursuit is weakened. The gaiety of
amusement is fled. The gratifications
of sense languish. When his accustomed
pleaiures, one after another, thus fleal
treacherously away, what can he, who is
an utter stranger to religion, and to the
hope of Heaven, substitute in their place?
-But even in fhat drooping period, the
promises and hopes of, religion support
the spirits of a good man till the latest

hour.

SER M. hour. His leaf, it is said in the Text,Jball

.. -.

- not wither. It shall not be in the power

of time to blast his prosperity: But old age
shall receive him into a quiet retreat, where,
if lively sensations fail, gentle pleasures
remain to sooth him. That hope of im-
mortality, which formerly improved his
other enijoyments, now in a great measure
supplies their absence. Its importance rises,
in proportion as its objet draws near. He
is not forsaken by the world, but retires
from it with dignity; reviewing with a
calm mind the part which he has aded,
and trusting to the promise of God for an
approaching reward. Such sentiments and
expeaations ihed a pleasing tranquillity
over the old age of the righteous man.
SThey make the evening of his days go
down unclouded; and allow the fiream of
life, though fallen low, to run clear to the
last drop.

THUS I have shown, I hope, with full

evidence, what material ingredients reli-
gion and a good conscience are in the pro-

7 fperity

fperity of life. Separated from them, pro- SE R M.

III.

fpertty, how fair soever it may seem to the _
world, is insipid, nay frequently noxious
to the poffeffor: United with them, it rises
into a real blefling bestowed by God upon
Sman. God giveth to a man that is good in
his ight, wisdom, and knowledge, and joy;
but to the fnner he giveth fore travail, to
gather, and to heap up, that he may give to
him that is good before God*.

ALLOW me now to conclude the sub-

jest, with representing to the prosperous
men of the world, those crimes and mise-
ries into which the abuse of their condi-
tion is likely to betray them, and calling
upon them to beware of the dangers with
which they are threatened.

It is unfortunate for mankind, that

those situations which favour pleasure, are
too generally adverse to virtue. Virtue re-
quires internal government and discipline;
prosperity relaxes the mind, and inflames
the paffioas. Virtue is supported by a

* Eccles. ii. z6,.

regard

SER M. regard to what is future; prosperity at-
S1 taches us wholly to what is present. The

charaaerifficks of virtue, are modesty and
humility; the most common attendants of
prosperity, are pride and prefurnption.
One thould think, that prosperity would
prove the strongest incitement to remember
and to honour that God who beftows it.
Yet such is the perverseness of human na-
ture, that it proves much oftener the mo-
tive to impiety. The changes of the
world call the attention of men to an Invi-
fible Power. But a train of events pro-
ceeding according to their wish, leads
them to. nothing beyond what they fee,
The Supreme Giver is concealed from view
by his own gifts. This instance of success
they ascribe to a fortunate concurrence of
worldly causes; that acquisition, to their
own skill and industry; unmindful of
him, who from, the beginning arranged
that series of causes, and who placed themn
in circumstances where their industry, could
operate with success. From forgetting God,
they too often proceed to despise him.

All

All that is light or giddy in their minds' s E R M
is set in motion by the gale of prosperity. .-..
Arrogance and felf-fufficiency are lifted
up; and their state is considered, as fe-
cured by their own strength. Hence that
pride of countenance, through which the
wicked, in their prosperity, as David ob-
serves, reffei to seek after God. They are
described as /peaking loftily, and setting
their mouth agaitn/l the Heavens. They
take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at
the found of the organ; and they fay unto
God, Depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. What is the Al-
mighty that we ]fould serve him? Or,
what profit ]fould we have, if we pray
unto him.

They fay unto God, Depart from us.-

What an impious voice! Could we have
believed it possible, that worldly plea-
fures thould so far intoxicate any human
heart ? Wretched and infatuated men!
Have you ever examined on what your
confidence tefts?-You have said in your
hearts, Tou Jhall never be moved; you

fancy

SE R M. fancy yourselves placed on a mountain
\.' which jlandeth fJrong. Awake from thole

flattering dreams, and behold how every
thing totters around you! You stand on
the edge of a precipice; and the ground
is sliding away below your feet. In your
health, life, poffeflions, conneaions, plea-
fures, principles of deftruaion work. The
mine advances in secret, which saps the
foundations, while you revel on the fur-
face. No mighty effort, no long prepara-
tion of events, is needed to overturn your
prosperity. By flow degrees it rose. Long
time, much labour, aud the concurrence
of many assisting causes, were necessary
to rear it up; but one flight incident can
entirely overthrow it. Suspicions are in-
fused into the patron or the prince on
whom you depend; and your disgrace
ensues. Exercise, or amusement, kindles
a fever in the veins of those whom you
loved; and you are robbed of your com-
forts and hopes* A few grains of sand
lodge themselves within. you; and the
reft of your life is disease and misery.

Ten

CTen thousand contingencies ever float on S F.R M.
the current of life, the smallest of which, .
if it meet your frail bark in the passing, is
fufficient to dash it in pieces.---Is this a
place, is this a time, to swell with fahcied
fecurityi to riot in unlawful pleafilre, and;
by your disregard of moral and religious
duties, to brave the governinent of the
Almighty? He hath flamped every pof-
session of nian with this inscription, Re-
joice with tremblinig. Throughout every
age, he hath pointed his peculiar difplea-
sure againift the confidence of prefuitrption,
and the arrogance of profpetity. He hath
pronoulnced, that whofocoer exalteth him-
felfJfIal be abased. And shall neither the
admonitions which you receive from the
visible inconstancy of the world, nor the
declarations of the Divine difpleafire, be
fufficient to check your thoughtless ca-.
reer? Know, that, by your impiety, yoU
multiply the dangers which already threat-
en you on every fide; you accelerate the
speed with which the changes of the world
advance to your defiruftion. The Al-

VoL. I. G mighty

s E R M. mighty touches with his rod that edifice of
l' dust, on which you fland, and boast of your

strength; and, at that instant, it crumbles
to nothing.

As men, then, bethink yourselves of

human instability. As Christians, reve-
rence the awful government of God. In-
sure your prosperity, by consecrating it to
religion and virtue. Be humble in your
elevation; be moderate in your views; be
submissive to him who hath raised and dif-
tinguithed you. Forget not, that on his
providence you are as dependent, and to
the obedience of his laws as much bound,
as the meanest of your fellow-creatures.
Disgrace not your flation, by that groflhefs
of sensuality, that levity of dissipation, or
that insolence of rank, which bespeak a lit-
tle mind. Let the affability of your beha-
viour show that you remember the natural
equality of men. Let your moderation in
pleasure, your command of passion, and
your fleady regard to the great duties of
life, show that you possess a mind worthy
of your fortune. Eflabliflh your charader

8 on

on the basis of esteem; not on the flattery s E R M.

III.

of dependents, or the praise of sycophants,
but on the refped of the wife and the
good. Let innocence preside over your
enjoyments. Let ufefulnefs and benefi-
cence, not ostentation and vanity, diret
the train of your pursuits. Let your alms,
together with your prayers, come up in me-
morial before God. So thall your profpe-
rity, under the blefling of Heaverr, be
as the jhining light, which jhineth more and
more unto the perfect day. So ihall it refem-
ble those celefftial fires which glow above,
with beneficent, with regular and perma-
nent lustre; and not prove that mirth of
fools, which by Solomon is compared to the
crackling of thorns under a pot, a glittering
and fervent blaze, but speedily extina.

On the whole, let this be our conclusion,

that both in prosperity and in adversity,
religion is the fafeft guide of human life.
Conduted by its light, we reap the plea-
fure.s, and at the fame time escape the dan-
gers, of a prosperous state. Sheltered under
its proteTion, we fiand the shock of adver-

G z fity

S E R M. fity with mod intrepidity, and fuffer least
-.. from the violence of the storm. He that

defireth ife, and loveth many days that he
mway fee good, let him keep his tongue from
evil, and his lips from guile. Let him depart
from evil, and do good. Let him fcek peace
with God, and pufute it. Then, in his ad-
verfity, God J'all hide him in his pavilion.
In his prosperity, he jall flourlyJ like a tree
planted by the rivers of water. The un-
godily are not so; but are like the chaff, light
and vile, which the wind driveth away.

# SERMON IV. On our imperfect Knowledge of a Future State. 1GORINTH. xiii. 12. For now we see thorugh a glass, darkly 

[ 85 ]

SERMON IV.

On our Imperfed KNOWLEDGE of a

FUTURE STATE.

I COR. xiii. 12.

For now we fee through a glass, darkly.-

T HE Apostle here describes the im- SER M.

perfedtion of our knowledge with iv.

relation to spiritual and eternal objeas.
He employs two metaphors to represent
more strongly the disadvantages under
which we lie; One, that we fee those ob-
jecs through a glqfs, that is, through the
intervention of a medium which obscures
their glory; the other, that we fee them
in a riddle or enigma, which our tranfla-
tors have rendered by feeing them darkly;
that is, the truth in part discovered, in

G 3 part

SE M. part concealed, and placed beyond our corn-
-- prehension.

This description, however just and true,

cannot fail to occasion some perplexity
to an enquiring mind. For it may seem
strange, that so much darkness flould be
left upon those celestial objeas, towards
which we are at the fame time commanded
to aspire. We are strangers in the uni-
verse of God. Confined to that spot on
which we dwell, we are permitted to
know nothing of what is tranfating in
the regions above us and around us. By
much labour, we acquire a superficial
acquaintance with a few sensible objets
which we find in our present habitation;
but we enter, and we depart, under a
total ignorance of the nature and laws of
the spiritual world. One fubjea in par-
ticular, when our thoughts proceed in this
train, must often recur upon the mind
with peculiar anxiety; that is, the im-
mortality of the fobul, and the future state
of man. Exposed as we are at present to
such variety of affliions, and fubjeded

to

to so much disappointment in all our pur- SER M.

IV.

suits of happiness, Why, it may be said,
has our gracious Creator denied us the
consolation of a full discovery of our fu-
ture existence, if indeed such an existence
be prepared for us ?-Reason, it is true,
suggests many arguments in behalf of
immortality: Revelation gives full affu-
rance of it. Yet even that Gospel which
is said to have brought life and immortality
to light, allows us to fee only through a
glass darkly. It doth not yet appear what
we flall be. Our knowledge of a future
world is very imperfet; our ideas of it
are faint and confused. It is not displayed
in such a manner, as to make an impref-
sion suited to the importance of the objet.
The faith even of the best men is much
inferiour, both in clearness and in force,
to the evidence of sense; and proves on
many occasions infufficient to counterba-
lance the temptations of the prelfent world.
Happy moments indeed there sometimes
are in the lives of pious men, when, sec
queftered from worldly cares, and born up

G 4 on

S E R M. on the wings of divine contemplation, they

IV. jrife to a near and transporting view of

immortal glory. But such efforts of the
mind are rare, and cannot be long sup-
ported. When the spirit of meditation
lubfides, this lively sense of a future state
decays; and though the general belief of
it remain, yet even good men, when they
return to the ordinary business and cares of
life, seem to rejoin the multitude, and to
re-aflume the fame hopes, and fears, and
interests, which influence the reft of the
world.

From such refle&ions, a considerable

difficulty refpeding this important sub-
je&, either arises, or seems to arise. Was
such an obscure and imperfed discovery of
another life worthy to proceed from God ?
Does it not afford some ground, either to
tax his goodness, or to fufped the evi-
dence of its coming from him ?-This is
the point which we are now to confider;
and let us confider it with that close atten-
tion which the fubjed merits. Let us en-
quire, whether we have any reason, ei-

, I thwr

ther to complain of Providence, or to ob- SER M.
jeQ to the evidence of a future state, be- .
cause that evidence is not of a more fenfi-
ble and striking nature. Let us attempt
humbly to trace the reasons, why, though
permitted to know and to fee somewhat of
the eternal world, we are nevertheless per-
mitted only to know in part, and to fee
through a glass, darkly.

IT plainly appears to be the plan of the

Deity, in all his difpenfations, to mix
light with darkness, evidence with uncer-
tainty. Whatever the reasons of this pro-
cedure be, the fad is undeniable. He is
described in the Old Testament, as a God
that hidetb himself*. Clouds and darknefi
are said to firround him. His way is in the
sea, and his path in the great waters; his
footfeps are not known. Both the works
and the ways of God are full of mystery.
In the ordinary course of his government,
innumerable events occur which perplex
}ps to the utmost. There is a certain limit

* Isaiah xlv. 15.

to

SER M. to all our enquiries in religion, beyond

IV.

\-*-' which if we attempt to proceed, we are

loft in a maze of inextricable difficulties.
Even that revelation which affords such
material inftrudion to man, concerning his
duty and his happiness, leaves many doubts
unresolved. Why it was not given sooner;
why not to all men; why there should he
so many things in it hard to be underjfood,
are difficulties not inconsiderable, in the
midst of that inconteftible evidence by
which it is supported. If, then, the future
state of man be not placed in so full and
clear a light as we desire, this is no more
than what the analogy of all religion,
both natural and revealed, gave us reason
to expect.

But such a solution of the difficulty will

be thought imperfe&. It may, perhaps,
not give much fatisfadion, to show, that
all religion abounds with difficulties of a
like nature. Our situation, it will be said,
is so much the more to be lamented, that
not on one fide only we are confined in our
enquiries, but on all hands environed with

mysterious

mysterious obfcurity.-Let us then, if so sB vRM.
much diffatisfied with our condition, give ..-
scope for once to Fancy, and confider how
the plan of Providence might be reaified
to our with. Let us call upon the Scep-
tick, and desire him to fay, what measure
of information would afford him entire fa-
tisfa&ion.

This, he will tell us, requires not any

long or deep deliberation. He desires only
to have his view enlarged beyond the li-
mits of this corporeal state. Inflead of
resting upon evidence which requires dif-
cuffion, which mufft be supported by much
reasoning, and which, after all, he alleges
yields very imperfe& information, he de-
mands the everlaflting mansions to be so
displayed, if in truth such mansions there
be, as to place faith on a level with the
evidence of sense. What noble and happy
effeas, he exclaims, would instantly fol-
low, if man thus beheld his present and
his future existence at once before him!
He would then become worthy of his rank
i the creation. Inflead of being the sport,

as

E R M. as now, of degrading passions and childish
IV.

4 attachments, he would aa solely on the

principles of immortality. His pursuit of
virtue would be steady ; his life would be
undisturbed and happy. Superiour to the
attacks of distress, and to the folicitations
of pleasure, he would advance, by a regu-
lar progress, towards those divine rewards
and honours which were continually pre-
sent to his view.----Thus Fancy, with
as much ease and confidence as if it were
a perfed judge of creation, ereds a new
world to itself, and exults with admira-
tion of its own work. But let us pause,
and suspend this admiration, till we coolly
examine the consequences that would fol-
low from this supposed reformation of the
universe.

CONSIDER the nature and circumhiances

of man. Introduced into the world in
an indigent condition, he is supported at
firfi by the care of others; and, as soon
as he begins to ad for himself, finds la-
hour and indufiry to be neceflary for sus-

taining

taining his life, and supplying his wants. sR M.
Mutual defence and interest give rife to ,-.-.
society; and society, when formed, re-
quires diftinaions of property, diversity
of conditions, subordination of ranks,
and a multiplicity of occupations, in or-
der to advance the general good. The
services of the poor, and tile protedtion
of the rich, become reciprocally necessary.
The governours, and the governed, muff
co-operate for general safety. Various
arts must be studied; some refpeaing the
cultivation of the mind, others the care
of the body; some to ward off the evils,
and some to provide the conveniences of
life. In a word, by the destination of
his Creator, and the neceflities of his

nature, man commences, at once, an
adive, not merely a contemplative being.
Religion assumes him as futh. It sup-
poses him employed in this world, as on
a busy stage. It regulates, but does not
abolish, the enterprizes and cares of or-
dinary life. It addresses itself to the va-
rious ranks in society; to the rich arind

the

sR a M. the poor, to the magistrate and the fubjea.

IV, S/ It rebukes the slothful; direas the diligent

how to labour; and requires every man to
do his own business.

Suppose, now, that veil to be with-

drawn which conceals another world from
our view. Let all obscurity vanish; Let
us no longer fee darkly, a. through a glass ;
but let every man enjoy that intuitive
perception of divine and eternal objets,
which the Sceptick was supposed to desire.
The immediate effeC of such a discovery
would be, to annihilate in our eye all
human objets, and to produce a total
stagnation in the affairs of the world.
Were the celestial glory exposed to our
admiring view; did the angelic har-
mony found in our enraptured ears; what
earthly concerns could have the power
of engaging our attention for a single mo-
ment ? All the studies and pursuits, the
arts and labours, which now employ the
adivity of man, which support the or-
der, or promote the happiness of society,
would lie negleded and abandoned. Thofle

desires

desires and fears, those hopes and interests S ER M.
by which we are at present stimulated, L
would cease to operate. Human life would
present no objeas fufficient to rouse the
mind; to kindle the spirit of enterprize,
or to urge the hand of indufiry. If the
mere sense of duty engaged a good man to
take some part in the business of the world,
the talk, when submitted to, would prove
diftafteful. Even the preservation of life
would be slighted, if he were not bound
to it by the authority of God. Impatient
of his confinement within this tabernacle
of duff, languithing for the happy day of
his translation to those glorious regions
which were displayed to his fight, he
would sojourn on earth as a melancholy
exile. Whatever Providence has prepared
for the entertainment of man, would be
viewed with contempt. Whatever is now
attraaive in society, would appear insipid.
In a word, he would be no longer a fit
inhabitant of this world, nor be qualified
for those exertions which- are allotted to

him

SE R M. him in his present sphere of being. But, all

IV.
.-y his faculties being sublimated abbve the mea-

sure of humanity, he would be in the con-
dition of a being of fuperiour order, who,
obliged to reside among men, would regard
their pursuits with scorn, as dreams, trifles;
and puerile amusements of a day.

But to this reasoning it may perhaps

be replied, That such consequences as I
have now fiated, supposing them to fol-
low, deserve not much regard.-For what
though the present arrangement of human
affairs were entirely changed, by a clearer
view, and a stronger impression of our fu-
ture state ? Would not such a change prove
the highest blessing to man ? Is not his
attachment to worldly objedts the great
source both of his misery and his guilt ?
Employed in perpetual contemplation of
heavenly objeas, and in preparation for
the enjoyment of them, would he not be-
come more virtuous, and of course more
happy, than the nature of his priefent
employments and attachments permits him

to

to be-Allowing, for a moment, the con.a s E M.
sequence to be such, this much is yielded, Ib j
that, upon the supposition which was made,
man would not be the creature which he
now is, tor human life the state which
we now behold. How far the change
would contribute to his welfare, comes to
be considered.

If there be any principle fully afcer-

tained by religion, it is, That this life was
intended for a state of trial and improve--
ment to man, His preparation for a bet-
ter world required a gradual purification,
carried on by steps of progressive difci-
pline. The situation, therefore, here as-
signed him, was such as to answer this
design, by calling forth all his Paive
powers, by giving full scope to his moral
dispositions, and bringing to light his
whole chara&er. Hence it became pro-
per, that difficulty and temptation fliould
arise in the course of his duty. Ample re-
wards were promised to virtue; but these
rewards were left, as yet, in obscurity
and distant profpe&. The impressions of

VOL. I. H sense

SER M. sense were so balanced against the disco-.

IV.

- veries of immortality, as to allow a con-

flia between faith and sense, between con-
science and desire, between present plea-
sure and future good. In this conflid, the
fouls of good men are tried, improved, and
ltrengthened. In this field, their honours
are reaped. Here are formed the capital
virtues of fortitude, temperance, and self-
denial; moderation in prosperity, patience
in adversity, fubmifflion to the will of God,
and charity and forgiveness to men, amidit
the various competitions of worldly in-
terest.

Such is the plan of Divine wisdom for

man's improvement. But put the cafe,
that the plan devised by human wisdom
were to take place, and that the rewards
of the just were to be more fully displayed
to view; the exercise of all those graces
which I have mentioned, would be en-
tirely superseded. Their very names would
be unknown. Every temptation being
withdrawn, every worldly attachment
being subdued by the overpowering dif-

5 coveries

coveries of eternity, no trial of sincerity4 SERM.

IV.

no discrimination of charaters, would re- i -.
main; no opportunity would be afforded
for those adive exertions, which are the
means of purifying and perfecing the
good. On the competition between time
and eternity, depends the chief exercise
of human virtue. The obscurity which
at present hangs over eternal objedts, pre-
serves the competition. Remove that ob-
fcurity, and you remove human virtue from
its place. You overthrow that whole sys.-
tem of discipline, by which imperfed crea-
tures are, in this life, gradually trained up
for a more perfeC state.

This, then, is the conclusion to which

at last we arrive. That the full display
which was demanded, of the heavenly
glory, would be so far from improving
the human foul, that it would abolish
those virtues an'd duties which are the
great instruments of its improvement. It
would be unsuitable to the charaCer of
man in every view, either as an adive
being, or a moral agent. It would dif-

H 2 qualify

S E R M. qualify him from taking part in the affairs
-.-v-. of the world; for relishing the pleasures,

or for discharging the duties of life: In
a word, it would entirely defeat the pur-
pose of his being placed on this earth.
And the question, Why the Almighty has
been pleased to leave a spiritual world,
and the future existence of man, under so
much obscurity, resolves in the end into
this, Why there ihould be such a crea-
ture as man in the universe of God ?--
Such is the issue of the improvements
proposed to be made on the plans of Provi-
dence. They add to the discoveries of the
fuperiour wisdom of God, and of the pre-
fumption and folly of man.

FROM what has been said, it now ap-

pears, That no reasonable obje&ion to the
belief of a future state arises, from the
imperfect discoveries of it which we en-
joy; from the difficulties that are mingled
with its evidence; from our feeing as
through a glass darkly, and being left to
walk by faith and not by fight. It cannot

be

be otherwise, it ought not to be other- SER fM.

IV

wife in our present state. The evidence
which is afforded, is fufficient for the
conviaion of a candid mind, fufficient
for a rational ground of condud; though
not so striking as to withdraw our atten-
tion from the present world, or altoge-
ther to overcome the impression of fen-
fible objeas. In such evidence it becomes
us to acquiesce, without indulging either
doubts or complaints, on account of our
not receiving all the fatisfaaion which
we fondly desire, but which our present
immaturity of being excludes. For, upon
the supposition of immortality, this life is
no other than the childhood of existence;
and the measures of our knowledge must
he proportioned to such a state. To the
fucceflive stages of human life, from in-
fancy to old age, belong certain peculiar
attachments; certain cares, desires, and
interests; which open not abruptly, but
by gradual advances on the mind, as it
becomes fit to receive them, and is pre-
pared for aaing the part to which, in

H 3 their

SERM their order, they pertain. Hence, in the

IV

«- education of a child, no one thinks of in-

spiring him all at once with the know-r
ledge, the sentiments, and views of a
man, and with contempt for the exer-,
cifes and amusements of childhood. On
the contrary, employments suited to his
age are allowed to occupy him. By these
his powers are gradually unfolded; and
advantage is taken of his youthful pur-
suits, to improve and strengthen his mind;
till, step by step, he is led on to higher
profpeas, and prepared for a larger and
more important scene of a6tion.

This analogy, which so happily illus-

trates the present condua of the Deity
towards man, deserves attention the more,
as it is the very illustration used by the
Apostle, when treating of this fubje& in
the context. Now, says he, we know in
part--but when that which if perseEi is
come, that which is in part Jhall be done
away. When I was a child, I spoke as a
child, I undertfood as a child, I thought as
a child; but when I became a man, Ip ut

a7eay~

away childi/h things. For now we fee S E R M.

IV.

through a glass, darkly; but then, face to -
face : Now I know in part ; but then, I
flall know even as I am known. Under
the care of the Almighty, our education
is now going on, from a mortal to an
immortal state. As much light is let in
upon us, as we can bear without injury.
When the objeas become too splendid
and dazzling for our fight, the curtain
is drawn. Exercised in such a field of
adion, as suits the strength of our un-
ripened powers, we are, at the fame time,
by proper profpeas and hopes, prompted
to aspire towards the manhood of our
nature, the time when childifl things jhall
be put away. But frill, betwixt those
future profpeas, and the impression of
present objeas, such an accurate propor-
tion is established, as on the one hand
(hall not produce a total contempt of
earthly things, while we aspire to those
that are heavenly; and on the other,
shall not encourage such a degree of at-
taclment to our present state, as would

H 4 render

S E R M. render us unworthy of future advancement.

IV. '. In a word, the whole course of things is

so ordered, that we neither, by an ir-
regular and precipitate education, become
men too soon; nor by a fond and trifling
indulgence, be fuffered to continue children
for ever.

LET these refledtions not only remove

the doubts which may arise from our
obscure knowledge of immortality, but
likewise produce the highest admiration
of the wisdom of our Creator. The ftruc-
ture of the natural world affords innume-
rable instances of profound design, which
no attentive fpeaator can survey without
wonder. In the moral world, where the
workmanship is of much finer and more
delicate contexture, fubjeas of still greater
admiration open to view. But admi-
ration must rife to its highest point,
when those parts of the moral conftitu-
tion, which at first were reputed ble-
mifhes, which carried the appearance of
obje'tions, either to the wifdgm or the

goodness

goodness of Providence, are discovered, on SE R M.
more accurate infpe&ion, to be adjusted IV.
with the most exquisite propriety. We
have now seen, that the darkness of man's
condition is no less essential to his well-
being, than the light which he enjoys.
His internal powers, and his external fitua-
tion, appear to be exaaly fitted to each
other. Those complaints which we are
apt to make, of our limited capacity and
narrow views, of our inability to penetrate
farther into the future destination of man,
are found, from the foregoing observations,
to be just as unreasonable, as the childish
complaints of our not being formed with a
microscopic eye, nor furnished with an
eagle's wing ; that is, of not being endowed
with powers which would subvert the na-
ture, apd counterac the laws, of our present
state.

In order to do justice to the fubje&, I

must observe, that the fame reasoning
which has been now employed with refpet
to our knowledge of immortality, is
equally applicable to many other branches

of

S E R M. of intelle&ual knowledge. Thus, why we
^-v-' are permitted to know so little of the na-

ture of that Eternal Being who rules the
universe; why the manner in which he
operates on the natural and moral world, is
wholly concealed ; why we are kept in such
ignorance, with refpea to the extent of his
works, to the nature and agency of fpiri-
tual beings, and even with refpea to the
union between our own foul and body:
To all these, and several other enquiries
of the fame kind, which often employ the
solicitous researches of speculative men, the
answer is the fame that was given to the
interesting question which makes the fubjea
of our discourse. The degree of know-
ledge desired, would prove incompatible
with the design, and with the proper bufi-
ness of this life. It would raise us to a
sphere too exalted; would reveal objeas
too great and striking for our present facul-
ties; would excite feelings too strong for
us to bear; in a word, would unfit us for
thinking or aaing like human creatures,
It is therefore reserved for a more ad.

vanced

vanced period of our nature ; and the hand s E R M.
of Infinite wisdom hath in mercy drawn a -
veil over scenes which would overpower the
fight of mortals.

One instance, in particular, of Divine

wisdom, is so illustrious, and corresponds
so remarkably with our present fubje&t,
that I cannot pats it over without notice;
that is, the concealment under which Pro-
vidence has placed the future events of
our life on earth. The desire of penetrat-
ing into this unknown region, has ever
been one of the most anxious passions of
men. It has often seized the wife as well
as the credulous, and given rife to many
vain and impious fuperfiitions throughout
the whole earth. Burning with curiosity
at the approach of some critical event, and
impatient under the perplexity of conjec-
ture and doubt, How cruel is Providence,
we are apt to exclaim, .in denying td man
the power of foresight, and in limiting
him to the knowledge of the present mo-
ment ? Were he permitted to look forward
intp the course of defliny, how much more

suitably

$ E R M. suitably would he be prepared for the various

IV,
" f turns and changes in his life ? With what

moderation would he enjoy his prosperity
under the fore-knowledge of an approach-
ing reverse ? And with.what eagerness he
prompted to improve the flying hours, by
feeing the inevitable term draw nigh which
was to finifl his course ?

But while Fancy indulges such vain de-

fires and criminal complaints, this coveted
fore-knowledge muff clearly appear to the
eye of Reason, to be the most fatal gift
which the Almighty could bestow. If, in
this present mixed state, all the successive
scenes of distress through which we are
to pass, were laid before us in one view,
perpetual sadness would overcast 'our life.
Hardly would any transient gleams of in-
tervening joy be able to force their way
through the cloud. Faint would be the
relifhe of pleasures, of which we foresaw
the close: Insupportable the burden of as-
flitions, under which we were oppressed
by a load not only of present, but of an-
ticipated sorrows. Friends 'would begin

6 their

their union, with lamenting the day which SER M.
was to dissolve it; and, with weeping eye, j
the parent would every moment behold
the child whom he knew that he was to
lose. In short, as soon as that myfRerious
veil, which now' covers futurity, was
lifted up, all the gaiety of life would dif-
appear; its flattering hopes, its pleasing
illusions, would vanish; *and nothing but
its vanity and sadness remain. The fore-
fight of the hour of death would conti-
nually interrupt the course of human as-
fairs; and the overwhelming profpea of
the future, instead of exciting men"to pro-
per a&ivity, would render them immove-
able with confiernation and dismay.--
How much more friendly to man is that
mixture of knowledge and ignorance which
is allotted him in this slate ! Ignorant of
the events which are to befall us, and of
the precise term which is to conclude our
life, by this ignorance our enjoyment of
present objects is favoured;, and knowing
that death is certain, and that human as-
fairs are full of change, by this know-

ledge

SE It M. ledge our attachment to those objeas is moo.

* derated. Precisely in the fame manner, asj

by the mixture of evidence and obscurity
which remains on the profppe of a future
state, a proper balance is preserved betwixt
our love of this life, and our desire of a

better, The longer that our thoughts dwell on
this fubjed, the, more we mufft be con-.
vinced, that in nothing the Divine wisdom
is more admirable, than in proportioning
knowledge to the necefflities of man. In-
stead of lamenting our condition, that we
are permitted only to fee as through a glass
darkly, we have reason to bless our crea-
tor, no less for what he hath concealed, than
for what he hath allowed us to know. He
is 'wonderful in counsel, as he is excellent
in working. He is wife in heart, and bis
thoughts are deep. How unsearchable are
the riches of the wisdom of the knowledge of
God !

FROM the whole view which we have

taken of the fubjet, this important in-

ftrudion

ftrution arises, That the great design of all S E R M.

Iv.

the knowledge, and in particular of the
religious knowledge which God hath as-
forded us, is, to fit us for discharging the
duties of life. No useless discoveries are
made to us in religion: No discoveries
even of useful truths, beyond the precise
degree of information, which is subservient
to right conduat. To this great end all out
information points. In this center all the
lines of knowledge meet. Life and immor-
tality are brought to light in the gospel; yet
not so displayed as to gratify the curiosity
es the world with an astonishing fpefacle ;
but only so far made known, as to assist and
support us in the practice of our duty. If
the discovery were more imperfe&, it would
excite no desire of immortality; if it were
more full and itriking, it would render us
careless of life. On the first supposition,
no fufficient motive to virtue would ap-
pear; on the second, no proper trial of it,
would remain. In the one cafe, we fthould
think and a& like men who have their pfor-
tion only in this world;. in the other cafe,

like'

sER M. like men who have no concern with this

IV. w-- world at all. Whereas now, by the wife

constitution of Heaven, we are placed in the
miioft favourable situation for aCing, with
propriety, our allotted part here; and for'
rising, in due course, to higher honour and
happiness hereafter.

Let us then second the kind intentions of

Providence, and a& upon the plan which
it hath pointed out. Checking our inqui.
fitive solicitude about what the Almighty
hath concealed, let us diligently improve
what he hath made known. Inhabitants of
the earth, we are at the faine time candi.
dates for Heaven. Looking upon these as
only different views of one consistent cha--
rater, let us carry on our preparation for
Heaven, not by abftrading ourselves froni
the concerns of this world, but by ful-
filling the duties and offices of every fla-
tion in life, Living soberly, righteously,
and godly in the present zworld, let us look
for that blessed hope, and the glorious appear.
ing of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus
Cbhri/.

Before

Before I condhide, it may be proper to SER M.

IV.

observe, That the reasonings in this dif-
course give no ground to apprehend any
danger of OUr being too much influenced
by the belief of a future state. I have
thown the hurtful effeats which would fol-
low from too bright and full a discovery of
the glory of that state; and in showing this,
I have justified the decree of Providence,
which permits no fich discovery. But as
our nature is at present constituted, at-i
tached by so many strong conne&ions to
the world of sense, and enjoying a com-
munication so feeble and distant with the
world of spirits, we need fear to danger
from cultivating intercourse with the latter
as much as possible. On the contrary,
from that intercourse the chief security of
our virtue is to be fought. The biafs of
our nature leans so much towards sense
that from this fide the peril is to be dread-
ed, and on this fide the defence is to be
provided.

Let us then wal/ by faith. Let us

strengthen this principle of aaion to the

VOL. I. I utmost

SE R M. utmost of our power. Let us implore the

IV.
-_ Divine grace, to strengthen it within us

more and more: That we may thence de-
rive an antidote againif that subtile poifonj
which incessant commerce with the obje&g
of sense diffufes through our fouls; that wo
may hence acquire purity and dignity of
manners, suited to our divine hopes; and,
undefiled by the pleasures of the world,
unihaken by its terrours, may preserve to
the end one conflant tenour of integrity.
Till at last, having, under the condut of
Christian faith, happily finithed the period
of discipline, we enter on that fiate, where
a far nobler scene thall open; where eter-
nal objeas shall shine in their native fplen-
dour; where, this twilight :of mortal life
being past, the Sun of rigbteoufnefs shall
rife; and that which is perfect being come,
that which is in part Jhall be done away.

C . - '.

,. .

# SERMON V. On the Death of Christ. JOHN xvii. 1. Jesus lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father! the bour is come; 

[ ii5 ]

SERMON V.

On the DEATH of CHRIST.

Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.

JOHN xvii. i.

Yefus lift up his eyes to heaven, and said,

Father! The hour is come ;-

T HESE were the words of our bless- S E RM.

ed Lord on a memorable occasion. v.

The feast of the passover drew nigh, at
which he knew that he was to fuffer. The
night was arrived, wherein he was to be
delivered into the hands of his enemies.
He had spent the evening in conference
with his disciples; like a dying father in
the midst of his family, mingling confola-
tions with his last infiruaions. When he

I 2 had

S E R M. had ended his discourse to them, he lifted

V.

L--^-. up his eyes to heaven, and, with the words

which I have now read, began that so-
lemn prayer of interceflion for the Church,
which closed his miniitry. Immediately
after, he went forth with his disciples into
the garden of Gethsemane, and furren-
dered himself to those who came to appre-
hend him.

Such was the situation of our Lord at

the time of his pronouncing these words.
He saw his million on the point of being
accomplithed. He had the profpet full
1)efore him, of all that he was about to
fuffer.-Father ! The hour is come.-What
hour? An hour the most critical, the
most pregnant with great events, since
hours had begun to be numbered, since·
time had begun to run. It was the hour
in which the Son of God was to termi-
nate the labours of his important life, by
a death flill more important and illuftri-
oils; the. hour of atoning, by his fuffer-
ings, for the guilt of mankind; the hour
of accomplishing prophccies, types, and

symbols,

*

symbols, which had been carried on SER M.

V.

through a series of ages; the hour of con-
cluding the old, and of introducing to the
world the new dispensation of religion;
the hour of his triumphing over the
world, and death, and hell; the hour of
his ereding that spiritual kingdom which
is to last for ever. Such is the hour, such

are the events, which you are to comme-
morate in the Sacrament of our Lord's
Supper. I mhall attempt to set them be-
fore you as proper lubjeds, at this time,
of your devout meditation. To diIplay
them in their genuine majesty, is beyond
the ability of man.

I. THIS was the hour in which Christ

was glorified by his fufferings. The
whole of his lifc had discovered much
real greatness, under a mean appearance.
Through the cloud of his humiliation,
his native lufire often broke forth ; but
never did it thine so bright, as in this last,
this trying hour. It was indeed the hour
of diftrcfs, and of blood. He knew it to

I 3 be

S E R M. be such; and when he uttered the words

V.

^-.-' of the Text, he had before his eyes, the

executioner and the cross, the scourge, the
nails, and the spear. But by profpeds of
this nature his foul was not to be over-
come. It is distress which ennobles every
great characer; and distress was to glo-
rify the Son of God. He was now to
teach all mankind, by his example, how
to fuffer and to die. He was to fiand
forth before his enemies, as the faithful
witness of the truth; justifying by his
behaviour the charader which he assumed,
and sealing with his blood the dotrine
which he taught.

What magnanimity in all his words

and adions on this great occasion! The
court of Herod, the judgment-hall of
Pilate, the hill of Calvary, were so many
theatres prepared for his displaying all the
virtues of a constant and patient mind.
When led forth to fuffer, the first voice
which we hear from him, is a generous
lamentation over the fate of his urifortu-
nate, though guilty, country; and, to the

last

last moment of his life, we behold him in S E R M.

V.

poffeflion of the fame gentle and benevolent ,----
spirit. No upbraiding, no complaining
exprefiion escaped from his lips, during
the long and painful approaches of a cruel
death. He betrayed no symptom of a
weak or a vulgar, of a discomposed or im-
patient mind. With the utmost attention
of filial tenderness, he committed his aged
mother to the care of his beloved disciple*.
With all the dignity of a Sovereign, he
conferred pardon on a penitent fellow-fuf-
ferer. With a greatness of mind beyond
example, he spent his last moments in apo-
logies and prayers, for those who were
ihedding his blood.

By wonders in heaven, and wonders on

earth, was thi3 hour distinguished. All
nature seemed to feel it; and the dead and
the living bore witness to its importance.
The veil of the temple was rent in twain.
The earth ihook. There was darkness
over all the land. The graves were open-
ed, and many whojiept, arose and went into

* See John xix. 26, z7.

14 4tle

SER M. the Holy City. Nor were these the only
L^ prodigies of this awful hour. The most

hardened hearts were subdued and chan-
ged. The judge, who in order to gratify
the multitude passed sentence against him,
publickly attcited his innocence. The
Roman centurion, who presided at the exe-
cuticn, glorified God, and acknowledged
the fufferer to be more than man. After
he saw the things which bad pa/fed, he
said, Certainly this was a righteous per-
son ; truly, this was the Son of God. The
Jewish malefaator who was crucified with
him, addressed him as a King, and im-
plored his favour. Even the crowd of in-
sensible fpetators, who had come forth as
to a common fpeaacle, and who began
with clamours and insults, returned home,
smiting their brea/is.--Look back on the
heroes, the philosophers, the legislators of
old. View them in their last moments.
Recall every circumstance which diftin-
guidhed their departure from the world.
Where can you find such an assemblage of
high virtues, and of great events, as con-

curred

curred at the death of Christ ? Where, so SER M.

V.

many testimonies given to the dignity of

,---

the dying person, by earth, and by hea-
ven ?

II. THIS was the hour in which Christ

atoned for the fins of mankind, and ac-
complifhed our eternal redemption. It was
the hour when that great sacrifice was of-
fered up, the efficacy of which reaches back
to the first transgression of man, and extends
forward to the end of time; the hour when,
from the cross, as from an high altar, the
blood was flowing, which washed away the
guilt of the nations.

This awful dispensation of the Al-,

mighty contains mysteries which are be-
yond the discovery of man. It is one of
those things into which the angels desire to
look. What has been revealed to us, is,
That the death of Christ was the interpo-
fition of Heaven for preventing the ruin
of human kind. We know, that under
the government of God, misery is the na-
tural consequence of guilt. After rational

6 creatures

SE R M. creatures had, by their criminal conduct,

V. -L introduced disorder into the Divine king-

dom, there was no ground to believe, that
by their penitence and prayers alone,
they could prevent the deftru.ion which
threatened them. The prevalence of pro-
pitiatory sacrifices throughout the earth,
proclaims it to be the general sense of
mankind, that mere repentance was not
of fufficient avail to expiate fin, or to
flop its penal effecs. By the constant
allusions which are carried on in the
New Testament to the sacrifices under
the Law, as pre-fignifying a great atone-
ment made by Christ; and by the fitrong
expressions which are used in describing
the effeas of his death, the sacred writers
show, as plainly as language allows, that
there was an efficacy in his fufferings, far
beyond that of mere example and in-
ftrudtion. The nature and extent of that
efficacy we are unable, as yet, fully to
trace. Part we are capable of behold-
ing; and the wisdom of what we behold,
we have reason to adore. We discern in

this

this plan of redemption, the evil of fin E R M.
strongly exhibited ; and the justice of the <
Divine government awfully exemplified, in
Christ iuffering for sinners. But let us not
imagine, that our present discoveries unfold
the whole influence of the death of Christ.
It is conneded with causes into which we
cannot penetrate. It produces consequences
too extensive for us to explore. God's
thoughts arc nIt as our Ihoughts. In all
things we fee only in part; and here, if
any where, we fee alio as through a gl.fs
darkly.

This, however, is fully manifest, that

redemption is one of the most glorious
works of the Almighty. If the hour of
the creation of the world was great and
illufirious; that hour, when, from the
dark and formless mass, this fair system
of nature arose at the Divine command;
when the morning flars fang together, and
all the sons of God Jjouted for joy ; no less
illuftrioqs is the hour of the restoration
of .the world; the hour when, from con-
demnation and misery, it emerged into

happiness

SE R M. happiness and peace. With less external
^--. . majesty it was attended, but is, on that

account, the more wonderful, that under
an appearance so simple, such great events
were covered.

III. IN this hour the long series of

prophecies, vilions, types, and figures,
was accomplished. This was the center
in which they all met: This the point
towards which they had tended and ver-
ged, throughout the course of so many
generations. You behold the Law and
the Prophets fianding, if we may speak
so, at the foot of the crof3, and doing
homage. You behold Moses and Aaron
bearing the ark of the covenant; David
and Elijah presenting the oracle of tefti-
mony. You behold all the priests and
sacrifices, all the rites and ordinances,
all the types and symbols, assembled
together to receive their consummation.
Without the death of Christ, the worship
and ceremonies of the law would have
remained a pompous, but unmeaning in-

ftitutior

flitution. In the hour when he was cru- SER M.

V.

cified, the book with the seven seals was
opened. Every rite assumed its fignifi-
cancy; every prediaion, met its event;
every symbol displayed its correspond-

ence.

The dark, and seemingly ambiguous

method of conveying important difcove-
ries under figures and emblems, was not
peculiar to the sacred books. The Spirit
of God, in pre-fignifying the death of
Christ, adopted that plan, according to
which the whole knowledge of those
early ages was propagated through the
world. Under the veil of mysterious al-
lusion, all wisdom was then concealed.
From the sensible world, images were
every where borrowed, to describe things
unseen. More was understood to be
meant, than was openly expressed. By
enigmatical rites, the Priest communi-
cated his dodrines; by parables and al-
legories, the Philosopher inftruaed, his
disciples; even the Legislator, by figu-
rative sayings, commanded the reverence

of

S E R M. of the people. Agreeably to this prevail-

c^ ing mode of infirudion, the whole dif-

penfation of the Old Testament was so
conduced, as to be the shadow and the
figure of a spiritual system. Every re-
markable event, every distinguished per-
fonage, under the Law, is interpreted in
the New Testament, as bearing some re-
ference to the hour of which we treat. If
Isaac was laid upon the altar as an inno-
cent vidim; if David was driven from his
throne by the wicked, and restored by the
hand of God; if the brazen serpent was
lifted up, to heal the people; if the rock
was smitten by Moses, to furnish drink in
the' wilderness; all were types of Christ,
and alluded to his death.

In prediding the fame event, the lan-

guage of ancient prophecy was magnifi-
cent, but seemingly contradidory: For it
foretold a Mefiah, who was to be at once
a fufferer and a conqueror. The Star was
to come out of Jacob, and the Branch to
fpringfrom the jem of jefe. Tihe Angel of
the Covenant, tke Desire of all Nations, was

3 to

to come suddenly to his temple; and to him S E R M
was to be the gathering of the people. Yet -
at the fame time, he was to be defpfid and
rejeled of men ; he was to be taken from
prf/on and from judgment, and to be led as
a lamb to the Jlaughter. Though he was a
man of sorrows and acquainted with grief
yet the Gentiles were to come to his light,
and Kings to the brightness of his riring. In
the hour when Christ died, those prophe-
tical riddles were solved; thol fe miteig
contradidions were reconciled. The ob-
fcurity of oracles, and the ambiguity of
types, vanithed. Th'e Sun. of rigbteoufpefs
rose; and, together with the dawn of re,
ligion, those fhlladows passed away. . :

IV. TiIs was the hour of the abolition

of the Law, and the introdu6tion Qof the
Gospel; thle hour of terminating the ,old
and of beginning the new dispensation of
religious knowledge and worship, throgh-
out the earth. Viewed in this ligh
forms the most august era which is to be
found in the lhiftory of mankind. Wlhen

Chrifl

SE R M. Christ was fuffering on the cross, we are

V.

L- informed by one of the Evangelists, that he

iaid, Ithirfj; and that they filled a fpunge
with vinegar, and put it to his mouth. After
be bad tasted the vinegar, knowing that all
things were now accomplijhbed, and the scrip-
ture fulflled, hefaid, It is fin/jbed* ; that is,
This offered draught of vinegar was the last
circumitance predited by ar ancient Pro-
phet +, that remained to be fulfilled. The
vision and the prophecy are now sealed :
The Mosaic dispensation is closed. And he
bowed his head, and gave up the ghofl.

It is Ji/hed.-When he uttered these

words, he changed the state of the uni-
verse. At that moment, the Law ceased,
and the Gospel commenced. This was the
ever-memorable point of time, which fe-
parated the old and the new world from
each other. On one fide of the point of
separation, you behold the Law, with its
priests, its sacrifices and its rites, retiring
from fight. On the other fide, you be-

* John xix. 28, 29, 30. t Psalm xiv. 21.

hold

hold the Gospel, with its simple and ve- SE R M.
nerable institutions, coming forward into .
view. Significantly was the veil of the
temple rent in this hour; for the glory
then departed' from between the cherubims.
The legal High Priest delivered up his
Urim and Thummim, his breast-plate,
his robes, and his incense: And CHRIST
stood forth as the great High Priest of all
succeeding generations. By that one fa-
crifice which he now offered, he abolished
sacrifices for ever. Altars on which the
fire had blazed for ages, were now to smoke

no more. Viftims were no more to bleed.
Not with the blood of bulls and goats, but
with his own blood, he now entered into the
Holy Place, there to appear in the presence of
God for us.

This was the hour of association and

union to all the worshippers of God.
When Christ said, It is fJni/hed, he threw
down the wall of partition which had so
long divided the Gentile from the Jew.
He gathered into one, all the faithful, out
of every kindred and people. He pro-

VOL. I. K claimed

SER M. claimed the hour to be come, when the

V.

- knowledge of the true God flhould be no

longer confined to one nation, nor his wor-
ihip to one temple; but over all the earth,
the worshippers of the Father should serve
him in spirit and in truth. From that hour,
they who dwelt in the uttermofl ends of the
earth, Jlrangers to the covenant of promise,
began to be brought nigh. In that hour, the
light of the Gospel dawned from afar on the
British islands.

During a long course of ages, Provi-

dence seemed to be occupied in preparing
the world for this revolution. The whole
Jewith oeconomy was intended to usher it
in. The knowledge of God was preserved
inextingulfhed in one corner of the world,
that thence, in due time, might issue forth
the light which was to overspread the
earth. Succeflive revelations gradually en-
larged the views of men beyond the nar-
row bounds of Judaea, to a more extensive
kingdom of God. Signs and miracles
awakened their expedation, and direded
their eyes towards this great event. Whe-

ther

ther God descended on the flaming moun- S E R M.

V.

tain, or spoke by the Prophet's voice; whe-
ther he scattered his chosen people into
captivity, or re-assembled them in their own
land; he was still carrying on a progrefive
plan, which was accomplished at the death
of Christ,

Not bnly in the territories of Israel, but

over all the earth, the great difpenfations
of Providence refpeted the approach of
this important hour. If empires rose or
fell; if war divided, or peace united the
nations; if learning civilized their man,
ners, or philosophy enlarged their views;
all was, by the secret decree of Heaven,
made to ripen the world for that fuilnef
of time, when Christ was to publish the
whole counsel of God. The Persian, the
Macedonian, the Roman Conqueror, en-
tered upon the fitage each at his prediaed
period; and, though be meant not so, neither
did his heart think so, ministered to this
hour. The revolutions of power, and
the succession of monarchies, were so ar-
ranged by Providence, as to facilitate the

K 2 progress

S E R M. progress of the Gospel- through the habit-.
^ ^ able world, after the day had arrived, when

the Jlone which 'was cut out of the moun-
tain without bands, flould become d great
mountain, and fill the earth *. This was
the day, which Abraham saw afar ojf, and
was glad. This was the day, which many
Prophets an;d Kings, and righteous men de-
fired to fce, but could not; the day for
which the carnefI expectation of the creature,
long oppressed with ignorance, and bewil-
dered in superstition, might be justly said to
wait.

V. Tills was the hour of Chrifi's tri-

umph over all the powers of darkness; the
hour in which he overthrew dominions and
thrones, led captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men. The contest which the kingdom
of darknels had long maintained against the
kingdom of light, wa· now brought to its
crisis. The period was come, when the feed
of the woman JIould bruff the head of the
ffrpent.

, For many ages, the moflt gross fu-

P Dan. ii. 34, 35.

perftition

perRition; had filled the earth. The glory of S E R M.
the uncorruptible God was every where, ex- c
cept in the land of Judaea, changed into images
made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and
beasts, and creeping things. The world, which
the Almighty created for himself, seemed to
have become a temple of idols. Even to
vices and pafiions altars were raised; and,
what was entitled Religion, was in effed a
discipline of impurity. In the midst of this
universal darkness, Satan had erefted his
throne; and the learned and, polished, as
well, as the savage nations, bowed: down
before him. But at the hour when Christ
appeared on the cropfs, the signal of his de-
feat was given. His kingdom suddenly
departed from Ihim; the reign of Idolatry
passed away: He was beheld to fall like
lightning fron Heaven In that hour,1 the
foundation of every f,Pagan temple shook. i
The fti~e ,of every,,falfe God tottered,pn i
its base. .,The Priest fledfrom his falling
thrine; and the Heathern oracles became

,

dumb for ever.

K 3 As

s E gM. As on the cross Christ triumphed over

ci Satan, so he overcame his auxiliary, the

world. Long had it assailed him with its
temptations and difcouragements, In this
hour of severe trial, he surmounted them
all. Formerly he had despised the pleasures
of the world. He now baffled its terrours,
Hence he is justly said to have crucified the
world. By his fufferings, he ennobled dif-
tress; and he darkened the lustre of the
pomp and vanities of life. He discovered
to his followers the path which leads,
through afflition, to glory and to vi&ory;
and he imparted to them the fame spirit
which enabled him to overcome. My king-
dom is not of this world. In this world ye
jhall have tribulation ; But be osgood cheer;
I have overcome the world *.

Death also, the last foe of man, was

the viaim of this hour. The formidable
appearance of the fpeare remained; but
his dart was taken away. For, in the
hour when Christ expiated guilt, he dif-

* John xvi. 33.

armed

armed death, by securing the refurredion S E R M.

V.

of the juit. When he said to his penitent
fellow-fufferer, To-day thouthalt be with me
in paradise, he announced to all his fol-
lowers the certainty of heavenly bliss. He
declared the cherubims to be difiniffed, and
the flaming sword to be fheathed, which
had been appointed at the fall, to keep from
man the way of the Tree of life *. Faint,
before this period, had been the hope, in-
diftind the profpea, which even good men
enjoyed of the heavenly kingdom. Life
and immortality were now brought to light.
From the hill of Calvary, the first clear and
certain view was given to the world of
the everlasting mansions. Since that hour,
they have been the perpetual consolation of
believers in Christ. Under trouble, they
sooth their minds; amidst temptation, they
support their virtue; and, in their dying
nioments, enable them to fay, 0 death! I
where is thy/fPing ? 0 grave! where is thy
,pifory ?

" Gen. iii. 24.

K 4 VI. THls

sER M. VI. THIS was the hour when our Lord

V.

cj ereded that spiritual kingdom which is
never to end. How vain are the coun-
fels and designs of men ! How shallow is
the policy of the wicked ! How ihort their
triumphing! The enemies of Christ ima-
gined, that in this hour they had success-
fully accomplished their plan for his de-
fitrudion. They believed, that they had
entirely scattered the finall party of his
followers, and had extinguished his name
and his honour for ever. In derision, they
addressed him as a King. They clothed
him with purple robes; they crowned, him
with a crown of thorns; they put a reed
into his hand; and, with insulting mock-,.
ery, bowed the knee before him. Blind
and impious men! How little did .they
know, that the Almighty was at that mo-
ment setting him as a King on the bill of
Sion ; giving him the Heathen for his in-
heritance, and the uttermof parts of the
earth for his pofe#ion ! How little did they.
know, that their badges of mock royalty
were at that moment converted into the

2 signals

fignais. of absolute dominion, and the in- S E R M.

V.

flruments of irresistible power! The reed
which they put into his hands became a
rod of iron, with which he was to break in
pieces his enemies; a sceptre, with which
he was to rule the universe in righteous-
ness. The cross, which they thought was
to stigmatize him with infamy, became the
ensign of his renown. Instead of being
the reproach of his followers, it was to be
their boast and their glory. The cross was
to ihine on palaces and churches, through-
out the earth. It was to be assumed as
the diftinaion of the most powerful mo-
narchs, and to wave in the banner of
viaorious armies, when the memory ,of
Herod and Pilate ihould be accursed;
when Jerusalem should be reduced to ashes,
and the Jews be vagabonds ,over all the
world.

These were the triumphs which com-

menced at this hour. Our Lord saw them
already in their birth ; he saw of the tra-
vail of his foul, and was satisfied. He
beheld the word of God going forth, con-

quering,

S E R M. quering, and to conquer; subduing t the

y obedience of his laws, the fubduers of the

world; carrying light into the regions of
darkness, and mildness into the habitations
of cruelty. He beheld the Gentiles wait-
ing below the cross, to receive the Gospel.
He beheld Ethiopia and the Isles flretching
out their hands to God; the desert begin-
ning to rejoice, and to blofom as the rose;
and the knowledge of the Lord filling the
earth, as the waters cover the sea. Well
pleased, he said, It is finifled. As a con-
queror, he retired from the field, reviewing
his triumphs : He bowed his head, and gave
up the ghof/.--From that hour, Christ
was no longer a mortal man, but He*d
over all things to the Church; the glorious
King of men and angels, of whose domi-
nion there shall be no end. Hi6 triumphs
thall perpetually increase\ His name Jlsall
endure for ever; it /Jall loft as long as the
fin ; menfhall be blessed in him, and all na-
tionjs all call him blefjed.

S.UCH were the tranfaions, such the es- S E t M.

V.

seas of this ever memorable hour. With -
all those great events was the mind of our
Lord filled, when he lifted up his eyes to
heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come.

From this view which we have taken

of this fubjea, permit me to suggest, what
ground it affords to confide in the mercy
of God, for the pardon of fin-; to trust to
his faithfulnefs, for the accomplishment of
all his promises; and to approach to him,
with gratitude and devotion, in a&s of
worship.

IN the first place, The death of Christ

affords us ground to confide in the Divine
mercy, for the pardon of fin. All the steps
of that high dispensation of Providence,
which we have considered, lead direatly
to this conclusion, He that spared not his
pwn Son, but delivered him up for us all,
kow Jhall he not with him also freely give
us all things*? This is the final result
of the discoveries of the gospel. On this

* Rom. viii. 32.

rStis

s E R M. rests that great system of consolation, which

V.

.

- it hath reared up for men. We are not

left to dubious and intricate -reasonings,
concerning the condud which God may
be expeded to hold towards his offending
creatures. But we are led to the view of
important and illuirious fads, which firike
the mind with evidence irresistible. For,
is, it.·poffible to believe, that fiuch great
operations,. as; I; have endeavoured to de-
scribe, werecarried on by the Almighty in
vaia ? Did he excite in the hearts of his
creatures, such encouraging hopes, with.,
out any intention to fulfil them ? After so
long -a preparation of goodness, could he
mean -to deny forgiveness to the penitent
and the humble ? When, overcome by the
sense of guilt,-man looks up with an aftd-
niihed eye to the-juftice of 'his Creator, :let
himi recolled that hour of which the Text
speaks, and be comforted. The signals of
Divine mercy, ereded in his view, are
too conspicuous to be either distrusted or
mistaken.

.

IN

IN the next place, The discoveries of SER M.

V.

this hour afford the highest reason to trust
in the Divine faithfulnefs, for the accom-
plifhment of every promise which remains
yet unfulfilled. For this was the hour of
the completion of God's ancient covenant.
It was the performance of the mercy pro-
mifed to the fathers. We behold the con-
summation of a great plan, which, through-
out a course of ages, had been uniformly
pursued; and which, against every human
appearance, was, at the appointed moment,
exadly fulfilled. No word that is gone out
of the mouth of the Lord, flall fail. No
length of time alters his purpose. No ob-
ftacles can retard it. Towards the ends
accomplished in this hour, the most repug-
nant inifruments were made to operate.
We discern God bending to his purpose,
the jarring passions, the opposite interests,
and even the vices of men; uniting seem-
ing contrarieties in his scheme; making the
wrath of man to praise him ; obliging the
ambition of Princes, the prejudices of the
Jews, the malice of Satan, all to concur,

either

SER . either in bringing forward this hour, or

v. in completing its destined effeas. With

what entire confidence ought we to wait
for the fulfilment of all his other promises
in their due time; even when events are
most embroiled, and the profpea is most
discouraging ? Although thou fayefl, Tbou
canq/ not fee him ; yet judgment is before him;
therefore trust thou in him. Be attentive
only to perform thy duty; leave the event
to God; and be assured, that under the di-
redion of his Providence, all things Jhall
work together for a happy issue.

LASTLY, The consideration of this whole

fubjea tends to excite gratitude and devo-
tion, when we approach to God in ats of
worlhip. The hour of which I have dif-.
coursed, presents him to us in the amiable
light of the Deliverer of mankind, the re-
florer of our forfeited hopes. We behold
the greatness of the Almighty, softened by
the mild radiance of condescension and
mercy. We behold him diminishing the
awful distance at which we stand from his

presence,

presence, by appointing for us a Mediator 3 E IR M,
and Intercessor,. through whom the humble
may, without dismay, approach to Him
who made them. By such views of the
Divine nature, ChriRian faith lays the foun-
dation for a worship which shall be at once
rational and affeaionate; a worship, in
which the light of the understanding shall
concur with the devotion of the heart, and
the most profound reverence be united with
the most cordial love. Chriflian faith is
not a system of speculative truths. It is
not a lesson of moral inftrution only. By
a train of high difcoverics which it reveals,
by a fucceflion of interesting objeds which
it places in our view, it is calculated to ele-
vate the mind, to purify the affeaions, and,
by the afifitance of devotion, to confirm
and encourage virtue. Such, in particular,
is the scope of that divine inflitution, the
Sacrament of our Lord's Supper. To this
happy purpose let it conduce, by concen-
tering, in one firiking point of light, all that
the Gospel has displayed of what is most im-
portant to man. Touched with just contri-

L tion

SER M. tion for past offences, and filled with a

V.
y' grateful sense of Divine goodness, let us

come to the altar of God; and with a
humble faith in his infinite mercies devote
ourselves to his service for ever.

# SERMON VI. On Gentleness. JAMES iii. 17. The wisdom that is from above, is  gentle

Si45 I

BERMON Vt.

On GETLE ESSi

JAMES 1ii. i7.

7he wejfdom that is from above, is--gentle-

TO be wife in our own eyesi to be SE R M.

wife in the opinion of the world, V-

and to be wife in the fight of God, are
three things so very different, as rarely to
coincide. One may often be wife in his
own eyes, who is far from being so in
the judgment of the world; and to be re-
puted a prudent man by the worlds is no
security for being accounted wife by God.
As there is a worldly happiness, which
God perceives to be no other than dif-
guised misery; as there are worldly ho-
hours, which in his estimation are re.

VOL, I. L proach

s E R M. proach; so there is a worldly wisdom,

VI "' which, in his fight, is foolflnefis. Of this

worldly wisdom the charaaers are given
in the context, and placed in contrast with
those of the wisdom which is from above.
The one is the wisdom of the crafty;
the other, that of the upright. The one
terminates in felfifhnefs; the other, in
charity. The one is full of jrfe and bit-
ter envyings; the other of mercy and of
good fruits. One of the chief charaders
by which the wisdom from above is dif-
tinguifhed, is gentleness, of which I am
now to discourse. Of this there is the
greater occasion to discourse, because it is
too seldom viewed in a religious light;
and is more readily considered by the
bulk of men, as a mere felicity of nature,
or an exterior accomplishment of man-
ners, than as a Christian virtue which
they are bound to cultivate. I thall first
explain the nature of this virtue; and shall
then offer some arguments to recommend,
and some diredions to facilitate, the prac-
tice of it.

I BEoGIN

t BEGIN with diftinguifliing true gen- SERM.

tlenefs from paflive tameness of spirit, '
and from unlimited compliance with the
manners of others. That passive tame-.
ness, which submits, without fitruggle, to
every encroachment of the violent and as-
fuming, forms no part of Christian duty

,

but, on the contrary, is deftruaive of
general happiness and order. That unli-
mited complaisance, which, on every oc-
cafion, falls in with the opinions and
manners of others, is so far from being a
virtue, that it is itself a vice, and the pa-
rent of many vices. It overthrows all
steadiness of principle; and produces that
sinful conformity with the world, which
taints the whole charater. In the pre-
sent corrupted state of human manners,
always to assent and to comply, is the
very worst maxim we can adopt. It is
impossible to support the purity and dig-
nity of Christian morals, without oppof-
ing the world on various occasions, even
though we should fHand alone. That
gentleness therefore which belongs to vir-

L 2 rue,

SE R M. tue, is to be carefully diflingufifhed rom
^-.I the mean spirit of cowards, and the fawn-

ing assent of sycophants. It renounces
no just right from fear. It gives up no
important truth from flattery. It is indeed
not only consistent with a firm mind, but
it necessarily requires a manly spirit, and a
fixed principle, in order to give it any real
value. Upon this solid ground only, the
polish of gentienefs can with advantage be
fuperinduced.

It stands opposed, not to the most de-

termined regard for virtue and truth, but
to harshness and severity, to pride and
arrogance, to violefice and oppression.
It is, properly, that part of the great
virtue of charity, which makes us un-
willing to give pain to any of our bre-
thren. Compassion prompts us to relieve
their wants. Forbearance prevents us from
retaliating their injuries. Meekness re-
strains our angry, passions; candour, our
severe judgments. Gentleness correds what-
ever is offenfive in our manners; and, by
a constant train of humane attentions,

2 studies

studies to alleviate the burden of common S E R M.

VI.

misery. Its office, therefore, is extensive. .-
It is not, like some other virtues, called
forth only on peculiar emergencies; but
it is continually in adtion, when we are
engaged in intercourse with men. It ought
to form our address, to regulate our speech,
and to diffufe itself over our whole beha-
viour.

I mufi warn you, however, not to

confound this gentle wisdom which is from
above, with that artificial courtesy, that
fludied fminoothnefs of manners, which is
learned in the school of the world. Such
accomplishments, the most frivolous and
empty may possess. Too often they are
employed by the artful, as a snare; too
often affeded by the hard and unfeel-
ing, as a cover to the baseness of their
minds. We cannot, at the fame time,
avoid observing the homage, which,
even in such instances, the world is con-
firained to pay to virtue. In order to
render society agreeable, it is found ne-
cetfary to assume somewhat, that may at

L 3 least

SE RM. least carry its appearance. Virtue is the

VI. S- universal charm. Even its ihadow is

courted, when the substance is wanting.
The imitation of its form has been re-
duced into an art; and, in the commerce
of life, the first study of all who would
either gain the esteem, or win the hearts
of others, is to learn the speech, and to
adopt the manners, of candour, gentle-
Iefs, and humanity. But that gentleness
which is the charaderiftick of a good
man, has, like every other virtue, its
feat in the heart: And, let me add, no-
thing except what flows from the heart,
can render even external manners truly
pleating. For no assumed behaviour can
at all times hide the real charater. In
that unaffeted civility which springs
from a gentle mind, there is a charm in-
finitely more powerful, than in all the
studied manners of the most finished cour-
tier.

True gentleness is founded on a sense

of what we owe to him who made us,
and to the common nature of which we

all

all share. It arises from refleaion on our SER M.

VI.

own failings and wants; and from just
views of the condition, and the duty of
man. It is native feeling, heightened and
improved by principle. It is the heart
which easily relents; which feels for every
thing that is human; and is backward
and flow to inflia the least wound. It is
affable in its address, and mild in its de-
meainour; ever ready to oblige, and will-
;ig to be obliged by others; breathing
habitual kindness towards friends, cour-
tefy to fitrangers, long-fuffering to ene-
mies. It exercises authority with modera-
tion; administers reproof with tender-
ness; confers favours with ease and mo-
defty. It is unassuming in opinion, and
temperate in zeal. It contends not ea-
gerly about trifles; flow to contradia, and
still flower to blame; but prompt to
allay dissention, and to restore peace. It
neither intermeddles unnecessarily with
the affairs, nor pries inquisitively into the
secrets of others. It delights above all
things to alleviate distress, and, if it c':i-

L 4 \ot

SE~ M. not dry up the falling tear, to soothe at

VI.

i

_ least the grieving heart. Where it has

not the power of being useful, it is never
burdensome. It .seeks to please, rather
than to Ihine and dazzle; and conceals
with care that superiority, either of talents,
or of rank, which is oppreflive to those
who are beneath it. In a word, it is that
spirit, and that tenour of manners, which
the gospel of Christ enjoins, when it com-
mands us to bear one another's burdens; to
rejoice with those who rejoice, and to weep
with those who weep ; to please every one
his neighbour for his good; to be kind and
tender-hearted; to be pitiful and courteous ;
to support the weak, and to be patient to-
wards all men.

Having now fufficiently explained the

nature of this amiable virtue, I proceed to
recommend it to your pradice. Let me,
for this end, desire you to confider the duty
which you owe to God; to confider the
relation which you bear one to another; to
ogpfider your own interest.

I. CONSIDER

I. CONSIDER the duty which you owe SER M.

to God. When you f4rvey his works,
nothing is so conspicuous, as his greatness
and majesty. When you consult his word,
nothing is more remarkable, than his atten-
tion to soften that greatness, and to place
it in the mildest and least oppressive light.
He not only cbaraaterifes himself as the
God of consolation, but, with condescending
gentleness, he particularly accommodates
himself to the situation of the unfortunate.
He dwelletb with the humble and contrite.
Je hideth not his face when the afflicEed cry.
He healeth the broken in heart, and bindetb
up their wounds..-When his Son came to
be the Saviour of the world, he was emi-
nent for the fame attribute of mild and
gentle goodness. Long before his birth, it
was prophesied of him that he should not
Jlrive, nor cry, nor cause his voice to be
heard in the flreets; that the bruised reed
he Jbould not break, nor quench the fmok-
ing flax *: And after his death, this

* Matth. ;i1. 19, 20.

diftin-

SER M. diflinguifhing feature in his charaCter was

VIs iso universally remembered, that the Apostle

Paul, on occasion of a request which he
makes to the Corinthians, uses those re-
markable expreflions *, I beseech you by the
meekness and gentlenefi of Christ. During
all his intercourse with men, no harshness,
or pride, or flately distance, appeared in
his demeanour. In.his access, he was easy;
in his manners, simple; in his answers,
mild; in his whole behaviour, humble and
obliging. Learn of me, said he, for I am
week and lowly in heart.-As the Son of
God is the pattern, so the Holy Ghost is
the inspirer of gentleness. His name is
the Comforter, the Spirit of grace and peace.
His fruits, or operations on the human
mind, are love, meekness, gentlnefs, and long-
frjfering t.-Thus, by every discovery of
the Godhead, honour is conferred upon
gentleniefs. It is held up to our view, as
peculiarly conneCted with Celestial Nature.
And suitable to such discoveries, is the whole
firain of the Gospel. It were unnecessary to

* 3 Cor. x. i. t Gal. v. 22.

appeal

*

appeal to any single precept. You need E RM,
only open the New Testament, to find this VL
virtue perpetually inculcated. Charity, or
love, is the capital figure ever presented
to our view; and gentleness, forbearance,
and forgiveness, are the founds ever recur-
ring on our ear.

So predominant, indeed, is this spirit

throughout the Christian dispensation,
that even the vices and corruptions of
men have not been able altogether to
defeat its tendency. Though that dif-
penfation is far from having hitherto
produced its full effeat upon the world,
yet we can clearly trace its influence, in
humanizing the manners of men. Re-
markable in this refped, is the vi&ory
which it has gained over those powers of
violence and cruelty, which belong to the
infernal kingdom. Wherever Chriftia-
nity prevails, it has discouraged, and, in
some degree, abolished slavery. It has
rescued human nature from that ignomi-
nious yoke, under which, in former ages,
the one half of mankind groaned. It has

introduced

SER M. introduced more equality between the two
'-y-' sexes, and rendered the conjugal union

more rational and happy. It has abated
the ferocioufnefs of war. It has miti-
gated the rigour of despotism, mitigated
the cruelty of punishment; in a word,
has reduced mankind, from their ancient
barbarity, into a more humane and gentle
ftate.--Do we pretend refped and zeal
for this religion, and at the fame time
allow ourselves in that harshness and feve-
rity, which are so contradiCory to its ge-
nius ? Too plainly we ihow, that it has no
power over our hearts. We may retain
the Christian name; but we have abandon-
ed the Christian spirit.

II. CONSIPER the relation which you

bear to one another, Man, as a solitary
individual, is a very wretched being.
As long as he stands detached fronm his
kind, he is poffeffed, neither of happiness,
nor of strength. We are formed by na-
ture to unite; we are impelled towards
each other, by the compassionate inftinas

in

in our frame; we are linked by a thou- S ItM.
sand conneaions, founded on comimon L
wants. Gentleness therefore, or, as it is
very properly termed, humanity, is what
rian, as such, in every station, owes to
fian. To be inaccessible, contemptuous,
and hard of heart, is to revolt against
our own nature; is, in the language of
scripture, to hide ourselves from our aewn
Rte/J. Accordingly, as all feel the claim
which they have to mildness and huma-
nity, so all are sensibly hurt by the want
of it in others. On n6o fide are we more
vulnerable. No complaint is more feel-
ingly made, than that of the harth and
rugged manners of persons with whom we
have intercourse. But how seldom do we
transfer the cause to ourselves, or examine
how far we are guilty of infliding on
others, whose sensibility is the fame with
ours, those very wounds of which we so
loudly complain ?

But perhaps, it will be pleaded by

some, That this gentleness on which we
now insist, regards only those smaller

offices

SE RM. offices of life, which in their eye are
I I. · not essential to religion and goodness.

Negligent, they confess, on flight occa-
fions, of the government of their temper,
or the regulation of their behaviour, they
are attentive, as they pretend, to the
great duties of beneficence; and ready,
whenever the opportunity presents, to
perform important services to their fel-
low-creatures. But let such persons re-
fled, that the occasions of performing
those important good deeds, very rarely
occur. Perhaps their situation in life, or
the nature of their conneations, may in
a great measure exclude them from such
opportunities. Great events give scope
for great virtues; but the main tenour of
human life is composed of small occur-
rences. Within the round of these, lie
the materials of the happiness of most
men; the fubjefts of their duty, and
the trials of their virtue. Virtue must
be formed and supported, not by unfre-
quent aas, but by daily and repeated
exertions. In order to its becoming either

vigorous

vigorous or useful, it muff be habitually SE RM
a&ive; not breaking forth occasionally with
a transient lufire, like the blaze of the
comet; but regular in its returns, like the
light of day: Not like the aromatic gale,
which sometimes feasts the sense; but like
the ordinary breeze, which purifies the air,
and renders it healthful.

Years may pass over our heads, with-

out affording any opportunity for aas
of high beneficence or extensive utility.
Whereas not a day passes, but in the
common tranfaaions of life, and efpe-
cially in the intercourse of domestic
society, gentleness finds place for pro-
moting the happiness of others, and for
strengthening in ourselves the habit of
virtue. Nay, by seasonable discoveries
of a humane spirit, we sometimes contri-
bute more materially to the advancement
of happiness, than by ations which are
seemingly more important. There are
situations, not a few, in human life,
where the encouraging reception, the
condescending behaviour, and the look

6 of

SER M. of sympathy, bring greater relief to tfie

VI.

C j heart than the most bountiful gift. While,

on the other fide, when the hand of libe-
rality is extended to bestow, the want of
gentleness is fufficient to frustrate the in-
tention of the benefit. We four those
whom we mean to oblige; and, by con-
ferring favours with ostentation and harsh-
ness, we convert them into injuries. Can
any disposition then be held to possess a
low place in the scale of virtue, whose in-
fluence is so considerable on the happinets
of the world?

Gentleness is, in truth, the great ave-

nue to mutual enjoyments Amidst the
strife of interfering interefis, it tempers
the violence of contention, and keeps
alive the feeds of harmony. It softens
animofities; renews endearments; and
renders the countenance of man, a re-
frefhment to man. Banish gentleness
from the earth; suppose the world to be
filled with none but harsh and contentious
spirits; and what fort of society would
remain ? The solitude of the desert were

preferable

preferable to it. The conflid of jarring s ER M.
elements in chaos; the cave, where iub-
terraneous winds contend and roar; the
den where serpents hiss, and beasts of the
forest howl; would be the only proper
representations of such assemblies of men.
-0 that 1 had wings like a dove ! for then
I would fly away, and be at reft. Lo ! then
I would wander fr off and remain in the
wilderness ; I cwould baf/lLn my cfapc from.
the windy Jform and temp, gI: For I have
fcen violence and flr/if in the city. 1M7'f-
chief andt orrow are in ihe midj, of it: De-
ceit and guilt depart not from the JIrcet '".
--Strange! that where men have all one
common interest, they ihould so often,
alfurdly, concur in defeating it! Has not
Nature already provided a fufficient quan-
tity of unavoidable evils for tile state of
man ? As if we did not fuffcr enough from
the storm which beats upon us without,
muff we conspire also, in thole societies
where we assemble, in order to find a re-
treat from that florm, to harass one ano-

* Pfal. lv. 6, 7, 8.

VOL. I. M ther?

S E R M. ther ?--But if the sense of- duty, and of

VI. Scommon happiness, be infufficient to re-

commend the virtue of which we treat, then
let me desire you,

III. To confider your own interest.

Whatever ends a good man can be supposed
to pursue, gentleness will be found to favour
them. It prepoffeffes and wins every heart.
It persuades, when every other argument
fails; often disarms the fierce,.and melts
the flubborn. Whereas harshness confirms
the opposition it would subdue; and, of an
indifferent person, creates an enemy. He
who could overlook an injury committed
in the collision of interests, will long and
severely resent the flights of a contemptuous
behaviour.-To the man of gentleness, the
world is generally disposed to ascribe every
other good quality. The higher endow-
ments of the mind we admire at a distance;
and when any impropriety of behaviour
accompanies them, we admire without love.
They are like some of the distant flars,whofe
beneficial influence reaches not to us. Where-

as,

As, of the influence of gentleness, all in S E R M.
some degree partake, and therefore all love
it* The man of this characer rises in the
world without struggle, and flourishes with-
out envy. His misfortunes are univcrfally
lamented; and his failings are cafily for-
given.

But whatever may be the effec of this

virtue on our external condition, its influ-
ence on our internal enjoyment is certain
and powerful, That inward tranquillity
which it promotes, is the first requisite to
every pleasurable feeling. It is the calm
and clear atmosphere, the serenity and fun-
ihine of the mirid. When benignity and
gentleness reign within, we are always least
in hazard of being ruffled from without;
every person, and every occurrence, are
beheld in the most favourable light. But
let some clouds of disgust and ill-humour
gather on the mind; and immediately the
scene changes: Nature seems transformed;
and the appearance of all things is blackened
to our view. The gentle mind is like the
smooth stream, which refleats every objet

M 2 in

s ER M. in its just proportion, and in its fairest co,

v,. lours. The violent spirit, like troubled wa-

ters, renders back the images of things
distorted and broken; and communicates to
them all that disordered motion which arises
Iblely from its own agitation.

Ojfences m/1i come. As soon may the

waves of the sea cease to roll, as provoca-
tions to arise from human corruption and
frailty. Attacked by great injuries, the man
of mild and gentle spirit will feel what hu-
man nature feels; and will defend and re-
sent, as his duty allows him. But to those
flight provocations, and frivolous offences,
which are the most frequent causes of dif-
quiet, he is happily fuperiour. Hence his
days flow in a far more placid tenour than
those of others; exempted from the num-
berlefs difcompofures which agitate vulgar
minds. Inspired with higher sentiments;
taught to regard, with indulgent eye, the
frailties of men, the omissions of the care-
less, the follies of the imprudent, and the
levity of the fickle, he retreats into the calm-
ness of his spirit, as into an undisturbed

fanauary;
I

fanduary; and quietly allows the ufi:al cur- s E R M.
rent of life to hold its course.

This virtue has another, and still more

important connetion with our interest, by
means of that relation which our present
behaviour bears to our eternal fRate. Hea-
ven is the region of gentleness and friend-
ihip; Hell, of fierceness and animosity. If
then, as the scripture infitrudts us, according
to what we now sow, we nmu1 hereafter
reap; it follows, that the cultivation of a
gentle temper is neceflhry to prepare us for
heavenly felicity; and that the indulgence
of harsh dispositions, is the introduaion to
future misery. Men, I am afraid, too often
separate those articles of their belief which
relate to eternity, from the ordinary affairs
of the world. They conned them with the
seasons of seriousness and gravity. They
leave them with much refpedt, as in a high
region, to which, only on great occasions,
they resort; and, when they descend into
common life, confider themselves as at li-
berty to give free scope to their humours
and pafilons. Whereas, in sac, it is their

M 3 belaviour

S E R M. behaviour in the daily train of social inter-
^---' course, which, more than any other cause,

fixes and determines their spiritual charac-
ter; gradually instilling those dispositions,
and forming those habits, which affed their
everlasting condition. With regard to trifles,
perhaps, their malignant dispositions may
chiefly be indulged. But let them remem-
ber well, that those trifles, by increasing the
growth of peevishness and paflion, become
pregnant with the most serious mifchiefs;
and may fit them, before they are aware,
for being the future companions of none
but infernal spirits.

I mean not to fay, that, in order to our

preparation for heaven, it is enough to be
mild and gentle; or that this virtue alone,
will cover all our fins. Through the feli-
city of natural constitution, a certain degree
of this benignity may be poffeffed by some,
whose hearts are in other refpeas corrupt,
and their lives irregular. But what I mean
to assert, is, That where no attention is
given to the government of temper, meet-
ness for Heaven is not yet acquired, and the

regenerating

regenerating power of religion is as yet un- S E R M.
known. One of the first works of the spirit . V
of God, is, to infuse into every heart which
it inhabits, that gentle wisdom, which is from
above. They who arc C(rijl's have crucified
the tc/Jf, with its aqfctions and lu//s : but let
it not be forgotten, that among the works
of the ficjh, hatred, variance, cmulations,
wrath, ynrjfe, and envyings, are as expressly
enumerated, as uncleanness, murders, drunk-
ennefs, and revelling . They who continue
either in the one or the other, /jhall not in-
herit, indeed cannot inherit, the kingdom of
God.

Having thus shown the importance of

gentleness, both as a moral virtue, and as
a Christian grace, I shall conclude the sub-
je&, with briefly suggesting some confidera-
tions which may be of use to facilitate the
praaice of it.

FOR this end, let me advise you to view

your charader with an impartial eye; and
to learri, froni your own failings, to give

* Gal. v. 19, o20, 21.

M 4 that

SER M. that indulgence which in your turn you

VI.
, ., claim. It is pride which fills the world

with so much harshness and severity. In the
fulness of felf-eftimation, we forget what
we are. We claim attentions, to which we
are not entitled. We are rigorous to of-
fences, as if we had never offended ; un-
feeling to distress, as if we knew not what
it was to fuffer. From those airy regions
of pride and folly, let us descend to our
proper level. Let us survey the natural
equality on which Providence has placed
man with man, and refled on the infirmi-
ties common to all. If the reflection on
natural equality and mutual offences be in-
iufficient to prompt humanity, let us at
least remember what we are in the fight of
God. Have we none of that forbearance
to give to one another, which we all so ear-
nefily intreat from Heaven ? Can we look
for clemency or gentleness from our Judge,
when we are so backward to show it to our
own brethren ?

Accustom yourselves, also, to reflea on

the fina!l moment of those things which are

the

the usual incentives to violence and conten- S E R M,
tion. In the ruffled and angry hour, we VI.
view every appearance through a false me-
dium. The mcft inconsiderable point of
interest, or honour, swells into a momentous
objea; and the slightest attack seems to
threaten immediate ruin. But after paflion
or pride has subsided, we look round in
vain for the mighty mifchiefs we dreaded.
The fabric, which our disturbed imagination
had reared, totally disappears. But though
the cause of contention has dwindled away,
its consequences remain. We have alienated
a friend ; we have embittered an enemy;
we have town the feeds of future suspicion,
malevolence, or difguft.-Sufpend your vio-
lence, I beseech you, for a moment, when
causes of discord occur. Anticipate that
period of coolness, which, of itself, will
soon arrive. Allow yourselves to think,
how little you have any profpe&t of gaining
by fierce contention; but how much of the
true happiness of life you are certain of
throwing away. Easily, and from the
smallest chink, the bitter waters of firife are

let

S E R M. let forth; but their course cannot be fore-

fV. seen; and he seldom fails of ilffering most
from their poisonous effed, who first al-
lowed them to flow.

But gentleness will, most of all, be pro-

moted by frequent views of those great
objets which our holy religion presents.
Let the profpecs of immortality fill your
minds. Look upon this world as a state of
passage. Confider yourselves as engaged
in the pursuit of higher interests ; as ading
now, under the eye of God, an introduc-
tory part to a more important scene. Ele-
vated by such sentiments, your minds will
become calm and sedate. You will look
down, as from a superior fiation, on the
petty disturbances of the world. They are
the felfifh, the sensual, and the vain, who
are most fubjea to the impotence of pas-
sion. They are linked so closely to the
world; by so many sides they touch every
objet, and every person around them, that
they are perpetually hurt, and perpetually
hurting others. But the spirit of true re-
ligion removes us to a proper difiance from

the

the grating objeds of worldly contention. SER M,
It leaves us fufficiently conneded with the
world, for ading our part in it with pro-
priety; but disengages us from it so far, as
to weaken its power of disturbing our tran-
quillity. It inspires magnanimity; and
magnanimity always breathes gentleness.
It leads us to view the follies of men with
pity, not with rancour; and to treat, with
the mildness of a fuperiour nature, what in
little minds would call forth all the bitter-
ness of passion.

Aided by such considerations, let us cul-

tivate that gentle wisdom which is, in so
many refpets, important both to our duty'
and our happinefs.' Let us assume it as the
ornament of every age, and of every station.
Let it temper the petulance of youth, and
soften the moroseness of old age. Let it
mitigate authority in those who rule, and
promote .deference among those who obey.
I conclude with repeating the caution, not
to mistake for true gentleness, that flimzy
imitation of it, called polished manners,
which often, among men of the world,

under

S E R M. under a smooth appearance, conceals much

v

. asperity. Let yours be native gentleness of

heart, flowing from the love of God, and
the love of man. Unite this amiable spirit,
with a proper zeal for all that is right, and
just, and true. Let piety be combined
in your charaater with humanity. Let de-
termined integrity dwell in a mild and
gentle breast. A charader thus supported
will command more real refped, than can
be procured by the most thining accom-
plifhments, when separated from virtue.

# SERMON VII. On the Disorders of the Passions. ESTHER v. 13. Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the King's gate.

[ i73 ]

SERMON VII.

On the DIs o RD E R s of the PA ss oN .

ESTHER v. 13.

Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I

fee Mordecai the few fitting at the Ki;;g's
gate.

T HESE are the words of one, who, SER M.

though high in station and power, VII.

confeffed himself to be miserable. They
relate to a memorable occurrence in the
Persian history, under the reign of Aha-
fuerus, who is supposed to be the Prince
known among the Greek historians by the
name of Artaxerxes. Ahasuerus had ad-
vanced to the chief dignity in his king-
dom, Haman, an Amalekite, who inhe-
rited all the ancient enmity of his race to

the

SER M. the Jewilh nation. He appears, from

i what is recorded of him, to have been a

very wicked miniffer. Raised to greatness
without merit, he employed his power
solely for the gratification of his paflions.
As the honours which he poffeffed were
next to royal, his pride was every day fed
with that servile homage which is pecu-
liar to Asiatic courts; and all the ser-
vants of the King profirated themselves
before him. In the midst of this general
adulation, one person only stooped not to
Haman. This was Mordecai the Jew;
who, knowing this Amalekite to be an
4enemy to the people of God, and, with
virtuous indignation, despising that in-
folence of prosperity with which he saw
him lifted up, bowed not, nor did him re-
verence. On this appearance of difre-
fpea from Mordecai, Haman was full of
wrath: But he thought scorn to lay hands
on Mordecai alone. Personal revenge was
not fufficient to satisfy him. So violent
and black were his passions, that he re-
solved to exterminate the whole nation td

2 which

which Mordecai belonged. Abusing, for SER M.
this cruel purpose, the favour of his cre-

V I

dulous Sovereign, he obtained a decree to
be sent forth, that, against a certain day,
all the Jews throughout the Persian do-
minions should be put to the sword.
Mean while, confident of success, and
blind to approaching ruin, he continued
exulting in his prosperity. Invited by
Ahasuerus to a royal banquet, which
Esther the Queen had prepared, he went
forth that day joyful, and with a glad heart.
But behold how flight an incident was
fufficient to poison his joy! As he went
forth, he saw Mordecai in the King's
gate; and observed, that still he refused
to do him homage : He lood not up, nor
was moved for him; although he well
knew the formidable designs which Ha-
man was preparing to execute. One pri-
vate man, who despised his greatness,
and difdained fubmiflion, while a whole
kingdom trembled before him; one spirit,
which the utmost firctch of his power
could neither ftibdue nor humble, blast-

ed

SER M. ed his triumphs. His whole foul was

VII. shaken with a storm of paflion. Wrath,

pride, and desire of revenge, rose into
fury. With difficulty he restrained him-
self in public; but as soon as he came
to his own house, he was forced to dif-
close the agony of his mind. He gather-
ed together his friends and family, with
Zeriih his wife. He told them of the glory
of his riches, and the multitude of his chil-
dren, and all the things wherein the King
bad promoted him, and how he had ad-
vanced him above the princes and servants
of the King. Hefaid, moreover, Yea, Et her
the c.ieen did let no man come in with the
King, unto the banquet that Jhe had pre-
pared, but mjyelf ; and to-morrow also am I
invited unto her with the King. After all
this preamble, what is the conclusion ?-
Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as
I fee Mordecai the Jew fitting at the King's
gate.

The sequel of Haman's history I fllall

not now pursue. It might afford matter
for much inftru6tion, by the confpicu-

ouS

ous justice of God in his fall and punifhl SERRM.
ment. But, contemplating only the fin- j
gular situation in which the Text presents
him, and the violent agitation of his
mind which it displays, the following
refletions naturally arise, which, together
with some praaical improvements, ihall
make the fubjet of this discourse. I. How
miserable is vice, when one guilty passion
creates so much torment! II. How una-
vailing is prosperity, when, in the height
of it, a tingle disappointment can destroy
the relish of all its pleasures! ItI. How
weak is human nature, which, in the ab-
fence of real, is thus prone to form to it-
self imaginary woes!

I. How miserable is vice, when one

guilty passion is capable of creating so
much torment! When we discourse to
you of the internal misery of sinners;
when we represent the pangs which they
fuffer, from violent paflions, and a cor-
rupted heart; we are sometimes fufpe&ed
of chufing a theme for declamation, and

VOL. I. N of

SERM. of heightening the piture which we

VII.
v " draw, by colours borrowed from fancy.

They whole nmind are, by nature, hap-
pily tranquil, or whose situation in life
removes them from the disturbance apd
tumult of passion, can hardly conceive,
that as long as the body is at ease, and
the external condition prosperous, any
thing which passes within the mind
thould cause such exquisite woe. But,
for the truth of our assertions, we appeal
to the history of mankind. We might
reason from the constitution of the ra-
tional frame; where the understanding is
appointed to be supreme, and the paflions
to be subordinate; and where, if this due
arrangement of its parts be overthrown,
misery as necessarily ensues, as pain is
consequent in the animal frame, upon
the distortion of its members. But lay-
ing speculations of this kind aside, it is
fufficient to lead you to the view of fats,
the import of which can neither be con-
troverted, nor mistaken. This is, indeed,
the great advantage of history, that it is

a mir-

ft hitrotir which holds up mankind to their E R M,

VII.

own view. For, in all ages, human na-
ture has been the fame. In the circle of
worldly affairs, the fame chara&ers and
situations are perpetually returning; and
in the follies and passions, the vices and
crimes, of the generations that are past, we
read those of the present.

Attend, then, to the nftance now be-

fore us; and conceive, if you can, a per-
son more thoroughly wretched, than one
reduced to make this humiliating confef-
sion, that though furroilnded with power,
opulence, and pleasure, he was loft to all
happiness, through the fiettenefs of his
resentment; and was at that moment
stung by disappointment, and torn by
rage, beyond what he could bears All
this availetb me nothing, so long as I fee
Mordecai the few jitting at the King's gate.
Had this been a soliloquy of Haman's
within himself, it would have been a fuffi*
cient discovery of his misery. But when
we confider it as a confeffion which he
makes to others, it is a proof that his

N misery

SE R M. misery was become insupportable. Foi
\ - such agitations of the mind every man

strives to conceal, because he knows they
difhondur him. Other griefs and for-
rows, he can, with freedom, pour'out to
a confident. What he fuffers from the
injustice or malice of the world, he is not
ashamed to acknowledge. But when his
fuffering arises from the bad dispositions
of his own heart; when, in the height
of prosperity, he is rendered miserable,
solely by disappointed pride, every ordi-
nary motive for communication ceases.
Nothing but the violence of anguith can
drive him to confess a paflion which ren-
ders him odious, and a weakness which
renders him despicable. To what ex-
tremity, in particular, must he be re-
duced, before he can disclose to his own
family the infamous secret of his misery ?
In the eye of his family every man wishes
to appear refpe&able, and to cover from
their knowledge whatever may vilify or
degrade him. Attacked or reproached
abroad, he consoles himself with his im-

portance

portance at home; and in domestic at- SE RM.
tachment and refpe&t, seeks for some com-
penfation for the injustice of the world.
Judge, then, of the degree of torment
which Haman endured, by its breaking
through all these restraints, and forcing
him to publish his shame before those
from whom all men seek most to hide it.
How severe must have been the conflit
which he underwent within himself, be-
fore he called together his wife and all
his friends for this purpose! How dread-
ful the agony he fuffered at the moment
of his confeffion, when, to the astonished
company," he laid open the cause of his
difrefs !

Assemble all the evils which poverty,

disease, or violence can inflit, and their
ftlings will be found by far less pungent,
than those which fuch' guilty'paffions dart
into the heart. Amidst the'ordinary cala-
mities of the world, the'mind can exert
its powers, and suggest relief: And the
mind is properly the man;. the fufferer,
and his fufferings, can be diftiiguiffld:

N 3 But

S-ErkM. But those disorders of passion, by feiz-

-1 ing diredly on the mind, attack hu-

man nature in its strong hold, and cut
off its last resource. They penetrate to
the very feat of sensation; and convert all
the powers of thought into instruments of

torture.

Let us remark, in the event that is now

before us, the awful hand of God; and
admire his justice, in thus making the
finner's own wickedness to repro've him, and
bis backflidings to corret him, Scepticks
reason in vain againit the reality of di-
vine government, It is not a fubje& of
dispute. It is' a fa& which carries the
evidence of sense, and displays itself be-
fore our eyes, We fee the Almighty ma-
niifftly pursuing the fnner *with evil. We
fee him conne&ing with every single de.
vijtion from duty, those wounds of the
spirit which occaion the most exquifito
torm ets, He hath not merely promul-
gated his laws. now, and delayed the dif-
trlbution f. rewards and punishments
ugtil a futte perio ops bi#g.. But th-

-4 fnftioQns

fan&ions of his laws already take place; SEvRM.
.their effeds appear; and with such infit-
tnite wisdom are they contrived, as to
require no other executiohers of juifice
against the sinners thah his own guilty
paflions. God needs riot come forth from
his secret place, in ordier to bring him to
1iunifhment. He needs not call thuntider
down from the heavens, nor raise any mi-
nifter of wrath from the abyss below. He
needs only fay, Ephraim is joined to his
idols; let bin~ alkne: And, at that instant,
the finner becomes his own tornientar.
The infernal fire begins, of itself, to kindle
ivithin him. The worm that never dies,
seizes on his heart.

Let us remark also, from this example,

how imperfe&ly we can judge from ex-
tbrnat appearahces, confierning real hap-
in~fs oi' misery. All Persia, it is pro-
tablde, en vied Haman as the happteft
person in the empire; while yet, at the
miement 6f which we now treat, thiere
was not 'iwthiif its b6urids, onBe mib6r
thor6ughly wrrtfchd W6 are fedited,

N4 and

S EVRM. and deceived by that false glare which
» prosperity sometimes throws around bad

men. We are tempted to imitate their
crimes, in order to partake of their ima-
gined felicity. But remember Haman,
and beware of the snare. Think not,
when you behold a pageant of grandeur
displayed to public view, that you dif-
cernm the ensign of certain happiness. In
order to form any just conclusion, you
must. follow the great man into the re-
tired apartment, where he lays aside his
disguise. You must not only be able to
penetrate into the interiour of families,
but you must have :a faculty by which
you can look into the inside of hearts,
Were you endowed with such a power,
you rwould most. commonly behold good
men, in proportion to their goddnefs,
satisfied 'and easy; you would behold
atrocious sinners, always restless .and~ uno
happy. .

Unjust are our complaints, .ofth

promiscuous distribution made by Provi-
dence, of its favours among men, Frotm

S' superficial

tuperficial view such complaints arise, S RM.
The distribution of the goods of fortune, i
indeed, may .often be promiscuous; that
is, difproportioned to the moral charac-
ters of men; but the allotment of real
happiness is never so. For to tIhe wicked
there is no peace. They are like the troubled
sea when it cannot reft. They travel witb
pain all their days. Trouble and angusjb
prevail againfl them. Terrours make them
afraid on every jide. A dreadful found is
in their ears ; and they are in great fear
where no fear is.----Hitherto we harve
considered Haman under the character of
a very wicked man, tormented by crimi-
aal passions. Let us now confider him,
.merely as a child of fortune, a profpe-
rous man of the world; and proceed to
observe,

"

ILI: How :unavailing worldly prosperity

is, since, in the midift of it, a single dif-
appointment is. fufficient to embitter all
its pleasures. We might at first imagiine,
that the natural effed of prosperity would

, be,

SERM. .b, to diffufe over the mind a prievailiig

_.y fatisfaation, which the lesser diilf of life

.cdald not riifle or diftutb. We might
cxpec, that as one in the full glow, of
healths defjpifes the inclemency ds wea-
ther; so one in poffeffion of all the ad-
vantages of high power and fatidn,
should disregard flight injuries ; and,, At
y'rfe& ease Within himself, fiould view,
in the mofl favourable light, the behavi-
oit of Others around him. Such effeais
would indeed follow, if worldly prosperity
contained in Itfeff the true principles' of
human felicity. But as it peffeflf them
riot, the very reverse of thofe' confequen:-
,cis geneially obtains. Prosperity deBili'.
-tayts instead of strengthening the mid.
Its' most. cdmmdn effet is, to. create an
extreme sensibility to the flighte~fWotfid.
It foments impatient desires; and raises
eip~ eations which no fuecefsaih fathfy.
Hifofter# a faife delicacy; which fickens
3n the fnidft. of:indtilgence. By repeatt-
,ed& gratification, it blunts the feelin'gs of
dae, towhat, is pleasing p and ~eavesn theih

I unhappily

unhappity acute to whatever is uneasy. ER M.
Hence, the gale which another would -
scarcely feel, is, to the prosperous, a rude
tempest. Hence, the roe-leaf doubled be.
low them on the couch, as it is told of the
effeminate Sybarite, breaks their reft.
Hence, the difrefpeat shown by Mordecai,
preyed with such violence on the heart of
Haman. Upon no principle of reason can
we assign a Itfficient cause for all the
distress which this incident occasioned to
him. The cause lay not in the external
incident. It lay within himself; it arose
from a mind diftempered-by prosperity.

Let this example corre& that blind

eagerness, with which we rufli to the
chafe of worldly greatness and honours.
I fay not, that it thould altogether divert
us from puirfuing them; since, when en-
joyed with temperance and wisdom, they
may doubtless both enlarge ouri utility,
and contribute to our comfort. But let it
teach us rot to over-rate tlhem. Let it
convince us that unless we add to them
tb niceffary ct ives- of piety and vir-

tue,

ER M' .tue, they are, by themselves, more likely
L.v.-- to render us wretched, than to make us

happy.

-Let the memorable fate of Haman

fuggef to us also,. how often, besides cor-
rupting the mind, and engendering inter-
nal nifery, they lead us among precipices,
and betray. us into ruin. At the moment
.when fortune seemed to smile upon him,
with the most serene and fettled afpel&,
.the' was digging in secret the pit for his
fall. Prosperity was weaving around his
head the web of defiruftion. Success in-
flamed his pride;' pride increased his thirst
'of revenge; the revenge which, for the
fake of one man, he fought to execute on
a whole nation, incensed the Queen; and
he is doomed to fuffer the 1fme death
which he had prepared f6r Mordecai.-T
Had Haman remained in a private fta-
tion, he might have arrived.at a peaceable
old age. He might-.have been, I (hall not
fay, a good or a happy man, yet pror
bably far less guilty, and less wretched,
than when placed at the head of the

greatest

greatest empire in the East. Who knoweth SER M.

VII.

what is good for man in this life, all the ^.^..
days of his vain life, which he fpendeth as a
jhado w?

An extensive contemplation of human.

affairs will lead us to this conclusion,
That among the different conditions and
ranks of men, the balance of happiness
is preserved in a great measure equal;
and that the high and the low, the rich
and the poor, approach, in point of real
enjoyment, much nearer to each other,
than is commonly imagined. In the lot
of man, mutual compensations, both of
pleasure and of pain, universally take
place. Providence never intended, that
any state here should be either completely
happy, or entirely miserable. If the feel-
ings of pleasure are more numerous, and
more lively, in the higher departments
of life, such also are those of pain. If
greatness flatters our vanity, it multiplies
our dangers. If opulence increases our
gratifications, it increases, in the fame
proportion, our desires and demands. If

the

SE R M. the poor are confined to a more nartro

VII.
... circle, yet within that circle lie most of

those natural fatisfaations, which, after
all the refinements of art, are found to
be the most genuine and true.-In a state,
therefore, where there is neither so much
to be coveted on the one hand, not to be
dreaded on the other, as at first appearsl
how submissive ought we to be to the dif-
pofal of Providence! How temperate in
our desires and pursuits! How much more
attentive to preserve our virtue, and to
improve our minds, than to gain the doubts
ful and equivocal advantages of worldly
prosperity !- But now, laying aside the
confiderationi of Haman's great crimes ;
laying aside his high prosperity; viewing
him simply as a man, let us observe, from
his history,

III. How weak human nature is,

which, in the absence of real, is thus
prone to create to itself imaginary woes.
All this availeth me nothing, so long as I fee
Mordecai the 7ew fitting at the King's gate.

-What

-,--,W1at wa.t* it, Q H1man! to thee, S I M,
tpgh h M ordeai had continued to, fit -
there, and negleded to do thee homage?
Would the banquet have been on that
account the less magnificent, thy palace
lets splendid, or thy retinue less numer
rols ? Could the difrefpe& of an obscure
stranger dithonour the favourite of a
mighty King ? In the midit of a thou-
sand submissive courtiers, was one sullen
countenance, an objea worthy of drawing
thy notice, or of troubling thy repose ?--
Alas! in Haman we behold too just a
pilture of what often passes within our*.
fplves. We never know what it is to be
long at ease. Let the world cease from.
changing around us. Let external things;
keep that situation in which we mofts
wish them to remain; yet fobmewhati
from within shall soon arise, to disturb
our happiness. A Mordecai appears, or
seems to appear, fitting at the gate. Some
vexation, which our fancy has either
entirely created, or at least has unreason-
ably aggravated, corrodes us in secret;

and

SER M. and until that be removed, all that we

VII.
-... enjoy availeth us nothing. Thus, while

we are incessantly complaining of the
vanity and the evils of human life, we
make that vanity, and we increase those
evils. Unskilled in the art of extraaing
happiness from the objeas around us, our
ingenuity solely appears in converting them
into misery.

Let it not be thought, that troubles of

this kind are incident only to the great
and the mighty. Though they, perhaps,
from the intemperance of their paflions,
are peculiarly exposed to them; yet the
disease itself belongs to human nature,
and spreads through all ranks. In the
humble, and seemingly quiet shade of
private life, discontent broods over its
imaginary sorrows; preys upon the citi-
zen, no less than upon the courtier; and
often nouriflhes paflions, equally malig-
nant in the cottage and in the palace.
Having once seized the mind, it spreads
its own gloom over every surrounding
obje&; it every where searches out ma-

7 terials

ierials for itself; and in no diredtion more S R M.

VII.

frequently employs its unhappy aClvi-
ty, than in creating divisions amongst
mankind, and in magnifying flight pro-
vocations into mortal injuries. Thofi
felf-created miseries, imaginary in the
cause, but real in the fuffering, will be
found to form a proportion of human
evils, not inferiour, either in severity or
in number, to all that we endure from
the unavoidable calamities of life. In
situations where much comfort might be
enjoyed, this man's fuiperiority, and that
man's neglec, our jealousy of a friend,
our hatred of a rival, an imagined as-
front, or a mistaken point of honour;
allow us no repose. Hence, discords in
families, animofities amoing friends, and
wars among nations. Hence, Haman
miserable in the midst of all that great-
ness could bestow. Hence, multitudes
in the most obscure stations, for whom
Providence seemed to have prepared a
quiet life, no' lcfs eager in their petty
broils, nor less tormented by their pas-

VoL. I. 0 fions,

SER M. fions, than if princely honours were the

VIl. - prize for which they contended.

FROM this train of observation, which

the Text has suggested, can we avoid re-
fleding upon the disorder in which hu-
man nature plainly appears at present to
lie ? We have beheld, in Haman, the
pidure of that misery which arises from
evil passions; of that unhappiness, which
is incident to the highest prosperity; of
that discontent, which is common to
every state. Whether we confider him
as a bad man, a prosperous man, or fim-
ply as a man, in every light we behold
reason too weak for passion. This is the
source of the reigning evil; this is the
root of the universal disease. The story
of Haman only Ihows us, what human
nature has too generally appeared to
be in every age. Hence, when we read
the hifiory of nations, what do we read
but the history of the follies and crimes
of men ? We may dignify those recorded
tranfaaions, by calling them the intrigues

6 of

(. statesmen, and the exploits of conquer-, s E. M
ours; but they are, in truth, no other than
the efforts of discontent to escape from
its misery, and the firuggles of contending
paflions among unhappy men. The history
of mankind has ever been a continued
tragedy; the world, a great theatre exhi-
biting the fame repeated fccne, of the follies
of men ihooting forth into guilt, and of
their paflions fermenting, by a quick pro-
cess, into misery.

But can we believe, that the nature of

man came forth in this state from the
hands of its gracious Creator? Did he
frame this world, an4 store it with inha-
bitants, solely that it might be replehifhed
with crimes and misfortunes ?-In the
moral, as well as in the natural world,
we may plainly discern the signs of some
violent convulsion, which has shattered the
original workmanship of the Almighty.
Amidst this wreck of human nature,
traces still remain which indicate its Au,
thor. Those high powers of conscience
and reason, that capacity for happiness,

O 2 that

 .

SER M. that ardour of enterprize, that glow of'

VII

- affedion, which often break through the

gloom of human vanity and guilt, are
like the scattered columns, the broken
arches, and defaced sculptures of some
fallen temple, whose ancient splendour
appears amidst its ruins. So conspicuous
in human nature are those charaders,
both of a high origin, and of a degrad-
ed iRate, that, by many religious feds
throughout the earth, they have been
seen and confeffed. A tradition seems to
have pervaded almost all nations, that
the human race had either through some
offence forfeited, or through some mif-
fortune loft, that station of primaeval
honour which they once poffeffed. But
while, from this docrine, ill understood,
and involved in many fabulous tales, the
nations wandering in Pagan darkness
could draw no consequences that were
just; while, totally ignorant of the na-
ture of the disease, they fought in vain
for the remedy; the fame divine revela-
tion, which has informed us in what

2

" manner

manner our apoftacy arose, from the abuse S ER M.

VII.

of our rational powers, has inftruacd us J
also how we may be restored to virtue and
to happiness.

LET us, therefore, study to improve

the assistance which this revelation affords,
for the restoration of our nature, and the
recovery of our felicity. With humble
and grateful minds, let us apply to those
medicinal springs which it hath opened,
for curing the disorders of our heart and
passions. In this view, let us, with reve-
rence, look up to that Divine Personage,
who descended into this world, on pur-
pose to be the light and the life of men;
who came, in the fulncfs of grace and
truth, to repair the dcfolations of many ge-
nerations, to restore order among the
works of God, and to raise up a new earth
and new heavens, wherein righteoufrefi
JJould dwell for ever. Under his tuition
let us put ourselves; and, amidif the
storms of passion to which we are here
pepofed, and the slippery paths which we

03 are

SE R M. are left to tread, never trust prefumIptu-

oufly to our own understanding. Tlia~ik-
ful that a Heavenly ConduAor vouclifafes
his aid, let us earnestly pray, that from
him may descend divine light to guide our
fieps, and divine strength to fortify our
minds. Let us pray, that his giace may
keep us from all intemperate paflions, and
mistaken pursuits of pleasure; that whether
it shall be his will to give or to deny us
earthly prosperity, he may bless us with a
calm, a found, and well-regulated mind;
may give us moderation in success, and
fortitude under disappointment; and may
enable us so to take warning from the crimes
and miseries of others, as to escape the
snares of guilt.

SWHIL E we thus maintain a due de-
pendence on God, let us also exert our-
selves with care in aaing our own part.
From the whole of what has been said,
this important initrudion arises, that the
happiness of every man depends more
upon the state of his own mind, shan

upon

upon any one external circumstance; nay, SERM.
more than upon any external things put ,
together. We have seen, that inordinate
passions are the great difturbers of life;
and that, unless we poflefs a good confci-
ence, and a well-governed mind, :difcon-
tent will blast every enjoyment, and the
higheRof prosperity will prove only difguif=
ed misery. Fix then this conclusion in
your minds, that the defiruaion of your
virtue, is the deftrudion of your peace.
Keep thy .heart with all diligence ; govern
it with the greatest care; for out of it are
the ijtes of life. In no station, in no period,
think yourselves secure from the dangers
which spring from your passions. Every
age, and every ifation they. beset; from
youth to gray hairs, and from the peasant
to the prince,

At your firit setting out in life, efpe.-

cially, when yet unacquainted 'with the
world and its snares, when every plea-
i.fure enchants with .its .smile, and every
.. objea thines with the gloss of novelty;
:bewvare of the feduciug ·appearanees which

0 4 surround

SER M. surround you, and recollet what others

_ have fuffered from the power of head-

firong desire. If you allow any passion,
even though it be esteemed innocent,
to acquire an absolute ascendant, your
inward peace will be impaired. But if
any, which has the taint of guilt, take
early poffeffion of your mind, you may
date from that moment the ruin of your
tranquiliity. Nor with the season of
youth does the peril end. To the im-
petuofity of youthful desire, succeed
the more sober, but no less dangerous,
attachments of advancing years; when
the passions which are conneded with
interest and ambition begin their reign,
and too frequently extend their malig-
nant influence, even over those periods
of life which ought to be most tranquil.
From the firfi to the lafi of man's abode
on earth, the discipline muff never be
relaxed, of guarding the heart from the
dominion of passion. Eager passions, and
violent defircs, were not made for man.
They exceed his sphere. They find no

adequate

adequate objeas on earth; and of course SER M.
can be produaive of nothing but misery. .
The certain consequence of indulging them
is, that there ihall come an evil day, when
the anguish of disappointment shall drive
us to acknowledge, that all which we en-
joy availeth us nothing.

You are not to imagine, that the warn-

ings which I have given in this discourse,
are applicable only to the cafe of such
signal offenders as he was, of whom the
Text treats. Think not, as I am afraid
too many do, that because your passions
have not hurried you into atrocious deeds,
they have therefore wrought no mischief,
and have left no sting behind them. By a
continued series of loose, though appa-
rently trivial, gratifications, the heart is
often as thoroughly corrupted, as by the
commiflion of any one of those enormous
crimes which spring from great ambition,
or great revenge. Habit gives the paflions
strength, while the absence of glaring
guilt seemingly justifies them; and, un-
awakened by remorse, the finner proceeds

in

1!:R -M. in his courFe,o till he wax bold i guilt, and
If- .become -ripe for ruin. For, by gradual

Sand latent flteps, the deftruaion of' our
ivirtue advances. Did the evil unveil itfeff
cat the ibeginning; did the storm which is
-to overthrow our. peace, discover, as it
rose, all its horrours, precautions would
more frequently be taken against it. But
we are imperceptibly betrayed; and from
one licentious iattachment, one criminal
paflion, are, by a train of consequences,
draiwn, on to another, till ithe.government
of our minds,.is irrecoverably loft. 'The
enticing and the odious paflions are, in this
.refpeA, similar in their proeefs; and,
though-by different roads, condua at last
*to the fame ':iffue. David, when he first
beheld Bathsheba, did not plan the death
of 'Uriah. Hamart was not delivered up
all at once to the madness of revenge. His
passions rose with the rising tide of pro-
fperity ; and pride completed what profpe-.
rity began. What was origihallyriho: more
-than,~difpleafure at Mo'decai's diifrefped,
"iIcreafed with every invitation he received

- to

to the banquet of the Queen; till it im-

'

pelled him to devise the flaughterpf a,whole
-ation, and ended in a Aegree of rage which
confounded his reason, and hurried him" to
ruin.. In this iianner, :every.criminal!- i^f
sion, in its prOgress, swells and blackens ;
and what was at first a small cloud, such as :

,.

the Prophet's servant saw, no bigger than a
man's hand, ri/ing from the sea *, is foot }^
found 'to carry the tempefjt, its womb, :

* J Kings, xviii. 44.

,' . i,

i'

i .

# SERMON VIII. On our Ignorance of Good and Evil in this Life. ECCLESIAST. vi. 12. Who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the das of his vain life, which be spendeth as a shadow?

[ 204 j

I.

SE R M O N VIII.

On our IGNORANCE of GOOD and EVIL

in this Life.

EccLES. vi. 12.

Who knoweth what is good for man in this

life, all the days of his vain life, which
he fpendeth as a /hadow ?

S E R M. H E measure according to which

VIII. knowledge is dispensed to man, as-

fords conspicuous proofs of divine wis-
dom. In many instances we clearly per-
ceive, that either more or less would have
proved detrimental to his ifate; that en-
tire ignorance would have deprived him
of proper motives to ation; and that
complete discovery would have raised
him to a sphere too high for his pre-

sent

sent powers. He is, therefore, permitted SERM.

VIII.

to know only in part; and to fee through
a glass darkly. He is left in that slate
of conjedure, and partial information,
which, though it may occasionally fubjea
him to distress, yet, on the whole, con-
duces most to his improvement ; which as-
fords him knowledge fifficient for the pur-
poses of virtue, and of adivc life, without
disturbing the operations of his mind, by
a light too bright and dazzling. This
evidently holds, with refpeda to that de-
gree of obscurity which now covers the
great laws of Nature, the decrees of the
Supreme Being, the state of the invisible
world, the future events of our own life,
and the thoughts and designs which pass
within the breasts of others .

But there is an ignorance of another

kind, with refpcd to which the applica-
tion of this remark may appear more du-
bious; the ignorance under which men
labour concerning their happiness in the
present life, and the means of attaining it.

* Vide Serm. IV.

If

S.WRM. If there be foundation for Solomon's
.nl l compInpt. in the Tjext. ¢h.o knoweth what

is. good~r an i~ -nthis :ife? this confe-
qunce :in.y; be thpighl4tipevitably to fol-
lowi That; the daysof/.hb lfe must be vain
is every flRfe,: pot ,only because. they are
fleeting, but ;gkcaufe they are empty too,
likle the ; adqi.- For, to what purpose
a- all .hi. labopurs in the ,pursuit of an
ohje , hich:it is rqt inm his power to
discover ,c,afcertaan ?--Let us then feri-
oufly:erlquiie, what account can be given
of our.prefent ignorance, refpefting, what
is good for us in this life; whether no-
thing ;bie:.left, but only to wander in
uncertainty amidit this. darkness, and to
lament it as. the fad consequence of our
fallen slate; or whether such in ruc-
tions may not be derived from it, as give
ground for acknowledging, that by this,
as by all its other appointments, the wis-
dom of Providence brings real good out
of seeming evil. I ihall, in order to de-
termine this point, first, endeavour to il-
lustrate the dotrine of the Text, Thlat we

know

know not4 or at mft knpw imperfe&ly, s. .
what it good for .m ikn this Ife/: I shall *
next explain the causes to which, tJis de- .
fe& in our knowledge is owing: And
then shall show the purpofes< which, it
was intended to serve, and the effe&s
which it ought to produce, 0n .oer co,>
duS . .

. . ,-.

THE whole history of. mankidid seems

a comment on :the. do1ri4ne of the Text.
When wer review the course of human
affhirs, one of the first objeds which every
where attraas our notice, is, the mif.
taken judgment of men eoncerning their
own interest. That fore evil, which Solp-
mon long ago remarked with. refpeC to
riches, of their being kept by the owners
thereof to their hurt,; takes place equally
with refped to .dominion and power, and
all the splendid objets and high stations
of life. We every day behold men climb--
ing, by painful steps, to that dangerous
height, which, in the end, renders their
fall more severe, and their ruin more eon-

fpicuous.

i. · ·

SERM. fpicuous. But it is not to high ftatiodri

VIII.
. . that the dodrine of the Text is limited.

In the crimes by which too often these are
gained, and in the misfortunes which they
afterwards bring forth, the greater part of
every audience may think themselves little
concerned. Leaving such themes, there-
fore, to the poet and the historian, let us
come nearer to ourselves, and survey the
ordinary walk of life.

Around us, we every where behold a

busy multitude. Restless and uneasy in
their present situation, they are incessantly
employed in accomplishing a change of
it; and, as soon as their wish is fulfill-
ed, we discern, by their behaviour, that
they are as diffatisfied as they were be-.
fore. Where they expedted to have found
a paradise, they find a desert. The man
of business pines for leisure. The leisure
for which he had longed, proves an irk-
some gloom; and, through want of em-
ployment, he languishes, fickens, and dies.
The man of retirement fancies no state to
be so happy, as that of aaive life. But

he

lie has not engaged long in the tumults SER M.
and contests of the world, until he finds ViIL
cause to look back with regret on the calm
hours of his former privacy ahd retreat.
Beauty, wit, eloquence; arid fame, are
eagerly defiied by persons in every rank
ps life. They ate the parent's fondefi
wish for his child; th6 ambition of th.a
young, and the admiration of the old.
And yet, in what numberless instances
liave they proved, to those who poffeffed
them, no other than thining snares; fe-
duaions to vice, inftligatidns to folly,
and, in the end, sources of misery ? Com-
fortably might their days have passed,
had they been less conspicuous. Biut the
diftin&ions which brought them forth
to notice, conferred splendour, and with-
drew happiness; Long life is, of all
others, the most general, and seemingly
the most innocent, objea of desire. With
refpe& to this too, we so frequently err,
that it would have been a blessing to
many to have had their with denied.
There was a period, when they might

:VOL. I. P have

SER M. have quitted the fiage with honour, and
vi. m>in peace. But by living too long, they

outlived their reputation; outlived their
family, their friends, and comforts; and
reaped nothing from the continuance of
days, except to feel the pressure of age, to
taste the dregs of life, and to behold a wider
compass of human misery.

Man walketh in a vain jhow. His fears

are often as vain as his withes. As what
flattered him in expeaation, frequently
wounds him in poffeffion; so the event
to which he looked forward with an
anxious and fearful eye, has often, when
it arrived, laid its terrours aside; nay,
has brought in its train unexpeaed blefl-
ings. Both good and evil are beheld at a
distance, through a perfpedive which
deceives. The colours of objeas when
nigh, are entirely different from what
they appeared, when they were viewed in
futurity.

THE fa& then being undoubtedly cer-

tain, that it is common for men to be

deceived

dieceived in their profpeas of happiness, SER M.
let us next enquire into the causes of that
deception. Let us attend to those peculiar
circumstances in our state, which render
us such incompetent judges of future good
or evil in this life.

First, We are not fufficiently acquaint-

ed with ourselves, to foresee our future
feelings. We judge by the sensations of
the present moment; and, in the fervour
of desire, pronounce confidently concern-
ing the desired objed. But we refled
not, that our minds, like our bodies, un-
dergo great alteration from the situations
into which they are thrown, and the pro-
greffive stages of life through which they
pass. Hence, concerning any condition
which is yet untried, we conjeaure with
much uncertainty. In imagination, we
carry our present wants, inclinations, and
sentiments, into the state of life to which
we aspire. But no sooner have we en-
tered on it, than our sentiments and incli-,
nations change. New wants and desires
arise; new objeats are required to gratify

P 2 them;

S ERM- them; and by consequence our old dif\-
in . fatisfadion returns, and the void, which

was to have been filled, remains as great
as it was before.

But, next, supposing our knowledge of

ourselves fufficient to dire& us in the
choice of happiness, yet still we are liable
to err, from our ignorance of the con-
hne&ions which subsist between our own
condition and that of others. No indi-
vidual can be happy, unless the circum-
stances of those around him be so ad-
jufted as to conspire with his interest. For,
in human society, no happiness or mi-
fery stands unconneted and independent.
Our fortunes are interwoven by threads
innumerable. We touch one another on
all sides. One man's misfortune or fuc-
cess, his wisdom or his folly, often, by
its consequences, reaches through multi-
tudes. Such a fyfitem is far too compli-
cated for our arrangement. It requires
adjufiments beyond our skill and power.
It is a chaos of events, into which our
eye cannot pierce; and is capable of re-

gulation,

gulatlon, only by him who perceives at one s F R M.
glance the relation of each to all. I -.j

Farther, As we are ignorant of the

events which will arise from the combi-
nation of our circumstances with those of
others, so we are equally ignorant of the
influence which the present tranfadions of
our life may have upon those which are
future. The important question is not,
What is good for a man one day; but
What is good for him all the days of his
life? Not, what will yield him a few
fecattered pleasures; but what will render
his life happy on the whole amount ?
And is he able to answer that question,
who knoweth not what one day may bring
forth; who cannot tell, whether the events
of it may not branch out into confe-
quences, which will assume a direCion
quite opposite to that in which they set
forth, and spread themselves over all his
life to come? There is not any present
moment that is unconneted with some
future one. The life of every man is a
continued chain of incidents, each link

P3 of

SER M. of which hangs upon the former. The

VIII.

ct, transition from cause to effea, from event

to event, is often carried on by secret
steps, which our foresight cannot divine,
and our sagacity is unable to trace. Evil
may, at some future period, bring forth
good; and good may bring forth evil,
both equally unexpeded. Had the Pa-
triarch, Joseph, continued to loiter under
his father's fond indulgence, he might
have lived an obscure and insignificant
life. From the pit and the prison, arose
the incidents which made him the ruler
of Egypt, and the saviour of his father's
house.

Laffly, Supposing every other incapa-,

city to be removed, our ignorance of the
dangers to which our spiritual state is
exposed, would disqualify us for judging
soundly concerning our true happiness,
Higher interests than those of the present
world, are now depending. All that is
done or fuffered by us here, ultimately
refers to that immortal world, for which
good men are trained up, under the care

8 of

of an Almighty Parent. We are as in., S E R M,
competent judges of the measures necef.-
fary to be pursued for this end, as children
are, of the proper condua to be held in
their education. We foresee the dangers
.of our spiritual, still less than we do those
of our natural Rfate; because we are less
attentive to trace them. We are still more
exposed to vice than to misery; because
the confidence which we place in our vir-
tue, is yet worse founded than that which
we place in our wisdom, Can you esteem
him prosperous, who is raised to a fitua-
tion which flatters his passions, but which
corrupts his principles, disorders his tem-
per, and, finally, overfets his virtue? In
the ardour of pursuit, how little are these
effeas foreseen? And yet, how often are
they accomplished, by a change of condi-
tion? Latent corruptions are called forth;
feeds of guilt are quickened into life; a
growth of crimes arises, which, had it not
been for the fatal culture of prosperity,
would never have seen the light. How
often is man, boastful as he is of reason,

P 4 merely

S E R M. merely the creature of his fortune; formi,

v ed, and moulded, by the incidents of his

life !-Hazael, when yet a private man,
detested the thoughts of cruelty. 7'hou
fhjalt flay the young men with the sword,
said the Prophet: Thou Jhalt dajh the chil-
dren, and rip up the women with child. Is
thy servant a dog, replied Hazael, that he
fIould do these things ? But no sooner was
he clothed with the coveted purple, than
it seemed to taint his nature. He com-
mitted the crimes of which, at a diflance,
he believed himself incapable; and became
the bloody tyrant, whose charaater his foul
once abhorred *.

SUCH then at present is man; thus

incapable of pronouncing with certainty
eoncerning his own good or evil. Of
futurity he discerns little; and even that
little he fees through a cloud. Ignorant
of the alteration which his sentiments
and desires will undergo from new fitua-
gipns in life; ignorant of the consequences

9 Kin gs viiii. 12, 3.

whicl

whch will follow from the combina- SER?46

VIII.

tion of his circumstances with those of y
others around him; ignorant of the in-
fluence which the present may have on the
future events of his life; ignorant of the
effeat which a change of condition may
produce, on his moral charaQer, and his
eternal interests; How can he know what
is good for him all the days of his vain life,
which hefpendetkh as a ljadow ?

Instead of only lamenting this ignorance,

let us, in the last place, confider how it
ought to be improved; what duties it
suggests, and what wife ends it was intend-
ed by Providence to promote,

I, LET this dotrine teach us to pro-

ceed with caution and circumfpeCion,
through a world where evil so frequent-
ly lurks under the form of good. To be
humble and modest in opinion, to be vigi-
lant and attentive in conduCt, to diflruft
fair appearances, and to restrain rash de-
fires, are inftrutions which the darkness
Qs our present state ihould strongly in-,

culcate.

SER M. culcate. God hath appointed our fitua-
V III. nr'^ tion to be so ambiguous, in order both

to call forth the exertion of those intelli-
gent powers which he hath given us, and
to enforce our dependence on his gracious
aid. It is not in man that walketh, to diret
his fleps, Surrounded with so many be-
wildering paths, among which the wisest
are ready to firay, how earnestly should
we implore, and how thankfully ihould
we receive, that divine illumination which
is promised in scripture to the pious and
the humble! ?The secret of the Lord is with
them that fear him, He will guide them
witb his council. He will teach them the
way that they Jhould chiffe. But what
muff be the fate of him, who, amidif all
the dangers attending human conduat,
neither looks up to Heaven for diredtion,
nor properly exerts that reason which
God hath given him? If to the most
diligent enquirer, it proves so difficult a
talk to distinguish true good, from those
fallacious appearances with which it is
ever blended, how ihould he discover it,

who

who brings neither patience nor attention SER M.

VIII,

to the search; who applies to no other
counsellor than present pleasure, and, with
a rash and credulous mind, delivers himself
up to every suggestion of desire ?

This admonition I particularly direa to

those, who are in a period of life too
often charaaerized by forward prefump-
tion, and headlong pursuit. The self-
conceit of the young, is the great source
of those dangers to which they are ex-
posed; and it is peculiarly unfortunate,
that the age which stands most in need of
the counsel of the wife, ihould be the
most prone to contemn it. Confident in
the opinions which they adopt, and in
the measures which they pursue, they
seem as if they understood Solomon to
fay, not, Who knoweth, but, Who is ig-
norant of what is good for man all the days
of his life? The bliss to be aimed at, is,
in their opinion, fully apparent. It is
not the danger of mistake, but the failure
of success, which they dread. Aaivity "
tp seize, not sagacity to discern, is the

only

SERM. only requisite which they value.--How

.. long ihall it be, ere the fate of your pre-

deceffors in the fame course teach you
wisdom ? How long shall the experience
of all ages, continue to lift its voice to
you in vain? Beholding the ocean on
which you are embarked, covered with
wrecks, are not those fatal signals fuffi-
dient to admonish you of the hidden
rock ? If, in Paradise itself, there. was a
tree which bare fruit fair to the eye, but
mortal in its effeats, how much more, in
this fallen state, may such deceiving ap-
pearances be expeated to abound! The
whole slate of Nature is now become a
scene of delusion to the sensual mind.
Hardly any thing is what it appears to
be: And what flatters most, is always
farthest from reality. There are voices
which sing around you; but whose strains
allure to ruin. There is a banquet spread,
where poison is in every dish. There is
a couch which invites you to repose; but
to slumber upon it, is death. In such a
situation, be not high-minded, but fear. Let

sobriety,

sobriety temper your unwary ardour. Let SE RM.

VIII.

modefiy check your rash presumption. Let
wisdom be the offspring of refledion now,
rather than the fruit of bitter experience
hereafter.

II. LET our ignorance of what is good

or evil, corred anxiety about worldly fuc-
cess. As rashness is the vice of youth,
the opposite extreme of immoderate care
is the vice of advancing years. The doc-
trine which I have illufirated, is pqually
adapted for checking both. Since we are
so often betrayed into evil by the mif-
taken pursuit of good, care and attention
are requisite, both in forming our choice,
and in conduaing our pursuit; but since
our attention and care are liable to be to
often frustrated, they should never be al-
lowed to deprive us of tranquillity.

The ignorance in which we are left con-

cerning good and evil, is not such as to
supersede prudence in condua: For wis-
dom is still found to excel folly, as far as
light excelleth darknb/s. But it is that de-

. gree

S E R M. gree of uncertainty, which ought to rentl
VII.
 der us temperate in pursuit; which ought

to calm the perturbation of hope and
fear, and to cure the pain of anxiety.
Anxiety is the poison of human life. It
is the parent of many fins, and of more
miseries. In a world where every thing
is so doubtful; where you may succeed
in your wish, and be miserable; where
you may be disappointed, and be blest in
the disappointment; what , means this
restless stir and commotion of mind? Can
your solicitude alter the course, or un-
ravel the intricacy of human events ? Can
your curiosity pierce through the cloud
which the Supreme Being hath made im-
penetrable to mortal eye!-To provide
against every apparent danger, by the em-
ployment of the most promising means,
is the office of wisdom. But at this point
wisdom flops. It commands you to re-
tire, after you have done all that was
incumbent on you, and to possess your
mind in peace. By going beyond this
point; by giving yourselves up to immo-

derate

derate concern about unknown events, S R M.

VIII.

you can do nothing to advance your fuc-
cess, and you do much to ruin your
peace. You plant within your breaf the
thorn which is long to gall you. To the
vanity of life, you add a vexation of
spirit, which is wholly of your own crea-
tion, not of Divine appointment. For
the dubious goods of this world were
never designed by God to raise such eager
attachment. They were given to man for
his occasional refreshment, not for his
chief felicity. By setting an excessive
value upon objeas which were intended
only for your secondary regard, you change
their nature. Seeking more fatisfaaion
from them than they are able to afford,
you receive less than they might give.
From a mistaken care to secure your hap-
pinefs, you bring upon yourselves certain
misery.

III. LET our ignorance of good and

evil determine us to follow Providence,
and to resign ourselves to God. One of

th.e

SER M. the most important lessons which can be

- given to man, is resignation to his Maker;

and nothing inculcates it more, than the
experience of his own inability to guide
himfelf.-You know not what is good for
you, in the future periods of life. But
God perfealy knows it; and if you faith-
fully serve him, you have reason to be-
lieve that he will always consult it. Be-
fore him lies the whole fucceflion of
events, which are to fill up your existence.
It is in his power to arrange and model
them at his pleasure; and so to adapt one
thipg to another, as to fulfil his promise
of making them all work together for good
to those rwho love him. Here then, amidst
the agitations of desire, and the perplexi-
ties of doubt, is one fixed point of reft.
By this let us abide-; and difinifs our
anxiety about things uncertain and un-
known. Acquaint yourselves with God, and
be at peace. Secure the one thing needful.
Study to acquire an interest in the Divine
favour: And you may safely surrender
yourselves to the Divine administration.

When

When tempted to repine at your condi- S E R M.

VIII.

tion, reflet how uncertain it is, whether
you thould have been happier in any
other. Remembering the vanity of many
of your former wishes, and the fallacy
which you have so often experienced in
your schemes of happiness, be thankful
that you are placed under a wiser direc-'
tion than your own. Be not too particu-
lar in your petitions to Heaven, con-
cerning your temporal interest. Suffer
God to govern the world according to his
own plan; and only pray, that he would
bestow what his unerring wisdom fees to
be belft for you on the whole. In a word,
Commit your way unto the Lord. Trn/ft in
him, and do good. Follow wherever his
Providence leads; comply with whatever
his will requires; and leave all the reft to
him.

IV. LET our ignorance of what is good

for us in this life, prevent our fa~ing any
unlawful ifep, in order to compass our
most favourite designs. Were the finner

VOL. I. Q bribed

SER M. bribed with any certain and unqueftion-
,- able advantage; could the means which

he employs ensure his success, and could
that success ensure his comfort; he might
have some apology to offer for deviating
from the path of virtue. But the doc-
trine which I have illustrated, deprives
him of all excuse, and places his folly in
the most striking light. He climbs the
steep rocks and treads on the edge of a
precipice, in order to catch a shadow.
He has cause to dread, not only the un-
certainty of the event which he wishes to
accomplish, but the nature also of that
event when accomplished. He is not only
liable to that disappointment of success,
which so often frustrates all the designs of
men; but liable to a disappointment still
more cruel, that of being fuccefsful and
miserable at once. Riches and pleasures
are the chief temptations to criminal
deeds. Yet those riches, when obtained,
may very possibly overwhelm him with
unforeseen miseries. Those pleasures may
cut ihort his health and life. And is it

6 for

for such doubtful and fallacious rewards, SERM.
that the deceiver fills his mouth with lies, .
the friend betrays his benefator, the apof-
tate renounces his faith, and the affaflin
covers himself with blood ?

Whoever commits a crime, Incurs a

certain evil for a most uncertain good.
What will turn to his advantage in the
course of this life, he cannot with any as-
furance know. But this he may know,
with full certainty, that by breaking the
Divine commandments, he will draw
upon his head that displeasure of the Al-
mighty, which ihall crush him for ever.
The advantages of this world, even when
innocently gained, are uncertain bless-
ings; when obtained by criminal means,
they carry a curse in their bosom. To
the virtuous, they are often no more than
chaff. To the guilty, they are always
poison.

V. LET our imperfect knowledge of

what is good or evil, attach us the more
to those few things, concerning which

S there

SER M. there can be no doubt of their being

VIII.
__ truly good. Of temporal things which

belong to this class, the catalogue, it mufft
be confeffed, is small. Perhaps the chief
worldly good we ihould wish to enjoy, is
a found mind in a found body. Health
and peace, a moderate fortune, and a few
friends, fum up all the undoubted articles
of temporal felicity. Wife was the man
who addressed this prayer to God; Re-
move fr from me vanity and lies. Give me
neither poverty nor riches. Feed me with
Sfood convenient for me. Les I be full and
deny thee, and fay, who is the Lord ? or les
I be poor andfteal, and take the name of my
God in vain ÷. He whose withes, refpea-
ing the poffeffions of this world, are the
most reasonable and bounded, is likely
to lead the fafeft, and, for that reason,
the most desirable life. By aspiring too
high, we frequently miss the happiness,
which, by a less ambitious aim, we might
have gained. High happiness on earth, is
rather a piaure which the imagination

* Prov. xxx. 8, 9.

forms,

forms, than a reality which man is allowed s E R M.
to possess. v--I

But with regard to spiritual felicity, we

are not confined to such humble views.
Clear and determinate objeds are pro-
posed to our pursuit; and full scope is
given to the most ardent desire. The for-
givenefs of our fins, and the assistance of
God's holy grace to guide our life; the
improvement of our minds, in knowledge
and wisdom, in piety and virtue; the
protedion and favour of the great Father
of all, of the blessed Redeemer of man-
kind, and of the Spirit of fanaification
and comfort; these are objeas, in the
pursuit of which there is no room for
hesitation and distrust, nor any ground for
the question in my Text, Who knoweth
what is good for man? Had Providence
spread an equal obscurity over happiness
of every kind, we might have had some
reason to complain of the vanity of our
condition. But we are not left to so
hard a fate. The Son of God hath de-
fcerided from heaven, to be the Light of

U3 the

SERM. the world. He hath removed that veil

VIII.

} which covered true bliss from the search of

wandering mortals, and hath taught them
the way which leads to life. Worldly en-
joyments are shown to be hollow and de-
ceitful, with an express intention to dire&
their affedions towards those which are
spiritual. The fame discoveries which di-
minifh the value of the one, serve to in-
crease that of the other. Finally,

VI. LET our ignorance of what is good

or evil here below, lead our thoughts and
desires to a better world. I have endea-
voured to vindicate the wisdom of Provi-
dence, by showing the many useful pur-
poses which this ignorance at present pro-
motes. It serves to check presumption
and rashness, and to enforce a diligent
exertion of our rational powers, joined
with a humble dependence on Divine aid.
It moderates eager paflions refpeaing
worldly success. It inculcates refigna-
tion to the disposal of a Providence which
is much wiser than man. It restrains us

from

from employing unlawful means, in order SE R M.

VIII.

to compass our most favourite designs. It n
tends to attach us more closely to those
things which are unquestionably good. It
is therefore such a degree of ignorance ag
suits the present circumstances of man bet-
ter than more complete information con-
cerning good and evil.

At the fame time the causes which

render this obscurity necessary, too plainly
indicate a broken and corrupted ifate of
human nature. They show this life to be
a ifate of trial. They suggest the ideas of
a land of pilgrimage, not of the house of
reft. Low-minded and base is he, who
aspires to no higher portion; who could be
satisfied to spend his whole existence, in cha-
sing those treacherous appearances of good,
which so often mock his pursuit. What
shadow can be more vain than the life of
the greatert part of mankind? Of all that
eager and buftiling crowd which we behold
on the earth, how few discover the path of
true happiness ? How few can we find, whose
a6tivity has nct been mifemployed, and

Q 4 wvhofe

SE R M. whole course terminates not in confetfions

VIII.
-^ . of disappointments? Is this the slate, are

there the habitations, to which a rational
spirit, with all its high hopes, and great
capacities, is to be limited for ever ?-Let
us bless that God who hath set nobler pro-
fpeds before us; who, by the death and
refurreaion of his son Jesus Christ, hath
begotten us to the lively hope of an inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not
away, reserved in the heavens. Let us ihow
ourselves worthy of such a hope, by setting
our affections upon the things above, not upon
things on the earth. Let us walk by faitbh
and not by fght; and, amidift the obscurity
of this faint and dubious twilight, console
ourselves with the expeatation of a brighter
day which is soon to open. This earth is
the land of thadows. But we hope to pass
into the world of realities; where the prol-
per objeas of human desire Thall be dif-
played; where the fubiftance of that bliss
ihall be found, whose image only we now
pursue; where no fallacious hopes shall any
longer allure, no smiling appearances flhall

betray,

betray, no insidious joys flhall sting; but SER M,
where truth shall be inseparably united with
pleasure, and, the milts which hang over
this preliminary state being dissipated, the
perfea knowledge of good shall lead to the
full enjoyment of it for ever.

# SERMON IX. On Religious Retirement. PSAL. iv. 4. Commune with your own heart, upon your bed, and be still.

[ 234 ]

S E R MON IX.

On RELIGIOUS RETIREMENT,

PSALM iv. 4.

Commune with your own heart, upon your

bed, and be/ ill.

SER M. N UCH communing with themselves

Ix.

,

, there has always been among man-

kind; though frequently, God knows, to
no purpose, or to a purpose worse than
none. Could we discover the employ-
ments of men in retirement, how often
should we find their thoughts occupied
with fubjeas, which they would be
ashamed to own? What a large share
have ambition and avarice, at some times
the grossest passions, and at other times the
meanest trifles, in their solitary musings?

They

They carry the world, with all its vices, SERM

IX.

into their retreat; and may be said to dwell 4
in the midst of the world, even when they
seem to be alone.

This, surely, is not that fort of com-

muning which the Psalmist recommends.
For this is not properly communing with
our heart, but rather holding secret in-
tercourfe with the world. What the
Psalmist means to recommend, is religi-
ous recolleaion; that exercise of thought
which is conneded with the precept given
in the preceding words, to fJand in awe,
and-fin not. It is to commune with our-
selves, under the charader of spiritual
and immortal beings; and to ponder those
paths of our feet, which are leading us to
eternity. I ihall, in the first place, show
the advantages of such serious retirement
and meditation; and thall, in the second
place, point out some of the principal
subj ets which ought to employ us in our
retreat.

The advantages of retiring from the

world, to commune with our heart, will be

found

SE R M. found to be great, whether we regard our

'X.

» happiness in this world, or our preparation

for the world to come.

LET us confider them, firfit, with re-

fpea to our happiness in this world. It
will readily occur to you, that an entire
retreat from worldly affairs, is not what
religion requires; nor does it even enjoin
a great retreat from them. Some stations
of life would not permit this; and there
are few stations which render it necessary.
The chief field, both of the duty and of
the improvement of man, lies in aftive
life. By the graces and virtues which he
exercises amidst his fellow-creatures, he
is trained up for heaven. A total retreat
from the world, is so far from being, as the
Roman Catholic Church holds, the perfeaion
of religion, that, some particular cafes ex-
cepted, it is no other than the abuse of it.

But, though entire retreat would lay

us aside from. the part for which Provi-
dence chiefly intended us, it is certain,

that,

that, without occasional retreat, we must SER M.

IX.

aa that part very ill. There will be »- -
neither consistency in the condua, nor
dignity in the charader, of one who sets
apart no share of his time for meditation
and refledion. In the heat and bustle of
life, while paflion is every moment throw-
ing false colours on the objeats around us,
nothing can be viewed in a just light. If
you wish that Reason ihould exert her
native power, you muff step aside from
the crowd, into the cool and silent shade.
It is there that, with sober and steady eye,
ihe examines what is good or ill, what is
wife or foolish, in human condud; the
looks back on the past, ihe looks forward
to the future; and forms plans, not for
the present moment only, but for the
whole of life. How ihould that man dif-
charge any part of his duty aright, who
never fuffers his paflions to cool? And
how should his passions cool, who is en-
gaged, without interruption, in the tu-
mult of the world? This incessant stir
may be called, the perpetual drunken-

ness

*

8 E R M. ness of life. It raises that eager ferment.
\»» ation of spirit, which will be ever fend-

ing forth the dangerous fumes of rashness
and folly. Whereas he who mingles reli-
gious retreat with worldly affairs, remains
calm, and master of himself. He is not
whirled round, and rendered giddy, by
the agitation of the world; but, from that
sacred retirement, in which he has been
conversant among higher objeas, comes
forth into the world with manly tran-
quillity, fortified by the principles which
he has formed, and prepared for whatever
may befal.

As he who is unacquainted with re-

treat, cannot sustain any charader with
propriety, so neither can he enjoy the
world with any advantage. Of the two

' classes of men who are most apt to be

negligent of this duty, the men of plea-
sure, and the men of business, it .is hard to
fay which fuffer most, in point of enjoy-
ment, from that negled. To the former,
every moment appears to be loft, which

- partakes not of the vivacity of amusement.

To

To7 connea one plan of gaiety with ano- SER M.
ther, is their sole fludy; till, in a very -
short time, nothing remain but to tread
the fame beaten round; to enjoy what
they have already enjoyed, and to fee
what they have often seen. Pleasures
thus drawn to the dregs, become vapid
and tasteless. What might have pleased
long, if enjoyed with temperance, and
mingled with retirement, being devoured
with such eager haste, speedily surfeits
and disgusts. Hence, these are the per-
tons, who, after having run through a
rapid course of pleasure, after having
glittered for a few years in the foremost
line of public amusements, are the most
apt to fly at last to a melancholy retreat;
not led by religion or reason, but driven
by disappointed hopes, and exhausted fpi-
rits, to the pensive conclusion, that all is
va ity.

If uninterrupted intercourse with the

world wears out the man of pleasure, it
no less oppresses the man of business and
ambition. The strongest spirits muff at

length

SER M. length fink under it. The happiest teni,

IX.
y- per must be soured by incessant returns

of the opposition, the incotiftancy, and
treachery of men. For he who lives al-'
ways in the bustle of the world, lives in
a perpetual warfare. Here an enemy en-
counters; there, a rival fipplants him.
* The ingratitude of a friend stings .him

this hour; and the pride of a fuperiour
wounds him the next. In vain he flies
for relief to trifling amusements. These
may afford a temporary opiate to care; but
they communicate no strength to the mindi
On the contrary, they leave it more soft
and defenceless, when molestations and in-
juries renew their attack.

Let him who wishes for an effectual

cure to all the wounds which the world
can infliat, retire from intercourse with
men, to intercourse with God. When
he enters into his closet, and shuts the
door, let him ihut out, at the fame time,
all intrusion of worldly care; and dwell
among objedts divine and immortal.-
Those fair profpeds of order and peace,

5 ihall

ihall there open to his view, which form S E RM,

IX.

the most perfea contrail to the confusion
and misery of this earth. The celestial
inhabitants quarrel not; among them
there is neither ingratitude, nor envy,
nor tumult. Men may harass one ano-
ther; but in the kingdom of God, con-
cord and tranquillity reign for ever.--
From such objeas, there beams upon the
mind of the pious man, a pure and en-
livening light; there is diffufed over his
heart, a holy calm. His agitated spirit
re-affumes its firmness, and regains its
peace. The world sinks in its import-
ance; and the load of mortality and
misery loses almost all its weight. The
green paflures open, and the Jfill waters
flow around him, beside which the Shep-
herd of Israel guides his flock. The dif-
turbances and alarms, so formidable to
those who are engaged in the tumults of
the world, seem to him only like thunder
rolling afar off; like the noise of distant
waters, whose found he hears, whole
course he traces, but whose waves touch

VOL. I. R him

SER M. h;m not.-As religious retirement is thus

IX

I..Z_ evidently conducive to our happiness in

this life, so,

IN the second place, it is absolutely

necessary in order to prepare us for the
life to come. He who lives always in
public, cannot live to his own foul.
The world lietb in wickedne~ ; and with
good reason the Christian is exhorted, not
to be conformed to it, but transformed by the
renewing of his mind. Our conversation
and intercourse with the world, is, in
several refpe&s, an education for vice.
From our earliest youth, we are accustomed
to hear riches and honours extolled as
the chief poffeffions of man; and pro-
posed to us, as the principal aim of our
future pursuits. We are trained up, to
look with admiration on the flattering
marks of diftina ion which they bestow.
In quest of those fancied blessings, we fee
the multitude around us eager and ser-
vent. Principles of duty, we may, per-
haps, hear sometimes inculcated; but

wec

te seldom behold them brought into SER M.

IX.

competition with worldly profit. The
soft names, and plausible .colours, under
which deceit, sensuality, and revenge,
are presented to us in common discourse,
weaken, by degrees, our natural sense of
the diftindion between good and evil.
We often meet with crimes authorized
by high examples, and rewarded with
the caresses and smiles of the world. We
discover, perhaps, at last, that those
whom we are taught to reverence, and
to regard as our patterns of condut,
aa upon principles no purer than those
of others.-Thus breathing habitually a
contagious air, how certain is our ruin,
unless we sometimes retreat from this
,pestilential regions and--feek for proper
correCives of the disorders which are
contra&ed there ? Religious retirement
both abates the disease, and fRitnifhes the
remedy. It lessens the corrupting' influ.a
ence of the world; and it gives oppor-*
tunity for better principles to exert thei
power. He who is accustomed to turn

R e aside,

SER M. aside, and commune with himself, will,
.-. sometimes at least, hear the truths which

the multitude do not tell him. A more
found inftrutor will lift his voice, and
awaken within the heart those latent fug.-
geftions, which the world had overpower-
ed and suppressed.

The aas of prayer and devotion, the

exercises of faith and repentance, all the
great and peculiar duties of the religion
of Christ, necessarily suppose retirement
from the world. This was one chief end
of their institution, that they might be
the means of occasionally sequestering us
from that great scene of vice and folly,
the continued presence of which is bo
hurtful. Solitude is the hallowed ground
which religion hath, in every age, chosen
for her own. There, her inspiration is
felt, and her secret mysteries elevate the
foul. There, falls the tear of contrition;
there, rises towards heaven the sigh of the
heart; there, melts the foul with all the
tenderness of devotion, and pours itself
forth before him who made, and him

who

who redeemed it. How can any one, SERM,.

IX.

who is unacquainted with such employ- '
ments of mind, be fit for heaven? If
heaven be the habitation of pure affetions,
and of intelleaual joy, can such a fiate be
relished by him who is always immersed
among sensible objeas, and has never ac-
quired any taste for the pleasures of the
understanding, and the heart ?

The great and the worthy, the pious

and the virtuous, have ever been addita-
ed to serious retirement. It is the cha-
raderiftic of little and frivolous minds,
to be wholly occupied with the vulgar
objects of life. These fill up their de-
fires, and supply all the entertainment
which their coarse apprehensions can re-
lifh. But a more refined and enlarged
mind leaves the world behind it, feels a
call for higher pleasures, and seeks them
in retreat. The man of public spirit
has recourse to it, in order to form plans
for general good; the man of genius, in-
prder to dwell on his favourite themes;
the philosopher, to pursue his discoveries;

R 3 th1

sE R M. the faint, to improve himself in grace.
.. . I/faa¢t went out to meditate in the fields, at

the evening tide. David, amidst all the
splendour of royalty, often bears witness
both to the pleasure which he received,
and to the benefit which he reaped, from
devout meditation. I communed with my
own heart, and my spirit made diligent
search. I thought on my ways, and turned
my feet unto God's teflimonies. In the
i multitude of thoughts within me, his com-.
forts delight my foul. Our blessed Sa-
viour himself, though of all who ever
lived on earth he needed least the affifit
ante of religious retreat, yet by his fre-
quent pratice, has done it signal honour,
Often were the garden, the mountain, and
the silence of the night, fought by him, for
intercourse with heaven. When he hadfent
the multitude away, he went up into a moun-
tain, apart, to pray.

The advantages of religious retirement

will still more clearly appear, by confider,
ing, as was proposed, in the next place,
fogii es those great objets which ihould

there employ our thoughts. I flall mention S E R M.
only three, which are of the most plain and y
acknowledged importance; God, the world,
and our own charaater.

I. WHEN you retire from the world,

commune with your hearts concerning God.
Impreflions of Deity, betides their being
the principle of what is ftrialy termed
religion, are the great support of all moral
sentiment, and virtuous condu&t, among
men. But with what difficulty are they
preserved in any due degree of force,
amidlt the affairs and avocations of the
world? While the crowd of surrounding
objeas is ever rushing on the jmagina-
tion, and occupying the senses and the
heart, what is not only absent from view,
but, by its nature, invisible, is apt to
vaniih like a shadow. Hence it is given
as the charater of wicked men, in scrip-,
ture, that they are without God in the
world. They deny not, perhaps, that he
does exist; but it is the fame to them as
though he did not: For having loft him

R 4 from

SER M. from their view, his existence has no es-

IX.

i.. fed on their condua. If, at any time,

the idea of God rife in their mind, it
rises like a terrifying phantom which they
hasten to expel; and which they gladly
fancy to be unreal, because they fee it
make so little impression on others around
them.

Let him who retires to serious medita-

tion, begin with impressing deeply on his
mind this important truth, That there is
undoubtedly a Supreme Governour, who
presides over the universe. But let him
not imagine, that to commune with his
heart concerning God, is to search into
the mysteries of the Divine nature, or to
attempt a discovery of the whole plan of
Providence. Long enough he may be-
wilder himself in this maze, without
making any proficiency in the pra&ical
knowledge of God. Shall he who knows
Io little of his own nature, or of the na-
ture of the objets with which he is fur-
rounded, exped to comprehend the Being
wvho made him ? To commune with our,

selves,

p

te ?: , any useful purpose, on this sub- SE RM.
je '

> bring home to our fouls the in- -

ternal, authoritative sense of God, as of a
Sovereign and a Father. It is not to fpecu-
late abqut what is mysterious in his essence,
but to contemplate what is displayed of his
perfecions. It is to realize the presence
of the Supreme Being, so as to produce the
most profound veneration; and to awaken
the earnest desire of as near an approach as
our nature will permit, to that great Foun-
tain of happiness and life.

After this manner was that holy man

affeced, who uttered this ardent wish*,
o that I knew where I might jind hii, that
I might come even to his feat !--If with
such a frame of mind you seek after God,
be assured that he is not far from you;
and that, though you are not permitted
as yet to come to his scat, you may, at
lealt, reach the footstool of his throne, and
touch the robe that covers him. In the
midst of your solitary musings lift your
eyes, and behold all nature full of God.

* Job xxiii. 3.

Look

SER M. Look up to the firmament, and admire

IX.

'-v.' his glory. Look round on the earth, and

observe his presence every where display-.
ed. If the gay landscape, or the fruitful
field, present themselves to your eye, be-
hold him smiling upon his works. If the
mountain raise its lofty head, or the ex-
panfe of waters roll its tide before you,
contemplate, in those great and solemn
objeats, his power and majesty. Nature,
in all its diversities, is a varied manifefta-
tion of the Deity. If you were to take the
wings of the morning, and dwell in the ut,
termosf parts of the sea, even there you
would find him. For in him you live and
move. He fills and animates all space. In
the barren wilderness, as in the peopled
region, you can trace his footsteps; and
in the deepest solitude, you may hear a
voice which teffifies of him.

Him, indeed, you are never to con-.

found with the workmanship of his
hands. Nature, in its most awful or most
pleasing fecenes, exhibits no more than
different forms of inanimate matter, But

on

on these dead forms is impressed the glory SER M.
of a living spirit. The beauty, or the
greatness, which appears in them, flows
from the Fountain of all greatness and
beauty; in him it centers; of his perfec-
tion it refleas an image; and towards
him should lead your view.-In converf-
ing with a fellow-creature on earth, it is
not with his body we converse, though it
is his body only which we fee. From his
words and aaions we conceive his mind;
with his mind, though invisible, we hold
correspondence, and diret towards this
Spiritual Essence, our affeaion and regard.
In like manner, though here we behold no
more of God than what his works display,
yet, in those displays, we are capable of
perceiving the universal Spirit, and of hold-
ing correspondence with this unseen Being,
in veneration, gratitude, and love.

It is thus that a pious man, in his re-

tired meditations, viewing natural objeas
with a spiritual eye, communes with his
heart concerning God. He walks among
the vwrious scenes of nature, as within

the

SER M. the precinads of a great temple, in the

X_. habitual exercise of devotion. To those

discoveries of the Supreme Being in his
works, let him apply the comment of
his word. From the world of Nature, let
him follow God into the world of Grace.
When conduded from the outer courts,
into this inmost fandtuary of the temple,
he shall feel himself brought still more
nigh to the Sacred Presence. In the great
plan of divine Wisdom, for extirpating
the evils produced by fin, he shall receive
the interpretation of many of the hidden
mysteries of Nature. He shall discover in
Christ, the Deity made, in some degree,
visible to sense. In the beneficent works
which he performed, and the gracious
undertaking which he accomplished, he
ihall behold the brigbtnefs of the Father's
glory, and shall discern it to be full of
grace and truth.--From the sacred retreat,
wherein his thoughts have been thus
employed, he returns to the world like a
fuperiour being. He carries into adive
life, those pure and elevating sentiments,

6 to

to which the giddy crowd are strangers. SER M.

IX.

A certain odour of fandity remains upon
his mind, which, for a while at least, will
repel the contagion of the world.

II. COMMU NE with your heart, in

the season of retirement, concerning the
world. The world is the great deceiver,
whose fallacious arts it highly imports us
to detca. But in the midst of its pleasures
and pursuits, the detedion is impossible.
We tread, as within an enchanted circle,
where nothing appears as it truly is. It
is only in retreat, that the charm can be
broken. Did men employ that retreat,
not in carrying on the delusion which the
world has begun, not in forming plans
of imaginary bliss, but in fubjeaing the
happiness which the world affords to a
stria discussion, the spell would dissolve;
and in the room of the unreal profpeas,
which had long amused them, the naked-
ness of the world would appear.

Prepare yourselves, then, to encounter

the light of truth. Resolve rather to bear

the

SER M. the disappointment of some flattering

- hopes, than to wander for ever in the

paradise of fools. While others meditate
in secret on the means of attaining world-.
ly success, let it be your employment to
scrutinize that success itself. Calculate
fairly to what it amounts; and whether
you are not losers on the whole, by your'
apparent gain. Look back for this put-
pose, on your past life. Trace it from
your earliest youth; and put the question
to yourselves, What have been its hap-
pieft periods? Were they those of quiet
and innocence, or those of ambition and
intrigue ? Has your real enjoyment uni-
formly kept pace with what the world
calls prosperity? As you are advanced inl
wealth or itation, did you proportionally
advance in happiness? Has success, al,,
most in any one instance, fulfilled your
expe&ations ? Where you reckoned upon
molt enjoyment, have you not often found
lear ? Wherever guilt entered into your
pleasures, did not its sting long remain,
after the gratification was past ?---Such

5 questions

queftlions as these candidly answered, SER M.
would in a great measure unmask the
world. They would expose the vanity of
its pretensions; and convince you, that
there are other springs than those which
the world affords, to which you muff apply
for happiness.

.

While you commune with your heart

concerning what the world now is, con-
fider also what it will one day appear to
be. Anticipate the awful moment of your
bidding it an eternal farewell. Think,
what refleaions ihall most probably arise,
when you are quitting the field, and look-
ing back on the scene of aaion. In what
light will your closing eyes contemplate
those vanities which now fthine to bright,
and those interests which now swell into
such high importance ? What part will
you then with to have afted ? What shall
then appear momentous, what trifling
in human condu& ?-Let the sober senti-
ments which such anticipations suggest,
temper now your misplaced ardour. Let
the last conclusions which you shall form,

enter

SE R M. enter into the present estimate which you

IX.

'-.ym make of the world, and of life.

Moreover, in communing with your-

selves concerning the world, contemplate
it as fubjea to the Divine dominion. The
greater part of men behold nothing more
than the rotation of human affairs. They
fee a great crowd ever in motion; the
fortunes of men alternately rising and
falling; virtue often distressed, and pro-
fperity appearing to be the purchase of
worldly wisdom. But this is only the
outside of things. Behind the curtailn
there is a far greater scene, which is be-
held by none but the retired, religious
fpedator. Lift up that curtain, when
you are alone with God. View the world
with the eye of a Christian; and you
shall fee, that while man's heart devifeth
his way, it is the Lord who direEleth his
Jleps. You ihall fee, that however men
appear to move and a&t after their own
pleasure, they are, nevertheless, retained
in secret bonds by the Almighty, and all
their operations rendered subservient .to

the

the ends of his moral government. You S E RM.

IX.

ihall behold him obliging the wrath of -
man to praise him; punishing the fminner
by means of his own iniquities; from
the trials of the righteous, bringing forth
their reward; and to a state of seeming
universal confusion, preparing the wisest
and most equitable issue. While the
fajhion of this world is passed fast away,
you thall discern the glory of another
rising to succeed it. You ihall behold all
human events, our griefs and our joys,
our love and our hatred, our charater and
memory, absorbed in the ocean of eternity;
and no trace of our present existence left,
except its being for ever well with the
righteous, and ill with the wicked.--.
Such a view of the world, frequently pre-
fented to our minds, could not fail to en-
force those solemn conclusions; There is no
wisdom, nor counsel, againJl the Lord. Fear
God, and keep his commandments; for this
is the whole of man. What is a man pro-
sited, if he Jhall gain the whole world, and
lose his own foul ?

VOL. I. S III. CO.M-

sERM. III. COMMUNE with your heart, cort-

IX.
. .,_, cerning yourselves, and your real charac-

ter. To acquire a thorough knowledge
of ourselves, is an attainment, no less dif-
ficult than important. For men are ge-i
nerally unwilling to fee their own imper-
fedions; and when they are willing to
enquire into them, their felf-love imposes
on their judgment. Their intercourse
with one another aflfits the delusion to
which, of themselves, they are prone.
For the ordinary commerce of the world
is a commerce of flattery and falsehood;
where reciprocally they deceive, and are
deceived, where every one appears under
an assumed form, profeffes esteem which
he does not feel, and beftows praise in
order to receive it. It is only in retreat,
where those false femblances disappear, and
those flattering voices are silent, that a man
can learn to think soberly of himself, and as
he ought to think.

It has been said, that there are three

chara&ers which every man sustains;
and these often extremely different from

Sone

tne another: One, which he poffeffee in S ERM.
his own opinion; another, which he car- c.,
ries in the estimation of the world; and
a third, which he bears in the judgment of
God. It is only the last which ascertains
what he really is.-Whether the charafer
which the world forms of you, be above or
below the truth, it imports you not much
to know. But it is of eternal consequence,
that the charader which you possess in
your own eyes, be formed upon that which
you bear in the fight of God. In order
to try it by this great standard, you must
lay aside, as much as possible, all partiality
to yourselves; and in the season of retire-
ment, explore your heart with such accurate
scrutiny, as may bring your hidden defeas
to light.

Enquire, for this purpose, whether you

be not conscious, that the fair opinion
which the world entertains of you, is
founded on their partial knowledge, both
of your abilities and your virtues ? Would
you be willing that all your ations should
be publickly canvassed ? Could you bear

S 2 to

SER M. to have your thoughts laid open? Are

IX.

(- there no parts of your life which you

would be uneasy if an enemy could dif-
cover? In what light, then, must there
appear to God? When you have kept
free of vice, has your innocence proceed-
ed from purity of principle, or from
worldly motives? Rises there no envy or
malignity within you, when you compare
your own condition with that of others?
Have you been as solicitous to regulate
your heart, as to preserve your manners
from reproach? Profefling yourselves to
be Christians, has the Spirit of Christ ap-
peared in your condua ? Declaring that
you hope for immortality, has that hope
surmounted undue attachments to the pre-
sent life ?

Such invefligation as this, seriously pur-

sued, might produce to cvery man many
discoveries of himself; difcoverie3, not
pleasing, perhaps, to vanity, but salutary
and useful. For he can be only a flat-
terer, but no true friend to himself, who
aims not at knowing his own defeas, as

8 well

well as virtues. By imposing on the world, S E R M.

IX.

he may carry on some plan of fancied ~
profit; but by imposing on his heart, what
can he propose to gain? He feedeth oj
ajhes: A deceived heart hath turned him
q/ide, that be cannot deliver his foul, nor
fay, Is there not a lie in my right hand *

.

THUS I have set before you, some of

those great objeds, which ought to em-
ploy your meditation in religious retire-
ment. I have endeavoured to introduce

you into a proper intercourse with your
heart, concerning God, the world, and
your own charader. Let this intercourse
terminate in fixing the principles of your
future condud. Let it serve to introduce
consistency into your life. Nothing can
be more wavering and disjointed, than4
the behaviour of those who are wholly
mien of the world, and have never been
inured to commune with themselves.
Dissipation is a more frequent cause of
their ruin, than determined impiety. It

* Ifa. xllv. 20.

S 3 is

S E R M. is not so much because they have adopted

Sj bad principles, as because they have never
attended to principles of any kind, that their
lives are so full of incoherence and difor-
der.-You hover on the borders of fin and
duty. One day, you read the scriptures,
you hear religious discourses, and form
good resolutions. Next day, you plunge
into the world, and forget the serious im-
pression, as if it had been never made.
The impression is again renewed, and again
effaced; and in this circle your life revolves,
Is such condua worthy of creatures en-i
dowed with intelligent powers! Shall the
close of life overtake you, before you have
determined how to live ? Shall the day ne-
ver come, that is to find you steady in your
views, decided in your plans, and engaged
in a course of aaion which your mind ap-
proves ?-If you wish that day ever to ar-
rive, retirement and meditation must first
bring you home to yourselves, from the
diflipation in which you are now scattered;
must teach you to fix such aims, and to lay
down f4ch rules of confud, as are suitable

tQ

to rational and immortal beings. Then SER M.

IX

will your characer become uniform and i4....,
refpetable. Then you may hope that
your life will proceed in such a train as
shall prepare you, when it is finished, for
joining the society of more exalted spirits.

84

# SERMON X. On Devotion. ACTS x. 2. Cornelius  a devout man.

[ 264 J

SERMON X,

On DEVOTION,

----**---

ACTS X. 2.

Cornelius--A devout man--

S E R M. 7 HAT religion is essential to the wel-

Sx. j fare of man, can be proved by the

most convincing arguments. But these,
how demonstrative soever, are infufficient
to support its authority over human con-
dut. For arguments may convince the
understanding, when they cannot con-
quer the passions. Trrefiftible they seem
in the calm hours of retreat; but, in the
season of adion, they often vanish into
smoke. There are other and more power-
f springs, which influence the great

movements

movements of the human frame. In or- SER M.

X.

der to operate with success on the aative
powers, the heart must be gained. Sen-
timent and affeaion muff be brought to
the aid of reason. It is not enough that
men believe religion to be a wife and ra-
tional rule of condua, unless they relish
it as agreeable, and find it to carry its
own reward. Happy is the man, who,
in the conflit of desire between God and
the world, can oppose, not only argu-
ment to argument, but pleasure to plea-
sure; who, to the external allurements of
sense, can oppose the internal joys of de-
votion; and to the uncertain promises of
a flattering world, the certain experience
of that peace of God which qaffeth under-
Janding, keeping his mind and heart.--Such
is the temper and spirit of a devout man.
Such was the charader of Cornelius, that
good centurion, whose prayers and atfns
are said to have come up in memorial before
God. Of this charader I intend, through
Divine assistance, to discourse; and shall
endeavour, I. To explain the nature of

deyotion i

SE RM. devotion; II. To justify, and recommend-

Sw it; and, III. To redify some mistakes con-

cerning it.

I DEVOTION is the lively exercise of

those affe&ions, which we owe to the
Supreme Being. It comprehends several
emotions of the heart, which all termi-
nate on the fame great objea. The chief
of them are, veneration, gratitude, desire,
and resignation.

It implies, first, profound veneration

of God. By veneration, I understand an
affe&ion compounded of awe, and love;
the affeaion, which, of all others, it best
becomes creatures to bear towards their
infinitely perfed Creator. Awe is the
first sentiment that rises in the foul, at
the view of his greatness. But, in the
heart of a devout man, it is a solemn and
elevating, not a dejeding, emotion; for
he glows, rather than trembles, in the
Divine presence. It is not the fuperfti.
tious dread of unknown power, but the
homage yielded by the heart to him who

is'

is, at once, the greatest and the best of Be- 8 ER M.
ings. Omnipotence, viewed alone, would y'
be a formidable obje&. But, considered
in conjunaion with the moral perfefions
of the Divine nature, it serves to heighten
devotion. Goodness affeas the heart with
double energy, when residing in One so
exalted. The goodness which we adore
in him, is not like that which is common
among men, a weak, mutable, undif.
cerning fondness, ill qualified to be the
ground of assured trut,. It is the good,
ness of a perfea Governour, a&ing upon
a regular extensive plan; a steady prin-*
ciple of benevolence, condu&ed by wis-
dom; which, fubje&Lt to no variableness or
Jbadow of turning, free from all partiality
and caprice, incapable of being either
soothed by flattery, or ruffled by resent.
ment, resembles, in its calm and equal
lustre, the eternal serenity of the highest
heavens. Thy mercy, 0 Lord! is in the beas
vens, and thy faitbfulnefs reacheth unto tbh
clouds. Thy righteoufrefs is like the great mounv
tains, and thy judgments are a Cgreat depth.

Such.

S ER M. Such are the conceptions of the.great

S* God, which fill with veneration the heart

of a devout man. His veneration is not
confined to aas of immediate worship.
It is the habitual temper of his foul.
Not only when engaged in prayer or
praise, but in the silence of retirement,
and even amidst the occupations of the
world, the Divine Being dwells upon his
thoughts. No place, and no objet, ap-
pear to him void of God. On the works
of Nature, he views the impreflion of his
hand; and in the adions of men, he
traces the operation of his Providence.
Whatever he beholds on earth, that is
beautiful or fair, that is great or good,
he refers to God, as to the supreme ori-
gin of all the excellence which is scattered
throughout his works. From those effeas,
he rises to the first cause. From those
fitreams, he ascends to the fountain whence
they flow. By those rays, he is led to
that eternal source of light in which they

centre,

DEVOTION

DEVOTION implies, secondly, sincere SERM.

gratitude to God, for all his benefits. -
This is a warmer emotion than simple
veneration. Veneration looks up to the
Deity, as he is in himself; Gratitude re-
gards what he is towards us. When a
devout man surveys this vast universe,
where beauty and goodness are every
where predominant; when he refleas on
those numberless multitudes of creatures,
who, in their different fiations, enjoy the
blessings of existence; and when at the
fame time he looks up to an Universal
Father, who hath thus filled creation with
life and happiness, his heart glows within
him. He adores that disinterested good-
ness, which prompted the Almighty to
raise up so many orders of intelligent be-
ings, not that he might receive, but that
he might give and impart; that he might
pour forth himself, and communicate to
the spirits which he formed, some emana-
tions of his felicity.

The goodness of this Supreme Benefac-

tor he gratefully contemplates, as display-

ed

SERM. ed in his 6wn state. He reviews the
i^ events of his life; and in every com-

fort which has sweetened it, he discerns
the Divine hand. Does he remember
with affecion the parents under whose
care he grew up, and the companions
with whom he passed his youthful life?
Is he now happy, in his family rising
around him; in the spouse who loves
him, or in the children who give him
comfort and joy? Into every tender re-
membrance of the past, and every pleas-
ing enjoyment of the present, devotion
enters; for in all those beloved objeas,
it recognizes God. The communication
of love from heart to heart, is an effufion
of his goodness. From his inspiration,
descends all the friendship which ever
glowed on earth; and therefore, to him
it justly returns in gratitude, and termi-
nates on him.

But this life, with all its interests, is

but a small part of human existence. A
devout man looks forward to iminorta-
lity, and discovers still higher fubjeats of

5 gratitude.

gratitude. He views himself as a guilty SEk kM.
creature, whom Divine benignity has re-
ceived into grace; whose forfeited hopes
it has restored; and to whom it has open-
ed the most glorious profpeas of future
felicity. Such generosity shewn to the
fallen and miserable, is yet more affe&ing
to the heart, than favours conferred on
the innocent. He contemplates, with afto-
nifhment, the labours of the Son of God,
in accomplishing redemption for men;
and his foul overflows with thankfulness
to him, who loved us, and wajhed us from
our fins in his own blood.--What jball I
render to the Lord for all his benefits? Bless
the Lord, 0 my foul! and all that is with-
in me, bless his holy name; who forgiveth
all thine iniquities, and healeth all thy dif-
eases; who redeemeth thy life from def/ruc-
tion, and crowneth thee with loving kindness,
and with tender mercies.

DEVOTION implies, thirdly, the de-

fire of th6 foul after the favour of the Su-
preme Being, as its chief good, and final

reft.

.... man allots inferiour and secondary attach-

ment. He disclaims not every earthly
affea ion. He pretends not to renounce
all pleasure in the comforts of his pre-
sent slate. Such an unnatural renuncia-
tion humanity forbids, and religion can-
not require. But from these he expeas
not his supreme bliss. He discerns the
vanity which belongs to them all; and
beyond the circle of mutable objeas
which surround him, he aspires after
some principles of more perfed felicity,
which shall not be fubjea to change or
decay. But where is this complete and
permanent good to be found? Ambition
pursues it in courts and palaces; and re-
turns from the pursuit, loaded with for-
rows. Pleasure seeks it among sensual
joys; and retires with the confeflion of
disappointment. The deep faith, it is not in
me; and thefea faith, it is not with me. It
cannot be gotten for gold; neither Jhal silver
be weighed for the price thereof Its place
is not in the land of the living. True hap-

pinefs

pinefs dwells with God; and from the S ER M.
light of his countenance, it beams upon the 'a ..
devout man. His voice is, Whom have I
in heaven but thee ? and there is none upon
earth that I desire bejide thee. After ex-
ploring heaven and earth for happiness,
they seem to him a mighty void, a wil-
dernefs of ihadows, where all would be
empty and unsubstantial without God.
But in his favour and love, he finds what
supplies every defed of temporal objects;
and assures tranquillity to his heart, amidst
all the changes of his exiftencc. 'ThoufJalt
guide me with thy coundl ; and thou flalt re-
ceive me to thy glory. My f/lc and my heart
faileth; but God is the firengtb of my heart,
and my portion for ever.

FROM these sentiments and affeaions,

Devotion advances, fourthly, to an entire
resignation of the foul to God. It is the
consummation of trust and hope. It ba-
nifhes anxious cares, and murmuring
thoughts. It reconciles us to every ap-
pointment of Divine Providence; and re-

VOL. I. T solves

S E R M. solves every wish into the desire of pleaif

-- ing him, whom our hearts adore. Its

genuine breathings are to this effea:
" Conduct me, 0 God ! in what path
" soever feemeth good to thee. In no-
" thing flhall I ever arraign thy sacred
" will. Doff thou require me to part
" with any worldly advantages, for the
" fake of virtue and a good conscience ? I
" give them up. Dost thou command me
" to relinquish my friends, or my coun-
" try ? At thy call I cheerfully leave
" them. Doff thou summon me away
" from this world ? Lo! I am ready to
" depart. Thou haft made, thou haft re-
" deemed me, and I am thine. Myself,
" and all that belongs to me, I surrender
" to thy disposal. Let the men of the
" world have their portion in this life. Be
" it mine, to behold thy fce in righteon/hefs;
" and 'when I awake, to be fatiSied with thy
(( likenps."

This, surely, is one of tile noblest aas

of which the human mind is capable,
when thus, if we may be allowed the ex-

pression,

I ,

pression, it unites itself with God. Nor SER M.
can any devotion be genuine, which in- X,
spires not sentiments of this nature. For
devotion is not to be considered as a tran-
fient glow of affeaion, occasioned by some
casual impressions of Divine goodness,
which are fuffered to remain unconneaed
with the condut of life. It is a power-
ful principle, which penetrates the foul
which purifies the affedions from debaf-
ing attachments; and, by a fixed and
steady regard to God, subdues every sinful
paflion, and forms the inclinations to piety
and virtue.

SuCH in general are the dispositions

that constitute devotion. It is the union
of veneration, gratitude, desire, and re-
fignation. It exprefles, not so much the
performance of any particular duty, as
the spirit which muff animate all religi-
ous duties. It fiands opposed, not mere-
ly to downright vice ; but to a heart
which is cbld, and insensible to sacred
things; which, from compulsion perhaps,

T 2 and

S E R M. and a sense of interest, preserves some re-

x.
. gard to the divine commands, but obeys

them without ardour, love, or joy. I
proceed,

II. To recommend this devout spirit

to your imitation. I begin with obferv-
ing, That it is of the utmost consequence
to guard against extremes of every kind
in religion. We must beware, left, by
seeking to avoid one rock, we split upon
another. It has been long the fubjea of
remark, that superstition and enthufiafin
are two capital sources of delusion ; fu-
peritition, on the one hand, attaching
men, with immoderate zeal, to the ritual
and external part of religion; and enthu-
fiafin, on the other, direaing their whole
attention to internal emotions, and myf-
tical communications with the spiritual
world; while neither the one, nor the
other, has paid fufficient regard to the
great moral duties of the Christian life.
But, running with intemperate eagerness
from these two great abuses of religion,

men

men have negleded to observe, that there S E RM.
are extremes opposite to each of them,
into which they are in hazard of precipi-
tating themselves. Thus the horrour of
fuperflition has sometimes reached so far,
as to produce contempt for all external
institutions; as if it were possible for
religion to subsist in the world, without
forms of worihip, or public acknow-
ledgment of God. It has also happened,
that some, who in the main are well as-
feaed to the cause of goodness, observing
that persons of a devout turn have at
times been carried, by warm affeaions,
into unjustifiable excesses, have thence
hastily concluded, that all devotion was
akin to enthusiasm; and separating reli-
gion totally from the heart and affeaions,
have reduced it to a frigid observance of
what they call the rules of virtue. This
is the extreme which I purpose at present
to combat, by showing you, first, That
true devotion is rational, and well found-
ed; next, That it is of the highest im-
portance to every other part of religion

T 3 and

SE R M. and virtue; and, lastly, That it is most

x.

~\-..-, conducive to our happiness.

IN the first place, True devotion is ra-

tional, and well founded. It takes its rife
from affedions, which are essential to the
human frame. We are formed by Na-
ture, to admire what is great, and to love
what is amiable. Even inanimate objets
have power to excite those emotions.
The magnificent profpeds of the natural
world, fill the mind with reverential awe.
Its beautiful scenes create delight. When
we survey the adions and behaviour of our
fellow-creatures, the affedions glow with
greater ardour; and, if to be unmoved,
in the former cafe, argues a defed of fen-
fibility in our powers, it discovers, in the
latter, an odious hardness and depravity
in the heart. The tenderness of an affec-
tionate parent, the generosity of a for-
giving enemy, the public spirit of a patriot
or a hero, often fill the eyes with tears,
and swell the breast with emotions too big
for utterance. The objed of those affec-

tions

tions is frequently raised above us, in con- S E R M.
dition and rank. Let us suppose him raised ..X,
also above us, in nature. Let us imagine,
that an Angel, or any being of fiperiour
order, had condefcended to be our friend,
our guide and patron; no person, sure,
would hold the exaltation of his benefac.
tor's charaaer, to be an argument why he
ihould love and revere him lefs.-Strange!
that the attachment and veneration, the
warmth and overflowing of heart, which
excellence and goodness on every other oc-
cation command, should begin to be ac-
counted irrational, as soon as the Supreme
Being becomes their objea. For what rea-
son mufft human sensibility be extind to-
wards him alone ? Are all benefits entitled
to gratitude, except the highest and the belt ?
Shall goodness cease to be amiable, only be.
cause it is perfea ?

It will, perhaps, be said, that an un-

known and invisible being, is not quali-
fied to raise affeation in the human heart.
Wrapt up in the mysterious obscurity of
his nature, he escapes our search, and as-

T 4 fords

SER M. fords no determinate objea to our love

x.
*J or desire. We go forward, but he is not

there; and backward, but we cannot per-
ceive him ; on the left hand, where he
worketh, but we cannot bchold him: He
hideth himself on the right hand, that we
cannot fee him *.--- Notwithstanding this
obscurity, is there any being in the uni-
verse more real and certain, than the Cre-
ator of the world, and the Supporter. of
all existence? Is he, in whom we live and
move, too distant from us to excite de-
votion ? His form and essence, indeed,
we cannot fee; but to be unseen, and
imperfealy known, in many other in-
flances, precludes neither gratitude nor
love. It is not the fight, so much as the
strong conception, or deep impression, of
an object, which affeds the paflions. We
glow with admiration of personages, who
have lived in a distant age. Whole na-
tions have been transported with zeal and
aftifion, for the generous hero, or pub-
lic deliverer, whom they knew only by

* Job xxxiii. 8, 9.

fame.

fame. Nay, properly speaking, the dire& S E R M,
objed of our love, is, in every cafe, in- --..v-
visible. For that on which affedion is
placed, is the mind, the foul, the internal
charaaer of our fellow-creatures; which,
surely, is no less concealed, than the Di-
vine Nature itself is, from the view of
sense. From adions, we can only infer
the dispositions of men; from what we
fee of their behaviour, we collet what is
invisible; but the conjedure which we
form, is, at best, imperfed; and when
their adions excite our love, much of
their heart remain still unknown. I ask
then, in what refped God is less qualified
than any other being, to be an objed of
affedion ? Convinced that he exists; be-
holding his goodness spread abroad in his
works, exerted in the government of the
world, displayed in some measure to sense,
in the adions of his son Jesus Chrit ; are
we not furnished with every essential re-
quifite which the heart demands, in' order
to indulge the most warm, and at the fame
time the most rational emotions ?

If

s E R M. If these considerations jufiify the rea-

x. fonablenefs of devotion, as expressed in

veneration, love, and gratitude, the fame
train of thought will equally justify it,
when appearing in the forms of desire,
delight, or resignation. The latter are,
indeed, the consequence of the former.
For we cannot but desire some communi-
cation with what we love; and will na-
turally resign ourselves to one, on whom
we have placed the full confidence of
affedion. The aspirations of a devout
man after the favour of God, are the
effeas of that earnest wish for happiness,
which glows in every breast. All men
have somewhat that may be called the
objed of their devotion ; reputation,
pleasure, learning, riches, or whatever
apparent good has firongly attached their
heart. This becomes the centre of at-
tracion, which draws them towards it;
which quickens and regulates all their
motions. While the men of the world
are thus influenced by the objeds which
they severally worship, shall he only who

direds

dire&s his devotion towards the Supreme SER M.
Being, be excluded from a place in the i
system of rational condua? or be censured
for having passions, whose sensibility corre-
fponds to the great cause which moves them ?
--Having vindicated the reaibnablenefs of
devotion, I come,

IN the second place, to fliow its im-

portance, and the high place which it
poffeffes in the system of religion. I ad-
dress myself now to those, who, though
they rejet not devotion as irrational, yet
confider it as an unneceflary refinement;
an attainment which may be safely left to
recluse and sequestered persons, who aim
at uncommon fandity. The solid and
material duties of a good life, they hold
to be in a great measure independent of
devout affection; and think them fuffi-
ciently supported, by their necessary con-
nedion with our interest, both in this
and in a future world. They insist much
upon religion being a calm, a sober, and
rational principle of condua,----I admit

that

S E R M. that it is very laudable to have a rational

X.

-,-. religion. But I muff admonish you, that

it is both reproachful and criminal, to have
an insensible heart. If we reduce religion
into so cool a state, as not to admit love,
affecion, and desire, we thall leave it in
poffeffion of small influence over human life.
Look abroad into the world, and observe
how few ad upon deliberate and rational
views of their true interest. The bulk of
mankind are impelled by their feelings.
They are attraated by appearances of good.
Taste and inclination rule their conduct.
To direct their inclination and taffte to-
wards the highest objecs; to form a relish
within them, for virtuous and spiritual en-
joyment; to introduce religion into the
heart, is the province of devotion; and
hence arifcs its importance to the interests
of goodness.

Agreeably to this docrine, the great

Author of our religion, who well knew
what was in min, laid the foundation of
his whole system in the regeneration of
the heart. The change which was to be

6 accompliihed

accomplished on his followers, he did not S E R M.
purpose to effea, merely by regulating -
their external condua ; but by forming
within them a new nature; by taking
away the heart of sone, and giving them
a heart of flefl, that is, a heart relenting
and tender, yielding to the Divine im-
pulse, and readily fiufceptible of devout
impressions. Thou flalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and mind, and foul,
and Jfrength : This is the JirJl and great
commandment. My [on, give me thy heart,
is the call of God to each of us: And,
indeed, if the heart be with-held, it is
not easy to conceive what other offering
we can present, that will be acceptable to
4lim.

Of what nature must that man's reli-

gion be, who profeffes to worship God,
and to believe in Clrrift; and yet raises
his thoughts towards God, and his Savi-
our, without any warmth of gratitude or
love? I speak not of those occasional de-
cays of pious affedion, to which the best
are fiubjec, but of a total insensibility to

this

S ER M. this part of religion. Surely let the out-

-y-' ward behaviour be ever so irreproachable,

there muff be some essential defed in a
heart, which remains always unmoved at
the view of infinite goodness. The as-
fedions cannot, in this cafe, be deemed
to flow in their natural channel. Some
concealed malignity must have tainted
the inward frame. This is not the man
whom you would chufe for your bosom-
friend; or whose heart you could expea
to answer, with reciprocal warmth, to
yours. His virtue, if it deserves that
name, is not of the most amiable fort;
and may, with reason, receive the appel-
lation (often injudiciously bestowed) of
cold and dry morality. Such a perfol
muff, as yet, be far from the kingdom of
Heaven.

As devotion is thus essential to religion

in its principle, so it enters into the pro-
per discharge of all its duties. It diffufes
an auspicious influence over the whole
of virtue. IThe prevailing temper of the
mind is formed by its most frequent em-

ployments.

ployments. Intercourse with Supreme SER M.
perfedion cannot, therefore, but ennoble -
and improve it. The pure love of God
naturally conneds itself with the love of
man. Hence, devotion has been often
found a powerful infirument, in huma-
nizing the manners of men, and taming
their unruly paflions. It finooths what
is rough, and softens what is fierce, in
our nature. It is the great purifier of the
affedions. It inspires contempt of the
low gratifications belonging to animal
life. It promotes a humble and cheerful
contentment with our lot ; ani subdues
that eager desire of riches and of power,
which has filled this unhappy world with
crimes and misery. Finally, it beftows
that enlargement of heart in the service
of God, which is the great principle,
both of perseverance, and of progress in
virtue. He who, unatquainted with de-
vout affedions, sets himself to keep the
Divine commandments, will advance in
obedience with a flow and languid pace;
like one who, carrying a heavy burden,

I toils

SER M. toils to mount the hill. But he whose

X.

^ heart devotion has warmed, will proceed

on his way, cheerful and rejoicing. The
one performs his duty, only because it is
commanded; the other, because he loves
it. The one is inclined to do no more
than necessity requires; the other seeks
to excell. The one looks for his reward
in somewhat betides religion; the other
finds it in religion itself: It is his meat
and drink to do the will of that heavenly
Father, whom he loves and adores. Which
of these two are likely to make the great-
eft improvement in goodness, is easily dif-
cerned. Let us now confider,

IN the third place, the influence of de-

votion on the happiness of life. Whatever
promotes and strengthens virtue, what-
ever calms and regulates the temper, is a
source of happiness. Devotion, as I have
just now shown, produces those effects in
a remarkable degree. It inspires compo-
sure of spirit, mildness, and benignity;
weakens the painful, and cheriihes the

pleating

pleasing emotions; and, by there means, S E R M.
carries on the life of a pious man in a
smooth and placid tenour.

Besides exerting this habitual influence

on the mind, devotion opens a field of
enjoyments, to which the vicious are en-
tire strangers; enjoyments the more valu-
able, as they peculiarly belong to retire-
ment when the world leaves us, and to
adversity when it becomes our foe. These
are the two seasons, for which every wife
man would most with to provide some
hidden store of comfort. For let him be
placed in the most favourable situation
which the human state admits, the world
can neither always amuse him, nor al-
ways shield him from distress. There
will be ,many hours of vacuity, and
many of dejeaion, in his life. If he be
a stranger to God, and to devotion, how
dreary will the gloom of solitude often
prove ? With what oppressive weight will
sickness, disappointment, or old age, fall
upon his spirits? But, for those pensive
periods, the pious man has a relief pre-

VOL. I. U pared. '

S ER M. pared. , From the tiresome repetition of

,'_ the common vanities of life, or from the

painful corrosion of its cares and sorrows,
devotion transports him into a new region;
and surrounds him there with such objeds,
as are the most fitted to cheer the dejedion,
to calm the tumults, and to heal the wounds
of his heart. If the world has been empty
and dclufive, it gladdens him with the pro-
sped of a higher and better order of things,
about to ariie. If men have been ungrate-
ful and base, it displays before him the
faithfulnefs of that Supreme Being, who,
though every other friend fail, will never
forsake him. Consult your experience,
and you will find, that the two greatest
sources of inward joy, are, the exercise of
love direted towards a deserving objea,
and the exercise of hope terminiating on
some high and assured. happiness. Both
these are Iupplied by devotion; and there-
fore we have no reason to be surprised,
if, on some occasions, it fill the hearts of
good men with a fatisfaaion not to be
expressed.

The

The refined pleasures of a pious mind SERM.

X.

are, in many refpeas, fuperiour to the J
coarse gratifications of sense. They are
pleasures which belong to the highest
powers, and best affeaions of the foul;
whereas the gratifications of sense reside
in the lowelf region of our nature. To
the one, the foul stoops below its native
dignity. The other, raise it above itself.
The one, leave always a comfortless, often
a mortifying, remembrance behind them.
The other, are reviewed with applause
and delight. The pleasures of sense re-
femble a foaming torrent, which, after a
disorderly course, speedily runs out, and
leaves an empty and offenfive channel,
But the pleasures of devotion resemble
the equable current of a pure river,
which enlivens the fields through which
it passes, and diffufes verdure and ferti-
lity along its banks. To thee, O Devo-
tion ! we owe the highest improvement of
our nature, and much of the enjoyment
of our life. Thou art the support of our
virtue, and the reft of our fouls, in this

U 2 turbulent

SER M. turbulent world. Thou compofeft the

x.

^^* thoughts. Thou calmest the passions.

Thou exalteft the heart. Thy commu,
nications, and thine only, are imparted
to the low, no less than to the high; to
the poor, as well as to the rich. In thy

- presence, worldly diftin&ions cease; and

under thy influence, worldly sorrows are
forgotten. Thou art the balm of the
wounded mind. Thy fantuary is ever
open to the miserable; inaccessible only
to the unrighteous and impure. Thou
beginneft on earth, the temper of heaven.
In thee, the hosts of angels and blessed
spirits eternally rejoice. It now remains,

III. To endeavour to correa some

errors, into which men are apt to fall
concerning devotion. For it is but too
obvious, that errors are often committed
in this part of religion. These frequently
disfigure its appearance before the world,
and fubjea it to unjust reproach. Let us
therefore attend deliberately to its nature,
so as to distinguish pure and rational de-

votion,

votion, of which I have hitherto treated, SE RM.
from that which is, in any degree, spurious -
and adulterated.

In the firif place, It is an error to

place devotion in the mere performance
of any external adt of worship. Prayer
and praise, together with the ordinances
peculiar to the Christian religion, are the
appointed means of raising the heart to-
wards the Supreme Being. They are the
instituted signs of devotion; the language
in which it naturally expresses itself. But
let us remember, that they are signs and
expreflions only; and we all know, that,
in various cafes, these may not correspond
to the thing signified. It is in the difpo-
fition of the heart, not in the motion of
the lips, or in the posture of the body,
that devotion consists. The heart may
pray or praise, when no words are utter-
ed. But if the heart be unconcerned or ill
affeaed, all the words we can utter, how
properly framed soever, are no other than
empty and tmnacceptable founds in the ear
ps the Almighty.

U 3 IM

s E R M. IN the second place, It is an error to

- m,- conceive the pleasures and advantages of'

devotion, to be indiscriminately open to
all. Devotion, like many parts of reli-
gion, may in some lights be considered
as a privilege, and in others as a duty.
It is the duty of all, to love God, and to
resign themselves to his will. But it is
the privilege of good men only, to re-
joice in God, and to confide in his
friendship. Hence a certain preparation
is requisite, for the enjoyment of devotion
in its whole extent. Not only muff the
life be reformed from gross enormities,
but the heart muff have undergone that
change which the Gospel demands. A
competent knowledge of God muff be ac-
quired. A proper foundation muit be laid
in faith and repentance, for intercourse with
Heaven.

They who would rush all at once from

the arms of the world, into the sacred
retreat of devotion; they who imagine
that retreat to stand always 'ready for the
reception of such as betake themselves to

it,

it, for no reason, but because every other SE R M.
refuge excludes them, betray grots igno- -
rance of this part of religion. They bring
to it, faculties unqualified to taste its plea-
fures; and they grasp at hopes, to which
they are not entitled. By incorporating
with devotion the unnatural mixture of
their unfandified passions, they defile and
corrupt it. Hence that gloom which has
often spread over it. Hence those super-
flitious mortifications and aufterities, by
which the falsely devout hope to purchase
favour from God; haunted by the ter-
rours of a guilty confcicnce, and vainly
firuggling to substitute a servile and
cringing homage, in the room of the pure
affedions of a renewed heart. On ifch
altars, the hallowed fire of true devotion
cannot burn; nor can any incense ascend
from them, that shall be grateful to Hea-
ven. Bring no more vain oblations. WafJ'
ye, make you clcan, put away the evil of
your doings from before mine Cyes, sith the
Lord. Cease to do evil; learn to do well.
Then draw nigh to God, and be will draw

U 4 nih h

SER M. nigh to jou.- But though devotion re,-

-· quires a pure heart, and a virtuous life,

and necessarily supposes the exercise of
frequent retirement, I muff observe,

IN the third place, That it is an error

to conceive it as requiring an entire re-
treat from the world. Devotion, like
every other branch of religion, was in-
tended to fit us for discharging the duties
of life. We serve God, by being useful
to one another. It is evident from the
frame of our nature, and from our com-
mon neccffities and wants, that we were
designed by Providence for an adive part
on this earth. The Gospel of Christ, ac-
cordingly, considers us as engaged in the
concerns of the world; and direts its
exhortations to men, in all the various re-
lations, charaders, and employments of
civil life. Abftraaion from society, there-
fore, and total dedication of our time to
devout exercises, cannot be the molt pro-
per method of acquiring the favour of
God.

I mean

I mean not, however, to throw any S ER M.

blame on those, who having loft all relish -' -
for the ordinary pursuits of life, in con-
sequence of severe wounds which they
have received from affliaion; who, be-
ing left to stand alone, and discerning
their connedions with the world to be
in some measure broken off, choose to
seek tranquillity in a religious retirement,
and to consecrate their days entirely to
God. Situations sometimes occur, which
both justify a great degree of retreat from
the world, and entitle it to rcfpe&. But,
with regard to the bulk of mankind,
Christian devotion neither requires nor
implies any such fequefitration from the
affairs of men. Nay, for the most part,
it will be cultivated with greater success,
by those who mingle it with the adive
employments of life. For the mind,
when entirely occupied by any one qb-
jea, is in hazard of viewing it at last
through a false medium. Obje&s, efpe-
cially, so great and sublime as those of
devotion, when we attempt to fix upon

them

S EXR M. them unremitting attention, overftretclh

-- and disorder our feeble powers. The

mind, by being relaxed, returns to them
with more advantage. As none of our
organs can bear intense sensations without
injury; as the eye, when dazzled with
overpowering light, beholds imaginary co-
lours, and 16'fes the real diffindion of ob-
jeas; so the mind, when overheated by
perpetual contemplation of celestial things,
has been sometimes found to mistake the
fitrong impreflions of fancy, for fupernatu-
ral communications from above. To the
employments of devotion, as to all other
things, there are due limits. There is a
certain temperate sphere, within which it
preserves longest its proper exertion, and
most fuccefsfully promotes the purposes for
which it was designed,

IN the fourth place, It is an error to

imagine, that devotion enjoins a total
contempt of all the pleasures and amuse-
ments of human society. It checks, in-
deed, that spirit of dissipation which is

toQ

too prevalent. It not only prohibits plea- S E R M.
fures which are unlawful, but likewise
that unlawful degree of attachment to
pleasures in themselves innocent, which
withdraws the attention of man from
what is serious and important. But it
brings amusement under due limitation,
without extirpating it. It forbids it as
the bufminefs, but permits it as the re-
laxation, of life. For there is nothing in
the spirit of true religion, which is hostile
to a cheerful enjoyment of our situation in
the world.

They who look with a severe and in-

dignant eye %ipon all the recreations by
which the cares of men are relieved, and
the union of society is cemented, are, in
two refpets, injurious to religion. First,
they exhibit it to others under a forbid-
ding form, by clothing it with the garb
of so much unnecessary austerity. And
next, they deprive the world of the be-
nefit which their example might afford,
in drawing the line between innocent and

dangerous

SER M. dangerous pleasures. By a temperate

-^ participation of those which are innocent,

they might fuccefsfully exert that autho-
rity, which a virtuous and refpeaable cha-
racer always poffeffes, in restraining un-
due excess. They would show the young
and unwary, at what point they ought
to stop. They would have it in their
power to regulate, in some degree, the
public manners; to check extravagance,
to humble presumption, and put vice to
the blush. But, through injudicious fe-
verity, they fall short of the good they
might perform. By an indiscriminate
censure of all amusement, they detrad
from the weight of their reproof, when
amusement becomes undoubtedly sinful.
By totally withdrawing themselves from
the circle of cheerful life, they deliver up
the entertainments of bfociety, into the
hands of the loose and the corrupted;
and permit the blind power of fashion, un-
controuled, to establish its own standards,
and to exercise its dangerous sway over the
world.

I N

IN the fifth place, It is an error to be S E R M.

lieve, that devotion nourithes a spirit of
severity, in judging of the manners and
characters of others. Under this re-
proach, indeed, it has so long fuffered in
the world; that, with too many, the ap-
pellation of devout, fuggefis no other
charaaer, but that of a four and recluse
bigot, who delights in censure. But the
reproach is unjust; for such a spirit is
entirely opposite to the nature of true de-
votion. The very first traces which it
imprints on the mind, are candour and
humility. Its principles are liberal. Its
genius is unassuming and mild. Severe
only to itself, it makes every allowance
for others which humanity can suggest.
It claims no privilege of looking into
their hearts, or of deciding with refpe&
to their eternal ftate.-If your supposed
devotion produce contrary effe6ts; if it
infuse harshness into your sentiments,
and acrimony into your speech; you may
conclude, that under a serious appear-
ance, carnal passions lurk. And, if ever

7 it

SER M. it flhall ib far lift you up with felf-con.

x.

.^' . celt as to make you establish your own

opinions as an infallible standard for the
whole Christian world, and lead you to
consign to perdition, all who differ from
you, either in some doarinal tenets, or
in the mode of expressing them; you may
reft aflured, that. to much pride you have
joined much ignorance, both of the nature
of devotion, and of the Gospel of Christ.
Finally, .,

IN the fixfh place, It is anr error to

think, that perpetual rapture and fpiri-
tual joy belong to devotions Devout
feelings admit very different degrees of
warmth and exaltation. Some persons,
by the frame of their minds, are much
more susceptible than others, of the ten-
der emotions. They more readily relent
at the view of Divine goodness, glow with
a warmer ardour or love, and, by confe-
quence, rife to a higher elevation of joy
and hope.. But, in the midst of still and
calm affeaions, devotion often dwells;

andy

and, though it produce no transports in SERM.
the mind, diffufes over it a steady fe- x
renity. Devout sensations not only vary in
their degree according to the frame of
different tempers; but, even among the
belt disposed, fuffer much interruption
and decay. It were too much to expect,
that, in the present state of human frailty,
those happy feelings should be uniform
and constant. Oppression of worldly
cares, languor of spirits, and infirmities
of health, frequently indispose us for the
enjoyment of devout affedions. Pious
men, on these occasions, are in hazard of
passing judgment on their own state with
too much severity; as if, for some great
iniquity, they were condemned by God
to final hardness of heart. Hence arises
that melancholy, which has been seen to
overcloud them; and which has given
occasion to many contemptuous fcoffs of
ungodly men. But it is a melancholy
which deserves to be treated with tender-
ness, not with contempt. It is the excels
of virtuous and pious sensibility. It is

2 the

S E R M. the overflowing of a heart affeded, in afl
Sextreme degree, with the humble sense

of its own failings, and with ardent
concern to attain the favour of God. A
weakness, however, we admit it to be,
though not a crime; and hold it to be
perfe&ly separable from the essence of de-
votion. For contrition, though it may melt,
ought not to fink or overpower the heart
of a Christian. The tear of repentance
brings its own relief. Religion is a spring
of consolation, not of terrour, to every
well-informed mind, which, in a proper
manner, refis its hope on the infinite good-
ness of God, and the all-fufficient merit of
Christ.

To conclude, Let us remove from de-

votion all those mistakes, to which the
corruptions of men, or' their ignorance
and prejudices, have given rife. With
us let it' be the worship of God, inspirit
and in truth; the elevation of the foul
towards him, in simplicity and love. Let
'us pursue it as the principle of virtuous

condut,

tondu&, and of inward peace. By fre- S ER M.
quent and serious meditation on the great
objeas of religion, let us lay ourselves open
to its influence. By means of the inftitu-
tions of the Gospel, let us cherish its im-
prefflons. And, above all, let us pray to
God, that he may establish its power in
our heart. For here, if any where, his
affiflance is requisite. The spirit of devo-
tion is his gift. From his inspiration it
proceeds. Towards him it tends; and in
his presence hereafter, it thall attain its full
perfection,

VOL. L X

# SERMON XI. On the Duties of the Young. TITUS ii. 6. Young men like wise exbort, to be sober-minded.

I 3O6 J

SERMON XL.

On the DUTIES of the YOUNG.

TITUS ii. 6.

Young men likewise exhort, to befober-minded.

SER~M. OBRIETY of mind, is one of those

Svirtues which the present condition

of human life firongly inculcates. The
uncertainty of its enjoyments, checks
presumption; the multiplicity of its dan-
gers, demands perpetual caution. Mo-
deration, vigilance, and felf-government,
are duties incumbent on all; but efpeci-
ally on such as are beginning the journey
of life. To them, therefore, the admo-
nition in the Text is, with great propriety,
directed; though there is reason to fear,
that by them it is in hazard of being

least

least regarded. Experience enforces the SER M.

XI.

admonition on the most giddy, after they -
have advanced in years. But the whole
state of youthful views and passions, is
adverse to sobriety of mind. The scenes
which present themselves, at our entering
upon the world, are commonly flattering.
Whatever they be in themselves, the lively
spirits of the young gild every opening
profpe&. The field of hope appears to
stretch wide before them. Pleasure seems
to put forth its blossoms on every fide.
Impelled by desire, forward they rush
with inconsiderate ardour: Prompt to
decide, and to choose; averse to hesitate,
or to enquire; credulous, because un-
taught by experience; rash, because un-
acquainted with danger; headiftrong,
because unfubdued by disappointment.
Hence arise the perils, of which it is my
design at present to warn them. I shall
take sobriety of mind, in its most compre-
henfive sense, as including the whole of
that discipline which religion and virtue "
prescribe to youth. Though the words

X 2 of

s E R M. of the Text are direaly addressed to young

XI.
_^ men, yet, as the fame admonition is given

in a preceding verse to the other sex, the
inftrudions which arise from the Text are
to be considered as common to both. I
intend, first, to show them the importance
of beginning early to give serious attention
to their condua; and, next, to point out
those virtues which they ought chiefly to
cultivate.

As soon as you are capable of reflec-

tion, you must perceive that there is a
right and a wrong, in human adions.
You fee, that those who are born with
the fame advantages of fortune, are not
all equally prosperous in the course of life.
While some of them, by wife and steady
condud, attain diftindion in the world,
and pass their days with comfort and ho-
nour; others of the fame rank, by mean
and vicious behaviour, forfeit the advan-
tages of their birth, involve themselves in
much misery, and end in being a dif-
grace to their friends, and a burden on

2 society.

society. Early, then, you may learn, that S E R M.
it is not on the external condition in '--
which you find yourselves placed, but on
the part which you are to ad, that your
welfare or unhappiness, your honour or
infamy, depend. Now, when beginning
to at that part, what can be of greater
moment, than to regulate your plan of
condut with the most serious attention,
before you have yet committed any fatal
or irretrievable errors ? If, instead of
exerting refledion for this valuable pur-
pose, you deliver yourselves up, at so cri-
tical a time, to sloth and pleasure ; if you
refuse to listen to any counsellor but hu-
mour, or to attend to any pursuit except
that of amufcement; if you allow your-
selves to float loose and careless on the
tide of life, ready to receive any direc-
tion which the current of fashion may
chance to give you; what can you exped
to follow from such beginnings ? While
so many around you are undergoing the
fad consequences of a like indiscretion,
for what reason (hall not those confe-

X 3 qucnces

SE R M. quences extend to you ? Shall you

Si attain success without that preparation,

and escape dangers without that precau-
tion, which is required of others ? Shall
happiness grow up to you, of its own ac-
cord, and solicit your acceptance, when,
to the reft of mankind, it is the fruit of
long cultivation, and the acquisition of
labour and care ?- Deceive not your-
selves with such arrogant hopes. What-
ever be your rank, Providence will not,
for your fake, reverse its established or-
der. The Author of your being hath en-
joined you to take heed to your ways; to
ponder the paths of your feet ; to remember
your Creator in the days of your youth. He
hath decreed, that they only who seek as-
ter wisdom, shall find it; that fools jhall
be afflited, bccaufe of their tranfgrefions ;
and that whoso refifeth inflruEtion, fall
defiroy his own foul. By listening to these
admonitions, and tempering the vivacity
of youth with a proper mixture of serious
thought, you may ensure cheerfulness for
the reft of life; but by delivering your-

selves

selves up at present to giddiness and levity, s E R M.
you lay the foundation of lasting heaviness '
of heart.

When you look forward to those plans

of life, which either your circumstances
have suggested, or your friends have pro-
posed, you will not hesitate to acknow-
ledge, that in order to pursue them with
advantage, some previous discipline is re-
quifite. Be assured, that whatever is to
be your profeffion, no education is more
necessary to your success, than the ac-
quirement of virtuous dispositions and
habits. This is the universal preparation
for every charader, and every flation in
life. Bad as the world is, refpe, is al-
ways paid to virtue. In the usual course
of human affairs, it will be found, that
a plain understanding joined with ac-
knowledged worth, contributes more to
prosperity, than the brightest parts with-
out probity or honour. Whether science,
or business, or public life, be your aim,
virtue flill enters, for a principal share,
into all those great departments of society.

X4 It

SE R M. It is conneaed with eminence, in every

-^ liberal art; with reputation, in every branch

of fair and useful business; with diftinc-
tion, in every public station. The vigour
which it gives the mind, and the weight
which it addls to charaater; the generous
sentiments which it breathes, the undaunted
spirit which it inspires, the ardour of dili-
gence which it quickens, the freedom which
it procures from pernicious and dithonour-
able avocations, are the foundations of all
that is high in fame, or great in success,

among men.

Whatever ornamental or engaging en-

dowments you now possess, virtue is a
necessary requifitc, in order to their shin-
ing with proper lustre. Feeble are the
attraaions of the fairest form, if it be
fufpe&ed that nothing within corre-
fponds to the pleating appearance without,
Short are the triumphs of wit, when it is
supposed to be the vehicle of malice. By
whatever arts you may at first attra& the
attention, you can hold the esteem, and
secure the hearts of others, only by ami-

ble

able dispositions, and the accomplishments SE R M.

XI.

of the mind. These are the qualities whose -
influence will last, when the lustre of all
that once sparkled and dazzled has passed

away.

Let not then the season of youth be

barren of improvements, so essential to
your future felicity and honour. Now is
the seed-time of life; and according to
wvhat you sow, you Jhall reap.' Your cha-
radter is now, under Divine assistance, of
your own forming; your fate is, in some
measure, put into your own hands. Your
nature is as yet pliant and soft. Habits
have not eflablifhed their dominion. Pre-

judices have not pre-occupied your un-
derftanding. The world has not had time
to contrad and debase your affedtions.
All your powers are more vigorous, dif-
embarrassed, and free, than they will be
at any future period. Whatever impulse
you now give to your desires and passions,
the diredion is likely to continue. It
will form the channel in which your life
is to run; nay, it may determine its ever-

lasting

SER M. lasting issue. Confider then the employ-
s ment of this important period, as the

highest trust which shall ever be com-
mitted to you; as, in a great measure,
decisive of your happiness, in time, and
in eternity. As in the fucceflion of the
fpafons, each, by the invariable laws of
Nature, affeas the produCions of what is
next in course; so, in human life, every
period of our age, according as it is well
or ill spent, influences the happiness of
that which is to follow. Virtuous youth
gradually brings forward accomplished
and flourishing manhood and such man-
hood passes of itself, without uneasiness,
into refpe&able and tranquil old age,
But when Nature is turned out of its re-,
gular course, disorder takes place in the
moral, just as in the vegetable world, If
the Spring put forth no blossoms, in
Summer there will be no beauty, and
in Autumn, no fruit. So, if youth be
trifled away without improvement, man-
hood will be contemptible, and old age
rniferable. If the beginnings of life have

betq

been vanity, its latter end can be no other S E R M.
than vexation of spirit.

Having thus shown the importance of

beginning early to give serious attention to
condudt, I come, next, to point out the
virtues which are most necessary to be cul-
tivated in youth. What I thall,

I. RECOMMEND, is piety to God. With

this I begin, both as the foundation of
good morals, and as a disposition parti-
cularly graceful and becoming in youth.
To be void of it, argues a cold heart, defti-'
tute of some of the best affeaions which
belong to that age. Youth is the season
of warm and generous emotions. The
heart should then, spontaneously, rife
into the admiration of what is great,
glow with the love of what is fair and
excellent, and melt at the discovery of
tenderness and goodness. Where can
any obje& be found, so proper to kindle
those affeaions, as the Father of the uni-
verse, and the Author of all felicity?
Unmoved by veneration, can you con-

template

SER M. template that grandeur and majefly,

Swhich his works every where display?
Untouched by gratitude, can you view
that profusion of good, which, in this
pleating season of life, his beneficent hand
pours around you ? Happy in the love
and affeaion of those with whom you
are conneaed, look up to the Supreme
Being, as the inspirer of all the friend-
ihip which has ever been ihown you/ by
others; himself, your best and your first
friend; formerly, the supporter of your
infancy, and the guide of your child-
hood; now, the guardian of your youth,
and the hope of your coming years,
View religious homage, as a natural ex-,
pression of gratitude to him for all his
goodness. Confider it as the service of the
God of your fathers; of him, to whom your
parents devoted you; of him, whom in for-
mer ages your ancestors honoured ; and by
whom they are now rewarded, and blessed
in heaven. Conneted with so many ten-
der sensibilities of foul, let religion be with
you, not the cold and barren offspring of

speculation,

speculation, but the warm and vigorous S ERM.
didate of the heart. I-*

But though piety chiefly belong to the

heart, yet the aid of the understanding is
requisite, to give a proper diredion to the
devout affedions. You must endeavour,
therefore, to acquire just views, both of
the great principles of natural religion, and
of the peculiar dodrines of the gospel. For
this end fludy the sacred scriptures. Con-
fiult the word of God, more than the systems
of men, if you would know the truth in its
native purity. When, upon rational and
sober enquiry, you have eflablifhed your
principles, fiffer them not to be shaken, by
the fcoffs of the licentious, or the cavils of
the sceptical. Remember, that in the ex-
amination of every great and comprehen-
five plan, such as that of Christianity, dif-
ficulties may be expeded to occur; and
that reasonable evidence is not to be rejeded,
because the nature of our present state al-
lows us only to know in part, and to fee
through a glass, darkly.

Impress

S ER M. Impress your minds with reverence for ait

v that is sacred. Let no wantonness of youth-

ful spirits; no compliance with the intem-
perate mirth of others, ever betray you
into prophane sallies. Besides the guilt
which is thereby incurred, nothing gives a
more odious appearance of petulance and
presumption to youth, than the affecation
of treating religion with levity. Instead of
being an evidence of fuperiour underfland-
ing, it discovers a pert and shallow mind;
which, vain of the first smatterings of know-
ledge, presumes to make light of what the
reft of mankind revere.

At the fame time, you are not to ima-

gine, that when exhorted to be religious,
you are called upon, to become more for-
mal and solemn in your manners than
others of the fame years, or to erea your-
selves into supercilious reprovers of those
around you. The spirit of true religion
breathes gentleness and affability. It
gives a native, unaffeaed ease to the be-
haviour. It is social, kind, and cheer-

ful:

iul: far removed from that gloomy and $ E R M.
illiberal fuperfiition which clouds the ^
brow, sharpens the temper, dejeas the
spirit, and teaches men to fit themselves
for another world, by negleting the con-
cerns of this. Let your religion, on the
contrary, conned preparation for heaven,
with an honourable discharge of the du-
ties of adive life. Let it be associated in
yodr imagination, with all that is manly
and useful; ,with whatsoever things are
true, are ju/s, are pure, are lovely, are of
good report, wherever there is any virtue,
and wherever there is any praise. Of such
religion discover, on every proper occasion,
that you are not ashamed ; but avoid mak-
ing any unnecessary ostentation of it before
the world.

II. To piety, join modesty and doci-

lity, reverence of your parents, and sub-
mission to those who are your fuperiours
in knowledge, in station, and in years.
Dependence and obedience belong to
youth. Modesty is one of its chief orna-

7 ments;

s E R M. ments; and has ever been esteemed a pre
^*Jl sage of rising merit. When entering or

the career of life, it is your part, not to
assume the reins as yet into your hands;
but to commit yourselves to the guidance of
the more experienced, and to become wife
by the wisdom of those who have gone
before you.

Of all the follies incident to youth,

there are none which either deform its
present appearance, or blast the profpet
of its future prosperity, more than self-
conceit, presumption, and obstinacy. By
checking its natural progress in improve.
ment, they fix it in long immaturity;
and frequently produce mifchiefs, which
can never be repaired. Yet these are vices
too commonly found among the young.
Big with enterprise, and elated by hope,
they resolve to trust for success to none
but themselves. Full of their own abili-
ties, they deride the admonitions which
are given them by their friends, as the
timorous fuggefiions of age. Too wife
to learn, too impatient to deliberate, too

forward

forward to be reftraiiied, they plunge, S ERM.
with precipitant indiscretion, into the <
midst of all the dangers with which life
abounds. Seefl thou a young man wife in
his own conceit? There is more hope of a
fool, than of him.-Pofitive as you now are
in your opinions, and confident in your
assertions, be assured, that the time ap-
proaches when both men and things will
appear to you in a different light. Many
charadters which you now admire, will,
by and by, fink in your esteem; and
many opinions, of which you are at pre-
sent most tenacious, will alter as you ad-
vance in years. Distrust, therefore, that
glare of youthful presumption, which
dazzles your eyes. Abound not in your
own sense. Put not yBurfelves forward
with too much eagerness; nor imagine,
that by the impetuosity of juvenile ar-
dour, you can overturn systems which
have been long eftablithed, and change
the face of the world. Learn not to think
more highly of yourselves than you ought to
think, but to think soberly. By patient and

VOL. I, Y gradual

SE R M. gradual progression in improvement, you
.- may, in due time, command lasting esteem.

But by assuming, at present, a tone of
superiority, to which you have no title,
you will disgust those whole approbation
it is most important to gain. Forward vi-
vacity may fit you to be the companions of
an idle hour. More solid qualities must re-
commend you to the wife, and mark you
out for importance and consideration in
subsequent life.

III. IT is necessary to recommend to

you, sincerity and truth. This is the
basis of every virtue. That darkness of
charater, where we can fee no heart;
those foldings of art, through which no
native affeaion is allowed to penetrate,
present an objea, unamiable in every
season of life, but particularly odious in
youth. If, at an age when the heart is
warm, when the emotions are strong,
and when nature is expeded to shew it-
self free and open, you can already smile
and deceive, what are we to look for,

when

when you shall be longer hackneyed in the S E R M.
ways of mea; when interest shall have com-
pleted the obduration of your heart, and
experience shall have improved you in all
the arts of guile ? Diflimulation in youth,
is the fore-runner of perfidy in old age. Its
first appearance, is the fatal omen of grow-
ing depravity, and future shame. It de-
grades parts and learning; obscures the
lustre of every accomplishment; and sinks
you into contempt with God and man.

As you value, therefore, the appro-

bation of Heaven, or the esteem of the
world, cultivate the love of truth. In all
your proceedings, be dired and consistent.
Ingenuity and candour poflefs the most
powerful charm; they bespeak universal
favour, and carry an apology for almost
every failing. The lip of truth, fall be
eJ/abli/Jed for ever ; but a lying toongue, is
but for a moment *. The path of truth, is
a plain and a safe path; that of falsehood,
is a perplexing maze. After the first de-
parture from lincerity, it is not in your

* Prov. xii. J9.

Y 2 power

SE R M. power to stop. One artifice unavoidably

XI.

__ leads on to another; till, as the intricacy

of the labyrinth increases, you are left
entangled in your own snare. Deceit dif-
covers a little mind, which stops at tem-
porary expedients, without rising to com-
prehenfive views of condud. It betrays,
at the fame time, a dastardly spirit. It is
the resource of one who wants courage
to avow his designs, or to reft upon him-
self. Whereas, openness of charater dif-
plays that generous boldness, which ought
to diftinguiih youth. To set out in the
world with no other principle than a
crafty attention to interest, betokens one
who is destined for creeping through the
inferiour walks of life. But to give
an early preference to honour above gain,
when they stand in competition; to despise
every advantage, which cannot be attained
without dishonest arts; to brook no mean-
ness, and to stoop to no dissimulation; are
the indications of a great mind, the pre-
sages of future eminence and diftindion in
life.

At

At the fame time, this virtuous sincerity s E R M.

Xh

is perfedly consistent with the most pru-
dent vigilance and caution. It is opposed
to cunning, not to true wisdom. It is not
the simplicity of a weak and improvident,
but the candour of an enlarged and noble
mind; of one, who scorns deceit, because
he accounts it both base and unprofitable;
and who seeks no disguise, because he needs
none to hide him, Lord! who jhall abide
in thy tabernacle? Who jhall afc end into thy
holy hill? He that walketh uprightly, and
worketh righteousness, andfp5eaketh the truth
in his beart.

IV. YOUTH is the proper season of

cultivating the benevolent and humane
affeaions. As a great part of your hap-
pinefs is to depend on the connedions
which you form with others, it is of high
importance that you acquire, betimes, the
temper and the manners which will ren-
der such conneaions comfortable. Let a
sense of justice be the foundation of all
your social qualities. In your most early

Y

$ intercQuref

s E R M. intcrcourfe with the world,, and even in

XI. '~-M your youthful amusements, let no unfair-

ness be found. Engrave on your mind
that sacred rule, of doing all things to
others, according as you w/ij that they
feould do unto you. For this end, impress
yourselves with a deep sense of the origi-
nal, and natural equality of men. What-
ever advantages of birth or fortune you
possess, never display them with an often-
tatious superiority. Leave the fubordi-
nations of rank, to regulate the intercourse
of more advanced years. At present, it
becomes you to ad among your compa-
nions, as man with man. Remember how
unknown to you are the vicissitudes of the
world; and how often they, on whom ig-
norant and contemptuous young men once
looked down with scorn, have risen to be
their fuperiours in future years.

Compassion is an emotion, of which

you ought never to be ashamed. Grace-
fiul in youth is the tear of sympathy, and
the heart that melts at the tale of woe.
Let not ease and indulgence contraa your

affecions,

affealons, and wrap you up in felfifh en- S E R M.

XI.

joyment. But go sometimes to the hose '-
of mourning, as well as to the houfje of feaj-
ing. Accustom yourselves to think of the
distresses of human life; of the solitary
cottage, the dying parent, and the weep-
ing orphan. Thou Jhalt not harden thy
heart, nor j hut thy hand from thy poor bro-
ther; but thou fJlalt surely give unto him in
the day of his need: And thine heart fJall
not be grieved when thou gives unto him;
becaqfe that for this thing, the Lord thy God
/hall bless thee in all thy works*. Never
sport with pain and distress, in any of your
amusements; nor treat even the meanest
inset with wanton cruelty.

In young minds, there is commonly a

strong propensity to particular intimacies
and friendihips. Youth, indeed, is the
season when friendfliips are sometimes
formed, which not only continue through
succeeding life, but which glow to the
last, with a tenderness unknown to the
connedions begun in cooler years. The
propensity therefore is not to be difcou-

* Deut. xv. 7. zo.

Y 4 raged;

SE R M. raged; though at the fame time it must

XI.

^^ be regulated with much circumfpelion

and care. Too many of the pretended
fricndfhips of youth, are mere combina-
tions in pleasure. They are often found-
ed on capricious likings; suddenly con-
traded, and as suddenly dissolved. Some-
times they arc the effed of interefled com-
plailance and flattery on the one fide, and
of credulous fondness on the other. Be-
ware of such rash and dangerous connec-
tions, which may afterwards load you
with dithonour. Remember, that by the
charader of those whom you choose for
your friends, your own is likely to be
formed, and will certainly be judged of
by the world. Be flow, therefore, and
cautious in contrading intimacy; but
when a virtuous friendship is once efta-
blifhed, confider it as a sacred engagement.
Expose not yourselves to the reproach of
lightness and inconstancy, which always
bespeak, either a trifling, or a base mind.
Reveal none of the secrets of your friend.
Be faithful to his interests. Forsake him
not in danger. Abhor the thought of ac-

quiring

quiring any advantage by his prejudice or S E R M,
hurt. There is a friend that loveth at all
times, and a brother that is born for adver-
Jity. Thine own friend, and thy father's
friend, forsake not *.

Finally, on this head; in order to ren-

der yourselves amiable in society, corre&
every appearance of harshness in beha-
viour. Let that courtesy distinguish your
demeanour, which springs, not so much
from fiudied politeness, as from a mild
and gentle heart. Follow the customs of
the world in matters indifferent; but flop
when they become sinful. Let your man-
ners be simple and natural; and of course
they will be engaging. Affeaation is cer-
tain deformity. By forming themselves
on fantastic models, and vying with one
another in every reigning folly, the young
begin with being ridiculous, and end in
being vicious and immoral.

V. LET me particularly exhort youth to

temperance in pleasure : Let me admonish

* Prov. xvii. 17-xxvii. to.

them,

SER M. them, to beware of that rock on which

XI. S-'- i thousands, from race to race, continue to

split. The love of pleasure, natural to marn
in every period of his life, glows at this age
with excessive ardour. Novelty adds fresh
charms, as yet, to every gratification. The
world appears to spread a continual feast;
and health, vigour, and high spirits, in-
vite them to partake of it without re-
fitraint. In vain we warn them of latent
dangers. Religion is accused of infuffer-
able severity, in prohibiting enjoyment :
and the old, when they offer their admo-
nitions, are upbraided with having forgot
that they once were young.-And yet, my
friends, to what do the restraints of reli-
gion, and the counsels of age, with re-
fpe£t to pleasure, amount ? They may all
be comprized in few words, not to hurt
yourselves, and not to hurt others, by
your pursuit of pleasure. Within these
bounds, pleasure is lawful; beyond them,
it becomes criminal, because it is ruinous.
Are these restraints any other, than what
a wife man would choose to impose on

hlimfelf ?

himlelf? We call you not to renounce plea- s E R M.
sure, but to enjoy it in safety. Instead of
abridging it, we exhort you to pursue it on
an extensive plan. We propose measures
for securing its poffeflion, and for prolonging
its duration.

Consult your whole nature. Confider

yourselves not only as sensitive, but as ra-
tional beings ; not only as rational, but
social; not only as social, but immortal.
Whatever violates your nature in any of
these refpeds, cannot afford true pleasure;
any more than that which undermines an
essential part of the vital system can pro-
mote health. For the truth of this conclu-
sion, we appeal, not merely to the autho-
rity of religion, nor to the testimony of the
aged, but to yourselves and your own ex-
perience. We ask, Whether you have not
found that in a course of criminal excess,
your pleasure was more than compensated
by succeeding pain? Whether, if not from
every particular instance, yet from every
habit, at least, of unlawful gratification,

there

s E R M. there did not spring some thorn to wound
-- you, there did not arise some consequence

to make you repent of it in the issue ? How
long then, ye simple ones! will ye love Jimpli-
city ? How long repeat the fame round of
pernicious folly, and tamely expose your-
selves to be caught in the fame snare ? If
you have any consideration, or any firmness
left, avoid temptations, for which you have
found yourselves unequal, with as much
care, as you would thun pestilential infec-
tion. Break off all conneations with the
loose and profligate. When sinners entice
thee, consent thou not. Look not on the wine
when it is red, when it giveth its colour in
the cup ; for at the lafi, it biteth like a ser-
pent, and Jlingeth like an adder. Remove
thy way from the frange woman, and come
not near the door of her house. Let not thine
heart decline to her ways; for her house is
the way to hell. Thou goeft after her as a
bird hafleth to the finare, and knoweth not
that it is for his life,

By

By these unhappy excesses of irregular S ER M.

pleasure in youth, how many amiable dif- »
positions are corrupted or destroyed! How
many rising capacities and powers are sup-
pressed ! How many flattering hopes of pa-
rents and friends are totally extinguished !
Who but muff drop a tear over human na-
ture, when he beholds that morning which
arose so bright, overcalt with such un-
timely darkness; that good humour which
once captivated all hearts, that vivacity
which sparkled in every company, those
abilities which were fitted for adorning
the highest flation, all sacrificed at the shrine
of low sensuality; and one who was formed
for running the fair career of life in the
midit of public esteem, cut off by his vices
at the beginning of his course, or funk,
for the whole of it, into insignificancy
and contempt! - These, O sinful Plea-
sure! are thy trophies. It is thus that,
co-operating with the foe of God and
man, thou degradeft human honour, and
blafteft the opening profpets of human fe-
licity.

VI. DILI-

sER M. VI. DILIGENCE, industry, and proper

XI.
vj improvement of time, are material duties

of the young. To no purpose are they
endowed with the best abilities, if they
want aaivity for exerting them. Un-
availing, in this cafe, will be every direc-
tion that can be given them, either for
their temporal or spiritual welfare. In
youth, the habits of industry are most
easily acquired. In youth, the incen-
tives to it are fitrongeft, from ambition
and from duty, from emulation and hope,
from all the profpeas which the begin-
ning of life affords. If, dead to these
calls, you already languish in slothful
inacion, what will be able to quicken
the more sluggish current of advancing
years ?

Industry is not only the instrument of

improvement, but the foundation of plea-
sure. Nothing is so opposite to the true
enjoyment of life, as the relaxed and
feeble state of an indolent mind. He
who is a stranger to industry, may pof-
fess, but he cannot enjoy. For it is la-

6 bour

bour only which gives the relish to plea- s ERM.
sure. It is the appointed vehicle of every -
good to man. It is the indispensable
condition of our poffTciing a found mind,
in a found body. Sloth is so incon-
fiftent with both, that it is hard to de-
termine whether it be a greater foe to
virtue, or to health and happiness. In-
ative as it is in itself, its effeas are
fatally powerful. Though it appear a
slowly flowing stream, yet it undermines
all that is stable and flourishing. It not
only saps the foundation of every virtue,
but pours upon you a deluge of crimes
and evils. It is like water which first pu-
trifles by stagnation; and then sends up
noxious vapours, and fills the atmosphere
with death.

Fly, therefore, from idleness, as the

certain parent both of guilt and of ruin.
And under idleness I include, not mere
inaaion only, but all that circle of tri-
fling occupations, in which too many
saunter away their youth ; perpetually
engaged in frivolous society, or public

amuse-

s E R M. amusements, in the labours of dress, or the

XI
. .. ostentation of their perfons.--Is this the

foundation which you lay for future use-
fulness and esteem ? By such accomplish-
ments, do you hope to recommend your-
selves to the thinking part of the world,
and to answer the expedations of your
friends, and your country !---Amuse-
ments, youth requires. It were vain, it
were cruel to prohibit them. But though
allowable as the relaxation, they are most
culpable as the business, of the young,
For they then become the gulf of times
and the poison of the mind4 They so-
ment bad paflions. They weaken the
manly powers. They fink the native vi-
gour of youth, into contemptible effemi-
nacy.

Redeeming your time from such dan-

gerous waste, seek to fill it with employ-
ments which you may review with fatif-
faction. The acquisition of knowledge
is one of the most honourable occupa-
tions of youth. The desire of it disco-
vers a liberal mind, and is conneaed with

3 many

many accomplishments, and many virtues. S E R M.
But though your train of life Ihould not
lead you to fludy, the course of education
always furnishes proper employments to a
well-difpofed mind. Whatever you pur-
sue, be emulous to excel. Generous am-
bition, and sensibility to praise, are, efpe-
cially at your age, among the marks of
virtue. Think not, that any affluence of
fortune, or any elevation of rank, exempts
you from the duties of application and
industry. Industry is the law of our being;
it is the demand of Nature, of Reason, and
of God. Remember always, that the years
which now pass over your heads, leave per-
manent memorials behind them. From
your thoughtless minds they may escape;
but they remain in the remembrance of
God. They form an important part of the
register of your life. They will hereafter
hear testimony, either for or against you, at
that day, when, for all your adions, but
particularly for the employments of youth,
you muff give an account to God.

VOL. I. Z Tilus

S ER M. THUS I have set before you, some of

IX, -^ the chief qualifications which belong to

that sober mind, that virtuous and religi-
ous chara&er, which the Apofile in my
Text recommends to youth; piety, mo-
deity, truth, benevolence, temperance, and
induitry. Whether your future course is
destined to be long or short, after this man-
ner it should commence; and, if it continue
to be thus conduaed, its conclusion, at what
time soever it arrives, will not be inglori-
ous or unhappy. For honourable age is not
that which Jandeth in length of time, or that
which is measured by number of years. But
'wifdom is the grey hair to man, and an un-
spotted life is old age.

LET me finish the fubje&, with recall-

ing your attention to that dependence on
the blefling of Heaven, which, amidst all
your endeavours after improvement, you
ought continually to preserve. It is too
common with the young, even when they
resolve to tread the path of virtue and ho-

nour,

nout, to set out with presumptuous con- S ER M.
fidence in themselves. Trusting to their -
own abilities for carrying them success-
fully through life, they are careless of
applying to God, or of deriving any as-
fiftance from what they are apt to reckon
the gloomy discipline of religion. Alas!
how little do they know the dangers which
await them ? Neither human wisdom, not
human virtue, unsupported by religion,
are equal for the trying situations which
often occur in life. By the (hock of tempt-
ation, how frequently have the most vir-
tuous intentions been overthrown? Un-
der the pressure of disaster, how often has
the greatest constancy funk ? Every good,
and every perfeE gift, is from above. Wis-
dom and virtue, as well as riches and ho-
nour, come from God. Destitute of his fa-
vour, you are in no better situation, with
all your boasted abilities, than orphans
left to wander in a trackless desert, with-
out any guide to condua them, or any
shelter to cover them from the gathering
fiorm. Correa, then, this ill-founded ar-

Z z rogance.

sE M. rogance. Expeat not, that your happiness

S- can be independent of him who made
youth. By faith and repentance, apply to
the Redeemer of the world. By piety and
prayer, seek the protedion of the God of
heaven. I conclude with the solemn words,
in which a great Prince delivered his dying
charge to his son; words, which every
young person ought to confider as addressed
to himself, and to engrave deeply on his
heart. Thou Solomon, my son, know thou
the God of thy fathers ; and serve him with a
perfef heart, and with a willing mind.
For the Lord fearcheth all hearts, and un-
derfjandeth all the imaginations ofthe thoughts.
If thou seek him, he will be found of thee;
but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee of
for ever *.

*

i Chron. xxviii. 9.

# SERMON XII. On the Duties and Consolations of the Aged. PROV. xvi. 31. The hoary heard is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.

[ 34i ]

SER MON XII.

On the DUTIES and CONSOLATIONS

of the A G E D.

PRO V. xv. 31.

The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it

be found in the way of righteousness.

TO fear God, and to keep his command- s E R M.

ments, is the rule of our duty, in .

every period of life. But, as the light
which guides our steps, varies with the
progress of the day, so the rule of reli-
gious condu& is diversified in its appli-
cation, by the different stages of our pre-
sent existence. To every age, there be-
longs a difrin& propriety of behaviour.
There arises from it, a series of duties
peculiar to itself.

Z3 of

SER M. Of those which are incumbent on

XII.
- youth, I have treated in the preceding

discourse. As we advance from youth to
middle age, a new field of adion opens,
and a different character is required. The
flow of gay and impetuous spirits be-
gins to subside. Life gradually assumes a
graver cast; the mind, a more sedate and
thoughtful turn. The attention is now
transferred from pleasure to interest; that
is, to pleasure diffufed over a wider extent,
and measured by a larger scale. Former-
ly, the enjoyment of the present moment
occupied the whole attention. Now, no
aaion terminates ultimately in itself, but
refers to some more distant aim. Wealth
and power, the instruments of lasting
gratification, are now coveted more than
any single pleasure. Prudence and fore-
fight lay their plans. Industry carries on
its patient efforts. Aaivity pushes for-
ward; address winds around. Here, an
enemy is to be overcome; there, a rival
to be displaced. Competitions warm; and
the strife of the world thickens on every

fide.

fide. To guide men through this busy S ERM.
period, without loss of integrity; to guard -
them against the temptations which arise
from mistaken, or interfering interests; to
call them from worldly pursuits, to serious
thoughts of their spiritual concerns, is the
great office of religion.

But as this includes, in a great mea-

sure, the whole compass of moral duty,
as the general strain of religious exhorta-
tion is addressed to those who are in this
season of life; a delineation of the vir.
tues properly belonging to middle age,
may appear unnecessary, and would lead
us into too wide a field. Let us therefore
turn our view to a bounded profpet;
and contemplate a period of life, the du-
ties of which are circumscribed within
narrower limits. Old age is a stage of
the human course, which every one hopes
to reach; and therefore the consideration
of it interests us all. It is a period justly
entitled to general refped. Even its fail-
ings ought to be touched with a gentle
hand; and though the petulant, and the

Z 4 vain,

SER M. vain, may despise the hoary head; yet the
\ 1 wifefi of men has asserted in the Text, that

when found in the way of righteotftefs, it is
a crown of glory. I shall first offer some
counsels, concerning the errors which are
most incident to the aged. Secondly, I
ihall suggest the peculiar duties they ought
to praaife; and thirdly, point out the con-
folations they may enjoy.

I. As the follies and vices of youth,

are chiefly derived from inexperience and
presumption; so, almost all the errors of
age, may be traced up to the feebleness
and distresses peculiar to that time of life.
Though, in every part of life, vexations
occur, yet, in former years, either bufi-
ness, or pleasure, served to obliterate their
impression, by supplying occupation to
the mind. Old age begins its advances,
with disqualifying men for reliflhing the
one, and for taking an adive part in the
other. While it withdraws their accustom-
ed fipports, it imposes, at the fame
time, the additional burden of growing

infirmities.

infirmities. In the former stages of their s ER M.

XII.

journey, hope continued to flatter them
with many a fair and enticing profped.
But in proportion as old age increases, those
pleasing illusions vanish. Life is contraaed
within a narrow and barren circle. Year
after year steals somewhat away from their
fiore of comfort, deprives them of some of
their ancient friends, blunts some of their
powers of sensation, or incapacitates them
for some fundtion of life.

Though, in the plan of Providence, it

is wifely ordered, that before we are
called away from the world, our attach-
ment to it ihould be gradually loosened;
though it be fit in itself, that as in the
day of human life, there is a morning
and a noon, so there should be an even-
ing also, when the lengthening ihadows
shall admonish us of approaching night;
yet we have no reason to be surprised,
if they who are arrived at this dejeding
season, feel and lament the change which
they iuffcr. The complaints, therefore,

of

s ER M. of the aged, flhould meet with tenderness,

XII.
L rather than censure. The burden under

which they labour, ought to be viewed
with sympathy, by those who muff bear it
in their turn, and who perhaps, hereafter,
may complain of it as bitterly. At the fame
time, the old ihould confider, that all the
seasons of life have their several trials allot-
ted to them ; and that to bear the infirmities
of age with becoming patience, is as much
their duty, as it is that of the young to resist
the temptations of youthful pleasure. By
calmly enduring, for the short time that re-
mains, what Providence is pleased to inflift,
they both express a resignation most accept-
able to God, and recommend themselves to
the esteem and assistance of all who are
around them.

But though the querulous' temper im-

puted to old age, is to be considered as a
natural infirmity, rather than as a vice;
the fame apology cannot be made for that
pecvifh disgust at the manners, and that
malignant censure of the enjoyments, of

the

the young, which is sometimes found to SER M.

XII.

accompany declining years. Nothing can i
be more unjust, than to take offence at
others, on account of their partaking of
pleasures, which it is past your time to
enjoy. By indulging this fretful temper,
you both aggravate the uneasiness of age,
and you alienate those on whose affection
much of your comfort depends. In order
to make the two extremes of life unite in
amicable society, it is greatly to be wished,
that the young would look forward, and
confider that they shall one day be old; and
that the old would look back, and remem-
bering that they once were young, make
proper allowances for the temper and the
manners of youth.

But instead of this, it is too common to

find the aged at declared enmity with the
whole system of present customs and man-
ners ; perpetually complaining of the grow-
ing depravity of the world, and of the afto-
nifhing vices and follies of the rising gene-
ration. All things, according to them, are
ruflhing fat into ruin. Decency and good

order

SER M. order have become extina, ever since that
»-r-' happy discipline, under which they spent

their youth, has passed away.--- Part, at
least, of this displeasure, you may fairly
impute to the infirmity of age, which
throws its own gloom on every surround-
ing objea. Similar lamentations were, in
the days of your youth, poured forth by
your fathers; and they who are now young,
ihall, when it comes to their turn, inveigh,
in the like strain, against those who fuc-
cced them. Great has been the corruption
of the world in every age. Sufficient
ground there is for the complaints made by
serious observers, at all times, of abound-
ing iniquity and folly. But though parti-
cular modes of vice prevail in one age, more
than in others, it does not follow, that
on that age all iniquity is accumulated.
It is the form, perhaps, more than the
quantity of cotruption, which makes the
diftinfion. In the worst of times, God
has assured us, that there shall be always
a fed who jIhallferve him *. Say not thou,

* Pfal. xxii. 30.

What

What is the canfe that the former days were S E R M.

XII.

better than thee f? for thou dof/ not enquire -
wi/ely concerning this. Be not righteous
over-much; neither make thyfclf over-wife *.
Former follies pass away, and are forgot-
ten. Those which are present, strike ob-
servation, and sharpen censure. Had the
depravation of the world continued to in-
crease in proportion to those gloomy calcu-
lations, which, for so many centuries part,
have estimated each race as worse than the
preceding; by this time, not one ray of
good sense, nor one spark of piety and vir-
tue, must have remained unextinguithed
among mankind.

One of the vices of old age, which ap-

pears the most unaccountable, is that covet-
ous attachment to worldly interest, with
which it is often charged. But this, too,
can naturally be deduced from the sense of
its feebleness and decay. In proportion as
the vigour both of body and mind declines,
timidity may be expeated to increase. With
anxious and fearful eye, the aged look for-

* Eccles. vii. Io. I6.

ward

SERM. ward to the evils which threaten them,

XII.

> and to the changes which may befal.

Hence, they are sometimes apt to over-
value riches, as the instrument of their
defence against these dangers, and as the
most certain means of securing them againif
solitude and difrefpea. But though their
apprehensions may justify a cautious fru-
gality, they can by no means excuse a
sordid avarice. It is no less absurd,
than it is culpable, in the old, from thef
dread of uncertain futurity, to deny
themselves the enjoyment of the present;
and to increase in anxiety about their
journey, in proportion as it draws nearer
to its close. There are more effetual
methods of commanding refpet from the
world, than the mere poffeflion of wealth.
Let them be charitable, and do good.
Let them mix beneficence to their friends,
with a cheerful enjoyment of the com-
forts which befit their state. They will
then receive the returns of real refpe&
and love. Whereas, by their riches,
they procure no more than pretended

demon-

demonitrations of regard; while tneir ill- S E R M.
judged parsimony occasions many secret \
withes for their death.

As increasing years debilitate the body,

so they weaken the force, and diminiflh
the warmth of the affeaions. Chilled by
the hand of time, the heart loses that ten-
der sensibility, with which it once entered
into the concerns and sorrows of others.
SIt is, in truth, a merciful appointment of
Providence, that as they who fee many
days, must behold many a fad scene, the
impreflions of grief upon their heart should
be blunted by being often repeated; and
that, in proportion as their power of ad-
vancing the prosperity of others decreases,
their participation of the misfortunes of
others ihould also lessen. However, as, in
every period of life, humanity and friend-
ship contribute to happiness, it is both the
duty and the interest of the aged, to
cherish the remains of the kind affec-
tions; and, from the days of former
years, to recal such impreflions as may

8 tend

SER M. tend to soften their hearts. Let them

XII. . not, from having fuffered much in the

course of their long pilgrimage, become
callous to the fufferings of others. But,
remembering that they fill are men, let
them fludy to keep their heart open to
the sense of human woe. Pradifed in
the ways of men, they are apt to be
suspicious of design and fraud; for the
knowledge, and the distrust of mankind,
too often go together. Let not, how-
ever, that wary caution, which is the
fruit of their experience, degenerate into
craft. Experience ought also to have
taught them, that amidst all the falsehood
of men, integrity is the best defence; and
that he who continueth to the end to walk
uprightly, thall continue to walk surely.
Having thus offered some admonitions
concerning the errors most incident to age,
I proceed,

II. To point out the duties which pecu-

liarly belong to it.

6 The

The first which I thall mention, is, a SERM.

XII.

timely retreat from the world. In every
part of life, we are in hazard of being too
deeply immersed in its cares. But, during
its vigorous periods, the impulse of aaive
spirit, the necessary business of our station,
and the allowable endeavours to advance
our fortune by fair industry, render it dif-
ficult to observe due moderation. In old
age, all the motives of eager pursuit dimi-
nifh. The voice of Nature then calls you
to leave to others the bustle and contest of
the world; and gradually to disengage
yourselves from a burden, which begins to
exceed your strength. Having born your
Ihare of the heat and labour of the day, let
the evening of life be passed in the cool and
quiet ihade. It is only in the thade, that
the virtues of old age can flourish. There,
its duties are discharged with moit success;
and there, its comforts are enjoyed with
greatest fatisfaaion.

By the retreat of old age, however, I

do not mean a total cessation from every

VOL. I. A a worldly

SER M. worldly employment. There is an error

XII

S, in this, as well as in the opposite extreme.

Persons who have been long harassed with
business and care, sometimes imagine, that
when life declines, they cannot make their
retirement from the world too complete.
But where they expeded a delicious enjoy-
ment of leisure and ease, they have often
fdund a melancholy solitude. Few are able,
in any period of their days, to bear a total
abftration from the world. There remains
a vacancy which they cannot fill up.
Incapable of being always employed in
the exercises of religion, and often little
qualified for the entertainments of the
understanding, they are in hazard of be-
coming a burden to themselves, and to
all with whom they are conne&ed. It
is, therefore, the duty of the aged, not so
much to withdraw entirely from worldly
business, as to contra& its circle; not so
much to break off, as to loosen their
communication with aaive life. Conti-
nuing that train of occupation to which

they

they have been most accustomed, let them S E R M.

XII.

pursue it with less intenseness; relaxing -
their efforts, as their powers decline; re-
tiring more and more, from public obfer-
vation, to domestic scenes, and serious
thoughts; till, as the decays of life ad-
vance, the world shall of itself withdraw to
a greater distance from their view; its ob-
jeas shall gradually yield their place to
others of more importance ; and its tumults
ihall found in their ears, only like a noise
which is heard from afar.

If it be the duty of the old, to retreat

betimes from the fatigue of worldly care,
it is fiill more incumbent on them, to
quit the pursuit of such pleasures as are
unsuitable to their years. Cheerfulness,
in old age, is graceful. It is the natural
concomitant of virtue. But the cheerful-
ness of age is widely different from the
levity of youth. Many things are allow-
able in that early period, which, in ma-
turer years, would deserve censure; but
which, in old age, become both ridiculous

Aa 2 and

s E R M. and criminal. By awkwardly affeaing to
'-.-.- imitate the manners, and to mingle in the

vanities of the young, as the aged depart
from the dignity, so they forfeit the privi-
leges of gray hairs. But if, by follies of
this kind, they are degraded, they are ex-
posed to much deeper blame, by descend-
ing to vicious pleasure, and continuing to
hover round those sinful gratifications to
which they were once addi&ed. Amuse-
ment and relaxation the aged require, and
may enjoy. But let them confider well,
that by every intemperate indulgence, they
accelerate decay; inflead of enlivening, they
oppress, and precipitate their declining
state. Ease, safety, and refpe&, are the
proper enjoyments of age. Within these
bounds let it remain, and not vainly attempt
to break through that barrier, by which
nature has separated the pleasures of youth,
from the comforts left to the concluding
years of life.

A material part of the duty of the

aged, consists, in studying to be useful

to

to the race who are to succeed them. SERM.

XII.

Here opens to them an extensive field, -
in which they may so employ themselves,
as considerably to advance the interest of
religion, and the happiness of mankind.
To them it belongs, to impart to the
young the fruit of their long experience;
to inftru& them in the proper conduct,
and to warn them of the various dangers,
of life; by wife counsel, to temper their
precipitate ardour; and, both by precept
and example, to form them to piety and
virtue.

It is not by rigorous discipline, and

unrelaxing austerity, that they canr main-
tain an ascendant over youthful minds.
The constraint which their presence will
impose, and the aversion which their
manners will create, if the one be con-
ftantly awful, and the other severe, tend
to frustrate the effect of all their wisdom,
They mufft assume the spirit of the com-
panion, and the friend; and mix with
the authority of age, a proper degree of
indulgence to the manners of the young.

A a 3 Instead

S ER M. Instead of lessening the refpet due to
^^ their years by such condescension, they

take the surest method to increase it. Old
age never appears with greater dignity
than, when tempered by mildness, and
enlivened with good humour, it aas as
the guide and the patron of youth. Reli-
gion displayed in such a charaaer, strikes
the beholders, as at once amiable and
venerable. They revere its power, when
they fee it adding so much grace to the
decays of nature, and shedding so pleasing
a luifre over the evening of life. The
young with to tread in the fame steps,
and to arrive at the close of their days
with equal honour. They listen with at-
tention to counsels, which are mingled
with tenderness, and rendered refpeaable
by gray hairs. For, notwithstanding all
its presumption, youth naturally bends
before fuperiour knowledge and years.
Aged wisdom, when joined with acknow-
ledged virtue, exerts an authority over
the human mind, greater even than that
which arises from power and station. It

can

can check the most forward, abath the mot SER M.
profligate, and strike with awe the most
giddy and unthinking.

In the midst of their endeavours to be

useful to others, let not the aged forget
those religious employments, which their
own state particularly requires. The first
of these, is, refleaion on their paRt beha-
viour, with a view to discover the errors
which they have committed; and, as far
as remaining life allows, to apply them-
selves to repentance and amendment.--
Long has the world bewildered you in its
maze, and imposed upon you by its arts,
The time is now come, when this great
leducer ihould mislead you ro more.
From the calm station at which you are
arrived, fequcftered from the crowd of
the deceiving and the deceived, review
your condua, with the eye of Christians
and immortal beings. After all the tu-
mult of life is over, what now remains to
afford you solid fatisfadion? Have you
ierved God with fidelity, and discharged
your part to your fellow-creatures with

A a 4 integrity

S ER M. Integrity and a good conscience ? Can

1 you look forward without terrour, to

that day which is to dissolve your con-
nedion with this world, and to bring
you into the presence of him who made
you, in order to give account of your
adions ?-The retrofped of life is seldom
wholly unattended by uneasiness and
shame. Though, to the good and the
bad, it presents a very different scene;
yet, to all men, it recalls much guilt
incurred, and much time mif-fpent. It
too much resembles the review, which a
traveller takes from some eminence, of a
barren country, through which he has
passed, where the heath and the defart
form the chief profped; diversified only
by a few scattered spots of imperfea cul-
tivation.

Turn then your thoughts to the proper

methods of making your peace with God
through Jesus Christ; and implore, from
Divine grace, that new heart, and right
spirit, which will fit you for a better
world. Let devotion fill up many of

thof

those hours, which are now vacant from SER M.

XII.

worldly business and care. Let your as-
sea ions dwell among divine and immor-
tal objeas. In silent and thoughtful me-
ditation, walk as on the shore of that vast
ocean, upon which you are bfoon to em-
bark. Summon up all the confidera-
tions, which ihould reconcile you to your
departure from life; and which may
prepare you for going through its last
scene, with firmness and decency. Often
let your thanksgivings ascend to God,
for that watchful care with which he
hath hitherto conduded you, through
the long journey of life. Often let your
prayers be heard, that, in what remains
of your pilgrimage, he may not forsake
you; and, that when you enter into the
valley of the Jhadow of death, he may there
support you with his flaff; and defend you
with his rod.-Amidft fuich thoughts and
cares, let old age find you employed; be-
taking yourselves to a prudent and timely
retreat; disengaged, both from the op-
preffive load of business, and from the

2 · unfeafon-

SE R M. unseasonable pursuit of pleasure; apply..
^ , ing yourselves to form the succeeding

race, by your counsels to virtue and wis-
dom; reviewing seriously your part life;
by repentance and devotion, preparing
yourselves for a better; and, with hum-
ble and manly composure, expe&ing that
hour, which Nature cannot now long de-
lay. It remains,

III. To suggest the consolations which

belong to old age, when thus found in the
way of righteouftefs.

I mult introduce them with observing,

That nothing is more reasonable in itself,
than to submit patiently to those infirmi-
ties of Nature, which are brought on by
the increase of years. You knew before-
hand what you had to expe&, when you
numbered the fucceflive Summers and
Winters which were pafling over your
heads. Old age did not attack you by
surprise, nor was it forced upon you
against your choice. Often, and earnestly,
did you wiflt to fee long lif, and many

days,

days. When arrived at the desired period, SER M.
have you any just cause to complain, on
account of enduring what the constitution
of our being imposes on all? Did you ex-
pet, that, for your fake, Providence was
to alter its established order ? Throughout
the whole vegetable, sensible, and rational
world, whatever makes progress towards
maturity, as Loon as it has passed that
point, begins to verge towards decay. It
is as natural for old age to be frail, as for
the stalk to bend under the ripened ear,
or for the autumnal leaf to change its
hue. To this law, all who went before
you, have submitted; and all who shall
come aftpr you, muff yield. After they
have flourished for a season, they shall
fade, like you, when the period of decline
arrives, and bow under the pressure of
years.

During the whole progress of the hu-

man course, the principal materials of
our comfort, or uneasiness, lie within our-
selves. Every age will prove burdensome,
to those who have no fund of happiness

6 jn

s E R M. in their own breat. Preserve them, if ydu

XII.

f could, from all infirmity of frame; bestow

upon them, if it were possible, perpetual
youth; still they would be restless and
miserable, through the influence of ill-
governed passions. It is not surprising, that
such persons are peevish, and querulous,
when old. Unjustly they impute to their
time of life, that misery with which their
vices and follies embitter every age.
Whereas, to good men, no period of life
is unsupportable, because they draw their
chief happiness from sources which are in-
dependent of age or time. Wisdom, piety,
and virtue, grow not old with our bodies.
They fuffer no decay from length of days.
To them only belongs unalterable and un-
fading youth. Those that be planted in the
house of the Lord, Jhall flouri/h in the
courts of our God. They fthall flill bring
forth fruit in old age ; they Jhall be fat and
flourishing *.

You can now, it is true, no longer re-

lih many of those pleasures which once

* Psalm xcii. 13, 14.

amused

amused you. Your sensations are less SERM.

XII.

quick than formerly; your days more
languithing. But if you have quitted the
region of pleasure, in return, you possess
that of tranquillity and repose. If you are
strangers to the vivacity of enjoyment,
you are free, at the fame time, from the
pain of violent and often disappointed
desire. Much fatigue, much vexation, as
well as vanity, attend that turbulence of
life, in which the younger part of man-
kind are engaged. Amidst those keen pur-
suits, and seeming pleasures, for which
you envy them, often they feel their own
misery, and look forward with a wishful
eye to the season of calmness and retreat.
For, on all sides of human life, the ba-
lance of happiness is adjusted with more
equality than at first appears; and if old
age throws some new distresses into the
scale, it lightens also the weight of others.
Many paflions, which formerly disturb-
ed your tranquillity, have now subsided.
Many competitions, which long filled
your days with disquiet and strife, are now

at

S E R M. at an end. Many affliaions, which once

XII.
-- rent your hearts with violent anguish, are

now softened into a tender emotion, on
the remembrance of past woe. In the be-
ginnings of life, there was room for much
apprehension concerning what might be-
fall in its progress. Your security was
never untroubled. Your hopes were inter-
rupted by many anxieties and fears. Hav-
ing finished the career of labour and danger,
your anxiety ought of course to lessen.
Ready to enter into the harbour, you can
look back, as from a secure flation, upon
the perils you have escaped, upon the tem-
pest by which you was tossed, and upon
the multitudes who are still engaged in
confliaing with the storm.

If you have aated your part with in-

tegrity and honour, you are justly 'entitled
to refpeat, and you will generally receive
it. For rarely, or never, is old age con-
temned, unless when, by vice or folly,
it renders itself contemptible. Though
length of time may have worn off super-
ficial ornaments, yet what old age loses

in

in grace, it often gains in dignity. The S E R M.

XII.

veneration, as was before observed, which
gray hairs command, puts it in the power
of the aged, to maintain a very important
place in human society. They are so far
from being insignificant in the world, that
families long held together by their autho-
rity, and focicties accustomed to be guided
by their counsels, have frequently had cause
to regret their loss, more than that of the
most vigorous and young. To success of
every kind, the head which direds, is no
less essential than the hand which executes.
Vain, nay, often dangerous, were youthful
enterprise, if not conduted by aged pru-
dence. I /aid, Days Jiould speak, and
multitude of years Jlaould teach wisdom *.
Tberefore, thoujhjalt rife up before the hoary
head, and honour the face of the old man,
and fear thy God t.

Though, in old age, the circle of your

pleasures is more contraded than it has
formerly been; yet, within its limits,
many of those enjoyments remain, which

* Job xxiii. 7. t Lev. xix. 3z.

are

SER M. are most grateful to human nature.

XII.

\- Temperate mirth, is not extinguished by

advanced years. The mild pleasures of
domestic life, still cheer the heart. The
entertainments of conversation, and social
intercourse, continue unimpaired. The
desire of knowledge, is not abated by the
frailty of the body; and the leisure of old
age, affords many opportunities for grati-
fying that desire. The sphere of your
observation and refleaion, is so much en-
larged by long acquaintance with the world,
as to supply, within itself, a wide range of
improving thought. To recall the various
revolutions which have occurred since you
began to at your part in life; to compare
the charaters of past and present times; to
trace the hand of Providence, in all the
incidents of your own lot; to contemplate,
with thoughtful eye, the successive new ap-
pearances which the world has assumed
around you, in government, education,
opinions, customs, and modes of living;
these are employments, no less entertaining,
than inftruaive to the mind.

While

While you are engaged in such em- SERM.

ployments, you are perhaps surrounded -y -
with your families, who treat you with
attention and refpea; you are honoured
by your friends; your charaaer is efla-
blifhed; you are placed beyond the reach
of clamour, and the frife of tongues; and,
free from diffrating cares, you can at-
tend calmly to your eternal intercfts. For
such comforts as these, have you not
cause moss thankfully to acknowledge
the goodness of Heaven ? Do they not
afford you ground to pass the remainder
of your days in resignation and peace;
disposing yourselves to rife in due time,
like satisfied guefis, from the banquet
that has been set before you; and to
praise and bless, when you depart, the
great Master of the feast ? To a man that
is good in his fight, whether he be young,
or old, God giveth wisdom, and knowledge,
and joy. For every season of life, the be-
nignity of his providence hath prepared
its own fatisfaaions, while his wisdom
hath appointed its peculiar trials. No

VOL. I. B b age

S E R M. age is doomed to total infelicity; provided

XII. Sthat we attempt not to do violence to Na-

ture, by seeking to extort from one age,
the pleasures of another; and to gather, in
the winter of life, those flowers which were.
destined to blossom, only in its Summer,
.or its Spring.

B U T perhaps it will be said, That I

have considered old age, only in its first
stages, and in its most favourable point
of light; before the faculties are as yet
much impaired, and when disease or as-
flidion has laid no additional load on
the burden of years. Let us then view
it with all its aggravations of distress.
Let us firppofe it arrived at its utmost
verge, worn out with infirmities, and
bowed down by sickness and sorrow.
Still there remains this consolation, that
it is not long ere the weary ]fall be at
refi. Having passed through so many of
the toils of life, you may now, surely,
when your pilgrimage touches on its
ilofe, bear, without extreme impatience,

the

the hardships of its concluding stage. SER M.

XII.

From the inestimable promises of the L
Gospel, and from the gracious presence
of God, the affidlions of old age cannot
seclude you. Though your heart Jhould
begin to faint, and your fleJh to fail, there
is One, who can be the jfrength of your
heart, and your portion for ever. Even to
your old age, faith the Lord, I ant He; and
even to hoary hairs, will I carry you. I
have made, and I will bear ; even I will
carry, and will deliver you ". Leave thy
fatherless children; I will preserve them
alive ; and let thy widows truji in me t.

There is undoubtedly a period, when

there ought to be a satiety of life, as
there is of all other things; and when
death ihould be viewed, as your merci-
ful difiniflion from a long warfare. ' To
come to the grave in a Jll age, like as a
Jhock of corn cometh in//, in ;i'ts /e/on -i:, is
the natural termination of the human
course. Amidst multiplhyiing infirmities,
to prolong life beyond its usual bounds,

* Ifa. xhvi. 4. t Jer. liv. n. Job v. 26.

B b 2 and

SER M. and to draw out your existence here to

XII. c- the last and foulest dregs, ought not to

be the with of any wife man. Is it de-
firable, to continue lingering on the bor-
ders of the grave, after every tie which
connedts you with life is broken; and to
be left a solitary individual, in the midst
of a new generation, whose faces you
hardly know ? The ihades of your de-
parted friends rife up before you, and
warn you, that it is time to depart.
Nature and providence summon you, to
be gathered to your fathers. Reason ad-
monifhes you, that as your predecessors
made way for you, it is just that you
thould yield your place to those, who
have arisen to succeed you on this busy
stage; who, for a while, shall fill it
with their actions and their fufferings,
their virtues and their crimes; and then
shall, in their turn, withdraw, and be
joined to the forgotten multitudes of for-

mer ages.

Could death indeed be considered in no

other view, than as the clofc of life, it

would

would afford only a melancholy retreat. SER M.
The total extintion of being, is a thought,
which human nature, in its most distressed
circumtnances, cannot bear without dejec-
tion. But, blessed be God! far other
profpeas revive the spirits of the aged, who
have spent their life in piety and virtue. To
them, death is not the extindion, but the
renovation of the living principle; its re-
moval from the earthly house of this taber-
nacle, to the botfe not made with hand., eter-
nal in the heavens. Having fought the good
fight; having flif/hed their course, and kept
the faith; there is laid up for them the crown
of righteoufefis. The Saviour of the world
hath not only brought immortality to light,
but placed it within the reach of their hope
and trust. By making atonement for their
guilt, he hath prepared their way within
the veil; and secured to them, the poffler-
sion of an inheritance, incorruptible and zn-
defled, reserved in the heavens.- Such
are the hopes and profpets, which cheer
the sorrows of old age, and surmount the
fear of death. Faith and piety are the only

B b 3 adequate

S E R M. adequate supports of human nature, in all

-v-j- its great emergencies. After they have

guided us through the various trials of life,
they uphold us, at last, amidst the ruins of
this falling frame; and when thefilver cord
isju/l ready to be loosed, and the golden bowl
to be broken ; when the pitcher is broken at
the fountain, and the wheel broken at the
ci/lern; they enable us to fay, 0 Death !
where is thy sing ? 0 Grave ! where is thy
viEtory ?

# SERMON XIII. On the Power of Conscience. GENESIS xlii. 21, 22. And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when be besought us; and 

[ 375 ]

SERMON XIII.

On the POWER of CONSCIENCE.

GENESIS xlii. 21, 22.

And they f!id one to another, FWe are verily

guilty concerning our brother, in that we
saw the angzi/h of his foul, when he
besought us; and we would not hear :
Therefore is this dj/lrefs come upon us.
And Reuben answered them, saying,
Spake I not unto you, fzying, Do not fin
again/I the child; and ye would not
hear ? Therefore, behold also his blood is
required.

T H IS book of Genesis displays a more S E R M.

singular and interesting scene, than .

was ever presented to the world, by any
other historical record. It carries us back

Bb 4 to

SE R M. to the beginning of time; and exhibits

XIII. -- mankind in their infant and rising state.

It shows us human manners in their pri-
mitive simplicity, before the arts of re-
finement had polished the behaviour, or
difguiied the charaders of men; when
they gave vent to their passions without
dissimulation, and spoke their sentiments
without reserve. Few great societies were,
as yet, formed on the earth. Men lived
in scattered tribes. The tranfations of
families made the chief materials of his-
tory; and they are related in this book,
with that beautiful simplicity, which, in
the highest degree, both delights the ima-
gination, and affeds the heart.

Of all the patriarchal histories, that of

Joseph and his brethren is the moss re-
markable, for the charadters of the aators,
the inftrudive nature of the events, and
the surprising revolutions of worldly for-
tune. As far as relates to the Text, and
is necessary for explaining it, the story is
to the following purpose.- Joseph, the
youngest, except one, of the sons of

Jacob,

Jacob, was distinguished by his father SER M.
with such marks of peculiar affeaion, as .1.
excited the envy of his brethren. Having
related to them, in the openness of his
heart, certain dreams which portended
his future advancement above them, their
jealousy role to such a height, that they
unnaturally conspired his deftruaion.
Seizing the opportunity of his being at
a distance from home, they firit threw
him into a pit, and afterwards fold him
for a slave; imposing on their father, by a
false relation of his death. When they had
thus gratified their resentment, they loft all
remembrance of their crime. The family
of Jacob was rich and powerful; and
several years passed away, during which
they lived in prosperity; without being
touched, as far as appears, with the least
remorse for the cruel deed which they had
committed.

Mean-while, Joseph was safely con-

duded, by the hand of Providence,
through a variety of dangers, until,
from the lowest condition, he role at

last

SER M. last to be chief favourite of the King of

XII.
·- _ Egypt, the most powerful monarch at

that time in the world. While he pof-
sessed this high dignity, a general famine
diftrefled all the neighbouring countries.
In Egypt alone, by means of his fore-
fight, and prudent administration, plenty
still reigned. Compelled to have recourse
to that kingdom for supply of food, the
brethren of Joseph, upon this occasion,
appeared in his presence, and made their
humble application to him, for liberty to
purchase corn; little fufpeting the Go-
vernour of the land, before whom they
bowed down their faces to the earth, to be
him, whom, long ago, they had fold as a
slave to the Ifhmaelites. But Joseph no
sooner saw, than he knew his brethren;
and, at this unexpeded meeting, his
heart melted within him. Fraternal ten-
dernefs arose, in all its warmth; and
totally effaced from his generous breafi,
the impreflion of their ancient cruelty.
Though, from that moment, he began to
prepare for them a furprize of joy; yet

he

he so far constrained himself, as to assume S E R M.

XIII.

an appearance of great severity. By this -
he intended, both to oblige them to bring
into Egypt his youngest and most beloved
brother, whose presence he inflantly re-
quired; and also, to awaken within them,
a due sense of the crime which they had
formerly perpetrated. Accordingly, his
behaviour produced the designed effeat.
For, while they were in this situation,
Rrangers in a foreign land, where they
had fallen, as they conceived, into ex-
treme distress; where they were thrown
into prison by the Governour, and treated
with rigour, for which they could assign
no cause; the refleaion mentioned in
the Text arose in their minds. Con-
science brought to remembrance, their
former fins. It recalled, in particular,
their long forgotten cruelty to Joseph;
and, without hesitation, they interpreted
their present distress, to be a judgment,
for this crime, inflided by Heaven. They
Jaid, one to another, We are verily guilty
concerning our brother, in that we saw the

R M. anguifJ of his foul when he besought us,

I and we would not hear : 'Therefore is this

difrefs come upon us.-Behold also his blood
is required.

From this inftruftive passage of his-

tory, the following observations naturally
ariie. I. That a sense of right and wrong
in condua, or of moral good and evil,
belongs to human nature. II. That it
produces an apprehension of merited pu-
nifhment, when we have committed evil.
III. That although this inward sentiment
be ftiflcd during the season of prosperity,
yet, in adversity, it will revive. And,
IV. That when it revives, it determines
us to confider every distress which we sus-
ser, from what cause soever it has arisen,
as an actual infliction of punishment by
Heaven. The consideration of these par-
ticulars, will lead us to a very serious view
of the nature of man, and of the govern-
ment of God.

I. THERE belongs to human nature, a

sense of moral good and evil, or a fa-

3 culty

culty which distinguishes right from SER M.

XIII.

wrong, in adion and condud. They said
one to another, tWe are verily guilty.-In
an age, when the law was not yet given,
when no external revelation of the Divine
will subsisted, except what had been
handed down among the Patriarchs, from
one generation to another; the brethren
of Joseph reasoned concerning their con-
du&, upon the fame moral principles,
and were affeaed by the fame feelings,
of which we are conscious at this day.
Such sentiments are coeval with human
nature; for they are the remains of a
law, which was originally written in our
heart. In the darkert regions of the
earth, and among the rudest tribes of
men, a diftindion has ever been made,
between jufi and unjust, between a duty
and a crime. Throughout all the inter-
course of human beings, these diftindions
are supposed. They are the foundation
of the mutual trust, which the tranlfac-
tions of life require; nay, the very enter-
tainments of society conflantly appeal to

them.

SER M. them. The Historian, who fludies to

XIII.

'--- magnify his hero, by representing him as

just and generous; the Poet, who seeks to
interest the world in his fidions, by en-
gaging the heart in behalf of distressed vir-
tue; are fufficient to confute the Sceptic,
who denies any natural perception of a di-
tfintion in adtions.

But though a sense of moral good and

evil be deeply impressed on the heart of
man, yet it is not of fufficient power to
regulate his life. In his present corrupted
state, it is both too general to afford him
full direCion in condud, and too feeble to
withstand the opposition of contrary prin-
ciples in his nature. It is often perverted,
by ignorance and superstition; it is too
easily overcome, by passion and desire.
Hence, the importance of that Divine re-
velation, which communicates both light
and fitrength; which, by the inftruA'ive
discoveries it makes, and by the powerful
assistance it supplies, raises man to a fta-
tion, infinitely fuperiour to that which he
poffeffes under the mere light of Nature.

It

It is of consequence, however, to re- SERM.

XIII.

mark, That this revelation neceffarilvy
supposes an antecedent sense of right and
wrong to take place in the human mind.
It addresses itself to men, as pofl`ffed of
such a faculty; and, when it commands
them, in general terms, to pursue what-
soever thbings are true, whatsoever thing;
are honej/, whatsoever things are juji, pure,
lovely, or of good report, if there be any vir-
tue, and if there be any prajc/, it plainly
appeals to the native didtates of their
heart. Nay, unless men were endowed
by Nature, with some sense of duty, or
of moral obligation, they could reap no
benefit from revelation; they would re-
main incapable of all religion whatever.
For, in vain were a system of duty pre-
fcribed to them by the word of God;
allegiance were in vain required towards
their Creator, or love and gratitude en-
joined towards their Redeemer; if, pre-
vioufly, there was no principle in their
nature, which made them feel the obli-
gations of duty, of allegiance, and of

I gratitude,.

s E R M. gratitude. They could have no ideas cor-

XIII.
- responding to such terms; nor any con-

vidion, that, independently of fear or
interest, they were bound to regard, either
him who made, or him who redeemed
them.-This, therefore, is to be held as a
principle fundamental to all religion, That
there is in human nature, an approving or
condemning sense of conduat; by means of
which, they who have not the law, are a
law unto themselves *. They who, from
a mistaken zeal for the honour of Divine
revelation, either deny the existence, or
vilify the authority of natural religion,
are not aware, that, by disallowing the
sense of obligation, they undermine the
foundation, on which revelation builds its
power of commanding the heart.

The Text leads us to observe, That one

of the cafes in which the natural sense of
good and evil operates most forcibly, is
when men have been guilty of injufftice
or inhumanity. JWe saw the angui/h of
our brother's foul when he besought us, and

* Rom. ii. 14.

we

we would not hear. An inward principle s E M.
prompts us to do good to others; but with
much greater authority, it checks and con-
demns us, when we have done them in-
juries. This part of the human confti-
tution deserves to be remarked as a signal
proof of the wisdom of its Author, and of
the gracious provision which he has made
for the welfare of mankind. We are all
committed, in some measure, to the care
and assistance of one another. But our
mutual influence reaches much farther
with refped to the evils, than with re-
fpe& to the enjoyments, of those around
us. To advance their prosperity, is often
beyond our ability; but to infli& inju-
ries, is almost always within our power:
And, at the fame time, felf-intereft very
frequently tempts us to commit them.
With the utmost propriety, therefore, we
are so framed, that the influence of the
moral principle should be most authori-
tative, in cafes where its aid is most
needed; that to promote the happiness
of others, should appear to us as praise-

VOL. I. C c worthy,

SE R M.- worthy, indeed, and generous; but that,
- to abstain from injuring them, should be

felt as matter of the ftriateft duty.--
Amidst the distress which the patriarchs
fuffered in Egypt, had only this suggestion
occurred, " We saw our brother begin.,
" ning to prosper, and we contributed
" not to his advancement," their minds
would have been more easily quieted.
But, when their refleaion was, We saw
his angui/h when he besought us, and we
would not hear, then compundion turned
upon them its tharpeRt edge. I proceed to
observe,

II. THAT our natural sense of right

and wrong, produces an apprehension of
merited punilhment when we have com-
mitted a crime. When it is employed in
surveying the behaviour of others, it dif-
tinguiihes some adions, as laudable and
excellent; and disapproves of others, as
evil and base. But when it is direded
upon our own condut, it afiumes a
higher office, and exercises the authority

of

of a judge. It is then properly termed, SERM.
Conscience.; and the sentiments which L.-
it awakens, upon the perpetration of a
crime, are ftiled, Remorse. Therefore, said
the brethren of Joseph, is this diflrefs come
upon us; behold also his blood is required.
They acknowledged, not only that they had
conmmitted a wrong, but a wrong for which
they were jufily doomed to fuffer.

Did not conscience suggest this natural

relation between guilt and punishment,
the mere principle of approbation, or dif-
approbation, with refpet to moral con-
du&, would prove of small efficacy. For
disapprobation attends, in some degree,
every conviaion of impropriety or folly.
When one has aaed unsuitably to his in-
terest, or has trespassed against the rules
of prudence or decorum, he reflets upon
his condua with pain, and acknowledges
that he deserves blame. But the differ-
ence between the . sense of mifcondud,
and the sense of guilt, consists in this,
That the latter penetrates much deeper

Cc 2 into

SE R Mi. into the heart. It makes the criminal feet,
XIII.

- that he is not only blameable, but justly

punishable, for the part which he has
afed. With reference to this office of
conscience, the inspired writers frequently
speak of it, in terms borrowed from the
awful folemnities of judicial procedure; as,
bearing witncfs for or against us; accusing, or
excu/ing, judging and condemning. It will
be found, that in the language of most na-
tions, terms of the fame import are applied
to the operations of conscience; exprefling
the sense, which all mankind have, of its
passing sentence upon them, and pro-
nouncing rewards or punishments to be due
to their ations.

The sense of punishment merited, you

are further to observe, can never be fepa-
rated from the dread, that, at some time or
other, punishment thall be a&ually infli&ed.
This dread is not confined to the ven-
geance of man. For, let the finner's evil
deeds be ever so thoroughly concealed
from the knowledge of the world, his
inward alarms are not quieted by that

consideration.

consideration. Now, punishment is the SERM.

XIII

fanaion of a law. Every law supposes a
rightful fuperiour: And therefore, when
conscience threatens punishment to secret
.crimes, it manifestly recognizes a fu-
preme Governour, from whom nothing is
hidden. The belief of our being account-
able to him, is what the most hardened
wickedness has never been able to eradi-
cate. It is a belief which arifies, not mere-
ly from reasoning, but from internal fen-
timent. Conscience is felt to aa as the
delegate of an invisible Ruler; both anti-
cipating his fentcnce, and foreboding its
execution.

Hence arise the terrours, which so of-

ten haunt guilt, and rife in proportion to
its atrocity. In the history of all na-
tions, the Tyrant and the Oppressor, the
bloody and the flagitious, have been ever
pointed out, as fearful, unquiet, and reft-
less; fubje& to alarms and apprehensions
of an unaccountable kind. And surely,
to' live under fich disquietude, from the
dread of merited punishment, is already

Cc3 to

s E R M. to undergo one of the most severe punish-

XJIII.
_ . ments which human nature can fuffhr,

When the world threatens us with any
of its evils, we know the extent, and dif-
cern the limits of the danger. We fee the
quarter, on which we are exposed to its
attack. We measure our own strength
with that of our adversary; and can take
precautions, either for making resistance,
or for contriving escape. But when an
awakened conscience places before the fin-
ner, the just vengeance of the Almighty,
the profped is confounding, because the
danger is boundless. It is a dark unknown
which threatens him. The arm that is
firetched over him, he can neither fee nor
resist. On every fide, he dreads it; and
on every objea which surrounds him, he
looks with terrour, because he is confci-
ous that every objea can be employed
against him as an instrument of wrath.
No wonder that the lonesome solitude, or
the midnight hour, flhould strike him
with horrour. His troubled mind beholds
forms, which other men fee not; and

he4r

hears voices, which found only in the ear S E R M.

XII.

of guilt. A hand appears to come forth, L
and to write upon the wall over against
him; as it did of old, in the fight of an
impious monarch. He Jhall find no ease,
nor refL. For the Lord flall give him a
trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and for-
row of mind: And his life fAall hang in doubt
before him; and he Jfaall fear day and night,
and have none afurance of his life. In the
morning he Jfall Jay, Would to God it were
even; and at even hejhallfay, Would to God
it were morning, for the fear of his heart
wherewith he fJall fear, and for the fight
which his eyes /hall fee. His life Jhall be
grievous unto him *.-Adversity! how blunt
are all the arrows of thy quiver, in com-
parison with those of guilt !-But if such
be the power of conscience, whence, it may
be asked, comes it to pals, that its influence
is not more general, either in restraining
men from the commission of fin, or in lead-
ing them to a timely repentance ? This
brings me to observe,

' Deut. xxviii. 6$, 66, 67. Ifa. xv. 4.

C c 4 III. TiHAT,

SERM. III. THAT, during a course of profpe-
k ^ rity, the operations of conscience are of-

ten suspended ; and that adversity is the
season which restores them to their proper
force. At the time when crimes are com-
mitted, the mind is too much heated
by passion, and engrossed by the obje& of
its pursuit, to be capable of proper reflec-
tion. After this tumult of spirits has sub-
sided, if a train of new passions be at
hand to. employ its a&ivity, or a fuccef-
sion of pleasurable objeas occur to en-
gage its attention, it may for a while re-
main, though not entirely free from in-
ward misgivings, yet unconscious of the
degree of its guilt. Dissipated among the
amusements of life, the finner escapes, in
some measure, from his own view. If he
refleas upon himself at all, the continu-
ance of prosperity seems to him a strong
justification of his condu&. For it will
be found, that in the hearts of all men,
there is a natural propensity, to judge of
the favour of the Supreme Being, from
the course of external events. When they

are

are born with a smooth gale along the SER M,

XIII.

stream of life, and behold every thing .---
proceeding according to their with, hard-
ly can they be brought to believe, that
Providence is their enemy. Basking in
the sun-shine of prosperity, they suppose
themselves to enjoy the finile of indulgent
Heaven; and fondly conclude, that they
are on terms of friendihip, with all above,
and with all below. Easy they find it,
then, to spread over the grossest crimes,
a covering, thin, indeed, and flight, yet
fufficient to conceal them from a superficial
view.

Of this we have a very remarkable in-

fAlance, in those brethren of Joseph, whose
history we now confider. Not only from
the silence of the inspired writer, we have
ground to believe that their remorse was
stifled, while their prosperity remained;
but we are able to trace some of the pre-
tences, by which, during that period, they
quieted their minds. For when they
were contriving the deftrution of Joseph,
we find Joseph saying to his brethren,

What

E RM. What profit is it, if we flay our brother,
^-iiy and conceal his blood? Let us fell him to the

IfJmaelites ; and let not our hand be upon
him; for he is our brother, and our flebh:
And his brethren were content *. Here
you behold them justifying their crime,
by a fort of pretended humanity; and
making light of felling their brother for
a slave, because they did not take away
his life. How firangely are the opinions
of men altered, by a change in their con-
dition! How different is this sentiment of
the Patriarchs, from that which they after-
wards entertained of the fame aaion, when,
as you fee in the Text, the remembrance of
it wrung their hearts with anguish ?

But men, in truth, differ as much from

themselves, in prosperity, and in adver-
fity, as if they were different creatures.
In prosperity, every thing tends to flatter
and deceive. In adversity, the illusions of
life vanish. Its avocations, and its plea.
fures, no longer afford the finner that
%helter he was wont to find from conv

* Gen. xxxvii. 26, 27.

science.

science. Formerly, he made a part of the s ER M.
crowd. He now feels himself a solitary J
individual, left alone with God, and with
his own mind. His spirits are not support-
ed, as before, by fallacious views of the fa-
vour of Heaven. The candle of the Lord
shines not on his head; his pride is humbled;
and his affeaions are softened for receiving
every serious impression. In this situation,
a man's iniquity is sure to jind him out.
Whatever has been notoriously criminal in
his former condua, rises as a fpe&re, and
places itself before him. The increased
sensibility of his mind, renders him alive
to feelings which lately were faint; and
wounds which had been jil healed, bleed
afresh. When men take the timbrel and the
harp, and rejoice at the found of the organ,
they fay, What is the Alrmighty that wej hould
serve him? But when they are holden in the
cords of afflition, then hejheweth them their
work, and their tranfgreflon, that they have
exceeded. He openeth also their cars to dif-
cipline; and command'eth, that they return
from iniquity.

a Hence,

SE R M. Hence, we may perceive the great
XII. ufefulnefs, and propriety of that inter-

change of conditions, which takes place.
in human life. By prosperity, God gives
scope to our paflions, and makes trial of
our dispositions. By adversity, he revives
the serious principle within. Neither the
one, nor the other, could be born entire
and unmixed. Man, always prosperous,
would be giddy and infoleot; always as-
flifted, would be sullen and despondent.
Hopes and fears, joy and sorrow, are,
therefore, so blended in his life, as both
to give room for worldly pursuits, and
to recall, from time to time, the admoni-
tions of conscience. Of the proportion
in which they thould be mixed for this
purpose, we are very incompetent judges,
From our ignorance of the degree of dif-.
cipline, which the spiritual state of others
requires, we often censure Providence
unjustly, for its severity towards them:
And, from the vanity and rashness of
our wishes, we complain, without rea-
bfoe, of its rigour to ourselves. While

we

we consult nothing but our eafie, God SE:RM.
attends to our spiritual improvement.

,

When we seek ·what is pleasing, he sends
what is useful. When, by drinking too
deep of worldly prosperity, we draw in a
Tecret poison, he mercifully infuses a me-
dicine, at the time that he troubles and
embitters the waters. It remains now to
observe,

IV. THAT when conscience is tho-

roughly awakened, it determines the
finner, to confider every calamity which
he fuffers, as a positive inflialon of pu-
nifhment by Heaven. As it had before
alarmed him with threatenings of Di-
vine displeasure, it tells him, when he
falls under distress, that the threatened
day of account is come. Affliaions, on
some occasions, rife dire&ly out of our
fins. Thus diseases are brought on by
intemperance ; poverty springs from
idleness; and disgrace from prefump- f
tion. In such cafes, the punishment is
so closely conneCed with the crime, that'

5 it

SE .M it is impoflible to avoid discerning the
.-v- relation which the one bears to the

other. But the appointment of Provi-
dence, which we now confider, reaches
farther than this. God has framed us
so, that difireffes, which have no per-
ceivable conne&ion with our former
crimes, are, nevertheless, interpreted by
conscience, to be infli&ed on their account.
They force themselves upon our apprehen-
sion, under this view. They are made to
carry, not only that degree of pain which
properly belongs to themselves, but that
additional torment also, which arises from
the belief of their being the vengeance of
the Almighty.

Let a man fall unexpeAedly into some

deep calamity. Let that calamity be
brought upon him, either by means
which the world calls fortuitous; or by
a train of incidents, in which his own
mifcondua, or guilt, has apparently had
no part ; yet one of the first questions,
which, in such a situation, he puts to
himself, is, What have I done to de-

serve

serve this? His refleaion is, almost in.- SER M.

XIII.

ftin&ively, drawn back upon his former c
life; and if, in the course of that re-
trofpet, any flagrant guilty deed occur
to smite his conscience, on this he can-
not avoid resting with anxiety and ter-
rour, and conneding it in his imagina-
tion with what he now fuffers. He fees,
or thinks that he fees, a Divine arm lifted
up; and what, in other circumstances,
he would have called a reverse of for-
tune, he now views as a judgment of
Heaven.

When the brethren ofJofeph, confined

in the Egyptian prison, were bewailing
the distress into which they had fallen,
there was no circumstance which pointed
out any relation between their present
misfortune, and their former cruelty to
their brother. A long course of years had
intervened, during which they flourished
in wealth and ease. They were now
far from the scene of their crime; in a
foreign land, where they believed them-
selves utterly unknown, and where they

had

SER M, had done nothing to offend But con-
i..,. science formed a conneaion between

events, which, according to the ordi-
nary apprehension of men, were entire-
ly independent of each other. It made
them recollea, that they, who once had
been deaf to the fupplications of a bro-
f ther, were now left friendless and fora-
lorn, imploring pity in vain from an un-
relenting Governour; and that they who
had first conspired to kill their brother,
and afterwards fold him for a slave,
were themselves deprived of liberty, and
threatened with an ignominious death.
How undefervedly soever these evils be-
fell them on the part of men, they con-
sessed them to be just on the part of
Providence. They concluded the hour of
retribution to be arrived; and, in the
person of the Governour of Egypt, they
beheld the ruler of the world calling
them to account for guilt. Therefore is
this difaefs come upon us. Behold also his
blood is required.

Similar

Similar sentiments on like occasions, SER M.

X, IIL.

Will be found not uncommon among _
mankind. Pious men, there is no doubt,
are at all times disposed to look up to
God, and to acknowledge his hand in
every event of life. But what I now
observe, is, That where no habitual ac-
knowledgment of God takes place; nay,
where a daring contempt of his autho-
rity has prevailed, conscience, neverthe-
less, conitrains men, in the day of their
distress, to recognize Gody under the most
awful of all charaders, The avenger of past
guilt.

Herein the wisdom of God appears

in such a light, as jufly to claim our
highest admiration. The ordinary course
of his Providence, is carried on by hu-
man means. He has fettled a train of
events, which ptoceed in a regular fuce
cession of causes and effeas, without his
appearing to interpose, or to at. But
these, on proper occasions, are made to
affeat the human mind, in the fame
manner as if he were beheld descend-

VOL. I, D d ing

SER M. ing from his throne, to punish the fin"
.2 ner with his own hand. Were God to

fufperid the laws of Nature, on occasion
of every great crime that was committed
on earth, and to govern the world by
frequent interpofitions of a miraculous
kind, the whole ordet bs huriian affairs
would be unhinged; no plans of aaion
could be formed; and no scope would
be given for the probation and trial of
men. On the other hand, were the ope-
ration of second causes allowed to con-
ceal a Divine hand totally from view, all
sense of fuperiour government would be
loft; the world wouild seem to be void
of God; the finner would perceive no-
thing but chance and fortune, in the
distresses which he fuffered. Whereas,
by its being so ordered, that several in-
cidents of life thall canrry the fame force,
and strike the mind with the fame im-
preflion, as if they were supernatural
interpofitions, the feat of God is kept
alive among men, and the order of hu-
man affairs is, at the fame time, pre-

served.

served unbroken. The finner fees his SER M.

XIII.

distress to be the immediate effea of
human violence or opprefion; and is
obliged, at the fame moment, to confi-
der it as a Divine judgment. His con-
science gives to an ordinary misfortune,
all the edge and the fling of a visitation
from Heaven.

FROM the train of thought which the

Text has suggested, several inferences
naturally follow. But I shall confine my-
self to two, which claim your particular at-
tention.

The first is, the clear evidence which

the preceding observations afford, of a
Divine government now exercised over
mankind. This most important and aw-
ful of all truths, cannot be too often pre-
fented to our view, or too strongly im-
pressed on our mind. To the imperfe&t
convi&ion of it, which obtains in the
world, must be ascribed, in a great mea-
sure, the prevalence of fin. Did men
firmly believe, that the Almighty Being,

Dd2 who

SER M. who formed them, is carrying on a fyfa-
XIII ^-^ tern of adminifiration which will not

leave guilt unpunithed, it is impossible
that they could remain so inattentive, as
we often behold them, to their moral
condut. But the bulk of mankind are
giddy and thoughtless. Struck by the
superficial appearances of pleasure, which
accompany licentiousness, they inquire
no farther; and deliver themselves up to
their senses and their passions. Where-
as, were they to refled, but for a mo-
ment, upon that view which has now
been given of human nature, they might
soon be satisfied, that the moral govern-
ment of God is no matter of doubtful
discussion. It is a fad, no less obvious and
incontestable, than the government exercised
by those earthly rulers, whom we behold
with the ensigns of their office before our
eyes.

To govern is to require a certain

course of adion, or, to prescribe a law;
and to enforce that law by a suitable
distribution of rewards and punishments.

Now,

Now, God has not only invested con- SiERM.
science, as we have seen, with authority _m.
to promulgate, but endowed it also with
power to enforce, his law. By placing
inward approbation and peace on the fide
of virtue, he gave it the fandion of re-
ward. But this was not enough. Pain
is a more powerful principle than plea-
sure. To escape misery is a stronger
motive for adion, than to obtain good.
God, therefore, so framed human nature,
that the painful sense of ill-defert should
attend the commission of crimes; that
this sense of ill-defert should necessarily
produce the dread of punishment; and
that this dread should so operate on the
mind, in the time of distress, as to make
the finner conceive Providence to be en-
gaged against him, and to be concerned
in infliding the punishment which he
fuffers. All these impressions he hath
stamped upon the heart with his own
hand. He hath made them conflituent
parts of our frame; on purpose, that by
the Union of so many firong and pungent

D d 3 senti-

SERM. sentiments, he might enforce repentance

XII.
i · and reformation, and publish to the hu-

man race his detefiation of fin., Were he
to speak to us from the clouds, his voice
could not be more decisive. What we
discern to be interwoven with the con-
texture of human nature, and to pervade
the whole course of human affairs, carries
an evidence not to be resifted. We might,
with as much r4fqn, doubt whether the
fun was intended to enlighten the earth,
or the rain, to fertilize it; as whether he
who has framed the human mind, in-
tended to announce righteoufiefs to man-
kind, as his law.

THE second inference which I make

from the foregoing discourse, refpe&s the
intimate conne&ion, which those opera-
tions of conscience have, with the pecu-
liar and distinguishing doarines of the
Gospel of Christ. They will be found to
accord with them so remarkably, as to
furnish an answer to some of those ob-
jeaions, which superficial reafoners are

apt

apt to raise against the Christian revela- SER M.

S XIII.

tion. In particular, they coincide with

.

that awful view which the Gospel gives
us, of the future consequences of guilt.
If the finner is now constrained by con-
science, to view the Almighty as pur-
suing him with evil for long-forgotten
crimes, how naturally must he conclude,
that, in a subsequent period of existence,
the Divine administration will proceed
upon the fame plan, and complete what
has been left imperfeat here ? f, during
this life, which is only the time of trial,
the displeasure of Providence at fin is
displayed by tokens so manifest, what
may be apprehended to follow, when
justice, which at present only begins to
be executed, shall be carried to its con-
summation ? What conscience forebodes,
revelation verifies; assuring us, that a
day is appointed, when God will render
to every mqn according to his works; (t
them, who by patient continuance in well-
doing, seek for glory, honour and immorta-
lity ; eternal life - But unto them that are

D d 4 contentious,

S ER M. contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey

-i-.. unnrighteoufnefs ; indignation and wrath,

tribulation and anguih, upon every foul of
man that doth evil, of the Jew firfi, and
affo of the Gentile. For there is no reffpe of
pcrfons with God. For as many as have
finned without the law,Jbalal also per if with-
out the law ; and as many as have finned in
the law, jhall be judged by the law *.

While the threatenings of conscience

thus strengthen the evidence of the scrip-
ture do&rine concerning future punish-
ments, they likewise pave the way for
the belief of what is revealed concerning
the method of our deliverance by Christ.
They suggest to the finner, some deep
and dark malignity contained in guilt,
which has drawn upon his head such
high displeasure from Heaven. They
call forth his most anxious efforts, to
avert the effeas of that displeasure, and
to propitiate his offended judge. Some
atonement, he is conscious, must be
made; and the voice of Nature has, in

* Rom..ii. 7"-13v every

every age, loudly demanded fuffering, as E R M.
the proper atonement for guilt. Hence -
mankind have conflantly fled for refuge
to such substitutions, as they could de-
vise to place in the room of the offender;
and, as by general consent, vidims have
every where been slain, and expiatory fa-
crifices have been offered up on innume-
rable altars. Wherewith Jhall I come be-
fore the Lord, and bow myself before the mofl
high God ? Shall I come before him with
burnt-offerings, and calves of a year old?
Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of
rams, or with ten thotind of rivers of oil ?
Or, jhall I give my first-born for my tratf-
grefion ; the fruit of my body, for the fin of
my foul *? These perplexities and agita-
tions of a guilty conscience, may be
termed preludes, in some measure, to the
Gospel of Christ, They are the pointings
of unenlightened Nature, towards that
method of relief, which the grace of
God has provided. Nature felt its inabi-

* Micah vi. 6, 7,

lity

8XER.M. lity to extricate itself from the confe.

t quences of guilt; The Gospel reveals the

plan of Divine interposition and aid.
Nature confeffed some atonement to be
necessary; The Gospel discovers, that the
neceflary atonement is made. The re-
medy is no sooner presented, than its
suitableness to the disease appears ; and
the great mystery of redemption, though
it reaches, in its full extent, beyond our
comprehension, yet, as far as it is re-
vealed, holds a visible congruity with
the sentiments of Conscience, and of Na-

ture.

Natural and revealed religion proceed

from the fame Author; and, of course,
are analogous and consistent. They are
parts of the fame plan of Providence.
They are conne&ed measures of the fame
system of government. The serious be-
lief of the one, is the best preparation
for the reception of the other. Both
concur in imprefling our mind with a
deep sense of one most important truth,

whih

which is the result of this whole dif- SERM.

XIII.

course, That as we sow now, we muf/ I
reap ; that under the government of
God, no one shall be permitted, with
impunity, to gratify his criminal pas-
fions, and to make light od the great
duties of life.

# SERMON XIV. On the Mixture of Joy and Fear in Religion. PSAL. ii. 11. Rejoice with trembling.

t 412

SERMON XIV.

On the Mixture of Jo Y and FEAR in

* RELIGION.

PSALM ii. II.

Rejoice with trembling.

SER M. JO Y and Fear, are two great springs

' J of human adion. The mixed con-

dition of this world, gives scope for
both; and, according as the one or the
other predominates, it influences the ge-
neral tenour of our condua. Each of
them poffeffes a proper place in religion.
To serve the Lord with gladness, is the
exhortation of the Psalmist David *. To
serve him with reverence and godly fear,
is the admonition of the Apostle Paul f.
But, under the present imperfeaion of

* Pfal. c. 2. t Heb. xii. 28,

human

human nature, each of these principles SER M.
may be carried to a dangerous extreme. XIV*
When the whole of religion is placed in
joy, it is in hazard of rising into unwar-
rantable rapture. When it rests altoge-
ther on fear, it degenerates into fuperfti-
tious servility. The Text enjoins a due
mixture of both; and inculcates this im-
portant maxim, That joy, tempered with
fear, is the proper disposition of a good
man. In discoursing of this fubje&t, I
ihall endeavour to Ihow, firfi, That joy
is essential to religion ; and next, That,
for various reasons, this joy ought to be
mixed with fear; whence we ihall be
able to ascertain the nature of that steady
and composed spirit, which is most suit-
able to our present condition, and most
acceptable to God.

I. JOY is essential to religion, in two

refpeas; as religion inspires joy, and as
it requires it. In other words; To rejoice,
is both the privilege, and the duty, of
good men,

Ie

SER M. I1 the fiif place, Religion inspires joy.
S.. . It affords just ground of gladness, to all

who firmly believe its doarines, and fin-
cerely fludy to obey its laws. For it con-
fers on them the two most material re-
quifites of joy; a favourable situation of
things without, and a proper disposition
of mind within, to relish that favourable
situation.

When they examine theif situation

without, they behold themselves placed
in a world which is full of the influ-
ence of a gracious Providence; where
beauty and good are every where predo-
minant; where various comforts are be-
flowed; and where, if any be with-held,
they have reason to believe, that they are
with-held by parental wisdom. Among
the crowd that encompass them, they
mnay be at a loss to discern, who are
their friends, and who their enemies.
But it is fufficient to know, that they
are under the prote&ion of an invisible
Guardian, whose power can keep them
from every evil. All the iteps of his

condut,

conduct, they may be unable to trace, SERM.

xlv.

Events may befall them, of which they i
can give no account. But as long as
they are satisfied, that the system of Di-
vine government is founded on mercy,
no present occurrences are able to destroy
tfeir peace; For he who spared not his
rwn Son, but delivered him up for them,
how jball be not with him freely give
them all things ? If their nature is frail,
Divine assistance is promised to strengthen
it. If their-virtue is imperfea, a difpen-
fation is opened, which gives them the
hope of pardon. If their external cir-
cumftances be in any refpea unfavour-
able, it is because a higher interest is
consulted. All things, they are assured,
/hall work together for their good. On
their prosperity rests, the blefling; on
their adversity, the fantifying Spirit, of
the Almighty. Old age may advance,
and life decay; but beyond those boun-
daries of Nature, faith opens the pro-
fpet of their lasting felicity. Without
anxiety, they pass through the different

5 periods

SE R M. periods of their present existence, because

XIV.
- they know it to be no more than an intro-

dudion to immortality,

As such a situation of things without,

lays a solid foundation for joy; so the
disposition which religion forms within,
promotes the relish of it. It is indeed
from within, that the chief sources of
enjoyment or trouble rife, The minds
of bad men are always disorderly; and
hence their lives are so generally uneasy.
In vain they take the timbrel and the harp,
and endeavour to rejoice at the found of the
organ. Spleen and disgust pursue them,
through all the haunts of amusement.
Pride and ill humour torment theme
Oppressed with discontent, their spirits
flag; and their worn-out pleasures afford
them entertainment no more. But reli-
gion subdues those malignant passions,
which are the troublers of human repose;
which either overcast the mind with the
gloom of peevishness, or disquiet it by
the violence of agitation. It infuses, in
their room, those mild and gentle difpo-

7 fitions,

fitiors, whose natural effeA is to finooth SERM.

XIv.

the tenour of the foul. Benevolence and -
candour, moderation and temperance,
wherever they reign, produce cheerful-
ness and serenity. The consciousness of
integrity gives ease and freedom to the
mind. It enables good men to extra&
from every objea, the whole fatisfaaion
which it is capable of yielding; and adds
the flavour of innocence, to all their ex-
ternal pleasures.

IN the second place, As religion natu-

rally inspires joy; so, what it inspires, it
commands us to cheriih. As a necessary
proof of our sincerity, it requires cheer-
fulness in the performance of our duty;
because, if this be wanting, our religion
discovers itself not to be genuine in prin-
ciple, and in praatice it cannot be stable.

Religious obedience, destitute of joy, is

not genuine in its principle. For, did
either faith or hope, the love of God, or
the love of goodness, rule the heart;
they could not fail to produce fatisfadion

VOL. 1. Ec in

SER M. in piety and virtue. All those causes of

XIV.

I joy which I have mentioned would then

operate; and their native effed on the
mind, would follow. The profpeas
which religion opens, would gladden,
and the affeaions which it inspires,
would sooth the heart. We serve, with
pleasure, the benefador whom we love.
We rejoice in every study and pursuit,
to which we are sincerely attached. If
we serve not God with pleasure, it is
because we know him not, or love him
not. If we rejoice not in virtue, it is
because our affedion is alienated from it,
and our inclinations are depraved. We
give too evident proof, that either we
believe not the principles of religion, or
that we feel not their power. Exclude
joy from religion; and you leave no
other motives to it, except compulsion
and interest. But are these suitable
grounds, on which to reft the whole of
our obedience to the Supreme Being?
My son, give me thy heart, is the call of
God. Surely if there be no pleasure in

fulfilling

fulfilling his commands, the heart is not SERM.

XIV.

given him; and, in that cafe, the multi- -
tude of facrfices and burnt offerings, is
brought to his altar in vain.

As religion, destitute of joy, is imperfet

in its principle; so, in praaice, it mufft be
unstable. In vain you endeavour to fix any
man to the regular performance of that, in
which he finds no pleasure. Bind him ever
so falls by interest or fear, he will contrive
some method of eluding the obligation.
Ingenuity is never so fertile of evasions, as
where pleasure is all on the one fide, and
mere precept on the other. He may study
to save appearances. He may dissemble
and constrain himself. But his heart re-
volts in secret; and the weight of incli-
nation will, in the end, draw the praCice
after it. If perseverance is not to be ex-
peted, still lets can zeal be looked for,
from him, who, in his religious duties,
trembles without rejoicing. Every at-
tempt towards virtue which he forms, will
be feeble and awkward. He applies to it
as a task; he dreads the task-master; but

Ee 2 he

SERM. he will labour no more than neceflfity

XIV.
* enjoins. To escape from punishment, is

his sole aim. He bargains for immunity,
by every duty which he performs; and
all beyond, he esteems superfluous toil.
--Such religion as this, can neither pu-
rify the heart, nor prepare for heavenly
bliss. It is the refuge of an abjedt mind.
It may form the ritual of the monk, or
prescribe the penance of the idolater;
but has no concern with the homage of
him, who worjhips the Father in spirit and
in truth. His charater is, that the joy of
the Lord is his Jlrengthb . It. attaches his
heart to religion. It inspires his zeal. It
supports his constancy; and accelerates his
progress.

There is no man, but has some obje&

to which he cleaves for enjoyment; some-
what that flatters him with distant hope,
or affords him present pleasure. Joy is
the end towards which all rational beings
tend. For the fake of it, they live; it
resembles the air they breath, which is

* Neh. viii. Io.

necessary

neceflary for the motion of the heart, SER M.

XIV.

and all the vital fundions. But as the
breathing of infeded air proves fatal to
life; in the fame manner, joy drawn
from a corrupted source, is deftrudive,
both of virtue, and of true happiness.
When you have no pleasure in good-
ness, you may with certainty conclude the
reason to be, that your pleasure is all de-
rived from an opposite quarter. You have
exhausted your affeation upon the world.
You have drunk too much of its poi-
foned waters, to have any relish for a pure
spring.

Estimate, therefore, the genuineness of

your religious principles; estimate the de-
gree of your stability, in religious prac-
tice, by the degree of your fatisfadion in
piety and virtue. Be assured, that where
your treasure is, there will your delight
be also. The worldly man rejoices in his
poffeffions; the voluptuous in his plea-
fures; the social in his friends and com-
panions. The truly good man rejoices
in doing jufly, loving mercy, and iwalking

E e 3 humbly i:

SERM. humbly with the Lord his God. He is

XIV.
VJ happy, when employed in the regular dif-

charge of the great duties of life. Spon-
taneous they flow from the affedions of a
pure heart. Not only from the keeping
of the divine commandments he expe&s,
but in the keeping of them, he enjoys, a
great reward.-Accordingly, in the senti-
ments of holy men recorded in scripture,
we find this spirit every-where prevalent.
Their language was; Thy Jlatutes have I
taken as mine heritage for ever ; for they are
the rejoicing of my heart. They are myfongs
in the house of my pilgrimage. They are
fwccter than honey, and the honey-comb.
Whom have I in heaven but thee ? And there
is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.
They did not receive the spirit of bondage,
but the spirit of adoption. They were filled
with peace and joy in believing. They re-
joiced in hope of the glory of God. As soon
as the .Ethiopian eunuch received from
Philip the light of the Gospel, that light
revived and cheered his heart. A new fun
seemed to arise; a new glory, to shine

aroun.4

around him. Every objet brightened; and s E R M.
he went on his way rejoicing '. After the j
fame manner should every good man pro-
ceed in his journey through life, with a fe-
rene and cheerful spirit. Consternation and
dejedion let him leave to the slaves of guilt;
who have every thing to dread, both from
this world and the next. If he appear be-
fore others with a dispirited afpe&, he dif-
honours religion; and affords ground for
suspicion, that he is either ignorant of its
pature, or a stranger to its power.

Thus I have ihewn joy to be essential

to religion. It is the spirit which it in-
spires, and which it requires, in good men.
But in our present ifate, the best principles
may be carried to a dangerous excess; and
joy, like other things, has its due limits.
To serve God with unmixed delight, be-
longs to more advanced spirits in a hap-
pier world. In this region of imper-
fedion, some infusions from a different
cup, must of necessity tincture our joy.
Let us then,

* AMs viii. 39.

Ee 4 II. Tuni

SE R M. II. TURN to the other fide of the argu-

j ment, and confider the reasons which ren-

der it proper, that, when we rejoice, we
should rejoice with trembling.

In the firift place, because all the ob-

jeds of religion, which afford ground sot
joy, tend to inspire, at the fame time, re,
verence and fear. We serve a Benefador,
it is true, in whom we have reason to de-
light; whose purposes are gracious; whose
law is the plan of our happiness. But this
Benefadtor, is the King eternal, immortal,
and invisible; at whose presence, the moun-
tains ihake, and Nature trembles. Every
good, and every perfea gift, come down from
him. But the hand which confers them,
we cannot fee. Mysterious obscurity rests
upon his essence. He dwelleth in thefecret
place of thunder; and clouds and darkness
surround him. He is the Hearer ofprayer;
but we lift our voice to him from afar,
Into his immediate presence no access is
permitted. Our warmest devotion admits
no familiarity with him. God is in heaven,
and thou upon earth; therefore, let thy

words

words be few. If his omniscience admi- SERM.

.XIV.

nifters comfort in our secret distress, it like-
wife fills with awe the heart that is conscious
of guilt. For, if he knows our frame, and
remembers we are dust; our iniquities, also,
are ever before him; our secret Jjns, in. the
light of his countenance.

Throughout all his difpenfations, great-

ness, in conjunction with goodness, strikes
our view; and, wherever we behold the
Parent, we behold the Legislator also. The
death of Christ, in behalf of a guilty
world, is the chief ground of religious
hope and joy. But it is no less the ground
of reverence; when, in this high tranf-
adtion, we contemplate God, as at once
ftri a in justice, and great in mercy. I
the Lord keep mercy for thousands of them
that fear me. I forgive their iniquity, trantf-
greffion, and fin ; but I will by no means
clear the guilty. When we open the book
of the Law, we find promises and threaten-
ings mingled in the fame page. On the
one fide, we fee Heaven displayed in
all its glory: On the other, Hell opening

7 its

SE R M. its terrours. In short, in whatever light
XIV.
i .. we view religion, it appears solemn and

venerable. It is a temple full of majesty,
to which the worshippers may approach
with comfort, in the hope of obtaining
grace, and finding mercy; but where they
cannot enter, without being impressed
with awe. If we may be permitted to
compare spiritual with natural things,
religion resembles not those scenes of
natural beauty, where every objea smiles..
It cannot be likened to the gay landscape,
or the flowery field. It resembles more
the august and sublime appearances of
Nature; the lofty mountain, the expanded
ocean, and the starry firmament; at the
fight of which, the mind is at once over-
awed and delighted; and, from the union
of grandeur with beauty, derives a pleasing,
but a serious, emotion.

IN the second place, As joy, tempered

by fear, suits the nature of religion, so
it is requisite for the proper regulation of
the condua of man. Let his joy flow

fro i

*

from the belt and purest source; yet, if it S E R M.

XIV.

remain long unmixed, it is apt to become i
dangerous to virtue. As waters which
are never stirred, nor troubled, gather a
sediment, which putrifies them; so the
undisturbed continuance of placid sensa-
tions engenders disorders in the human
foul. It is wifely ordered in our present
state, that joy and fear, hope and grief,
thould aa alternately, as checks and ba-
lances upon each other, in order to pre-
vent an excess in any of them, which
our nature could not bear. If we were
subjeCt to no alarms of danger, the
wisest would soon become improvident;
and the most humble, presumptuous.
Man is a pilgrim on earth. Were his
path to be always smooth and flowery,
he would be tempted to relinquish his
guide, and to forget the purpose of his
journey. Caution and fear are the
ihields of happiness. Unguarded joy
begets indolence; indolence produces fe-
curity; security leads to rashness; and
ralhnefs ends in ruin. In order to re-

joice

SER M. joice long, it is necessary that we rejoice
XIV.
\ j with trembling. Had our first parents

observed this rule, man might have been
itill in paradise. He who faith in his
heart, My mountain Jlands fJrong ; I f}all
never be moved; may be assured, that his
state already begins to totter. Religion,
therefore, performs a kind office, in giv-
ing us the admonition of the Text. It
inspires cheerfulness in the service of
God. It proposes joy, as our chief spring
of adion. But it supports joy, by guard-
ing it with fear; not fupprefling, but re-.
gulating its indulgence; requiring us to
rejoice, like persons who have obtained
a treasure, which, through want of vigi-
lance, they are exposed to lose. De-
pendent beings are formed for fubmifr
lion; and to submit, is to stand in awe.
Because the Lord reignetb, let the earth be
glad. We are the fubjeas of God; and
therefore may justly rejoice. But still we
are fubjeas; and, therefore, trembling
must mix itself with our joy,

IN

IN the third place, The unstable condi- S ERtM.

XIV.

tion of all human things, naturally in-
spires fear in the midst of joy. The
spirit to which religion forms us, mufft
undoubtedly correspond to the Rfate in
which we are placed, and to the part
which is afligned us to adt. Now, the
first view under which our present fiate
appears, is that of fallen creatures, who
are undergoing, in this world, probation
and trial for their recovery; and are
commanded to work out their salvation
with fear and trembling. This view of
our condition infers not habitual dcjedionr
of mind. It requires not melancholy
abftradion from the affairs, or total con-
tempt of the amusements of life. But it
inspires humility. It enforces dependance
on Divine aid; and calls forth the voice
of supplication to Heaven. In a situation
so critical, and where interests so important
are at flake, every reasonable person must
confess, that seriousness ought to temper
rejoicing.

Were

S ER M. Were there in human life and fixed

XIV.
-- point of flability and reft, attainable by

man; could we, at any one moment, as*
sure ourselves, that there remained no
latent source of danger, either to our tem-
poral, or our spiritual state; then I ad-
mit, we might lay trembling aside, and
rejoice in full security. But, alas! no
such safe station, no such moment of
confidence, is allowed to man during his
warfare on earth. Viciflitudes of good
and evil, of trials and consolations, fill
up his life. The best intentioned are
sometimes betrayed into crimes; the most
prudent, overwhelmed with misfortunes.
The world is like a wheel incessantly re-
volving, on which human things alter-
nately rife and fall. What is palft of our
life, has been a chequered scene. On its
remaining periods, uncertainty and dark-
ness reft. Futurity is an unknown re-
gion, into which no man can look for-
ward without awe, because he cannot tell
what forms of danger or trial may meet
him there. This we know well, that in

every

every period of our life, the path of hap- s E R M.

XIV.

pinefs ihall be found steep and arduous; _
but swift and easy, the descent to ruin.
What, with much exertion of care and
vigilance, we had built up, one unwary
adion may, in an evil hour, overthrow.
The props of human confidence are, in
general, insecure. The sphere of human
pleasures is narrow. While we form
schemes for strengthening the one, and
for enlarging the other, death, mean-while,
advances. Life, with a swift, though
insensible course, glides away; and, like
a river which undermines its banks, gra-
dually impairs our ifate. Year after year
tfeals something from us; till the decaying
fabric totter of itself, and crumble at
length into duff. So that, whether we
confider life or death, time or eternity, all
things appear to concur in giving to man
the admonition of the Text, Rejoice with
trembling.

I HAVE now shown, in what refpets

religion both promotes joy, and inspires

8 seriousness.

s E R M. seriousness. It places us in the most faa

XIV. _^^ vourable situation, which human life as-

fords, for joy; and it gives us every assist-,
ance, for relishing that joy. It renders
it our duty, to cultivate the fatisfadior
which it yields. It demands a cheerful
spirit, in order to ascertain the sincerity
of our principles, and to confirm us in
good pradice. At the fame time, the
joy which it inspires, is tempered with
fear, by the genius of religion itself;
by the danger to which unguarded joy
would expose us; and by the impropriety
of indulging it, in a situation to mixed as
the present. The trembling which is here
enjoined, is not to be understood as fig-
nifying a pusillanimous deje1ion. It im-
ports no more than that caution and so-
briety, which prudence dictates, as be-
longing to our state. By conneding such
trembling with our joy, religion means
to recommend to us, a cheerful, but a
composed, spirit, equally remote from
the humiliating depreflion of fear, and
the exulting levity of joy. Always to re-

joice,

joice is to be a fool. Always to tremble, is S E R M.

XIV,

to be a slave. It is a modest cheerfulness, a
chastened joy, a manly seriousness, which
becomes the servant of God.

BUT is this, it may perhaps be said,

the whole amount of that boasted fatif-
fation which religion beftows? Is this
all the compensation which it makes, for
those sacrifices it exa&s? Are not the
terms which vice holds out, far more
enticing, when it permits us to gratify
every desire; and, in return for our fur-
mounting the timorous scruples of con-
science, promises us a life of gaiety, fef-
tivity, and unrestrained joy ?-- Such
promises, vice may indeed make; but,
how far it fulfils them, we may safely
refer to the determination of the greatest
sensualist, when he has finished his ca-
reer, and looks back on what he has en-
joyed. Ask him, Whether he would re-
commend to his children, and his friends,
to hold the fame course; and whether,
with his dying breath, he dare assure

VOL. I. F f them,

S E R M. them, that the gratifications of licentious-

XIV.
^d.-. ness afford the greatest enjoyment of life ?

Whatever hopes vice may at the beginning
inspire, yet, after the trial is made, it has
been always found, that criminal pleasures
are the bane of happiness ; the poison, not
the cordial, of our present state. They
arc pleasures, compensated by an infinite
overbalance of pain; moments of delight,
fuccecded by years of regret; purchased at
the expence of injured reputation, broken
health, and ruined peace. Even abftrad-
ing from their pernicious consequences,
they are, for most part, in themselves
treacherous pleasures; unsound and dif-
turbed in the moments of enjoyment. In
the midf of such laughter, the heart is
forrofiful. Often is the smile of gaiety
assumed, while the heart akes within: And
though folly may laugh, guilt will sting.
Correding this pernicious phrenzy of plea-
sure, and reducing it to a more sober and
regulated state, religion is, in truth, no
other than wisdom, introducing peace and
order into the life of man.

While

While religion condemns such pleasures SE R M.

XIV.

as are immoral, it is chargeable with no

,-

improper austerity, in refpea of those which
are of an innocent kind. Think not, that
by the cautious discipline which it prescribes,
it excludes you from all gay enjoyment of
life. Within the compass of that sedate
spirit, to which it forms you, all that is
innocently pleasing will be found to lie. It
is a mistake to imagine, that, in constant
effuflions of giddy mirth, or in that flutter
of spirits which is excited by a round of di-
versions, the chief enjoyment of our state
consists. Were this the cafe, the vain and
the frivolous would be on better terms for
happiness, than the wife, the great, and the
good. To arrange the plans of amusement,
or to preside in the haunts of jollity, would
!)e more desirable, than to exert the highest
effort of mental powers for the benefit of
nations. A consequence so absurd, is fuffi-
cient to explode the principle from which
it flows. To the amnu'cments and lesser
joys of the world, religion assigns their
proper plKacc. It admits of them, as relax-

i f 2 ations

SER M. ations from care, as instruments ofpromot..

XIV.

i

_ ing the union of men, and of enlivening

their social intercourse. But though, as
long as they are kept within due bounds, it
does not censure nor condemn them; nei-
ther does it propose them, as rewards to the
virtuous, or as the principal objeds of their
pursuit. To such, it points out nobler ends
of adion. Their felicity it engages them to
seek, in the discharge of an useful, an up-
right, and honourable part in life; and, as
the habitual tenor of their mind, it promotes
cheerfulnlefs, and discourages levity.

Betwen these two there is a wide diftinc-

tion; and the mind which is most open to
levity, is frequently a stranger to cheerful-
ness. It has been remarked, that transports
of intemperate mirth, are often no more
than flashes from the dark cloud; and that,
in proportion to the violence of the efful-
gence, is the succeeding gloom. Levity
may be the forced produaion of folly or
vice; cheerfulness is the natural offspring of
wisdom and virtue only. The one is an
occasional agitation; the other a permanent

habit.

habit. The one degrades the charadcer; the S E R M.

xiv.

other is perfetly consistent with the dignity
of reason, and the Rfeady and manly spirit
of religion. To aim at a constant fucceflion
of high and vivid sensations of pleasure, is
an idea of happiness altogether chinmerical.
Calm and temperate enjoyment, is the ut-
most that is allotted to man. Beyond this,
we struggle in vain to raise our Rlate; and,
in fad, depress our joys, by endeavouring
to heighten them. Instead of those falla-
cious hopes of perpetual festivity, with
which the world would allure us, religior
confers upon us a cheerful tranquillity. In-
Rfead of dazzling us with meteors of joy,
which sparkle and expire, it sleds around us
a calm and steady light. By mixing trem-
bling with our joy, it renders that joy more
solid, more equal, and more lasting.

In this spirit, then, let us serve God

and hold our course through life. Let us
approach to the Divine Being, as to a
sovereign of whom we stand in awe, and
to a father in whom we trust. In our con-
dut, let us be cautious and humble, as

F f 3 those

SE R M. those who have ground to fear; well pleased

XIV.
^ and cheerful, as those who have cause to

rejoice. Let us ihow the world, that a re-
ligious temper, is a temper, sedate, not fad;
that a religious behaviour, is a behaviour,
regulated, not fliffand formal. Thus we
shall u/s the world, as not abujing it; we
shall pass through its various changes, with
the least discomposure; and we shall vindi-
cate religion, from the reproaches of those
who would attribute to it, either enthufiaf-
tic joys, or slavish terrours. We shall show,
that it is a rational rule of life, worthy of
the perfecion of God, and suited to the
nature and slate of man.

# SERMON XV. On the Motives to Constancy in Virtue. GAL. vi. 9. And let us not be weary in well-doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

[ 439 ]

SERMON XV.

On the Motives to CoNSTANCY in

V RTU E.

GALAT. Vi. 9.

And let us not be weary in well-doing;

for in due feafoon we /hall reaf, if we
faint not.

DISCONTENT is the most general SERM.

of all the evils which trouble the X

life of man. It is a disease, which every-
where finds materials to feed itself; for,
if real distresses be wanting, it substitutes
such as are imaginary in their place. It
converts even the good things of the
world, when they have been long enjoy-
ed, into occasions of disgust. In the
midst of prosperity, it disposes us to
complain; and renders tranquillity tire-

F f 4 some,

s E R M. some, only because it is uniform. There is

.xv. no wonder that this spirit of reftleffnefs

and diffatisfadtion, which corrupts every
terrestrial enjoyment, should have some-
times penetrated into the region of virtue.
Good men are not without their frailties;
and the perverseness incident to human na-
ture, too readily leads us, who become
weary of all other things, to be weary, also,
in well-doing.

Let me put a cafe, which, perhaps,

will be found not unfrequent in ordinary
life. Suppose a person, after much com-
merce with the world, to be convinced
of its vanity. He has seen its most
flattering hopes to be fallacious. He has
felt its most boasted pleasures to be un-
fatisfaaory. He resolves, therefore, to
place his happiness in virtue; and, dif-
regarding all temptations from interest,
to adhere to what is right and honour-r
able in condua. He cultivates acquaint-
ance with religion. He performs, with
seriousness, the offices of devotion. He
lays down to himself, a rational and use-

ful

ful plan of life ; and, with fatisfa&ion, holds s E R M.

XV.

on for a while in this reformed course. i
But, by degrees, difcouragements arise.
The peace which he hoped to enjoy, is
interrupted, either by his own frailties, or
by the vices of others. Passions, which had
not been thoroughly subdued, struggle for
their accustomed gratification. The plea-
sure which he expeded to find in devotion,
sometimes fails him; and the injustice of the
world often fours and frets him. Friends
prove ungrateful; enemies misrepresent,
rivals supplant him: And part, at least, of
the mortifications which he fuffers, he be-
gins to ascribe to Virtue. --Is this all
the reward of my serving God, and re-
nouncing the pleasures of fin? Verily, in
vain 1 have cleansed my heart, and wajl/ed
my hands in innocency. Behold, the ungodly
prosper in the world, and have more than
heart can wi/J ; while, all the day long, I
am plagued and chaflened every morning.--
To such persons as these, and to all who
are in hazard of being infeaed with their

spirit,

SER M. spirit, I now address myself. In reply to

XV. .their complaints, I purpose to ihow, That

in no slate they can chufe on earth, by no
plan of condua they can form, it is pof-
fible for them to escape uneasiness and dif-
appointment; that in a life of virtue, they
will fuffer less uneasiness, and fewer dif-
appointments, than in a course of vice;
they will possess much higher resources and
advantages; and they will be assured of
complete reward at the end. From these
considerations, I hope to make it appear,
that there is no fufficient reason for our be-
ing weary in well-doing; and that, taking
human life upon the whole, Virtue is far
the most eligible portion of man.

I. UNEASINESs and disappointment

are inseparable, in some degree, from every
fltate on earth. Were it in the power of
the world, to render those who attach
themselves to it, satisfied and happy, you
might then, I admit, have some title to
complain, if you found yourselves placed

upon

upon worse terms in the service of God. S E R M.
But this is so far from being the cafe, that xv.
among the multitudes who devote them-
selves to earthly pleasure, you will not find:
a tingle person who has completely attained'
his aim. Enquire into the condition of
the high and the low, of the gay and the
serious, of the men of business and the
men of pleasure, and. you shall behold them
all occupied in supplying some want, or in
removing some distress. No man is pleased
with being precisely what he is. Every-
where there is a void; generally, even in
the most prosperous life, there is some cor-
ner poffeffed by sorrow. He who is engaged
in business, pines for leifiure. He who
enjoys leifiure, languishes for want of
employment. In a tingle state, we envy
the comforts of a family. In conjugal
life, we are chagrined with domeflic
cares. In a safe flation, we regret the
want of objets for enterprise. In an
enterprising life, we lament the want of
safety. It is the doom of man, that his

sky

SE R M. sky should never be free from all clouds.

XV.

S- He is, at present, in an exiled and fallen

slate. The objeas which surround him,
are beneath his native dignity. God has
tinged them all with vanity, on purpose to
make him feel, that this is not his reft; that
here he is not in his proper place, nor arrived
at his true home.

If, therefore, you aim at a condition

which lhall be exempted from every dif-
quiet, you pursue a phantom; you in-
crease the vanity and vexation of life, by
engaging in a chace so fruitless. If you
complain of virtue, because there is in-
cident to it a portion of that uneasiness
which is found in every other slate, your
complaint is most unreasonable. You
claim an immunity from evil, which be-
longs not to the lot of man. Recon-
cile yourselves, then, to your condition;
and, instead of looking for perse& hap'
pinefs any where on earth, gladly em-
brace that state which contains the fewest
Jorrows.

II. THOUGHv

II. THOUGH no condition of human S11RM.

XV

life is free from uneasiness, I contend,
That the uneasiness belonging to a sinful
course, is far greater, than what attends
a course of well-doing. If you be weary
of the labours of virtue, be assured, that
the world, whenever you try the ex-
change, will lay upon you a much heavier
load. It is the outside, only, of a licentious
life, which is gay and smiling. Within,
it conceals toil, and trouble, and deadly
sorrow. For vice poisons human happiness
in the spring, by introducing disorder into
the heart. Those paflions which it seems
to indulge, it only feeds with imperfea
gratifications; and thereby strengthens them
from preying, in the end, on their unhappy
viCtlms.

It is a great mistake to imagine, that

the pain of felf-denial is confined to virtue.
He who follows the world, as much
as he who follows Christ, muff take up
his cross; and to him, assuredly, it will
prove a more oppressive burden. Vice
allows all our paflions to range uncon-

trouled;

7

SERM. troubled; and where each claims to be

XV.

«L fuperiour, it is impossible to gratify all.

The predominant desire can only be in-
dulged at the expence of its rival. No
mortifications which virtue exads, are
more severe than those, which ambition
imposes upon the love of ease, pride upon
interest, and covetousness upon vanity.
Self-denial, therefore, belongs, in com-
mon, to vice and virtue; but with this
remarkable difference, that the passions
which virtue requires us to mortify, it
tends to weaken; whereas, those which
vice obliges us to deny, it, at the fame
time, ffrengthens. The one diminifles
the pain of felf-denial, by moderating
the demand of passion; the other in-
creases it, by rendering those demands
imperious and violent.-What distresses,
that occur in the calm life of virtue, can
be compared to those tortures, which re-
morse of conscience inflids on the wicked;
to those severe humiliations, arising from
guilt combined with misfortunes, which
fink them to the duff; to those violent

agitations

agitations of shame and disappointment, SERM.

XV.

which ibfometimes drive them to the moftf
fatal extremities, and make them abhor
their existence? How often, in the midit
of those difafirous situations, into which
their crimes have brought them, have
they curied the fedudtions of vice; and,
with bitter regret, looked back to the day
on which they firfl forsook the path of in-

nocence !

But, perhaps, you imagine, that to such

miseries as these, great criminals only are
exposed; and that, by a wary and cautious
management, it is possible to avoid them.
Take vice and virtue, then, in the most
general point of view. Compare God and
the world as two masters, the one or other
of whom you muff obey; and confider
fairly, in whose service there will be reason
for your being weary soonest, and repenting
most frequently. The world is both a hard,
and a capricious master. To submit to a
long servitude, in the view of a recompence
from which they are excluded in the end,

1 is

s E R Mi is known to be often the fate of those, who

XV are devoted to the world. They sacrifice

their present ease, to their future profpeas.
They court the great, and flatter the mul-
titude. They prostitute their conscience,
and dishonour their charader: And, after
all their efforts, how uncertain is their fuc-
cess ! Competitors justle, and outstrip them.
The more artful deceive, the more violent
overthrow them. Fair profpeds once
smiled; but clouds soon gather; the sky is
darkened; the scene changes; and that
fickle world, which, a moment before, had
flattered, the next moment, forgets them.

God is never mistaken in the charadter

of his servants; for he feeth their hearts,
and judgeth according to the truth. But
the world is often deceived in those who
court its favour; and, of course, is un-
just in the distribution of its rewards.
Flattery gains the ear of power. Fraud
supplants innocence; and the pretending,
and assuming, occupy the place of the
worthy and the modest. In vain you

claim

elaim any merit with the world, on ac- SERM.
count of your good intentions. The -
world knows them not; regards them
not. It judges of you, solely by your
ations; and, what is worse, by the fuc-
cess of your ations, which often depends
not on yourselves. But, in the fight of
the Supreme Being, good intentions sup-
ply the place of good deeds, which you
had not the opportunity of performing.
The well-meant endeavours of the poor
find the fame acceptance with him, as
the generous aaions of the rich. The
widow's mite is, in his eye, a costly of-
fering; and even he who giveth to a dif-
ciple a cup of cold water, when he can
give him no more, goeth not without his re-
ward.

As the world is unjust in its judgments,

so it is ungrateful in its requitals. Time
speedily effaces the memory of the greatest
services; and when we can repeat them no
more, we are negleaed, and thrown aside.
tt was the saying of a noted great man of
the world, on the fall of his fortunes,

VoL. I. G g (' Had

SE R M. " Had I served God as faithfully as I

XV. " have done my King, he would not have

" caff me off in my old age." Unfaithful-
ness, and ingratitude, are unknown to God.
With him no new favourites arise, to usurp
the place, or to bear off the rewards, of his
ancient servants. Even to your old age, I
am He; and even to hoary hairs, I will
carry you. I have made, and I will bear;
even I will carry, and will deliver you, faith
the Lord Almighty*.--Since, then, in our
several departments, we muff labour, What
comparison is there, between labouring for
God, and for the world ? How unjust are
they, who become weary so much sooner
in the service of God, than they do in that
of the most severe and imperious of all
maifters !

III. THE resources of virtue are much

greater than those of the world; the com-
penfations which it makes for our distresses,
far more valuable. Perpetual success be-
longs neither to the one, nor the other.

* Ifa. xlvi. 4,

But

But under disappointments, when they SER M.
occur, virtue bears us up; the world al- L
lows us to fink. When the mind of a
good man is hurt by misfortunes, reli-
gion administers the cordial, and infuses
the balm. Whereas the world inflias
wounds, and then leaves them to fester.
It brings sorrows, but it provides no con-
folation. Consolation is entirely the pro-
vince of religion. Supposing religion to
be inferiour to vice in external advan-
tages, it muff be allowed to possess inter-
nal peace in a much hligher degree. This
is so certain, that almost all men, at some
period or other of their life, look forward
to it, as to a desirable retreat. When the
ends of their present pursuit ihall be ac-
complifhed, they propose to themselves
mnuch fatisfadion, in an honourable dif-
charge of the duties of their station,
amnidft those moderate passions, and tem-
perate pleasures, which innocence allows.
That which all men agree in holding to
be second in importance to the pursuit
which they follow, may be safely esteemed

G g 2 to

S E R M. to be the first in real worth; and it may

XV.
^ be concluded, that if they were not blinded

by some prevailing pafflion, they would dif-
cern and adopt it as such.

It is the peculiar effea of virtue, to

make a man's chief happiness arise from
himself and his own condua. A bad
man is wholly the creature of the world.
He hangs upon its favour, lives by its
smiles, and is happy or miserable, in pro-
portion to his success. But to a virtuous
man, success in worldly undertakings is
but a secondary obje&. To discharge his
own part with integrity and honour, is
his chief aim. If' he has done properly
what was incumbent on him to do, his
mind is at reft; to Providence he leaves
the event. His witness is in heaven, and
his record is on high. Satisfied with the
approbation of God, and the testimony
of a good conscience, he enjoys himself
and despises the triumphs of guilt. In
proportion as such manly principles rule
your heart, you will become independent
of the world; and will forbear complain-

ing

ing of its difcouragements. It is the im- sE R M.
perfeaion of your virtue, which occasions .--
you to be weary in well-doing. It is be-
cause your hearts remain divided between
God and the world, that you are so often
discontented; partly withing to discharge
your duty, and partly seeking your happi-
ness from somewhat that is repugnant to
your duty. Study to be more consistent in
principle, and more uniform in praaice,
and your peace will be more unbroken.

Though virtue may appear at first fight

to contraa the bounds of enjoyment, you
will find, upon refleaion, that, in truth,
it enlarges them. If it restrains the excels
of fcme pleasures, it favours and encreafes
others. It precludes you from none, but
such as are either fantastic and imaginary,
or pernicious and defirudive. Whatever
is truly valuable in human enjoyment, it
allows. to a good man, no less than to
others. It not only allows him such plea-
fures, but heightens them, by that grateful
reliih which a good conscience gives to
every pleasure. It not only heightens

G g 3 them,

SERM. them, but adds to them, also, the pecu-

XV liar fatisfaaions which flow from virtuous

sentiments, from devout affeations, and
religious hopes. On how much worse
terms is the finner placed, in the midst of
his boasted gratifications ? His portion is
confined to this world. His good things
are all of one fort only; he has neither
knowledge, nor relish, of any thing be-
yond them. His enjoyment, therefore,
rests on a much narrower basis, than that
of the servants of God. Enlarge, as much
as you please, the circle of worldly grati-
fications; yet, if nothing of the mind and
the heart, nothing of a refined and moral
nature, enter into that circle, and vary the
enjoyment, languor and weariness soon
succeed. Among whom do you hear more
peevish expressions of discontent, or more
frequent complaints of low spirits, than
among the profeffed votaries of worldly
pleasure ?

Vice and virtue, in their progress, as

in every other refped, hold an opposite
course. The beginnings of vice are en-

ticing,

k~...-_...-

ticing. The first steps of worldly advance- S ER M.

XV.

ment, are flattering and pleasing. But the
continuance of success blunts enjoyment,
and flattens desire. Whereas the begin-
nings of virtue are laborious. But, by
perseverance, its labours diminish, and
its pleasures increase. As it ripens into
confirmed habit, it becomes both smoother
in pratice, and more complete in its re-
ward. In a worldly life, the termination
.of our hopes always meets our view. We
fee a boundary before us, beyond which
we cannot reach. But the profpeas of
virtue are growing and endless. The righ-
teous fJall hold on in his way ; and he
that hath clean hands, Jhall wax fJronger
and fJronger. The path of the ju/l is as the
Jhining light, that Jflineth more and more
unto the perfetc day. This brings me to
confider,

IV. THE assured hope, which good

men enjoy, of a full reward at last. I
have endeavoured, by several confidera-
tions, to correft your impatience under

G g 4 the

SER M. the present difcouragements of virtue. i

XV
-,- have shown many high advantages, which

it already poffeffes. But now, laying
all these aside; supposing virtue to have
brought you no advantage, but to have
only engaged you in perpetual struggles
with an evil world ; the Text suggests
what is fufficient to answer every ob-
jedtion, and to silence every complaint;
In due season you Jh/all reap, if you faint
not. It is not a loose encouragement, or
a dubious hope, which is held forth to
us. A direa and explicit declaration is
made by the Spirit of God, that piety
and virtue, how discouraged soever, or
oppressed, they may be for a while, shall
not be frustrated of their reward ; but
that in due season, when the period which
is fixed by the Divine decree shall come,
all who have not been weary in wellr
doing, though they may have sown in
tears, Jhall reap in joy. As this great prin-
ciple of faith is so essential to our present
argument, and is indeed the foundation
of all religion, it will be proper that we

now

now take a view of the grounds on which S E R M.

XV.

it rests. By fixing our attention, both on
the proofs which reason suggests, and on
the discoveries which revelation has made,
of a state of future retribution, we shall
take an effeaual method of confirming our
adherence to religion, and of baffling those
temptations which might lead us to be weary
in well-doing.

THE first, and most obvious prefump.

tion, which reason affords in behalf of
future rewards to the righteous, arises
from the imperfect distribution of good
and evil in our present state. Notwith-
standing what I have advanced concern-
ing the pk~afures and advantages of vir-
tue, it cannot be denied, that the happi-
ness of good men is often left incomplete.
The vicious possess advantages, to which
they have no right; while the confcien-
tious fuffer for the fake of virtue, and
groan under distresses which they have
not merited from the world. Indeed,
wvere the distribution of good and evil, in

this

S E R M. this life, altogether promiscuous; could

XV.

- it be said, with truth, that the moral

condition of men had no influence what-
ever upon their happiness or misery ; I
admit, that from iuch a state of things,
no presumption would arise of any fu-
ture retribution being intended. They
who delight to aggravate the miseries of
life, and the difireffes of virtue, do no
service to the argument in behalf of Pro-
vidence. For, if total disorder he found
to prevail now, suspicions may, too just-
ly, arise, of its prevailing for ever. If
he who rules the universe, entirely ne-
gleds virtue here, the probability muffl
be small, of his rewarding it hereafter.
But this is far from being the true state
of the fad. What human life presents to
the view of an impartial observer, is by
no means a scene of entire confusion;
but a state of order, begun, and carried
on a certain length. Virtue is so far
from being negleted by the Governour
of the world, that from many evident
marks it appears to be a chief objedt of

his

his care. In the constitution of human SERM.

XV.

nature, a foundation is laid, for comfort :
to the righteous, and for internal punish-
ment to the wicked. Throughout the
course of Divine government, tendencies
towards the happiness of the one, and the
mifiry of the other, constantly appear.
They are so conspicuous, as not to have
escaped the notice of the rudest nations.
Over the whole earth, they have diffufed
the belief, that Providence is propitious to
virtue, and averse to guilt. Yet thee
tendencies are, sometimes, disappointed of
their effet; and that which Providence vi-
sibly favours, is left, at present, without an
adequate reward.

From such an imperfed distribution of

happiness, what are we to conclude, but
that this system is the beginning, not the
whole of things; the opening only of a
more extensive plan, whose consummation
reaches into a future world ? If God has
alreadyfet his throne for judgment; if he has
yifibly begun to reward and to punish, in

some

S E R M. some degree on earth, he cannot mean to

XV.
- . leave the exercise of government incom-

plete. Having laid a foundation of a
great and noble ftruture, he will in due
time rear it up to perfeaion. The unfi-
nifhed parts of the fabric evidently show,
that a future building is intended. All his
other works are confitruded according to
the most full and exad proportion. In the
natural world, nothing is deficient, nothing
redundant. It is in the moral world, only,
that we discover irregularity and defea.
It falls short of that order and perfeaion,
which appear in the reft of the creation. It
exhibits not, in its present fRate, the fame
features of complete wisdom, jufRice, or
goodness. But can we believe, that, under
the government of the Supreme Being, those
apparent disorders fliall not be redified at
the last? Or, that from his condu&t, towards
his rational creatures, the chief of his works,
the sole objedion against his perfeaion shall
be allowed to rife, and shall continue unre,
moved for ever ?

On

On the supposition of future rewards SER M.

XV.

and punishments, a satisfying account L
can be given, of all the difbrders which
at present take place on earth. Chriftia-
nity explains their origin, and traces
them to their iflfue. Man, fallen from
his primaval felicity, is now undergoing
probation and discipline for his final
slate. Divine justice remains, for a sea-
son, concealed ; and allows men to ad
their parts with freedom on this theatre,
that their characters may be formed and
ascertained. Amidst difcouragements and
afflidions, the righteous give proof of
their fidelity, and acquire the habits of
virtue. But, if you suppose the events
of this life to have no reference to an-
other, the whole state of man becomes,
not only inexplicable, but contradiaory,
and inconsistent. The powers of the in-
feriour animals are perfecly suited to
their station. They know nothing higher
than their present condition. In gratify-
ing their appetites, they fulfil their defti-
ny, and pats away. Man, alone, comes

8 forth

S ER M. forth to a& a part, which earries rid

XV.

< meaning, and tends to no end. Endowed

with capacities, which extend far beyond
his present sphere ; fitted by his rational
nature, for running the race of immorta-
lity, he is flopped short in the very en-
trance of his courife. He squanders his
ativity on pursuits, which he discerns to
be vain. He languishes for knowledge,
which is placed beyond his reach. He
thirfis after a happiness, which he is
doomed never to enjoy. He fees, and
laments the disasters of his slate; and
yet, upon this fiuppofition, can find no-
thing to remedy them.-Has the eternal
God any pleasure in sporting himself
with such a scene of misery and folly, as
this life, if it had no conneaion with an-
other, mufft exhibit to his eye ? Did he
call into exiflence this magnificent uni-
verse, adorn it with tb much beauty and
splendour, and surround it with those
glorious luminaries which we behold in
the heavens, only that some generations
of mortal men might arise to behold there

5 wonders,

Wonders, and then disappear for ever ? SERM.

XV.

How unsuitable, in this cafe, were the
habitation to the wretched inhabitant!
How inconsistent the commencement of
his being, and the mighty preparation of
his powers and faculties, with his defpi-
cable end! How contradiaory, in fine,
were every thing which concerns the state
of man, to the wisdom and perfeCion of his
Maker!

Throughout all ages, and among all

nations, the persuasion of a future life
has prevailed. It sprung not from the
i-efinements of science, or the speculations
of philosophy; but from a deeper and
stronger root, the natural sentiments of
the human heart. Hence it is common
to the philosopher and the savage; and
is found in the mofi barbarous, as well
as in the most civilized regions. Even
the belief of the being of a God, is not
more general on the earth, than the be-
lief of immortality. Dark, indeed, and
confused, were the notions which men
entertained concerning a future state.

Yet

SERM. Yet still, in that state, they looked for

XV.
^ retribution, both to the good, and the

bad; and in the perfeaion of such plea-
fures, as they knew best, and valued most
highly, they placed the rewards of the vir-
tuous. So universal a consent seems plain-
ly to indicate, an original determination
given to the foul by its Creator. It shows
this great truth to be native and congenial

to man.

When we look into our own breasts,

we find various anticipations and pre-
sages of future existence. Most of our
great and high pafflions extend beyond
the limits of this life. The ambitious
and the felf-denied, the great, the good,
and the wicked, all take interest, in what
is to happen after they shall have left the
earth. That passion for fame, which in-
spires so much of the ativity of man-
kind, plainly is animated by the perfua-
sion, that consciousness is to survive the
dissolution of the body. The virtuous
are supported by the hope, the guilty
tormented with the dread, of what is to

take

take place after death. As death approaches, S E R M.

XV.

the hopes of the one, and the fears of the -
other, are found to redouble. The foul,
when issuing hence, seems more clearly to
discern its future abode. All the operations
of conscience, proceed upon the belief of
immortality. The whole moral conduc of
men refers to it. All legislators have sup-
posed it. All religions are built upon it.
It is so essential to the order of society, that
were it erased, human laws would prove
ineffeaual restraints from evil, and [a de-
luge of crimes and miseries would overflow
the earth. To suppose this universal and
powerful belief to be without foundation
in truth, is to suppose, that a principle of
delusion was interwoven with the nature of
man; is to suppose, that his Creator was
reduced to the necessity of imprefing his
heart with a falsehood, in order to make
him answer the purposes of his being.

BUT though these arguments be strong,

yet all arguments are liable to objeaion.
Perhaps this general belief, of which I have

VOL. I. H h spoken,

S E R M. spoken, has been owing to inclination and

XV. desire, more than to evidence. Perhaps, in

our reasonings on this fubjea from the Di-
vine perfecions, we flatter ourselves with
being of more consequence, than we truly
are, in the fyflem of the universe. Hence
the great importance of a discovery proceed-
ing from God himself, which gives full
authority to all that reason had suggested,
and places this capital truth beyond the
reach of suspicion or difiruft.

The method which Christianity has ta-

ken, to convey to us the evidence of a future
state, highly deserves our attention. Had
the Gospel been addressed, like a system of
philosophy, solely to the understanding of
men; had it aimed only at enlightening the
studious and refleaing, it would have con-
lined itself to abftrad truth; it would
have simply informed us, that the righteous
are hereafter to be rewarded, and sinners to
be punished. Such a declaration as that
contained in the Text, would have been
fufficient: Be not ',eary in well-doing, for
in due season you jhall reap, if y'ou faint not.

7 But

But the Gospel has not flopped, at barely S E R M.
announcing life and immortality to man- j
kind. It was calculated for popular edifi-
cation. It was intended to be the religion
not merely of the few, whole understanding
was to be informed; but of the many, also,
whose imagination was to be impressed, and
whose paflions were to be awakened, in or-
ler to give the truth its due influence over
them, Upon this account it not only re-
veals the certainty of a future state, but, in
the perbfon of the great founder of our re-
ligion, exhibits a series of fads relating to
it; by means of which, our senses, our
imagination, and passions, all become in-
terefted in this great objet.

'The refurredion of Christ from the grave,

was designed to be a sensible evidence, that
death infers not a final extindion of the
living principle. He rose, in order to show,
that, in our name, he had conquered death,
and was become the fji,-fruits of them that
Jfleep. Nor did he only rife from the grave,
l)ut, by ascending to heaven in a visible
form, before many witnesses, gave an ocu-

Hh 2 lay

s E R M. lar specimen of the transition from this worlk

xv.
L-. into the region of the blessed. The employ-

ments which now occupy him there, are
fully declared. As our fore-runner, he hath
entered within the veil. He appears in the
presence of God for us. He maketh perpetual
intercef/ion for his people. Igo, faith he, to
my Father and your Father, to my God and
your God. In my Father's hofli are many
mansions. I go to prepare a place for you.
I will come again, and receive you to myf/ef,
that where lam, there ye may be also. The
circumfianlces of his coming again, are dif-
tindly foretold. The founding of the last
trumpet, the refurredion of the dead, the
appearance of the Judge, and the solemnity
with which he shall discriminate the good
from the had, are all dcfcribed. The very
words in which he shall pronounce the final
fcntence, are recited in our hearing: Come,
ye bcfcd rs my Fathcr ! iinhrit the kingdom
prepared for you f-om the/ foundation of the
world. Then shall the holy and the jufi be
caught up in the clouds, to mcet the Lord in
the air. They ihall enter with him into

the

the city of the living God. They ihall possess sR IRM.

XV.

the new earth and new heavens, wherein u
dwelleth righteoufrefs. God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes. They ftlall behold
his face in righteousness, and be fatisfjed with
his likeness for ever.-By recording such a
train of striking circumstances and faats, the
Gospel familiarizes us in some measure with
a future state. By accommodating this great
discovery, in so useful a manner, to the
conceptions of men, it furnishes a strong
intrinsic evidence of its divine origin.

THus, upon the whole, whether you

consult your reason, or listen to the disco.
veries of revelation, you behold our argu-
ment confirmed ; you behold a life of piety
and virtue issuing in immortal felicity. Of
what worldly pursuit can it be pronounced,
that its reward is certain ? Look every where
around you, and you ihall fee, that the race
is far from being always to the swift, or the
battle to the irong. The most diligent, the
most wife, the most accomplished, may,
after all their labours, be dif'appointed in the

9 end;

SER M. end; and be left to fuffer the regret, of

xv.
-^ havingfpent theirj rength for nought. But,

for the righteous, is laid up the crown of life.
Their final happiness is prepared in the eter-
nal plan of Providence, and secured by tile
labours and fufferings of the Savipur of the
world,

Cease then, from your unjuil complaints

against virtue and religion. Leave difcon-r
tent, and peevishness, to worldly men. In
no period of distress, in no moment of dif-
appointment, allow yourselves to fufpe6t,
that piety and integrity are fruitless. In
every state of being, they lead to happiness.
If you enjoy not at present their full rewards,
it is because the season of recompence is not
yet come. For, in due fetn youJball reap.
There is a time which is proper for reward ;
and there is a period which belongs to trial.
How long the one should last, and when
the other ihould arrive, belongs not to you
to determine. It is fixed by the wife,
though unknown, decree of the Almighty.
But, be assured, that He that cometh, fJall
come, and will not tarry. He shall come im;

due

due season, to restore perfea order among SER M.

XV.

his works; to bring reft to the weary, com-
fort to the afflided, and just retribution to
all men. Behold, faith the faithful and true
Witness, I come quickly, and my reward is
with me. To him that overcometh, will I
give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the
mid/l of the paradise of God. I will give
him the morning Jfar. I will make him a
pillar in my temple. He shall be cloathed in
white raiment ; andjhall fit down with me,
on my throne *.

* Rev. xxii. I2.-ii. 7. 2.-- iii. 12. 5. 21.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
