SERMONS,

B Y

HUGH BLAIR, D.D. F.R.S. ED.
One of the MINISTERS of the HIGH CHURCH,

A H D
AND
PROFESSOR of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTRES

in the UNIVERSITY, of EDINBURGH.
VOLUME THE THIRD.

LONDON:
Printed for A. STRAHAN; .and T. CADELL in the Strand;

and W. CREECH, Edinburgh.

MI DCC XC.

B LRITA \
,-

# THE CONTENTS.

THE
C O N T E N T S.

SERMON I.

On the True Honour of Man.

PROVERBS, iv. 8. Exalt her, and Jhe

Jhall promote thee; Jhe Jhall bring thee
to honour. - Page i

SERMON II.

On Sensibility,
ROMANS, xii. IS. Rejoice 'with them

that do rejoice, and weep with them
that weep. 22

SERMON III.

On the Improvement of Time.
GENESIS, xlvii. 8. And Pharaoh said

unto Jacob, How old art thou ? 44

A 2

SERMON IV.
On the Duties belonging to Middle

Age.
I CORINTH.- xiii. I . ---When I be-

came a man, I put away childifb
things. - Page 65

SERMON V.

On Death.
ECCLESIASTES, xii. 5. - Man goeth

to his long home, and the mourners go
about the flreets. 88

SERMON VI.
On the Progress of Vice.
I CORINTH. XV. 33. Be not deceived:

Evil communications corrupt good-man-
ners. 0o8

SERMON VII.

On Fortitude.
PSALM xxvii. 3. Though an host Jhould

encamp agailfi me, my heart Jhall not
fear.- 129

S E R M O N VIII.

On Envy.
I CORINTH. xiii. 4. Charity envieth

not.- Page 1So

S E R M ON IX.

On Idleness.
MATTHEW, XX. -. -Why Jandye

here all the day idle P 172

SERMON X.

On the.Senfe of the Divine Presence.
PSALM Ixxiii. 23. -- am continual

ly with thee. I96

SERMON XL

On Patience.
LUKE, xxi. 19. In your Patiencepo/J,

ye your fouls. 219

SERM ON XII.

On Moderation.
PHILIPPIANS, iv. 5. Let your Moaera-

tion be known unto all Men... 242

S E.R M O N XIII.
On the Joy, and the Bitterness of the

Heart.
PROVERBS, XiV. 10. The heart knoweth

his own bitterness, arid a Jiranger doth
not intermeddle with his joy. , Page 263

SERM ON XIV.

On Charaaers of ImperfeR Goodness.
MARK, X. 21. Then yess, beholding

him, loved him.- 86

SERMON XV.
On the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,

as a Preparation for Death.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.
MATTHEW, XXVi. 29. But Ifay unto

you, I ill not drink henceforth of this
fruit of the vine, until that day when I
drink it new with you in my Father's
kingdom. 305

SERMON XVI.

On the Use and Abuse of the World.
ICORINTH. vii. 3. -- Thcythat le

this world, as not abesing it.- Page 329

S E R M O N XVII.
On Extremes in Religious and Moral

Condu.c
PROVERBS, iv. 27. Turn not to the right

hand, nor to the left.- 351

S E R M ON XVIII.

On Scoffing at Religion.
2 PETER, iii. 3. -- here hall come

in the lal days fcofers. 37I

SERMON XIX.

On the Creation of the World.
GENESIS, i. I. In the beginning God

created the heaven, and the earth. 391

SERMON XX.

On the Dissolution of the World.
2 PETER, iii. Io. But the day of the

Lord will come as a thief in the night;
in the which the heavens Jhall pass away
with a great noei, and the elementsJhall
melt with fervent heat; the earth aso,
and the works that are therein, Jhall be
burnt p. - - Page 413

# SERMON I. On the TRUE HONOUR of MAN. PROVERBS, iv. 8. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee; she shall bring thee to honour. —

S E R M ON I.
On the TRUE HONOUR of MAN.

PROVERBS, iv. 8.
Exalt her, andJ he JhJall promote thee; JhJc

Jhall bring thee to honour.-

HE love of honour is one of the SERI.
strongest passions in the human
heart. It shows itself in our earliest

years; and is coeval with the irft exer-
tions of reason. It accompanies us through
all the stages of subsequent life; and in
private stations discovers itself no less than
in the higher ranks of society. In their
ideas of what constitutes honour, 'men

VOL. III. B greatly

S ER M. greatly vary, and often grossly err. But

of somewhat which they conceive to form
pre-eminence and diitintion, all are defi-
rous. All with, by ibme means or other,
to acquire refpeA from those among whom
they live; and to contempt and disgrace,
none are insensible.

Among the advantages which attend re-

ligion and virtue, the honour which they
confer on man is frequently mentioned in
Scripture as one of the most considerable.
W'ifdon is the principal thing, fays Solomon
in the passage where the text lies, therefore
get wvildom ; and with all thy' getting, get
inider/landing. Exalt her, andj fe /hall pro-
mote thee; JJeJhIall bring thee to honour, when
thou dofI emblrace her. SheJ all give to thine
head an ornament of grace ; a crown of glory
Jfall fJe deliver to thee. It is evident that
throughout all the sacred writings, and par-
ticularly in this book of Proverbs, by wf-
dom is to be understood a principle of re-
ligion producing virtuous conduct. 'he
Jfear of the Lord is said to be the beginning
of wVfdorn: And by this fear of the Lord

men

·men are said to depl,.rt frol evil; to wanl s E R Ir.
in the way of good imen, ind to lckp the path

p , )

'of the righteous . Man is then regulated by
the w ifiom which is froml above, when he is
formed by piety to the duties of virtue and
morality; and of the wisdom which pro-
duces this effct, it is afrerted in the text,
that it briwgeth us to hoIcnur.

On this recommendation of religion it

is the more necessary to fix our attention,
because it is often refused to it by men of
the world. Their notions of honour are
apt to run in a very diffcrent channel.
Wherever religion is mentioned, they con-
nceC with it ideas of melancholy and de-
jedion, or of mean and feeble spirits. They
perhaps admit that it may be useful to the
multitude, as a principle of restraint fiom
disorders and crimes; and that to persons
of a peculiar turn of mind, it may afford
consolation under the distresses of life. But
from the atlive scenes of the world, and
from those vigorous exertions which dif-
play to advantage the human abilities, they

Prov. ii. 2o.
B 2 incline

SERM. incline totally to exclude it. It may tooth

the timid, or the fad: But they confider it
as having no connection with what is pro-
per to raise men to honour and distinction.
I shall now endeavour to remove this re-
proach from religion; and to show that in
every situation of human life, even in the
highest stations, it forms the honour, as
well as the happiness of man.

But first, let us be careful to ascertain

what true religion is. I admit that there
is a certain species of religion (if we can
give it that name) which has no claim to
such high diftiniction; when it is placed
wholly in speculation and belief, in the re-
gularity of external homage, or in fiery
zeal about contested opinions.' From a fu-
perftition inherent in the human mind, the
religion of the multitude has always been
tinCtured with too much of this spirit.
They serve God as they would' serve a
proud master, who may be flattered by
theirproftrations, appeased by their gifts,
and gained by loud protestations of attach-
ment to his interests, and of enmity to all

whom

whom they suppose to be his foes. But SERM.
this is not that wildoim to which Solomon _
ascribes, in the text, such high preroga-
tives. It is not the religion which we,
preach, nor the religion of Christ. That'
religion consists in the love of God and
'the love of man, grounded on faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ,. the great Redeemer of
the world, the Intercessor for the penitent,
and the Patron of the virtuous; through
whom we enjoy comfortable access to the
Sovereign of the universe in the acs of
worlhip and devotion. It consists in ju-
ltice, humanity, and mercy; in a fair and
candid mind, a generous and affectionate
heart; accompanied with temperance, self-
government, and a perpetual regard in all
our actions to conscience, and to the law
of God. A religious, and a thoroughly
virtuous character, therefore, I confider as
the fame.

BY the true honour of man is to be un-

derftood, not what merely commands ex-
ternal refped, but what commands the re-

B 3 fpe.

sERAM. spec of the heart; what raises one to ac-

_ knowledged eminence above others of the

fame species; what always creates esteem,
and in its highest degree, produces vene-
ration. The question now before us is,
from what cause this eminence arises ? By
what means is it to be attained ?

I SAY, firfl, from riches it does not arise.

These, we all know, may belong to the
vilest of mankind. Providence has scatter-
cd them among the crowd with an undif-
tinguifliing hand, as of purpose to show of
what finall account they are in the fight
of God. Experience every day proves that
the possession of them is consistent with
the most general contempt. On this point
therefore I conceive it not neceifary to in-
sift any longer.

NEITHER does the honour of man arise

from mere dignity of rank or office. Were
such diftintions always, or even generally,
obtained in consequence of uncommon me-
rit, they would indeed confer honour on
tle charafter. But, in the present state of

fbciety,

society, it is too well known that this is SE R M.
not the cale; They are often the confe-
quence of birth alone. They are bome-
times the fruit of mere dependence and
assiduity. They may be the recompence
of flattery, versatility, and intrigue; and
so be conjoined with meanness and base-
ness of character. To persons graced with
noble birth, or placed in high tfations,
much external honour is due. This is
what the filbordination of society necefit-
rily requires; and what every good mem-
ber of it will chearfully. yield. But how
often has it happened that such persons,
when externally respected, are, neverthe-
less, despised by men in their hearts; nay,
sometimes execrated by the public ? Their
elevation, if they have been unworthy of
it, is so far from procuring them true ho-
nour, that it only renders their infignifi-
cance, perhaps their infamy, more conipi-
cuous. By dra\ving attention to their con-
duct, it discovers in the most glaring light
how little they deserved the station which
they poflefs.

B4 I

SERM. I MUST next observe, that the proper ho-
,_!_- nour of man arises not from some of those

iplendid actions'and abilities which excite
high 'admiration.' Courage and prowess,
military renown, signal victories a'nd con-
quers, may render the name of' a man fa-
mous, without'rendering his.characer tru-
ly honourable. 'To many brave men, to
many heroes renowned in ifory, we look
up with wonder. Their exploits are re-
corded. Their praises are sung. They stand
as on an eminence above the reft of man-
kind.' Their enmiience, nevertheless, may
not be of that fort before which we bow
with inward eiteem -and 'respect. Some-
fhing more is wanted tor that'purpofe, than
the conquering arm, 'and the intrepid mind.
The laurels of the warrior mufft at' all times
be dyed in blood, and 'bedewed with the
tears of the widow and the oi:phani. But
if they.have been stained by rapine and in-
humanity; if fordid avarice las marked his
character; or low and gross sensuality has
degraded his life; the great 'hero finks into
a little'man. What at a distance, or on a

fiperficial'

superficial view, we admired, becomes mean, s E R M.
perhaps odious, when we examine it more _ .
closely. It is like the Colossal statue, whole:
immense size struck the fpec'ator afar off
with aftoninfment; but when nearly view-
ed, it appears disproportioned, unihapely,
and rude. -

Observations of the fame kind may be

applied to all the reputation derived from
civil 'accomplifiments; froin the refined
politics of the flatefiana or the literary
efforts of geiius and erudition. These be-
flow, and,, within certain bounds, ought
to bestow, eminence and: diftincaion on
men: They discover talents which in them-
selves are flhining; and which become high-
ly valuable, when employed in advancing
the good of mankind. Hence, they fre-
quently give rife to fame. But a diftinc-
tion is to be made between fame and true
honour. The fornler.is a loud: and noisy
applaife: The latter, a more silent and in-
ternal homage. Fame floats on the' breath
of the multitude: Honour refts on the
judgement of the- thinking. Fame may

give

SERM. give praise while it with-holds esteem:

* True honour implies esteem mingled with

refpeL. The one regards particular diftin-
guifhed talents: the other looks up to the
whole character. Hence the statesman, the
orator, or the poet, may be famous; while
yet the man himself is far from being ho-
noured. We envy his abilities. We wifl
to rival them. But we would not chufe to
be classed with him who possessed them.
Instances of this fort are too often found in
every record of ancient or modern history.

.FROM all this it follows, that in order to
discern where man's true honour lies, we
mufft look, not to any adventitious circum-
flance of fortune; not to any single sparkling
quality; but to the whole of what forms
a man; what intitles him, as such, to rank
high among that class of beings to which
he belongs; in a word, we must look to
the mind and the foul.--A mind superior
to fear, to felfifli interest and corruption;
a mind governed by the principles of uni-
form rectitude and integrity; the fame in

prosperity

prosperity and adversity; which no bribe SERM.
can seduce, nor terror overawe; neither by ...
pleasure melted'into effeminacy, nor by
diflrefs funk into dejection; such is the
mind which forms the distinction and emi-
nence of man.- One, who in no fitua-
tion of life is either afliamed or afraid of
discharging his duty, and acting his proper
part with firmness and constancy; true to
the God whom he worfiips, and true to
the faith in which he professes to believe;
full of affe&ion to his brethren of man-
kind; faithful to his friends, generous to
his enemies, warm with compassion to the
unfortunate; felf-denying to little private
interests and pleasures, but zealous for pub-
lic interest and happiness; magnanimous,
without being proud; humble, without be-
ing mean; just, without being harsh; fim-
ple in his manners, but manly in his feel-
ings; on whose word you can entirely re-
ly; whose countenance never deceives you;
whose professions of kindness are the effu-
sions of his heart: one, in fine, whom in-
dependent of any views of advantage, you

would

SERM. would chule for a £uperior, could trust in

as a friend, and could love as a brother:
-- This is the man, who'i in your heart,
above all others, you do, you muit, ho-
rour.

SUCH a chara&er, imperfecly as it has

now been drawn, all muff acknowledge to'
be formed solely by the influence of steady
religion and virtue. It is the effec of prin-
ciples-which, operating on conscience, de-
termine it uniformly to pursue whatsoever-
things are true, *whatsoever things are honeJ-
'whatsoever things are jit, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, what-
soever things are of good report, if there -be'
any virtue, and if there be any praie *. By-
thee 'means, wisdom,' as the text -asserts,
bringeth us to honour.

IN confirmation of this doctrine it is to

be observed, that the honour which man
acquires by religion and virtue is more in-
dependent, and more complete, than wrhat

* Philip, iv. 8.

can

can be acquired by any other means. It is SERM.
independent of any thing foreign or exter-
nal. It is not partial, but entire respect,
which it procures. Wherever fortune is
concerned it is the station or rank which
commands our deference. Where some fhi-
ning quality attracs admiration, it is only
to a part of the character that we pay ho-
mage. But when a person is distinguished
for eminent worth and goodness, it is the
man, the whole man, whom we refpedt.
The honour which he possesses is intrinsic,
Place him in any situation of life, even an
.obscure one; let room only be given for
his virtues to come forth and show them-
selves, and you will revere him; as a pri-
vate citizen; or as the father of a family,
If in higher.life he appear more illuftripus,
this is-not owing merely to the refped crea-
ted by- rank. It is, because there a nobler
sphere of acsion is opened to him,; because
his virtues are brought forth into more ex-
tended exertion; and placed in such con-
fpicuous view, that he appears to grace
and adorn the station which he fills. Even

in

SERM. in the silence of retirement, or in the re-

treat of old age, such a man finks not in-
to forgotten obscurity. His remembered
virtues continue to be honoured, when their
acive exertions are over; and to the last
stage of life he is followed by public esteem
uand refpe&. Whereas, if genuine worth
be wanting, the applause which may have
attended'a man for a while, bydegrees dies
away. Though, for a part of his life, he
had dazzled the world, this was owing to
his deficiency in the essential qualities ha-
ving not been fufpeted. As soon as the
imposture is discovered, :the falling star
finks in darknefs.-There is therefore a
standard of independent, intrinsic worth,
to which we must brifig in the end what-
ever claims to be honourable among men.
By this we must measure it; and it will al-
ways be found, that nothing but what is
essential to man has power to command the
refpec of' man's heart.

IT is to be farther observed, that the
universal consent of mankind in honouring

real

real virtue, is sufficient to show what the SER M.
genuine sense of human nature is on this
iibjec. All other claims of honour are
ambulatory and changeable. The degrees
of refped paid to external flations vary with
forms of government, and faflions of the
times. Qualities which in one country are
highly honoured, in another are lightly
esteemed. Nay, what in some regions of
the earth ditinguifhes a man above others,
might elsewhere expose him to contempt or
ridicule. But where was ever the nation
on the face of the globe, who did not ho-
nour unblemifled worth, unaffected piety,
stedfast, humane, and regular virtue ? To
whom were altars erected in the Heathen
world but to those who by their merits and
heroic labours, by their invention of useful
arts, or by some signal acts of beneficence
to their country, or to mankind, were
found worthy, in their opinion, to be tranf-
ferred from among men, and added to the
number of the gods ?- Even the coun-
terfeited appearances of virtue, which are
so often found in the world, are teftimo-

nies

GERM. nies to its praise. -The hypocrite knows
'c j 'that, without affluning the garb of 'virtue,

every other advantage, he can possess is in-
sufficient to procure him esteem. Interfe-
rence of interest, or perversity of difpofi-
tion; may occasionally lead individuals to
oppose, even to hate, the uprights and the
good. But however the charaaers of such
persons may be mirtaken, or misrepresent-
ed, yet, as far as they are acknowledged to
be virtuous, the profligate dare not traduce
them. Genuine virtue las a langtuage that
speaks to every heart:throughlut the world.
It is a language which is understood by all.
In every region, every clime, the homage
paid to it is the fame.. In no one feni-
ment were ever mankind more generally a-
greed.

FINALLY, the honour acquired by reli-

gion and virtue is honour divine and im-
mortal. It is honour, not in the eftima-
tion of men only, but in the fight of God
whose judgement is the standard of truth
.and right; whose approbation confers a

crowit

crown of glory that fadeth not away. All SErIM.
the honour we can gain among men is li-
mited and confined. Its circle is narrow.
Its duration is short and transitory. But
the honour which is founded on true godd-
ness, accompanies us through the whole
progress of our existence. It enters with
man into a future state; and continues to
brighten throughout eternal ages. What
procured him refpea on earth, fiall ren-
der him estimable among the great affcm-
bly of angels, and spirits of juit men made
perfebt; where, we are assured, they who
have been eminent in righteousness fllall
jhine as the brightness of the firmament, and
as the J]ars for ever and ever ,--Earthly
honours are both {hortiived in their con-
tinuance, and, while they last, tarnished
with spots and stains. On tome quarter
or other, their brightness is obscured; their
exaltation is humbled. But the honour
which proceeds from God, and virtue, is
unmixed and pure. It is a lustre which is

* Daniel xii. 3.
VOL. III. C derived

SERM. derived from heaven; and is likened, in
Lys- scripture, to the light of the morning, when

the Jin rifeth; even a morning without clouds;
to the light which Jhineth more and more unto
the petsec day *. Whereas the honours
which the world confers resemble the feeble
and twinkling flame of a taper; which is
often clouded by the smoke it fends forth;
is always wafting; and Loon dies totally
away.

LET him, therefore, who retains any sense

of human dignity; who feels within him
that desire of honour which is congenial to
man, aspire to the gratification of this pas-
sion by methods which are worthy of his
nature. Let him not reft on any of those
external distinctions which vanity has con-
trived to introduce. These can procure
him no more than the semblance of re-
speC. Let him not be flattered by the ap-
plause which some occasional display of a-
bilities may have gained him. That ap-

2 Sam. xxiii. 4.; Prov. iv. 18.

plause

plause may be mingled with contempt. SERM.
Let him look to what will dignify his
charayter as a man. Let him cultivate
those moral qualities which all men in
their hearts refpet. Wisdom shall then give
to his head an ornament of grace; a crown
of glory Jhall Jhe deliver tohim. This is an
honour to which all may aspire. It is a
prize, for which every one, whether of
high or low rank, may contend. It is al-
ways in his power so to distinguish him-
self by worthy and virtuous conduct, as to
command the refpedt of those around him;
and, what is highest of all, to obtain praise
and honour from God.

LET no one imagine that in the reli-

gious part of this character there is any
thing which casts over it a gloomy ihade,
or derogates from that esteem which men
are generally disposed to yield to exemplary
virtues. False ideas may be entertained of
religion; as false and imperfect conceptions
of virtue have often prevailed in the world.
But to true religion there belongs no ful-

C2 len

S-ERM. len gloom; no melancholy austerity, tend'

ing to withdraw men from human society,
or to diminish the exertions of acive vir&
tue. On the contrary, the religious prin-
ciple, rightly understood, not only unites
with all such virtues, but supports, fortid
fies, and confirms them. It is so far from
obscuring the lustre of a character, that it
heightens and ennobles it. It adds to all
the moral virtues a venerable and autho-
ritative dignity. It renders the virtuous
characer more august. To the decorations
of a palace, it joins the majesty of a tem-
ple.

He who divides religion from virtue,

understands neither the one, nor the other.
It is the union of the two which confum-
mates the human character and state. It
is their union which has distinguished those
great and illustrious men, who have flonc
with so much honour in former ages; and
whose memory lives in the remembrance
of succeeding generations. It is their u-
nion which forms that wifdolm which is
from above; that wisdom to which the text

ascribes

ascribes such high effeds; and to which SERM.
belongs the sublime encomium given of it _d
by an author of one of the apocryphal
books of Scripture; with whose beautiful
and emphatical expreflions I conclude this
discourse. The memorial of virtue is immor-
tal. It is known with God, and with men.
7,Vhen it is prfent, men take example at it;
and when it is gone, they desire it. It wear-
eth a crown, and triuiipheth for ever.; ha-
ving gotten the victor); Jfriving for undefiled
rewards. Wi'domi is the breath of the power
of God; and a pure influence Jowing from the
glory of the Ahlighty. Therefore can no de-
filed thing fall into her. She is the bright-
ness of the everlafling light; the unSfotted
mirror of the power of God; and the image
of his goodness. Remaining in herself, ,f e
maketb all things new; and in all ages, en-
tering into holy fouls; Jse maketh them friends
of God, and prophets: For God loveth none
but him that dwelleth with wisdom. She is
more beautifrl than the fin ; and above all the
order ofthe fars. Being compared with light,
JJJe is found before it ,
* Wisdom of Solomon, iV. 2. 3.-vii. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29.

C3 SE R-

# SERMON II. On SENSIBILITY. ROMANS, xii. 15. Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

s 22 J
SERMON II.

On SENSIBILITY.

ROMANS, xii. 15.
Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep

with them that weep.

SERM. r HE amiable spirit of our holy reli-
-I-. T _ gion appears in nothing more than in

the care it hath taken to enforce on men
the social duties of life, This is one of the
clearest charaaeriftics of its being a reli,
gion whose origin is divine: For every doc-
trine which proceeds from the Father of
mercies will undoubtedly breathe benevo-
lence and humanity. This is the scope of
the two exhortations in the text, to rejoice
with them that rejoice, and to weep with them

that

that weep; the one calculated to promote SERM.
the happiness, the other, to alleviate the II-
sorrows of our fellow-creatures; both con-
curring to form that temper which interests
us in the concerns of our brethren; which
disposes us to feel along with them, to take
part in their joys, and in their sorrows.
This temper is known by the name of Sen-
fibility; a word, which in modern times
we hear in the mouth of every one; a qua-
lity, which every one affeds to possess; in
itself, a most amiable and worthy difpofi-
tion of mind; but often mistaken and ab-
used; employed as a cover, sometimes, to
capricious humour; sometimes, to selfish
passions. I iall endeavour to explain the
nature of true sensibility. I liall confider
its effects: and after showing its advanta-
ges, shall point out the abuses, and mifta-
ken forms of this virtue.

THE original conffitution of our nature

with respeCt to the mixture of selfish and
social affections, discovers in this, as in eve-
ry other part. of our frame, profound and

C 4 admirable

' E R M. admirable wisdom. Each individual is, by

II
. 'u-_ his Creator, committed particularly to him-

self, and his own care. He has it more in
his power to promote his own welfare, than
any other person can poflibly have to pro-
mote it. It was therefore fit, it was necef-
fary, that in each individual felf-love 1hould
be the ftrQngeft and most active instinct.
This felf-love, if he had been a being who
'flood solitary and alone, might have pro-
ved sufficient for the purpose both of his
preservation, and his welfare. But such is
not the situation of man. He is mixed a-
mong multitudes of. the fame nature. In
these multitudes, the felf-love of one man,
or attention to his particular interest, en-
countering the felf-love and the interests of
another, could not but produce frequent
opposition, and innumerable mischiefs. It
was neceflary, therefore, to provide a coun-
terbalance to this part of his nature'; which
is accordingly done, by implanting in him
those social and benevolent inftincs which
lead him in some measure out of himself, to
follow the interest of others. The strength

of

of these social inftinds is, in general, pro- SE RM.
portioned to their importance in human
life. Hence that degree of sensibility which
prompts us to weep with them that weep, is
fironger than that which prompts us to re-
joice with them that rejoice; for this reason,'
that the unhappy itand more in need -of
our fellow-feeling and afliftance than the
prosperous. Still however it was requisite,
that in each individual the quantity of self-
love should remain in a large proportion,
on account of its importance to the prefer-
vation of his life and well-being. But as the
quantity requisite for this purpose is apt both
to ingrofs his attention, and to carry him
into criminal excesses, the perfection of his
nature is measured by the due counterpoise
of those social principles which, tempering
the force of the selfish affeftion, render
man equally useful to himself, and to those
with whom he is joined in society. Hence
the use and the value of that sensibility of
which we now treat.

THAT it constitutes an eflential part of a

religious

SERM. religious charaóler, there can be no doubt.

I, Not only are the words of the text express

to this purpose, but the whole New Testa-
mnent-abounds.with pafrages which -enjoin
the cultivation of this disposition. Being
all one body, and members one of another, we
'are commanded to love our neighbour as our-
self; to look every man not on -his own things
pnly, -but on those of others alo; to be pitiful,
to be courteous,-to be tender-hearted; to bear
*one another's burdens, and Jo to fusil the law
of Chri *. The dispositions opposite to
e'nfibility are, cruelty, hardness of heart,
contrated attachment to worldly interests;
which.every one will admit to be directly
opposite to the Christian character. Accor-
ding to the different degrees of conftitutio-
nal warmth in 'men's affections, sensibility
may, even among the virtuous, prevail in
different proportions. For all 'derive not
from nature the fame happy delicacy, and
tenderness of feeling. With some, the heart

* Luke, x. 27.; Philip. ii. 4.; 1 Peter, iii. 8.; Ephef.
.iY. 23.; Galat. vi. z.

melts,

melts, and relents, in kind emotions, much SER k
more easily than with others. But with I,
every one who aspires to the character of a
good man, it is necessary that the humane
and compassionate dispositions ihould be
found. There mufft be that within him
which ihall form him to feel in some degree
with the heart of a brother; and when he
beholds others enjoying happiness, or fees
them funk in sorrow, shall bring his as-
fecions to accord, and, if we-may speak
so, to found a note unison to theirs. This
is to rejoice with them that rejoice, and
to weep with them that weep. How much
this temper belongs to the perfection of
our nature, we learn from one who exhi-
bited that perfection in its highest degree.
When our Lord Jesus, on a certain occa-
sion, came to the grave of a beloved friend,
and saw his relations mournirig around it,
he presently caught the impreflion of their
sorrow; he groaned in spirit, and was trou-
bled. He knew that he was about to re-
move the cause of their distress, by re-
calling Lazarus to life: Yet, in the mo-

ment

SE RM. ment. of grief, his heart sympathised with

IL

theirs; and, together with the weeping
friends,. Jefits wept *.

LET us next proceed to confider the es-

fee of this virtuous sensibility on our cha-
raacer, and our state. -I ihall confider it in
two views; its influence on our moral con-
du9t, .and its influence on our happiness.

F IRST, it powerfully influences the proper

discharge of all the relative and social du-
ties of life. Without some discharge of
those duties there could be no comfort or
security in human society. Men would
become hordes of savages, perpetually ha-
rafiing one another.. In one way or other,
therefore, the great duties of social life must
he performed. There must be among man-
kind some reciprocal co-operation and aid.
In this, all consent. But let us observe,
that these duties may be performed from
different principles, and in different ways.
Sometimes they are performed merely from

John, ii, 35.
:.S ~ . - decency

decency and regard to character; £ome- SE R M.
times from fear, and even fron felfifhnefs, _
which obliges men to show kindeefs, in ol-
der that they may receive returns of it. In
such cafes, the exterior of fair behaviour
may be preserved. But all will admit, that
when from conflraint only, the offices of
seeming kindness are performed, little de-
pendance can be placed on them, and little
value allowed to them.

By others, these offices are discharged

solely from a principle of duty. They are
men of cold affections, and perhaps of ail
interested characer. But, overawed by a
fenfi of religion, and convinced that they
are bound to be beneficent, they fulfil the
course of relative duties with regular tenor.
Such men ad from conscience and prin-
ciple. So far they do well, and are woi-
thy of praise. They assist their friends;
they give to the poor; they do justice to
all. But what a different complexion is
given to the fame actions, how much high-
er flavour do they acquire, when they flow
from the sensibility of a feeling heart ? If

one

5,ERM. one be not moved by affecdion, even sup-
_>^ p posing him influenced by principle, he

will go no farther than ftri& principle
appears to require. He will advance flow-
ly, and relucantly. As it is justice, not
generosity, which impells him, he will of-
ten feel as a task what he is required by
conscience to perform. Whereas, to him
who is prompted by virtuous sensibility,
every office of beneficence and humanity
is a pleasure. He gives, assists, and relieves,
not merely because he is bound to do so,
but because it would be painful for him
to refrain. Hence, the smallest benefit he
confers rifes in its value, on account of its
carrying the afferion of the giver impress-
ed upon the gift. It speaks his heart; and
the discovery of the heart is very frequent-
ly of greater consequence than all that li-
berality can bestow. How often will the
affecionate smile of approbation gladden
the humble, and raise the dejeced? How
often will the look of tender sympathy, or
the tear that involuntarily falls, impart con-
folaton to the unhappy ? By means of this

correspondence

torrefpondence of hearts, all the great du- SERM.
ties which we owe to one another are both
performed to more advantage, and endear-
ed in the performance. From true fenfibi-
lity flow a thousand good offices, apparent-
ly small in themselves, but of high impor-
tance to the felicity of others; offices which
altogether escape the observation of the cold
and unfeeling, who, by the hardness of
their manner, render themselves unamiable,
even when they mean to do good.-How
happy then would it be for mankind, if this
affetionate disposition prevailed more ge-
nerally in the world ! How much would
the fum of public virtue and public felicity
be increased, if men were always inclined
to rejoice with them that rejoice, and to weep
with them that weep !

BUT, besides the effec of such a temper

on general virtue and happiness, let us con-
fider its effet on the happiness of him who
possesses it, and the various pleasures to
which it gives him access. If he be ma-
fter of riches or influence, it affords him

the

SERM. the means of increasing his own enjoy-
,_,. ment, by relieving the wants, or increa-

sing the comforts of others. If he com-
mand not these advantages, yet all the
comforts which he fees in the possession of
the deserving become in some fort his, by
his rejoicing in the good which they enjoy.
Even the face of nature yields a fatisfac-
tion to him which the insensible can never
know. The profusion of goodness which
he beholds poured forth on the universe,
dilates his heart with the thought that in-
numerable multitudes around him are blest
and happy. When he fees the labours of
men appearing to prosper, and views a
country flourishing in wealth and indus-
try; when he beholds the spring coming
forth in its beauty, and reviving the de-
cayed face of nature; or in autumn be-
holds the fields loaded with plenty, and
the year crowned with all its fruits; he lifts
his affections with gratitude to the great
Father of all, and rejoices in the general
felicity and joy.

It may indeed be objeced, that the fame

sensibility

sensibility lays open the heart to be pier- SE RM.
! ced with many wounds from the difireffes I
| which abound in the world; exposes us to
frequent suffering from the participation
which it communicates of the sorrows, as
well as of the joys of friendship. But let
it be confidered, that the tender melancho-
lyy of sympathy is accompanied with a fen-
s fation, which they who feel it would not
I exchange for the gratifications of the fel-

fiih. When the heart is strongly moved
; by any of the kind affections, even when
| it pours itself forth in virtuous sorrow, a
i secret attractive charm mingles with the
painful emotion; there is a joy in the
midst of grief. Let it be farther confider-
ed, that the griefs which sensibility intro-
duces are counterbalanced by pleasures
which flow from the fame source. Senfibi-
lity heightens in general the human pow-
ers, and is connected with acuteness in all
our feelings. If it make us more alive to
f some painful sensations, in return, it ren-
i ders the pleasing ones more vivid and a-
nimated. The selfish man languishes in

VOL. III. D his

SERM. his narrow circle of pleasures. They are

IL
i,_I\ confined to what affecs his own interest.

He is obliged to repeat the fame gratifica-
tions, till they become insipid. But the
man of virtuous sensibility moves in a wi-
der sphere of felicity. His powers are much
more frequently called forth into occupa-
tions of pleasing activity. Numberless oc-
cafions open to him of indulging his fa-
vourite taste, by conveying fatisfaftion to
others. Often it is in his power, in one way
or other, to sooth the affli&ed heart; to
carry some consolation into the house of
woe. In the scenes of ordinary life, in the
domestic and social intercourses of men,
the cordiality of his affections cheats and
gladdens him. Every appearance, every
description of innocent happiness, is enjoy-
ed by him. Every native expression of
kindness and affection among others is felt
by him, even though he be not the objec
of it. Among a circle of friends, enjoying
one another, he is as happy as the happiest.
In a word, he lives in a different fort of
world from what the selfish man inhabits.

He i

He possesses a new sense, which enables SERM;
him to behold objects which the felfifli
cannot fee. At the fame time, his enjoy-
ments are not of that kind which remain
merely on the fiu-face of the mind. They
penetrate the heart. They enlarge and e-

,; levate, they refine and ennoble it. To all

the pleasing emotions of affedtion, they add
the dignified consciousness of virtue.--
g Children of men ! Men formed by nature
to live and to feel as brethren ! How long
will ye continue to estrange yourselves from
one another by competitions and jealou-
lies, when in cordial union ye might be so
much more blest ? How long will ye seek
your happiness in selfish gratifications a-
lone, neglecting those purer and better
sources of joy, which flow from the assec-
tions and the heart?

HAVING now explained the nature, and

truhown the value and high advantages of
. true sensibility, I proceed to point out some

of the mistaken forms, and abuses of this
virtue.-- In modern times, the chief im-

D 2 provement

SE RLM. provenment of which we have to boafR, is a
ok,, sense of humanity. This, notwithstanding

the felfifhnefs that still prevails, is the fa-
vourite and distinguishing virtue of the age.
On general manners, and on several depart-
ments of society, it has had considerable
influence. It has abated the spirit of per-
fecution: It has even tempered the horrors
of war; and man is now more ahfamed than
he was in Some former ages, of acting as a
savage to man. Hence, sensibility is be-
come To reputable a quality, that the ap-
pearance of it is frequently affuned when
the reality is wanting. Softness of man-
ners must not be mistaken for true fenfi-
bility. Senribility indeed tends to produce
gentleness in behaviour; and when such
behaviour flows from native affection, it is
valuable and amiable. Butcthe exterior
manner alone may be learned in the school
of the-world; and often, too often, is found
to cover much unfeeling hardness of heart.
Professions of sensibility on every trifling
occasion, joined with the appearance of ex-
ceflive softness, and a profusion of senti-

mental

mental language, afford always much SERM.
ground for distrust. They create the sus- .
picion of a studied characer. Frequently,
under a negligent and seemingly rough
manner, there lies a tender and feeling
heart. Manliness and sensibility are so far
from being incompatible, that the truly
brave are, for the most part, generous and
humane; while the soft and effeminate are
hardly capable of any vigorous exertion of
affection.

As sensibility supposes delicacy of feel-

ing with refpec to others, they who as-
sec the highest sensibility are apt to carry
this delicacy to excess. They are, perhaps,
not incapable of the warmth of disinterest-
ed friendihip; but they are become so re-
fined in all, their sensations; they enter-
tain such high notions of what ought to
correspond in the feelings of others to their
own; they are so mightily hurt by every
thing which comes not up to their ideal
standard of reciprocal affection, as to pro-
duce disquiet and uneafnefs to all with

D whom

SERM. whom they are connected. Hence, unjust

suspicions of their friends; hence, ground-
less upbraidings, and complaints of un-
kindness; hence, a proneness to take vio-
lent offence at trifles. In consequence of
'examining their friends with a microfco-
pic eye, what to an ordinary observer
would not be unpleafing, to them is gra-
ting and disgusting. At the bottom of the
character of such persons there always lie
much pride, and attention to themselves.
This is indeed a false species of sensibility.
It is the fubftituton of a capricious and
irritable delicacy, in' the room of that plain
and native tenderness of heart, which
prompts men to view others with indul-
gent eye, and to make great allowances for
the imperfections which are sometimes ad-
· herent to the most amiable qualities.

THERE are others who assec not fenfi-

bility to this extreme, but who found
high claims to themselves upon the degree
* of interest which they take in the concerns
of others. Although their sensibility can

produce

produce no benefit to the person who is SERIM.
its objec, they always conceive that it in- I,
titles themselves to some profitable returns.
These, often, are persons of refined and art-
ful character; who partly deceive them-
selves, and partly employ their sensibility
as a cover to interest. He who ads from
genuine affetion, when he is feeling along
with others in their joys or sorrows, thinks
not of any recompence to which this gives
him a title. He follows the impulse of his
heart. He obeys the dictate of his nature;
just as the vine by its nature produces
fruit, and the fountain pours forth its
fireams. Wherever views of interest, and
profpets of return, mingle with the feel-
ings of affection, sensibility afts an imper-
set part, and intitles us to small fliare of
praise.

BUT supposing it to be both complete

and pure, I must caution you against reft-
ing the whole merit of your character on
sensibility alone. It is indeed a happy con-
ltitution of mind. It fits men for the pro-

D4 per

SERM. per discharge of many duties, and gives

them access to many virtuous pleasures.
It is requisite for our acceptance either
with God or man. At the fame time, if
it remain an instinctive feeling alone, it
will form no more than an imperfec cha-
ra6cer. Complete virtue is of a more ex-
alted and dignified nature. It supposes
sensibility, good temper, and benevolent
affe&ions; it includes them as essential
parts; but it reaches farther: It supposes
them to be strengthened and confirmed by
principle; it requires them to be support-
ed by justice, temperance, fortitude, and
all those other virtues which enable us to
a& with propriety, in the trying situations
of life.

It is very possible for a man to possess

the kind affecions in a high degree, while,
at the fame time, he is carried away by
passion and pleasure into many criminal
deeds. Almost every man values himself
on possessing virtue in one or other of its
forms. He wilhes to lay claim to some
quality which will render him estimable

in

in his own eye, as well as in that of the SERM'
public. Hence, it is common for many, ,
especially for those in the higher classes of
life, to take much praise to themselves on
account of their sensibility, though it be, in
truth, a sensibility of very defeCtive kind.
They relent at the view of misery when it is
firongly set before them. Often too, affected
chiefly by the powers of description, it is at
feigned and pictured difireis, more than at
real misery, that they relent. The tears which
they shed upon these occasions they confider
as undoubted proofs of virtue. They applaud
themselves for the goodness of their hearts;
and conclude, that with such feelings they
cannot fail to be agreeable to Heaven. At
the fame time, these transient relentings
make flight impreflion on conduct. They
give rife to few, if any, good deeds; and
oion after such persons have wept at tome
tragical tale, they are ready to stretch forth
the hand of oppression, to grasp at the gain
of injustice, or to plunge into the torrent
of criminal pleasures. This fort of fenfi-
bility affords no more than a fallacious

claim

fiERM. claim to virtue, and gives men no ground
._c_ to think highly of themselves. We must

inquire not merely how they feel, but how
their feelings prompt them to ac, in order
to ascertain their real character.

I SHALL conclude with observing, that

sensibility, when genuine and pure, has a
firong connection with piety. That warmth
of affection, and tenderness of heart, which
lead men to feel for their brethren, and to
enter into their joys and sorrows, should
naturally dispose them to melt at the re-
membrance of the divine goodness; to
glow with admiration of the divine ma-
jefly; to fend up the voice of praise and
adoration to that Supreme Being who
makes his creatures happy. He who pre-
tends to great sensibility towards men, and
yet has no feeling for the high objects of
religion, no heart to admire and adore the
great Father of the universe, has reason to
distrust the truth and delicacy of his fenfi-
bility. He has reason to fufpecl, that in
some corner of his heart there lodges a fe-

cret

cret depravity, an unnatural hardness and SE RM.
callousness, which vitiates his character. _
- Let us study to join all the parts of
virtue in proper union; to be confitently
and uniformly good; just and upright, as
well as pitiful and courteous; pious, as
well as sympathising. Let us pray to him
who made the heart, that he would fill it
with all proper dispositions; rectify all its
errors; and render it the happy abode of
personal integrity and social tenderness, of
purity, benevolence, and devotion.

S E R-

# SERMON III. On the IMPROVEMENT of TIME. GENESIS, xlvii. 8. And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old art thou?

[ 44

SER M N III.
On the IMPROVEMENT of TIME.

GENESIS, xlvii. 8.
'nd Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old art

thou P

SERM/gT. IME is of so great importance to man-
I;IL. L kind, that it cannot too often employ

religious meditation. There is nothing in
the management of which wisdom is more
requisite, or where mankind display their
inconfifency more. In its particular par-
cels, they appear entirely careless of it; and
throw it away with thoughtless profusion.
But, when collected into some of its great
portions, and viewed as the measure of
their continuance in life, they become fen-

fible

fible'of its value, and' begin to regard it SERM.
with a serious eye. While day after day is
wafted in a course of idleness or vicious
pleasures, if some incident shall occur
which leads the moit inconsiderate man to
think of his age, or time of life; how
much of it is gone; at what period of it he
is now arrived; and to what proportion of'
it he can with any probability look for-
ward, as yet to come; he can hardly avoid
feeling some secret compunction, and re-
fleting seriously upon his state. Happy,
if that virtuous impression were not of mo-
mentary continuance, but retained its in-
fluence amidst the succeeding cares and
pleasures of the world ! To the good old
Patriarch mentioned in the text, we have
reason to believe that such imprefiions
were habitual. The question put to him
by the Egyptian monarch produced, in his
answer, such reflections as were naturally
suited to his time of life. ' And Jacob said
unto Pharaoh, the days of the years of my pil-
grimage are ann hundred and thirty years:
few and evil have the days of the years of my

Isft

SERM. lfe been, and have not attained unto the days
\-v-_ of the years of the life of my fathers, in the

days of their-pilgrimage. But the peculiar
circumfiances of the Patriarch, or the num-
ber of his years, are not to be the subjea
of our prefent.confideration. My purpose
is, to show how we should be affected in
every period of human life, by reflection
.upon our age, whether we be young, or
advanced in years; in order that the que-
ition, Haow old art thou ? may never be put
to any of us without some good effect.
There are three different portions of our
life which such a question naturally calls to
view; that part of it which is pa:s; that
which is now present; and that to which
we fondly look forward, as future. Let
us confider in what manner we ought to
be affected by attending to each of there.

I. LET us review that part of our time

which is past. According to the progress
which we have made in the journey of life,
the field which past years present to our re-
view will be more or less extensive. But

to

to every one they will be found to afford s E r. t.

Ill.

fffifcient matter of humiliation and regret. A
For where is the person, who having acted
for any time in the world, remembers not
many errors, and many follies, in his past
behaviour ? Who dares to fay, that he has
improved, as he might have done, the va-
rious advantages which were afforded him;
and that he recalls nothing for which he
has reason either to grieve, or to blfh ?
When we recolleQ the several stages of life
through which we have palsed; the fuccef-
live occupations in which we have been
engaged, the designs we have formed, and
the hopes and fears which alternately have
filled our breaff; how barren for most
part is the remembrance; and how few
traces of any thing valuable or important
remain ? Like charaCters drawn on the
sand, which the next wave washes totally
away, so one trivial succession of events has
effaced the memory of the preceding; and
though we have seemed all along to be bu-
fy, yet for much of what we have ated,
we are neither wiser nor better than if such

actions

SERM. actions had never been. Hence, let the re-
__L trofped of what is past produce, as its first

effect, humiliation in our own eyes, and
abatement before God. Much do human
pride and felf-complacency require some
correction; and that correction is never
more effedually adminiiftered, than by an
impartial and serious review of former life.

But though past time be gone, we are

not to confider it as irredeemably loft. To
a very profitable piupofe it may yet be ap-
plied, if we lay hold of it while it remains in
remembrance, and oblige it to contribute to
future improvement. If you have gained
nothing more by the years that are past,
you have at least gained experience; and
experience is the mother of wisdom. You
have seen the weak parts of your characer;
and may have discovered the chief sources of
your mifconduci. To these let your atten-
tion be directed; on these, let the proper
guards be set. If you have trifled long,
resolve to trifle no more. If'your passions
have often betrayed and degraded you,
study how they may be kept, in future,

under

under better discipline. Learn, at the fame s E RM.
time, never to trust prefiunptuoufly in your
own wisdom. Humbly apply to the Au-
thor of your being, and beseech his grace
to guide you safely through those slippery
and dangerous paths, in which experience
has shown that you are so ready to err, and
to fall.

In reviewing past life,-it cannot but oc-

cur, that many things now appear of in-
considerable importance, which once occu-
-pied and attached us; in the higheft'de-
gree. Where are those keen competitions,
those mortifying disappointments, thore
violent enmities, tliofe eager pursuits, which
we once thought were to last for ever, and
on which we confidered our whole happi-
ness or misery as fifpended? We look
back upon them now, as upon a dream
which has passed away. None of those
mighty consequences have followed which
we had predicted. The airy fabric has' va-
nifhed, andleft no trace behind it. We
finile at our former violence; and wonder
how such- things could have 'ever appeared

VOL. III. E so

SE R M. 'so significant and great. We may reft as.
IlL_ fured, that what hath been, shall again be.

When Time ihall once have laid his lenient
hand on the paflions and pursuits of the
present moment, they too ihall lose that i-
maginary value which heated fancy now
bestows upon them. Hence, let them al-
ready begin to subside to their proper level.
Let wisdom infuse a tincture of moderation
into the eagerness of contest, by anticipa-
ting that period of coolness, which the lapse
of time will, of itself, certainly bring.--
When we look back on years that are past,
how swiftly do they appear to have fleeted
away ? How insensibly has one period of
life. stolen upon us after another, like the
successive incidents in a tale that is told ?
Before we were aware, childhood had grown
up into youth; youth had passed into man-
hood; and manhood now, perhaps, begins
to assume the gray hair, and to decline in-
to old age. When we are carrying our
views forward, months and years to come
seem to stretch through a long and exten-
Iive space. But when the time shall arrive

of

of our looking back, they flall appear con- s E RM.
trated within narrow bounds. Time, when \
yet before us, seems to advance with flow
and tardy steps; no sooner is it past, than
we discern its wings.

It is a remarkable peculiarity in the re-

trofpec of former life, that it is commonly
attended with some measure of heaviness of
heart. Even to the most prosperous, the
memory of joys that are past is accompa-
nied with secret sorrow. In the days of
former years, many objets arise to view,
which make the most unthinking, grave;
and render the serious, fad. The pleafu-
rable scenes of youth, the objects on which
our affections had been early placed, the
companions and friends with whom we had
spent many happy days, even the places
and the occupations to which we had been
long accustomed, but to which we have
now bid farewell, can hardly ever be re-
called, without softening, nor sometimes,
without piercing, the heart. Such sensa-
tions, to which few, if any, of my hearers,
are wholly strangers, I now mention, as

E 2 affording

SERM. affording a strong proof of that vanity of

l the human fRate, which is so often repre-
sented in the sacred writings: And vain
indeed mist that state be, where ihades of
grief tinge the recollection of its brightest
scenes. But, at the fame time, though it
be very proper that such meditations should
sometimes enter the mind, yet on them I
advise not the gentle and tender heart to
dwell too long. They are apt to produce a
fruitless melancholy; to dejet, without
bringing much improvement; tb thicken
the gloom which already hangs over hu-
man life, without furnishing proportionable
assistance to virtue.

Let me advise you, rather to recall to view

such parts of former conduct if any such
there be, as afford in the remembrance a
rational satisfaction. And what parts of-
conduct are these ? Are they the pursuits
of sensual pleasure,. the riots of jollity, or
the displays of ihow and vanity? No.; I
appeal to your hearts, my friends, if what
you recollec with moft-pleafure be not the
innocent, the virtuous, the honourable parts

of

of your past life; when you were employ- E RM, .
ed in cultivating your minds, and impro- i
ving them with useful knowledge; when,
by regular application and persevering la-
bour, you were laying the foundation of
future reputation and advancement; when
you were occupied in discharging with si-
delity the duties of your station, and ac-
quiring the esteem of the worthy and the
good; when in some trying situation you
were enabled to at your part with firm-
ness and honour; or had seized the happy
opportunity of aflifting the deserving, of
relieving the distressed, and bringing down
upon your heads the bleflngs of those that
were ready to peri/J.-Thefe, these are the
parts of former life which are recalled with
most fatisfadion! On them alone, no heavi-
ness of heart attends. You enjoy them as a
treasure which is now stored up, and put
beyond all danger of being loft. These
chear the hours of sadness, lighten the bur-
den of old age, and, through the mortify-
ing remembrance of much of the past, dart
a ray of light and joy.-From the review

E 3 of

SE RM. of these, and the comparison of them with
·-j I.the deceitful pleasures of fin, let us learn

how to form our estimate of happiness. Let
us learn what is true, what is false, in hu-
man pleasures; and from experience of the
pafl, judge of the quarter to which we
must in future turn, if we would lay a
foundation for permanent fatisfadtion. As-
ter having thus reviewed the former years
of our life, let us confider,

II. WHAT attention is due to that period

of age in which we are at present placed.
Here lies the immediate and principal ob-
ject of our concern. For the recollection
of the pafl is only as far of moment, as it
acts upon the present. The past, to us
now, is little; the future, as yet, is no-
thing. Between these two great gulphs of
time subsists the present, as an isthmus or
bridge, along which we are all palling.
With hasty and inconsiderate steps let us
not pass along it; but remember well, how
much depends upon our holding a fleady,
and properly conduced course. Whatfo-

ever

ever thine hand fndeth to do, do it zow with SERM.
all thy might; for now is the accepted time; -I
now is the day of salvation. Many direc-
tions might be given for the wife and reli-
gious improvement of the present; a few
of which only I shall hint.

Let us begin with excluding those super-

fluous avocations which unprofitably con-
fume it. Life is liort; much that is of
real importance remains to be done. If we
fuifer the present time to be wafted either
in absolute idleness, or in frivolous em-
ployments, it will hereafter call for venu
geance against us. Removing therefore
what is merely superfluous, let us bethink
ourselves of what is most material to be at-
tended to at present: As, first and chief,
the great work of our salvation; the dif-
charge of the religious duties which we
owe to God our Creator, and to Christ our
Redeemer. God waiteth as yet to be gra-
cious; whether he will wait longer, none of
us can tell. Now, therefore, seek the Lord
while he may be found, call upon him while
be is near. Our spiritual interests will be

E 4 bell

SERM. best promoted by regular performance of
,_L _all the duties of ordinary life. Let these,

therefore, occupy a great share of the pre-
sent hour. Whatever our age, our charac-
ter, our profefion, or tfation in the world,
requires us to do, in that let each revolving
day find us busy. Never delay till to-mor-
row what reason and conscience tell you
ought to be performed to-day. To.mor-
row is not yours; and though you should
live to enjoy it, you mufft not overload it
with a burden not its own. Sfficient for
the day will prove the duty thereof

The observance of order and method, is

of high consequence for the improvement
of present time. He who performs every
employment in its due place and season,
suffers no part of time to escape without
profit. He multiplies his days; for he
lives much in little space. Whereas he who
neglecs order in the arrangement of his
occupations, is always losing the present in
returning upon the past, and trying, in
vain, to recover it when gone.-Let me
4dvife you frequently to make the present

employment

employment of time an objec of thought. SERM.

III.

Ask yourselves, about what are you now
busied? What is the ultimate scope of
your present pursuits and cares ?- Can you
jultify them to yourselves ? Are they like-
ly to produce any thing that will survive
the moment, and bring forth some fruit
for futurity? He who can give no satis-
facory answer to such queffions as these,
has reason to suspect that his employment
of the present is not tending either to his
advantage, or his honour.- Finally let
me admonifl you, that while you study to
improve, you thould endeavour also to en-
joy, the present hour. Let it not be dif-
turbed with groundless discontents, or poi-
soned with foolifli anxieties about what is
to come: But look up to Heaven, and ac-
knowledge, with a grateful heart, the actual
bleflings you enjoy. If you must admit,
that 'you are now in health, peace, and
safety; without any particular or uncom-
mon evils to afflic your condition; what
more can you reasonably look for in this
vain and uncertain world? How little can

the

ER I. the greatest prosperity add to such a fate ?

Will any future situation ever make you
happy, if now, with so few causes of grief,
you imagine yourselves miserable? The
evil lies in the slate of your mind, not in
your condition of fortune; and by no al-
teration of circumstances is likely to be re-
medied. Let us now,

III. CONSIDER with what dispositions

we ought to look forward to those years of
our life that may yet be to come. Merely
to look forward to them, is what requires
no admonition. Futurity is the great ob-
jec on which the imaginations of men are
employed; for the fake of which the past
is forgotten, and the present too often ne-
glefed. All time is in a manner swallow-
ed up by it. On futurity, men build their
designs; on futurity, they reft their hopes;
and though not happy at the present, they
always reckon on becoming so, at some
subsequent period of their lives. This pro-
penfity to look forward, was for wife pur-
poses implanted in the human breast. It

serves

serves to give proper occupation to the aCtive E RM.
powers of the mind, and to quicken all its ,_I.
exertions. But it is too often immoderate-
ly indulged, and grossly abused. The cu-
riofity which sometimes prompts persons to
inquire, by unlawful methods, into what
is to come, is equally foolish and sinful.
Let us restrain all desire of penetrating far-
ther than is allowed us, into that dark and
unknown region. Futurity belongs to God:
and happy for us is that mysterious veil
with which h\s wisdom has covered it.
Were it in our power to lift up the veil,
and to behold what it conceals, many and
many a thorn we would plant in our
breasts. The proper and rational conduc
of men with regard to futurity, is regulated
by two coniiderations: First, that much
of what it contains, must remain to us
absolutely unknown; next, that there are
also some events in it which may be cer-
tainly known and foreseen.

First, much of futurity is, and must be,
entirely unknown to us. When we fpecu-

late

SERM. late about the continuance of our life, and

the events which are to fill it, we behold a
river which is always flowing; but which
soon escapes out of our fight, and is cover-
ed with mists and darkness. Some of its
windings we may endeavour to trace; but
it is only far a very short way that we are
able to pursue them. In endless conjec-
tures we quickly find ourselves bewil-
dered; and, often, the next event that
happens baffles all the reasonings we had
formed concerning the succession of events.
The consequence which follows from this
is, that all the anxiety about futurity,
which passes the bounds of reasonable pre-
caution, is unprofitable and vain. Certain
measures are indeed necessary to be taken
for our safety. We are not to ruih for-
ward inconsiderate and headlong. We muff
make, as far as we are able, provision for
future welfare; and guard against dangers
which apparently threaten. But having
done this, we must flop; and leave the reft
to Him who difpofeth of futurity at his
will. He who itteth in the heavens laughs

at

at the wisdom and the plans of.worldly SERM.
men. . Wherefore, boat not thyfef of to-mor- vi
row; for thou knowel not what a day may
bring forth. For the fame reason, despair
not of to-morrow; for it may bring forth
good as well as evil. Vex not yourselves
with imaginary fears. The impending
black cloud, to which you look up with
so much dread, may pass by harmless; or
though it should discharge the florm, yet,
before it breaks, you may be lodged in
that lowly mansion which no storms ever
touch.

In the next place, there are in futurity

some events which may be certainly fore-
seen by us, through all its darkness. First,
it may be confidently prediced, that no
Situation into which it will bring us, fliall
ever answer fully to our hopes, or confer
perfect happiness. This is as certain as if
xwe already saw it, that life; in its future
periods, will continue to be what it has
heretofore been.; that it will be a mixed
and varied state; a checquered scene of
pleasures and pains, of fugitive joys and

transient

SERM. transient griefs, succeeding in a round to

one another. Whether we look forward
to the years-of youth, or to those of man-
hood and advanced life, it is all the fame.
The world will be to us, what it has been
to generations past. Set out, therefore, on
what remains of your journey under this
persuasion. According to this measure,
estimate your future pleasures; and calcu-
late your future gains. Carry always along
with you a modest and a temperate mind.
Let not your expedations from the years
that are to come rife too high; and your
disappointments will be fewer, and more
easily supported.

Farther; this may be reckoned upon as

certain, that in every future situation of life,
a good conscience, a well ordered mind, and
a humble trust in the favour of Heaven,
will prove the essential ingredients of your
happiness. In refleting upon the past,
you have found this to hold. Assure your-
selves that in future, the cafe will be the
fame. The principal correcAives of human
vanity and distress, must be fought for in

religion

religion and virtue. Entering on paths SERM.
which to you are new and unknown, place _
yourselves under the conduct of a divine
guide. Follow the great Shepherd of Jrael,
who, amidit the turmoil of this world,
leads his flock into green pa/ures, and by the
jill owaters. As you advance in life, study
to improve both in good principles, and
in good pradice. You will be enabled to
look to futurity without fear, if, whatever
it brings, it shall find you regularly em-
ployed in doing jiitly, loving mercy, and
walking humbly with the Lord your God.

Lastly, Whatever other things may be

dubious in futurity, two great events are
undoubtedly certain, death and judgement.
These, we all know, are to terminate the
whole course of time; and we know them
to be not only certain, but to be approach-
ing nearer to us, in consequence of every
day that passes over our heads. To these,
therefore, let us look foward, not with the
dread of children, but with that manly fe-
rioufnefs which belongs to men and Chri-
ftians. Let us not avert our view from

them;

SERM. them, as if we could place them at some
_,_. greater distance by excluding them from

oiu thoughts. This indeed is the refuge of
too many; but it is the refuge of fools,
E;.ho -aggravate thereby the terrors they
must encounter. For he that cometh, Jhall
come, and will not tarry. To his coming, let
us look with a steady eye; and as life ad-
vances through its progressive stages, pre-
pare for its close, and for appearing before
him who made us.

THus I have endeavoured to point out

the reflections proper to, be made, when the
question is put to any of us, How old art
thou? I have hown with what eye we liould
review the past years of our life; in what
light we ihould confider the present; and
with what dispositions look forward to the
future : In order that such a queftion-may
always leave some serious impreflion behind
it; and may dispose .usfo to number the years
of our life, that we may apply or hearts unto
wVfdoint.

SE R-

# SERMON IV. On the DUTIES belonging to MIDD… AGE. 1 CORINTHIANS, xiii. 11. — When I became a man, I put away childish things.

[ 65 ]

SERMON IV.
On the DUTIES belonging to MIDD-

AGE.

I CORINTHIANS, Xiii. 11.
- When I became a ntan, Iput away child-

f/h things.
7 0 every thing, fays the wife man, there sERAM.

is a season; and a time to every purpose

tnder heaven *. As there are duties which
belong to particular lituations of fortune,
so there are duties also which result from
particular periods of human life. In every
period of it, indeed, that comprehensive
rule takes place, Fear God, and keep his comn

. Eccles. iii. r.
VOL. III. F mandments;

SE RAM. maidments; for this is the whole duty of man%

>L,_ Piety to God, and charity to men, are in-

cumbent upon persons of every age, as
soon as they can think and ac. Yet these
virtues, in different stages of life, assume
different forms; and when they appear in
that form which is moss suited to our age,
they appear with peculiar gracefulness;
they give propriety to conduct, and add
dignity to character. In former difcourles
I have treated of the- virtues which adorn
youth, and of the duties which specially
belong to old age t. The circle of those
duties which refpet middle age is indeed
much larger. As that is the busy period
in the life of man, it includes in effect the
whole compass of religion, and therefore
cannot have its peculiar character so de-
finitely marked and ascertained. At the
fame time, during those years wherein one
is sensible that he has advanced beyond
the confines of youth, but has not yet pass-
.ed into the region of old age, there are fe-
* Eccles. xii. . f See vol. I. Sermons il. and 12.

veral

veral things which reflection on that por- s ER M.
tion of human life suggests, or at least _
ought to suggest, to the mind. Inconfi-
derate must he. be, who, in his gradual
progress throughout middle age, pauses not,
at times, to think; how far he is now re-
ceding from youth; how near he draws to
the borders of declining age; what part it
is now incumbent on him to at; what
duties both God and the world have a title
to expec from him. To these, I am at
present to call your attention; as what
materially concern the greatest part of those
who are now my hearers.

I. I BEGIN with observing, that the first

duty of those who are become men is, as
the text expresses it, to put away childih
things. The season of youthful levities,
follies, and passions, is now over. These
have had their reign; a reign perhaps too
long; and to which a termination is cer-
tainly proper at last. Much indulgence is
due to youth. Many things admit of ex-
cufe then, which afterwards become un-

F 2 pardonable.

SERM. pardonable, Some things may even be

I.~., graceful in youth, which, if not criminal,

are at least ridiculous, in persons of matu-
rer years. It is a great trial of wisdom, to
make our retreat from youth with pro-
priety; to assume the character of man-
hood, without expofmg ourselves to re-
proach, by an unseasonable remainder of
juvenility, on the one hand, or by precise
and disgusting formality, - on the other
Nature has placed certain boundaries, by
which she discriminates the pleasures, ac-
tions, and employments, that are suited to
the different stages of human life. It be-
comes us, neither to overleap those boun-
daries by a transition too hafsy and vio-
lent; nor to hover too long on one fide of
the limit, when nature calls us to pass o-
ver to the other.

There are particularly two things in

which middle age flould preserve its dif-
tinction and reparation from youth; these
are, levities of behaviour, and intemperate
indulgence of pleasure. The gay spirits of
the young often prompt an inconsiderate

degree

degree of levity, Sometimes amusing, some- SE RM.

Iv.

times offensive; but for which, though be- ,_
traying them occasionally into serious dan-
gers, their want of experience may plead
excuse. A more composed, and manly be-
haviour is expected in riper years. The
affecation of youthful vanities, degrades
the dignity of manhood; even renders its
manners less agreeable; and by aukward
attempts to please, produces contempt.
Chearfulnefs is becoming in every age.
But the proper chearfulnefs of a man is as
different from the levity of the boy, as the
flight of the eagle is from the fluttering of
a sparrow in the air.

As all unseasonable returns to the levity

of youth ought to be laid afide,-an admo-
nition whith equally belongs to both the
fexes,-ffill more are we to guard against
those intemperate indulgences of pleasure,
to which the young are unhappily prone.
From these we cannot too soon retreat.
They open the path to ruin, in every pe-
riod of our days. As long, however, as
these excesses are confined to the first stage

F 3 of

SER M. of life, hope is left, that when this fever of

the spirits shall abate, sobriety may gain the
ascendant, and wiser counsels have power
to influence condut. But after the sea-
son of youth is pall, if its intemperate fpi-
rit remain; if, inflead of listening to the
calls of honour, and bending attention to
the cares, and the business of men, the
fame course of idleness and sensuality con-
tinue to be pursued, the cafe becomes
more desperate. A fad presumption a-
rifes, that long immaturity is to prevail;
and that the pleasures and passions of the
youth are to fink and overwhelm the man.
Difficult, I confess, it may prove to over-
come the attachments which youthful habits
had for a long while been forming. Hard,
at the beginning, is the talk, to impose on
our conduct restraints which are altogether.
unaccustomed and neiy. But this is a trial
which every one must undergo, in enter-
ing on new scenes of action, and new pe-
riods of life. Let those who are in this
situation bethink themselves, that all is now
at flake. Their charater and honour, their

future

future fortune and success in the world, SERM.
depend in a great measure on the steps they 1V
take, when first they appear on the ltagc
of aftive life. The world then looks to
them with observing eye. It itudies their
behaviour; and interprets all their motions,
as presages of the line of future conduct
which they mean to hold. Now, there-
fore, pit away childi/h things; dismiss your
former trifling amusements, and youthful
pleasures; blast not the hopes which your
friends are willing to conceive of you.
Higher occupations, more serious cares, a-
wait you. Turn your mind to the fleady
and vigorous discharge of the part you are
called to aft. This leads me,

II. To point out the particular duties

which open on those who are in the middle
period of life. They are now come for-
ward to that field of acion where they are
to mix in all the stir and bustle of the
world; where all the human powers are
brought forth into fill exercise; where all
sll that is conceived to be important in hu-

F 4 mal

SERM. man affairs is incessantly going on around
I1. them. The time of youth was the prepa-

tion for future action. In old age our ac-
tive part is filppofed to be finished, and reft
is permitted. Middle age is the season when
we are expected to display the fruits which
education had prepared and ripened. In
this world, all of us were formed to be as-
fiftants to one another. The wants of so-
ciety call for every man's labour, and re-
quire various departments to be filled up.
They require that some be appointed to
rule, and others to obey; some, to defend
the society from danger, others to main-
tain its internal order and peace; some, to
provide the conveniencies of life, others to
promote the improvement of the mind;
niany, to work; others to contrive and di-
re&. In thort, within the sphere of society
there is employment for every one; and in
the course of these employments, many a
moral duty is to be performed; many a
religious grace to be exercised. No one is
permitted to be a mere blank in the world.
No rank, nor fation, no dignity of birth,

nor

nor extent of possessions, exempt any man SERM.
from contributing his fliarc to public uti-
lity and good. This is the precept of God.
This is the voice of nature. This is the
just demand of the human race upon one
another.

One of the first queftidns, therefore,

which every man who is in the vigour of
his age Should put to himself is, " What
" am I doing in this world ? What have
" I yet done, whereby I may glorify God,
" and be useful to my fellows ? Do I pro-
" perly fill up the place which belongs to
"my rank and ifation ? Will any memo-
" rial remain of my having existed on the
" earth ? or are my days passing fruitless
"away, now when I might be of some im-
" portance in the system of human affairs ?"
- Let not any man imagine that he is of
no importance, and has, upon that ac-
count, a privilege to trifle with his days
at pleasure. Talents have been give to all;
to some, ten; to others, five; to others,
two. Occupy weith these till I come, is the

* Luke, xix. 13.

command

SE R M. command of the great Master to all. Where

vL superior abilities are pofeffed, or diftin-

guified advantages of fortune are enjoyed,
a wider range is afforded for useful exer-
tion, and the world is intitled to expect it.
But among those who fill up the inferior
departments of society, though the sphere
of usefulness be more contracted, no one is
left entirely insignificant. Let us remem-
ber, that in all stations and conditions, the
important relations take place, of matiers
or servants, husbands and wives, parents
and children, brothers and friends, citizens
and fubjeas. The discharge of ,the duties
arising from those various relations, forms
a great portion of the work assigned to
the middle age of man. Though the part
we have to aft may be confined within a
humble line, yet if it be honourably act-
ed, it will be always found to carry its
own reward.

In fine, induflry, in all its virtuous

forms, ought to inspirit and invigorate
manhood. This will add to it both satis-

faRion

faction and dignity; will make the current SERM.
of our years, as they roll, flow along in a
clear and equable stream, without the pu-
trid stagnation of sloth and idleness. Idle-
ness is the great corrupter of youth; and
the bane and dishonour of middle age. He
who, in the prime of life, finds time to
hang heavy on his hands, may with much
reason fufped, that he has not consulted
the duties which the consideration of his
age imposed upon him; assuredly he has
not confilted his own happiness.: But a-
midst all the bustle of the world, let us not
forget,

III. To guard with vigilance againIf the

peculiar dangers which attend the period of
middle life. It is much to be regretted,
that in the present itate of things there is
no period of man's age in which his virtue
is not exposed to perils. Pleasure lays its
snares for youth: and after the season of
youthful follies is past, other temptations,
no less formidable to virtue, presently arise.

The

SERM. The love of pleasure is succeeded by the
,__ paflion for interest. In this paflion the

whole mind is too often absorbed; and the
chairge thereby induced on the characer is
of no amiable kind. Amidst the excesses
of youth, virtuous affections often remain.
The attachments of friendship, the love of
honour, and the warmth of sensibility, give
a degree of lustre to the character, and co-
ver many a failing. But interest, when it is
become the ruling principle, both debases
the mind, and hardens the heart. It dead-
ens the feeling of every thing that is sub-
lime or refined. It contracts the affections
within a narrow circle; and extinguishes
all tiote sparks of generosity and tender-
ness which once glowed in the breast.

In proportion as worldly pursuits multi-

ply, and competitions rife, ambition, jealou-
fy, and envy, combine with interest to ex-
cite bad passions, and to increase the corrup-
tion of the heart. At first, perhaps, it was
a man's intention to advance himself in the
world by none but fair and laudable me-

thods.

thods. He retained for some time an aver- s E R M.
sion to whatever appeared dishonourable. IV,
But here, he is encountered by the violence
of an enemy. There, he is Supplanted by
the address of a rival. The pride of a fu-
perior insults him. The ingratitude of a
friend provokes him. Animofities ruffle
his temper. Suspicions poison his mind.
He finds, or imagines that he finds, the
artful and designing surrounding him on
every hand. He views corruption and
iniquity prevailing; the modest neglected;
the forward and the crafty rising to diftinc-
tion. Too easily, from the example of
others, he learns that mystery of vice, call-
ed the way of the world. What he has
learned he fancies necessary to pradife for
his own defence; and of course afiumes
that fipple and versatile characer, which
he observes to be frequent, and which of-
ten has appeared to him successful.

To'thefe, and many more dangers of the

fame kind, is the man exposed who is deep-
ly engaged in active life. No small degree

of

SERM. of firmness in religious principle, and of
1_V constancy in virtue, is requisite, in order to

prevent his being assimilated to the spirit of
the world, and carried away by the multi.
tude of evil doers. Let him therefore call
to mind those principles which ought to
fortify him against such temptations to vice.
Let him often recollect that, whatever his
flation in life may be, he is a man; he is
a Chrifilan. These are the chief characters
which he has to support; characers fupe-
rior far, if they be supported with dignity,
to any of the titles with which courts can
decorate him; superior to all that can be
acquired in the strife of a busy world. Let
him think, that though it may be desire-
able to increase his opulence, or to advance
his rank, yet what he ought to hold much
more sacred is, to maintain his integrity and
honour. If these be forfeited, wealth or
station will have few charms left. They
will not be able to protect him long from
finking into contempt in the eye of an ob-
serving world. Even to his own eye he

wiu

will at last appear base and wretched.-- SER M.
Let not the affairs of the world entirely in- _V.
gross his time and thoughts. From that
contagious air which he breaths in the
midst of it, let him sometimes retreat into
the salutary shade consecrated to devotion
and'to wisdom. There, conversing serious-
ly with his own foul, and looking up to
the Father of spirits, let him study to calm
those unquiet passions, and to rectify those
internal disorders, which intercourse with
the world had excited and increased. In
order to render this medicine of the
mind more effectual, it will be highly pro-
per,

IV. THAT as we advance in the course

of years, we often attend to the lapse of
time and life, and to the revolutions which
these are ever effecding. In this medita-
tion, one of the firit refledions which
Ihould occur is, how much we owe to that
God who hath hitherto helped us; who
hath brought us on so far in life; hath

guided

SERM. guided us through the slippery paths of
_V_ youth, and now enables us to flourish in

the strength of manhood. Look back, my
friends, to those who. started along with
yourselves in the race of life. Think how
many of them have fallen around you.
Observe how many blank spaces you can
number in the catalogue of those who were
once your companions. If, in the midit
of so much devastation, you have been
preserved and blessed; confider ferioulny
what returns you owe to the goodness of
Heaven. Inquire whether your conduct
has corresponded to these obligations; whe-
ther, in public and in private, you have
honoured, as became you, the God of your
fathers; and whether, amidit the unknown
occurrences that are yet before you, you
have ground to hope for the continued
protecion of the Almighty.

Bring to mind the various revolutions

which you have beheld in human affairs,
since you became actors on this busy the-
atre. Reflect on the changes which have
taken place in men and manners, in.opi-

nions

nions and customs, in private foftunes, and SERM.
in public conduc. By the observations IV
you have made on these, and the experi-
ence you have gained, have you impro-
ved proportionably in wisdom ? Have the
changes of the world which you have wit-
neffed, loosened all unreafoiable attachment
to it? Have they taught you this great
lesson, that, while the fqflion of the world is
ever pa/f/ng away, only in God and in vir-
tue, ltability is to be found ? Of great use,
amidst the whirl of the world, are such
"pauses as these in life; such refting places
of thought and reflection; whence we can
calmly and deliberately look back on the
past, and anticipate the future.

To the future, we are often catling an

eager eye; and fondly storing it, in our i-
magination, with many a pleating scene.
But if we would look to it, like wife men.
let it be under the persuasion that it is
nearly to resemble the paft,.in bringing
forward a mixture of alternate hopes and
fears, of griefs and joys. In order to be
preparedfor whatever it may bring, let us
: VOL. III. G cultivate

.SE RM. cultivate that manly fortitude of mind,
_-, which, supported by a pious trust in God,

will enable us to encounter properly the
vicissitudes of our state. No quality is
more necessary than this, to them who are
passing through that stormy season of life
of which we now treat. Softness and es-
feminacy, let them leave to the young and
unexperienced, who are amusing themselves
with florid profpets of.blifs. But to those
who are now engaged in the middle of
their course, who are supposed to be well
acquainted with the world, and to know
that they have to struggle in it with va-
rious hardihips, firmness, vigour, and re-
solution, are dispositions more suitable.
They must buckle on well this armour of
the mind, if they would issue forth into
the contest with any profpe& of success.-
While we thus study to corre&t the er-
rors, and to provide against the dangers,
which are peculiar to this stage oflife,
let us also,

V. LAY foundation for comfort in old

a. ge.

age. That is a period which all expect and SE RM.
hope to fee; and to which, amidst the toils i
of the world, men Sometimes look for-
ward, not without satisfac'tion, as to the
period of retreat and reft. But let them
not deceive themselves. A joyless and
dreary season it will prove, if they arrive
at it with an unimproved, or corrupted
mind. For old age, as for every other
thing, a certain preparation is requisite;
and that preparation consists chiefly in three
particulars; in the acquisition of know-
ledge, of friends, of virtue. There is an
acquisition of another kind, of which it is
altogether needless for me to give any re-
commendation, that of riches. But though
this, by many, will be esteemed a more mate-
rial acquisition than all the three I have na-
med, it may be confidently pronounced,
that,. without these other requisites, all the
wealth we can lay up in itore will prove
insufficient for making our latter days pass
smoothly away.

First, He who wilhes to render his old
age comfortable, should. tudy betimes to

G 2 enlarge

SERM. enlarge and improve his mind; and by

thought and inquiry, by reading and re-
flecing,' to acquire a taste for useful know-
ledge. This will provide for him a great
and noble entertainment, when other en-
tertainments leave him. If he bring into
the iblitary retreat of age a vacant, unin-
formed mind, wvhere no knowledge dawns,
where no ideas' rife, which has nothing to'
feed upon within itself, many a heavy and
comfordefs day he mufa necessarily pass.-
Next, When a-man declines into the vale
of years, he depends -more -on the aid of
lis friends, than in-any other period of his
life. Then is the time,- when he would
especially with: to find-himfelf surrounded
'by some who love and refped him; who
"will bear with: his infirmities; relieve him
-of his labours, and chear him with their
'society. - Let' hin, therefore, now, in the
'-iummer of his days, while 'yet adCive and

ouirifhihn,-: by ac'ts-offeafohable kindnets
and beneficence cnfure that' lovc, and by
-iupright and honourable conduct lay'foun-
dationi foi that ref'ct, which .in old age

- .....* -
. ----he

he would wish to enjoy.-In the last place, SERM.

IV.

Let him confider a good conscience, peace
with God, and the hope of heaven, as the
most effetilal consolations he can possess,
when the evil days llall come, wherein,
otherwise, he is likely to find little plea-
sure. It is not merely by transient ats
of devotion that such consolations are
to be provided. The regular tenor of a
virtuous and pious life, spent in the faith-
ful discharge of all the duties of our tfa-
tion, will prove the best preparation for
old age, for death, and for immortality.

AMONG the measures thus taken for the

latter scenes of lifes let me admonish every
one not to forget to put his worldly affairs
in order, in due time. This is a duty
which he owes to his. charater, to his fa-
mily, or to those,- whoever they be, that
are to succeed him; but a duty too often
unwisely delayed, from a childish averlion
to entertain any thoughts of quitting the
world. Let him not trust much to what
he will do in his old age. Sufficient for

G 3 that

SERM. that day, if he -hall live to fee it, will be

IV. the burden thereof. It has been remark-

ed, that as men advance in years, they
care less to think of death. Perhaps it oc-
curs oftener to the thoights of the'youhg,
than of the old. Feebleness of' spirit ren-
ders'melancholy ideas more oppressive;
and after having been so long accustomed
and inured to the world, men bear worse
with: any thing which reminids' them'thai
they must soon part with it.-However,
as to part with it is the doom of all, let
us take measures betimes for going off the
stage, when it shall -be our turn to with-
draw, with decency and propriety; leaving
'iothing unfulfilled which it is expedient
to have done before we' die. To live long,
ought not to be our favourite wish, so.
much as to live well. By continuing too
long on earth, we might only live to wit-
ness a-greater number of melancholy scenes,
and to expose ourselves to a wider compass
of human woe. He who has served his
generation faithfully in the world, has du-
ly honoured God, and been beneficent and

useful

useful to mankind; he who in his life has SE R M.
been refpeated and beloved; whose death __
is accompanied with the sincere regret of
all who knew him, and whose memory is
honoured; that man has sufficiently fulfil-
led his course, whether it was appointed by
Providence to be long or ihort. For ho-
nourable age is not that which Jandeth in
length of time, nor that which is measured by
number of years; but wisdom is the gray hair
to man; and an unspotted life is old age .,

Wildom, iv. 8. 9.

04 S: E R-

# SERMON V. On DEATH. ECCLESIASTES, xii. 5. — Man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets.

[ 88 3
S E R M O N V.

On DEATH.

ECCLESIASTES, xii. 5.
- Man. goeth to his long home, and the

mourners go about the Jireets.
SERM. THIS is a fight which incessantly pre-

V-.v J sents itself. Our eyes are so much

accustomed to it, that it hardly makes any
impression. Throughout every season of
the year, and during the course of almost
every day, the funerals which pass along
the streets show us man going to his long
home. Were death a rare and uncommon
objec; were it only once in the course of
a man's life, that he beheld one of his fel-
low-creatures carried to the grave, a solemn

awe

awe would fill him; he would flop flolt in SE RM.
the midst of his pleasures; he would even
be chilled with secret horror. Such impref-
sions, however, would prove unsuitable to
the nature of bur preient iate. When they
became so firong as to render men-unfit, for
the ordinary business of life, they would in
a great measure defeat the intention of our
being placed in this world. It is better or-
dered by the wisdom of Providence, that
they 1hould be weakened by. the frequency
of their recurrence; and- so tempered by
the mixture of other passions, as to allow
us to go on freely, in acting our parts on
earth.

Yet, familiar as death is now become, it

is undoubtedly fit, that by an event of so
important a nature, some impression ihould
be made upon our minds. It ought not to
pass over, as one of those common incidents
which are beheld without concern,. and a-
walken no reflection. There are many things
which the funerals of our fellow-creatures
are calculated to teach; and' happy it were
for the gay .and diflipated, if they would

lifeni

SERM. liften more frequently to the inftrucions
~ of so awful a monitor. In the context, the

wiseman had described, under a variety of
images suited to the eastern style, the grow-
inginflimities of old age, until they arrive
it 'thait: period which concludes them all;
wien,; a's he beautifully expresses it, the fil-
ver cord being loosened, and the golden bowl
brote'i;, the pitcher being broken at the foun-
tai, and the wheel at the cifern, man goeth
to hi. long home, and the mourners go about
.'hejireets. -In discoursing from these words,
it :is hot my purpose to treat, at present, of
the lnftirut ions to be drawn from the pro-
fpe& of our own death. I am to confine
myself to the death of others; to confider
death as orie of the most frequent and con-
fiderable events that happen in the course
of: hiuman:affairs; and to show in what
manrier.we ought to be affected, firit, by
the death of strangers, or indifferent per-
sons; secondly, by the death of friends;
and thirdly, by the death of enemies.

-I, BY the death of indifferent persons;

'.
. .if

if any can be called indifferent, to whom SERM.

V.

we are so nearly allied as brethren by na-
ture, and brethren in mortality. When
we observe the funerals that pass Along- the
fireets, or when we walk among the mo-
numents of death, the first thing that na-
turally strikes us is the undiftinguihfing
blow, with which that common enemy le-
vels all. We behold a great promiscuous
multitude all carried to the fame abode;
all lodged in the fame dark and silent man-
sions. There, mingle persons of every age
and character, of every rank and condition
in life; the young and the old, ;the poor
and the rich, the gay and the grave, the
renowned and the ignoble. A few weeks
ago, most of those whom we have seen car-
ried to the grave, walked about as we do
now on the earth; enjoyed their friends,
beheld the light of the fun, and were form-
ing deligns for future days. Perhaps, it is
not long since they were engaged in scenes
of high festivity. For them, perhaps, the
cheerful company assembled; and in the
midst of the circle they shone with gay and

pleasing

E RM. pleasing vivacity. But now-to them, all is
V.

finally clpfed. To them, no more shall the
seasons return, or the fti arise. No more hall
they hear the voice of mirth, or behold the
face of man. They are swept from the
universe, as though they had never been.
They are carried away as with a flood: 5The
wind has passed over then, and they are gone.

When:we contemplate this desolation of

the human race; this final termination of
Io many hopes-; this silence that now reigns
among those who, a little while ago, were
so busy, or so gay; who can avoid being
touched with sensations at once awful and
tender? What heart but then warms with
the glow of humanity ? In whose eye does
not the tear gather, on revolving the fate of
pafling and shortlived man ? Such sensa-
tions are so congenial to human nature, that
they are attended'with a certain kind of
sorrowful pleasure. Even voluptuaries them-
selves, sometimes indulge a taste for fune-
real melancholy. After the festive assembly
is difmiffd, they chufe to walk retired in
the shady grove, and to contemplate the ve-
nerable sepulchres of their ancestors. This

melancholy

melancholy pleasure arises from two diffei- s ERM.
ent sentiments meeting at the fame tme in V.
the breast; a sympathetic sense of 'the short-
ness and vanity of life, and a persuasion
that something exists after death; senti-
ments, which unite at the view of the hoife
appointed for all living. A tomb, it has
been justly said, is-a monument situated on
the confines of both worlds. It, at once,
presents to us the termination of the inquie-
tudes of life, and sets before us the image
of eternal reft. 7here, in the elegant ex-
pressions of Job, the wicked ceafefrom tron-
bling; and irthere te weary be at rcAt. There
the prrfioners rejf together; they hear not the
voice of the oppre/or. T7heinall and the great
are there; and the servant is free from his
majler. It is very remarkable, that in all
languages, and among all nations, death
has been described in a style of-this kind;
exprefled by figures of speech, which con-
vey every where the fame idea of reft, or
sleep, or retreat firm the evils of life. Such'
-a style 'perfetaly agrees with the general be-
lief bs the'foul's iimdmrality ; but'affuredly

conveys

SERM. conveys no high idea of the boasted plea

v. ures of the world. It shows how much

all mankind have felt this life to.be a.fcene
of trouble and care; and have. agreed in
opinion, that perfect reft is to be expected
only in the grave,

There, fays Job, are the small. and the

great. There, the poor man lays down at
last the burden of his wearisome life. No
more shall he groan under the load of po-
verty and toil. No more ihall he hear the
insolent calls of the master, from whom he
received his scanty wages. No more ihall
he be raised from needful slumber on his
bed of straw, nor be hurried away from
his homely meal, to undergo the repeated
labours of the day. While his humble grave
is preparing, and.a few poor and decayed
neighbours are carrying him thither, it is
good for us to think, that this man too was
our brother; that for him the aged and de-
ftitute wife, and the needy children now
weep; that, neglected as he was by the
world, he possessed perhaps both.a found
understanding, and a worthy heart; and is

* *, . , lnow

now carried by angels to reft in Abraham's SERM.
bofom.-At no great distance from him, the y
grave is opened to receive the rich and proud
man. For, as it is said with emphasis in
the, parable, the rich man alo died, and was
buried '. He a/o died. His riches prevent-
ed not his lharing the fame fate with the
poor man; perhaps, through luxury, they
accelerated his doom. Then, indeed, the
moirners go about the Jreets; and while, in
all the pomp and magnificence of woe, his
funeral is prepared, his heirs, in the mean
time, impatient to examine his will, are
looking on one another with jealous eyes,
and already beginning to quarrel about the
division of his substance.- One day, we
fee carried along the coffin of the smiling
infant; the flower just nipped as it began to
bloflom in the parents view: and the next
day, we behold the young man, or young
woman, of blooming form and promising
hopes, laid in an untimely grave. While
the funeral is attended by a numerous, un-

*Luke, xvi. 22.

concerned

SERM. concerned -company, who are' difcourfng

V.-.; to one another about the news of the day,

or the ordinary affairs of -life, let -our
thoughts rather -follow to' the house of
mourning, and represent to themselves what
'is going on there. There, we would fee a
'disconsolate family,' fitting in silent grief,
thinking of the fad breach that is made in
their little society; and, with tears in their
eyes, looking to the chamber that is now
left vacant, and to every memorial that
presents itself of their departed friend. By
such attention .t the woes of others,, the
'selfish hardness of our hearts will be gra-
dually softened, and melted down into hu-
manity.

Another day, we follow to the grave one

who, in old age, and after a long career
'of life, has in full maturity funk' at last
into reft. As we are' going along to the
'mansion of the dead, it is natural for us to
think, and to difcoiire, 'of all the changes
which such a 'person his seen diuring the
course of his life. He has pafied, it is
-likely, through varieties of fortune. He

has

has experienced prosperity, and adversity. SERM.
He has seen families and kindreds rife and V.
fall. He has seen peace and war succeed-
ing in their turns; the face of his country
undergoing many alterations; and the ve-
ry city in which he dwelt rifingj in a man-
ner,,new around him. After all he has
beheld, his eyes are now closed for ever.
He was becoming a stranger in the midst
of a new fuccefion of men. A race who
knew him not, had arisen to fill the earth.
Thus passes the world away. Throughout
all ranks and conditions, one generation pa/-
eth, and another generation cometh; and this
great inn is by turns evacuated, and re-
plenished, by troops of succeeding pilgrims.
- 0 vain and inconstant world! 0 fleet-
ing and transient life ! When will the sons
of men learn to think of thee, as they
ought ? When will they learn humanity
from the afflitions of their brethren; or
moderation and wisdom, from the sense of
their own fugitive state ?-But, now to
come nearer to ourselves, let us,

VOL. III. H II. CON-

SERM. II. CONISIDER the death of our friends.

, Want of refletion, or the long habits, ei-

ther of a very busy, or a very diflipated life,
may have rendered men insensible to all
such objecs. as I have now described. The
stranger, and the unknown, fall utterly
unnoticed at their fide. Life proceeds with
them in its usual train, without being as-
seced by events in which they take- no
personal concern. But the diffiluton of
those ties which had long bound- men toge-
ther, in intimate and familiarlunion, gives
a painful shock to every. heart. - When a
family, who, for years, had been living in
comfort and peace, are-fuddenly ihattered
by some of their most beloved or refpe&ed
members being torn from them; when
the hufiband or the spouse are separated for
ever from the companion who, amidst eve-
ry viciflitude of fortune, solaced their life;
vho had shared all their joys, and partici-
pated in all their sorrows ; when the weep-
ing parent is folding in his. arms the dying
child whom he tenderly loved; when he
is giving his last blessing, receiving the
.-. last

last fond adieu, looking for the last time SERM.

V.

on that countenance, now wafting and fa- i.
ded, which he had once beheld with much
delight; then is the time, when the heart
is made to drink all the bitterness of hu-
man woe.-But I seek not to wound your
feelings by dwelling on these fad defcrip*
tions. Let us rather turn our thoughts to
the manner in which such events ought
to be received and improved, since happen
they must in the life of man.

Then, indeed, is the time to weep. Let

not a false idea of fortitude, or mistaken
conceptions of religious duty, be employed
to reitrain the bursting emotion. Let the
heart seek its relief, in the free effusion of
just and natural sorrow. It is becoming in
every one to show, on such occasions, that
he feels, as a man ought to feel. At the
fame time, let moderation temper the grief
of a good man and a Christian. He must
not sorrow like those who have no hope. As
high elation of spirits befits not the joys,
so continued and overwhelming dejection
suits not the griefs of this transitory world.

H 2 Grief,

SE RM. Grief, when it goes beyond certain bounds,

V. becomes unmanly; when it lasss beyond a

certain time, becomes unseasonable. Let
him not reject the alleviation which time
brings to all the wounds of the heart, but
susser exceflive grief to subside, by degrees,
into a tender and affectionate remem-
brance. Let him confider, that it is in the
power of Providence to raise him up other
comforts in the place of those he has loft.
Or, if his mind, at present, reject the
thoughts of flichL consolation, let it turn
for relief to the profpe& of a future meet-
ing in a happier world. This is indeed
the chief soother of affliction; the most
powerful balm of the bleeding heart. It
afififs us to view death, as no more than
a temporary separation of friends. They
whom we have loved flill live, though not
present to us. They are only removed in-
to a different mansion in the house of the
common Father. The toils of their pil-.
grimage are finished; and they are gone
to the land of reft and peace. They are.
gone from this dark and troubled world,

to

to join the great aflembly of the just; and SE RM.

V.

to dwell in the midst of everlafling light.
In due time we hope to be associated with
them in these blissful habitations. Until
this season of re-union arrive, no principle
of religion discourages our holding corre-
fpondence of affection with them by means
of faith and hope.

Meanwhile, let us refpe& the virtues,

and cherish the memory, of the deceased.
Let their little failings be now forgotten.
Let us dwell on what wa-a4miable in their
characer, imitate their worth, and trace
their fleps. By this means, the remem-
brance of those whom we loved shall be-
come useful and improving to us, as well
as sacred and dear; if we accustom our-
selves to confider them as still speaking,
and exhorting us to all that is good; if,
in situations where our virtue is tried, we
call up their refpeded idea to view, and,
as placed in their presence, think of the
part which we could at before them with-
out a blush.

Moreover, let the remembrance of the

H 3 friends

SERM. friends whom we have loft, strengthen our

V. affetion to those that remain. The nar-

rower the circle becomes of those we love,
let us draw the closer together. Let the
heart that has been softened by sorrow,
miellow into gentleness and kindness; make
liberal allowance for the weaknesses of
others; and divest itself of the little pre-
judices that may have formerly prepossess-
ed it against them. The greater havock
that death has made among our friends
on earth, let us cultivate connection more
with God, and heaven, and virtue. Let
those noble views which man's immortal
character affords, fill and -exalt our miads.
Passengers only through this sublunary re-
gion, let our thoughts often ascend to that
divine country, which we are taught to
confider as the native feat of the foul.
There, we form connections that are ne-
ver broken. There, we meet with friend's
who never die. Among celestial things
there is firm and lasting conftarncy, while
all that is on earth changes and passes a-
way---Such are some of the fruits we

should

fiould reap from the tender feelings ex- SE RM.
cited by the death of friends. But they ,
are not only our friends who die. Our
enemies also must go to their long home.
Let us, therefore,

III. CONSIDER how we ought to be as-

sected, when they from whom suspicions
have alienated, or rivalry has divided us;
they with whom we have long contended,
or by whom we imagine ourselves to have
suffered wrong, are laid, or about to be
laid, in the grave. How inconsiderable
then appear those broils in which we had
been long involved, those contests and
feuds which we thought were to last for
ever? The awful moment that'now ter-
minates them, makes us feel their vanity.
If there be a spark of humanity left in the
breast, the remembrance of our common
fate then awakens it. Is there a man, who,
if he were admitted to stand by the death-
bed of his bitterest enemy, and beheld him
enduring that conflidc which human na-
ture muff fiffer at the last, would not be

H 4 incline?

S E R M. inclined to stretch forth the hand of friend,
v., hip, to utter the voice of forgiveness, and

to with for perfect reconciliation with him
before he left the world? Who is: there
that, when he beholds the remains of his
adversary deposited in the dust, feels not,
in that moment, some relentings at the re-
membrance of thqfe past animosities which
mutually embittered their life ?-" There
' lies the man with whom I contended so
" long, silent and mute for ever. He is
"fallen; and I am about to follow him.
"How poor is the advantage which I now
"enjoy ? Where are the fruits of all our
" contests ? In a short time we ihall be
"laid together; and no remembrance re-
"main of either of us, under the fun.
" How many mistakes may there have
" been between us ? Had not he his vir-.
" tues and good qualities, as well as I?
" When we shall both appear before the
"judgement-feat of God, lhall I be found
"innocent, and free of blame, for all the
"' enmity I have borne to him ?"- My
friends, let the anticipation of such senti-

ments,

ments, serve now to correc the inveteracy SE RM.
of prejudice, to cool the heat of anger, to
allay the fierceness of resentment. How
unnatural is it for animofities so lafRing to
possess the hearts of mortal men, that no-
thing can extinguish them, but the cold
hand of death? Is there not a sufficient
proportion of evils in the short span of
human life, that we seek to increase their
number, by ruffing into unnecessary con-
tefis with one another ? When a few; funs
more have rolled over our heads, friends
and foes lhall have retreated together; and
their love and their hatred be equally bu-
ried. , Let our few days; then, be spent in
peace. While we are all journeying on-
wards to death, let us rather bear one an-
other's burdens, than harass one another by
the way. Let us smooth and chear the
road as much as we can, rather than fill
the valley of our pilgrimage with the
hateful monuments of our contention and
strife.

Tlus I have set before you some of

those

SE RM. those meditations which are naturally fug-

V.
t-v« gested by the prevalence of death around

us; by the death of strangers, .of friends,
and of enemies. Because topics of this na-
ture are obvious, let it not be thought that
they are without use. They require to be
recalled, repeated, and enforced. Moral
and religious inftrufion derives its efficacy,
not so much from what men are taught to
know, as from what they are brought to
feel. It is not the dormant knowledge of
any truths,. but the vivid imprefion of
them, which has influence on pracice.
Neither let it be thought, that such medita-
tions are unseasonable intruflons upon those
who are living in health, in affluence, and
ease. There is no hazard of their making
too deep or painful an impression. The
gloom which they occasion is transient; and
will soon, too soon, it is probable, be dif-
pelled by the succeeding affairs and plea-
fures of the world. To wisdom it certain-
ly belongs, that men should be impressed
with just views of their nature, and their.
state: and the pleasures of life will always

be

be enjoyed to most advantage when they SERM.
are tempered with serious thought. There V.
is a time to mourn, as well as a time to rejoice.
There is a virtuous sorrow, which is better
than laughter. There is afadnefs of the coun-
tenance, by which the heart is made better.

S E R.

# SERMON VI. On the PROGRESS of VICE. 1 CORINTHIANS, xv. 33. Be not deceived: Evil communications corrupt good manners.

[ 10o8 ]

S E R M ON VI.
On the PROGRESS of VICE.

I CORINTHIANS, XV. 33.
Be not deceived: Evil communications corrupt

good manners.

SERM. TnHOUGH human nature be now fallen
VI'. T from its original honour, several good

principles still remain in the hearts of men.
There are few, if.any, on whose minds the
reverence for a Supreme Being continues
not, in some degree, imprefled. In every
breast, some benevolent affections are found;
and conscience f1ill retains a sense of the
diftindion between moral good and evil.
These principles of virtue are always sus-
ceptible of improvement; and, in favour-

able

able situations, might have a happy in-' S E R .
fluence on pracice. But such is the frail- V1.
ty of our nature, and so numerous are the
temptations to evil, that they are in perpe-
tual hazard of being either totally effaced,
or so far weakened as to produce no effect
on conduct. They are good feeds original-
ly sown in the heart; but which require
culture, in order to make them rife to any
maturity. If left without afliftance, they
are likely to be stifled by that profusion of
noxious weeds which the foil fends. forth
around them.

Among the numerous causes which in-

troduce corruption into the heart, and ac-
celerate its growth, none is more unhappily
powerful than that which is pointed out in
the text, under the description of evil com-
munications; that is, the contagion which is
diffused by bad examples, and heightened
by particular connescions with persons of
loose principles, or dissolute morals. This,
in a licentious state of society, is the most
common source of those vices and disorders'
which so much abound in great cities;

and

SERM. and often proves, in particular manner, fa-
VI.

tal to the young; even to them whose be-
ginnings were once auspicious and promi-
sing. It may therefore be an useful em-
ployment of attention, to trace the progress
of this principle of corruption; to examine
the means by which evil communications gra-
dually undermine, and at last destroy good
manners, or (which here is the proper fig-
nification of the original word) goad morals.
It is indeed disagreeable to contemplate hu-
man nature, in this downward course of its
progress. But it is always profitable to
know our own infirmities and dangers.
The consideration of them will lead me to
suggest some of the means proper to be u-
fed, for preventing the mischiefs arising
from evil communications.

AGREEABLY to what I observed of cer-

tain virtuous principles being inherent in
human nature, there are few but who set
out at first on the world with good difpofi-
tions. The warmth which belongs to youth
naturally exerts itself in generous feelings,

and

and sentiments of honour; in strong at- SERM.
tachment to friends, and the other emo- V
tions of a kind and tender heart. Alnoft
all the plans with which persons who have
been liberally educated begin the world, are
connected with honourable views. At that
period, they repudiate whatever is mean
or base. It is pleasing to them to think, of
commanding the esteem of those among
whom they live, and of acquiring a name
among men. But alas ! how soon does this
flattering profpe& begin to be overcast!
Desires of pleasure uflier in temptation, and
forward the growth of disorderly passions.
Miniflers of vice are seldom wanting to. en-.
courage, and flatter, the passions of the
young. Inferiors study to creep into fa-
vour, by servile obsequiousness to all their
desires and humours. Glad to find any
apology for the indulgences of which they
are fond, the young too readily liften to the-
voice of those who suggest to them, that
strict notions of religion, order, and vir-
tue, are old fashioned and illiberal; that
the restraints which they impose are only

fit

SE RM. fit to be prescribed to those who are in the

,VL first stage of pupillage; or to be preached

to the vulgar, who ought to be'kept within
the.clofeft bounds of regularity and subjec-
tion. But the goodness of their hearts, it
is insinuated to them, and. the liberality of
tlde-views, will fully juffify their emanci.
pating 'themselves, in some 'degree, 'from
the rigid discipline of parents and,teachers.

Soothing as such infinuatios are to the

youthful, and inconsiderate, their first steps,
however, in vice, are cautious and timid,
and occasionally checked by remorse. As
they begin to mingle more in the world,
and emerge into the circles of gaiety and
pleasure, finding there loose ideas counte-
nanced by too general practice, 'they gra-.
dually become bolder in the'liberties they
.take. If they have been bred to bufinefsi'
they begin to tire of industry,- and look
with contempt on the plodding race of citi-
zens. If they be of superior rank, they
think it becomes them to resemble their e-
quals; to assume that freedom of beha-
viour, that air of forwardness, that tone of

dissipation,

dissipation, that easy negligence of those SE R .
with whom they converse, which appear _
faflionable in high life. If affluence of
fortune unhappily concur to favour their
inclinations, amuSements and diversions
succeed in a perpetual round; night and
day are confounded; gaming fills up their
vacant intervals; they live wholly in public
places; they run into many degrees of ex-
cess, disagreeable even to themselves, mere-
ly from weak complaisance, and the fear of
being ridiculed by their loose associates.
Among these associates, the most hardened
and determined always take the lead. The
reft follow them with implicit submission;
and make proficiency in this school of ini-
quity, in exact proportion to the weakness
of their underfiandings, and the strength
of their passions.

How many pass away, after this mianner,

some of the most valuable years of their
life, toft in a whirlpool of what cannot be
called pleasure, so much as mere giddiness
and folly? In the habits of perpetual con-
necfion with idle or licentious company,

VOL. III. I all

E R M. all reflection is loft ; while, circulated frorff
VI.
,--- one empty head, and one thoughtless heart,

to another, folly shoots up into all its most
ridiculous forms; prompts the extravagant,
unmeaning frolic, in private; or sallies forth
in public into mad riot; impelled some-
times by intoxication, sometimes by mere
levity of spirits. .

All the while, amidst this whole course

of juvenile infatuation, I readily admit, that
much good nature may till remain. Ge-
nerofity and attachments may be found;
nay, some awe of religion may still subsist,
and some remains of those good impressions
which were made upon the mind in early
days. It might yet be very possible to re-
claim such persons, and to form them for
useful and refpeafable stations in the world,
if virtuous and improving society mould
happily succeed to the place of that idle
crew with whom they now afrociate; if
important bulinefs lhould occur, to bring
them into a different sphere of action; or;
if some seasonable stroke of afflicion ihould
in mercy be sent, to recall them to-them-

;:; ~ -,~ -:~ ~selves,

selves, and to awaken serious and manly StRM.
thought. But, if youth and vigour, and ^v
flowing fortune continue; if a similar fuc-
cession of companions go on to amuse them,
to ingrofs their time, and to stir up their
passions; the day of ruin,-let them take
heed, and beware !-the day of irrecover-
able ruin, begins to draw nigh. Fortune
is squandered; health is broken; friends
are offended, affi-onted, estranged; aged
parents, perhaps, lent affliced and mourn-
ing, to the dust.

There are certain degrees of vice which

are chiefly stamped with the character of
the ridiculous, and the contemptible: and
there are also certain limits, beyond which
if it pals, it becomes odious and execra-
ble. If, to other corruptions which the
heart has already received, be added the
infusion of Sceptical principles, that worst
of all the evil communications of finers, the
whole of morals is then on the point of
being overthrown. For, every crime can
then be palliated to conscience; every'check
and restraint which had hitherto remained,

I 2 is

E RM. is; taken away. He who, in the beginning
L2.'1 of his course, soothed himself with the

thought, that while he indulged his de-
fires, he did hurt to no man;: now,, pfeffed
by the necessity of fupplyiig those wants
into which his expensive pleasures have
brought him, goes on vwithout 'reimorfe to
defraud, and to oppress. The ldver. ofplea-
sure, now becomes hardenred-'.and cruel;
violates his trust, or betrays his friend; be-
comes a man of treachery, or a man of
blood; satisfying, or at least endeavouring
all the while to satisfy himself,' that circum-
fances form his excuse; that by neceflity
he is impelled; and that, in gratifying the
passions which nature had implanted' within
him, he does no more than follow nature.

Miserable and deluded man! to what

art thou come at the last? Dost thou
pretend to follow nature,- when. thou art
contenning the laws of the God of nature?
when thou art fifling his voice within
thee, which remonstrates against thy crimes ?
wheiw thou art violating the befR part of
:thy nature, by counteraaing the dictates

of

of:juftice and humanity-? Dost thou fol- SE R .
low nature, when .thou rendereft thyself an Vi.
useless animal on the earth; and not use-
less only, but :noxious to the society to
which thou belongeft, and to which thou
art a disgrace; noxious, by. the bad ex-
ample thou haft set; noxious, by the crimes
thou haft.committed; sacrificing innocence,
to .thy .guilty pleasures, .and introducing
shame and .ruin into the habitations of
peace; defrauding of their due the unfiif-
picious who have trusted thee; involving
in the ruins.of thy fortune many a worthy
family; reducing the industrious and the
aged to misery and want; by all which, if
thou haft.efcaped the deserved sword of ju-
ftice, thou haft at least brought on thyfeif
*he resentment, and the reproach of all the
refpedable and the worthy.-Tremble then
at the view of the gulph which is opening
before thee.' Look with horror at the pre-
cipice, on the brink of which thou stand-
eft: and if yet a moment be left for re-
treat, think how thou mayst escape, and
*be raved.

I 3 Tins

SERM. Tins brings me to what I proposed
Vt. a as the next head of discourse; to suggest

some means that may be' used for flopping
in time the progress of such mischiefs; to
point out some remedies against the fatal
infection of evil communications.

THE first and most obvious is, to with-

draw from all afrociations with bad men,
'with persons either of licentious principles,
or of disorderly conduc. I have mhown to
what'iffue such dangerous connections are
apt to bring men at last; Nothing, there-
fore, is of more importance for the young,
to whom I now chiefly address myself, than
to be careful in the. choice of their friends
and companions. This choice is too fre-
quently made without much thought, or
is determined by some casual connection;
and yet, -very often; the whole fate of their
future' life depends upon it. The circum-
fiances which chiefly attract the liking and
the friendhiip of youth, are vivacity, good
humour, engaging manners, and a cheer-
ful or easy temper; qualities, I confers, a-

miable

miable in themselves, and useful and va- sERM.
Iuable in their place. -But I intreat you to V
remember, that these are not all the quali-
ties requisite to form an intimate compa-
nion or friend. Something more is still to
be looked for; a found understanding, a
steady mind, a firm attachment to prin-
ciple, to virtue, and honour. As only so-
lid bodies polish well, it is only on the sub-
ftantial ground of these manly endowments,
that the other amiable qualities can receive
their proper lustre. Destitute of these es-
fential requisites, they shine with no more
than a tinsel brilliancy. It may sparkle for
a little, amidst a few circles of the frivolous,
and superficial; but it imposes not on the
discernment of the public. The world in
general seldom, after a short trial, judges
amiss of the characters of men. You may
be assured, that its character of you will be
formed by the company you frequent; and
how agreeable soever they may ieem to be,
if nothing is to be found among them but
hollow qualities, and external accomplifl-
ments, they soon fall down into the class,

I 4 at

SE RM. at best, of the iniignificant, perhaps of the

VI.
><Oi worthless; and you fink of course,' in the

opinion of the public, into the fame.defpi-
cable rank.

Allow me to warn you, that the most

gay and pleasing, are Sometimes the molt
insidious and dangerous companions; an
admonition which refpeds both the. sexes.
Often they attach themselves to you from
interested motives; and if any taint or fifpi-
cion lie on their character, under the cover
of your rank, your fortune, or your good
reputation, they seek protection for them-
selves. Look round you, then, with atten-
tive eye, and weigh chara&ers well before
you conneca yourselves too closely with any
who court your . ociety. He that walketh
with wee men Jhall be wfe ; but a companion
of fools Jhall be deflroyed. Wherefore, enteir
not thou into the counel of the scorner. Walk
not in the way with evil men; avoid it; pafp
not by it, turn from it, and pasS away *.

* Prov. xiii. 20.; Prov. iv. 14.

Is

IN order to prevent the influence of evil SERM.

comminunications, it is farther needful, that Vi.
you fix to yourselves certain principles of
conduct, and be resolved and determined
on no occasion to swerve from them. Set-
ting the consideration 6f religion and vir-
tue aside, and attending merely to interest
and reputation, it will be found, that he
who enters on active life without having
ascertained some regular plan, according to
which he is to guide himself, will be un-
prosperous iin the whole of his subsequent
progress. But when conduct is viewed in
a moral and religious light, the effec of
having fixed no principles of aftion; of
having :formed no laudable standard of
charader, .becomes more .obviously fatal.'
For hence it is, that the young and thought-
less imbibe so readily the .poison of evil
commnnnications, and fall a prey to every fe-
ducer. They have no internal guide whom
they are accustomed to follow and obey; no-
thing within.themfelves, that can give firm-
ness to their condut. They are of course
the victims of momentary inclination or

caprice;

SERM. caprice; religious and good by starts,
vt_, when, during the absence of temptation

and tempters, the virtuous principle stirs
within them; but never long the fame;
changing and fluCtuating according to the
passion that chances to rife, or the inftiga-
tion of those with whom they have con-
neced themselves. They are failing on a
dangerous sea, which abounds with rocks;
without compass, by which to direct their
course, or helm, by which to guide the vef-
fel. Whereas, if they acted on a system,
if their behaviour made it appear that they
were determined to conduCt themselves by
certain rules and principles, not only.would
they escape innumerable dangers, but they
would command respeCt from the licenti-
ous themselves. Evil doers would cease to
lay their snares for one whom they saw
moving above them, in a higher sphere,
and with a more steady course.

As a farther corretive of evil communi-

cations, and as a foundation to those prin-
ciples which you lay down for conduct,

let

let me advise you Sometimes to think fe- SERM.

VI.

rioufly, of what constitutes real enjoyment _
and happiness. Your days cannot be en-
tirely spent in company and pleasure.
How closely soever you are surrounded and
besieged by evil companions, there must
be some intervals, in which you are left by
yourselves; when, after all the turbulence
of amusement is over, your mind will na-
turally assume a graver and more pensive
cat. These are precious intervals to you,
if you knew their value. Seize that fober
hour of retirement and silence. Indulge
the meditations which then begin to rife.
Cast your eye backwards on what is past
of your life-; look forward to what is pro-
bably to come. Think of the part you
are now acting; and of what remains to
be ated, perhaps to be suffered, before you
die. Then is the time to form your plans
of happiness, not merely for the next day,
but for the general course of your life.
Remember, that what is pleasing to you at
twenty, will not be equally so at forty or
fifty years of age; and that what continues

longest

SERM. longest pleasing, is always most valuable.
'_t,~ Recolleat your own feelings in different

T.enep of life. Inquire on what.occafins
you -ha-ve felt the truest fat;isfacRion; whe-
ther days of fqbriqty, and rational ,employ-
ment, ayve not left behind them a more a-
greable--re embrance, thann-ights of li-
entioQfie,fs .and riot. Look .round you on
the worl.; refleet on the different focie-
ties -which have fallen under -your obfer-
vation.; and-think who a-mqng themr ap-
pear.to enjoy life to moft.advantage3 -whe-
ther they who, encircled by gay compa-
nions, are .constantly fat.iguing themselves
in quest of.pleafure; ,or they to whom plea-
sure .comes unsought, .in the.courfe of an
active, virtuous, and manly -life. ,Compare
together these two classes of mankind, and
ask your own hearts, to which of them
you would chufe to belong. -If, in a hap-
py moment, .the light of truth begin to
break in upon you, refute not admittance
to the ray. If. your hearts secretly re-
.proach you for the wronlg.choice you have
made, bethink yourselves that the evil is

not

not irreparable; Still tere is time fr re- S ER I
pentance and retreat; and a: return to wis- _
dom, is always honourable.

Were su'ch rieditations oftrii indulged,

the evil cowmiinicttions of finners would die
away before thiei-; the foirce f their poi-
fonr would', evaporte; the world would be-
gin to assume in your eyes a new form
aid fhiape. Disdain rio, in -these solitary
liours, to- recolle& what: the wisess have
said, and have-writteh .'concdri'in'g huniman
hippiriefs; aiid' human- vanity. Treat not
their' opinimodis as effifions merely of pee-
iiilhnefs- 6o difapjpintment': but b elieve
t-'erfi t6 be, what they. truly are, the result
of long experieiice, and thorough acquaint-
ance with the world. C6ifider that the
teafoni of youth is afling' fast away. It
is time for you toI be taking'me-afuies for
an establishment in life; nay, it were wife
to be looking forward to 'a placid enjoy-
ment of. old age. That is a period you
wish to fee; but how miserable when it
arrives, if it yield you nothing but the
dregs- of life; and present no retrdfpedct

except

SE RM. except that of a thoughtless, and ,dilho

j noured youth!

LET me once more advise you, to look

forward Sometimes beyond..old age; to
look to a future world. Amidft.evil commu-
nications, let your belief, and your character
as Christians, arise to your view.. Think
of the sacred name in which you.were
baptized. Think of the God whom your
fathers honoured. and worihipped; of the
religion in which they trained you up ; of
the venerable rites in which they brought
you to partake. Their paternal cares have
now ceased. They have finilhed their
earthly course: and the time is coming
when you must follow them. You know
that you are not to live always here; and
you surely do not believe that your exist-
ence is to end with this life. Into what
world then are you next to go ? Whom
will you meet with there ? Before whose
tribunal are you to appear ? What account
will you be able to give of your present
trifling and irregular condut to him who

made

made you ?-Such thoughts may be treat- sE r.,
ed as unseasonable intrusions. But intrude VI.
they sometimes will, whether you make
them welcome or not. Better then, to al-
low them free reception when they come,
and to confider fairly to what they lead.
You have seen persons die; at least, you
have heard of your friends dying near you.
Did it never enter into your minds, to
think what their last reflections probably
were in their concluding moments; or
what your own, in such a situation, would
be? What would be then your hopes and
fears; what part you would then wish to
have ated; in what light your closing
eyes would then view this life, and this
world ?

These are thoughts, tny friends, too im-

portant to be always excluded. These are
things too solemn and awful to be trifled
with. They are superior to all the ridicule
of fools. They come home to every man's
bosom; and are intitled to every man's
highest attention. Let us regard them as
becomes reasonable and mortal creatures;

and

SERM. and they will prove effecual antidotes to
,.___ the evil communications of petulant scoffers.

When vice or folly arise to tempt us un-
der flattering forms, let the serious charac-
ter which we bear as men come also for-
ward to view; and let the folemn'admo-
nitions, with which I conclude, found full
in our ears: My son, if finners entice thee,
consent tbou not. Come out from amongjl
them, and be separate. Remember thy Crea-
tor in the days of thy youth. Fear the Lord,
and depart from evil. The way of -lif is
above to the wife; and he that keepeth the
commandment, keepeth his own foul *.

Prov. i. Io.; 2 Corinth. vi. 17.; Eccles. xii. I.3
Prov. zxv, 4.

S E R-

# SERMON VII. On FORTITUDE. PSALM xxvii. 3. Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear. —

[ 129 ]
S E R M O N VII.

On FORTITUDE.

PSALM XXVil. 3.
though an hoo? Jhouild encamp against me, my

heart Jhall not fear.-

T HIS world is a region of danger, in SERM.

-; L which perfeCt safety is poffefied by _;

no man. Though we live in times of e-
stablished tranquillity, when there is no
ground to apprehend that an hoJi ihall, in
the literal sense, encamp agaill us; yet eve-
ry man, from one quarter or other, has
omewhat to dread. Riches often make to
themselves wings, and flee away. The firm-
eft health may in a mdment be fhalken.
The most flourishing family may unexpect-

VOL. III. K edly

SERM. edly be scattered. The appearances of our

VII.
,_,^ security are frequently deceitful. When

our sky seems most fettled and serene, in
some unobserved quarter gathers the little
black cloud, in which the tempest ferments,
and prepares to discharge itself on our head.
Such is the real situation of man in this
world; and he who flatters himself with an
opposite view of his Rtate, only lives in the
paradise of fools.

In this situation, no quality is more re-

quifite than constancy, or fortitude of
mind; a quality which the Psalmist ap-
pears, from the sentiment in the text, to
have possessed in an eminent degree. For-
titude was justly classed by the ancient
philosophers, among the cardinal virtues.
It is indeed essential to the support of them
all; and is most neceflary to be acquired
by every one who wifies to discharge with
fidelity the duties of his station. It is the
armour of the mind, which will fit him
for encountering the trials, and surmount-
ing the dangers, that are likely to occur in
the course of his life. It may be thought,

perhaps,

perhaps, to be a quality, in some measure, s E R M.
conititutional; dependent on firmness of ,a
nerves, and strength of spirits. Though,
partly, it is so, yet experience flows that
it may also be acquired by principle, and
be fortified by reason; and it is.only when
thus acquired, and thus fortified, that it
can be accounted to carry the charater of
virtue. Fortitude is opposed, as all know,
to timidity, irresolution, a feeble and a
wavering spirit. It is placed, like other
virtues, in the middle between two ex-
tremes; standing at an equal distance from
rahlmefs on the one hand, and from pufil-
lanimity on the other. In discoursing on
this subjed, I purpose, first, to flow the
importance of fortitude or constancy; next,
to ascertain the grounds on which it must
reft; and, lastly, to suggest some confidera-
tions for assisting the exercise of it.

I. THE high importance of fortitude will

easily appear, if we confider it as refped-
ing either the happiness 'of human life, or
the proper discharge of its duties.

K 2 'Without

SERM. Without some degree of fortitude there
VI. can be no happiness; because, amidst the

thousand uncertainties of life, there can be
no enjoyment of tranquillity. The man
of feeble and timorous spirit, lives under
perpetual alarms. He foresees every distant
danger, and trembles. He explores the re-
gions of possibility, to discover the dangers
that may arise. Often he creates imaginary
ones; always magnifies those that are real.
Hence, like a person haunted by speares,
he loses the free enjoyment even of a safe
and prosperous state. On the first hock of
adversity, he desponds. Instead of exerting
himself to lay hold on the resources that
remain, he gives up all for loft; and re-
signs himself to abje& and broken spirits.
-On the other hand, firmness of mind is
the parent of tranquillity. It enables one
to enjoy the present without disturbance;
and to look calmly on dangers that ap-
proach, or evils that threaten in future. It
fuggefis good hopes. It supplies resources.
It allows a man to retain the full possession
of himself, in every situation of fortune.
Look into the heart .of this man, and' you

will

will find composure, cheerfulness, and mag- s E R M.
nlanimity. Look into the heart of the other, v].
and you will fee nothing but confusion,
anxiety, and trepidation. The one is the
catle built on a rock, which defies the at-
tacks of surrounding waters. The other
is a hut placed on the shore, which every.
wind ihakes, and every wave overflows.

IF fortitude be thus essential to the enjoy-

ment of life, it is equally so, to the proper
discharge of all its most important duties.
He who is of a cowardly mind is, and
must be, a slave to the world. He fathions
his whole conduct according to its hopes
and fears. He smiles, and fawns, and be-
trays, from abject considerations of personal
safety. He is incapable of either concei-
ving, or executing, any great design. He
can neither stand the clamour of the mul-
titude, nor the frowns of the mighty. The
wind of popular favour, or the threats of
power, are sufficient to mhake his most
determined purpose. The world always
knows where to find him. He may pretend

K 3 to

SERM. to have principles; but on every trying oc-
rl. cation, it will be seen, that his pretended

principles bend to convenience and safety.
-The man of virtuous fortitude, again,
follows the dictates of his heart, unembar-
raffed by those restraints which lie upon
the timorous. Having once determined
what is fit for him to do, no threatenings
can fliake, nor dangers appall him. He
refts upon himself, supported by a con-
fcioufnefs of inward dignity. I do not fay
that this disposition alone, will secure lim
against every vice. He may be lifted up
with pride. He may be reduced by plea-
sure. He may be hurried away by paflion.
But at leafs on one quarter, he will be safe;
by no abject fears milled into evil.

Without this temper of mind, no man

can be a thorough Christian. For his pro-
session, as such, requires him to be fupe-
rior to that fear of man which bringeth a
fiare; enjoins him, for the fake of a good
conscience, to encounter every danger; and
to be prepared, if called, even to lay down
his life in the cause of religion and truth.

All

All who have been diftinguiflied as ser- SERM.

VII.

vants of God, or benefactors of men; all >
who, in perilous situations, have aced their
part with such honour as to render their
names illustrious through succeeding ages,
have been eminent for fortitude of mind.
Of this we have one conspicuous example in
the Apostle Paul, whom it will be inftruc-
tive for us to view in a remarkable occur-
rence of his life. After having long adced
as the apostle of the Gentiles, his mifion
called him to go to Jerusalem, where he
knew that he was to encounter the utmost
violence of his enemies. Just before he set
fail, he called together the elders of his
favourite church at Ephesus, and in a pa-
thetic speech, which does great honour to
his charaCter, gave them his last farewel.
Deeply affected by their knowledge of the
certain dangers to which he was exposing
himself, all the assembly were filled with
distress, and melted into tears. The cir-
cumftances were such, as might have con-
veyed dejetion even into a resolute mind;
and would have totally overwhelmed the

K 4 feeble.

SE RM. feeble. They all weptfore, andfell on Paul's
_VI. neck, and kJied him; sorrowing moJi of all

for the words which hefpake, that they.Jhould
fee his face no more. What were then the
Sentiments, what was the language, of this
great and good man ? Hear the words
which spoke his firm and undaunted
mind. Behold, I go bound in the spirit, un-
to Jerzfalem, not knowing the things that
Jhall befall me there; save that the Holy
GboJt witnefeth in every city, faying, that
bonds and afftliions abide me. But nonie of
these things move me; neither count I my life
dear unto miyfelf Jo that I might jnifi my
course with joy, and the minJiry which I
have received of the Lord yefus, to teJtify the
gospel of the'grace of God *. There was ut-
tered the voice, there breathed the spirit, of
a brave, and a virtuous man. Such a man
knows not what it is to ihrink from dan-
ger, when conscience points out his path.
In that path he is determined to walk; let
the consequences be what they will. Till

AEts xx. 22. 23. 24.; 37. 38.

I die,

Idie, I will not remove my integrity from me. SE RM.
My righteozfnefs I hold fafl, and will not let _
it go. My heartJ hall not reproach mefo long
as I live :. " For me, there is a part ap-
" pointed to aa. I go to perform it. My
"duty I ihall do to-day. Let to-morrow
,k take thought fr the ings of itself"-
Having thus shown the importance, I pro-
ceed,

II. To ihow the proper foundations of
conffancy and fortitude of mind. They
are principally two; a good conscience,
and trust in God.

A corrupted and guilty man, can possess

no true firmness of heart. He who by
crooked paths, pursues dishonourable ends,
has many things to dismay him. He not
only dreads the disappointment of his de-
signs, by some of those accidents to which
all are exposed; but he has also to dread
the treachery of his confederates, the dif-
covery and reproach of the world, and the

X Job xxyii. 5' 6

just

SERM. juif displeasure of Heaven. His fears he

v is obliged to conceal; but while he assumes

the appearance of intrepidity before the
world, he trembles within himself; and
the bold and steady eye of integrity, fre-
quently darts terror into his heart. There
is, it is true, a fort of constitutional cou-
rage, which sometimes has rendered men
daring in the most flagitious attempts.
But this fool-hardiness of the raflh, this
boldness of the ruffian, is altogether differ-
ent from real fortitude. It arises merely
from warmth of blood, from want of
thought, and blindness to danger. As it
forms no characer of value, so it appears
only in occasional rallies; and never can be
uniformily maintained. It requires adven-
titious props to support it; and in some
hour of trial, always fails. There canr be
no true courage, no regular persevering
conflancy, but what is connected with
principle, and founded on a consciousness
of reCtitude of intention. This, and this
only, erects that brazen wall which we can
oppose to every hostile attack. It cloaths

us

us with an armour, on which fortune will S ERM.
spend its flafts in vain. All is found u.
within. There is no weak place, where we
particularly dread a blow. There is no
occasion for false colours to be hung out.
No disguise is needed to cover us. We
would be satisfied if all mankind could
look into our hearts. What has he to
fear, who not only adts on a plan which
his conscience approves, but who knows
that every good man, nay, the whole un-
biassed world, if they could trace his in-
t tentions, would justify and approve his
: conduc ?

HE knows, at the fame time, that he is at-
ing under the immediate eye and protec-
tion of the Almighty. Behold my witness is
in heaven; and my record is on high '. Here
opens a new source of fortitude to every .
virtuous man. The consciousness of such
an illustrious fpecator, invigorates and ani-
mates him. He trusts, that the eternal lo-

* Job xvi. I9.

ver
i

SERM. ver of righteousness not only beholds and
;v_,, approves, but will itrengthen and assist;

will not susser him to be unjufily oppressed,
and will reward his constancy in the end,
with glory, honour, and immortality. A
good conscience, thus supported, beflows
on the heart a much greater degree of intre-
pidity, than it could otherwise inspire. One
who refts on an Almighty, though invisible,
Protecor, exerts his powers with double
force; ads with vigour not his own. Ac-
cordingly, it was from this principle of
trust in God, that the Psalmist derived that
courage and boldness, which he expresses
in the text. He had said immediately be-
fore, rhe Lord is my light and my salvation;
the Lord is theJirength of my ife. The con-
sequence which directly follows is, of whom
Jhall I be afraid ? Though an hoJi Jhotld en-
camp againtl me, my heart Jhall not fear. It
remains,

III. THAT I suggest a few considerations
which may prove auxiliary to the exercise

of

of virtuous fortitude, in the midst of dan- SE RM.

VII.
gers. L

From what was just now said, it appears,

first, that it is of high importance to every
one who wiihes to act his part with be-
coming resolution, to cultivate a religious
principle, and to be inspired with trust in
God. The imperfections of the best are
indeed so numerous, as to give them no
title to claim, on their own account, the
protection of Heaven. But we are taught
to believe, that the merciful God, who made
us, and who knows our frame, favours the
sincere and upright; that the supreme ad-
miniitration of the universe is always on
the fide of truth and virtue; and, that,
therefore, every worthy character, and eve-
ry just and good cause, though for a while
it should be deprefled, is likely to receive
countenance and protection in the end.
The more firmly this belief is rooted in
the heart, its influence will be more power-
ful, in surmounting the fears which arise
from a sense of our own weakness or dan-
;er. The records of all nations afford a

thousand

SERM. thousand remarkable instances of the es-
VI.J sea of this principle, both on individuals,

and on bodies of men. Animated by th
strong belief of a just cause, and a pro-
tecting God, the feeble have waxed JArong,
and have despised dangers, sufferings,
and death. Handfuls of men have defied
hoJfs that were encamped againt/ them ; and
have gone forth, conquering and to con-
quer. The sword of the Lord, and of Gi.
deon, have called forth a valour which a-
ftonifhed the world; and which could have
been exerted by none, but those who fought
under a divine banner.

IN the next place, let him who would

preserve fortitude in difficult situations, fill
his mind with a sense, of what constitutes
the true honour of man. It consists not in
the multitude of riches, or the elevation of
rank; for experience shows, that these may
be possessed by the worthless, as. well as by
the deserving. It consists, in being deterred
by no danger when duty calls us forth; in
fulfilling our allotted part, whatever it may

be,

be, with faithfulness, bravery, and con- SERM.
Rancy of mind. These qualities never fail VII
to stamp distinCtion on the charatcer. They
confer on him who discovers them, an ho-
nourable superiority, which all, even ene-
mies, feel and revere. Let every man,
. therefore, when the hour of danger comes,

bethink himself, that now is arrived the
hour of trial; the hour which must deter-
mine whether he is to rife, or to fink for
ever, in the esteem of all around him. If,
when put to the test, he discover no firm-
nets to maintain his ground, no fortitude
to stand a shock, he has forfeited every
pretension to a manly mind. He must
reckon on being exposed to general con-
tempt; and what is worse, he will feel that
he deserves it. In his own eyes he will be
contemptible; than which, iurely, no mi-
fery can be more severe.

BUT in order to acquire habits of forti-

tude, what is of the highest consequence
is, to have formed a just estimate of the
goods and evils of life, and of the value of

life

SE RM. life itself. For here lies the chief source of
VII. our weakness and puillanimity. We over.

value the advantages of fortune; rank and
riches, ease and safety. Deluded by vain
opinions, we look to these as our ultimate
goods. We hang upon them with fond at-
tachment; and to forfeit any hope of ad-
,vancement, to incur the least discredit with
the world, or to be brought down but one
flep from the station we possess, is regard-
ed with consternation and dismay. Hence,
a thousand weights hang upon the mind,
which depress its courage, and bend it to
mean and dishonourable compliances. What
fortitude can he posess, what. worthy or
generous purpose can he form, who con-
ceives diminution of rank, or loss of for-
tune, to be the chief evils which man can
susser? Put these into the balance with
true honour, with conscious integrity, with
the esteem of the virtuous and the wife,
with the favour of Almighty God, with
peace of mind, and hope of heaven; and
then think, whether those dreaded evils are
sufficient to intimidate you from doing

your

your duty. Look beyond external appear- SERM.
ances to the inside of things. Suffer not
yourselves to be imposed oni by that glitter-
ing varnish, with which the surface of the
world dazzles the vulgar, Confider how
many are contented and happy without
those advantages of fortune, on which you
put so extravagant a value. Confider whei
ther it is possible for you to be happy with
them, if, for their fake, you forfeit all that
is estimable in man. The favour of the
great, perhaps, you think, is at stake; or
that popularity with the multitudes on
which you build plans of advancement.
Alas ! how precarious are the means which
you employ in order to attain the end you
have in view; and the end itself, how little
is it worthy of your ambition? That fa-
vour which you pursue, of dubious advan-
tage when gained,- is frequently loft by
servile compliance. The timid and abject
are detected, and despised even by those
whom they court; while the firm and re-
solute rife in the end to those honours,
which the other pursued in vain.

VOL. IIL L PUT?

E RMI. PUT the cafe at the worst. Suppose not
,_, your fortune only, but your safety, to be

in hazard; your life itself to be endanger-
ed, by adhering to conscience and vir-
tue.. Think, what a creeping and igno-
minious state you would render life, if,
when your duty calls, you would expose it
to no danger; if by a dastardly behaviour,
you would, at any expence, preserve it,
That life, which you are so anxious to pre-
serve, can at any rate be prolonged only
for a few years more; and those years may
be full of woe. He who will not rifle death
when conscience requires him to face it,
ought to be ashamed to live.- Confider,
as a man and a Christian, for what purpose
life was given thee by Heaven. Was it,
that thou mighteft pass a few years in -low
pleasures, and ignoble sloth; flying. into
every corner to hide thyself, when the leat
danger rifes to view ? No: Life was given,
that thou mighteft come forth to a fbome
useful and honourable part, on that theatre
where thou haft been placed by Provi-
dence; mighteft glorify. him that made

.~*-~_~
-. ~thee;

thce; and by steady perfevelance in virtue, S R M.
rife in the end to an immortal slate.

Son of man ! Remember thine original

honours. Aile:rt the dignity of thy nature;
Shake off this pusillanimous dread of death;
and seek to fulfil the ends for which thou
wert sent forth by thy Creator.- The
sentiment of a noble mind is, Icount not

y it Ife dear unt o tayf, Jo that I may finifJ

2iy' co ife with joy. To the filiajiug of his
cor0Jfe, let every one direCt his eye; and let
him now appretiate life according to the
value it will, be found to have, when fum-
med up at the close. That is the period
which brings every thing to the test. Illu-
sions may formerly have imposed on the
world; may have imposed on the man him-
self.. But all illulion then vanishes. The
real character comes forth. The estimate
of happiness is fairly formed. Hence it
has been justly said, that no man can be
pronounced either great or happy, until his
last hour come. To that last hour, what
will bring such fatisfadtion, or add so much
dignity, as the reflection, on having fur-

L 2 mounted

S'ER M mounted with firmness all the. discourage-

VII.
vL-,- ments of the world, and having persevered

to the end in one uniform course of fidelity
and honour ? We remarked before, the
magnanimous behaviour of the Apostle
Paul, when he had.perfecution and distress
full in view. Hear now the sentiments of
the fame great man, when the time of his
last suffering approached; and remark the
majesty, and the eafe,.with which he look-
ed on death. I am now ready. to be-.ofered,
anid the time of my departure is at hantd. I
have fought the good fght. I have finip/ed
my rcour.. I have kept the faith. Hence-
forth there is laid up for me a crown of: righ-
t. eoui.efs :. How many years of life does
such a dying moment overbalance ? Who
would not chufe, in this manner, to go off
the stage, with such a Long of triumph in
his mouth, rather than prolong his exist-
ence through a wretched old age, fained
with fin and shame ?

' * 3 Timothy, iv. 6. 7.

ANIMATED

ANIMATED by these considerations, let SEr:.

us nouriflh that fortitude of mind, which is ._ .:
so essential to a man, and a Christian. Let
no discouragement, nor danger, deter us
from doing what is right. Through ho-
nour and dij/onour, through good report ani
bad report, let us preserve fidelity to ou1
God and our Saviour. Though an hofJhotild
encamp againjf us, let us not fear to dif-
charge our duty. God afifts us in the vir-
tuous conflit; and will crown the conque-
ror with eternal rewards. le thou fait/fil
unto death, and I will give thee a crown of
lIf,. 2o Inim that overcometh, faiith our bleif-
ed Lord, I 4Will grant to fit wilth mie on my
throne; even as I aso overcame, and amn set
down with my Father on his throne *.

Rev. ii. o.-iii. r.

I, 3 S E R-

# SERMON VIII. On ENVY. 1 CORINTHIANS, xiii. 4. Charity envieth not. —

[ I-50 ]
SE IM O N VIII.

On ENVY,

I CORINTHIANS, Xiii. 4,

Charity envieth not.-

SERM. '?NVY is a sensation of uneasiness
VIII. L and disquiet, arising from the ad-

vantages which others are supposed to
possess above us, accompanied with ma-
lignity towards those who possess them.
This is universally admitted to be one' of
the blackest paflions in the human heart.
In this world, we depend much on one
another; and were therefore formed by
God to be mutually ulfeful and assisting,
The instinCts of kindness and compafnion
which belong to our frame, lhow how

much

much it was the intention of our Creator, SE RM.
that we should be united in friendihip. If vL.
any infringe this great law of natire, by
acts of causeless hostility, resentment may
justly arise. No one is to be condemned
for defending his rights, and showing dif-
pleasure against a malicious enemy. But
to conceive ill-will at one who has attacked
none of our rights, nor done us any inju-
ry, solely because he is more prosperous
than we are, is a disposition altogether un-
natural; it suits not the human confittu-
tion, and partakes more of the rancour of
an evil spirit. Hence, the character of an
envious man is universally odious. All dif-
claim it; and they who feel themselves un-
der the influence of this passion, carefully
conceal it.

But itis proper to confider,' that among

all our.paflions, both good and bad, there
are many different gradations. Sometimes
they swim on the surface of the mind,
without producing any internal agitation.
They proceed no farther than the begin-
nings of passion. Allayed by our confti-

L 4 tution,

S E RM. tution, or tempered by the mixture of other

dispositions, they exert no considerable in-
fluence on the temper. Though the cha-
rater in which envyforms the ruling pas-
sion, and reigns in all its force, be one too
odious, I hope, to be common; yet some
Ihade, some tincture, of this evil difpofi-
tion, mixes with most characters in the
world. It is, perhaps, one of the most pre-
vailing infirmities to which we are subjet.
There are few but who, at one time or
other, have found'fomewhat of this nature
itirring within them; some lurking unea-
finess in their mind, when they looked up
to others, who enjoyed a greater ihare than
had fallen to their lot, of some advantages
which they wiihed, and thought themselves
intitled, to possess. Though this ihould
not embitter their disposition; though it
flould create the uneasiness only, without
the malignity, of envy; yet fill it is a dif-
turbed state of mind; and always borders
upon, if it actually include not, some vi-
cious affections. In order, as far as pof-
fible, to remedy this evil, I hall now con-

fider

fider what are the most general grounds of SERM.m

VIII.

the envy which men are apt to bear to _-
others; and lhall examine what foundation
they afford, for any degree of this trouble-
some and dangerous pafion.-The chief
grounds of envy may be reduced to three:
Accomplifiments of mind; advantages of
birth, rank, and fortune; superior success
in worldly purfifits.

I. ACCOMPLISHMENTS, or endowments

of the mind. The chief endowment for
which man deserves to be valued, is virtue.
This, unquestionably, forms the most eiti-
mable distinction among mankind. Yet
this, which may appear furpriiing, never
forms any ground of envy. No man is
envied for being more just, more generous,
more patient, or forgiving, than others.
This may, in part, be owing to virtue pro-
ducing in every one who beholds it, that
high degree of refpea and love, which ex-
tingtiihes envy. But probably, it is more
owing to the good opinion which every
one entertains of his own moral qualities.

Some

SE RMI. Some virtues, or, at least, the feeds of them,
·iI. he finds within his breast. Others, he vain-

ly attributes to himself. Those in which
he is plainly deficient, he undervalues; as
either not real virtues, or virtues of very
inferior rank; and refts satisfied, that, on
the whole, he is as worthy and refpedable
as his neighbour.

The cafe is different, with regard to those

mental abilities and powers which are a-
fcribed to others. As long as these are lex-
erted in a sphere of action remote from
ours, and not brought into competition
with talents of the fame kind, to which we
have pretensions, they create no jealousy.
They are viewed as distant objects, in
which we have not any concern. It is not
until they touch our own line,: and appear
to rival us in what we wish, to excel, that
they awaken envy. Even then, envy is,
properly speaking, not grounded on the
talents of others. For here, too, our self-
complacency brings us relief; from the
persuasion, that were we thoroughly known,
and full jufice done to us, our abilities

would

would be found not inferior to those of SERM.
our rivals. What properly occasions envy, JvI.
is the fruit of the accomplishments of
others; the pre-eminence which the opi-
nion of the world bestows, or which we
dread it will bellow, on their talents above
ours. Hence, distinguished superiority in
genius, learning, eloquence, or any other
of those various arts that attract the no-
tice of the world, often become painful
grounds of envy; not indeed to all indif-
ferently, but to those who follow the fame
line of pursuit. Mere rivality, inspired by
emulation, would carry no reproach; were
not that rivality joined with obliquity, and
a malignant spirit; did it not lead to fe-
cret detraction, and unfair methods of di-
minifhing the reputation of others. Too
frequently has such a spirit tarnished the
charader of those who fought to thine in
the elegant arts; and who, otherwise, had a
just title to fame.--Let such as are ad-
dited to this infirmity confider, how much
'they degrade themselves. Superior merit,
of any kind, always refts on itself. Con-

fcious

SERM. fcious of what it deserves, it disdains low
VUL_ competitions. and jealouiies. They who

are ftung'with envy, especially when they
allow its malignity to appear, confess a sense
of their own inferiority; and, in effec, pay
homage to that merit from which they en-
deavour to detract

But in order to eradicate the pafion,

and to cure the disquiet which it creates,
let..fuch persons farther qonfider, how in-
.considerable the advantage is which their
rivals have gained, by any superiority over
them. They whom you envy, are them-
selves inferior to others who. follow the
fame pursuits.- For how few, how very
few, have reached the summit of excel-
lence, in the art. or study which they cul-
tivate ? Even that degree ,of excellence
which they have attained, how feldom'is
it allowed to them by. the world, till after
they die ? Public applause is the moIt fluc-
tuating, and uncertain, of all rewards.. Ad-
mired, as they may be, by a circle of their
friends, they have,.to look up, to others,
who stand abov,e them in public opinion;

and

and undergo the fame mortifications which S ER M.
you susser in looking up to them. Con- _;,
fider what labour it'has colt them to arrive
at that degree of eminence they have gain-
ed; and after all their: labour, how im-
perfect their recompence is at lafi. With-
in what narrow bounds is- their fame con-
fined? With what a number of humilia-
tions is it mixed ? To how many are they
absolutely unknown ? Among those who
know them, how many censure and decry
them ?- Attending fairly to these confi-
derations, the envious might come in the
end to discern, that the fame acquired by
any accomplishment of the mind, by all
that ikill can contrive, or genius can exe-
cute, amounts to no more than a small ele-
vation; raises the possessor to such an in-
considerable height above the crowd, .that
others.may, without disquiet, fit down con-
tented with their own mediocrity.

II. ADVANTAGES of fortune, superiority

in birth, rank and riches,-even qualifica-
ions of body and form, become grounds

of

SER M. of envy. Among external advantages,
V__. those which relate to the body ought cer-

tainly, in the comparative estimation of
ourselves and others, to hold the lowest
place; as in the acquisition of them we
can claim no merit, but mufft ascribe them
entirely to the gift of nature. Yet envy
has often Ihowed itself here in full malig-
nity; though a small measure of reflection
might have discovered, that there was little
or no ground for this passion to arise. It
would have proved a blessing to multi-
tudes, to have wanted those advantages for
which they are envied. How frequently,
for instance, has Beauty betrayed the pof-
feffors of it into many a snare, and brought
upon them many a disaster ? Beheld with
spiteful eyes by those who are their rivals,
they, in the mean time, glow with no less
envy against others by whom they are fur-
passed; while, in the midst of their com-
petitions, jealousies, and concealed enmi-
ties, the fading flower is easily blasted;
shortlived at the belt; and trifling, at any

rate,

rate, in comparison with the higher, and SE RM.

VIII.
more lasting beauties of the mind.

But of all the grounds of envy among

men, superiority in rank and fortune is
the most general. Hence, the malignity
which the poor commonly bear to the
rich, as ingroffing to themselves all the
comforts of life. Hence, the evil eye with
which persons of inferior station scrutinise
those who are above them in rank; and if
they approach to that rank, their envy is ge-
nerally firongeft against such as are just one
ftep higher than themfelves.-Alas ! my
friends, all this envious disquietude, which
agitates the world, arises from a deceitful
i figure which imposes on the public view.

False colours are hung out: the real state
of men is not, what it seems to be. The
order of society requires a difiindion of
ranks to take place; but in point of hap-
piness, all men come much nearer to equa-
lity than is commonly imagined; and the
circumfiances, which form any material
difference of happiness among them, are not
of that nature which renders them grounds

sIl~~~ ~of
.,

SERM. of envy. The poor man possesses not, it

is true, some of the conveniencies and
pleasures of the rich; but, in return,-he
is free of many embarrassments to which
they are subjea. By the simplicity and
uniformity of his life, he is delivered from
that variety of cares, which perplex those
who have great affairs to manage, intricate
plans to pursue, many enemies, perhaps, to
encounter in the pursuit. In the tranquil-
'lity of his small habitation, and private
family, he enjoys a peace which is often
unknown at courts. The gratifications of
nature, which are always the most satis-
factory, are pofleffed by him to their full
extent; and if he be a firanger to the re-
fined- pleasures of the wealthy, he is un-
acquainted also with the desire of them,
and by consequence,. feels no want. His
plain meal satisfies his appetite, with a re-
lih, probably, higher than that of the rich
man, who fits down to his luxurious ban-
quet. His sleep is more found; his health
more firm; he knows not what spleen,
languor, or litleifefs are, His accustom-

ed

cd employments or labours are not more SERM.
oppressive to him, than the labour of at- ii
tendance on courts and the great, the la-
bours of dress, the fatigue of amusements,
the very weight of idleness, frequently are
to the rich. In the mean time, all the
beauty of the face of nature, all the enjoy-
ments of domestic society, all the gaiety
and chearfulnefs of an easy mind, are as
open to him as to those of the highest
rank. The splendour of retinue, the found
of titles, the appearances of high refpe&,
are indeed soothing, for a ihort time, to
the great. But become familiar, they are
soon forgotten. Custom effaces their im-
pression. They fink into the rank of those
ordinary things, which daily recur, without
raising any sensation of joy.-Ceafe, there-
fore, from looking up with discontent and
envy to those whom birth or fortune have
placed above you. Adjust the balance of
happiness fairly. When you think of the
enjoyments you want, think also of the
troubles from which you are free. Allow
their just value to the comforts you pof-

VOL. I. M fess

sE RM. fess; and you will find, reason to reft: fai
,i syi. -tisfied,: with,.a very moderate, though not

an .opulent and splendid, condition of for-
ztne. ,,Often, ,did you. know the whole,
you .,would be inclined to. pity the state of
'those. whom you now envy.,

III. SUPERIOR fiuccefs in the course of

worldly pursuits, is a frequent ground of
envy. Among all ranks .of men, compe-
titions arise. Wherever any favourite ob-
jet ,is .pursued in common, jealousies -fel-
:dom fail. to take place .among those, who
.are.equally desirous of attaining it.; as in
-that ancient infiance of. envy recorded of
Joseph's brethren, who hated theirbrother,
bjecaufe their father loved .him more than. all
.te rcj l . ; '.I could easily bear," fays one,
"'. that some others should be. more re p u-
,table; or -famous, lhould ,be richer; or
" greater,; than I. It is but just, that this

man. ihould enjoy the, difitinion to
" which.his. splendid .abilities have. raised

Gen. xxxvi. 4.

" him.

" him. It is natural for that man, to SERM.
"command the refpet to which he is in- VIII.
"titled by his birth or his rank. But
"when I, and another, have flarted in the
" race of life, upon equal terms, and in
" the fame rank; that he, without any
" pretension to uncommon merit, ihould
" have suddenly so far outstripped me;
" should have ingroffed all that public fa-
" vour to which I am no lels intitled than
" he; this is, what I cannot bear; my
" blood boils, my spirit swells with indig-
" nation, at this undeserved treatment I
" have suffered from the world." Com-
plaints of this nature are often made, by
them who leek to justify the envy which
they bear to their more prosperous neigh-
bours. But if such persons with not to be
thought'unjuft, let me desire them to in-
quire, whether they have been altogether
fair in the comparison they have made of
their own merit with that of their rivals;
and whether they have not themselves to
blame, more than the world, for being left
behind in the career of fortune. The world

.M 2 is

SER'M. is not always blind or unjust, in conferring
i^__ · its favours. Instances indeed, sometimes,

occur, of deserving persons prevented, by a
fucceflion of cross incidents, from rising
into public acceptance. But, in the ordi-
nary course of things, merit, sooner or later,
receives a reward; while the greater part
of men's misfortunes and disappointments
can, generally, be traced to some mifcondud
of their own. ,Widom bringeth to honour:
The hand of the diligent maketh rich-; and, it
has been said, not altogether without rea-
son, that, of his own fortune in life, every
man is the chief artificer. If Joseph was
preferred by the father to all his brethren,
his subsequent conduct showed how well
-he merited the preference.

Supposing, however, the world to. have.

been unjust, in an uncommon degree, with
regard to you, this will not vindicate ma-
lignity and envy towards a more prof-
perous competitor. You may accuse the
'world; but what reason have .you to bear
ill-will to him, who has only improved the
favour which the world mhowed him ? If,

by

by means that are unfair, he has risen; SERM.
and, to advance limfelf, has acted inju- j.
rioufly by. you, resentment is justifiable;
but if you cannot accuse him of any such
improper conduct, his success alone gives
no fanation to your envy. You, perhaps,
preferred the enjoyment of your ease, to the
stir of a busy, or to the cares of a thoughts
ful life. Retired from the world, and fol,
lowing your favourite inclinations, you were
not always attentive to seize the opportu-
nities which offered, for doing justice to
your clharaAer, and improving your fitua-
tion. Ought you then to complain, if the
more active and laborious have acquired
what you were negligent to gain? Confi-
der, that if you have obtained less prefer-
ment, you have pofleffed more indulgence
and ease. Confider, moreover, that the ri-
val to whom you look up with repining
eyes, though more fortunate in the world,
may perhaps, on the whole,, not be more
happy than you. He has all the vicifi-
tudes of the world before him. He may
have much to encounter, much to susser,

M 3 fiom

SE RM. from which you are proteced by the great-
VL.-r er obscurity of your station. Every fitua-

tion in life, has both a bright and a dark
fide. Let not your attention dwell only
on what is bright on the fide of those you
envy, and dark on your own. But bring-
ing into view both fides of your respective
conditions, estimate fairly the fum of fe-
licity.

THUS I have suggested several confider-

ations, for evincing the unreasonableness of
that disquietude which envy raises in our
breasts; considerations, which tend at least
to mitigate and allay the workings of this
malignant passion, and which, in a' fober
mind, ought totally to extinguish it. The
scope of the whole has been, to promote,
in every one, contentment with his own
state. Many arguments of a different na-
ture may be employed against envy; some
taken from its sinful and criminal nature;
some, from the mischiefs to which it gives
rife in the world; others, from the misery
which it produces to him who nourishes

this-

this viper in his bosom. But,.. undoubted- SERIM.

VIII.

Iy,.the most efficacious arguments, are such _
as.thow, that the circumstances of others,
compared with our own, afford no ground'
for envy. The miflaken ideas which are.
entertained, of the high importance of cer-.
tain worldly advantages and distinctions,
form the principal cause of our repining.
at our own lot, and envying that of others.
To things light in themselves, our imagi-
nation has added undue weight. Did we
allow reflection and wisdom to correst the.
prejudices which we have imbibed, and to
disperse those phantoms of our own creating,
the.gloom which overcasts us would gra-
dually vanish. Together with returning
contentment, the fIy would clear up, and
eyery object brighten around us. It is in
the fullen and dark shade of discontent,
that noxious passions, like venomous ani-
mals, breed, and prey upon the heart.

', ENVY is a paflion of so odious a nature,
that not only it is concealed as much as
possible from the world, but every man is

M 4 glad

SE RM. glad to dissemble the appearances of it to
vii. his own heart. Hence, it is apt to grow

upon him unperceived. Let him who is
desirous to keep his heart chaste and pure
from its influence, examine hinfelf strictly
on those dispositions which he bears to-
wards his prosperous neighbours. Does he
ever view, with secret uneasiness, the merit
of others rising into notice and diftincion?
Does he hear their praises with unwilling
ear ? Does he feel an inclination to depre-
ciate, what he dares not openly blame ?
When obliged to commend, does his cold
and aukward approbation, insinuate his be-
lief of some unknown defects in the ap-
plauded character? From such symptoms
as these, he may infer that the disease of
envy is forming; that the poison is be-
ginning to spread its infec&ion over his
heart.

THE causes that nourish envy are prin-

cipally two; and two which, very frequent-
ly, operate in conjunction; these are, pride
and indolence. The conneCtion of pride

with

with envy, is obvious and direc. The high SERM.
value which the proud set on their own
merit, the unreasonable claims which they
form on the world, and the injustice which
they suppose to be done to them by any prese-
rence given to others, are perpetual sources,
_ !rft of discontent, and next of envy. When

indolence is joined to pride, the disease of
: 'e mind becomes more inveterate and in-
curable. Pride leads men to claim more
than they deserve. Indolence prevents them
from. obtaining what they might justly
claim. Disappointments follow; and spleen,
malignity, and envy, rage within them.
The proud and indolent, are always envi-
ous. Wrapt up in their own importance,
they fit still, and repine, because others are
more prosperous than they; while, with
all their high opinion of themselves, they
have done nothing either to deserve, or to
acquire, prosperity. As, therefore, we va-
lue our virtue, or our peace, let us guard
againit these two evil dispositions of mind.
Let us be modest in our own esteem, and,
by diligence and industry, study to acquire

the

SE R M. the esteem of others. So flall we ihut up

I the avenues that lead to many a bad pas-

sion; and shall learn, il wha foeverJlate we
are, therewith to be content.

FINALLY, in order to subdue envy, le:

us bring often into view those religios,
considerations which regard us particularly
as Christians. Let us remember how ur
worthy we all are in the fight of God; .and
how much the blessings which each of vu
enjoy, are beyond-what we deserve. Let us
nourish reverence and submission to that
Divine government, which has appointed.
to every one such a condition in the world
as-is fittest for him to possess. Let us re-
colled how opposite the Christian spirit is
to. envy; and what sacred obligations it
lays upon us, to walk in love and charity
towards one another. Indeed, when we
reflect on the many. miseries which abound
in human life; on the scanty proportion of
happiness which any man is here allowed
to enjoy; on the small difference which the
diversity of fortune makes on that scanty.

proportion;

proportion; it is surprising, that envy should s E R M.
ever have been a prevalent passion among v_,
men, much more that it flould have pre-
vailed among Christians. Where so much
is suffered in common, little room is left
for envy. There is more occasion for pity
and sympathy, and inclination to assist each
other. To our own good endeavours for
rertifying our dispositions, let us not forget
toadd serious prayers to the Author of our
being, that he who made the heart of man,
and knows all its infirmities, would tho-
roughly purify our hearts from a passion so
base, and so criminal, as envy. Create in me,
0 God, a clean heart; and renew a rightfpi
rit within me. Search me, and know my
heart. . Try me, and know my thoughts. See
if there be any wicked way in me, and lead
me in the way everlaJfing *.

* PS. li. 1o.; cxxxur. 23. 24.

S E R-

# SERMON IX. On IDLENESS. MATTHEW, xx. 6. — Why stand ye here all the day idle?

L[ 72
SERMON IX.

On IDLENESS.

MATTHEW, XX. 6.

---Why fland ye here all the day idle ?
SERM. TT is an. observation which.naturally oc-

. o. curs, and has been often made, that all
the representations of the Christian life in
scripture are taken from active scenes;
fromf. carrying on a warfare, running a
race, striving to .enter in at a itrait gate,
and, as in this context, labouring in a vine-
yard. Hence the conclusion plainly fol-
lows, that various active duties are requi-
red of the Christian; and that sloth and
indolence are inconsistent with his hope of
heaven.

But

But it has been sometimes supposed, that SE R M.

industry, as far as it is matter of duty, re- IX.
gards our spiritual concerns and employ-
ments only; and that one might be very
busy as a Christian, who was very idle as a
man. Hence, among some denominations of
Chriftiais, an opinion has prevailed, that the
perfection of religion-was to be found in
those mohaftic retreats, where every active
function of civil life was totally excluded,
and the whole time of men filled up with
exercises of devotion. They who hold such
opinions proceed on the supposition, that
religion has little or no concern with the
ordinary affairs of the world; that its du-
ties stand apart by themselves; and mingle
not in the intcrcourfe which men have with
one another. The perfect Christian was
imagined to live a fort of angelic life, fe-
questered from the business or pleasures
of this contemptible state. The gospel, on
the contrary, represents the religion of
Christ as intended for the benefit of human
society. It assumes men as engaged in the
business of aative life; and direEts its ex-

lortations,

SERM. hortations, accordingly, to all ranks and
X-' stations; to the magistrate and the subjea,

to the master and the servant; to the rich
and the poor, to them that buy and them
that fell, them that use and them that abuse
the world. Some duties, indeed, require
privacy and retreat. But the most import-
ant must be performed in the midst of the
world, where we are commanded to Jhine
as lights, and by our good works to glorify
our Father which is in heaven. This world,
as the context represents it, is God's vine-
yard, where each of us has a talk assigned
him to perform. In every station, and at
every period of life, labour is required. At
the third, the sixth, or the eleventh hour,
we are commanded to work, if we would
not incur, from the great Lord of the vine-
yard, this reproof, Why Jsand ye here all the
day idle ?- We may, I confers, be 'busy
about many things, and yet be found ne-
gligent of the One thing needful. We may
be very active, and, withal, very ill employ-
ed. But though a person may be indu-
ftrious without being religious, I must at

the

the fame time admonifl you, that no man s E P. .
can, be idle without being sinful. This I I
shall endeavour to show in the sequel of the
discourse; wherein I purpose to reprove a
vice which is too common among all ranks
of men. Superiors admonifli their infe-
iors, and parents tell their children, that
idleness is the mother of every fin; while,
in their own practice, they often set the
example of what they reprobate severely in
others. I fliall study to fiow, that the idle
man is, in every view, both fooliih, and
criminal; that he neither lives to God;
nor lives to the world; nor lives to him-
self.

I.I HE lives not to God. The great and

wife. Creator certainly does nothing in vain.
A small measure of reflection might con-
vince every one, that for some useful pur-
pose he was sent into the world. The na-
ture of man bears no mark of infignifican-
cy, or negle&. He is placed at the head
of all things here below. He is furnished
with a great preparation of faculties and

powers.

SERM. powers. He is enlightened by reason with
I _ many important discoveries; even taught

by revelation to confider himself as ranfo-
med, by the death of Christ, from misery;
and intended to rife, by gradual advances,
to a still higher rank in the universe of
God. In such a situation, thus diftin-
guifhed, thus favoured and affifed by his
Creator, can he hope to be forgiven, if he
aim at no improvement, if he pursue no
useful design, live for no other purpose but
to indulge in sloth, to consume the fruits
of the earth, and to spend his days in a
dream of vanity? Existence is a sacred
trust ; and he who thus misemploys, and
squanders it away, is treacherous to its Au-
thor.- Look around you, and you will
behold the whole universe full of -aCive
powers. Action is, to speak so, the genius
of nature. By motion and exertion, the fy-
Item of being is preserved in vigour. By
its different parts always adcing in fubordi-
nation one to another, the perfection of the
whole is carried on. The heavenly bodies
ppeetually revolve. Day and night incef-

fantly

tantly repeat their appointed course. Con- s ER M.
t sinual operations are going on in the earth,
and in the waters. Nothing stands still;
All is alive, and stirring, throughout the
univerfe.-In the midst of this animated

- and busy scene, is man alone to remain
I idle in his place ? Belongs it to him, to be
I the sole inadive and slothful being in the
, creation, when he has so much allotted
i him to do; when in so many various ways
he might improve his own nature; might

: advance the glory of the God who made

rjhim; and contribute his part to the gene-
3 ral good ?

Hardly is there any feeling of the hu-
t man heart more natural, or more univer-

fal, than that of our being accountable to
God. It is, what the most profligate can
never totally erase. Almost all nations have
agreed in the belief, that there is to come
some period, when the Almighty will act
as the judge of his creatures. Prefenti-
A ments of this, work in every breast. Con-

science has already erected a tribunal, on
which it anticipates the sentence which at

VOL, III. N that

S.iM. that period hall be passed. Before this tri-

^" bunal let us sometimes place ourselves in

serious thought, and confider what account
we are prepared to give of our condut to
Him who made us. '" I placed you," the
great Judge may then be supposed to fay,
" ina fRation where you had many occa-
" sions for action, and many opportunities

of improvement. You were taught, and

"you knew, your duty. Throughout.a
" course of years I continued your life. I
"' surrounded you with friends, to whom
" you might be useful. I gave you health,
' ease, leisure, and various advantages of
" situation.- Where are the fruits of
" those talents which you possessed ? What
" good have you done with them to your-
" selves? what good, to others ? How
" have you filled up your place, or answer-
- " ed your deflination, in the world ? Pro-
" duce some evidence, of your not having

existed altogether in vain ?"- Let such

as are now mere blanks in the world, and
a burden to the earth, think what answer
they will give to those awful questions.

II. THE

II. THE idle live not to the world, and s E J M.

their fellow-creatures around them, any y
more than they do to God. Had any man
a title to stand alone, and to be independ-
.ent of his fellows, he might then confider
himself as at liberty to indulge in solitary
ease and sloth, without being responsible
to others for the manner in which he
; chose to live. But, on the face of the

earth, there is no such person, from the
King on his throne, to the beggar in his
cottage. We are all connected with one
- another, by various relations; which create

a chain of mutual dependence, reaching
from the highest, to the lowest station in

: society. The order and happiness of the

- world cannot be maintained, without a per-
petual circulation of active duties and of-
fices,.which all are called upon to perform
in their turn. Superiors are no more inde-
pendent of their inferiors, than these infe-
riors are of them. Each have demands
and claims upon the other; and he, who
in any situation of life, refuses to act his
part, and to contribute his share to the ge-

N 2 neral

SERM. neral stock of felicity, deserves to be pro.

_ i{ fcribed from society, as an unworthy mem-

ber. If any man will not work, fays the A-
poftle Paul, neither flould he eat *. If he
will do nothing to advance the purposes of
society, he has no title to enjoy the advan-
tages of it.

It is sometimes supposed, that industry

and diligence are duties required of the
poor alone, and that riches confer the pri-
vilege of being idle. This is so far from
being justified by reason, how often soever
it may obtain in fa&, that the higher one
is raised in the world, his obligation to be
useful is proportionably increased. The
claims upon him, from various quarters,
multiply. The sphere of his active duties
widens on every hand. Even supposing
him exempted from exerting himself in be.
half of his' inferiors, supposing the relation
between superiors and inferiors abolished,
the relation among equals must itill subsist.
If there be no man, however high in rank,
who flands not frequently in need of the

* 2 Theft. iii. Ic.

good

good offices of his friends, does he think SER M.
that he owes nothing to them in return ? x,_
Can he fold his arms in felfifl indolence,
and expect to be served by others, if. he
will not exert himself, in doing service to
any ?-W ere there no other call to indu-
i ftry, but the relation in which every one

f iands to his own family, the remembrance
z of this alone, should make the man of idle-

ness blui. Pretends he to love those with
whom he is connected by the dearest ties,
.i and yet will he not bestir himself for their

guidance, their support, or their advance-
ment in the world? How immoral, and
cruel, is the part he acts, who slumbers in

: sensual ease, while the wants and demands
j of a helpless family cry aloud, but cry in

vain, for his vigorous exertions ? Is this a
husband, is this a father, that deserves to
be honoured with those sacred names?
How many voices will be lifted up against
him, at the last day ? Let such persons re-
member the awful words of scripture, and
tremble. It is written in the First Epifile
;5 to Timothy, the fifth chapter, and eighth

N 3 verse,

SERM. verse, If any proviae not for his own, and
^IXL specially for those of his own house, he bath

denied the faith, and is worse than an inli-
del.

III. THE idle man lives not to himself,

with any more advantage than he lives to
the world. It is indeed on a supposition
entirely opposite, that persons of this cha-
racter proceed. They imagine that, how
deficient soever they may be in point of
duty, they at least consult their own satis
fation. They leave to others the drudge-
ry of life; and betake themselves, as they
think, to the quarter of enjoyment and
ease. Now, in contradiction to this, I as-
fert, and hope to prove, that the idle man,
first, shuts the door against all improve-
ment; next, that he opens it wide to every
destructive folly; and, lastly, that he ex-
cludes himself from the true enjoyment of
pleasure.

FIRST, He {huts the door against im-
provement of every kind, whether of mind,

body,

state of his affairs is described by Solomon. s ER M.
I went by the field of the jlothfidl, and by the
vineyard of the man void of nnderJianding.
And, lo ! it was all grown over with thornss;
and nettles had covered the face thereof; and
the Jtone wall thereof was broken down.
Then I.Jaw and cotfidered it well. I looked
uipon it, and received ifltrudion *. In' the
midst, too, of those diftrefles which idle-
ness brings on its votaries, they must sub-
mit to innumerable mortifications, which
never fail to attend their ihameful conduct.
They must reckon, on feeing themselves
contemned by tie virtuous and wife, and
flighted by the thriving part of mankind.
They must expect to be left behind by eve-
ry competitor for rank or fortune. They
will be obliged to humble themselves be-
fore persons, now far their superiors in the
world, whom, once, they would have dif-
dained to acknowledge as their equals.-
Is it in this manner, that a man lives to
himself? Are these the advantages, which

* Pror. txiv. 30. 31. 32.

were

S.E RM. were expected to be found in the lap of
cI. ease ? The down may at first have appear-

ed soft : But it will soon be found to cover
thorns innumerable. Howz long wilt thou.
Jleep, 0 fiuggard ? When wilt thou arise out
of thy Jeep ? Yet a little jleeq yet a little
Jltmber, a little folding of the hands to Jleep.
So Jhall thy poverty, come as one that travel-
leth; and thy want as an armed man =.-
But this is only a small part of the evils
which persons of this description bring on
themselves: For,

.' IN the second place, while in this man-
ner they ihut the door againit every im-
provement, they open it wide to the most
deftrurdive vices and follies. The hu-
man mind cannot remain always unem-
ployed. Its passions must have some exer-
cife. If we supply them not with proper
employment, they are sure to run loose
into riot and disorder. While we are un-
occupied by what is good, evil is continu-

* Prov. xiv. 3. 34.

ally

body, or fortune. The law of our nature, s E M.
the condition under which we were placed c

I~

from our birth, is, that nothing good or
great is to be acquired, without toil and in-
duftry. A price is appointed by Provi-
dence to be paid for every thing;. and the
price of improvement, is labour. Indu-
ftry may, indeed, be sometimes difappbinted.
The race may not be always to the fwiTft,
nor the battle to the Jfrong. But, at the
fame time, it is certain that, in the ordi-
nary course of things, without strength,
; the battle cannot be gained; without swift-

ness, the race cannot be run with success.
In all labour, fays the wife man, there is
i profit; but e/oth e l f the liuggard deireth,

and hath nothing . If we consult either
the improvement of the mind, or the health
of the body, it is well known that exercise
is the great instrument of promoting both.
Sloth enfeebles equally the bodily, and the
i mental powers. As in the animal system
it engenders disease, so on the faculties of

Plov. xiv. z3.; xiii. 4.

|1 . 'IN 4 the
41 "

SERM. the foul it brings a fatal rust, which cor-
IX- rodes and waftes them; which, in a ihort

time, reduces the brightest genius to the
fame level with the meanest understanding.
The great differences which take place a-
mong men, are not owing to a diftinftion
that nature has made in their original
powers, so much as to the superior dili-
gence with which some have improved
these powers beyond others, To no pur-
pose do we possess the feeds of many. great
abilities, if they are suffered to lie dormant
within us. It is not the latent possession,
but the active exertion of them, which
gives them merit. Thousands whom in-
dolence. has funk into contemptible obfcu-
rity, might have come forward to the high-
eft diftindion, if idleness had not fruftra-
ted the effe I of all their powers.

Instead of going on to improvement, all

things go to decline, with the idle man.
His character falls into contempt. His for-
tune is consumed. Disorder, confusion,
and embarrassment, mark his whole fitua-
tion Observe in what lively colours the

.tatc

ally at hand; and hence it is said in Scrip- s E R M.
ture, that as soon as Satan found the horse Ix
empty, he took possession, and filled it with
evil. spirits r, Every man who recollets
his conduct, may be satisfied, that his
hours of idleness have always proved the
hours most dangerous to virtue. It was
then, that criminal desires arose; guilty
pursuits were suggested; and designs were
formed, which, in their issue, have dif-
quieted and embittered his whole life. If
seasons of idleness be dangerous, what must
a continued habit of it prove ? Habitual
indolence, by a silent and secret progress,
undermines every virtue in the foul. More
v;iolent passions run their course, and ter-
mrinate. They are like rapid torrents, which
foam, and swell, and bear down every
thing before them. But after having over-
- lowed their banks, their impetuosity sub-

fides. They return, by degrees, into their
natural channel; and the damage which
they have done, can be repaired. Sloth is
2 ~ i'~ ~Matuh. xii. 44.

XJ~~~~~~~

rj~like

Ir:i
t-

S-Rg. like the flowly-flowing, putrid stream,

_ which stagnates in the marsh, breeds veno-

mous animals, and poisonous plants; and
infects with pestilential vapours the whole
country round it. Having once tainted
the, foul, it leaves no part of'it found; and,
at the fame time, gives not those alarms
to conscience, which the eruptions of bold-
er and fiercer emotions often occasion. The
disease which it brings on, is creeping and
insidious; and is, on that account, more
certainly mortal.

One constant effect of idleness, is to nou-

rifh the passions, and, of course, to height-
en our demands for gratification; while it
unhappily withdraws from us the proper
means of gratifying these demands. If the
desires of the industrious man be set upon
opulence or rank, upon the conveniencies,
or the splendour of life, he can accomplish
his desires, by methods which are fair and
allowable. The idle man has the fame de-
fires with the industrious, but not the fame
resources for compassing his ends by ho-
nourable means. He must therefore turn

himself

himself to seek by fraud, or by violence, S Rmr.
what he cannot submit to acquire by in- .-
duftry. Hence, the origin of those multi-
plied crimes to which idleness is daily gi-
ving birth in the world; and which con-
tribute so much to violate the order, and
to difalrb the peace, of fociety.-In gene-
ral, the children of idleness may be rank-
ed under two denominations or classes of
men; both of whom may, too justly, be
termed, The children of the devil. Either,
incapable of any effort, they are such as fink
i into absolute meanness of character, and

contentedly wallow with the drunkard and
debauchee, among the herd of the sensual;
until poverty overtake them, or difeae :cut
them' off: Or, they are such as, retaining
some remains of vigour, are impelled, by
their passions, to venture on a desperate at-
tempt for retrieving their ruined fortunes.
In; this, cafe, they employ the art of the
fraudulent gamester to ensnare the un-
wary. They issue forth with the high-
wayman to plunder on the road; or with
the thief and the robber, they infest the

city

SERM. city by night. From this class, our pri-

_X_. sons are peopled; and by them the scaffold

is furnished with those melancholy. admo-
'nitions, which are so often delivered from it
to the crowd. Such are frequently the tra-
gical, but well known, consequences of the
vice against which I now warn you.

IN the third, and last place, how dan-

gerous soever idleness may be to virtue,
are there not pleasures, it may be said,
which attend it ? Is there not ground to
plead, that it brings a release from the op-
preffive cares of the world; and sooths the
mind with a gentle fatisfactioi, which is
not to be found amidit the toils of a busy
and active life ?-- This is. an advantage
which, least of all others, we admit it to
possess. In behalf of incessant labour, no
man contends. Occasional leleafe from toil,
and indulgence of ease, is what nature de-
mands, and virtue allows. But what we
assert is, that nothing is so great an enemy
to the lively and spirited enjoyment of life,
as a relaxed and indolent habit of mind.

IH

He who knows not what it is to labour, SERM.

IX.

knows not what it is to enjoy. The feli- x
city of human life, depends on the regular
prosecution of some laudable purpose or
object, which keeps awake and enlivens all
our powers. Our happiness consists in the
pursuit, much more than in the attainment,
of any temporal good. Reft is agreeable;
but it is only from preceding labours, that
reit acquires its true relilh. When the
mind is suffered to remain in continued
inaction, all its powers decay. It soon lan-
guifhles and sickens; and the pleasures
which it proposed to obtain from reft, end
in tediousness and insipidity. To this, let
that mifcrable set of men bear vitnefs,
who, after spending great part of their life
in adtive industry, have retired to what
they fancied was to be a pleating enjoy-
ment of themselves, in wealthy inati-
vity, and profound repose. Where they
expe&ed to find an elysium, they have
found nothing but a dreary and com-
fortlefs waste. Their days have dragged
e n, in uniform languor; with the melan-

choly

SE RM. choly remembrance often returning, of the
IX. chearful hours they passed, when they were

engaged in the honest business, and labours
of the world.

We appeal to every one who has the least

knowledge or observation of life, whether
the busy, or the idle, have the most agree-
able enjoyment of themselves ? Compare
them in their families. Compare them
in the societies with which they mingle;
and remark, which of them discover most
chearfulnefs and gaiety; which possess the
most regular flow of spirits; whose temper
is most equal; whose good humour, most
unclouded. While the acive and diligent
both enliven, and enjoy, society, the idle
are not only a burden to themselves, but a
burden to those with whom they are con-
neded; a nuisance to all whom they op.
press with their company. On whom does
time hang so heavy, as oh the slothful and
lazy ? To whom are the hours so linger-
ing? Who are so often devoured with
spleen, and obliged to fly to every expedi-
-ent which can help them to get rid of

themselves

themselves? Instead of producing tran- SERM.
quillity, indolence produces a fretful reft-
leffnefs of mind; gives rife to cravings
which are never satisfied; nourishes a sick-
ly effeminate delicacy, which fours and cor-
rupts every pleasure.

ENOUGH has now been said to convince

every thinking person, of the folly, the
guilt, and the misery, of an idle state. Let
these admonitions stir us up, to exert our-
selves in our different occupations, with
that virtuous activity which becomes men
and Christians. Let us arise from the bed
of sloth; distribute our time with attention
and care; and improve to advantage the
opportunities which Providence has beflow-
ed. The material business in which our
several stations engage us, may often prove
not fuflicient to occupy the whole of our
time and attention. In the life even of
busy men, there are frequent intervals of
leisure. Let them take care, that into
these, none of the vices of idleness creep.
Let Come secondary, some subsidiary em-

VoL. III. 0 ployment,.

SER-M. ployment, of fair and laudable kind, be
, _, always at hand to fill up those vacant ipaces

of life, which too many assign, either to
corrupting anufements, or to mere inac-
tion. We ought never to forget, that en-
tire idleness always borders, either on mi-
fery, or on guilt.

AT the fame time, let the course of our

employments be ordered in such a manner,
that in carrying them on, we may be also
promoting our eternal interest. With the
bueinefs of the world, let us properly in-
termix the exercises of devotion. By reli-
gious duties, and virtuous actions, let us flu-
dy to prepare ourselves for a better world.
In the midst of our labours for this life, it is
neRver to be forgotten; that we must firJ
seek the kingdom of God, and his righteozifnefs;
and give diligence to make our calling and
eleeion fire. Otherwise, how active soever
we may seem to be, our whole activity will
prove only a laborious idleness: We fihall
appear in the end, to have been busy to no
purpose, or to a purpose worse than none.

Then

Then only we fulfil the proper character of SE RM.
Christians, when we join that pious zeal '_X
which becomes us as the servants of God,
with that induitry which is required of
us, as good members of society; when, ac-
cording to the exhortation of the Apostle,
we are found not Jlothfil in btjinefs, and, at
the fame time, fervent iln spirit, serving the
Lord .

Rom. xii. iI.

02 S E R-

# SERMON X. On the SENSE of the DIVINE PRESENCE. PSALM lxxiii. 23. — I am continually with thee — .

[ i96 ]

SER MON X.
On the SENSE of the DIVINE PRESENCE.

PSALM lxxiii. 23.

- I am continually with thee .
SERM. .7 E live in a world which is full of the

divine pretence and power. We be-

hold every where around us the traces of
that supreme goodnefsi which enlivens and
supports the universe. Day nttereth speech
of it to day; and night JIJoweth knowledge of
it to night. Yet, surrounded as we are with
the perfections of God, meeting him where-
ever we go, and called upon by a thousand
objects, to confers his presence, it is both the
misfortune and the crime of a great part

of

of mankind, that they are strangers to Him s E R M.
in whose world they dwell. Occipied with x-:
nothing but their puitfu/its of intereff and
pleasure, they pass through this world, as
though God were not there. The virtu-
ous and reflecting, are particularly diftin-
guiiled -frbm the giddy and dissolute, by
that habitual sense of the divine pretence
which charaCterises the former. To them;
nothing appears void of God. They con-
template his perfections in the works of
nature; and they trace his Providence ini
the incidents of life. When retired from
the world, he often employs their medita-
tion. When engaged in action, he always
influences their condut. Wherever a pious
man is, or whatever he does, in the style
of the text, he is continually with God.

The happy effect of this sentiment on

the heart,, is fully displayed in the context.
We fee it allaying all the disquiet which
the Psalmist, in the preceding verses, de-
scribes himself to have suffered on account
of the prosperity of the wicked. The firfl
reflection which restored tranquillity to his

0 3 mind,

SERM. mind, was the remembrance of the pre-
,-_, fence of God. Nevertheless, I am continu-

ally with thee; thou hat holden me by my
right hand. He became sensible, that what-
ever distresses the righteous might susser
for a time, they could not fail of being
compensated in the end, by that Almighty
Protector, whose propitious pretence ever
continued to surround them. Whereupon
follow those memorable expreflions of his
trust and joy in God. Thou Jhaltguide me
·with thy counsel; and afterwards receive me
to glory. Whom have I in heaven but thee ?
and there is none upon earth I desire besides
thee.

THERE are principally two effe6s, which

the.fenfe of the divine pretence is fitted to
produce upon men. One is, to restrain
them from vice; the other, to encourage
their virtue. Its operation, as a check up-
on the finner, is obvious. The perpetual
presence of so powerful and venerable a
witness, is one of the most awful confidera-
tions which can be addressed to the dif1

solute.

solute. It removes all the security which. SE RM
secrecy can be supposed to give to crimes. . _
It aggravates the guilt of them, from be-
ing committed in face of the Almighty;
and has power to strike terror into the
heart of the greatest criminal, in the midst,
of his misdeeds. While this principle of,
religion thus checks and terrifies the fin-i
ner, it produces also another effect, that of,
fitengthening and comforting the good
man, in the practice of his duty. It is the:
influence of the divine pretence on good
men,which,in consequence of the Psalmist's
sentiment, I purpose to confider. To their
character, it belongs to be continually with
God. I hall endeavour to show the high
benefit and comfort which they derive
from such a habit of mind; and fiall, for
this end, first confider their internal moral
state; and next, view them as they are as-
feted by several of the external accidents
and situations of life.

LET us begin with confidering them in
their internal state. The belief of divine

O 4 presence

SE RM. pretence afts upon them here, firit, as an

._ , incitement to virtue. The presence of one

whom we highly esteem and revere, of a
sovereign, for instance, a father, or a friend;
whose approbation we are solicitous to gain,
is always found to exalt the powers of men,
to refine, and improve their behaviour.
Hence, At has.been given as a rule:by an-
cient moralists, that, in order to excel in
virtue, we ,hould propound to ourselves
some person of eminent and diftinguiihed
worth; and should accuflom ourselves to
adt, as if he were flanding by, and behold-
ing us. To the esteem and approbation
of their fellow creatures, none are insen-
fible. There are few who, in the confpi-
cuous parts of their life, when they know
the eyes of the public to be fixed on them;
ad not their part with propriety and de-
corum. But what is the observation of the
public, what is the presence of the greatell
or wisest man on earth, to that pretence of
the Divinity which constantly surrounds
us? The man who realises to his mind
this august pretence, feels a constant incen-

tive

tive for acquitting himself with dignity. SERM;

X.

He views himself as placed on an illuftri- j
ous theatre. To have the Almighty for
the fpedator and witness of his conduct,
is more to him than if' the whole world
were assembled to observe him. Men judge
often falsely, always imperfectly, of what
passes before them. They are imposed on
by specious appearances; and the artful
carry away the praise which is due to the
deferviig. 'Even supposing them to judge
fairly, we may want the opportunity of
doiing justice to our character, by any pro-
per display of it in the fight of the world.
Our fittation may bury in obscurity; those
talents and virtues which were intitled to
command the higheit esteem. But he, in
whose presence the'good man ads, is both
an. impartial, and an unerring judge of
wbrtli. No fallacious appearances impose
on him. 'No secret virtue is hidden from
him HFe is-attentive equally to the mean-
eft and the greatest; and his approbation
confers eternal rewards. The man, there-
fore, who sets the Lord always before him,

is

st RM. is prompted to excel in virtue by motives,

x_ which are peculiar to himself, and which

engage, on the fide of duty, both honour
and interest. I have kept thy precepts; and
thy tejfimonies; for all my -ways are before
thee ,

SUPPOSING, however, his virtuous en-

deavours to be faithful, many imperfec-
tions will attend them. A faultless tenor
of unblemihed life, is beyond the reach of
man. Paflions will sometimes overcome
him; and ambition or interest, in an un-
guarded hour, will turn him aside into e-
vil. Hence, he will be aihamed of him-
self, and disquieted by a sense of guilt and
folly. In this state, to which we are often
reduced by the weakness of human nature,
the belief of God's continual pretence brings
reliefto the heart. It aCted before as an
animating principle. It now acds as a prin-
ciple of comfort. In the midst of many
imperfections, a virtuous man appeals to
his divine witness, for the sincerity of his

* Psalm cxix. 168.

intentions.

intentions. He can appeal to him who SERM.
knows his frame, that in the general train x
of his conduc, it is his study to keep the
law of God.

Mere law, among men, is rigid and

inflexible. As no human lawgiver can
look into the hearts of his fubjefts, he
cannot, even though he were ever pre-
lent with them, estimate their character
exactly. He can make no allowance for
particular situations. He must prescribe
the fame terms to all whom he rules; and
treat all alike, according to their outward
aftions. But every minute diversity of
character, temper, and situation, is known
to God. It is not only from what his ser-
vants do, but from what they seek to do,
that he forms his judgement of them. He
attends to all those circumstances which
render the trial of their virtue, at any time,
peculiarly hard. He hears the whisper of
devotion as it rites in the foul. He beholds
the tear of contrition which falls in secret.
He fees the good intention struggling in
its birth; and pursues it, in its progress,

through

SE R .; ihrOugh th6fe ivariiis 6bftaeles whikh fmiay

x.
X i_ prevent' it from nipening iiito aEion; Good

indni: thertfobre,-':i t'eit iloflfhnimbled and
dejeded state, draw some conflatdion from
iis:knowledge of tieir .ia'frt Thoughthey
ti'iy fmetiies 'have err'ed from the ight

tiath, they can look up to hii' 'who is ever

ith 'them, arid fay, asi 'ah 'apoft e, w-io

haid rievofly dffended, odne s'aid to his
girat' Master; Lord, thoi kin'toie all things;
fhbu inoweJt that I love hb *. i

Appedling thus to their' ofniifcient 'wit-

iefs, they are' naturally soothed and encou-
ratedg by the' hope ' of his' clemency. At
the Tame tie,-, it i' tlie :pecuiliar advatiage
of this fentirmelit of the divine presence,
that it prevents such hope from flattering
them too 'much, or rising idito undue pre-
fuhiption. For' while it encouiages, it tends
alf6otd!humble, a pious man. If it encou-
rage him, by the refletion oil all his good
difpofitidns being .known and attended to
by-God, it humbles him, by the' remem-

.* Johni. xxi. i7.

brance,

brance, that his ficret fins also are ever in SERM.
the light of the divine countenance. So that, by
dwelling under the sense of Qod being con-
tinually with us, we keep alive the proper
temper of a Christian in the foul; humility,
vithout dejectior; fear, mingled with hope.
We are c eared, without being lifted up.
We feel ourselves obnoxious to the all-obfer-
ving eye of jufice; but are comforted with
the thoughts qs that mercy which, through
I efus Christ, the Discerner of all hearts
holds forth to the sincere and penitent.-
Such are the blessed effects which this prin-
ciple of religion produces upon the inward
moral fiate of a good man. Let us now,

IN the second place, confider his exter-

nal circumitances; and examine the in-
fluence which the fame principle has upon
Ihis happiness, in several different situations
of life.

I LET us first view him in what the world

calls prosperity; when his circumstances
are easy or affluent, and his life flows in a

smooth

SE RM. mb'oth untroubled fiream. Here, it might

X' be thought, that a sense of the' divine pre-

fence coiild: operate upon him only, or
chiefly, fr promoting temperance, ard re-
straining the disorders incident to a profpe-
rous state. Valuable effeds, indeed, these
are; and most conducive to the true enjoy-
ment of all that is agreeable in life. But
though it, doubtless, does exert this falu-
tary influence, yet it stops not there. It
not only preserves the virtue of a good man
amidst the temptations of pleasure, but it
gives to his prosperity a security, and a pe-
culiar relish, which to others is unknown.
He who is without a sense of God upon
his mind, beholds in human affairs nothing
but a perpetual fluctuation, and vicifitude
of events. He is surrounded with unknown
causes, which may be working his deftruc-
tion in secret. He cannot avoid perceiving,
that there hangs over him the irresistible
arm of that Providence, whose displeasure
he has done nothing to flay or avert. But
he who, in the day of prosperity, dwells
with God, is delivered from those disquiet-

ing

ag alarms. He dwells as with a friend SE M.
and protector, from whom he conceives his i
blessings to proceed. He can appeal to him
l for the thankfulness with which he receives
j them; and for his endeavours to employ
them well. He trusts, that the God whom
he serves will not forsake him; that the
goodness which he has already experienced,
will continue to bless him; and though he
believes himself not exempted from the

! changes of the world, yet, in the midst of
i these, he has ground to hope, that sources
i of comfort and happiness {hall always be
' left open to him.

Moreover, the pleasures of life, while
- they last, are unspeakably heightened by

the. presence of that Benefactor who be-
flows them. The pleasing emotion of gra-
i titude to the giver, mingles with the enjoy-

ment of the gift. While to the mere world-
ly man, the whole frame of nature is only
a vast irregular fabric; and the course of
human affairs no more than a confused fuc-
ceilion of fortuitous events; all nature is
beautified, and every agreeable incident is

enlivened,

SERM. enlivened, to him who beholds God in all

X things. Hence arise. a variety of pleasing

sensations, to fill up those solitary hours, in
which external prosperity supplies him with
no entertainment. In the smiling scenes of
nature, he contemplates the benignity of
its author. In its sublime objects, he ad-
mires his majesty. In its awful and ter-
rible ones, he adores his power. He dwells
in this world as in a magnificent temple,
which is full of the glory of its founder;
and every where views nature offering up
its ineenfe to him, from a thousand altars.
Such ideas exalt and ennoble the human
mind; and reflect an additional lustre on
the brightness of prosperity.

FROM the prosperous, let us next turn to

the afflided condition of a good man. For,
as prosperity may, affliftion certainly will,
at one time or other, be his lot. It enters
into the appointed trial of his virtue; and,
in one degree or other, is the doom of all.
Here we ihall find various situations occur,
in which no relief is equal to what a vir-

tuout

tuous and holy man derives from a sense of s E R M.
the perpetual pretence of God. _-_

Is he, for instance, thrown into an ob-

fcure condition in the world, without friends
to aflift him, or any to regard and confider
his state? He enjoys the fatisfaftion of
thinking, that though he may be neglected
by men, he is not forgotten by God. In-
considerable as he is in himself, he knows,
that he will not be overlooked by the Al-
mighty, amidst the infinite variety of be-
ing, or loft in the immensity of his works.
The poor man can, with as much en-
couragement as the rich or great, lift up
his eyes to heaven, and fay, Nevertheless, 0
Lord, Iam continually with thee: Thou hold-
.eft me by my right hand. The gracious pre-
fence of that Supreme Being is affeded by
no diversity of rank or fortune. It imparts
itself alike to all the virtuous and upright;
like its glorious image, the fun in the fir-
mament, which sheds its rays equally upon
the humble cottage, and upon the palace of
Kings. In the presence of the great Lord
of heaven and earth, all the diftin&ions

VOL. III. P which

SE RM. which vanity has contrived to make among

x. , men, totally disappear. All ranks are on one

level. The rich and the poor here indeed
veet together; without any. other diftinftion
than what arises from the heart and the foul.
The sense of this, lifts the poor man above
contempt; supports his spirits when apt to
be dcjected; and bestows dignity on the
part which he ads. How inconsiderable
soever that part may appear in the effima-
tion of an injudicious world, it is ennobled,
when virtuously performed, by the appro-
bation of his divine witness. He can bear
with indifference the scorn of the proud,
as long as he knows, that there is one
higher than the highest to regard him.
He can enjoy himself with pleasure in
his mean habitation, .because he believes
that God dwells with him there. The
Divine presence. chears to him the most
lonely retreat. It accompanies his steps to
the most distant regions of the earth. If
he should be driven into exile from all his
friends, and obliged to dwell in the utter-
nmoJ parts of the sea, even there God's hand

wolrld

would hold him, and his right hand would SER t.
guide him. Though left without compa- v
nion or friend, he never thinks himself de-
solate, as long as he can fay, I am Jill with
God.

BUT though raised above obscurity or

poverty, yet, in any situation of fortune, ca-
lumny and reproach may be the lot of the
servant of God. His good intentions may
be mifconftrucled; his character unjustly
traduced; and, to the open reviling of ene-
mies, the more bitter unkindness of friends
may sometimes be joined. In this fitua-
tion, when wounded in spirit, and, per-
haps, unable to make his innocence appear,
to whom lhall he have recourse for defence,
to whom make his last appeal, but to that
God who is ever present with him, and
who knoweth his heart? How frequent-
ly, amidst the injustice and oppression of
the world, has diftrefled innocence had no
other relief but this ? " God is my wit-
" nes. God is my avenger. He hath seen
"it; and he will repay." A good con-

P 2 science,

SERM. science, it is true, is, of itself, a powerful
th.. support. But God is Lord of the con-

science; and it is only when connected
with a sense of divine presence and appro-
bation, that a good conscience becomes a
steady principle of fortitude in the mind,
under all discouragements. Hence, a vir-
tuous man possesses a high degree of inde-
pendence, both on the praise, and on the
censure of the world. It is enough to him,
if, when undergoing the fame reproaches
which Job suffered from his mistaken
friends, he can fay with him, Behold my
~witness is in heaven, and my record is on
high *. He affects not to divulge his good
deeds to the world. He is without con-
cern whether the world be acquainted with
them, or not. He knoweth, that his Father
'which is in heaven feeth in secret; and that
his prayers and his alms come up in grateful
memorial before him. With me, it is a small
thing to be judged of you, or of man's judge-
ment; he that judgeth me is the Lord -. .He

' Job ivi. 9. - l Cor. iv. 3. 4.

Jhal!

Jfall bring forthJ my righleozfiefs, at last, as SERM.
the light, and my judgement as the noon day. ,
In this consciousness of integrity, he looks
down with indifference, as from a superior
station, upon the harsh censures of a giddy
and ignorant world. The sense of being
continually with God diffuses over his foul
a holy calm, which unjust reproach canno:
diflurb. In the pretence of that august and
venerable witness, all the noise and cla-
mours of men, like the murmurings of a
distant storm, die away.

LASTLY, Supposing the characer of a

good man to be untainted by reproach,
supposing also his external situation to be
opulent or distinguished, many, notmWith-
standing, and severe, are the distresses to
which he may be exposed. Secret griefs
may be preying upon him; and his heart
left to feed in silence on its own bitterness.
He may labour under fore disease, and dif-
cern his earthly frame gradually moulder-
ing into dust. He may be deprived of those

I friends and relatives who had been the
j P 3 chief
'

SERM. chief comforts of his state; or may be ob-

X.
L-y~ liged to prepare himself for taking farewel

of them for ever. In the midst of these
various afflicting scenes of human life, no
consolation can be more powerful than
what arises from the presence of a divine
protedtor and guardian, to whom our cafe,
with all its sorrows, is perfectly known.
To him, fays the Pfallift, I poured out my
tomplaint. IJ /wed befoe him my trouble.
I looked on my right hand and viewed; but
behold there was no' man who cared for my
foul. Ijaid unto thee, 0 Lord, thou art my
refuge. When my spirit was overwhelmed
within me, then thou kneweft my path *.

We all know, that to communicate our

grief to a faithful friend, often gives ease
and relief to the burdened heart. Such com-
munication we are encouraged to make, and
such relief we may expect to find, in pour-
ing out our heart before that God in whom
compajions flow. We may have no earthly
friend to whom we can with full confi-

* Psalm cxlii. 2. 3. a.

dence

dence disclose all our fbrrows; or we may SERM.
want words in which to express them. But I
God is the fearchcr of all hearts; and the
hearer of all prayers. To the secret an-
guifh of the foul, he is no inattentive wit-
ness. Every groan which is heaved from the
labouring bosom, though heard by no hu-
man ear, reaches his throne. As he knows
olr frame, so he remembers wie are didf; and
thence light arises to the bpright in dark-
ness. For the hope naturally springs, that
this beneficent being will pity them, as a
father pitieth his children; and in the midst
of those distresses which the present cir-
cumfiances of man render unavoidable,
willfend them help from his faJbnary. Sur-
rounded with this compattionate pretence
of the Almighty, good men never view
themselves as left in this vale of tears, to
bear, solitary and alone, the whole weight
of human woe. In their dark, as. well as
in their brighter hours, God is with them.
Even in that valley of the ihadow of death,
where no friend, no comforter, can go a-
long to aid them, he is with them fill. In

P 4 the

SERM. the last extremity of nature, the rod and

. Jaff of the Shepherd of Israel fipport them.

THUS I have hown, though in an im-

perfec manner, what benefits holy men
derive from a habitual sense of the divine
presence. It animates and strengthens their
virtue. It enlivens and brightens their pro-
fperity. Under various forms of adversity,
it affords them consolation and relief.-
Such considerations, undoubtedly, form a
strong argument in favour of a devout fpi-
rit, and a virtuous life. But they are con-
fiderations which may, probably, be regard-
ed by some, as ideal and visionary; requiring
aid from a heated, or an enthusiastic fancy,
in order to give them force. I readily ad-
mit, that amidif the hurry and turbu-
lence of the world, it may be difficult to
bring these religious sentiments as fully in-
'to view, as is necessary for their making a
just impression on the foul. This requires
.the effort of an intelligent and feeling
mind; and therefore cannot be expeced
to be commonly found. To the unrefled-

ing

ing crowd, nothing appears real, but what SE ,M.
is exposed to sense. What is invisible, is i
the fame to them, as if it had no existence.
But by the grossness of their own concep-
tions, they have no title to measure those of
others. While they affect to treat all con-
fiderations taken from the sense of the di-
vine presence, as visionary and enthufiaf-
tic, it can, on the contrary, be clearly
ihown, that they are founded on the most
certain and unquestionable principles of
reason. They eflentially belong not to re-
vealed only, but to natural, religion. Their
reality can be denied by none, but those
who deny that God exists, or that he go-
verns the world. For, if he exist, he must
undoubtedly pervade and infpeC the world
which he governs. He must know what
is going on throughout his own universe;
and especially mufft know what passes with-
in the hearts which he has made, and of
which he is to judge. To be every where
present, is the attribute of his nature,
which, of all others, is the most necessary
to his administration of the universe. This,

accordingly,
J.

SERM. accordingly, is an attribute which all re-

x.
.-.¥ ligions have ascribed to him. All nations

have believed in it. All societies appeal to
it, in the folemnities of an oath, by which
they determine controversies. This attri-
bute being once admitted to belong to the
Deity, the consequences which I have de-
duced from it, plainly and naturally fol-
low: And every good man has ground to
fay, 0 Lord, I am continually 'with thee.

S E R-

# SERMON XI. ON PATIENCE. LUKE, xxi. 19. In your Patience possess ye your souls.

SE R M ON XI.

ON PATIBNCE.

LUKE, XXi. I9.

In your Patience poji;fs j'e your fouls.
T HE pjoeffion of our fouls is a very em- SERM,

p hatical expression. It describes that XI.

state in which a man has both the full
command, and the undicfurbed enjoyment
of himself; in opposition to his undergo-
ing some inward agitation which difcom-
poses his powers. Upon the least reflec-
tion, it must appear, how essential fiich a
fiate of mind. is to happiness. He only
who thus pfejcs his foul is capable of pof-
felling any other thing with advantage;
and in order to attain and preserve this

self-

SERM. felf-poffeffion, the most important requisite
XI- is, the habitual exercise of patience.

I know that patience is apt to be ranked

by many, among the more humble and
obscure virtues; belonging chiefly to those
who groan on a sick-bed, or who languish in
a prison. If their situation be, happily, of a
different kind, they imagine that there is
no occasion for the difSipline of patience
being preached to them. But I hope to
make it appear, that, in every circumstance
of life, no virtue is more important, both
to duty and to happiness; or more requi-
site for forming a manly and worthy cha-
rafter. It is not confined to a situation of
continued adversity. It principally, in-
deed, regards the disagreeable circum-
stances which are apt to occur. But; in
our present state, the occurrence of these
is so frequent, that, in every condition of
life, patience is incessantly called forth.
Prosperity cannot be enjoyed, any more
than adversity supported, without it. It
must enter into the temper, and form the
habit of the foul, if we would pass through

the

the world with tranquillity and honour. SERM.
What I purpose is, to point out some of X,
the chief occasions on which patience is re-
quired; and to recommend and enforce
the exercise of it, in order to our 5ojefing
esr fouls.

I. PATIENCE under provocations. The

wide circle of human society is diverififed
by an endless variety of charaters, difpo-
fitions, and passions. Uniformity is, in no
refpec, the genius of the world. Every
man is marked by some peculiarity which
distinguishes him from another: and no
where can two individuals be found who
are exactly, and in all refpeds, alike.
Where so much diversity obtains, it can-
not but happen, that, in the intercourse
which men are obliged to maintain, their
tempers {hall often be ill adjusted to that
intercourse; mhall jar, and interfere with
each other. Hence, in every fation, the
highest as well as the lowest, and in every
condition of life, public, private, and dome-
itic, occasions of irritation frequently arise.

We

SERM. We are provoked, sometimes, by the folly
XI. and levity of those with whom we are con-

neded; Sometimes, by their indifference or
neglect; by the incivility of a friend, the
haughtiness of a superior, or the insolent
behaviour of one in lower station. Hardly
a day passes, without somewhat or other oc-
curring,whichferves to ruffle the man of im-
patient spirit. Of course, such a man lives
in a continual tform. He knows not what
it is to enjoy a train of good humour.
Servants, neighbours, friends, spouse, and
children, all, through the unrestrained vio-
lence of his temper, become sources of di-
fturbance and vexation to him. In vain
is affluence; in vain are health and profpe-
rity. The least trifle is sufficient to dif-
compose his mind, and poison his plea-
fures. His very amusements are mixed
with turbulence and passion.

I would beseech this man to confider, of

what small moment the provocations which
he receives, or at least imagines himself to
receive, are really in themselves; but of
what great moment he makes them, by

fullering

fnffering them to deprive him of the pof- SERM.

XI..

fefflion of himself. I would beseech him,
to confider, how many hours of happiness
he throws away, which a little more pa-
tience would allow him to enjoy; and how
much he puts it in the power of the most
insignificant persons to render him mise-
rable. " But who can expect," we hear him
exclaim, " that he is to possess the infenfi-
"bility of a stone ? How is it possible for
"human nature to endure so many re-
" peated provocations ? or to bear calmly
" with such unreasonable behaviour ?"-
My brother ! if you can bear with no in-
flances of unreasonable behaviour, with-
draw yourself from the world. You are
no longer fit to live in it. Leave the in-
tercourfe of men. Retreat to the moun-
tain, and the desert; or fliut yourself up
in a cell. For here, in the midit of so-
ciety, ojfences mfl conme. You might as well
expect, when you beheld a calm atmo-
sphere, and a clear fly, that no clouds were
ever to rife, and no winds to blow, as that
your life was long to proceed, without re-

ceiving

sz r. ceiving provocations from human frailty.
,Xi. The careless and the imprudent, the giddy

and the fickle, the ungrateful and the in-
terested, every where meet us. They are
the briars and the thorns, with which the
paths of human life are beset. He only
who can hold his course among them with
patience and equanimity, he who is pre-
pared to bear what he must expect to hap-
pen, is worthy of the name of a man.

Did you only preserve yourself compo-

fed for a moment, you would perceive the
insignificancy of most of those provocations
which you magnify so highly. When a few
iuns more have rolled over your head, the
storm will have, of itself, subsided; the cause
of your present impatience and disturbance
will be utterly forgotten. Can you not, then,
anticipate this hour of calmness to your-
self; and begin to enjoy the peace which
it will certainly bring ? If others have be-
haved improperly, leave them to their own
folly, without becoming the viclim of their
caprice, and punilhing yourself on their
account.- Patience, in this exercise of it,

cannot

cannot be too much studied by all who SERM.
wifli their life to flow in a smooth stream. XI
It is the reason of a man, in opposition to
the patron of a child. It is the enjoyment
of peace, in opposition to uproar and con-
J fusion. He that bath no rule over his own

spirit, is like q city that is broken down, and
without walls .-The next important ex-
ercife of patience is,

II. PATIENCE under disappointments.

There will often happen to the best and
wisef men; sometimes, to the wisest and
best concerted plans. They may happen,
too, not through any imprudence of thoel
who have devised the plan, not even
1 through the malice or ill design of others;

but merely in consequence of some of those
cross incidents of life which could not be
foreseen. On such occasions, persons of a
w warm and sanguine temper are preiently in
a ferment. They had formed their hopes,
as they think, upon the jufMeft grounds.

. Prprs:v. x . .
VoL. III. < They

SERM. They had waited long for success;. and

XI.

borne with many delays. But when their
designs are brought to so unexpected an
issue; when, without any fault of their
own, they find their hopes finally blasted,
all patience forsakes them; they no longer
possess their fouls; the most pafionate ex-
clamations break forth. " To whom, ex-
"cept to them, could such a disappoint-
" ment have happened ? Since the creation
" of the world, was such a combination of
"disastrous incidents ever beheld? Why
"are they doomed to be so unfortunate
",beyond all others ?"- Alas! how un-
flfilfully have you calculated the course of
human events ? How rashly and prefump-
tuoufly had you trusted to success ? To
whom was it ever given, to guard against
all the vicissitudes, which the fluctuating
faihion of. the world is incessantly bringing
about ? If one friend, to whom you look-
ed up, has died, or another has loft his in-
fluence and power; if the opinion of the
public is changed, and its favour has been
,withdrawn; if some mistakes have occur-

red

red to leflen the good will of a patron on SERM.
whom you depended; if, through the con-
currence of these, or such like circum-
frances, a more fortunate rival has prevail-
ed against you; what is there in all this,
that differs from the ordinary lot of man ?
Are we not, each in his turn, doomed to
experience the uncertainty of worldly pur-
suits ? Why, then, aggravate our misfor-
tunes by the unreasonable violence of an
impatient spirit ? If our designs have fail-
ed through rashness or misconduct , let
us blame ourselves. If they have failed
through circumstances which we could not
prevent, let us submit to the fate of man;
and wait, with patience, till a more favour-
able opportunity shall occur of regaining
faccefs.

Meanwhile, let us turn to the other fide

o~ the profpest; and calmly confider how
dubious it was, whether the success which
we longed for, would have proved a blef-
sing. Who knoweth what is good for man
in this life ? Perhaps, the accompliflment
of our designs might have been pregnant

Q02 with

SERM. with misery. Perhaps, from our present
X"j disappointment, future prosperity may rife.

Of such unlooked for issues, we all know
there have been many examples. Who can
tell, whether our cafe may not add one to the
number ?-At any rate, let us recollet,
that there is a Supreme Ruler, who disposes
of the affairs of men; under whom, all fe-
cond causes work only as subordinate a-
gents. Looking up to that irresistible arm
which is stretched over our heads, let us
be calm; let us submit and adore. Either
to despair, or to rage, under disappoint-
ments, is sinful. By the former, we injure
ourselves. By the latter, we insult Provi-
dence, and provoke its displeasure to con-
tinue. To posess our fouls in patience is, at
once, our wisdom as men, and our duty
as Christians. The benefits of this virtue
are so often reaped in this world, that
good policy alone would recommend it to
every thinking man. Disappointments de-
range, and overcome, vulgar minds. The
patient and the wife, by a proper improve-
ment, frequently make them contribute to

their

their high advantage.-Let me next recon- S E R M.
mend, xl.

III. PATIENCE under restraints. Nu-

merous are the restraints imposed on us, by
the nature of the human condition. To
the restraints of authority and law, all
muff submit. The restraints of education
and discipline lie on the young. Confi-
derations of health restrain the indulgence
of pleasure. Attentions to fortune restrain
expence. Regard to friends, whom we are
jbound to please; respeCt to established cu-

foms, and to the opinions of society, im-
pose restraints on our general behaviour.
There is no man, in any rank of life, who
is always at liberty to at according as he
would incline. In some quarter or other,
lie is limited by circumstances, that either
actually confine, or that ought at least to
confine and restrain him.

These restraints, the impatient are apt to

- scorn. They will needs burst the barriers

which reason had ereced, or their fitua-
t on had formed; and without regard to

,3I 0_ ~3 consequences,
g^^^

SERM. conlequences, give free scope to their pre-
_ ,X fLent wish. Hence, many dangerous ex-

cesses flow; much confusion and misery
are produced in human life. Had men
the patience to submit to their condition,
and to wait till it should allow them a
freer indulgence of their desires, they
might, in a short time, obtain the power
of gratifying them with safety. If the
young, for instance, would undergo, with
patience, the labours of education, they
would rife, at a proper period, to honours,
riches, or ease. If the infirm would, with
patience, bear the regulations which their
constitution demands, they might regain
the comforts of health. If persons of itrait-
ened fortune had patience to conform them-
selves to their circumstances, and to abridge
their pleasures, they might, by degrees, im-
prove and advance their state. Whereas,
by eagerness of temper, and precipitancy
of indulgence, they forfeit all the advan-
tages which patience would have procu-
red ; and incur the opposite evils to their
full eXtent,

IN

IN the present state of human affairs, SE RM.

no lesson is more necessary to be learned x.
by all, to be inculcated on the young, and
to be praCtised by the old, than that of
patient fubmiflion to necessity. For under
the law of necessity, we are all inevitably
placed. No man is, or can be, always his
own master. We are obliged, in a thou-
sand cafes, to submit and obey. The dif-
cipline of patience preserves our minds ea-
fy, by conforming them to our Rate. By
the impetuosity of an impatient and un-
submitting temper, we fight againit an un-
conquerable power; and aggravate the e-
vils we muff endure.-Another important
exercise of the virtue concerning which
we discourse, is,

IV. PATIENCE under injuries and

wrongs. To these, amidit the present con-
fusion of the world, all are exposed. No
Ration is so high, no power so great, no
characer so unblemified, as to exempt
men from being attacked by raflnefs, ma-
lice, or envy. To.behave under such at-

QL+ tacks

SERM. tacks with due patience and moderation,
xIl is, it mufl be confeifed, one of the most

trying exercises of virtue.-But, in order
to prevent niftakes on this subjet, it is
necessary to observe, that a tame fubmif-
sion to wrongs is not required by religion.
We are, by no meang, to imagine, that re-
ligion tends to extinguiih the sense of ho-
nour, or to suppress the exertion of a man-
ly spirit, It is under a false apprehension
of this kind, that Christian patience is
sometimes stigmatised in discourse, as no
other than a different name for cowardice.
On the contrary, every man of virtue
ought to feel what is due to his character,
and to support properly his own rights.
Resentment of wrong, is an useful principle
in human nature; and for the wisest pur-
poses, was implanted in our frame. It is
the necefary guard of private rights; and
the great reflraint on the insolence of the
violent, who, if no refitance were made,
would trample on the gentle and peace-
able.

Resentment, however, if not kept with-
-:: : ' in

in due bounds, is in hazard of rising into SERMi
fierce and cruel revenge. It is the office of xL,
patience, to temper resentment by reason.
In this view, it is most properly described in
the text, by a man's poffiig. his foul; acting
the part which felf-defence, which juflice, or
honour, require him to act, without being
transported out of himself by the vehe-
mence of anger; or infifing on such de-
grees of reparation as bear no proportion
to the wrong that he has suffered. What
proportion, for instance, is there between
the life of a man, and an affront received
by some ralh exprefion in conversation,
which the wife would have flighted; and
which, in the course of a few weeks, would
have been forgotten by every one ? How
fantastic, then, how unjustifiable, are those
supposed laws of modern honour, which
for such an affront, require no less repara-
tion than the death of a fellow-creature;
and which, to obtain this reparation, re-
quire a man to endanger his own life?
Laws, which as they have no foundation
in reason, never received the least fantion

from
j;

SE RM. from any of the wife and polished nations

L of antiquity; but were devised in the

darkest ages of the world, and are derived
to us from the ferocious barbarity of Go-
thic manners.

Nothing is so inconsistent with felf-pof-

session as violent anger. It overpowers
reason; confounds our ideas; distorts the
appearance, and blackens the colour, of
every object. By the florm which it raises
within, and by the mischiefs which it oc-
cafions without, it generally brings on the
passionate and revengeful man, greater mi-
fery than he can bring on his enemy. Pa-
tience allays this deftrutive tempest, by
making room for the return of calm and
fober thought. It suspends the blow which
sudden resentment was ready to inflit. It
disposes us to attend to the alleviating cir-
cumftances, which may be discovered in
the midit of the wrongs we suppose our-
selves to have suffered. Hence, it natural-
ly inclines us to the moderate and gentle
fide; and while it allows all proper mea-
fures to be taken, both for safety, and for

just

just redress, it makes way for returning SERM.

XI.

peace. Without some degree of patience A
exercised under injuries, human life would
be rendered a state of perpetual hoflility;
offences and retaliations would succeed to
one another in endless train; and the world
would become a field of blood.-It now
remains to recommend,

V. PATIENCE under adversity and as-

fliftion. This is the most common sense
in which this virtue is understood; as it
refpeds disease, poverty, old age, loss of
friends, and the other calamities which are
incident to human life. Thotgh7 a man live
many years, and rejoice in them all, yet let
him remember the days of darkness, for they
Jhall be many *. The various duties to
which patience, under this view, gives rife,
afford a larger subjet to discourse than I
am at present to pursue. In general, there
are two chief exercises of patience under
adversity; one refpeating God, and another
refpefing men.

Eccles. xi. 8.

Patience,

SERM. Patience, with refpec to God, must, in

. in the days of trouble, suppress the risings

of a murmuring and rebellious spirit. It
muif appear in that calm resignation to the
will of Heaven, which is expressed in those
pious sentiments of ancient good men: I
was dumb; I opened not my mouth, becatfe
thou didJZ it. It is the Lord, let him do what
feemeth good in his eyes. Shall we receive
good at the hand of the Lord, and Jhall we
not receive evil alo ? This is loyalty to the
great Governor of the universe. This is
that reverence which so well becomes crea-
tures who know they are dependent, and
who must confess themselves to be iinful.
Such a spirit is fitted to attract the favour
of Heaven; and to bring the revere vifita-
tion sooner to a close. Whereas the stub-
born and impatient, who submit not them-
selves to the decrees of the Most High,, re-
quire to be humbled and subdued by a
continuance of chastisement. -

Patience in adversity, with refpec to

men, must appear by the composure and
tranquillity of our: behavieur; . The -loud

complaint,

&omplaint, .the querulous temper, and fret- SE RM.
ful spirit,. disgrace every characer.. They XI.
show a mind that is unmanned by misfor-
tunes. We weaken thereby the: sympathy
of others; and estrange them from the of-
sices of kindness and comfort. The exer-
tions of pity will be feeble, when it is
mingled with contempt. At the fame time,
by thus weakly yielding to adverfity,-we
allow its weight to bear us down with
double pressure. Patience, by preserving
composure within, refifs. the impression
which trouble makes from without. By
leaving the mind open to every consolation,
it naturally tends to alleviate our burden.
-To maintain a steady and unbroken
mind, amidst all the flocks of the world,
forms the highest honour of a man. Pa-
tience, on such occasions, rites to magna-
nimity. It .hows a great and noble mind,
which is able to reft on itself, on God,, and
a good conscience; which can enjoy itself
amidst all evils; and would rather endure
the greatest hardships, than submit to what
was dishonourable, in order to obtain re-

lief

SERM. lief. This gives proof of a firength that

X. is derived from Heaven. It is a beam. of

the Immortal Light, shining on the heart.
Such patience, is the most complete triumph
of religion and virtue; and accordingly it
has ever charaterifed those whose names
have been transmitted with honour to po-
iterity. It has ennobled the hero, the faint,
and the martyr. We are troubled on every
fide, yet not difirefed; we are perplexed, but
not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken;
.caJt down, but not deJtroyed A.

THUS I have traced Patience through

several of its moft,important operations, in
different circumstances of life; under pro-
vocations; under disappointments; under
restraints; under injuries; and under as-
flictions. We now fee, that it is a virtue
of universal use. No man, in any condi-
tion, can pass his days with tolerable com-
fort, who has not learned to pratife it.
His prosperity will be continually disturb-

* z Cor. iv. 8. 9.

ed;

ed; and his adversity will be clouded with SERM.
double darkness. He will be uneasy and ,I.
troublesome to all with whom he is con-
neCted; and will be more troublesome
to himself than to any other.-Let me
particularly advise those who wish to'cul-
tivate so necessary a virtue, to begin their
cultivation of it, on occasions when small
offences and provocations arise. It is a
great, but common, error to imagine, that
we are at liberty to give loose reins to tem-
per, among the trivial occurrences of life.
No excuse for irritation and impatience can
be worse, than what is taken from the per-
son being inconsiderable, or the incident
being flight, which threw us off our guard.
With inconsiderable persons we are fur-
rounded. Of flight incidents, the bulk of
human life is composed. In the midst of
these, the ruling temper of the mind is
formed. It is only by moderation and self-
7 command then acquired, that we can inure

ourselves to.patience, when the great con-
junctures of life shall put it to a feverer
trial. If negleded then, we fiall after-

wards

SERM. wards solicit its return in vain. If thou

haft run with footmen, and they have wea-
ried thee, how catnt thou contend with horses
and if in the land of peace, wherein thou
trujIedjI , they wearied thee, then how wilt
thou do in the swellings of Jordan * ?

IN order to aflift us in the acquisition of

this grace, let us often contemplate that
great model of it, which is displayed in the
whole life of our Saviour Jesus Christ.
Whose temper was ever tried by more fre-
quent provocations, more repeated difap-
pointments, more flagrant injuries, or more
severe difcrefs ? Yet, amidst them all, we
behold him patiently enduring the contra-
diEcion of inners; to their rudeness, oppo-
sing a mild and unruffled, though 'firm,
spirit; and, in the cause of mankind, gene-
roufly bearing with every indignity. Well
might he fay, Learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in heart t- Having such a high
example before our eyes, let us be afliamed

Jer. xii. 5. . t Matth. xi. 29.

of

of those sallies of impatience which we so SERM,
often susser to break forth, in the midit of X?
prosperity. By a more manly tranquillity
and felf-command, let us discover to the
world, that, as men, and as Christians, we
have learned in patience to pojefs our fouls.

VOL. IIL S E
R

# SERMON XII. On MODERATION. PHILLIPPIANS, iv. 5. Let your Moderation be known unto all Men. —

[ 42- ]
SERMON XI.

On MODERATION.

PHILLIPPIANS, iv. 5.
Let your Moderation be known tluto aOll

Men.-
SERM. T HE present slate of man is neither

doomed to constant misery, nor de-

signed for complete happiness. It is, in
general, a mixed itate, of comfort and for-
row, of prosperity and adversity; neither
brightened by uninterrupted funffiine, nor
overcast with perpetual shade; but fubjedt
to alternate successions of the one, and the
other. While such a-ftate forbids despair,
it also checks presumption. It is equally
adverse to despondency of mind, and to

high

high elevation of spirits. The temper which E RM.
best suits it, is expressei* iii-the text by mo- _
deration; which, as the habitual tenor of
the foul, the apostle exhorts us to discover
in our whole conduc; let it be kiowsn unto
all men. This virtue consists in the equal
balance of the foul. It imports such pro-
per government of our paffiois and plea-
fures, as ihall prevent us from running in-
to extremes of any kind; and shall pro-
duce a calm and temperate frame of mind;
It chiefly refpeds our conduct in that state5
which comes under the description of ease,
or prosperity, Patience, of which I treat-
ed in the preceding difcourfej directs the
proper regulation of the mind, under the
disagreeable incidents of life. Moderation
determines the bounds within which it
thould remain, when circumstances are a-
greeable or promising. What I now pur-
pose is, to point out some of the chief in-
itances in which Moderation ought to take
place, and to show the importance of pre-
serving it.

j R I. Ma-

SERM. I. MODERATION in our withes. The
,XL active mind of man seldom or never refts

satisfied with its present condition, how
prosperous soever. Originally formed for
a wider range of objeas, for a higher sphere
of enjoyments, it finds itself, in every si-
tuation of fortune, itraitened and confi-
ned. Sensible of deficiency in its state, it
is ever fending forth the fond desire, the
aspiring wiih, after something beyond what
is enjoyed at present. Hence, that restless-
ness which prevails so generally among
mankind. Hence, that disgust of pleasures
which they have tried; that passion for
novelty; that ambition of rising to some
degree of eminence or felicity, of which
they have formed to themselves an indif-
tinc idea. All which may be confidered
as indications of a certain native, original
greatness in the human foul, swelling be-
yond the limits of its present condition;
and pointing at the higher objets for
which it was made. Happy, if these latent
remains of our primitive state served to di-
ret our wiihes towards their proper defti-

nation,

nation, and to lead us into the path of true s E RM.
bliss! XI.

But in this dark and bewildered slate,

the aspiring tendency of our nature unfor-
tunately takes an opposite direction, and
feeds a very misplaced ambition. The
flattering appearances which here present
themselves to sense; the diftin6tions which
fortune confers; the advantages and plea-
fures which we imagine the world to be
capable of bellowing, fill up the ultimate
with of most men. These are the objets
which ingrofs their solitary musings, and
stimulate their active labours; which warm
the breasts of the young, animate the in-
duftry of the middle aged, and often keep
alive the passions of the old, until the very
close of life. Assuredly, there is nothing
unlawful in our wishing to be freed from
whatever is disagreeable, and to obtain a
fuller enjoyment of the comforts of life.
But when these wishes are not tempered by
reason, they are in danger of precipitating
us into much extravagance and folly. De-
ires and withes are the first springs of ac-

R 3 tion.

SERM. tion. When they become exorbitant, the
vee., whole character is likely to be tainted. If

we susser our fancy to create to itself, worlds
of ideal happiness; if we feed our imagi-
nation, with plans of opulence and splendor
far beyond our rank; if we fix to our
wifies certain tfages of high advancement,
or certain degrees of uncommon reputation
or diftinftion, as the sole stations of feli-
city; the affuired consequence will be, that
we shall become unhappy in our present
state; unfit for afting the part, and dif-
charging the duties that belong to it; we
ihall discompose the peace and order of our
minds, and foment many hurtful paflions.
Here, then, let Moderation begin its reign;
by bringing within reasonable bounds the
wilfes that we form. As soon as they be-
come extravagant, let us check them, by
proper reflections on the fallacious nature
of those objects, which the world hangs out
to allure desire.

You have strayed, my friends, from the

road which conducts to felicity; you have
dihonroured the native dignity of your

fouls,

folls, in allowing your wifihes to terminate s ER M.
on nothing higher than worldly ideas of _XI
greatness or happiness. Your imagination
roves in a land of fiadows. Unreal forms
deceive you. It is no more than a phan-
tom, an illusion of happiness, .which at-
trads your fond admiration; nay, an illu-
sion of happiness, which often conceals
much real misery. Do you imagine, that
all are happy, who have attained to those
summits of ditincdion, towards which your
wifes aspire Alas! how frequently has
experience ihewed, that where roses were
supposed to bloom, nothing but briars and
thorns grew ? Reputation, beauty, riches,
grandeur, nay, royalty itself, would, many
a time, have been gladly exchanged by the
possessors, for that more quiet and humble
station, with which you are now diffatif-
fled. With all that is splendid and ihining
in the world, it is decreed that there should
mix many deep shades of woe. On the e-
levated situations of fortune, the great ca-
lamities of life chiefly fall. There the storm
spends its violence, and there the thunder

R 4 breaks;

8 E RM. breaks; while safe and unhurt, the inhabit-

XII. '
tv,-. ant of the vale remains below.-- Retreat,

then, from those vain and pernicious excur-
sions of extravagant desire. Satisfy your-
selves with what is rational and attainable.
Train your minds to moderate views of
human life, and human happiness. Re-
member, and admire, the wisdom of Agur's
wish. Remove far from me vanity and lies.
Give me neither poverty nor riches. Feed me
with food convenient for me: Left I be full,
and deny thee, and Say, who is the Lord? or
left I be poor, and Jleal, and take the name of
my God in vain .- Let me recommend,

II. MODERATION in our pursuits.

Wishes and desires reft within. If immo-
derate and improper, though they taint
the heart, yet society may not be asseted
by them. The obscure and harmless in-
dividual may indulge his dreams, without
difurbing the public peace. But when
the ac2ive pursuits in which we engage,

* Prov. xxx. 8. 9.

rife

rife beyond moderation, they fill the world SER M.
with great disorders; often with flagrant XGo.
crimes. This admonition chiefly respects
the ambitious men of the world. I fay not,
that all ambition is to be condemned; or
that high pursuits ought, on every occa-
sion, to be checked. Some men are form-
ed by nature, for rising into conspicuous
stations of life. In following the impulse
of their minds, and properly exerting the
talents with which God has blessed them,
there is room for ambition to ad in a lau-
dable sphere, and to become the inftru-
ment of much public good. But this may
safely be pronounced, that the bulk of
men are ready to over-rate their own abi-
lities, and to imagine themselves equal to
higher things than they were ever design-
ed for by nature. Be fober, therefore, in
fixing your aims, and planning your de-
ffined pursuits. Beware of being led a-
fide from the plain path of found and mo-
derate condud, by those false lights which
felf-flattery is always ready to hang out.
By aiming at a mark too high, you may

fall

SE.RM. fall short of what it was within your
xu._ power to have reached. Instead of attain-

ing to eminence, you may expose your-
selves to derision; nay, may bring upon
your heads manifold disasters. I Jay to
every man that is among you, not to think of
himself more highly than be ought to think,
but to think soberly *.

Whatever your aims be, there is one ex-

ercife of moderation which must be en-
joined to those of the greatest abilities, as
well as to others; that is, never to tranf-
grefs the bounds of moral duty. Amidst
the warmth of pursuit, accustom your-
selves to fuhmit to the restraints, which re-
ligion and virtue, which propriety and de-
cency, which regard to reputation and cha-
rater, impose. Think not, that there are
no barriers which ought to flop your pro-
grefs. It is from a violent and impetuous
spirit that all the evils spring, which are
so often found to accompany ambition.
Hence, in private life, the laws of truth

t Rom. xii. 3.

and

and honour are violated. Hence, in pu- SERM.
blic contests, the peace and welfare of na- l
tions have been. so often sacrificed to the
ambitious projects of the great. The man
of moderation, as he is temperate in his
wiflhes, so in his pursuits he is regulated
by virtue. A good conscience is to him
more valuable than any success. He is
not so much bent on the accomplishment
of any design, as to take a diflhonourable
ftep, in order to compass it. He can have.
patience. He can brook disappointments.
He can yield to unsurmountable obstacles;
and, by gentle and gradual progress, is
more likely to succeed in the end, than
others are, by violence and impetuosity. In
his highest enterprise, he wifles not to
have the appearance of a meteor, which
fires the atmosphere; or, of a comet, which
astonishes the public, by its blazing, ec-
centric course; but rather to resemble those
steady luminaries of heaven, which ad-
vance in their orbits, with a silent and re-
gular motion. He approves himself there-
by to the virtuous, the wife, and discern-

ing

SER M. ing; and, by a temperate and unexcep-

XII.
-"- tionable conduct, escapes those dangers

which persons of an opposite description
are perpetually ready to incur.

III. BE moderate in your expectations.

When your state is flourishing, and the
course of events proceeds according to your
wish, susser not your minds to be vainly
lifted up. Flatter not yourselves with high
profpe&s of the increasing favours of the
world, and the continuing applause of men.
Say not within your hearts, 'My mountain
Jands Jfrong, and Jhall never, be moved. I
Shall never fee adversity. To-morrow Jhall
be as, this day, and more abundantly.-You
are betraying yourselves; you are laying a
sure foundation of disappointment and mi-
fery, when you allow your fancy' to soar
to such :lofty pinnacles of confident hope.
By building your house in this airy region,
you are preparing for yourselves a great
and- cruel fall. Your tritz is the Jfider's
vweb. You may lean on your house; but it
Ihall not jand. You may hold it fafi; but it

Jall

Jfiall not endure. For, to man on earth it S E R.

3I'.

was never granted, to gratify all his hopes; -~ d
or to persevere in one trac of uninterrup-
ted prosperity. Unpleafing vicissitudes ne-
ver fail to succeed those that were grateful.
The faJ/ion of the world, how gay or fmi-
ling soever, paoeth, and often paffeth fud-
denly, away.

By want of moderation in our hopes,

we not only increase dejedion, when dif-
appointment comes, but we accelerate dif-
appointment; we bring forward, with great-
er ipeed, disagreeable changes in our state.
For the natural consequence of prefump-
tuous expectation, is rashness in condut.
He who indulges confident security, of
course neglects due precautions against the
dangers that threaten him; and his fall
will be foreseen, and predicted. He not
only exposes himself unguarded to dan-
gers, but he multiplies them against him-
self. By presumption and vanity, he either
provokes enmity, or incurs contempt.

The arrogant mind, and the proud
hope, are equally contrary to religion, and

to

BE RM. to prudence. The world cannot bear such
tj, a spirit; and Providence seldom fails to

check it. The Almighty beholds with dif-
pleasure those who, intoxicated with pro-
fperity, forget their dependence on that Su-
preme Power which raised them up. His
awful government of the world has been
in nothing more conspicuous than in bring-
ing low the lofty looks of man, and flattering
the proud in the imaginations of their minds.
-Is not this the great Babylon which I have
built by the might of my power, and for the
honour of my Majej/y *? Tlius exclaimed
the prefiinptuous monarch, in the pride of
his heart. But, lo! when the word was
yet in his mouth, the visitation from hea-
ven came, and the voice was heard; 0,
1Vebuchaduezzar ! to thee it is fpokei ; thy
kingdom is departed from thee.-He that ex-
alteth himself, Ihall be bumbled; and he that
humbleth himfeif, fJall be exalted t. A tem-
perate spirit, and moderate expectations,
are the best safeguard of the mind in this

* Danicl, iv. 30. 31. - Luke, xiv. It.

uncertairi

uncertain and changing fate. They en- SE R M.
able us to pass through life with rmoft xLn
comfort. When we rife in the world, they
contribute to our elevation; and if we
must fall, they render our fall the lighter.

IV. MODERATION in our pleasures is an

important exercise of the virtue which we
are now confidering. It is an invariable
law of our present condition, that every
pleasure which is pursued to excess, con-
verts itself into poison. What was intend-
ed for the cordial and refrehment of hu-
man life, through want of moderation, we
turn to its bane. In all the pleasures of
sense, it is apparent, that only when indul-
ged within certain limits, they confer fa-
tisfadion. No sooner do we pass the line
which temperance has drawn, than perni-
cious effets come forward, and show them-
- elves. Could I lay open to your view the
monuments of death, they would read a
j lecture in favour of moderation, much

more powerful than any that the most elo-
quent preacher can give. You would be-

hold

SERM. hold the graves peopled with the victims

X of intemperance. You would behold those

chambers of darkness hung round, on eve-
ry fide, with the trophies of luxury, drunk-
ennefs, and sensuality. So numerous would
you find those martyrs of iniquity, that it
may safely be asserted, where war or pefti-
lence have fain their thousands, intempe-
rate pleasure has slain its ten thousands.

While the want of moderation in plea-

sure brings men to an untimely grave,
at the fame time, until they arrive there,
it pursues and afflicts them with evils
innumerable. To what cause so much
as to this, are owing, faded youth, and
premature old age; an enervated body,
and an enfeebled, mind; together with
all that long train of diseases, which the
indulgence of appetite and. sense have in-
troduced into the world? Health, chear-
fulness, and vigour, are known to be the
offspring of temperance, The man of
moderation brings to all the natural and
innocent pleasures of life, that found un-
corrupted relihi, which gives him' a much

;~~''~ ~

~
~s. fuller

fuller enjoyment of them, than the palled s ER M.
and vitiated appetite of the voluptuary al- -__,
lows him to know; He culls the flower of
every allowable gratification, without dwell-
.ing upon it until the flavour be loft. He
.taftes the fveet of every pleasure, without
pursuing it till the bitter dregs rife. Where-
as the man of opposite charatcr dips so
deep, that he never fails to stir an impure
and noxious sediment, which lies at the
bottom of the cup.- In the pleasures,
besides, which are regulated by modera-
tion, there is always that dignity which
goes along with innocence. No man needs
to be aihamed of them. They are consist-
ent with honour; with the favour of God,
and of man. But the sensualist, who dif-
dains all reltraint in his pleasures, is odioui
in the public eye. His vices become gross;
his charaAter, contemptible; and he ends
in being a burden both to himself and to
society. Let me exhort you, once more,

V. To moderation in all your passions,
This exercise of the virtue is the more re?

VOL. III. S quifite

SE R.M., quifite, because there is no passion in hu-

. man nature but what has, of itself, a ten-

dency to run into excess. For all passion
:implies a violent emotion of mind.'. Of
course, it is apt to derange the regular
course of our ideas; and to produce con-
fusion within. Nothing, at the fame time,
is more seducing than paflion. During the
time when it grows and swells, it constant-
ly justifies, to our apprehension, the tumult
which it. creates, by means of a thousand
false arguments which it forms, and brings
.t its aid. Of some passions, such as anger
and resentment, the excess is so obviously
: dangerous, as loudly to call for modera-
tion;h He who gives himself up to the im-
.petuofity of such passions, without restraint,
is universally condemned by the world;
and hardly accounted a man of found
/ find..: But, what is lels- apt to be attend-
ed to,: sorn even of those pafions which
are reckoned innocent, or whole tendency
.. to disorder and evil is not apparent, stand,
. neterthdelefsin need of moderation and re-
ftrairi4 !as well as others:: For, kfuch is the

fecblenefs

feebleness of our nature, that every naflion sE IRM.
which has for its object any worldly goodl i
is: in hazard of attaching us too strongly,
and of transporting us beyond the bounds
of reason. If allowed to acquire the full and
unrestrained dominion of the heart, it is-
sufficient, in various situations, to render
us' miterable; and alnoft in every fitua-
tioni "by' its lingroffmirg power, to render
us negligent of duties which,- as men or
Christians, we are bound to perform.,
| Of theinfidious growth of pafilon, there-
fore, we have great reason to beware, We
ought always to have at hand confidera-
t tions, which may assist us in tempering its
warmth, and in regaining poffefiion of our
fouls. Let us be persuaded, that moments
of passion are always moments of delusion;
that nothing truly is, what it then.feems. to
be,; that all the opinions which we then
form, are erroneous; and all the judge-
m ients which we pass, are extravagant. ·Let
moderation accustom us to wait. until the
fiumes of passion be spent; until the: milt
which it has raised begin to be di^ipated.

SERM. We shall then be able to fee where truth
ix__ and right lie; and reason Ihall, by degrees,

resume the ascendant. On no occasion let
us imagine, that strength of mind is ihown
by violence of paflion. This is not the
firength of men, but the impetuosity of
children, It is the strength of one who is
in the delirium of a fever, or under. the
disease of madness. The strength of such a
person :is indeed increased. But it is ar
unnatural strength; which being under no
proper guidance, is directed towards ob-
jets that occasion his deftruftion. True
strength of mind is shown in .governing
.and refifing. passion, not in giving it scope;
in restraining the wild beast within; and
.acting, on the most trying occasions, ac-
cording'to the dictates of conscience, and
temperate reason.

THUS I have'pointed out, in several in-

:.ances, how moderation ought to be dif-
played: Moderation in our wishes; mo-
deration in our pursuits; moderation in
our hopes; moderation in. our pleasures;

moderation

moderation in our passions. It is a prin- SE R M.

XIlr.

ciple which flould habitually influence our
conduct, and form the reigning tempera-
ture of the foul.

THE great motive to this virtue is suggest-

ed by the words immediately following the
text; the Lord is at hand. The Judge is co-
ming, who is to close this temporary scene of
things, and to introduce a higher state of
existence. The day is at hand, which will
place the great concerns of men in a point
of view very different from that in which
they are at present beheld; will strip the
world of its false glory; will detect the va-
nity of earthly pursuits; and disclose ob-
jects which have the proper title to interest
a rational mind. Objecs acquire power
to engage our passions, only in proportion
as they are conceived to be great. But
great, or little, are no more than terms of
comparison. Those things which appear
great to one who knows nothing greater,
will fink into a diminutive size, when he
becomes acquainted with objects of a high-

S 3 3r

S ER M. er nature. Were it oftener in our thoughts,
XI". that the Lord is at hand, none of those

things which now discompose and agitate
worldly men, would appear of sufficient
magnitude to raise commotion in our
breasts. Enlarged views of the future de-
ftination of man, and of the place which
he may hope to possess in an eternal
world, naturally give birth to modera-
tion of mind. They tend to cool all mif-
placed ardour about the advantages of this
Rfate; and to produce that calm and tem-
'perate frame of spirit, which becomes men
and Christians. They give no ground for
entire disregard of earthly concerns. While
we-are men, we must feel and ad as such.
But they;afford a good reason why they
who believe the Lord to be at hand, fihould
let their moderation appear, and be known
unto all men.

. .SE. R-

'.,'.", -: '
^ S E R-

# SERMON XIII. On the JOY, and the BITTERNESS of the HEART. PROVERBS, xiv. 10. The heart knoweth his own bitterness, and a stranger doth not intermeddle with his joy.

[ 263 ]

SE R M ON XIi.
On the JoY, and the BITTERNESS of the

HEART.

· . PROVERBS, Xiv. 10.

The heart inoweth his own bitlcrLyef, and a

Jiranger doth not intermeddle with his joy.
IT is well known, that men have always SERM.

been much inclined to place their hap- i-

piness in the advantages of fortune, and
the diftinftions of rank. Hence these have
been pursued by the multitude with such
avidity, that every principle of honour,
probity, and vir:ue, have been sacrificed
to the attainment of them. At the fame
time, many circumstances might have con-
vinced men, that supposing them to be fuc-

S 4 cefiful

SE RM. cefsful in the pursuit, it by no means fol-
XIII. ,,-Z lowed, that happiness was to be the re-

ward. For if happiness be, in truth, es-
fentially conneced with splendid fortune,
or exalted rank, how comes it to pass, that
many in the inferior ltations of life, visibly
spend their days with more comfort, than
they who occupy the higher departments
of the world ? Why does the beggar sing,
while the King is fad ? A small measure of
refledtion on our natire might satisfy us,
that there are other priiciples of happiness
or misery, too often overlooked by the
world, which immediately affect the heart,
and operate there with greater force and
power, than any circumstances of rank. or
fortune. This is the observation of the
wife man in the text; and what I now pur-
pose to illustrate. I shall take a view of
the chief sources of that bitternefi which the
heart knowetb, and of that joy with which
ia Jranger doth not intermeddle; and then
shall point out the proper improvements to
be made of the subject.

IF

IF we inquire carefully into the sources S R M.

of the joy or bitterness of the heart, we ,X'
ihall find, that they are chiefly two; that
they arise either from a man's own mind
and temper; or, from the connection in
which he stands with some of his fellow-
creatures. In other words, the circum-
stances which most essentially affect every
man's happiness are, his personal character,
and his social feelings.

I. EVERY man's own mind and temper

is, necessarily, to himself a source of much
inward joy or bitterness. For every man,
if we may be allowed the expression, is
more connected with himself, than with
any external objet. He is constantly a
companion to himself in his own thoughts;
and what he meets with there, must, of all
things, contribute most to his happiness or
his disquiet. Whatever his condition in
the world be, whether high or low, if he
find no cause to upbraid himself for his
behaviour; if he be satisfied that his con-
duCt proceeds upon a rational plan; if,

amidst

SE R M amidst the failings incident to humanity,
Xi I. his conscience be, in, the main, free from

reproach, and his mind undisturbed by
any dismal presages of futurity; the foun-
dation is laid for a placid and agreeable te-
nor of life. If to this you add a calm and
chearful temper, not easily fretted or di-
iturbed, not subjed to envy, nor prone to
violent passion, much of that joy will be
produced, which it is said in the text, a
Jlranger intermeddleth not with. For this is
an intrinsic joy, independent of all foreign
causes. The upright man, as it is written,
is fiatfied from himfllf. Undisturbed by
the vexations of folly, or the remorse of
guilt, his nights will be peaceful, and his
days serene. His mind is a kingdom to it-
self. A good conscience, and good tem-
per, prepare, even in the midst of poverty,
a continual feast.

But how sadly will the scene be reverTed,

if the first thoughts which occur to a man
concerning himself, ihall be of a gloomy
and- threatening kind; if his temper, in-
stead of calmness and felf-enjoyment, fliall

yield

yield him nothing but disquiet and painful sE R M
agitation? In any situation of fortune, is- xII.
it possible for him to be happy, whose
mind is in this troubled state ? he spirit
of a man will fit/ain his infirmities; but a
wounded spirit, who can bear ? Vigour of
mind, may enable a man to sustain many
shocks of adversity. In his spirit, as long
as it' is found, he can find a resource,
when other auxiliaries fail. But if that
which lhould sustain him be enfeebled and
broken; if that to which he has recourse
for the cure of other sorrows, become itself
the wounded part; to what quarter can he
turn for relief?

The wounds which the spirit suffers are

owing chiefly to three causes; to folly, to
paflion, or to guilt. They frequently ori-
ginate from folly; that is, from vain, and
improper pursuits, which, though not di-
rectly criminal, are unsuitable to a man's
age, character, or condition, in the world.
In consequence of thele, he beholds him-
self degraded and exposed; and suffers the
pain of many a mortifying reflection, and

many

.ERM. many a humbling comparison of himself
^xs[. with others. The diflrefs :occasioned by a

sense of folly, is aggravated by any violent
passion being allowed to take poffeilion of
the heart. Even though it be.of the class
of those which are reckoned innocent, yet,
if it have entirely seized and overpowered
a.man, it destroys his tranquillity, and
brings his mind into a perturbed ltate.
But if it be a paflion of the black and vi-
cious kind, it is fuficient to blast the most
flourishing condition,. and to poison all his
joys.- If to those wounds infliced by. fol-
ly, or by passion, you add the wound of
guilt, the remorse and fear produced by
criminal deeds,, you fill up the measure. of
pain, and bitterness of heart. Often have
the terrors of conscience occasioned inward
paroxyfins, or.violent agitations of mind.
A dark:and threatening cloud seems, to the
conicious fimner,. to be hanging, over his
head., He who believes himself despised,
or, hated, by men, and who dreads, at the
fame time, an avenging God, can derive
little pleasure from the external comforts of

;~~~~~.:~ -*~ ~life,

life. The bitterness of his heart infuses it- s E:pR Ss.
self into every draught which pleasure of- xii.
sers to his lips.

The external misfortunes of life,: difap-

pointments, poverty, and sickness, are no-
thing in-comparifon of those inward di-
stresses of mind, occasioned by folly, by
passion, and -by guilt.. They may indeed
prevail-in different degrees, according as
one or other of those principles of bitter-
ness is predominant. But they are seldom
parted far asunder from one another; and
when, as it too often happens, all the three
are complicated, they complete the misery
of man. The disorders of the mind, ha-
ving then arisen to their height, become of
all things the most dreadful., The hame
of folly, the violence of passion, and the
remorse of guilt, acting in conjunction,
have too frequently driven men to the, last
and abhorred. refuge, of seeking, relief in
death from a life too embittered ,to be any
longer endured. I proceed to confider

1. OTHER troubles, and other joys of.

.he

SERM. the heart, arising from fouices different
X|L<. from;.thofe that I- have now. described;

founded in the relations or connections
which we have with others, and springing
·from the feelings which these. occasion.
Such causes .of sorrow or joy .are of an
-external nature. Religion does not teach,
that all the sources .of inward pleasure or
pain are derived fiom our temper, and mo-
ral behaviour ..These are indeed the prin-
.cipal springs of bitterness or joy. In one
way or other, they affect all the: pleafurcs
.and pains of life; but they include not,
within themselves, the whole of them. Our
Creator did not intend, that the happiness
of each individual should have no depend-
ence on those who are around him. Ha-
ving connected us in society by many -ties,
it is his decree, that these ties fiould prove,
both during their fubfiftencei and in their
dissolution, causes of pleasure or: pain, im-
mediately, and often deeply, affecting the
human heart. My doctrine, therefore, is
,not, that the bitterness which the heart know-
eth as its own, and the joy w.ithb which a

Jlra'ngct'

Jiranger intermeddleth iotf is independent of 3 Et M.
every thing external. What I assert is, xl,
that this bitterness, and this joy, depend
much more on other causes, than on' riches
or poverty, on high or low' ations in the
world; that,' equally in the conditions of
elevated fortune; and of private life, the
most material circumstances of trouble *or
felicity, next to the state of our own mind
and temper, are the feniations and assec-
tions which arise from the connections we
have with others.

·M . '
. .

IN order to make this appear, let us sup-

pose a man, in any rank or condition of
life, happy in his family and his friends;
9 soothed by the cordial intercourse of kind

affections, which he partakes with them;
enjoying the comfort of doing them good
offices, and receiving in return their since-
left. gratitude; experiencing no jealousy
nor envy, no disquiet or aliehation of as-
feRion, among those with whom he is con-
nected; -how many, and how copious
sources of inward joy open to such a man

| " " ItHow

SER M. How smooth is the tenor of a life.that pro-

ceedsin such a course! What a fniling
aspea does the love of parents and chil-
dren, of brothers and filters, of friends and
relations, give to every surrounding object,
and every returning day,! With what a
lustre does it gild even the small habitation
where such placid intercourse dwells; where
such scenes of, heartfelt fatisfation succeed
uninterruptedly to one another!

But let us suppose this joyful intercourse

to be broken off, in an untimely hour, by
the cruel hand of the last foe; let us ima-
gine the family, once so happy among
themselves, to behold the.parent, the child,
or the spouse, to whom their hearts were
attached by the tendereft ties, stretched on
the cold bed of death; then, what bitter-
ness does the heart know! This, in the
ftriteft sense, is its own bitternesS; from
|I which it is not in the power of any exter-

I| ~ nal circumstance whatever to afford it. re-

lief. Amidit those piercing griefs of the
heart, all ranks of life are levelled; all dif-
tindions of fortune are forgotten. Un-

availing

availing are the trophies of splendid woe, S E R M.
with which riches deck the fatal couch, to ,I
give the least comfort to the mourner. The
prince, and the peasant, then equally feel
their own bitterness. Dwelling on the me-
lancholy remembrance of joys that are past
and gornei the one forgets his poverty; the
other despises the gilded trappings of his
state. Both, in that fad hour, are fully
sensible, that on the favours of fortune it
depends not to make man happy in this
world.

But it is not only the death of friends,

which, in the midst of a seemingly pro-
fperous state, is able to bring distress home
to the heart. From various failures in their
conduct when living, arises much of the
inward uneasiness we susser. It will, in
general, be found, that the behaviour of
those among whom we live in near connec-
tion, is, next to personal character and
temper, the chief source, either of the plea-
fures, or of the disquietudes, of every man's
life. As, when their behaviour is cordial
and fatisfaAory, it is of all external things
VOL III. T the

S ER M. the most soothing to the mind; so, on the
XIII.
,_,y« other hand, their levity, their inattention,

or occasional harshness, even though it pro-
ceed to no decided breach of friendflhip,
yet ruffles and frets the temper. Social
life, harassed with those petty vexations,
resembles a road which a man is doomed
daily to travel; but finds it rugged, and
tfony, and painful to be trod,

The cafe becomes much worse, if the

base and criminal condua of perfens whom
we have once loved, dissolve all the bonds
of amity, and show that our confidence
has been abused. Then are opened, some
of the deepest springs of bitterness in the
human heart. Behold the heart of the
parent, torn by the unworthy behaviour,
and cruel ingratitude of the child, whom
he had trained up with the fondest hopes;
on whom he had lavished his whole assec-
tion; and for whole fake he had labbured
and toiled, through the course of a long life.
Behold the endearments of the conjugal
Rtate changed into black suspicion, and mif-
trust; the affectionate spouse, or the vir-

tulous

tuous husband, left to mourn, with a bro- s E R M.
ken heart, the infidelity of the once-beloved X^i.
partner of their life. Behold the unfuf-
peEting friend betrayed, in the hour of
danger, by the friend in whom he trusted;
or, in the midit of revere misfortune, meet-
ing nothing but cold indifference, perhaps
scorn and contempt, where he had expect-
ed to find the kindest sympathy.- Are
these, let me ask, uncommon scenes in the
world ? Are such difireffes peculiar to any
rank or flation ?' Do they chiefly befall
persons in humble life, and have the great
any prerogative which affords them exemp-
tion ? When the heart is sorely wounded
by the ingratitude or faithlessness of those
on whom it had leaned with the whole'
weight of affection, where liall it turn for
relief? Will it find comfort in the recol-
leftion of honours and titles, or in the con-
templation of surrounding treasures ?:-
Talk not of the honours of a court. Talk
not of the wealth of the eait. These, in.
the hours of heart-bitternefs, are spurned,
as contemptible and vile; perhaps cursed,

T 2 as

SE RM. as indirect causes of the present distress.
*XnI. The dart has made its way to the heart.

There, there, it is fixed. The very feat of
feeling is aflailed; and in proportion to
the sensibility of the sufferer's heart, and
the tenderness of his affections, such, un-
fortunately, will be his degree of anguish.
A good conscience, and hope in God, may
indeed bring him consolation. But un-
der such distresses of the heart, as I have
described, fortune, be it as flourishing as
you will, is no more than an empty pa-
geant. It is a feeble reed, which affords
no support. It is a house of straw, which
is scattered before the wind.

THUS you fee this dotrine meeting us

from many quarters, that the heart knows
a bitterness and a joy of its own, altogether
diftindt from the uneasiness or the pleasure
that is produced by the circumstances of
external fortune; arising either from per-
fonal character, and the itate of a man's
own mind; or from the affections excited
by the relations in which he stands to others.

This

This joy, and this bitterness, are, each of s E RM.

XIII.

them, of so much greater consequence than
any distinctions of fortune, that blessed with
the former, one may be happy, as far as
human happiness goes, in a cottage; and
afflicted with the latter, he must be mise-
rable in a palace.-Let us now proceed
to an important part of the fubje6, the
pradcical improvement to which this doc-
trine leads.

FiRST, Let it serve to moderate our pas-

sion for riches, and high situations in the
world. It is well known, that the eager
pursuit of.thefe is the chief incentive to the
crimes that fill the world. Hence, among
the middle and lower ranks of men, all the
fraud, falsehood, and treachery, with which
the competition for gain infests society.
Hence, in the higher stations of the world,
all the atrocious crimes flowing from am-
bition, and the love of power, by which
the peace of mankind has so often been
broken, and the earth stained with blood.
Had there coveted advantages the power,

T 3 when

SERM. when obtained, of ensuring joy to the
* L-. heart, and rendering it a stranger to bitter-

ness, some apology might be offered for
the violence to which they have given oc-
cafion. The prize might be supposed wor-
thy of being acquired at a high expence,
when so much depended on the attain-
ment. But I have ihown, I hope with fa-
tisfactory evidence, that the contrary is the
truth. I fay not, that the advantages of
fortune deserve no regard from a wife or a
good man. Poverty is always distressing.
Opulence and rank are both attended with
many comforts, and may be rendered sub-
servient to the most valuable purposes. But
what I fay is, that it is a great error to rate
them beyond their just value. Secondary
advantages, inferior assistances to felicity,
they are; and no more. They rank below
every thing that immediately affecs the
heart; and that is a native source of joy or
bitterness there. If a man be either un-
happy in his dispositions, or unhappy in all
his connections, you heap upon him in
vain, all the treasures, and all the honours,

which

which kings can bestow. Divest these sE RM,
things, then, of that falke glare which the
opinions of the multitude throw around
them. Contemplate them with a more im-
partial eye. Pursue them with less eager-
ness. Above all, never sacrifice to the pur-
suit any degree of probity or moral worth,
of candour or good affection; if you would
not lay a foundation for that bitterness of
heart, which none of the goods of fortune
can either compensate or cure.

SECONDLY, Let the observations which

have been made, corret our mistakes, and
check our complaints, concerning a fuppo-
fed promiscuous distribution of happiness
in this world. The charge of injustice,
which so often, on this account, hath been
brought against Providence, reffts entirely
on this ground, that the happiness and mi-
fery of men may be estimated by the de-
gree of their external prosperity. This is
the delusion under which the multitude
have always laboured; but which a just
consideration of the invisible springs of hap-

T 4 piness

SERM. piness that asset the heart, is sufficient to

corret. If you would judge whether a
man be really happy, it is not solely to his
houses and his lands, to his equipage and
his retinue, you are to look. Unless you
could fee farther, and discern what joy, or
what bitterness, his heart feels, you can
pronounce nothing concerning him. That
proud and wicked man, whom you behold
Surrounded with Gate and splendour, and
upon whom you think the favours of Hea-
ven so improperly lavished, may be a
wretch, pining away in secret, with a thou-
sand griefs unknown to the world. That
poor man, who appears neglected and over-
looked, may, in his humble station, be
partaking of all the moral, and all the so-
cial joys, that exhilarate the heart; may
be living chearful, contented, and happy.
Cease, then, to murmur againfr difpenfa-
tions of Providence, which are, to us, so im-
perfectly known. Envy not the prosperity
of finners; Judge not of the real condition
of men, from what floats. merely on the
surface of their itate. Let us' rather,

THIRDLY,

'rTHRDLY, Turn our attention to those SERM.
internal sources of happiness or misery, on X_
which it hath been shown that so much
depends. As far as the bitterness or joy
of the heart arises from the first of those
great springs which I assigned to it, our
own conduct and temper, so far our hap-
piness is placed, in some measure, in our
own hands. What is amiss or disordered
within, in consequence of folly, of paflion,
or guilt, may be rectified by due care, un-
der the assistance of divine grace. He who
thereby attains to a tranquil and composed
slate of heart; free from ill humour and
disgust, from violent paflions, and from
vexing remorse, is laying a foundation for
enjoyment of himself, much furer and
broader, than if he were amafling thou-
sands to increase his estate.

With regard to the other spring of joy

or bitterness of heart, arifng from our con-
nections with others, here indeed, we are
more dependent on things not within our
power. These connections are not al-
ways of our own forming; and even when

they

S E RM. they have been formed by choice, the wireft
XIII. are liable to be disappointed in their expec-

tations. Yet here too it will be found, that
the proper regulation of the heart is of the
utmost importance, both for improving the
joys -which our situation affords, and for
mitigating the griefs which our connec-
tions may render unavoidable. As far as
the choice of friends or relatives depends
on ourselves, let their virtue and worth
ever direct that choice, if we look for
any lasting felicity from it. In all the
habits and attachments of social life, after
they are formed, let it be our study, to ful-
fil properly our own part. Let nothing be
wanting on our fide, to nourish that mutual
harmony and affecionate friendship which,
in every situation of life, as has been flown,
is of so great consequence to our peace and
satisfaCtion. It is not, indeed, in our power
to preserve always alive those friends, in
whom our hearts delight. It is often not
in our power to prevent the ingratitude and
unworthy behaviour of other friends, from
whom we once expeced, comfort. But

under

under those affliting incidents of life, S lR M.
much may be done by proper employment ,-_-
of the thoughts, and direCtion of the assec-
tions, for obtaining relief. To a purified
and well-regulated heart, reason and reli-
gion can bring many aids for healing its
wounds, and restoring its peace; aids which,
to the negligent and vicious, are wholly
unknown. The greater experience we have
of the vicissitudes of human life, with more
weight will that precept of the wife man
always come home to our remembrance;
Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of
it are the ji/es of ife *.--Hence arises,

IN the fourth and last place, another in-

ftruction, that it is of the utmost import-
ance to us all, frequently to look up to
Him who made the human heart; and to
implore his affiflance in the regulation and
government of it. Known to him, are all
the sources of bitterness and joy by which
it is affected. On him it depends, to let

P* Pov. iv. 23.

them

SE.RM. them forth, or to fiut them up; to in-
t_,X crease, or to diminish them, at. his plea-

sure. In a study so infinitely important to
happiness, as that of the preservation of in-
ward peace, we cannot be too earnest in
beseeching aid from the great Father of
Spirits, to enable us to keep our hearts free
from distress and trouble. Betides the
affiflance which we may hope to derive
from divine grace, the employments of de-
votion themselves, form one of the most
powerful means of composing, and tran-
quillifing the heart. On various occasions,
when the sources of heart-bitternefs have
been most overflowing, devotion has been
found the only refuge of the sufferer. De-
votion opens a sanCtuary, to which they,
whose hearts have been most deeply wound-
ed, can always fly. Within that quiet and
sacred retreat, they have often found a
healing balsam prepared. When grieved
by men, they have derived, from the ascent
of the mind towards God and celestial ob-
jecs, much to sooth them at present, and
much to hope for in future. Let us, there-

fore,

fore, neglect no mean with which religion SERM.

XIII.

can furnish us, for promoting the joys, and _-u
assuaging the bitterness of the heart. A-
midst the frailties of our nature, the incon-
ftancy of men, and the frequent changes
of human life, we ihall find every assistance
that can be procured, little enough, for en-
abling us to pass our few days with tole-
rable comfort and peace.

S E R-

# SERMON XIV. On CHARACTERS of IMPERFECT GOODNESS. MARK, x. 21. Then Jesus, beholding him, loved him. —

[ 286 ]

SE R M O N XIV.
On CHARACTERS of IMPERFECT GOOD-

NESS.

MARK, X. 21.

Then yefis, beholding him, loved him.-
SE R M. T HE characers of men which the world

, ~_ presents to us are infinitely diversified.

In some, either the good or the bad qualities
are so predominant, as strongly to mark
the character; to discriminate one person
as a virtuous, another as a vicious man.
In others, these qualities are so mixed to-
gether, as to leave the character doubtful.
The light and the liade are so much blend-
ed, the colours of virtue and vice run in
such a manner into one another, that we

can

can hardly distinguish where the one ends, SERM.

XIv.

and the other begins; and we remain in
fufpence, whether to blame or to praise.
While we admire those who are thorough-
ly good, and detest the grossly wicked, it
is proper also to belfow attention on those
imperfect characters, where there may be
much to praise, and somewhat to blame;
and where regard to the commendable part,
shall not hinder us from remarking what
is defective or faulty. Such attentions will
be found the more useful, as characters of
this mixed fort are, more frequently than
any other, exhibited to us in the commerce
of society.

It was one of this fort, which gave occa-

sion to the incident recorded in the text. The
incident seems to have been confidered as re-
markable, since it is recounted by three of
the evangelical writers; and by them all,
with nearly the fame circumstances. The
person to whom the history relates was a ru-
ler; one of higher rank and station than
those who usually retorted to Jesus. He
was a rich man: He was a young man. His

whole

SERM. whole behaviour was prepossessing and en-

, gaging. He appears to have' conceived a

high opinion of our Lord. He addressed
him with the utmost refpe&t; and the que-
stion which he put to him was proper and im-
portant. He kfeeled to him; and fdid, Good
MaJter, What Jhall I do that I may inherit
eternal life P His conduct in the world had
been regular and decent. He could pro-
test, that he had hitherto kept himself free
from .any gross vice; and in his dealings
with others, had observed the precepts of
God. Our Lord, beholding him, is said to
have loved him j whence we have reason to
conclude, that he was not hypocritical in
his profeflions; and that his countenance
carried the expression of good dispositions,
as his speech, and his manners, were altoge-
ther complacent and gentle. Yet this per-
son, amiable as he was, when his virtue
was put to the test, disappointed the hopes
which he had given reason to form. At-
tached, in all probability, to the indulgence
of ease and pleasure, he wanted fortitude
of mind to part with the advantages of the

world,

world, for the fake of religion. When our s E R .

XIV.

Lord required him to fulfil his good inten-
tions, by relinquifliing his fortune, beco-
ming one of his followers, and preparing
himlelf to encounter fuierings, the facri-
fice appeared to him too great. Imprefions
of virtue, however, still remained on his
mind. He was enfible of what he ought
to have done; and regretted his want of
courage to do it. Hc was frro'wdl: He
was grieved: Yet he wnct away.

PE-RSONS of a character somewhat re-

fembling this, all of us may have met with;
especially, among the young; among those
who have been liberally educated, and
polifihed by good society. They abhor
open vice, and crimes that diiturb the
world. They have a respect for religion.
They are willing to receive instruction for
their condutd. They are modest and un-
assuming; reii)etful to their superiors in
age or Ration; gentle in their address; in-
offensive and courteous in their whole be-
haviour. They are fond of obliging every

VOL. III. U one;

S E R M. one; unwilling to hurt or displease any.-
x~J .Such persons we cannot but love. We

gladly promise well of them; and are dif-
posed to forward and assist them. Yet such
is the weakness of our nature, that at the
bottom of this characrer there may lie, as
we fee exemplified in the instance before
us, some secret and material defecs. That
vigour of mind, that firmness of principle,
may be wanting, which is requisite for en-
abling them to aa with propriety, when
their virtue is put to a decisive trial. The
softness of their nature is unfavourable to a
steady perseverance in the course of inte-
grity. They possess the amiable qualities;
but there is ground to suspeCt, that in the
estimable ones they are deficient. While,
therefore, we by no means class them among
the bad, we dare not give them the full
praiie of virtue. When they set out in the
world, we cannot pronounce with confi-
dence, what confirmed features their cha-
racter will assume; nor how far they can
be depended upon, in future life. Allow
me now to point out the dangers which

such

Iuch persons are moil likely to incur; and SERM.

XIV.

to flow what is requisite for them farther
to study, in order to their fulfilling the part
of good men and true Christians.

I; PERSONS of this description are not

qualified for discharging aright many du-
ties, to which their situation in life may
call them. In certain circumstances, they
behave with abundance of propriety. When
all is calm and smooth around them; when
nothing occurs to agitate the mind, or to
disturb the tenor of placid lifes none of
their defects come forward. They are be-
loved; and they are useful. They promote
the comfort of human fodiety; and, by
gentleness, and courtesy of manners, serve
to cement men together in agreeable union.
But to fail on the tranquil surface of an
unruffled lake, and to steer a safe course
through a troubled and flormy ocean, re-
quire different talents: and alas! human
life oftener resembles the stormy oceans
than the unruffled lake. We Ihall ndt
have been long embarked, without find-

TU ing

SERM. ing the resemblance to hold too close-
XIV.

Amidst the buffle of the world, amidst

the open contentions, and secret enmities,
which prevail in every society, mildness
and gentleness alone, are not sufficient to
carry us, with honour, through the duties
of our different flations; as heads of fami-
lies, citizens, subjeCts, magistrates, or as
engaged in the pursuits of our several call-
ings. Disturbances and trials arise, which
demand vigorous exertions of all the moral
powers; of patience, vigilance, and self-
denial; of constancy and fortitude, to sup-
port us under danger and reproach; of
temperance, to restrain us from being car-
ried away by pleasure; of firm and deter-
mined principle, to make us despise the
bribes of fin. These manly dispositions of
mind are indispensably necessary to prepare
one, for surmounting the discouragements
of virtue; and for struggling honourably
through the hardihips of life. Unless he
be thus armed and fortified, whatever good
intentions have been in his heart, they are

likely

likely to be frustrated in ation. Nothing s ERM.
that is great, can be undertaken. Nothing xIv.
that is difficult or hazardous, can be accom-
pliflied. Nor are we to imagine, that it is
only in times of perftcution, or war, or ci-
vil commotions, that there is occasion for
those stronger efforts, those masculine vir-
tues of the foul, to be displayed. The pri-
vate, and seemingly quiet, stations of life,
often call men forth, in the days of peace,
to severe trials of firmness and conitancy.
The life of very few proceeds in so uniform
a train, as not to oblige them to discover,
in some situation or other, what portion
they possess of the estimable qualities of
man. Hence it sometimes happens, that
persons, whose manners were much less
promising and engaging than those of
others, have, nevertheless, when brought
to at a part in critical circumstances, per-
formed that part with more unfullied ho-
nour, and firmer integrity, than they.

II. PERSONS of the character I have de-

fcribed are ill fitted, not only for difchar-
ging the higher duties of life, but also for

U 3 refilling

SERtM. resisting the common temptations to vice.
_xIV With good.difpofitions in their mind, with

a desire, like the young ruler in the text,
to know what they shall do, in order to int
herit eternal life; yet, when the terms re-
quired of them interfere with any favou-
rite enjoyment, like him, they are sorrow,
fill; and go away. The particular trial to
which he was put, may appear to be a hard
one, and to exceed the ordinary rate of
virtue. Our Lord, who discerned his heart,
saw it to be necessary, in his cafe, for
bringing his character to the tet. But in
cafes, where trials of much less difficulty
present themselves, they who partake of a
character similar to his, are often found to
give way. The good qualities which they
possess, border on certain weaknesses of the
mind; and these weaknesses are apt to be-
tray them insensibly into vices, with which
they are connected.

Good nature, for instance, is in dan-

ger of running into that unlimited com-
plaifance, which assimilates men to the
loose manners of those whom they find
ground them. Pliant, and yielding in

their

their temper, they have not force to stand SE RM.
by the decisions of their own minds, with
regard to right and wrong. Like the a-
nimal which is said to assume the colour
of every object to wlich it is applied, they
lose all proper chara&er of their own; and
are formed by the characers of those with
whom they chance to affociate.-The mild
are apt to fink into habits of indolence and
sloth. The chearful and gay, when warm-
ed by pleasure and mirth, lose that sobriety
and felf-denial, which is essential to the
support of virtue.--Even modesty and
fubmiifion, qualities so valuable in them-
selves, and so highly ornamental to youth,
sometimes degenerate into a vicious timi-
dity; a timidity which restrains men from
doing their duty with firmness; which can-
not stand the frown of the great, the re-
proach of the multitude, or even the ridi-
cule and sneer of the scorner.

Nothing can be more amiable than a

constant desire to please; and an unwilling-
ness to offend or hurt. Yet in charac'trs
where this is a predominant feature, dc-

Ul 4 fe6tl

SERM. fee's are often found. Fond always to ob-
XIV. lige, and afraid to utter any disagreeable

' truth, such persons are Sometimes led to

dissemble. Their love of truth is sacrificed
to their love of pleating. Their speech, and
their manners, assume a fludied cou tefy.
You cannot always depend on their smile;
nor, when they promise, be sure of the per-
formance. They mean' and intend well.
But the good intention is temporary. Like
wax, they yield easily to every impression;
and the transient friendship contraced with
one person, is effaced by the next. Undif-
tinguifhing desire to oblige, often proves, in
the present itate of human things, a dan-
gerous habit. They who cannot, on many
occasions, give a firm and steady denial, or
who cannot break off a connection, which
has been hastily and improperly formed,
stand on the brink of many nifchiefs.
They will be reduced by the corrupting,
ensnared by the artful, betrayed by thofi
in whom they had placed their trust. Un-
suspicious themselves, they were flattered
yith the belief of having many friends a-

round

round them. Elated with sanguine hopes, S ERVM.
and chearful spirits, they reckoned, that to-
morrow would be as this day, and more abun-
dant. Injudicious liberality, and thought-
lets profusion, are the consequence; until,
in the end, the firaits to which they are re-
duced, bring them into mean or dishonour-
able courses. Through innocent, but un-
guarded weakness, and from want of the
feverer virtues, they are, in process of time,
betrayed into downright crimes. Such may
be the conclusion of those, who, like the
young ruler before us, with many amiable
and promising dispositions, had begun their
career in life.

III. SUCH persons are not prepared for

sustaining, with propriety and dignity, the
distresses to which our state is liable. They
were equipped for the 'eafon' of funihine
and feremty; but when the sky is overcast,
and the days of darkness come, theirfeeble
minds are destitute of shelter, and ill pro-
vided for defence. Then is the time, when
more hardy qualities are required; when

courage

SE R M. courage must face danger, constancy sup-
xlv. XV. port pain, patience possess itself in the midst

of discouragements, magnanimity display
its contempt of threatenings. If those high
virtues be altogether firangers to the mind,
the mild and gentle will certainly fink un-
der the torrent of disasters. The ruler
in the text could plead, that his behaviour
to others, in the course of social life, had
been unexceptionable. So far, the reflec-
tion on his conduct would afford him com-
fort amidst adversity. But no man is with-
out failings. In the dejecting season of
trouble, it will occur to every one, that he
has been guilty of frequent tranfgreflion;
that much of what ought to have been
done, was neglected; and that much of
what has been done, had better have been
omitted. In such situations, when a thou-
sand apprehensions Arise to alarm conscience,
nothing is able to quiet its uneasiness, ex-
cept a well-grounded trust in the mercy
and acceptance of Heaven. It is firm reli-
gious principle, acting upon a manly and
enlightened mind, that gives dignity to the

character,

character, and composure to the heart, un- SERM.
der all the troubles of the world. This X
enables the brave and virtuous man, with
success to buffet the storm. While he, who
had once sparkled in society with all the
charms of gay vivacity, and had been the
delight of every circle in which he was
engaged, remains dispirited, overwhelmed,
and annihilated, in the evil day.

SUCH are the failings incident to persons

of mixed and imperfect goodness: such
the defects of a character formed merely of
the amiable, without the cftimable quali-
ties of man.

It appears from this, that we must not

place too much trust in the fair appear-
ances, which a character may at first exhi-
bit. In judging of others, let us always
think the best, and employ the spirit of
charity and candour. But in judging of
ourselves, we ought to be more severe. Let
us remember him whom our Lord beheld,
and loved; and who yet fell short of the
kingdom of heaven. Let us not forget,

that

SE R M. that something more than gentleness and

modesty, than complacency of temper and
affability of manners, is requisite to form a
worthy man, or a true Christian. To a
high place in our esteem, these qualities are
justly intitled. They enter essentially into
every good man's character. They form
some of its most favourable diftinclions.
But they constitute a part of it; not the
whole. Let us not, therefore, reft on them
entirely, when we conceive an idea of what
manner of persons we ought to be.

LET piety form the baiis of firm and

established virtue. If this be wanting, the
character cannot be found and entire. Mo-
ral virtue will always be endangered, often
be overthrown, when it is separated from
its surest support. Confidence in God,
strengthened by faith in the great Redeem-
er of mankind, not only, amidst the fevc-
rer trials of virtue, gives constancy to the
mind, but, by nourishing the hope of im-
mortality, adds warmth and elevation to
the affections.. They whose conduct is not

animated

animated by religious principle, are depri- SER l.
ved of the most powerful incentive to wor- ,___
thy and honourable deeds.

Let such diScipline, next, be studied, as

may form us to the afive and manly vir-
tues. To natural good affecions, we can
never entirely trust our conduct. These,
as has been ihown, may sometimes be
warped into what is wrong; and often will
prove infuflicient, for carrying us rightly
through all the duties of life. Good assec-
tions are highly valuable; but they must
be supported. by fixed principles, cultivated
in the understanding, and rooted in the
heart. Habits must be acquired of tempe-
rance and felf-denial, that we may be able
to resist pleasure, and endure pain, when
either of them interfere with our duty;
that we may be prepared to make a facri-
fice of any worldly interest, when the voice
of God and conscience demand it. Let us
always remember, that without fortitude
of mind, there is no manhood; there can
be no perseverance in virtue. Let a sacred
and inviolable regard for truth reign in

our

SERM. our whole behaviour. Let us be diftin-
xIv. guifled for fidelity to every promise we

have made; and for constancy in every
worthyfriendfllip we have formed. Let
no weak complaisance, no undue regard to
the opinions of men, ever make us betray
the rights of conscience. What we have
once, upon due consideration, adopted as
rules of condut, to these let us adhere un-
shaken. However the world may change
around us, let it find us the fame in pro-
fperity and adversity; faithful to God and
virtue; faithful to the convictions of our
own heart. What our lot in the world
may be, is not ours to foresee or determine,
But it is ours to resolve, that whatever it
shall be, it shall find us persevering in one
line of uprightness and honour.

BY such discipline, such attentions as

there, we are to guard against those fail
ings, which are sometimes found to stain
the most engaging characters. Joining in
proper union the amiable and the estimable
qualities, by the one we fliall attract the

good;

good; and by the other, command refpeat SERM.
from the bad. We ihall both secure our X__V'
own integrity, and ihall exhibit to others a
proper view of what virtue is, in its native
grace and majesty. In one part of our
character, we flall resemble the flower that
smiles in spring; in another, the firmly-
rooted tree, that braves the winter storm,
For, remember we must, that there is a
feafib of winter, as well as of spring and
summer, in human life; and it concerns
us to be equally prepared for both.

A higher and more perfect example of

such a character as I now recommend,
cannot be found, than what is presented to
us in the life of Jefls Christ. In him, we
behold all that is gentle, united with all
that is refpetable. It is a remarkable ex-
pression, which the Apostle Paul employs
concerning him; Ibefeech you by the meek-
izcfs and gentlenef of Chrfly*. Well might
these qualities be singled out, as those for
which he was known and difinguifhed.

2 Cor, x, r.

We

SERM. We fee him in his whole behaviour affable,
a__. courteous, and easy of access. He con-

versed familiarly with all who presented
themselves; and despised not the meanest.
With all the infirmities of his disciples he
calmly bore; and his rebukes were mild,
when their provocations were great. He
wept over-the calamities of his country,
which persecuted him; and apologised and
prayed for them who put him to death.
Yet the fame Jesus we behold, awful in the
itricnefs of his virtue; inflexible in the
cause of truth; uncomplying with prevail-
ing manners, when he found them cor-
rupt; setting his face boldly against the
hypocritical leaders of the people; over-
awed by none of their threatenings; in
the most indignant terms, reproving their
vices, and stigmatizing their characters.
We behold himgentle, without being tame;
firm, without being teern; courageous,
without being violent. Let this mind be in
us whicbh was alo in yejis Chrifi; and we
shall attain to honour, both with God and
with man.

SER-

# SERMON XV. On the SACRAMENT of the LORD'S SUPPER, as a PREPARATION for DEATH. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. MATTHEW, xxvi. 29. But I say unto you, I will not drink ...

[ 3o5 ]

SERMON XV.
On the SACRAMENT of the LoRD's SUP-

PER, as a PREPARATION for DEATH.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrameht of the

Lord's Supper.

MATTHEW, Xxvi. 29.

But Ifay unto you, ' will not dri;ik hence-

forth of thisfruit of the vine, until that day
when I. drink it nIew with you in my Fa-
ther's kingdom.
/ITH'thefe words of our blessed Lord, s ERM.

the Evangelist concludes his account XV.

of the institution of the sacrament of the
Supper. It is an institution which, solemn
and venerable in itself, is rendered ffill more
so, by the circumstances which accompanied

VOL. III, X it.

SERM. it. Our Lord had now, for about three
,_ years, continued '" appear in his public

character, in the land of Judea. He had,
all along, been watched with a jealous eye,
by his enemies; and the time was come,
when they were to prevail against lim.. A
few friends he had, from the, beginning,
selected, who, in every viciflitude of his
state, remained faithfully attached to him.
With these friends he was now meeting for
the last time, on the very evening in which
he was betrayed and seized. He perfectly
knew all that was to befal him. He knew
that this was the last meal in which he was
to join with thbfe, who had been the com-
panions of all his labours, the confidents of
all his griefs; among whom he had passed
all the quiet and private moments of his life.
He knew, that within a few hours, he was
to be torn from this loved society, by a
band of ruffians; and by to-morrow, was
to be publicly arraigned, as a malefactor.
With a heart melting with tenderness, he
said to the twelve Apofiles, as he fat down
with them at table, With defre I have dered

to
,: - . .~:

to eat this pafover with ;9'o before I iff!er . S E RM.
And then, having gratified'hifelf for the xv,
last time in their society, and having infti-
tuted that commemoration of his death
which was to continue in the Christian
church until the end of ages, he took a so-
lemn and affectionate farewel of his friends,
in the words of the text, Ifay into you,
that I will not drink hencefbrth of this fruit
of the vine, until that day when I drink it
new with yoUt n my Father's kingdom.

As these words were uttered by our

Lord, in the prospect of his sufferings';
when preparing himself for death, and
looking forward to a future meeting with
his friends in heaven; let us, under this
vite': 'confider the sacrament, which he
then instituted, as a preparation for all the
£ufferings of life, and especially, a prepa-
ration for death. It is fit and proper, that
such solemn profpeds should enter into the
service which we are this day to perform.
We have no reason to imagine, that they

* Luke, xxii. r5.

X will

SERM. will render it a gloomy service. A good

XV.
At- and wife man is often disposed to look for-

ward to the termination of life. The num-
ber of our days is determined by God; and
certainly it will not tend to florten their
number, that we employ ourselves in pre-
paring for death. On the contrary, while
our days last, it will tend to make us pass
them more comfortably, and more wifely.
Let us now then, as if for the last time we
were to partake of this sacrament, confider
how it may serve to prepare us for the dy-
ing hour.

I. IT is a high exercise of all those difpo-

fitions and affections, in which a good man
would wish to die. He would surely wish
to leave this world, in the spirit of. devo-
tion towards God, and of fellowlhip and
charity with all his brethren on earth.
Now, these are the very sentiments, which
the sacrament of the Lord's Supper in-
spires into the heart of every pious com-
municant.' It includes the highest -ats of
devotion of which human nature is ca-

"i::**,,.. , . pable.

pable. It imports, a lively sense of the in- SERM.
finite mercies of Heaven; of the gratitude x.
we owe to that God, who, by the death of
his Son, hath reltored the forfeited happi-
ness and hopes of the human race. It im-
ports, the consecration of the foul to God;
the entire resignation of ourselves, and all
our concerns, into his hands; as to the God
whom we serve and love; the guardian in
whom we confide. To thee, 0 Lord, do lift
tup mySfoul. I willgo to the altar of God, to God
imy exceeding joy. I will come into thy hozfe
in the multitude of thy mercy; and in thy feaar,
I will wor/hip towards thy holy temple
e .

These devout affections towards God are,

on this occasion, neceilarily accompanied
with benevolent dispositions towards men.
Our communion is not only with God, but
with one another. In this solemn service,
the diftintion of ranks is abolished. We
assemble in common before our great
Lord, professing ourselves to be all mem-
bers of his family, and children of the
fame Father. No feud, nor firife, nor en-

Psalm xlii. 4.; v. 7.

X 3 mity,

SERM. nity, is permitted to approach the sacred
XiV. table. All within that hallowed space

breathes peace, and concord, and love. If
thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there re-
memberefJ that thy brother hath ought againf
thee; leave there thy gift before the altar, and
go thy way ; fiJt be reconciled to thy brother;
and then come and offer thy gift*. What can
be more becoming men and Christians,
than such sentiments of piety to the great
Father of the univcrfe; gratitude to the
merciful Redeemer.of mankind; and cha-
rity and forgiveness towards all our bre-
thren ? Is not this the temper in which a
good man would wish to live? more efpe-
cially, is not this the frame of mind which
will give both dignity and peace to his last
moments? How discomposed and embit-
tered will these important moments prove,
if, with a mind. oured by the remembrance
of unfoigiven injuries, with a breast rankled
by enmity, with a heart alienated from
God, and insensible to devotion, one be
forced away from life ?

* Matthew, v. 23. 24.

Contemplate

Contemplate the manner in which our SE.RM.

blessed Lord died; which the service of thiis x
day brings particularly into your view.
You behold him, amidst the extremity of
pain, calm and collected within himself;
possessing his spirit with all the serenity
which sublime devotion, and exalted bene-
volence inspire. You hear him, first, la-
menting the fate of his'unhappy country;
next, when he was fattened to the cross,
addressing words of consolation to his as-
fiicted parent; and lastly, fending up pray-
ers, mixed with compassionate apologies,
for those who were ihedding his blood.
After all those exercises of charity, you be-
hold him in an ad of devout adoration and
trust, resigning his breath; Father, into thy
hands Icommend my jpirit. - Can any death
be pronounced unhappy, how distressful so-
ever its circumstances may be, which is
thus supported, and dignified ? What could
we wifih for more in our last moments, than
with this peaceful frame of mind, this caln
of all the affedions, this exaltation of heart

X 4 towards

SERM. towards God, this diffusion of benevolence

. towards men, to bid adieu to the world?

If, in such a spirit as this, we would. all

with to die, let us think, that now is the
time to prepare for it, by seasonably cul-
tivating this spirit while we live; by im-
bibing, in particular, from.the holy sacra-
ment, those dispositions and affedtions
which we would wish to' possess at our
latest period, It is altogether vain toima-
gine, that when the hour of death ap-
proaches, we shall be able to form our-
selves into the frame of mind which is then
most proper and decent. Amidst the ftrug-
gles of nature, and under the load of sick-
ness or pain, it is not time for unaccuflom-
ed exertions to be made, or for new refor-
mations to be begun. Sufficient, and more
than fuflcient, for that day is the evil there-
of It will be too late to assume then the
hero, or the faint, if we have been totally
unacquainted with the charater before.
The sentiments we would display, and the
language we would utter, will be alien and
Irange to us. They will be forced, and so-

reign

reign to the heart. It is only in confe- SERM.
quence of habits acquired in former and XV_
better days, that a temper of piety and
charity can grow up into such strength, as
to confer peace and magnanimity on the
concluding hours of life. Peculiarly fa-
vourable to the acquisition of such a tem-
per,- are the devotions of this day. In this
view, let us perform them; and study to
be at the table of the Lord, what we would
wish to be when the summons of death ihall
come.

II. THIS. sacrament becomes a prepara-

Li-n fro' death, by laying a foundation for
peace with God. What is important at the
close of life, is not only the temper in
which we leave the world, but the situation
in which we. stand with refpec to that
great Judge, before whom we are about to
appear. This view of our situation is apt
to escape us, during the ordinary course of
life. Occupied with the affairs and con-
cerns of this world; flattered by those illu-
five colours of innocence and virtue, in

which

SERM. which felf-love dresses up our characer,
xv. apprehensions of guilt create little uneafi-

ness to the multitude of men. But, on the
approach of death, their ideas change. As
the inquisition of the supreme Judge draws
nigh, remembered tranfgreflions crowd up-
on the mind. Guilt becomes strongly rea-
lifed to the imagination; and alarms, be-
fore unknown, begin to arise. Hence that
anxiety, in the profpec of a future invi-
fible world, which is so often seen to attend
the bed of death. Hence those various me-
thods, which fuperilition has devised for
quieting this anxiety; the trembling mind
eagerly grasping every feeble plank on
which it can lay hold; and flying for pro-
tection to the most unavailing aid. The
stoutest spirits have been then known to
bend; the proudest hearts, to be humbled.
They who are now most thoughtless about
their spiritual concerns, may, perhaps, be
in this state before they die.

The dispensation of grace, discovered in

the gospel, affords the only remedy against
those terrors, by the promise of pardon, ex-

tended

tended to the penitent, through the merits SERM.
of our Lord Jefis Christ. It is the very _
essence of this Sfacrament, to exhibit this
promised grace to mankind; My body which
was broken for you; nmy blood Jhedfor many,
for the remnfonl of fins. Here, mhines from
above, the ray of hope. Divine justice, we
are assured, is not inexorable. Divine mer-
cy is acceflible, to all who believe and re-
pent. The participation of this sacrament,
therefore, naturally imparts comfort to the
worthy communicant; as it supposes, on
his part, a cordial compliance with those
terms, on which pardon is offered by the
gospel to mankind.

I mean not to fay, that the participation

of this sacrament, how pious and proper
ofever our dispositions at the time may be,
is, of itself, sufficient to ensure us of com-
fort at death. It were unwarrantable to
flatter Christians, with hopes to this extent.
No single aa of the most fervent devotion
can afford assured hopes of peace with Hea-
ven, until these hopes be confirmed by the
succeeding tenor of a good life. But what

may

SERM: may safely be afterted is, that communica-
xv. x. ting in a proper manner, makes way for

such hopes. It is an introduction to that
state of reconciliation with God, which will
give you peace in death. It is the begin-
ning of a good course, which, if duly pur-
sued, will make your latter end blessed. It
is the entrance of the path of the jif ; the
morning of that light, which Jhineth more
and more unto the perfel day. For this holy
sacrament is a profefled renunciation of the
vices and corruptions of the world. It is
a: prfeffed dereliction of former evil ha-
bits ; a solemn return, on our part, to God
and virtue, under the firm trust, that God
will,- through Jesus Christ, {how mercy to
the.frailties of the penitent. If you conti.
nue to support the character which you
this day afftume, the invisible world will no
longer present to you a scene of terrors.
You will be comforted with the view of
goodness and compaflion, as predominant
in the administration of the universe. As-
ter having finished a virtuous course, you
will be able to look up to that God whom

': yo

you have worshipped, and to fay, I know SERM.
in whom I have trijied. t'hough I walk X.
through the valley of the Jhadow of death, I
will far no evil; for thou art with me. Thy
rod and thy JlafJfall consort me.

III. THIS sacrament prepares us for a

happy death, by strengthening the connec-
tion between Christians, and Christ their
Saviour. This is a connection which, in
various ways, redounds to their benefit;
and will be found particularly consolatory
at the houreof death. The awful majesty
of Heaven is in danger of overwhelming
the mind, in the feeble moments of depart-
ing life. The reverence it inspires is ming-
led with sensations of dread, which might
be too strong for us then to bear.. When
we look up to it, through a Mediator and
Intercessor, that Majefly assumes a milder
aspect, and appears to invite our approach.
Whatever, therefore, forms a connecRion
with this great Mediator, this powerful
friend and patron of the human race, must
be most desirable to every one, especially to

the

SERM. the dying man. Now, this sacrament u-
XV. X. nites us closely with him. It is the oath of

our allegiance. It is the aat of enlisting
ourselves under the banner. of this divine
Leader. Of course, it strengthens our faith
in him, as our guide through life, and our
guardian and protector in death. It gives
us a title to look up to him, under the
confidence of that reciprocal engagement,
which fidelity on the one hand is always
underifood to imply, of protection on the
other.

His participation of our nature conveys

a degree of encouragement, which we could
derive from no being altogether celeflial,
how gracious or benign soever. In our ut-
most extremity, we can have recourse to
his sympathizing aid, who had experience
both of the diitreffes of life, and of the
terrors of death. 'We behold, in the text,
with what firm tranquillity he looked for-
ward to his approaching sufferings. Sin-
cere attachment to our great Master, may
be expeced to infuse into us some degree
of the fame happy composure of mind. It

is

is owing to our losing out of view this per- SERM.

XV.

feat model; to our following the crowd, _
and adopting the common spirit of the
world, that we become mean-fpirited and
base; servilely attached to life, and afraid
to die. Did we, according to our engage-
ments at the Lord's table, keep our eye
fixed on our divine Leader, and study to
follow his steps, a portion of his spirit
·would descend upon us at the hour of
death. It would be as the mantle of Eli-
jah, falling on a chosen disciple; and would
enable us, as it did Elisha of old, to finite,
and divide the waters.-We believe our
Saviour now to rule in the world of spirits.
The grave, therefore, bars not his follow-
ers from access to him. In the grave,, for
our fake, he once lay down, that he might
dispel the gloom which appears to us to
cover that formidable mansion. In a fhoirt
time he arose from it, in order to assure us,
that the dark and narrow house was not to
confine his followers for ever. By his,
death, he conquered death; and him that
had the power of it; and his -voice to us

is,

SERM. is, Becanfe I live, ye /hall live aso. Hence,

xv.
_x as long as we preserve that attachment to

him which we this day profess, we are fur-
nifled with a variety of considerations pro-
per for supporting us in the profped of our
diffolution.-This leads me to observe,

IV. THAT the sacrament of which we

are to partake, prepares us for death, by
confirming and. enlivening our hope of im-
mortality. In this sacrament, my friends,
you ad for both worlds. As inhabitants
of the earth, you are on this, day to look
forward, with care, to your future beha-
viour in it. For you are not, by any means,
disengaging yourselves totally from this life,
and its concerns. On the contrary,.you
are forming, and even strengthening, those
connections, which virtue requires you to
maintain with your friends, and fellow-
creatures around yoi..-- At the fame time,
you are not to confider yourselves as citi-
zens of earth only; but also as citizens of
heaven. You are to recognise, on this oc-
cation, your relation to a higher and better

country,

country, with which you are connected by SE RM.
the most sacred ties; and from which you _,
derive those comforts and hopes, that will
both purify your life, and render your
death happy. The sacrament of the supper
is, in this view, an ascent of the mind a-
bove terrestrial things. At the Lord's table,
we associate ourselves, in some degree, with
spirits of a more exalted order. We de-
clare, that we are tending towards their so-
ciety; and have fixed our final reft within
the veil. This view of the institution, so
comfortable to the last period of life, is
plainly given us in the words of the text.
For it is worthy of particular observation,
that, as soon as our Lord had instituted
this sacrament, he straightway leads the
thoughts of his disciples to a state of future
existence. Employing that metaphorical
style, which the occasion naturally suggest-
ed, he tells them, that though he was not
henceforth to drink of the fruit of the vine
on earth, yet a day was coming, when he
was again to drink it with them; to drink
it, in his Father's kigdom. Two diftina

VOL. III. Y ideas

SERM. ideas are, in there words, presented to us.

. One is, the abode into which our Saviour

was to remove; his Father's kingdom. The
other, the society which he was there to en-
joy; with you, in my Father's kingdom. These
correspond to the two views, under which
death is most formidable to men; both of
which he intended to banish, by the infti-
tution of this sacrament: first, that death
is a transition to a new and unknown
world; and next, that it is a final fepara-
tion from all the friends whom we have
loved on earth.

FIRST; if death terminates our existence

here, the abode to which it translates the
faithful followers of Christ, is the kingdom
of his Father. The institution of this fa-
crament dispels all the gloomy ideas of an-
nihilation, of non-existence, of total dark-
ness, which our imagination is ready to as-
fociate with the grave. We are here affu-
red, 'that, to good men, death is not the
close of being, but a change of slate; a re-
moval, from a distant and obscure province

of

of the universe, into the city of God, sERM.

xv.

the chief feat of their Father's kingdom. ,
They have every reason to believe, that
the objecs which are to meet them there,
how new and unknown soever, ihall all be
propitious and friendly. For into the king-
dom of his Father, their Lord has decla-
red, that he is entered as their forerunner.
I go to my Father, and your Father; to my
God, and your God. In my Father's hoife are
many manjions. I go to prepare a place for
you. I will come again, and receive you to
myself, that where I am, there ye may be alo.
What reasonings, what speculations, can
have power to impart so much peace to the
dying man, as a promise so direc and ex-
plicit, coming from him who is truth itself,
and cannot lie ? If it were not so, I would
have told you *. The profped becomes still
more chearing and relieving, when we in-
clude,

THE other circumstance mentioned in

John, xiv. 2.

Y . the

SERM. the text; the society to be enjoyed in that
XV._ future state of being. With you, I Jhall

drink of the fruit of the vine in nmy Father's
kingdom. In how amiable a light does our
Saviour here appear, looking forward to a
future reunion with those beloved friends,
whom he was now leaving, as to a circum-
stance which should increase both his own
felicity and theirs, when they met again in
a happier world ! Thus, in the mos[ assec-
tionate manner, chearing their drooping
and dejeaed spirits; and, by a similar pro-
fpe&, providing for the comfort of his fol-
lowers in future generations, when they
ihould be about to leave the world.

The expreflions in the text plainly suggest

a joyful intercourse among friends, who
had been separated by death: and therefore
seem to give much confirmation, to what
has always been a favourite hope of good
men; that friends shall know and recog-
nife each other, and renew their former
connections, in a future state of existence.
How many pleasing proipeds, does such an
intimation opeln to the mind! How mucl

does

does it tend to compensate the vanity of life, s E R M.
and to mitigate the sorrows of death! For XV.
it is not to be denied, that one of the most
bitter circumstances attending death, is the
-final reparation from beloved friends. This
is apt equally to wring the hearts of the
dying, and the surviving; and it is an an-
guihl of that fort, which descends most
deeply into the virtuous and worthy breast.
When, surrounded with an affectionate fa-
mily, and weeping friends, a good man is
taking his last adieu of all whom he held
most dear on earth; when, with a feeble
voice, he is giving them his blessing, before
he leaves them for ever; when, for the
last time, he beholds the countenance, he
touches the hand, he hears the voice, of the
person nearest his heart; who could bear
this bitterness of grief, if no support were
to be ministered by religious hope ? if there
were no voice to whisper to our spirits, that
hereafter we, and those whom we love,
shall meet again in a more blissful land ?
-W hat higher view can possibly be gi-
ven, of the benefit redounding from this

Y 3 divine

SE RM. divine institution, than its affording us con-
_XV folation in such situations of extreme di-

firess, by realising to our fouls the belief
of an immortal state, in which all the vir-
tuous and worthy shall be reunited in the
pretence of their common Lord ?

THUS I have set before you many confi-

derations, arising from the sacrament of
our Lord's supper, which render it a pro-
per preparation, not only for a good life,
but for a comfortable and happy death.
The great improvement to be made of the
fubjeEt is, to bring to the altar of God
such dispositions of heart, as may give us
ground to hope for this blessed effect. Let
us approach to the sacrament with the fame
seriousness of frame, as if it were the last
time we were ever to partake of it; as if we
were now making provision for a journey
to that land whence none return; as if we
were never to drink, in this manner, of the
fruit of the vine, zntil that day when we drink
it, with thofc whom we have loved, in our
Father's kingdom.,- God only knows to

whom

whom this may be truly spoken! God SE RM.
knows who, of this assembly, fliall never ,x.
have opportunity to approach again to the
sacred table, and to meet with their bre-
thren, on such an occasion, in the courts
of the Lord's house !-Whatever our doom
is to be, whether we are appointed for life
or for death, such is the frame of mind
which now best becomes, and will most
improve us, in partaking of the holy sacra-
ment.

LET me caution you, before I conclude,

against judging of the propriety of your
disposition in this solemn aa of worship,
solely by the warmth of your affections,
and the fervour of your devotion. This
state of heart, how desirable soever it may
be, cannot be at all times possessed. It de-
pends, in some measure, on natural fenfi-
bility. All are not equally endowed with
warm and tender feelings. Even they who
are susceptible of the highest degrees of
pious and virtuous sensibility, cannot, on
every occasion, command that happy tem-

Y 4 perature

SERM. perature of mind. We are not, therefore,
xv.

to judge unfavourably of ourselves, if this
be not always the privilege of our devo-
tions. It is chiefly a sedate and compo-
fed frame of spirit, that we must study to
cultivate; arising from grave and fober
thoughts; from serious and penitent recol-
ledtion of past errors; from good purposes
for the future; and from a deep sense of
the approaching events of death and im-
mortality. Penetrated with such difpofi-
tions, you have ground to come to the al-
tar of God with humble trust and joy;
under the belief, that you are approaching,
through the great Redeemer, to that mer-
ciful Creator, to whom, in the high and holy
place of eternity, the devout afpirations.of
his servants on earth, are ever acceptable
and pleating,

S E R-

# SERMON XVI. On the USE and ABUSE of the WORLD. 1 CORINTHIANS, vii. 31. — They that use this world, as not abusing it. —

[ 329 ]

S E R M ON XVI.
On the USE and ABUSE of the WORLD.

I CORINTHIANS, Vii. 31.

-hea, that tifi this world, as 7ot abifing it.-
-rHE world is always represented in SERM.

Scripture as the great scene of trial to

a Christian. It sets before him a variety of
duties, which are incumbent on him to per-
form; and, at the fame time, surrounds
him with many dangers, against which he
has to guard. The part which is proper
for him to at, may be comprised in these
two expressive words of the text; 7fi1g the
world, and not abifing it; the significancy
and extent of which, I purpose now to ex-
plain. The subjec is of the higher im-

portance,

SERM. portance, as in the world we must live;
XVI. and according as we use, or abuse it, it will

prove either our friend, or our greatest
foe.

It is natural to begin with observing,

that the Christian is here supposed to gife
the world; by which we mufft certainly un-
derftand the Apostle to mean, maintaining
intercourse and connection with the world;
living in it, as one of the members of hu-
man society; assuming that rank which
belongs to his station. No one can be said
to ife the world who lives not thus. Hence
it follows, that sequestration from the world
is no part of Christian duty; and it ap-
pears strange, that even among those who
approve not of monaftick confinement, fe-
clufion from the.pleafures of society should
have been sometimes confidered, as belong-
ing to the character of a religious man.
They have been fippofed to be the best
fcrvants of God, who, consecrating their
time to the exercises of devotion, mingle
least in the ordinary commerce of the
world; and especially who abstain most

rigidly

rigidly from all that has the appearance of s E R M.
amusement. But how pious and sincere XVI.
soever the intentions of such persons may
be, they certainly take not the propereft
method, either for improving themselves, or
for advancing religion among others. For
this is not using the world, but relinquiih-
ing it. Instead of making the light of a
good example shine with useful splendour
throughout the circle of society, they con-
fine it within a narrow compass. Accord-
ing to the metaphor employed by our Sa-
viour, after the candle is lighted, they put it
under a bhi/fel. Instead of recommending
religion to the world, they exhibit it un-
der the forbidding aspet of unnecessary au-
fterity. Instead of employing their influ-
ence, to regulate and temper the pleasures
of the world, by a moderate participation
of those that are innocent, they deliver up
all the entertainments of society, into the
hands of the loose and giddy.

The various dangers which the world

presents to one who is desirous of main-
taining his piety and integrity, have given

rife

SERM. rife to this scrupulous caution concerning
XVI. the use of the world; and so far, the prin-

ciple is commendable. But we must re-
member, that the virtue of a Christian is
to be shown, in surmounting dangers which
he is called to encounter. Into the post of
danger we were ordered by Providence,
when we were brought into this world.
We were placed as soldiers, on the field of
battle. It is there, that our fidelity to our
great Commander must appear. The most
signal virtues which adorn and improve the
human character, are displayed in active
life. There, the strength of the mind is
brought forth, and put-to the test. There,
all the amiable dispositions of the heart find
their proper exercise: humanity is culti-
vated; patience, fortitude, and felf-denial,
come forward in all their forms; and the
light of good men's works so shines before
others; as to lead them to glorify their Fa-
ther which is in Leaven.

It may be assumed, therefore, as a prin-

'ciplejuftified by the text, and by the whole
strain of Scripture, that to use, and in a cer-

tain

tain degree to enjoy, the world, is altoge- SE R M.
tlier consistent with religion. According x_
to the rank which men possess in society,
according to their age, their employment
and connections, their intercourse with the
world will be more or less extended. In
private life, they use the world with pro-
priety, who are aative and industrious in
their callings; just and upright in their
dealings ; fober, contented, and chearful in
their station. When the circumflances of
men allow them a wider command of the
enjoyments of the world, of those enjoy-
ments they may freely partake, within the
bounds of temperance, moderation, and
decency. The highest situations of rank
and opulence, ought to be diftinguified by
dignity of characer; by extensive benefi-
cence, usefulness, and public spirit; by
magnificence, without ostentation; and ge-
nerous hospitality, without profusion.

We ihall have a clearer view of the pro-

per use of the world, when we contrast it
with that abuse of the world, which we too
often observe. Those abuses manifest them-

selves

E R M. selves in various forms; but in general may
XiV. be classed under three great heads.

I. They are abusers of the world, who

intemperately give themselves up to its plea-
fures, and lead a life of licentiousness,
riot, and dissipation. Amidst the wealth
and luxury of the present age, it will be
admitted, that persons of this description
are not unfrequent, who, being opulent in
fortune, and perhaps high in rank, think
themselves intitled to pass their days in a
careless manner, without any other obje&
in view, than the gratification of their senses
and passions. It ihall be granted, that they
are not obliged to that exact oconomy and
attention in their manner of living, which
the state of fortune may require of others.
Gaiety shall be permitted to them; change
of scene, and variety of amusements. But
let them not forget, that as men and mem-
bers of society, not to fay profeflors of the
Christian faith, they are bound to flop short
in their career of pleasure, as soon as it be-
comes disgraceful to themselves, and hurt-

ful

ful to the world. By the train of life which s E R M.
they lead, they defeat every purpose for xvi.
which Providence betlowed on them the
blessings of prosperity. They fink every
talent which they poilefs, into useless infig-
nificancy. They corrupt the public man-
ners by their example; and diffuse among
others the spirit of extravagance and folly.
They behave in a manner altogether un-
suitable to the condition of the world in
which we live; where we are exposed to so
much change, surrounded with so much
distress, and daily behold so many affecting
scenes, as ought to awaken serious reflec-
tion, and chasten dissolute. mirth.

With indignant eyes, the fober and think-

ing part of mankind, view the luxury and
riot of those abusers of the world. To them
are owing the discontents of the poor, their
difaffedion to their superiors, their prone-
ness to disturb the peace of the world.
When the poor behold wealth properly
ufed,-they look up with refpeC to them
who possess it. They reft contented in
their tfation; and bless the just and the ge-

nerous,

SERM. nerous, from whose munificence they re-

XVI.
(vy ceive employment and reward. But when

they behold those men of pleaufre diffipa-
ting, in vice and folly, the fortune which
their forefathers had honourably earned;
when they behold them oppressing all their
dependents, merely that they may revel in
luxurious extravagance, then their hearts
swell within them; with murmurs of ful-
len grief, they eye their own mean habita-
tion, and needy family; and become pre-
pared for robbery, tumult, sedition, and
every evil work.

The condut of such abusers of the

world, is not only pernicious to the wel-
fare of society, and to the interests of vir-
tue; it is equally ruinous to themselves.
I Ihall not insist on the loss of reputation,
the waite of fortune, the broken health,
and debilitated frame, which are the well-
known consequences of a life of intempe-
rate pleasure. I shall not recount all the
better and more substantial enjoyments
which they forfeit. Amidst the turbulence
of riot, and the fumes of intoxication, uin

known

known to them are the rational entertain- SE RM;

XVI.

meats of regular life; the enjoyment of the *
face of nature; the picafures of knowledge,
and an improved mind; the pleafiures of
private friendIhip, and domestic society;
the conscious fatisfadion which accompa-
nies honourable labours, and the justly ac-
quired esteem of those who surround dhem.
All these they have thrown away; and in
their room have substituted, what they
think more high and vivid pleasures. But
of what nature are those pleasures ? Even in
'laughter the heart is fJrrowcid; and the end of
that mirth is beavinefs

At the bottom of the hearts of all men;

there lies a secret sense of propriety, virtue,
and honour. This sense may be so far blunt-
ed, as to lose its influence in guiding men to
what is right, while yet it retains its power
of making them feel that they are ating
wrong. Hence remorse often gnaws the
heart, which affeas to appear light, and gay,
before the world. Among the crowd of a-

V Pror. xiv. 13.
Vol. IiI. Z mufements,

SERM. mufements, the voluptuary may endea-
XVI.

L deavour to itifle his uneasiness; but through

all his defences it will penetrate. A con-
fcious ifnfe of his own insignificance, when
he fees others distinguished for acting a
manly and worthy part; reflection on the
time he has wafted, and the contempt he
has incurred; the galling remembrance of
his earlier and better days, when he gave
the fair promise of accompliflmlents, which
now are blasted, have frequently been found
to fadden the festive hour. The noile of
merriment may be heard; but heaviness
lies at the heart. While the tabret and the
viol play, a melancholy voice founds in his
ears. The wafted estate, the negleced halls,
and ruined mansion of his fathers, rife to
view. The angry countenances of his
friends, seem to tfare him in the face. A
hand appears to come forth on the wall,
and to write his doom.

Retreat then, fiom your dihlonourable

courses, ye who by licentiousness, extra-
vagance, and vice, are abusers of the world!
you are degrading, you are ruining your-

selves,

selves. You are grossly misemploying the s ER M.
gifts of God; and the giver will not fail to XVL.
punifll. Awake to the pursuits of men of
virtue, and honour. Break loose from that
magic circle, within which you are at pre-
sent held. Rejec the poisoned cup which
the enchantress Pleaftlre holds up to your
lips. Draw aside the veil which she throws
over your eyes. You will then fee other
objects than you now behold. You will
fee a dark abyss opening below your feet.
You will fee virtue and temperance mark-
ing out the road, which conduCts to true
felicity. You will be enabled to discern, that
the world is enjoyed to advantage, by none
but such as follow those divine guides; and
who confider pleafire as the seasoning, but
not as the business of life.

II. THE world is abused, not only by an

intemperate pursuit of its pleasures, but by
a fordid attachment to its gains. This re-
spects a set of men of very different de-
scription from the former; more decent in
their carriage, and less flagrant in their

Z 2 vices;

SERM. vices; but corrupted by the world in no
xvi. less a degree. For the world is often abused

by the men of business, as much as by the
men of pleasure. When worldly success
becomes the sole object of their life; when
the accumulation of fortune so engrosses
them, as to harden their heart against eve-
ry feeling of moral obligation; when it
renders them insensible to the calls of as-
feaion, and to the impressions of piety
and religion; they then come under the
clais of the covetous, whom, it is said, the
Lord abhorreth *.

The world, with its advantages, is a

lawfill object of pursuit to a Christian.
He may seek, by fair industry, to ren-
der his circumstances affluent. Without
reproof, he may aim at distinction and
consideration in the world. He may be-
stow a considerable portion of his time and
attention, on the successful management of
his worldly interests. All this is within the
limits of that allowable use of the world, to
which religion gives its fandion. But to

* Psalm x. 3.

a

a wife and good man, the world is only a E R M.

XVI.

secondary objec. He remembers there is
an eternity beyond it. His care is, not
merely to amass and possess, but to use his
pofleffions well, as one who is accountable
to God. He is not a slave, either to the
hopes, or the fears of the world. He would
rather forfeit any present advantage, than
obtain it at the expence of violating the di-
vine ltw, or neglecting his duty. This is
using the world like a good man. This is
living in it, as a fubjeat of God, and a
member of the great community of man-
kind. To such a man, riches are a blef-
sing. He may enjoy them with magnifi-
cence; but he will use them with liberali-
ty. They open a wide field to the exercif2
of his virtue, and allow it to ihine with
diffusive lustre.

Very opposite to this, is the character of

the worldly-minded. To them, the mere
attainment of earthly possessions, is an ulti-
mate aim. They cannot be said to ife the
world; for to possess, not to use or enjoy,
is their object. They are emphatically said

3 in

SERM. in Scripture, to load thenfelves wiith thick

V._>J clay '. Some fort of apology may be framed

for them who seek to extract from the
world, pleasure of one kind or other. But
for those who know no pleasure, farther
than adding lhofe to hoitfe, and field to field,
and calling them their own, it is hardly
poflible to frame any apology. Such per-
sons are idolaters of the worst kind; for
they have made the world their God. They
daily worihip and bow down before it;
and hold nothing to be mean or base, which
can promote the enlargement of their for-
tune.-He is an abuser of the world, let
his possession of it be ever so ample, who
knows nothing higher than the gains of the
world. He is an abuser of the world, who
sacrifices probity, virtue, or humanity, to
its interests. He is an abuser of the world,
who cannot occasionally retreat from it, to
confider what characer he bears in the
fight of God; and to what issue his con-
du: will bring him at last. In a word, the

: Habakkuk, ii. 6.

world

world is then properly used, when it is ge- S E RM.

XVI.

ncroutly and beneficently enjoycd; neither
hoarded up by avarice, nor squandered by
ostentation.

III. THE world is abused, by those who

employ its advantages to the injury or op-
pression of their brethren. Under this class
are included, the worst and most criminal
abusers of the world; who turn against
their fellow-crcatures, those advantages
with which it has pleased Heaven to diftin-
guifli them. It is a class which compre-
hends, the sovereign who tyrannises over his
people; the great man who oppresses his
dependents; the master who is cruel to his
servants; every one, in fine, who renders
his superiority of any kind, whether of
wealth or power, unnecessarily grievous to
those who are his inferiors: Wihofe super-
cilioufnefs dejecs the modest; whose info-
lence tramples on the poor; whose rigour
makes the widow and the orphan weep.
Persons of this characer, while thus abu-

Z 4 sing

SE RM. sing the advantages of the world, may, for
xvj .a awhile, enjoy their triumph. But let them

not think, theirrtriumph is always to lait.
Their turn shall come, to be humbled as
low as those whom they now oppress. For
there is a vigilant eye in the heavens, atten-
tive to observe their procedure. There is
an impartial ear, which listens to every just
complaint preferred against them. There
is an irresistible arm firetched over their
heads, whose weight they shall one day
feel. The Sovereign of the universe cha-
radterifes himself in the sacred writings, as
peculiarly an adversary to the insolent and
haughty. For the opprefion of the poor, for
thefighing of the needy, now will I arie,fiaith
the Lord; I willset him in safety from. him
itat ptf tlh at him k. I will come near to y)o
,1 judgeiment; and I will be a swift witness
againfl those that oppress the hireling in his
wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and
that turn aside the fJranger from his right t.
Hle that opprejjeth the poor, reproacheth bis

- PsaLm xii. 5. t Malachi, ili. .

Maker,

Maker *. the Lord will plead their canfe; SERM.
and/poil thefoul of those that Spoiled them t. xv

After hearing these awful words, is it

not strange, O men, at once infatuated and
cruel! that you cannot use the world, with-
out abufmg it, to the distress of your bre-
thren? Even fippoling no punishment to
be threatened, no arm to be lifted up a-
gainft you, is there nothing within you,
that relents at the circumstances of those
below you in the world? Is it not enough,
that they susser their own hard fate, with-
out its being aggravated, by your severity
and opprellion? Why must the aged, the
poor, and the friendless, tremble at your
greatness? Cannot you be happy, unless
you make them eat their scanty morsel in
bitterness of heart ? You happy !-profane
not the word-what is such happiness as
yours, compared with that of him who
could fay, TWhen the ear heard me, then it
blIced me; and when the eye saw me, it gave
witness to me; becaife I delivered the poor

* Prov. xiv. g3 . t Prov. xxii. 23.

that

s ER M. that cried, and the fathcrlefs, and him that
xVI. had none to help him. I was a father to the

poor. The blefing of him that was readj, to
peri/h, came upon me; and I caifed the widow's
heart to sing fr joy *. How properly did
such a man lfe the world, and with what
just honour did he flourish in it! Unto me
men gave ear; they kept filene, and waited
for nmy confiel. The princes refrained talking.
The aged arose, and flood up. My root was
spread out by the waters; and the dew lay
upon my branch.- Not only unknown to
you are such pleafares of virtuous profpe-
rity; but, even previous to prepared pu-
nifliment, be assured, that remorse is ap-
proaching to wring your hearts. Of the
world, which you now abuse, in a short
time nothing {hall remain, but the horror
arising from remembered crimes. The
wages you have detained, the wealth you
have squeezed from the needy, ihall lie
heavy on your fouls. The ifately build-
ings which your pride has erected, by means

. Job, xxix. ii.-16.

of

of violence and opprefflon, shall seem haunt- s E RM.
ed by injured ghofls. The Jlone Jhall cry XI
out of the wall; and the beam out of the tim-
ber jhall aifewer it '. When you lie on the
bed of death, the poor, whom you have
oppressed, shall appear to you, as gather-
ed together; stretching forth their hands,
and lifting up their voices against you, at
the tribunal of Heaven. I have seen the
wicked great in power, and spreading himself
like a green bay-tree. But he pased away,
and was not. Ifought him, but he could not be
found. They arc brought down to desolation
in a moment, and utterly coTfiimed with ter-
rors. As a dream when one awaketh, so, 0
Lord, iwhen thou awakefJ, thou JJialt defpjfe
their inage t.

TiIvU I have fliown what it is to ife, and

what to abif the world. When, according
to our different itations, we enjoy the ad-
vantages of the world with propriety and
decency; temperate in our pleasures; mo-

" Habak. i;. I . - Pflitn xxxvii. 35.; Ixxiii. 19.

derate

SERM. derate in our pursuits of interest; mindful
_yVI. of our duty to God, and, at the fame time,

just, humane, and generous to our bre-
thren; then, and then only, we /fe the
'world, as becomes men, and Christians.
Within these limits, we may safely enjoy
all the comforts which the world affords,
and our station allows. But if we pass be-
y6nd these boundaries, into the regions of
disorderly and vicious pleasure, of debating
covetousness, or of oppressive insolence, the
world will then serve only to corrupt our
minds, and to accelerate our ruin. The
licentious, the avaricious, and the insolent,
form the three great classes of abusers of
the world.

Let not those who are in wealthy and

flourishing circumstances, complain of the
restraints which religious docrine attempts
to impose on their enjoyments. For, to
what do these restraints amount ? To no
more than this, that, by their pleasures,
they would neither injure themselves, nor
injure others. We call not on the young,
to relinquihi their gaiety; nor on the rich,

to

to forego their opulence; nor on the great, s E R M.
to lay aside their slate. We only call on _
them, not to convert gaiety into licentioui:
ness; not to employ opulence in mere ex-
travagance; nor to abuse greatness for the
oppreflion of their inferiors: While they
enjoy the world, not to forget that they are
the fubjeas of God, and are {oon to pass
into another slate. Let the motive by
which the Apostle enforces the exhortation
in the text, present itself to their thought;
Use this world as not abtfing it; for the fa-
Jhjion of the world pafeth away. Its pomp
and its pleasures, its riches, magnificence,
and glory, are no more than a transient
{how. Every thing that we here enjoy,
changes, decays, and comes to an end. All
floats on the surface of a river, which, with
swift current, is running towards a bound-
less ocean. Beyond this present scene of
things, above these sublunary regions, we
are to look for what is permanent and
stable. The world passes away; but God,
and heaven, and virtue, continue unchange-
ably the fame. We are soon to enter into

eternal

SERM. eternal habitations: and into these, our
,XL works ihall follow us. The consequences

ihall for ever remain of the part which we
have aaed as good, or bad men; as faith-
ful fubjeCs of God, or as servants of a vain
world.

S E R

# SERMON XVII. On EXTREMES in RELIGIOUS and MORAL CONDUCT. PROVERBS, iv. 27. Turn not to the right hand, nor to the left. —

i 3J1 1

SERM ON XVIL.
On EXTREMES in RELIGIOUS and MORAL

CONDUCT.

PROvERBS, iv. 27.

'Turn not to the right hand, nor to the left.
T Will behave myji'f wifeyi, , said the Psalmist S ERM.

XVII.

David, in a perfeti way :'". Wisdom is -

no less necessary in religious, and moral,
than in civil conduca. Unless there be a
proper degree of light in the understand-
ing, it will not be enough, that there are
good dispositions in the heart. Without
regular guidance, they will often err fiom
the right scope. They will be always wa-

Pfanlm ci. 3.

Vermng

SERM. vering and unsteady; nay, on some occa-
XV.L s rions, they may betray us into evil. This

is too much verified by that propensity to
run into extremes, which so often appears
in the behaviour of men. How many have
originally set out with good principles, and
intentions, who, through want of difcre-
tion in the application of their principles,
have in the end injured themselves, and
brought discredit on religion ? There is a
certain temperate mean, in the observance
of which, piety and virtue consist. On
each fide there lies a dangerous extreme.
Bewildering paths open; by deviating into
which, men are apt to forfeit all the praise
of their good intentions; and to finish
with reproach, what they had begun with
honour. This is the ground of the wife
man's exhortation in the text. Let thine
eyes look right on, and let thine eye-lids look
Jlraight before thee.. Ponder the path of thy
feet, and let all thy ways be efablifhed. Tlrn
not to the right hand, nor to the left; remove
thy footfrom evil. In discoursing from these
words, I purpose to point out some of the

extremes

extremes into which men are apt to run in s ERM.

XVII.

religion and morals; and to suggest dircc- tY
tions for guarding againit them.

WITH regard to religious principle in

general, it may perhaps be expe&ced, that
I should warn you of the danger of being)
on one hand, too rigid in adhering to it,
and, on the other hand, too easy in relax-
ing it. But the diftinaion between these
supposed extremes, I conceive to have no
foundation. No man can be too itrid, in
his adherence to a principle of duty. Here,
there is no extreme. All relaxation of prin-
ciple, is criminal. What conscience dictates
is to be ever obeyed. Its commands are
universally sacred. Even though it should
be milled, yet, as long as we conceive it to
utter the voice of God, in disobeying it we
fin. The error, therefore, to be here a-
voided is, not too scrupulous or tender re-
gard to conscience, but too little care to
have conscience properly enlightened, with
respect to what is matter of duty and of
fin.---R eceive not, without examination,

VOL. III. A a whatever

SERM. whatever human tradition has consecrated
XVII.

as sacred. Recur, on every occasion, to
those great fountains of light and know-
ledge, which are opened to you in the pure
word of God. Distinguish, with care, be-
tween the superstitious fancies of men, and
the everlasting commandments of God.
Exhaust not on trifles that zeal, which
ought to be reserved for the weightier mat-
ters of the law. Overload not conscience,
with what is frivolous and unnecessary.
But when you have once drawn the line,
with intelligence and precision, between
duty and fin, that line you ought on no
occasion to transgress.

THOUGH there is no extreme in the reve-

rence due to conscience, there may un-
doubtedly be an extreme, in laying too
much firess, either on mere principle, or
on mere practice. Here we must take par-
ticular care, not to turn to the right hand,
nor to the left; but to hold faith and a good
coifcience united, as the Scripture, with great

propriety,

propriety, exhorts us . The error of ret- S E RM.

XVII.

ing wholly on faith, or wholly on works, ,-
is one of those fedudions, which most ea-
fily mislead men; under the semblance of
piety on the one hand, and of virtue on
the other. This is not an error peculiar to
our times. It has obtained in every age of
the Christian church. It has run through
all the different modes of false religion. It
forms the chief diftindion of all the va-.
rious secs which have divided, and which
till continue to divide the church; accord-
ing as they have leaned moss to the fide of
belief, or to the fide of morality.

Did we liften candidly to the voice of Scrip-

ture,it would guard us against either extreme.
The Apostle Paul every where testifies, that
by no works of our own we can be jufti-
fled; and that without faith it is imnpogible
to please God. The Apostle James as clear-
ly flows, that faith, if it be unprodudtive
of good works, justifies no man. Between
those sentiments, there is no opposition.

' I Tir-othy, i. I9.

A a, 2 Faith

SERM. Faith without works, is nugatory and in-
XVIj. significant. It is a foundation, without any

fuperftrudcure raised upon it. It is a foun-
tain which fends forth no stream; a tree
which neither bears fruit, nor affords shade.
Good works, again, without good princi-
ples, are a fair, but airy ftrudure; without
firmness or liability. They resemble the
house built on the sand; the reed which
ihakes with every wind. You must join
the two in full union, if you would exhi-
bit the character of a real Christian. He
who sets faith in opposition to morals, or
morals in opposition to faith, is equally an
enemy to the interests of religion. He
holds up to view an imperfe& and disfi-
gured form; in the room of what ought to
command refped from all beholders. By
leaning to one extreme, he is in danger of
falling into vice; by the other, of running
into impiety.

WHATEVER the belief of men be, they

generally pride themselves, in the possession
of some good moral qualities. The sense

of

of duty is deeply rooted in the human SE R M.

XVI.

heart. Without some pretence to virtue, _t
there is no felf-efteem; and no man wilies
to appear in his own view, as entirely
worthless. But as there is a constant strife
between the lower and higher parts of our
nature, between inclination and principle,
this produces much contradiction and in-
consistency in condud. Hence arise most
of the extremes, into which men run in
their moral behaviour; refting their whole
worth on that good quality, to which, by
constitution or temper, they are most in-
clined.

ONE of the firit and most common of

those extremes, is that of placing all virtue,
either in justice, on the one hand; or in
generosity, on the other. The oppoition
between these, is most discernible among
two different classes of men in society.
They who have earned their fortune by a
laborious and industrious life, are naturally
tenacious of what they have painfully ac-
quired. To justice, they confider them-

A a 3 selves

SERM. selves as obliged; but to go beyond it in
,v.- ats of kindness, they confider as super-

fluous and extravagant. They will not
take any advantage of others, which con-
science tells them is iniquitous; but nei-
ther will they make any allowance for their
necessities and wants. They contend, with
rigorous exaanefs, for what is due to them-
selves. They are satisfied, if no man sus-
ser unjustly by them. That no one is be-
nefited by them, gives them little concern.
- Another set of men place their whole
merit in generosity and mercy; while to
justice and integrity they pay small regard.
These are persons generally of higher rank,
and of easy fortune. To them, justice ap-
pears a fort of vulgar virtue, requisite chief-
ly in the petty tranfadions, which those of
inferior station carry on with one another.
But humanity and liberality, they confider
as more refined virtues, which dignify their
characer, and cover all their failings. They
can relent at representations of distress; can
betlow with ostentatious generosity; can
even occasionally share their wealth with a

companion

companion of whom they are fond; while, S E R M.
at the fame time, they with-hold from XVI.
others what is due to them; are negligent
of their family and their relations; and to
the just demands of their creditors give no
attention.

Both these classes of men run to a faulty

extreme. They divide moral virtue be-
tween them. Each takes that part of it
only, which suits his temper. Without ju-
slice, there is no virtue. But without hu-
manity and mercy, no virtuous character
is complete. The one man leans to the ex-
treme of parsimony. The other, to that of
profusion. The temper of the one is un-
feeling. The sensibility of the other is
thoughtless. The one you may in some
degree refped; but you cannot love. The
other may be loved; but cannot be re-
fpedted: and it is difficult to fay, which
characer is most defecive.-We must un-
doubtedly begin with being just, before we
attempt to be generous. At the fame time,
he who goes no farther than bare juilice,
tfops at the beginning of virtue, We are

A a 4 som

SE R M. commanded to do jeifly; but, to love mercy.

_V The one virtue, regulates our actions. The

other, improves our heart and affiecions.
Each is equally necessary to the happiness
of the world. Justice is the pillar, that
upholds the whole fabric of human society.
Mercy is the genial ray, which chears and
warms the habitations of men. The per-
fecion of our social character confifIs, in
properly tempering the two with one an-
other; in holding that middle course,
which admits of our being just, without
being rigid; and allows us to be generous,
without being unjust.

WE must next guard against either too

great severity, or too great facility of man-
ners. These are extremes, of which we
every day behold instances in the world.
He who leans to the fide of severity, is
harfl in his censures, and narrow in his
opinions. He cannot condescend to others
in things indifferent. He has no allowance
to make for human frailty; or for the dif-
ference of age, rank, or temper, among

mankind,

tnankind. With him, all gaiety is sinful SERM.

XVII.

levity; and every amusement is a crime.
To this extreme, the admonition of Solo-
mon may be:underftood to belong; Be not
righteous over much; neither make thyJelf over
vwife. Why Jhouldft thou destroy thyfilf*
When this severity of manners is hypocri-
tical, and assumed as a cloak to secret' in
dulgence, it is one of the worst proftitu-
tions of religion. But I now confider it,
not as the effea of design, but 'of natural
austerity of temper, and of coiltraced ma-
xims of conduct. Its influence upon the
person himself, is to render him gloomy
and four; upon others, to alienate them
both from his society, and his counsels;
upon religion, to set it forth as a morose
and forbidding' principle.--The opposite
extreme to'this is, perhaps, still more dan-
gerous; that of too great facility, and ac-
commodation to the ways of others. The
man of this character, partly from indolent
weakness, and partly from softness of tem-

*Eccles. vii. 16.

per,

SERM. per, is disposed to a tame and universal as.
'.XV sent. Averse either to contradict or to

blame, he goes along with'the manners that
prevail. He views every characer with in-
dulgent eye; and with good .dispositions in
his breast, and a natural reluaance to pro-
fligacy and vice, he is enticed to the com-
million of evils which he: condemns, mere-
ly through. _want of fortitude to oppose
others.

Nothing,.it mut be confessed.. in moral

condut, is more difficult, than to avoid
*turning here,. either to, the right hand or to
the left. One of the greatest trials both of
wisdom and virtue is, to preserve a just
medium, between that harfinefs of aufte-
rity, which disgusts and alienates mankind,
and that weakness of good-nature, which
opens the door to sinful excels. The one
separates us too much from the world. The
other connects us too closely with it; and
seduces us to follow the multitude in doing
evil. . One who is of the former character,
studies too little to be agreeable, in order to
render himself useful. He who is of the

latter,

latter, by tfudying too much to be agree- SERM,
able, forfeits his innocence. If the one XVI
hurt religion, by cloathing it in the garb
of unnecessary ftridnefs; the other, by un-
warrantable compliance, strengthens the
power of corruption in the world. The
one borders on the character of the Pha-
rifee; the other, on that of the Sadducee.
True religion enjoins us to stand at an
equal distance from both; and to pursue
the difficult, but honourable aim, of uni-
ting good nature with fixed religious prin-
ciple; affable manners, with untainted vir-
tue.

FARTHER ; we run to one extreme, when

we contemn altogether the opinions of man-
kind;. to another, when we court their
praise too eagerly. The former discovers
a high degree of pride and felf-conceit.
The latter betrays servility of spirit. We
are formed by nature and Providence, to be
connected with one another. No man can
stand entirely alone, and independent of
all his fellow-creatures. A reasonable re-

gard,

SEVRM. gard, therefore, for their esteem and good
XVII .
t . opinion, is a commendable principle. It

flows from humanity; and coincides with
the desire of being mutually useful. But,
if that regard be carried too far, it becomes
the-fource of much corruption. For in the
present ftateof mankind, the praise of the
world often interferes with our acing that
steady and conscientious part, which gains
the approbation of God. Hence arises the
difficulty, of drawing a proper line, between
the allowable regard for reputation, and
thleexceflive desire of praise. On the one
fide, and on the other, dangers meet us; and
either extreme will be pernicious to virtue.

He who extinguifles all regard to the

sentiments of mankind, suppresses one in-
centive to honourable deeds; nay, he re-
moves one of the firongeft checks on vice.
For, where there is no desire of praise,
there will be also no sense of reproach and
fliame; and when this sense is destroyed,
the way is paved to open profligacy. On
the other hand, he who is atuated solely
by the love of human praise, incroaches on

the

the higher respect which he owes to con- ER M.

XV1L.

science, and to God. Hence, virtue is V
often counterfeited; and many a fplen-
did appearance has been exhibited to the
world, which had no basis in real prin-
ciple, or inward affection. Hence, reli-
gious truths have been disguised, or un-
fairly represented, in order to be suited
to popular taste. Hence the Scribes and
Pharilees reje&ed our blefled Lord, becaute
they loved the praie of men more than the
praie of God.-Turn, therefore, neither to
the right hand, nor to the left. AffeCt not to
despise what the world thinks of your con-
duCt and character; and yet, let not the
sentiments of the world entirely rule you.
Let a desire of esteem be one motive of
your conduct; but let it hold a fubordi-
nate place. Measure the regard that is due
to the opinions of men, by the degree in
which these coincide with the law of God.

ALLOW me next to suggest, the danger

of running to the extreme of anxiety about
worldly interests on the one hand, and of

negligence

SE RM. negligence on te other. It is hard to fay
XV.II.

which of these extremes is fraught with
most vice, and most misery. Industry and
diligence are unquestionable duties, ftri&-
ly enforced on all Christians; and he who
fails in making suitable provision for his
household and family, is pronounced to be
wqorfe than an infidel. But there are bounds,
within which our concern for worldly fuc-
cess must be confined. For anxiety is the
certain poison of human life. It debases
the mind; and lharpens all the passions.
It involves men in perpetual diftrations,
and tormenting cares; and leads them aside
from what ought to be the great scope of
human action. Anxiety is, in general, the
effet of a covetous temper. Negligence is
commonly, the offspring of licentiousness,
and always, the parent of universal dioir-
der. By anxiety, you render yourselves
miserable. By negligence, you too often
occasion the ruin of others. The anxious
man- is the votary of riches; the negligent
man, the votary of pleasure. Each offers
his mistaken worship, at the flirine of a

false

false deity; and each shall reap only such SE Rt.
rewards as an idol can bestow; the one fa- XVI
crificing the enjoyment and improvement
of the present, to vain cares about futuri-
ey; the other so totally taken up in enjoying
the prefent,'as to store the future with cer-
tain miseries. - True virtue holds a tem-
perate course between these extremes; nei-
ther careless of to-morrow, nor taking too
much thought for it; diligent, but not
anxious; prudent, but not covetous; at-
tentive to provide comfortable accommo-
dation on earth, but chiefly concerned to
lay up trcafitres in Heaven.

I ihall only warn you farther against the

extreme, of engaging in a courle ot life too
busy and hurried, or of devoting your-
selves to one too retired and unemployed.
We are formed for a mixture of action,
and retreat. Our conneCtions with society,
and the performance of the duties which we
owe to one another, necessarily engage us
in active life. What we owe to ourselves,
requires occasional retirement. For he who

lives

SERM. lives always in the bustle of the world can-
XVII. not, it is to be feared, always preserve his

virtue pure. Sentiments of piety will be
deprived of that nouriihment and support,
which they would derive from meditation
and devotion. His temper: will be often
ruffled and disturbed. His paflions will be
kept too much on the stretch. From the
contagious manners which every where a-
bound, he will not be able to avoid con-
tra&ing some dangerous infetion.- On
the other hand, he who flies to total retreat,
in order either to enjoy ease, or to escape
from the temptations of the world, will of-
ten find disquiet meeting him in solitude,
and the worst temptations arising from
within himself. Unoccupied by aftive and
honourable pursuits, unable to devote his
whole time to improving thoughts, many
an evil passion will start up, and occupy the
vacant hour. Sullenness and gloom will be
in danger of overwhelming him. Peevifli
displeasure, and suspicions of mankind, are
apt to persecute those who withdraw them-
selves altogether from the haunts of men.

- Steer

- Steer therefore a middle course, be- seRM.
tween a life oppressed with burinefs on the
one hand; and burdened, for the burden
is no less, with idleness on the other. Pro-
vide for yourselves matter of fair and ho-
nest pursuit, to afford a proper object to
the adive powers of the mind. Temper
business with serious meditation; and en-
liven retreat by returns of action and in-
duftry.

THUS I have pointed out some of those

extremes into which men are apt to run,
by forsaking the line which religion and
wisdom have drawn. Many more, I am
sensible, might be suggested; for the field
is wide, and hardly is there any appearance
of piety, virtue, or good conduct, but what
the folly of men is apt to pulh into undue
excess, on one or other fide. What I have
mentioned, will be sufficient to low the
necessity of prudent circumfpedion, in or-
der to escape the dangers which beset us in
this tfate of trial. Let us study to attain
a regular, uniform, consistent character;

VOL. III. B b where

SERM. where nothing that is exceflive or difpro-
XVII.
.XV portioned'fhall come forward to view;

which ihall not plume itself with a fair
.how on one fide only, while in other quar-
ters it remains unadorned, and blemished;
but, where the different parts of worth and
goodness shall appear united, and each shall
exert its proper influence on conduct.
Thus, ttrnitg neither to the right band nor to
the left, we lhall, as far as our frailty per-
mits, approach to the perfection of the hu-
man character; and shall have reason not
to be aJhamed when we have equal refpeEt to
all God's commandments.

S E R-
1 1 '

# SERMON XVIII. On SCOFFING at RELIGION. 2 Peter, iii. 3. — There shall come in the last days Scoffers. —

[ 371 ]
SE R M ON XVIII.

On SCO6FING at RELIGION.

2 Peter, iii. 3.

-There Jiall come in the 1,ft dajs Scoffers.-
A S the Christian religion is adverse to the s E R M.

inclinations and paiiions of the corrupt- XVITr.

edpart of mankind, it has been its fate, in eve-
ry age, to encounter the opposition of various
foes. Sometimes,it has undergone the storms
of violence and persecution. Sometimes, it
has been attacked by the arms of false
reasoning, and sophistry. When these have
failed of success, it has at other times been
exposed to the scoffs of the petulant. Men
of light and frivolous minds, who had no
compreh6ifiori of thought for discerning

B b 2 what

SE RM: what is great,, and no solidity of judge-

nx¥I. ment for deciding on what is. true, have

taken upon.them to treat religion with con-
tempt, as if it were of no consequence to
the world, They. have affeced to represent
the whole of that venerable fabric, which
has so long commanded the refpe& of man-
kind; which, for ages, the learned have
supported, and the wife have admired, as
having no better foundation than the
gloomy imagination of fanatics and vifio-
naries. Of this character were those fcof-
fers,'predicted by the Apoffle to arise in the
iaft days ; a prediEion which we have seen
too ofte -fulfilled. As the false colours
which such men throw on religion, are apt
toimnpofe.on the weak and unwary, let us
now examine, whether religion affords any
,uft grounds for the contempt or ridicule
of the scoffer. .They muftbe.either the
dotrines, or the preceptsof religion, which
he endeavours to hold forth to, contempt.

.. TH; doctrines of the Chriffian religion
are rational and pure, All that it has re-

vealed

vealed concerning the perfections of God, SERM,

XVIII.

his moral government and laws, the defti- ,v
nation of man, and the rewards and pu-
nifhmnents of a future state, is perfecly con-
sonant to the most enlightened reason. In
some articles which transcend the limits of
our present faculties, as in what relates to
the essence of the Godhead, the fallen state
of mankind, and their redemption by Jesus
Christ, its dotrines may appear myiferious
and dark.' Against these, the scoffer has of-
ten directed his attacks; as if whatever could
not be explained by us, ought upon that
account to be exploded as absurd.

It is unnecessary to enter,at prefent,on any

particular defence of these dbtrines, as there-
is one observation which, if duly weighed,
is sufficient to silence the cavils of the fcof-
ser.' Is he not compelled to admit, that the
whole fyfiem of nature around him is full
of mystery ? What reason, then, had he to
suppose, that the doctrines of revelation,
proceeding from the fame author, were to
contain no mysterious obscurity? All that
is requisite for the conduct of life, both in

B b 3 nature

SERM. nature and in religion, divine wisdom has
',- rendered obvious to all. As nature has as-

forded us sufficient information concerning
what is necessary for our food, our accom-
modation, and our safety; so religion has
plainly inftruded us in.our duty towards
God, and our neighbour. But as loon as
we attempt to rife towards objects that lie
beyond our immediate sphere of action,
our curiosity is checked; and darkness meets
us on every fide. What the essence is of
those material bodies which we fee and
handle; how a feed grows up into a tree;
how man is formed in the womb; or how
the mind' ads upon the body, after it is
formed; are mysteries of which we can give
no more account, than of the most obscure
and difficult parts of revelation. We are
obliged to admit the existence of the fact,
though the explanation of it exceeds our fa-
culties.

After the fame manner, in.natural reli-

gion, questions arise concerning the crea-
tion of the world from nothing, the origin
of evil under the government of a per:dzt
+:;~~ ji~~~~~ .Being,

Being, and the confiffency of human liber- SE .RM,
ty with divine prescience, which are of as XVII.
intricate nature, and of as difficult solution,
as any questions in Christian theology. We
may plainly fee, that we are not admitted
into the secrets of Providence, any more
than into the mysteries of the Godhead. In
all his ways, the Almighty is a God that
hideth himself: He makcth darh efis his pavi-
lion. He holdeth back the face of his throne;
and fpreadeth a thick cloud upon it.- In-
fead of its being any objection to revela-
tion, that some of its doctrines are myfte-
rious, it would be much more strange and
unaccountable, if no such doctrines were
found in it. Had every thing in the Chri-
ftian system been perfctly level to our ca-
pacities, this might rather have givenground
to a suspicion, of its not proceeding from
God; since it would have been then so un-
like to what we find, both in thc system
of the universe, and in the system of natu-
ral religion. Whereas, according as mat-
ters now stand, the gospel has the fame sea-
tures, the fame general characler, with the

B b 4 other

SE R M. other two, which are acknowldedged :to be of
XvllI. 1.. ·

divine origin; plain and comprehensible, in
what relates to pracice; darik~and myfte-
rious, in what relates to speculation and be-
lief . The cavils of the scoffer, therefore,
on this head, are so far from having any
just foundation, that they only.difcover
his ignorance, and the narrowness of his
views.

LET us next proceed to what relates to

practice, or the preceptive part of religion.
-The duties which religion enjoins us to
perform towards God, are those which have
ofteneft furnifled matter to the scoffs of
the licentious. They attempt to .represent
these as so idle and superfluous, that they
could owe their birth to nothing but en-
thufiafin.-For, is.not the Deity so far ex-
alted above us, as to receive neither advan-
tage nor:pleafure, from our worship? What
are our prayers,or .our praises, to that infinite

* See this argument 'fully pursued, and placed in a

ftrog 'light, by the masterly hand 6f Bishop Butler, in
his Analogy of atural-and,;Reveald Reigion. ·

.i ,.,mind,

mind, who, refting in the full enjoyment SERM.
of his own beatitude, beholds all his crea- xVIII.
tures passing before him, only as the inse&s
of a day What but superstitious terrors,
could have dicated those forms of homage,
and.thofe diftinfcions of sacred days, in
which vulgar minds delight, but which the
liberal and enlarged look upon with scorn ?

Now, in return to such insults of the

scoffer, it might be sufficient to observe,
that the united sentiments of mankind, in
every age and nation, are against him.
Thoughtless as the bulk of men are, axid
attached only to objects which they fee a-
round them; this principle has never been
extinguished in their breafis, that to the
great Parent of the human race, the uni-
versal, though invisible, benefacor of the
world, not only internal reverence, but ex-
ternal homage is due. Whether he need
that homage or not, is not the question. it
is what, on our part, we undoubtedly owe;
and the heart is, with reason, held to be
bate; which tifles the emotions of grati-
tude to a benefactor, how independent so-

ever

S E R M. ever he may be of any returns.- True vir"
VI_- tue, always prompts a public declaration of

the grateful sentiments which. it feels; and
glories in exprefling them. Accordingly,
over all the earth, crowds of worfliippdrs
have assembled to adore, in various forms,
the Ruler of the world. In these adorations,
the philosopher, the savage, and the faint,
have equally joined. None. but the cold
and unfeeling can look up to that benefi-
cent Being, who is at the head of: the uni-
verse, without -some inclination to pray, or
to praise. In vain, therefore, would the
scoffer deride, what the loud voice of na-
ture demands andjuftifies; He ere&s him-
self against the general, and declared sense
of the human race.

But apart from this consideration, I must

call on him to attend to one of a still more
serious and awful nature. By his licentious
ridicule of the duties of piety, and of the
institutions of divine worship, he is weak-
ening the power of conscience over men;
he is undermining the great, pillars of so-
ciety; he is giving a mortal: blow to public

order,

order, and public happiness. All these reft sE R .
on nothing so much, as on the general be- xv
lief of an all-feeing witness, and the gene-
ral veneration of an Almighty Governor.
On this belief, and this veneration, is found-
ed the whole obligation of an oath; with-
out which, government could not be admi-
niftered, nor courts of justice act; controm
verfies could not be determined, nor private
property be preserved safe. Our only fe-
curity against innumerable .crimes, to
which the'reftraints of human laws cannot
reach, is the dread of an invisible avenger,
and of those future punifliments which he
hath prepared for the guilty. Remove this
dread lfrom the minds of men; and you
strengthen the hands of the wicked, and
endanger the safety of human society.

But how could imprefions so necefiary to

the public welfare be preserved, if there were
no religious assemblies, no sacred inftitu-
tions, no days set apart for divine worihip,
in order to be solemn remembrancers to
men of the existence, and the dominion of
God; and of the future account they have

to

SE RM. to give of their actions to him ? To all rankl
XVII. of men, -the sentiments which public reli-

gion tends to awaken, are salutary and be-
neficial. But with refpe& to the inferior
classes, it is well known, that the only prin-
ciples which restrain them from evil, are
acquired in the religious assemblies which
they frequent. Destitute of the advantages
of regular education; ignorant, in great
measure, of public laws; unacquainted
with those refined ideas of honour and pro-
priety, to which others of more knowledge
have been trained; were those sacred tem-
ples- deserted to which they now resort,
they-would be in danger of degenerating
into a ferocious race, from whom lawless
violence was perpetually to be dreaded. -

He, therefore, who treats sacred things

with any degree of levity and scorn, is.ad-
ing-the part, perhaps without his feeing or
knowing it,- of a public enemy to society.
He is precisely the madman described in the
book of Proverbs, * who cateth firebrands,

* Prov. xxvi. 18.
~-- - arrows,

arrows, and death; and faith, am I not in S.ERM,
sport We fiall hear him, at times, corn-
plain loudly of the undutifulness of chil-
dren, of the dishonesty of servants, of the
tumults and insolence of the lower ranks;
while he himself is, in a great measure,
responsible for the disorders of which he
complains. By the example which he sets
of contempt for religion, he becomes ac-
ceffory to the manifold crimes, which that
contempt occasions among others. By his
scoffing at sacred institutions, he is encou-:
raging the rabble to uproar and violence;
he is emboldening the false witness to take
the name of God in vain; he is, in effe&,
putting arms into the hands of the high-
wayman, and letting loose the robber on
the streets by night.

WE come next to confider that great

class of duties, which respect our conduct
towards our fellow-creatures. The absolute
necessity of these to general welfare is so
apparent, as to have secured them, in a
.great degree, from the attacks of the £cos-

*;. -„.~ . i -ser.
I'

SERM. ser. He who ihould attempt to turn ju-
xvmI. ftice, truth, or honesty, into ridicule, would

be avoided by every one. 'To those who
had any remains of principle, he would. be
odious. To those who attended only to
their interest, he would appear a dangerous
man. But though the. social virtues are
treated in general as refpeftable and 'acred,
there are certain forms and degrees of them,
which have not been exempted from the
scorn of the unthinking. That extensive
generosity, and high public spirit, which
prompt a man to sacrifice his own interest,
in order to promote some great general
good; and that ftriC and scrupulous inte-
grity, which will not allow one, on any
occalion, to depart from the truth; have
often been treated with contempt by those
who are called men of the world. They
who.,will not stoop to flatter the great; who
difdain.to comply with prevailing manners,
when they;judge them to be evil;, who re-
fuse to take the finalleftadvantage.of others,
in order to.pmocuie thelr.greefi:benfin. for
themselves.; are reprefeqtw'j as:prn-fis ;of

romantic

romantic character, and visionary notions, SE R M.

XVIII.:

unacquainted with the world, and unfit ._-.
to live in it.

Such persons are so far from being liable

to any just ridicule, that they are intitled
to a degree of refpet, which approaches to
veneration. For they are, in truth, the
great supporters and guardians of public
order. The authority of their character
overawes the giddy multitude. The weight
of their example retards the progress of cor-
ruption; checks that relaxation of morals,
which is always too apt to gain ground in-
sensibly, and to make incroachments on
every department of society. Accordingly,
it is this high generosity of spirit, this in-
flexible virtue, this regard to principle, fu-
perior to all opinion, which has ever mark-
ed the characters of those who have emi-
nently diflinguifhed themselves in public
life; who have patronised the cause of ju-
fice against powerful oppressors; who, in
critical times, have supported the falling
rights and liberties of men; and have re-
flected honour on their nation and country.

Such
*1

ER M, Such persons may have been scoffed at by
x i .some among whom they lived; but pofte-

rity has done them ample justice; and they
are the persons, whose names are recorded
to future ages, and who are thought and
spoken of with admiration.

The mere temporizer, the man of accom-

modating principles, and inferior virtue,
may support a plausible character for a
while among his friends and followers;
but as soon as the hollowness of his prin-
ciples is detected, he finks into contempt.
They who are prone to deride men of in;
flexible integrity, only betray the littleness
of their minds. They mhow that they un-
derftand not the sublime' of virtue; that
they have no discernment of the true ex-
cellence of man. By affecting to throw
any discouragement on purity and firict-
ness of morals, they not only expose them-
feives to just contempt, but propagate fen-
timents very dangerous to society. For, if
we loosen the regard due to virtue in any
of its parts, we begin to Lap the whole of
it. No man, as it has been often said, be-

comes

comes entirely profligate at once. He de- SERM.

XVIIL

.iates, ftep by ftep, from conscience. If _
the .loose casuistry of the scoffer were to
prevail, open diflionelty, falsehood, and
treachery, would speedily grow out of those
complying principles, those relaxations of
virtue, which he would represent to be ne-
ceffary for every man who knows the
world.

THE last class of virtues I am to men·

tion, are those which are of a personal na-
ture, and which refpet the government to
be exercised over our pleasures and passions.
Here, the scoffer has always confidered
himself as having an ample field. Often,
and often, have such virtues as sobriety,
temperance, modesty, and chastity, been
made the subjec of ridicule, as monkifi
habits, which exclude men from the com-
pany of the faihionable and the gay; ha.
bits, which are the effec of low education,
or of mean spirits, or of mere feebleness of
constitution; while icoffrs, walking, as it is
too truly. said of th!en by the Apoffle, after

VOL. III. Cc e/hr,

SERM. their ltfls,. boast of their own manners as
An, liberal and free, as manly and spirited.

They fancy themselves raised thereby much
above the crowd; and hold all those in con-
tempt, who confine themselves within the
vulgar bounds of regular and orderly life.

Infatuated men! who fee not that the

virtues of which they make sport, not
only derive their authority from the laws of
God, but are moreover essentially requisite
both to public,, and to private happiness.
By the indulgence of their licentious plea-
fures for a.while, as long as youth and vi-
gour remain, a few passing gratifications
may be obtained. But what are the confe-
quences ? Suppose any individual to per-
severe unrestrained in this course, it is cer-
tainly to be followed by disrepute in, his
charater, and disorder in his affairs; by a
wafted, and.:broken constitution; and a
fpeedy.and .miserable old age.. Suppose a
society to be wholly formed of such persons
as the scoffers applaud; suppose it to be
filled with none but those whom they call
the sons of pleasure; that is, with the in-

temperate,

tenmperate, the riotous, and dissolute, among s E R M.
whom all regard to sobriety, decency, and XVII
private virtue, was aboli:hed; what an odious
scene would such a society exhibit? How
unlike any civilised or well-ordered fiate,
in which mankind have chosen to dwell?
What turbulence and uproar, what contests.
and quarrels, would perpetually reign in
it ? What man of common understanding
would not rather chufe to dwell in a. de-
fert, than to be associated for life with such
companions? Shall, then, the scoffer pre-
fume to make light of those virtues, with-
out -which there could. be neither peace,
nor comfort, nor good order, among man-
kind?

Let him be desired to think, of his do-

meffic situation and connecdions. Is he a
father, a husband, or a brother ? Has he
any friend or relation, male or female, in
whose happiness he is interested ?- Let
us put the question to him, whether he be
willing that intemperance, unchaffity, or
dissipation of any kind, lmould mark their
character ? Would he recommend to them

C c 2 such

SERM. such excesses ? Would he chufe, in their
XVIII.
,v-.L. presence, openly, and without disguise, to

scoff at the opposite virtues, as of no con-
sequence to their welfare ?- If even the
most licentious shudders at the thought;
if, in the midst of his loose pleasures, he
be desirous that his own family Ihould re-
main untainted; let this teach him the va-
lue of those private virtues, which, in the
hours of dissipation, in the giddiness of his
mind, he is ready to contemn. Banish so-
briety, temperance, and purity, and you
tear up the foundations of all public order,
and all domestic quiet. You render every
'house a divided and miserable abode, re-
founding with terms of shame, and mutual
reproaches of infamy. You leave nothing
-refpeaable in the human character. You
change the man into a brute.

: THE conclusion from all the reasonings
which we have now pursued is, that reli-
gion. and virtue, in all their forms, either
of docrine or of precept; of piety towards
God, integrity towards men, or regularity

in

in private conduct; are so far from afford- SE RML

XVIII.

ing any grounds of ridicule to the petulant,
that they are intitled to our highest vene-
ration; they are names, which {hould ne-
ver be mentioned, but with the utmost ho-
nour. It is said in Scripture, Fools make a
mock at fin *. They had better make a
mock at pestilence, at war, or famine.
With one, who should chufe these public
calamities for the subjea of his sport, you
would not be inclined to associate. You
would fly from him, as worse than a fool;
as a man of distempered mind, from whom
you might be in hazard of receiving a iud-
den blow. Yet certain it is, that, to the
great fbciety of mankind, fin is a greater
calamity, than either pestilence, or famine,
or war. These operate, only as occasional
causes of misery. But the fins and vices
of men, are perpetual scourges of the world.
Impiety and injustice, fraud and falsehood,
intemperance and profligacy, are daily pro-
ducing mischief and disorder; bringing

* Prov. xiv. 9.

C c3 rin

SERM ruin on, individuals; tearing families and
XVIII.

communities in pieces; giving rife to a
thousand tragical scenes on this unhappy
theatre. In proportion as manners are vi-
cious, mankind are unhappy: The per-
section of virtue which reigns in the world
above, is the chief source of the perfect
blessedness which prevails there.

When, therefore; we observe any tenden-

cy to treat religion or morals with difre-
fpet and levity, let us hold it to be a sure
indication of a perverted understanding,. or
a depraved heart. In the feat of the scorner
let us never fit. Let us account that wit
contaminated, which attempts to sport itself
on Sacred subjeCts. When the scoffer arises,
let us maintain the honour of out God,
arid our Redeeiner; and :resolutely adhere
to'the cause of virtue and goodness. The
lips of the wire utter knowledge; but the mouth
of the fooli/h is near to deftruftion. Him that
honoureth God, God will honour. Thefear of
the Lord is the beginning of '6ifdom : and he
that keepeth the .commandment, keepetb his
own foul,

S E. R-

# SERMON XIX. On the CREATION of the WORLD. GENESIS, i. 1. In the beginning God created the heaven, and the earth.

[ 391 ]

SERMON XIX.
On the CREATION of the WORLD.

GENESIS, i. I.
In the beginning God created the heaven,. andi

the earth.
OUCH is the commencement of the his- SERM.

tory of mankind; an ara, to which we I- .

must ever look back with solemn awe and
veneration. Before the fun and the moon
had begun their course; before the found
of the human voice was heard, or the
name os.man was known; in the beginning
God created the heaven, and the earth.
To a beginning of the world, we are led
back by every thing that now exists; by
all history, all records, all monuments of

C c 4 antiquity.

SER M. antiquity. In tracing the tranfadions of
,_ j past ages, we arrive.at a period, which clear-

ly indicates the infancy of the human race.
We behold the world peopled by degrees.
We arcend t tthe origin of all those, useful
and necessary arts, without the knowledge
of which, mankind could hardly subsist.
We discern society and civilization arising
from rude beginnings, in every corner of
the earth; and gradually advancing to the
fate in which we now find them: All,
w'hich afford plain evidence, that there was
a period, when mankind began to inhabit
and cultivate the earth. What is very re-
parkable, the moit authentic chronology
- aand liftory of most nations, coincides with

Thp account of Scripture; and makes the
period during which the world has been
inhabited by the race of men, not to ex-
;end beyond fix thoufand-years.

To the .ancient philosophers, creation

from nothing appeared an unintelligible
idea. They maintained the eternal exiit-
ence of matter, which they supposed to be
modelled by, the sovereign mind of the uni-

verse,

verse, into the form which the earth now SERM,
exhibits. But there is nothing in this opi- txlx
nion which gives it any title to be opposed
to the authority of- revelation. The doc-
trine of two felf-exiftent, independent prin-
ciples, God and matter, the one active, the
other passive, is a hypothesis which presents
difficulties to human reason, at least as
great as the creation of matter from no-
thing.. Adhering then to the testimony of
Scripture, we believe, that in the beginning
God created, or from non-existence brought
into being, the heaven and the earth.

But though there was a period when this

globe, with all that we fee upon it, did not
exist, we have no reason to think, that the
wisdom and power of the Almighty were
then without exercise or employment;
Boundless is the extent of his dominion.
Other globes and worlds, enlightened by
other funs, may then have occupied, as
they fill appear to occupy, the immense
regions of space. Numberless orders of be-
ings, ,to.us unknown, people the wide ex-
tent of the universe; and afford an endless

variety

SER M. variety of objects to the ruling care of the
,_ . great Father of all. At length, in the

course and progress of his government,
there arrived a period, when this earth was
to be called into existence. When the fig-
nal moment, predestined from all eternity,
was come, the Deity arose in his might;
and with a word created the world.-
What an illustrious moment was that,
when, from non-existence, there sprang at
once into being, this mighty globe, on
which so many millions of creatures now
dwell !-No preparatory measures were re-
quired. No long circuit of means was em-
ployed. He spake; and it was. done: He
commanded; and it flood fafi. The earth
was at first, eithout form, and void; and
darkness was on the face of the deep. The Al-
mighty surveyed the dark abyss; and fix-
ed bounds to the several divilions of na-
ture. He said, Let there be light; and there
was light. Then appeared the sea, and the
dry land. The mountains rose; and the
rivers flowed. The fun and moon began
their course in the kies. Herbs and plants

cloathed

cloathed the ground. The air, the earth, SERM.
and the waters, were stored with their re- x _
fpedive inhabitants. At last, man was
made after the image of God. He appear-
ed, walking with countenance ereA; and
received his Creator's benediction, as the
Lord of this new world. The Almighty
beheld his work when it was finished; and
pronounced it good. Superior beings saw
with wonder this new accefiloi to existence.
The morning Jfars fang together; and all the
Jfns of GodJhoutedfor joy %.

But, on this great work of creation, let

us not merely gaze with astonishment. Let
us confider how it flould affect our con-
duc, by presenting the divine perfections
in a light which is at once edifying, and
comforting, to man. It displays the Crea-
tor as supreme in power, in wisdom, and
in goodness.

I. As supreme in power. When we con-
fider with how much labour and difficulty

* Job xxxviii. 7.

human

SE R' M human power performs its inconfidei'abfc

w, orks; what time it costs to rear them;
and how easily, when .reared, they arede-
stroyed; -the very'idea of creating power
overwhelms the mind with awe. Let us
look around, and survey this flupendous
edifice, which' we have been' admitted to
inhabit. Let us think of the extent of the
differerit climates and regions. of the earth;
of the magnitude of the mountains, and of
the expanse of the ocean. Let us conceive
that immense globe which contains 'them,
launched at once from the hand of the Al-
mighty; made to revolve incessantly on its
axis, that it might produce the vicissitudes
of day and night; thrown forth, at the
fame time,- to run its annual course in per-
petual circuit through. the heavens; after
such .a meditation, where is the greatness,
where is the pride of man ? Intodwhat total
annihilation do we fink, before an omnipo-
tentBeing ? Who is not disposed to exclaim,
Lord, what is man, that thou art nmindfil of
him ; or the /on of man, that thou lJhozldJ vijit
him ? When compared with thee, all men are

vanity;

vanity; their works are nothing.--Reve- SE, iM.
rence, and humble adoration, ought fpon- xl
taneoufly to arise. He who feels no pro-
penfity to worship and adore, is dead to all
sense of grandeur and majesty; has extin-
guifhed one of the most natural feelings of
the. human heart. Know the Lord, that hee
is God, we are all his people; the workman-
Jhip of his hands. Let us worjaip and bow
down. Let us kneel before the Lord our
Maker.

Of all titles to legislation and rule, none

is so evident and direct as that of a Crea-
tor.. The conviction is felt in every breast,
that he who gave us being, hath an abfo-
lute right to regulate. our condudt. This
gives a fancdion to the precepts of God,
which the most hardened dare not contro-
vert. When it is a Creator and a Father
that speaks, who would not liften and
obey? Are justice and humanity his de-
clared laws; and ihall we, whom but ye-
fterday he called from the dust, and whom
to-morrow he can reduce into dust again,
presume, in contempt of him, to be unjust

or

S ERM. or inhuman? Are there any little interests
,__,j of our own which we dare to eret, in op-

position to the pleasure of him who made
us ? Fear ye not me, faith the Lord; will ye
not tremble at my presence, who have placed
the sand for the bound of the sea, by a per-
petual decree, that it cannot pass it; who
Jwretch forth my hand over the earth, and none
bindereth ?

At the fame time, the power of a.Crea-

tor is encouraging, as well as awful. While
it enforces duty, it inspires confidence un-
der affliction. It brings to view a relation,
which imports tenderness and comfort, for
it suggests the compassion of a father. In
the time of trouble, mankind are led by
natural impulse, to fly for aid to Him, who
knows the weakness of the frame which he
has made; who remembers we are didi; and
fees the dangers with which we are envi-
roned. " I am thine; for thou haft made
" me: Forsake not the work of thine own
" hands," is one of the most natural ejacula-
tions of the distressed mind. How blef-
fed are the virtuous, who can reft under the

protection

protetion of that powerful arm, which SE'RM.

XIX.

made the earth and the heaven? The om-
nipotence which renders God so awful, is
to them a source of joy. In the whole coi-
pass of nature, nothing is formidable to
them, who firmly repose their trust in the
Creator. To them, every noxious power
can be rendered harmless; every threaten-
ed evil, if not averted, can be transformed
into good. In the Author of nature, they
find not only the author of their being;
but their protector and defender, the lifter
up of their heads. Happy is he that bath the
God of yacob for his help; whose hope is in
the Lord his God; which made heaven and
earth, thefea, and all that therein is; which
keepceth truth for ever *.

II. THE work of creation is the display of

supreme wisdom. It carries no character
more conspicuous than this. If, from the
ftruture and mechanism of some of the most
complicated works of human art, we are led

* Psalm cxlvi, 5. 6.

to

SE RM. to high admiration of the wisdom of the

j.contriver, what aftoniflunent may fill' our

minds, when we think of the ftrudure of
the univere ! It is not only the tfupendous
building itself, which excites admiration;
but the exquisite flill, with which the end-
less variety of its parts :are adapted. to their
refpecive purposes. Insomuch, that the
study of nature, which, for ages, has em-
.ployed the lives of so many learned men,
and which is still so far from being: ex-
haufted, is no other than the study of di-
vine wisdom displayed in the creation. The
farthei our researches are carried, more
itriking proofs of it every where meet us.
The provision made for 'the constant regu-
larity of the universe, in the disposition of
the heavenly bodies, so that in the course
of several thoufahd years, nature Sh]ould
ever exhibit the fame useful and grateful
variety, in the returns of light and dark-
ness, of summer and winter; and ever fur-
nish food and habitation to all the animals
that people the earth; must be a lasting
theme of wonder to every-reflecting mind.

But

But they are not only the heavens that SERM.

XiX.

declare the glory of God, and the firmament .
that JhJeweth forth his handy work. In the
most inconsiderable, as well as in the most il-
luftrious works of the Creator, consummate
art and design appear. There is not a crea-
ture that moves, nor a vegetable that grows,
but, when minutely examined, furnishes
materials of the highest admiration. The
fame wisdom that placed the fun in the
centre of the system, and arranged the fe-
veral planets around him in their order,
has no less fliown itself, in the provision
made for the food and dwelling of every
bird that roams the air, and every beast
that wanders in the desert; equally great,
in the smallest, and in the most magnifi-
cent objects; in the star, and in the insert;
in the elephant, and in the fly; in the beam
that shines from heaven, and in the grass
that cloaths the ground. Nothing is over-
looked. Nothing is carelessly performed.
Every thing that exists, is adapted with per-
fed symmetry to the end for which it was
designed. All this infinite variety of par-

VoL. III. D d ticular

S E R M. ticulars must have been present to the mind
xlx. X, of the Creator; all beheld with one glance

of his eye; all fixed and arranged, from
the beginning, in his great design, when
he formed the heavens and the earth. Just-
ly may we exclaim with the Psalmist, How
excellent, 0 Lord, is tIhy name in all the earth !
How manifold are thy works ! In wifdAom bait
thou made them all. No man can f. d olt the
work that God maketh, from. the beginning
to the end. . Such knowledge is too wonderfil
for ts. It is high; we cannot attain unto it.

This wisdom displayed by the Almighty

in the creation, was not intended merely to
.gratify:curiofity, and to raise wonder. It
.ought to beget profound submission, and
pious trust, in every heart, It is not un-
comm.on for many who speak with rapture
of creating wisdom, to be guilty, at the fame
time, of arraigning the conduct of Provi-
dence, In the ftrudture of the universe,
they confess that all is goodly and beauti-
ful. But in the government of human as-
fairs, they can fee nothing but disorder and
confusion..--- Have they forgotten, that

bOth

both the one, and the other, proceed from S ER M.

XIX.

the fame author ? Have they forgotten, that .
he who balanced all the heavenly bodies,
and adjusted the proportions and limits of
nature, is the fame who hath allotted them
their condition in the world, who diftri-
butes the measures of their prosperity and
adversity, and fixes the bounds of their habi-
tation ? If their lot appear to them ill forted,
and their condition hard and unequal, let
them only put the question to their own
minds, Whether it be most probable, that
the great and wife Creator hath erred in
his distribution of human things, or that
they have erred, in the judgement which
they form concerning the lot afigned to
them? Can they believe, that the divine
Artist, after he had contrived and finised
this earth, the habitation of men, with
such admirable wisdom, would then throw
it out of his hands as a neglected work;
would susser the affairs of its inhabitants to
proceed by chance; and would behold them
without concern, running into misrule and
disorder ? Where were then that confiflen-
· -:., .. D d 2 cy

SERM. cy of conduct, which we difcover.in all the
".-. _, works of nature, and which we cannot but

ascribe to a perfec Being ?- My brother!
when thy plans are disappointed, and thy
heart is ready to despair; when virtue is
oppressed, and the wicked prosper around
thee; in those moments of diflurbance, look
up to him who created the heaven and the
earth; and confide, that he who made light
to spring fiom primaval darkness, will make
order at last to arise from the seeming con-
fusion of the world.

Had any one beheld the earth in its fiate

of chaos; when the elements lay mixed and
confuked; when the earth was witboutform
and void, and darkness was on the face of the
deep; would he have believed, that it was
presently to become so fair and well order-
ed. a globe as we now behold; illumined
with the splendor of the fun, and decorated
with all the beauty of nature? The fame
powerful hand, which perfeced the work
of creation, ihall, in due time, disembroil the
plans of Providence. Of creation, we can
judge more clearly, because it flood forth

at

at once; it was perfect from the beginning. s R M.
But the course of Providence is progressive. I
Time is required for the progression to ad-
vance; and before it is finised, we can
form no judgement, or at leaf a very imper-
feit one, concerning it. We mufft wait un-
til the great xra arrive, when the secrets of
the universe {hall be unfolded; when the
divine designs {hall be consummated; when
Providence fhall'be brought'to the fame
completion which creation has already at-
tained. Then, we have every reason to be-
lieve, that the wife Creator {hall appear in
the end, to have been the wife and just ruler
of the world. ' Until that period come, let
us be contented and patient; let us submit
and adore. Although thou fayefl thou halt
iotfee him, yet judgement is before him; there-
fore, trfl thou in him * This exhortation
will receive more force, when we,

III. Confider creation as a display of fii-
preene good nets, no less than of wisdom and

Jb :xx:v. [A.

D d 3 power.

SER M. power. It is the communication of num-
XIX. h__| berlefs benefits to all who live, together

with existence. Justly is the earth said to
be fll of the goodness of the Lord. Through-
out the whole system of things, we behold
a manifest tendency to promote the benefit
either of the rational, or the animal crea-
tion. In some parts of nature, this tenden-
cy may be less obvious than in others. Ob-
jeas, which to us seem useless, or hurtful,
may sometimes occur; and strange it were,
if in. o vast and complicated a system, dif-
ficulties of this kind should not occasional-
ly present themselves to beings, whose views
are so narrow and limited as ours. It is
well known, that in proportion as the
knowledge of nature has increased among
men, these difficulties have diminished. Sa-
tisfaftory accounts have been given of ma-
ny perplexing appearances. Useful and
proper purposes have been found to be pro-
moted, by objects which were, at first,
thought unprofitable or noxious.

Malignant must be the mind of that per-
son; with a distorted eye he mufft have con-

templated

templated creation, who can fufped, that sERM.
it is not the production of infinite benigni- ~
ty and goodness. How many clear marks
of benevolent intention appear, every where
around us ? What a profusion of beauty and
ornament is poured forth on the face of na-
ture? What a magnificent spectacle pre-
sented to the view of man? What supply
contrived for his wants ? What a variety of
objecs set before him, to gratify his senses,
to employ his understanding, to entertain
his imagination, to cheer and gladden his
heart? Indeed, the very existence ,of the
universe is a standing memorial of the
goodness of the Creator. For nothing ex-
cept goodness could originally prompt crea-
tion. The supreme Being, felf-exiftent and
all-fufficient, had no wants which he could
seek to supply. No new accession of felici-
ty or glory was to result to him, from crea-
tures whom he made. It was goodness
communicating and pouring itself forth,
goodness delighting to impart happiness
in all its forms, which in the beginning
created the heaven and the earth. Hence,

D d 4 those

$'E R M. those innumerable orders of living creatures
XIX.
.-'.- with which the earth is peopled ; from the

lowest class of sensitive being, to the high-
eft rank of reason and intellience. Where-
ever there is life, there is some degree of
happiness; there are enjoyments suited to
the different powers of feeling; and earth,
and air, and water, are, with magnificent
liberality, made to teem with life.

Let those friking displays of creating.

goodness call forth, on our part, refponiive
love, gratitude, and veneration. To this
great Father of all existence and life, to
Him who hath raised us up to behold the
light of day, and to enjoy all the comforts
which his world presents, let our hearts
fend forth a perpetual hymn of praise.
Evening and morning let us celebrate Him,
who maketh the morning and the evening
to rejoice over our heads; who openeth his
hand, and fatisfeth the desire of every living
thing. Let us rejoice, that we are brought
into a world, which is the production of
infinite goodness; over which a supreme
intelligence presides; and where nothing

happens,

happens, that was not planned and arran- SERM.
ged, from the beginning, in his decree. Con- xlx.
vinced that he hateth not the works which
he hath made, nor hath brought creatures
into existence, merely to susser unnecessary
pain, let us, even in the midst of sorrow,
receive, with calm submission, whatever he
is pleated to fend; thankful for what he
bestows; and satisfied, that, without good
reason, he takes nothing away.

SUCH, in general, are the effects which

meditatidn on the creation of the world
ought to produce. It presents such an afto-
nilhing conjunction of power, wisdom, and
goodness, as cannot be beheld without re-
ligious veneration. Accordingly, among
all nations of the earth, it has given rife to
religious belief and worihip. The most
ignorant and savage tribes, when they look-
ed round on the earth and the heavens,
could not avoid ascribing their origin to
some invisible designing cause, and feeling
a propensity to adore. They are, indeed, the
awful appearances of the Creator's power,

by

SERM, by which, chiefly, they have been impreffl
xx. ed; and which have introduced into their

worihip so many rites of dark fuperllltion.
When the usual course of nature seemed to
be interrupted; when loud thunder rolled
above them in the clouds, or earthquakes
ihook the ground, the multitude fell on
their knees, and, with trembling horror,
brought forth the bloody sacrifice to ap-
pease the angry divinity. But it is not in
those tremendous appearances of power
merely, that a good and well-inftrudced
man beholds the Creator of the world. In
the constant and regular working of his
hands, in the silent operations of his wis-
dom and goodness, ever going on through-
out nature, he delights to contemplate and
adore him.

This is one of the chief fruits to be de-

rived from that more perfect knowledge of
the Creator, which is imparted to us by the
Christian revelation. Impressing our minds
with a just sense of all his attributes, as not
wife and great only, but as gracious and
merciful, let it lead us to view every object

of

of calm and undisturbed nature, with a per- s R M.
petual reference, to its author. We shall _
then behold all the scenes which the hea-
vens and the earth present, with more.refi-
ned feelings, and sublimer emotions, than
they who regard them solely as objets of
curiosity, or amuifement. Nature will ap-
pear animated, and enlivened, by.the pre-
fence of its author. When the fun rifes
or sets in the heavens; when spring paints
the earth, when summer {hines in its glory,
when autumn pours forth its fruits, or
winter returns in its awful forms, we ihall
view the Creator manifesting himself in his
works. We ihall meet his presence in the
fields. We {hall feel his influence in the
cheering beam. We shall hear his voice in
the wind. We {hall behold ourselves every
where surrounded with the glory of that
universal spirit, who fills, pervades, and
upholds all. We shall live in the world as
in a great and august temple; where the
presence of the divinity, who inhabits it,
inspires devotion.

Magnificent as the fabric of the world

is,

SERM. is, it was not, however, intended for per-
_iL.f petual duration. It was ereted as a tem-

porary habitation for a race of beings, who,
after ating there a probationary part, were
to be removed into a higher state of exist-
ence. As there was an hour fixed from all
eternity for its creation, so there is an hour
fixed for its dissolution; when the heavens
and the earth shall pass away, and their
place ihall know them no more. The con-
fideration of this great event, as the coun-
terpart to the work of creation, shall be the
iubjet of the following Discourse.

S E R-

# SERMON XX. On the DISSOLUTION of the WORLD. 2 PETER, iii. 10. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements ...

[ 413 ]

SERMON XX.
On the DISSOLUTION of the WORLD.

2 PETER, iii. 10.
But the day of the Lord will come as a thief

in the night; in the which the heavens jhall
pass away with a great noise, and the ele-
ments Jhall melt with fervent heat; the
earth aso, and the works that are therein,
Jhall be burnt up.
T'-IHESE words present to us an awful SERM

view of the final catastrophe of the _, s

world. Having treated, in the preceding
Discourse, of the commencement, let us
now contemplate the close, of all human
things. The dissolution of the material
system is an article of our faith, often allu-

ded

S ER M. ded to in the Old Testament, clearly pre-
xX. XXj dieted in the New. It is an article of faith

so far from being incredible, that many
appearances in nature lead to the belief of
it. We fee all terrestrial substances chan-
ging their form. Nothing that consists of
matter, is formed for perpetual duration.
Every thing around us, is impaired and
consumed by time; waxes old by degrees,
and tends to decay. There is reason, there-
fore, to believe, that a ftruture so complex
as the world must be liable to the fame
law; and shall, at some period, undergo
the fame fate. Through many changes, the
earth has already passed; many lhocks it
has received, and still is often receiving. A
great portion of what is now dry land ap-
pears, from various tokens, to have been
once covered with water. Continents bear
the marks of having been violently rent,
and torn asunder from one another. New
islands have risen from the bottom of the
ocean; thrown up by the force of fubter-
raneous fire. Formidable earthquakes have,
in divers quarters, ihaken the globe; and

at

at this hour terrify, with their alarms, ma- SE RM.

XX.

ny parts of it. Burning mountains have,
for ages, been discharging torrents of flame;
and from time to time renew their explo-
sions, in various regions. All these circum-
frances show, that in the bowels of the
earth, the instruments of its dissolution are
formed. To our view, who behold only
its surface, it may appear firm and unlha-
ken; while its deftrucion is preparing in
secret. The ground on which we tread is
undermined. Combustible materials are
stored. The train is laid. When the mine
is to spring, none of us can foresee.

Accustomed to behold the course of na-

ture proceeding in regular order, we in-
dulge, meanwhile, our pleasures and pur-
suits with full security; and such awful
scenes as the convulsion of the elements,
and the dissolution of the world, are so-
reign to our thoughts. Yet, as it is certain
that some generation of men must witness
this great catafirophe, it is fit and proper
that we flould sometimes look forward to
it. Such profpecs may not, indeed, be al-

lurng

BERM. luring to the bulk of men. But they carry

xx.
hL-_
- a grandeur and solemnity, which are con-

genial to some of the most dignified feel-
ings in our nature; and tend to produce
elevation of thought. Amidst the circle of
levities and follies, of little pleasures and
little cares, which fill up the ordinary round
of life, it is necessary that we be occasional-
ly excited to attend to what is serious and
great. Such events as are now to be the
fubje& of. our meditation, awake the slum-
bering mind; check the licentiousness of
idle thought, and bring home our recollec-
tion to what most concerns us, as men and
Christians.

Let us think what afionifhment would

have filled our minds, and what devout c-
mnotions would have swelled our hearts, if
we could have been Ipedators of the crea-
tion of the world; if we had ieen the earth
when it arose at first qvitbout form and void,
and beheld its parts arranged by the divine
word; if we had heard the voice of the
Almighty, calling light to spring forth from
the darkness that was on the face of the deep;

if

if we had seen the fun arising, for the first SE ; M.

XX.

time, in the east with majestic glory; and L.yv
all nature instantly beginning to teem with
life. This wonderful scene, it was impof-
fible that any human eye could behold. It
was a spectacle afforded only to angels, and
superior spirits. But to a fpecacle no less
astonishing, the final dissolution of the
world, we know there shall be many hu-
man witnesses. The race of men living in
that last age, ihall fee the presages of the
approaching fatal day. There shall befigns
in the Jun, as the Scripture informs us, and
signs in the moon, and Jlars; upon the earth,
difrefs of nations, with perplexity; the sea
and the waves roaring *. They shall clear-
ly perceive,' that universal nature is tend-
ing to ruin. They ihall feel the globe
ihake; shall behold their cities fall; and
the final conflagration begin to kindle a-
round them.- Realising then this awful
scene; imagining ourselves to be already
fpetators of it, let us,

Luke, xxi. 25.
VOL. IlI. E e I. CON-

SERM. I. CONTEMPLATE the Supreme Being

directing the dissolution, as he direted the
original formationi of the world. He is
the great agent in this wonderful tranfac-
tion. It was by him foreseen. It was by
him intended; it entered into his plan
from the moment of creation. This world
was destined from the beginning to fulfil a
certain period; and then its duration was
to terminate. Not that it is any pleasure to
the Almighty, to display his omnipotence
in destroying the works which he has made;
but as for wife and good purposes the earth
was formed, so for wife and good. ends it
is diffolyed, when the time most proper for
its termination is come. He who, in the
counsels of his Providence, brings about so
many revolutions among mankind; who
changcth the times and the feaJons; who rai-
les up empires to rule, in fucceflion,. among
the nations, and at his pleasure puts an end
to their glory; hath also fixed a term for
the earth itself, the feat of all human great-
ness. He saw it meet, that after the pro-
bationary course was finiihed, which the

-~~~~~. * generations

generations of men were to accomplish, S RM..
their present habitation should be made to _x.
pass [away. Of the seasonableness of the
period when this change should take place,
no being can judge, except .the Lord of the
universe. These are counsels, into which
it is not ours to penetrate. But amidst this
great revolution of nature, our comfort is5
that it is a revolution brought about by
Him, the measures of whose government
are all founded in goodness.

It is called in the text, the day of the Lord;

a day peculiarly his, as known to him on-
ly; a day in which he shall appear with
uncommon and tremendous majesty. But
though it be the day of the terrors of the
Lord, yet from there terrors, his upright
and faithful fubjeds fliall have nothing to
apprehend. They may remain safe and
quiet fpecators of the threatening scene.
For it is not to be a scene of .blind confu-
sion; of universal ruin, brought about by
undesigning chance. Over the ihock of
the elements, and the wreck of nature,
Eternal Wisdom presides. According to its

E e 2 direction,

SE RM. direcion, the conflagration advances which
XX. is to consume the earth. Amidst every

convulsion of the world, God shall conti-
nue to be, as he was from the beginning,
the dwelling-place of his servants to all gene-
rations. The world may be loft to them;
but the ruler of the world is ever the fame,
unchangeably good and just. This is the
high tower to which they can fly, and be
safe. The righteous Lord loveth righteous-
ness; and under every period of his govern-
ment, his countenance beholdeth the upright.

II. LET us contemplate the dissolution of

the world, as the end of all human glory.
This earth has been the theatre of many a
great spectacle, and many a high atchieve-
ment. There, the wife have ruled, the:
mighty have fought, and conquerors have
triumphed. Its surface has been covered
with proud and stately cities. Its temples
and palaces have raised their heads to the
skies. Its kings and potentates, glorying
in their magnificence, have erected pyra-
mids, conftruaed towers, founded monu-

ments,

ments, which they imagined were to defy SERM.
all the assaults of time. Their inward
thought was, that their holses were to conti-
nue for ever, and their dwelling-places to all
generations. Its philosophers have explored
the secrets of nature; and flattered them-
selves, that the fame of their discoveries
was to be immortal.-Alas ! all this was
no more than a transient {how. Not only
the fqahion of the world, but the world it-
self, pafeth away. The day cometh, when
all the glory of this world shall be remem-
bered, only as a dream when one awaketh.
No longer shall the earth exhibit any of
those scenes which now delight our eyes.
The whole beautiful fabric is thrown down,
never more to arise. As soon as the de-
itroying angel has founded the last trum-
pet, the everlasting mountains fall; the
foundations of the world are lhaken; the
beauties of nature, the decorations of art,
the labours of industry, perifli in one com-
mon flame., The globe itself fhiall either
return into its ancient chaos, without form
and void;, or, like a star fallen from the

E e 3 heavens,

S ER M. heavens, lhall be effaced from the universe,

xx.
v.. and its place Jhall know it no more.

THIS day of the Lord, it is foretold in

the text, will come as a thief in the night;
that is, sudden and unexpeded. Mankind&
notwithstanding the presages given them,
ihall continue to the last in their wonted
security. Our Saviour tells us, that as in
the days of roah before the flood, they were
eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage, until the flood came, and took them
all away; so Jhall also the coming of the Son of
'nan be A.- How many projecs and de-
signs .hall that day suddenly confound?
What long-contrived schemes of pleasure
iall it overthrow ? What plans of cunning
and ambition shall it utterly blast? How
miserable they, whom it thall overtake in
the midst of dark conspiracies, of criminal
deeds, or profligate pleasures? In what
strong colours is their dismay painted, when
they are represented in the book of Reve-

* Matthew, Xxiv. 38.

lations,

lations, as calling to the hills and mountains S E RM.

X .

to fall 'o tfem and cover them ? - Such de- _
scriptions are apt to be confidered as exag-
gerated. The impression of those awful'
events is weakened bythe great distance of
time, at which our imagination places
them. But have not we had a striking'
image set before us, in our own age, of the
terrors which the day of the Lord flall pro-
duce, by those partial ruins of the world,
wvhidh the visitation of God has brought on
counttrie well known, and not removed very
far froth ourselves ? When in the miiiftof
peace, opulence, and 'ecurity, suddenly the
earth was felt by the terrified inhabitants to
tremble, with violent-agitation, below them;
when their houses began to shake over their
heads, and to overwhelm them with ruins;
the flood, at the fame time, to rife from its
bed, aid to swell around them; when en-
compassed with universal desolation, no
friend could aid another; no profpe& of
escape appeared; no place of refuge remain-
ed; how similar were such scenes of de-
ftrucion to the terrors of the last day?

E e What

S RM. What similar sensations of dread, and re-
,__ morse, and too late repentance, muff they

have excited among the guilty and pro-
fane?

To such formidable convulsions o^ na-

ture,. we, in- these happy islands, through
the blessing of Heaven, are strangers; and
itrangers to them may we long continue!
But however we may escape partial ruins
of the globe,, in its general and final ruin,
we also must be involved. To us must
come at last that awful day, when the fun
Thall for the last time arise, to perform his
concluding circuit round the world. They
how blest, whom that day ihall find em-
ployed in religious acts, or virtuous deeds;
in the conscientious discharge of the.duties
of life; in the exercise of due preparation
for the conclusion of human things, and for
appearing before the great Judge of the
world.! Let us now,

III. CONTEMPLATE the foul of man, as

remaining unhurt in the midst of this gene-
ra desolation, when the whole animal crea-

tion

tion perilhes, and the.whole frame of na- SE RM.
ture falls into ruins. What a high idea XX_
does this present, of the dignity pertaining
to the rational spirit! The world may fall
back into chaos; but, superior to matter,
and independent of all the changes of ma-
terial things, the foul continues the fame.
When the heavens pass away with a great
noise, and the elements melt with fervent heat,
the foul of man, Ramped for immortality,
retains its state unimpaired; and is capable
of flourishing in undecaying youth and vi-
gour. Very different indeed the condition
of human spirits is to be, according as
their different qualities have marked, and
prepared them, for different future man-
sions. But for futurity, they are all de-
ftined. Existence, still, is theirs. The ca-
pacity of permanent felicity they all pof-
fess; and, if they enjoy it not, it is owing
to themselves.

Here then, let us behold what is the true

honour and excellence of man. It coniifts
not in his body; which, beautiful or vigo-
rous as it may now seem, is no other than

a

SE R M. a 'fabrick of dust, quickly to rettrn to 'diif
x again.' It is'not derived-foni any cotinec-:

tion he can form with earthly tiings, which,
as we have seen, are all doomed to perish.
It -'corifts in that thinking; parit which is
fuifc'pible of intellectual improvement and'
moral worith; 'whlich was formed iafter the
image of God; which is capable of perpe-
tual progress in drawing 'iieaer to his ha-
tire; and Ihall piatake of the' divine -eter-
hity, when timi arid the world shall be no'

more. hThis

is all thatis iYeieCtable in man.'

By this alohne, he 'is iaifed ab'ove perishable:
fuibftaies,' and allied to thbfe that are ce-
leftial'and 'inmortal. This part o our na-
mire,.then, let us cutiivate with-care; and,
on its improvement reft our felf-eftimatibn.
if, on the contrary, suffering ourselves to
be wholly immersed in matter, pluiiged in
the dregs of fenfiialty, we behave as if we
were only. made for the body and its ani-
mial pleasures, how degenerate and bae 'do
wie become ?' Destined to furvite this whole
material system, sent foth to run the race of
i fim ortality and glory, ihall we-thus-abufe

our

our Maker's goodness, degrade our origi- SERM.

XX.

nal honour, and fink ourselves into defer- X_
ved misery ? It remains, that,

IV. WE contemplate the dissolution of

the world, as the introdution to a greater
and nobler system, in the government of
God. H'e, according to his promie, look for
new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwel-
leth righteofnefs''. Temporal things are
now to give place to things eternal. To
this earthly habitation is to ficceed the city
of the living God. The earth had com-
pleted the purpose for which it was created.
It had been employed as a theatre, on which
the huiman generations were successively to
come forth, and to fulfil their term of trial.
As long as the period of trial continued,
much obscurity was of course to cover the
counsels of Providence. It was appointed,
that all things flould appear as coming alike
to all; that the righteous flould seem of-
ten neglected by Heaven, and the wicked be

*2 Peter, iii. 13.

allowed

SERM. allowed externally to prosper; in order that
XX'. virtue and piety might undergo a proper

test; that it might be shown who were fin-
cere adherents to conscience, and who were
mere followers of fortune. The day which
terminates the duration of the world, ter-
minates all those seeming disorders. The
time of trial is concluded. The final dif-
crimination of characters is made. When
the righteous go to everlasting happiness,
and the wicked are dismissed into the re-
gions of punishment, the whole mystery of
human affairs is unravelled; and the con-
duc of Providence is justified to man..

Suited to a condition of trial was the state

and form of the world, which we now in-
habit. It was not designed to be a mansion
for innocent and happy spirits; but a dwell-
ing for creatures of fallen nature, and of
mixed characters. Hence, those mixtures
of pleasure and pain, of disorder and beau-
ty, with which it abounds. Hence, some
regions of the earth, presenting gay and
pleasing scenes; others, exhibiting.nothing
but ruggedness and deformity; the face of

nature,

nature, sometimes brightened by a serene SERM.
atmosphere, and a splendid fun; sometimes xx.
disfigured by jarring elements, and over-
cast with troubled fides. But far unlike
shall be the everlasting habitations of the
just: Though how they are formed, or
what objects they contain, is not given us
now to conceive; nor, in all probability,
would our faculties be equal to the con-
ception. The emblematical defcriptibns of
them in Scripture, are calculated to excite
high ideas of magnificence and glory. This
one particular we know with certainty, that
therein dwelleth righteoitfnefs; that is, com-
plete virtue and eternal order; and where-
ever these are found, the moRl perfect
sources are opened of joy and bliss. This
earth was never intended for more than the
outer court, the porch, through which the
righteous were to pass into the temple and
fanduary of the Divinity. W'hen that which
is perfec is come, that which is in part Jhall be
done away.

THE inference which follows from what

has

SERM. has been said on this subjet, cannot be so
xx.
c-vwy well expressed as in the words.of the Apostle,

in the verse immediately following the text;
feeing that all these things ,hall be d/olved,
what manner ofperfons opght we to be in all
holy conversation and godliness? Ought not
the important discoveries which have been
made to us, of the designs of the Almighty,
and of the destiny of man, to exalt our fen-
timents, and to purify our life from what
is vitious or vain? While we pursue the
business and cares of our present station,
and partake of the innocent pleasures which
the world affords, let us maintain that dig-
nity of character, which becomes immortal
beings; let us ad with that circumfpetion,
which becomes those who know they are
loon to stand before the judgement-feat of
the Son of God: In a word, let us study to
be what we would with to be found, if to
us the day of the Lord h ould come.

I KNOW it will occur, that the prospect of

that day cannot be expected to have much
influence on the present age. The events

of

of which J have treated, must needs, it will s E R M.
be said, belong to some future race of men. --
Many prophecies yet remain to be fulfilled.
Many preparatory events must take place,
before the world is ripe for final judgement.
,-Whether. this be the cafe or not, none
of us with certainty know.-But allow me
to remind you, that to each of us, an event
is approaching, and not far distant, which
shall prove of the fame effect, with the co-
ming of the day of the Lord. The day of
death is,. to every individual, the fame as
the day of the dissolution of the world.
The fun may continue to shine; but to
them who are laid in the grave, his light is
finally extinguilhed. The world may re-
main adtive, busy, and noisy; but to them,
all is silence. The voice which gives the
mandate, Return again to your duii, is the
fame with the found of the last trumpet.
Death fixes the doom of every one, finally
and irrevocably. This surely is an event
which none of us can remove in our
thoughts to a remote age. To-morrow,
to-day, the fatal mandate may be if-

filed.

SE RM. sued. rVatch therefore; be fober and vigi-
'va 'lant; ye know not at what hour the Son of

Man cometh.

HAVING now treated both of the crea-

tion and dissolution of the world, I cannot
conclude, without calling your thoughts to
the magnificent view, which these events
give us, of the kingdom and dominion of
the Almighty. With reverence we con-
template his hand in the signal difpenfa-
tions of Providence among men; deciding
the fate of battles; railing up, or overthrow-
ing empires; casting down the proud, and
lifting the low from the dust. But what
are such occurrences to the power and wis-
dom, which He displays in the higher re-
volutions of the universe; by his word,
forming, or dissolving worlds; at his plea-
sure, transplanting his creatures from one
world to another; that he may carry on
new plans of wisdom and goodness, and
'fill all space with the wonders of creation!
Succeflive generations of men have arisen
to poffefi the earth. By turns they have

passed

passed away, and gone into regions un- SERM.
known. Us he hath raised up, to occupy , i
their room. We too shall shortly disappear.
But human exiflence never perishes. Life.
only changes its form, and is renewed.
Creation is ever filling, but never full.
When the whole intended course of the ge-
nerations of men ihall be finished, then, as
a shepherd leads his flock from one pasture
to another, so the great Creator leads forth
the fouls which he has made, into new and
prepared abodes of life. They go'from this
earth to a new earth, and new heavens;
and still they remove, only from one pro-
vince of the divine dominion to another.
Amidst all those changes of nature, the great
Ruler himself remains, without variableness
,,rJhadow of turning. To him, these fuccef-
live revolutions of being are but as yeJterday
when it is pa/I. From his eternal throne, he
beholds worlds rising and passing away;
meafiures out, to the creatures who inhabit
them, powers and faculties suited to their
state; and distributes among them rewards
and punishments, proportioned to their ac-

VOL. III, F f tions.

SE R M. tions.-What an astonishing view do such
_jm nmeditations afford of the kingdom of God;

infinite in its extent; everlasting in its du-
ration; exhibiting, in every period, the
reign of perse& righteousness and wisdom!
Whho by Jearching can find out God ? who can
fnd out the Almighty to perfetion ? Great
and marvellous are all thy works, Lord God
Almighty ! Jtu and true are all thy ways,
thou King of faints !

;R.ITA S.
E I N I S.
