I / '2

SERMONS,
, BB Y

H U G H B L A IR. ID. D.
HUGH:~BLAP;'D.D.
One odlhe MINISTEIS of thlicHjGHCHU RCH,

. .S - s.' ' ''
PROFESSOR of RHETORICK and BELLES LETTRES

in the Univcrfity, of Edinburgh.

/ ,'

E D I N B U RGH:
Printed for WIL LIAM CREECH, Edinburgh ; and

W. STRAHAN, and T. CADELL, London.

M1, DC C, LXXVI I.

1M 1

I1 C'f b

# THE CONTENTS.

THE
CONTENTS.

Page.

SERMON I.

On the Union of Piety and Morality.
ACTS X. 4. Thy prayers and thine

alms are come up for a memorial
before God.

S E R M ON II.
On the Influence of Religion upon

Adversity.
PSAL. xxvii. 5. In the time of trou-

ble, he Jhall hide me in his pavi-
lion; in the secret of his tabernacle
J7f3ll he hide me; he Jhall set me up
iipon a rock. 2;

a2 SER-

S E R M 0 N III.
On the Influence of Religion upon

Profpcrity.

PsA... i. 3. Ie JIhall be lie a tree

planted by the rivers of iwter, that
brinrctth forth lhis fruit in his fi/a-
Jm ; ,his lcq alo Jlhall not wither,
and wvatfoevce rc tltJhail
proJp. iL. 57

SERMON IV.
On our imperfcdt Knowledge of a

Future State.

I CORINTII. xii. I2. For nowwwefIe
throu1gh a gljfs, darkI)'- 84

S F R M 0 N V.

On the Death of Christ.
JOHN xvii. i. .efius lifi up his CeCs

to heavcn, and ftid, Il, ther! the
boIlr is coite;- I I

S L R-

Page.
SE R M ON VI.

On Gcntlenefs.

.JAMES iii. 17. The u'ifdom that is
.ionr above, is-gentle- 144

S ERMON VII.

On the Disorders of the Paflions.
ESTIIER . 13. Yet all this availcth

me nsthlint,Jo long as IfJe MlorJdtcai
the 7ew Jitting at the King's gate. 172

SERMON VIII.
On our Ignorance of Good and Evil

in this Life.
EccL.ES.IST. vi. 12. Who knoucth

what is good for man in this life,
all the days of his vain life, which
he fpcndeth as a Jhadoulw ? 203

SE R-

Page.

S ER MON IX. ag

On religious Retirement.
I's. r.. iv. 4. (.inmuinn with your own

/Jcart, up)o your' bed, and be lill. 233

S 1 R M 0 N X.

On Devotion.
ACTS x. 2. (brnclius-ardevout man. 263

SERMON XI.

On the Duties of the Young.
'T, rus ii.. 6. ionZ men likcuifL ex-

hort to be J;bcr-mindld. 3

S E R M 0 N XII.
On the Duties and Consolations of

the Aged.
PROV. xvi. 31. 7he hoary head is a

crow, l J'sglo,:y, if it be fjuundl in the

,y,} ' ,, ,i?,.iJ/ij. 340

S E R-

S F R M 0 N XIII.

On the Power of Confcicnce.
Gr:NrIs:s xlii. 21, 22. A2 n the.' [lii,

one to another, IVe arc vcril' yguilty
concernitng our brothcr, in tht we
/l'w the angi/7, of lis ouil, lben
he bc/hnbt us; and we woulid not
hear: Theretore is this dijrtcs com.e
pon ius. And Rcuben t n/;t'trcd
them, firling, Spakc I not unto 1'u,
.firin, )Do not Jin agaifnlt the childl;
and ye would not hear ? Th7re/orc,
behold aljo, his blood is rcquircd. 374

SERMON XIV.
On the Mixture of Joy and Fear in

Religion.
PSAL. ii. l. Rejoice with trembling. 41o

SE R-

Pa'ge.

S F R M 0 N XV.
On the Motives to Conltancy in

Virtue.
GALAT. i. 9. And let us not be weary

in wcll-ldoin,; for in due /fean we
Jball reap, if we faint not. 41

SERMON I.

# SERMON I. On the Union of PIETY and MORALITY. ACTS x. 4. Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God.

t .<. i e !*

... I*
c | :'* j o o o t j 3

SERMON I.
On the Union of PIETY and MORALITY.

ACTS x. 4.
Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for

a memorial bejore God.

,K-+-* HE High and Lofty One who SERM.
+s T7 :* inhabitath eternity, dwelleth alo .
i :J': , with him that is of humble and

contrite heart. In the midit of

his glory, the Almighty is not inattentive
to the meaneit of his fubjecs. Neither
obscurity of flation, nor imperfection of
knowledge, fink those below his regard,
who worihip and obey him. Every prayer

A which

I . R I. . which they fend up fiom their fccrct re-
I tirc;illnt., i'. lilllened to by him; and every

work of charitv which they pertorm, hlow

.knw 1 lbvre' tI) th!: worldl, aitl ls his

I)otic:. 'I'!1T t:;: i\; l;c'lti a ligal inllance
of ti''i; ( :,l;, i()l:tI'.t} r tlh. In the city of
(Crle;rc , t'.:.:": . i ,-1: I

a Rom;an ccnturion,

1 i)ii::i:- o'".i'.r tf iintirior rank, a Gen-
tile, ' , .'r !)v 1 :-t! nor rcligion entitled
to t i ivi oi,,s

( thiC JcwilI nliation. But

lie wa , ;i dI-v,>;it andl b)clicvolcnt nlan
vhlo, L '.)1',Iil:; to his incalilre of rcldigius
knowl io.', 't1udlic to perform his duty,
praie!. to *(1.l /Li;'.r, nLt gave murh anlms
to the /rh'd,::. i li a

I ciara lmc r pa!lld not

unolh)f','lci b\i\ (;(dl. Sto hillhlv was it
honourcd, tilit ;:) tlils goo(l centurion an
angel wa;i :n: fioin hciven, in order to
dirct him to the means of fill infltruiiion
in the truth. The angel accolts him withl
this lalutation, (.nilrliul, 7Ty plrayers and
ti'e: azllri are come up Jfr a 7cCNmorial before

It is to tisi conjunction of pra'ers and
alns, that 1 pluipole now to dircc2 your

thoughts,

thoughts, as (deicrlbing the relcctable S E R M.
and amiable characrer of a man, as form- I-
ing the honour and the bleflid'iief of a
true Chriltian; piety joined with charity,
faith with good works, devotion with mo-
rality. These are things which Cod hath
conneted, and which it is impious in man
to separate. It is only when they remain
united, that they can come up as a grate-
ful memorial before God. a I ihall firll endea-
vour to ihow you, That alms without
prayers, or prayers without alms, mora-
lity without devotion, or devotion without
morality, are extremely defecive ; and
then ihall point out the happy cfledes of
their mutual union.

LET us begin with confidering the cafe

of a'ms without prayers; that is, of good
works without piety, or a proper iCnIf of
God and Religion. This is no rare nor
uncommon cale. With many, Virtue is,
or at leafl is pretended to be, a rcfieclable
and an honoured name, while Piety
founds meanly in their ears. They are

A 2 men

8 E R M. men of the world, and they claim to be

men of honour. They reft upon their
humanity, their public spirit, their pro-
bity, and their truth. They arrogate to
themselves all the manly and the active
virtues. But devout affections and reli-
gious duties they treat with contempt, as
founded on shadowy speculations, and fit
to employ the attention only of weak and
fuperititious minds. Now, in opposition
to such persons, I contend, that this ne-
gled of piety argues depravity of heart;
and that it infers an irregular discharge
of the duties of morality.

FIRST, It argues internal depravity; it

discovers a cold and a hard heart, which
can never be a good one. If there be any
impression which man is formed by na-
ture to receive, it is a sense of religion.
As soon as his mind opens to observation
and reflecion, he discerns innumerable
marks of his dependent state. He finds
himself placed, by rome superior power,
in a vast world, where the wisdom and

goodness

goodness of the Creator are conspicuous SERM.
on every fide. The magnificence, the
beauty and order of nature, excite him to
admire and adore. When he looks up
to that invisible hand which operates
throughout the universe, he is impressed
with reverence. When he receives blef-
sings which he cannot avoid ascribing to
divine goodness, he is prompted to grati-
tude. The exprelfions of those affeAcions
under the various forms of religious wor-
{hip, are no other than native effusions of
the human heart. Ignorance may mif-
lead, and superstition corrupt them; but
their origin is derived from sentiments
that are essential to man.

Cast your eyes over the whole earth.

Explore the most remote quarters of the
east or the weft. You may discover tribes
of men without policy, or laws, or cities,
or any of the arts of life: But no where
{hall you find them without some form
of religion. In every region you behold
the prostrate worihipper, the temple, and
the offering. Wherever men have existed,

they

s E R M. they have been linfible that some acknow-

_vv ledgment was due on their part, to the

Former of the world. If in their rudest
and inoit ignorant slate, this obligation
has been confecedl, how much is it in-
creased by the improvements of human
knowledge, but clpecially by the great
difioveries of the Chriltian revelation?
Whatevcr, either from reverence or from
gratitude, can excite men to the worship of
God, is by this revclation placed in such
a light as one flould think were sufficient
to over-awe the most thoughtless, and to
melt the molt obdurate mind.

Canst thou, then, pretend to be a man

of reason, nay, a man of virtue, and yet
continue regardless of one of the first and
chief dictates of human nature ? Where
is thy sensibility to what is right and fit,
if that loud voice which calls all nations
throughout the earth to religious homage,
has never been heard by thee ? Or, if it
has been heard, by what itrange and
talli refinements haft thou tlifled those
natural sentiments which it tends to a-

waken ?

waken? Calling thyself a son, a citizen, SERM.
a friend; claiming to be faithful and as-
feftionate in theie relations; haft thou
no sense of what thou oweft to thy first
Parent, thy highest Sovereign, thy great-
eft Bcnefator ? Can it be conlillent with
true virtue or honour, to value thyself up-
on thy regard to inferior obligations, and
yet to violate that which is the most iacred
and the molt ancient of all? When simple
inftind teaches the Tartar and the Indian,
together with his alms and good works
to join his prayers to that Power whom
he confiders as the source of good, llall
it be no reproach, in the most enlightened
state of human nature, and under the
purest dispensation of religion, to have
extinguished the sense of gratitude to Hea-
ven, and to flight all acknowledgment of
the great and the true God ? What does
such conduc imply, but either an entire
want, or a wilful suppression of some of
the best and most generous affecions be-
longing to human nature ?-Surely, there
must be an essential defef in that heart

which

SE R M. which remains cold and insensible, where

it ought to be affeced most warmly.
Surely, such a degree of depravity must
be lodged there, as is sufficient to taint
all the other i)rings of pretended virtue.

BUT besides this, I mutt contend, in

the second place, That where religion is
neglecded, there can be no regular nor
steady practice of the duties of morality,
The character, will be often inconsistent;
and Virtue placed on a basis too narrow to
support it, will be always loose and tot-
tering. For such is the propensity of our
nature to vice, so numerous are the tempt-
ations to a relaxed and immoral conduct,
that stronger restraints than those of mere
reason are neceirary to be imposed on
man. The sense of right and wrong, the
principle of honour, or the inftind of be-
nevolence, are barriers too feeble to with-
stand the strength of paflion. In the
tranquil seasons of life, these natural prin-
ciples may, perhaps, carry on the ordi-
nary course of social duties with some re-

1 ~ ~gularity,

gularity. But wait until some trying E R M.
emergence come. Let the confli& of pas-
sions arise. Let the heart be either wound-
ed by fore distress, or agitated by violent
emotions; and you lhall prelently fee that
virtue without religion is inadequate to
the government of life. It is destitute of
its proper guard, of its finneft support,
of its chief encouragement. It will fink
under the weight of misfortune; or will
yield to the solicitation of guilt.

The great motives that produce con-

ftancy and firmness of action must be of
a palpable and striking kind : A Divine
Legislator uttering his voice from heaven;
an Omniscient Witness beholding us in
all our retreats; an Almighty Governour
firctching forth his arm to punish or re-
ward, disclosing the secrets of the invisible
world, informing us of perpetual reft
prepared hereafter for the righteous, and
everlasting sorrows for the wicked: These
are the considerations which over-awe the
world, which support integrity and check
guilt. They add to virtue that solemnity

B which

E R M. which should ever characerize it. To
'v the admonitions of conscience they give

the authority of a law. Co-operating
with all the good dispositions of a pious
man, they strengthen and insure their in-
fluence. On his alms you can have no
certain dependence, who thinks not of
God, nor has ever joined prayer to his
charitable deeds. But when humanity is
seconded by piety, the spring from which
it flows is rendered, of course, more re-
gular and conftant.-In ihort, withdraw
religion, and you shake all the pillars of
morality. In every heart you weaken the
influence of virtue: And among the mul-
titude, the bulk of mankind, you over-
throw its power.

HAVING thus shewn that morality

without devotion is both defective and
unstable, I proceed to confider the other
extreme, of prayers without alms, devo-
tion without morality.

In every age the practice has prevailed,
of substituting certain appearances of piety

in

in the place of the great duties of huma- s E R M.
nity and mercy. Too many there have I
always been who flatter themselves with
the hope of obtaining the friendship of
their Creator, though they neglec to do
justice to their fellow-creatures. But such
persons may be assured, that their fuppof-
ed piety is altogether of a spurious kind.
It is an invention of their own, unknown
to reason, unknown in the word of God.
In scripture we are ever direced to try
our faith by our works, our love of God
by our love of men. We are directed to
confider piety as a principle which rege-
nerates the heart, and forms it to good-
ness. We are taught that in vain we ad-
dress any ads of homage to Christ, un-
less we do the things which he faith; and
that love, peace, gentlenesS, goodnefJ, meek-
ness and temperance, are not only the in-
juncions of his law, but the nativefruits
of hisfpirit *. If therefore while piety seems
ardent, morality shall decline, you have
full reason to believe that into that piety

B 2 some
Luke vi. 46. Gal. v. 22.

S E R M. some corrupting ingredients have entered.

1.
^wo And if ever your regard to morality shall

totally fail; if, while you make many
prayers, you give no alms; if, while you
appear to be zealous for God, you are
false or unjust to men; if you arc hard or
contraced in heart, severe in your cen-
fures, and oppressive in your condud;
then, conclude with certainty, that what
you had termed piety was no more than
an empty name. For as soon, according
to the scripture similitude, will bitter wa-
ters flow from a sueet fountain, or thitles
become the fruit of the vine, as such es-
seas be produced by genuine piety.

What you have called by that name,

resolves itself into one or other of three
things. Either it is a hypocritical form
of godlinels, assumed in order to impoie
on the world; or, which is the most fa-
vourable supposition, it is a transient im-
pression of ferioufiies, an accidental melt-
ing of the heart, which pajjs away like
the moruing cloud and the earl) dew; or,
which I am afraid is too often the cafe,

it

it is the deliberate refuge of a deluded and s E RM.
fiupertitious, but at the fame time a cor-
rupted mind. For all men, even the moll
depraved, are subject, more or less, to
compundtions of conscience. It has never
been in their power to withdraw totally
beyond the reach of that warning voice,
which tells them that iomething is necef-
fary to be done, in order to make their
peace with the Ruler of the world. But,
backward at the fame time to resign the
gains of dishonesty, or the pleasures of vice,
averse from fubmillion to that sacred law
which enjoins righteoufneli in its whole
extent, they have often attempted to make
a obrt of composition with Heaven; a com-
position, which, though they dare not a-
vow it words, lurks in secret, at the bot-
tom of many a heart. If God will only
dispense with lome articles of obedience,
they will repay him with abundant ho-
mage: If they fail in good practice, they
will fludy to be found in belief; and, by
the number of their prayers, will atone,
in tome measure, for their deficiency in
charitable deeds.

But

S E R M. But the attempt is as vain, as it is im-
,I ^ pious. From the simplest and plainest

principles of reason it must appear, that
religious worship, disjoined from justice
and virtue, can upon no account what-
ever find acceptance with God. To what
purpose is the multitude of your facrifces un-
to me ? faith the Lord. Bring no more vain
oblations. Incense is an abomination unto me.
The new moons and sabbaths, the calling of
alremblies, I cannot away with; it is iniqui-
ty, even thefolemn meeting*.-Ceafe, foolili
and impious man! Cease to confider the
Almighty as a weak or vain-glorious be-
ing, who is to be appeared by thy devout
prostrations and thy humble words; or
to be gratified by the parade and oftenta-
tion of external worthip. What is all thy
worihip to him ? Will he eat the flef of
thy sacrifices, or drink the blood of offered
goats ? Was worihip required of thee,
dost thou think, upon his account, that
thou mighteft bring any increase to his
glory and felicity by thy weak and infig-

nificant
' b. i. 11, 14.

nificant praises? Sooner mighteft thou S E RM.
increase the splendor of the fun by a L
lighted taper, or add to the thunder by
thy voice. No: It is for the fake of man,
not of God, that worihip and prayers are
required; not that God may be rendered
more glorious, but that man may be made
better; that he may be confirmed in a
proper sense of his dependent ifate, and
acquire those pious and virtuous difpofi-
tiens by which he draws near to God.

Of all the principles in religion, one

should take this to be the most evident;
and yet, frequent admonitions are needed
to renew the impression of it upon man-
kind. For what purpose did God place
thee in this world, in the midst of human
society, but that as a man among men
thou mighteft cultivate humanity; that
each in his place might contribute to the
general welfare; that as a spouse, a bro-
ther, a son, or a friend, thou mighteft at
thy part with an upright and a tender
heart; and thus aspire to resemble Him
who ever consults the good of his crea-

tures,

S E R M. tures, and whose tender mercies are over

all hli; torks ? And dareft thou, who
haft been sacrificing unflirfjicious inno-
cznce to thy loolc pleafurcs; thou, who
haft bcen diflturbing the repofc of focicty
by thine ambition or craft; thou, who, to
incrcal thy treaftlres, haft been making
thc widow. and the orphan weep; dareft
thou approach God with thy worship and
thy prayers, and entertain the hope that
upon thee le will look down in peace ?
Will the God of order and juflice accept
filch poor compenfition for his violated
laws ? Will the God of love regard the
lfrvices of one who is an enemy to his
creatures ? Shall a cornrpter of the focicty
of men aspire to the habitations of God ?
-Believe it, HI that fJith he Ioveth God,
n;;? iove hir brother alS. CenJa to io evil;
:arn to do well. Seek judgment ; relieve
te prd, the

ppreid, j t therlefs, pleadfir

th: twildow: And then, Draw nigh to God,
an.! 1h: :i-ll lrrnw nirh to thee; call upon
him in the d, ty of trouble, and he will annfuer
thee. Thy prayers and thine alms shall

then

then ascend, in joint memorial, before SE R M.
the Most High. L.

I HAVE now shown the evil of maim-

ing and splitting religion; of dividing
asunder two things, which though in
theory they may be separated, yet in
practice must always co-exist if either of
them be real, Devotion to God, and Cha-
rity to men. Let us confider next the
happy effects of their union.

Their union forms the consistent, the

graceful, the refpedable characer of the
real Christian, the man of true worth. If
you leave either of them out of your fy-
ftem, even though you excel in the other,
you can stand trial only in one point of
view. It is only on one fide your cha-
racer is fair; on the other, it will always
be open to much reproach. And as you
dishonour yourselves, so you do great in-
justice to religion. For by dividing its
parts from one another, you never fail to
expose it to the censure of the world:
And perhaps, by this fort of partial and

C divided

SE R M. divided goodness, religion has suffered

more in the esteem of mankind, than by
open profligacy. The unbeliever will
scoff at your picty, when he fees you ne-
gligent of moral duties. The bigot will
run down all morality, when he fees you
pretending to be a follower of virtue,
though you be a dcflpiler of God. Where-
as he who fears God, and is at the fame
time jult and beneficent to men, exhibits
religion to the world with full propriety.
It Ihincs in his conduct with its native
qilendor; and its rays throw a glory
round him. His character is above re-
proach. It is at once amiable and vene-
rable. Malice itself is afraid to attack
him; and even the worst men refped
and honour him in their hearts.

This too is the man whose life will be

most peaceful and happy. He who fails
materially either in piety or in virtue, is
always obnoxious to the anguiih of re-
morse. His partial goodness may flatter
him in the day of superficial observation;
but when solitude or diitrefs awakens the

powers

powers of refletion, he {hall be made to S E R M.
feel, that one part of duty performed L
atones not for another which is neglected.
In the midst of his prayers the remem-
brance of injustice will upbraid him with
hypocrisy; and in the distribution of his
alms, the prayers which the poor put up
for him will make him blush for his ne-
glea of God. Conscience will supply the
place of the hand coming forth to write
over against him on the wall, Thou art
weighed in the balance, and art found want-
ing *. Whereas he who holds faith and a

ood conscience together, who attends equal-
ly to the discharge of his duty towards
God and towards man, enjoys, as far as
human imperfecion allows, the sense of
fairness and conliftency in conduct, of in-
tegrity and soundness of heart.

The man of mere morality is a stranger

to all the delicate and refined pleasures of
devotion. In works of beneficence and
mercy, he may enjoy fatisfacion. But his
fatisfadion is destitute of that glow of as-

C 2 fedioi
Dan. v. 27.

8 E R M. section which enlivens the feelings of one

who lifts his heart at the fame time to
the Father of the universe, and confiders
himself as imitating God. The man a-
gain who refts bolely on devotion, if that
devotion open not his heart to humanity,
not only remains a firanger to the plea-
fures of beneficence, but must often un-
dergo the pain arising from bad pallions.
But unite together beneficence and devo-
tion, and you pour upon the man in
whom they are united, the full pleasures
of a good and pure heart. His alms con-
ned him with men; his prayers with
God. Ile looks without dismay on both
worlds. All nature has to him a benign
aspet. If engaged in acive life, he is the
friend of men; and he is happy in the
exertions of that r'iendfhip. If left in
retirement, he walks among the works of
nature, as with God. Every object is en-
'ivened to him by the sense of the divine
presence. Every where he traces the be-
neficent hand of the Author of nature;
and every where, with glowing heart,

he

he hears and anfwcrs his fccret voice. s E M.
When he looks up to heaven, he rejoices
in the thought that there dwells that God
whom he fervcs and honours; that Sa-
viour in whom he trusts; that Spirit of
grace from whose inspiration his piety and
his charity flow. When he looks around
him on the world, he is toothcd with the
pleasing remembrance of the good offices
which he has done, or at Icaft has studied
to do, to many who dwell there. How
comfortable the reflecion, that him no
poor man can upbraid for having with-
held his due; him no unfortunate man
can reproach for having fcen and defpiifed
his sorrows; but that on his head are de-
scending the prayers of the needy and the
aged; and that the hands of those whom
his protecion has supported, or his boun-
ty has fed, are lifted up in fecrct to bless
him !

Life passed under the influence of such

dispositions, naturally leads to a happy
end. It is not enough to fay, that faith
and piety, joined with active virtue, con-

ftitutc

E R M. ftitute the requisite preparation for hea-

ven. They in truth begin the enjoyment
of heaven. In every state of our existence
they form the chief ingredients of felicity.
Hence they are the great marks of Chri-
ftian regeneration. They arc the figna-
ture of that Holy Spirit, by which good
men are said to be Jfaled unto the day of
redemption.-Of the estimation in which
they are held by God, the text affords a
striking proof. Amidst that infinite va-
riety of human events which pass under
his eye, the prayers and the alms of Cor-
nelius attracted his particular notice. He
remarked the amiable dispositions which
rose in the heart of this good man. But
he saw that they were yet impcrfet,
while he remained unenlightened by the
principles of the Christian religion. To
remove this obftnirion to his rising
graces, and to bring him to the full
knowledge of that God whom lie fought
to honour, he was favoured with a super-
natural message from heaven. While the
princes of the earth were left to ad by

the

the counsels of their own wisdom; while, s E R M.
without interposition from above, Ge-
nerals conquered or fell, according to the
viciflitude of human things; to this good
centurion an angel was commiflioned
from the throne of God.

What then can I fay more or higher in

praise of this blessed characer, than that
it is what God delights to honour? Men
single out as the objects of diflincdion, the
great, the brave, or the renowned. But he
wzhofeeth not as man eeth, pafling by those
qualities which often ihine with false
splendor to human observation, looks to
the inward principles of acion; to those
principles which form the essence of a
worthy character; and which, if called
forth, would give birth to whatever is
laudable or excellent in condu.--Is there
one, though in humble station or obscure
life, who feareth God and zworketh righ-
teoufnefs; whose prayers and alms, pro-
ceeding in regular unaffeced tenour, be-
speak the upright, the tender, the devout
heart ?-Those alms and prayers come

up

SE R I. up in memorial before that God who is

no r /j,'ter a/ per/fs. Him the Almighty
beholds from his throne with compla-
ccncv. Divine illumination is ready to
inltnidl him. Angels miniltcr to him.
They now mark him out on earth as their
filture associate; and for him they make
ready in paradifi the white robes, the
palms, and the f/eptres of the just.

To this honour, to this blellcdnefs, let

our hearts continually aspire; and through-
out the whole of life, let those iblemn and
and sacred words, with which 1 conclude,
found in our ears, and be the great direc-
tory of our conduct : He hath Jhewed
thee, 0 man, what is good; and what doth
the Lord thy God require of thee, but-to do
jif!lr, and love mercy-and to walk humbly
with thy God ?

Micab vi. 8.

SER-
I

# SERMON II. On the Influence of Religion upon Adversity. PSALM xxvii. 5. In the time of trouble, he shall hide me in his pavilion; in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me up ...

25

S E RM 0 N II.
On the Influence of Religion upon Adversity.

PSALM xxvii. 5.
In the time of trouble, he Jh7all hide me in

his pavilion ; in the secret of his taber-
nacle Jhall he hide me; he Jhall set me
up upon a rock.

H E life of man has always been a S E R M.
very mixed Rfate, full of uncertainty IL

and vicissitude, of anxieties and fears. In
every religious audience, there are many
who fall under the denomination of the
unfortunate; and the reit are ignorant
how soon they may be called to join them.
For the prosperity of no man on earth is
stable and afliured. Dark clouds may soon
gather over the heads of those whose sky
is now most bright. In the midst of the

D deceitful

S E R M. deceitful calm which they enjoy, the flornn

that is to overwhelm them has perhaps
already hegun to ferment. If a man live
mninvy ),ei,'s, .l.l r'.c'i'c in them a11l; yet let
lI,,! rI',i::nl,:. tlh ila,'s of darknlcf, for they
Jhrll 1', ,::'nI '.

J Iclcc, to a thoughtful mind, no study

c;an ;;pear more important, than how to
Ibe liitably prepared for the misfortunes
of life ; so as to contemplate them in pro-
fplcct withoult difnay, and, if they must
befal, to bear them witl the least dejeeion.
Throughout every age, the wifdiom of the
wile, the trcafilres of the rich, and the
power of the mighty, have been employed
either in guarding their state against the
approach of dittrcs, or in rendering them-
ielves less vulnerable by its attacks. Power
has endeavoured to remove adversity to a
distance: Philosophy has tludied, when it
Irew nigh, to conquer it by patience ; and
Wealth has fought out every pleasure that
can compensate or alleviate pain.

While the wi(lom of the world is thus
occupied, religion has been no less atten-

tive
Ecclcf. xi. 8.

tive to the fame important object. It in- SERM.
forms us in the text, of a pavilion whlich II
God erecs to 1helter his servants in the
time of trouble, of afecret place in his taber-
nacle into which he brings them, of a
rock on which he Jets them up; and else-
where it tells us of a lield anl a buckler
which he spreads before them, to cover
themfrom the terror by night, and the ar-
row thatflieth by day. Now, of what na-
ture are those instruments of defence
which God is represented as providing
with such solicitous care for those who
fear him? Has he reared up any bul-
warks, impregnable by misfortune, in
order to separate the pious and virtuous
from the reft of mankind, and to screen
them from the common disasters of life?
No: To 'thoie disasters we behold them
liable no less than others. The defence
which religion provides, is altogether of
an internal kind. It is the heart, not the
outward state, which it profeffcs to guard.
When the time of trouble comes, as come
it must to all, it places good men under

D 2 the

s E R M. the pavilion of the Almighty, by afford-
_1L ing them that security and peace which

arise from the belief of divine protection.
It brings them into thefecret of his taber-
nacle, by opening to them sources of con-
folation which are hidden from others. By
that strength of mind with which it en-
dows them, it Jets them uip upon a rock, a-
gainlt which the tempest may violently
beat, but which it cannot shake.

How far the comforts proceeding from

religion merit those high titles under
which they are here figuratively defcrib-
ed, I shall in this discourse endeavour to

ohow. I shall for this end compare to-

gether the situation of bad men and that
of the good, when both are suffering the
misfortunes of life; and then make such
improvement as the subjec' will naturally
fugget.

I. RELIGION prepares the mind for en-

countering with fortitude, the most severe
shocks of adversity; whereas vice, by its
natural influence on the temper, tends to

produce

produce dejection under the slightest trials. s IE RM.
While worldly men enlarge their poflef- "
sions, and extend their connections, they
imagine that they are ftrengthcning them-
selves against all the poflible viciflitudes of
life. They fay in their hearts, AMy moun-
tain flands frong, and IJhall never be mov-
ed. But so fatal is their delusion, that in-
stead of itrengthening, they are wcaken-
ing that which only can support them
when those vicissitudes come. It is their
mind which must then support them; and
their mind, by their sensual attachments,
they corrupt and weaken. Addicted with
intemperate fondness to the pleafurcs of
the world, they incur two great and cer-
tain evils; they both exclude themselves
from every resource except the world,
and they increase their fenfibilitv to every
blow which comes upon them from that
quarter.

They have neither principles nor temper

which can tfand the assault of trouble.
They have no principles which lead them
to look beyond the ordinary rotation of

cvents;

S E R b. events; and therefore, when misfortunes

involve them, the profpecl must be com-
fortlels on every fide. Their crimes have
disqualified them for looking up to the
assistance of any higher power than their
own ability, or for relying on any better
guide than their own wisdom. And as
from principle they can derive no tup-
port, so in a temper corrupted by prof-
perity they find no relief. They have
loft that moderation of mind which en-
ables a wife man to accommodate himself
to his situation. Long fedwith false hopes,
they are exasperated and stung by every
disappointment. Luxurious and effemi-
nate, they can bear no uneafincfs: Proud
and presumptuous, they can brook no
opposition. By nourilhing dispositions
which so little filit this uncertain state,
they have infused a double portion of bit-
ternefs into the cup of woe; they have
sharpened the edge of that sword which
is lifted up to finite them. Strangers to all
the temperate satisfactions of a good and
a pure mind; Rtrangers to every pleasure

except

except what was seasoned by vice or va- s E R M.
nity, their advcrfitv is to the last degree
disconsolate. Flourishing health, and fa-
vourable fortune, were the two pillars on
which they refted. Shake either of them;
and down falls their whole edifice of hope
and comfort. Prostrate and forlorn, they
are left on the ground; obliged to join
with the man of Ephraim in his abjed
lamerltation, They have taken away my gods
which I had made, and what have I mre * ?
-Such are the causes to which we muf
ascribe the broken spirits, the peevish tem-
per, and impatient passions, that so often
attend the declining age, or falling for-
tunes of vicious men.

But how different is the condition of a

truly good man in those trying situations
of life ! Religion had gradually prepared
his mind for all the events of this incon-
ftant state. It had inftruCed him in the
nature of true happiness. It had early
weaned him from the undue love of the
world, by discovering to him its vanity,
and by setting higher profpeds in his

view.
Judges x iii. 24.

SE R M. view. Afflitions do not attack him by

IL furprite, and therefore do not overwhelm

him. He was equipped for the storm, as
well as the calm, in this dubious naviga-
tion of life. Under those conditions he
knew himself to be brought hither, that
lie w.s not to retain always the enjoyment
of what lie loved: And therefore he is not
overcome by difi)ppointment, when that
which is mortal, dies; when that which
it mutable, begins to change; and that
which he knew to be transient, passes

away.

All the principles which religion teaches,

and all the habits which it forms, are fa-
vourable to strength of mind. It will be
found, that whatever purifies, fortifies al-
so the heart. In the courie of living rigb-
tefly,; soberly and godly, a good man ac-
quires a Hteady and well-governed spirit.
Trained, by God's grace, to enjoy with
moderation the advantages of the world,
neither lifted up by success, nor enervated
with fcnfuality, he meets the changes in
his lot without unmanly dejehion: He is

Xi ~ inured

*

inured to temperance and restraint. Hehas s E RM.
learned firmness and f'elf-command. He 1
is accustomed to look up to that Supreme
Providence which diflpofs of human as-
fairs, not with reverence only, but with
trust and hope.

The time of prosperity was to him not

merely a season of barren joy, but pro-
ductive of much useful improvement.
He had properly cultivated his mind: He
had stored it with useful knowledge, with
good principles, and virtuous dispositions.
These resources remain entire, when the
days of trouble come. They remain with
him in sickness, as in health; in poverty,
as in the midst of riches; in his dark and
solitary hours, no less than when fur-
rounded with friends and gay bociety.
From the glare of prosperity, he can,
without dejetion, withdraw into the
shade. Excluded from several advantages
of the world, he may be obliged to retreat
into a narrower circle; but within that
circle he will find many comforts left.
His chief pleasures were always of the

E calm,

s R. R M. calm, innocent, and temperate kind; and

over thefc, the changes of the world have
the leat power. His mind is a kingdom
to him; and he can still enjoy it. The
world did not bestow upon him all his
enjoyments; and therefore it is not in the
power of the world, by its most cruel at-
tacks, to carry them all away.

II. TiHE diltreffes of life are alleviated to

good men by reflecions on their palt con-
(lut ; while, by such reflccTons, they are
highly aggravated to the bad. During
the gay and acive periods of life, finners
elude, in some mcafure, the-force of con-
fcicnce. Carried round in the whirl of as-
fairs and pleafurcs; intent on contrivance,
or eager in pursuit; amused by hope, or
elated by enjoyment, they are iheltered
by that croud of trifles which surrounds
them, from firious thought. But con-
fciencc is too great a power to remain al-
ways flppreffed. There is in every man's
life, a period when he shall be made to
stand forth as a real objeCt to his own

view:

*

view: And when that period comes, Wo s E R M.
to him who is galled by the fight! In the I.
dark and solitary hour of distress, with a
mind hurt and fore from fomc recent
wound of fortune, how flhall he bear to
have his character for the first time dif-
closed to him, in that humiliating light
under which guiit will necessarily present
it? Then, the recollection of the past be-
comes dreadful. It exhibits to him a life
thrown away on vanities and follies, or
consumed in flagitiousness and fin; no
station properly supported; no material
duties fulfilled. Crimes which once had
been eaffy palliated, rife before him in
their native deformity. The sense of guilt
mixes itfclf with all that has befallen him.
He beholds, or thinks that he beholds,
the hand of the God whom he hath of-
fended, openly stretched out againtl him.
-At a season when a man stands most in
need of support, how intolerable is the
weight of this additional load, aggravat-
ing the deprcffion of disease, dilappoint-
mcnt, or old age! How miserable his

E 2 flatc,

S E R M. state, who is condemned to endure at once

IL the pangs of guilt, and the vexations of

calamity ! The Jirit of a man may fuflain
his infirmities; but a wounded spirit, who
can bear ?

Whereas, he who is blessed with a clear

confcicncc, enjoys, in the worst conjunc-
tures of human life, a peace, a dignity, an
elevation of mind peculiar to virtue. The
tcllimony of a good conscience is indeed
to be always diltinguifled from that
prcfumptuous boadt of innocence, which
every good Christian totally disclaims.
The better he is, he will be the more
humble, and lenfible of his failings. But
though he acknowledge that he can claim
nothing from God, upon the footing of
desert, yet he can trust in his merciful
acceptance through Jesus Christ, accord-
ing to the terms of the gospel. He can
hope that his prayers and his alms have
come up in memorial before God. The piety
and virtue of his former life were as feeds
sown in his prosperous tlate, of which he
reaps the fruics in the season of adversity.

The

The riches, the pleasures, and the fiiends S E RM
of the world, may have made vwigy s to v
thenmljher, and flown awnay. But the im-
provement which he made of those advan-
tages while they lasted, the temperate
spirit with which he enjoyed them, the
beneficent acions which he performed,
and the good example which he set to
others, remain behind. By the memory
of there, he enjoys his prosperity a fe-
cond time in rcflection; and perhaps this
second and reflected enjoyment is not in-
ferior to the first. It arrives at a more
critical and needful time. It afibrds him
the high fatisfaclion of having extraced
lasting pleasure from that which is short;
and of having fixed that which by its na-
ture was changing.-" If my race be
"now about to end, I have this comfort,
" that it has not been run in vain. I have
"fought the good fight; I have kept the
"faith. My mind has no load. Futurity
" has no terrors. I have endeavoured to
"do my duty, and to make my peace
" with God. I leave the reft to Heaven."

Thefc

SE R M. These are the reflections which to the up-

right nake light aritJ in darkness; reflec-
tions, which clear the lonely house of vir-
tuous poverty, and attend the confcien-
tious sufferer into prison or exile; which
tooth the complaints of grief, lighten the
pressure of old age, and furnish to the
bed of ficknelf a cordial of more grateful
relish, and more sovereign virtue, than
any which the world can afford.

Look abroad into life, and you will

find the general sense of mankind bearing
witness to this important truth, thit mind
is superior to fortune; that what oie*eels
within, is of much greater importait
than all that befals him without. .LetL
man be brought into some fich severe'id
trying situation, as fixes the attention of
the public on his behaviour. The first
question which we put concerning him, is
not, What does he susser ? but, How does
he bear it ? Has he a quiet mind? or, Does
he appear to be unhappy within ? If we
judge him to be composed and firm, re-
signed to Providence, and supported by

conscious

conscious integrity, his characer rifes, s E R M.
and his misery lessens in our view. We .
esteem and admire, rather than pity him.
Recollect what holy men have endured
for the fake of conscience, and with what
chearfulnefs they have suffered. On the
other hand, when conscience has concur-
red with outward misfortunes in diftref-
fmg the guilty, think of the dreadful
consequences which have cnfued. How
often, upon a reverse of fortune, after ab-
used prosperity, have they madly hurried
themsves over that precipice from which
there is no return; and, in what nature
nioft abhors, the voluntary extincion of
l.li iive fought relief from that torment
ofrefletion, which was become too great
for them to bear ?

Never then allow yourselves to imagine

that misfortunes alone form the chief mi-
fery of man. None but the guilty are
completely miserable. The misgiving and
distrust, the accusations and reproaches of
their minds, the sense of having drawn
down upon their heads the evils which

they

SE R M. they susser, and the terrifying expecda-

tion of more and worse evils to come;
theef are the cflcntial ingredients of hu-
man milSry. They not only whet the
edge, but they envenom the darts of as-
flition, and add poison to the wound.
Whereas, when misfortunes aflail a good
man, they carry no such fatal auxiliaries
in their train. They may tear the furfacc
of his foul; but there is a strength with-
in, which refills their farther impression.
The constitution b, his mind is found.
The world lan inflict hpon it no wounds,
but what admit of cure.

III. ILL men in the time of trouble can

look up to no Protetor, while good men
commit themfclves, with trust and hope,
to the care of Heaven. The human mind,
naturally feeble, is made to feel all its
weakness by the pressure of adversity.
Dejeded with evils which overpower its
strength, it relies no longer on itself. It
calts every where around a wishing ex-
ploring eye, for some shelter to screen,

I~ frome

some power to uphold it; and if, when SERM.
abandoned by the world, it can find no- I.
thing to which it may fly in the room of
the world, its state is truly forlorn. Now,
whither should the ungodly, in this fitua-
tion, turn for aid? After having contend-
ed with the storms of adverse fortune till
their spirits are exhausted, gladly would
they retreat at last to the fanduary of re-
ligion. But that sanctuary is shut against
them; nay, it is environed with terrors.
They behold there, oar a Protedor to
whom they can fly, but a judge whom
they dread; and in those momn ts when
they need his friendihip the m*, they
are reduced to deprecate his wrath. If he
once called when they refused, and fretch-
ed out his hands when they would not re-
gard, how much reason have they to fear,
that he will leave them now to eat the
fruit of their own ways, and to be filled with
their own devices; that he will laugh at
their calamity, and mock when their fear
cometh ?

F But

S E R h. But of all the thoughts which can enter

nr into the mind, in the season of distress,

the belief of an interest in his favour
who rules the world is the most soothing.
Every form of religion has afforded to
virtuous men some degree of this confo-
lation. But it was reserved for the Chri-

ftian revelation to carry it to its highest
point. For it is the dired scope of that
revelation, to accommodate itself to the
circumltances of man, under two main
views; as guilty in the fight of God, and
as struggling with the evils of the world.
Under the former, it discovers to him a
Mediator and an atonement; under the
latter, it promises him the Spirit of grace
and consolation. It is a fytlem of com-
plete relief, extending from our spiritual
to our temporal distresses. The fame hand
which holds out forgiveness to the peni-
tent, and assistance to the frail, dispenses
comfort and hope to the afflicted.

It deserves your particular notice, in

this view, that there is no character which
God more frequently assumes to himself

in

in the sacred writings, than that of the pa- S E R M
tron of the distressed. Compassion is that I.
attribute of his nature which he has cho-
fen to place in the greatest variety of
lights, on purpose that he might accom-
modate his majesty to our weakness, and
provide a cordial for human griefs. He
is the hearer of all prayers; but with par-
ticular attention he is represented as lift-
ening to the cry of the poor, and regard-
ing the prayer of the deflitute. All his crea-
tures he governs with justice and wisdom;
but he takes to himself, in a special man-
ner, the charge of executing judgment for
the opprefed, of protecting theJ ranger, of
delivering him who hath no helperfrom the
hand of thefpoiler. For the opprejfon of the
poor, andfor thefighing of the needy, will I
arife,faith the Lord, tofet him infafct from
him that pufeth at him. He is the Father
of thefatherlefs, and the Judge of the wi-
dow in his holy habitation. He raifeth up
them that are bowed down. He dwelletb
with the contrite. He healeth the broken in
heart. For he knoweth our frame; he re-

F 2 memberetb

E£ RM. mmnberetb that we are duft*.----If the
I wisdom of his providence saw it necessary

to place so many of his creatures in an
affliced state, that state, however, he com-
miferates. He disdains not to point out
himself as the refuge of the virtuous and
pious; and to invite them, amidst all their
troubles, to pour out their hearts before
him. Those circumltances which estrange
others from them, interest him the more
in their situation. The negleft or scorn
of the world expose them not to any con-
tempt in his fight. No obscurity conceals
them from his notice; and though they
Should be forgotten by every friend on
earth, they are remembered by the God
of heaven. That sigh, heaved from the
afflited bosom, which is heard by no hu-
man ear, is listened to by him; and that
tear is remarked, which falls unnoticed
or despised by the world.

Such views of the Supreme Being im-
part the most sensible consolation to every

pious

* Pal. ix. 8.-cii. 17.-cxlvi. 7-lxviii. 5.-clvii. 3.
ciii. 14.-(-c.

pious heart. They present his adminiftra- s F R M
tion under an asped so mild and benign, I
as in a great measure to disperse the gloom
which hangs over human life. A good
man ads with a vigour, and fuffcrs with
a patience more than human, when he
believes himself countenanced by the
Almighty. Injured or oppressed by the
world, he looks up to a Judge who
will vindicate his cause; he appeals to a
Witness who knows his integrity; he
commits himself to a Friend who will never
forsake him. When tired with the vexa-
tions of life, devotion opens to him its
quiet retreat, where the tumults of the
world are hushed, and its cares are loft in
happy oblivion; where the wicked ceajc
from troubling, and the weary are at ref.
There his mind regains its serenity; the
agitation of passion is calmed; and a soft-
ening balm is infused into the wounds of
the spirit. Difclofmg to an invisible Friend
those secret griefs which he has no encou-
ragement to make known to the world, his
heart is lightened. He does not feel him-

self

S E R M. self solitary or forsaken. He believes God

to be present with him, and the Holy
Ghost to be the inspirer of his confolati-
ons. From that ficret place of the divine
tabernacle, into which the Text represents
him as admitted, he hears this voice issue,
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will
answer thee. Fear not; for I am with thee.
Be not dsinayed; for I am thy God. And as
he hears a voice which speaks to none but
the pure in heart, so he beholds a hand
which finners cannot fee. He beholds the
hand of Providence conducting all the
hidden springs and movements of the uni-
verle; and with a secret, but unerring ope-
ration, direcing every event towards the
happincfs of the righteous. Those afflici-
ons which appear to others the messengers
of the wrath of Heaven, appear to him the
ministers of sanctification and wisdom.
Where they discern nothing but the hor-
rors of the tempest which surrounds them,
his more enlightened eye beholds the an-
gel who rides in the whirlwind, and di-
rects the form. Hence a peace keeping the

mind

mind and heart, which is no where to be s E R M.
found but under the pavilion of the Al- It
mighty.

IV. Good men are comforted under

their troubles by the hope of heaven; while
bad men are not only deprived of this hope,
but distressed with fears arifmg from a fu-
ture state. The foul of man can never di-
vest itself wholly of anxiety about its fate
hereafter. There are hours when even to
the prosperous, in the midst of their plea-
fures, eternity is an awful thought. But
much more when those pleasures, one after
another, begin to withdraw; when life al-
ters its form, and becomes dark and chear-
less; when its changes warn the most in-
considerate, that what is so mutable will
soon pass entirely away; then, with pun-
gent earnestness comes home that question
to the heart, Into what world are we next
to go ?-How miserable the man, who, un-
der the diftraations of calamity, hangs
doubtful about an event which so nearly
concerns him; who, in the midst of doubts

and

S E R . and anxieties, approaching to that awful

1i boundary which separates this world from

the next, {hudders at the dark profped
before him; witfling to exist after death,
and vet afraid of that existence; catching
at every feeble hope which superstition can
afford him, and trembling, in the fame
moment, from reflection upon his crimes!

But blefled be God who hath brought

life and immortality to light; who hath not
only brought them to light, but secured
them to good men; and by the death and
refurrecion of Jefils Chritl, hath begot-
ten them into the lively hope of an inheri-
tance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadetb
not aneway. Justly is this hope ftiled in
scripture the anchor of the fJul, both sure and
fledffj. For what an anchor is to a ship
in a dark night, on an unknown coast, and
amidst a boisterous ocean, that is this hope
to the foul when diftraded by the confu-
sions of the world. In the midit of dan-
ger, it gives security; in the midst of gene-
ral fluctuation, it affords one fixed point
of reft. It is indeed the most eminent of

I all

all the advantages which religion now SERM.
confers. For, confider the mighty power of I
hope over the human mind. It is the uni-
verlal comforter. It is the spring of all hu-
man activity. Upon futurity, men are con-
ftantly suspended. From the profpet of
some future good, they toil and susser
through the whole course of life; and it
is not so much what they are at present,
as what they hope to be in some after
time, that enlivens their motions; fixes
attention, and stimulates industry. Now,
if in the common affairs of life such is the
energy of hope, even when its objeCt is
neither very considerable, nor very cer-
tain; what effids may it not be expected
to produce, when it refts upon an object
so splendid, as a life of immortal felicity?
Were this hope entertained with that full
persuasion which Christian faith demands,
it would, in truth, not merely alleviate,
but totally annihilate, all human miseries.
It would banish discontent, extinguish
grief, and suspend the very feeling of pain.

But allowing for the mixture of human
frailty; admitting those abatements which

G our

s E R M. our imperfeclion makes upon the effect of

every religious principle, fill you will find,
that in proportion to the degree in which
the hope of Heaven operates upon good
men, they will be tranquil under susser-
ings; nay, they will be happy, in com-
parison of those who enjoy no such relief.
What indeed, in the eourfe of human as-
fairs, is ftfficient to distress, far less to over-
whelm the mind of that man, who can look
down on all human things from an eleva-
tion so much above them ? He is only a
passenger through this world. He is travel-
ling to a happier country. How disagree-
able soever the occurrences of his journey
may be, yet, at every flage of that jour-
ney, he receives the assurance that he is
drawing nearer and nearer to the period of
reft and felicity.-Endure, and' tho 'fmalt
overcome. Persevere and thou halt be
successful. The time of trial hatensto a.
close. Thy mansion is prepared above;
thy reft remaineth among the people of
God. The disorders which vice has intro-
diced into the works of God, are about to

terminate;

terminate; and all tears are soon to be s E R M.
wiped away from the eyes of the just.-
The firm assurance of this happy conclu-
sion to the vexations and the vanities of
life, works a greater efiecl on the sincere
illiterate Chriitian, than all the refinements
of philosophy can work on the molt learned
infidel. These may gratify the mind that
is at ease; may tooth the heart when only
discomposed in a flight degree; but when
it is fore and deeply torn, when bereaved
of its belt and most beloved comforts, the
only consolations that can then find access,
arise from the hope of a better world; where
those comforts Shall be again restorcd; and
all the virtuous {hall be aflembled, in the
pretence of him who made them. Such
hopes banifli that black melancholy which
overwhelms, and leave only that tender
melancholy which softens the heart, and
often renders the whole character more
gentle and amiable.

Of this nature are the resources which
religion provides for good men. By its

G 2 previous

S E R M. previous discipline, it trains them to forti-
vv , tude; by the reflections of a good confci-

ence it sooths, by the sense of divine fa-
vour it supports them; and when every
comfort fails them on earth, it chears them
with the hope of heaven. Distinguishing
his servants with iuch advantages, God is
justly said to cred his pavilion over them
in the evil time. He not onlyfpreads a tent
for them in the wilderness, but he tranf-
forms in some measure the state of nature
around them. To use the beautiful lan-
guage of antient prophecy; In the defart,
the thirfiy land, where no water is, he opens
springs. Inflead of the thorn, he makes the
fir-tree to come up; injlead of the briar, the
myrtle to Jpring. In midJf of the habita-
tion of dragons, he makes green pajfures rfe,
and Jlill waters flow around his people.

THE improvement to be made of there

truths is as obvious, as it is important.
Let us study so to conduct our lives, that
we may be qualified for deriving such
consolations from religion. To their rea-

lity,

lity, and their importance, all mankind S E R M.
bear wirnefs. For no sooner are they n.
overtaken by distress, than to religion
they all fly. This, throughout every age,
has been the univcrfal flelter which the
young and the old, the high and the low,
the giddy and the serious, have fought to
gain, as soon as they found that reft could
be no where else procured for the weary
head, or the aching heart. But amidlt
those multitudes that croud to religion for
relief, how few are entitled to approach
that sacred source of comfort ? On what
feeble props do their hopes and pretensions
reft ? How much superstition mingles
with that religion to which men are driven
by distress and fear ?-You must first ap-
ply to it as the guide of life, before you
can have recourse to it as the refuge of
sorrow. You must submit to its legislative
authority, and experience its renewing
influence, before you can look for its con-
folatory effed. You must secure the te-
itimony of a good conscience, and peace
with God through Jesus Christ; otherwise,

wwhen

S E R M. when the floodsJlall come, and the rains de-

fiLend, and the windt blow, the house which
you had proposed for your retreat, flall
prove the hIouf founded on the sand, not on
the rock.

There are two plans, and there are but

two, on which any man can propose to
conduc himself through the dangers and
distresses of human life. The one is the plan
of worldly wisdom; the other, that of de-
termined adherence to conscience. He who
ads upon the former, lays principle aside,
and trusts his defence to his art and abi-
lity. He avails himself of every advantage
which his knowledge of the world fug-
gefis. He attends to nothing but what he
confiders as his interest, and, unconfined
by conscience, pursues it by every coiuie
which promises him success. This plan,
though too often adopted, will be found, on
trial, ineffectual and deceitful. For human
ability is an unequal match for the violent
and unforeseen vicissitudes of the world.
When these torrents rife in their might,
they sweep away in a moment the banks

which

which worldly wisdom had reared for de- s E R M.
fence, and overwhelm alike the crafty and I.
the artless. In the mean time, persons of
this character condemn themselves to live
a most unquiet life. They pass their days
in perpetual anxiety, listening to every
motion; tartled by every alarm; chan-
ging their measures on every new occur-
rence; and when distress breaks in over
all their defences, they are left under it,
hopeless and disconsolate.

The plan which, in opposition to this,

religion recommends, as both more ho-
nourable in itself, and more effecual for
security, is, at all hazards, to do your
duty, and to leave the consequences to
God. Let him who would ac upon this
plan, adopt for the rule of his conduc,
that maxim of the Psalmist's, Trujt in the
Lord, and do good . To firm integrity, let
him join a humble reliance on God. Let
his adherence to duty, encourage his reli-
gious trust. Let his religious trust, inspire
him with fortitude in the performance of
his duty. Let him know no path but the

atraight
* Pfal. xxxvii. 3.

E R M. straight and dired one. In the most cri-
I. tical moments of action, let him ask no

further questions, than, What is the right,
the fit, the worthy part? How as a man,
and as a Christian, it becomes him to ad ?
Having received the decision of conscience,
let him commit his way unto the Lord. Let
him, without trepidation or wavering,
proceed in discharging his duty; resolved,
that though the world may make him
unfortunate, it ihall never make him
base; and confiding, that in what God
and his conscience require him to act or
susser, God and a good conscience will sup-
port him.-Such principles as these, are
the best preparation for the vicissitudes of
the human lot. They are the thield of
inward peace. He who thinks and ats
thus, shall be exposed to no wounds but
what religion can cure. He may feel the
blows of adversity; but {hall not know
the wounds of the heart.

X ESER-

# SERMON III. On the Influence of Religion upon Prosperity. PSALM i. 3. He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not ...

57

S E R M ON III.
On the Influence of Religion upon Profpcrity.

PSALM i. 3.
He Jhall be like a tree planted by the rivers.

of water, that bri7geth forth his fruit in
his Jfafon ; his leaf alo Jhlall not withe-,
and whatsoever he doth Jhall prosper.
T H E happy influence of religion S E R M.

upon human life, in the time of ad- II.

verfity, has been confidered in the pre-
ceeding discourse. Concerning this the
sentiments of men are more generally
agreed, than with refpea to some other
prerogatives which religion claims. They
very readily assign to it the office of a
Comforter. But as long as their state is
prosperous, they are apt to account it an
unnecessary gucft, perhaps an unwelcome

H intruder.

S E R M. intruder. Let us not be thus unjust to

n religion, nor confine its importance to

one period only in the life of man. It
was never intended to be merely the nurse
of sickness, and the staff of old age. I
purpose now to flow you, That it is no
less essential to the enjoyment of profpe-
rity, than to the comfort of adversity:
That prosperity is prosperous, if we may
be allowed the expreflion, to a good man
only; and that to every other person, it
will prove, notwithstanding its fair ap-
pearance, a barren and joyless state.

The Psalmist, in the Text, by an image

taken from one of the most beautiful ob-
jeAs in nature, describes a man who
flourishes in full prosperity. But to whom
is the description limited ? To him, as the
preceding verles inform us, that walketb
not in the couityl of the ungodly, norflandeth
in the way of finners, nor fitteth in the feat
of the Jforn/il, but hath his delight in the
law of God. He only is like the tree plant-
ed by the rivers of water; whilst the un-
godly, as he adds, are not so; but how

prosperous

prosperous soever they may appear to the s E R M.
world, are in truth but like the chaf which
the wind driveth away. In confirmation
of this doctrine, I shall lay before you,
some of those circumstances which diftin-
guiflh the prosperity of the good man be-
yond that of the finner; and shall con-
clude, with pointing out the dangers and
miseries, into which the latter is apt to he
betrayed, by his favourable situation in
the world.

I. PIETY, and gratitude to God, con-

tribute in a high degree to enliven prof-
perity. Gratitude is a pleasing emotion.
The sense of being diftinguiihed by the
kindness of another, gladdens the heart,
warms it with reciprocal affection, and
gives to any possession which is agreeable
in itself, a double relish, from its being
the gift js a friend. Favours conferred
by men, I acknowledge, may prove bur-
denfome. For human virtue is never per-
fed; and sometimes unreasonable expec-
tations on the one fide, sometimes a mor-

H 2 tifying

SE R M. tifying sense of dependence on the other,

corrode in secret the pleasure of benefits,
and convert the obligations of friendlhip
into grounds of jealousy. But nothing of
this kind can assec the intercourse of gra-
titude with Heaven. Its favours are
wholly difinterelted; and with a grati-
tude the most cordial and unfufpicious,
a good man looks up to that Almighty
Benefacdor, who aims at no end but the
happiness of those whom he blesses, and
who defircs no return from them, but
a devout and thankful heart. While
others can trace their prosperity to no
higher source than a series of worldly
causes, and, often, of mean or trifling in-
cidents, which occasionally favoured their
designs; with what superior fatisfadion
does the fcrvant of God remark the hand
of that gracious Power which hath raised
him up; which hath happily conducted
him through the various steps of life, and
crowned him with the most favourable
diftindion beyond his equals ?

Lct

let us farther conlider, that not only S E R M.

gratitude for the pall, but a chearing TTi
sense of God's favour at the present, en-
ters into the pious emotion. They are
only the virtuous, who in th;cir profpcr-
ous days hear this voice addrclicd to
them: Go thy way, cat thy bread with joy,
and drink thy wine with a merry heart; /}r
God now accepteth thy works ". He who
is the Author of their profperitv, gives
them a title to enjoy, with complacency,
his own gift. While bad men Iilatch the
pleasures of the world as by stealth, with-
out countenance from God the proprietor
of the world, tie righteous fit openly
down to the feast of life, under the lilile
of approving Heaven. No guilty fears
damp their joys. The blefling of God
refts upon all that they pollels ; his pro-
tection lurrounds them; and hence, i!l tlhe
habitations of the rightlous, is found thel
voice of rejoicing and salvation. A lullre
unknown to others, invefis, in their fight,
the whole face of nature. Their piety re-

fleds
* Ecelf. i.

s E R M. fleCts a fun-line from heaven upon the

M prosperity of the world; unites in one

point of view, the smiling asped both of
the powers above, and of the objets be-
low. Not only have they as full a relish
as others, of the innocent pleasures of
life, but, moreover, in these they hold
communion with God. In all that is
good or fair, they trace his hand. From
the beauties of nature, from the improve-
ments of art, from the enjoyments of so-
cial life, they raise their affection to the
source of all the happiness which fur-
rounds them; and thus widen the sphere
of their pleasures, by adding intellectual,
and spiritual, to earthly joys.

For illustration of what I have said on

this head, remark that chearful enjoy-
ment of a prosperous state which King
David had, when he wrote the twenty-
third Psalm; and venture, if you can, to
compare the highest pleasures of the
riotous finner, with the happy and satis-
sied spirit which breathes throughout that
Pfalm.-In the midst of the splendour of

royalty,

royalty, with what amiable simplicity of S E R M
gratitude does he look up to the Lord m.
as his Shepherd; happier in ascribing all
his success to divine favour, than to the
policy of his counsels, or to the force of
his arms ! How many instances of divine
goodness arose before him, in pleasing re-
membrance, when with such relifi he
speaks of the green paflures and Jfill waters
betide which God had led him, of his cup
which he had made to overflow, and of the
table which he had prepared for him in
presence of his enemies! With what perfec
tranquillity does he look forward to the
time of his pafling through the valley of
the Jhadow of death; unappalled by that
SpeCtre, whose most distant appearance
blasts the prosperity of finners ! He fears
no evil, as long as the rod and the Jlaff of
his Divine Shepherd are with him; and
through all the unknown periods of this,
and of a future existence, commits him-
self to his guidance with secure and tri-
umphant hope. Surely goodness and mercy
/hall follow me all the days of my lif ; and

I

S . R M. I t'ill tdwell in the houif of the Lord for

I" ever.--What a purified, sentimental en-

joyment of prolpnerity, is here exhibited !
I low (litfcrcnt from that grois relish of
worldly plealures, which belongs to those
who behold only the terrestrial fide of
things ; whose views rife no higher than
the fucccirion of human contingencies,
and the weak efforts of human ability;
who have no protctor or patron in the
heavens, to enliven their prosperity, or
to wvarm their hearts with gratitude and
trust!

II. RELIGION affords to good men a

peculiar security in the enjoyment of their
prosperity. One of the first reflections
which must strike every thinking man,
after his situation in the world has become
agreeable, is the instability of that fitua-
tion. From a variety of causes, he lies
open to change. On many fides he fees
that he may be pierced; and the wider
his comforts extend, the broader is the
mark which he fprcads to the arrows of

I ~ ~ misfortune.

misfortune. Hence many a secret alarm S £ R
to the reflecing mind; and to those who IIL
reject all such alarms, the real danger in-
creases, in proportion to their improvi-
dent security.

By worldly aflifance it is vain to think

of providing any effechtal defence, feeing
the world's mutability is the very cause
of our terror. It is from a higher prin-
ciple, from a power superior to the world,
that relief must be fought, amidst such
disquietudes of the heart. He who in
his prosperity can look up to One who is
witnefi to his moderation, humanity, and
charity; he who can appeal to Heaven,
that he has not been elated by pride, nor
overcome by pleasure, but has studied to
employits gifts to the honour of the giver;
this man, if there be any truth in reli-
gion, if there be any benignity or good-
ness in the administration of the universe,
has somewhat to reft upon for security
and hope. Not that an interest in God's
grace will perpetuate to a good man,
more than to others, a life of unruffled

I prosperity.

SERM. profperlty. Change and alteration form

I. the very essence of the world. But let the

world change around him at pleasure, he
has ground to hope that it shall not be able
to make him unhappy. Whatever may
change, God's providence is still the fame;
and his love to the righteous remains un-
altered. If it Ihall be the divine will to
remove one comfort, he trusts that rome
other shall be given. Whatever is given,
whatever is taken away, he confides, that
in the last result, all Jhall work for his
good.

Hence, he is not disturbed, like bad

men, by the instability of the world. Dan-
gers, which overcofme others, ihake not his
more teady mind. He enjoys the pleasures
of life pure and unallayed, because he en-
joys them, as long as they last, without
anxious terrors. They are not his all, his
only good. He welcomes them, when they
arrive; and when they pass away, he can
eye them, as they depart, without agony
or despair. His prosperity frikes a deep-
er and firmer root than that of the un-

godly.

godly. And for this reason he is com- SER M
pared, in the Text, to a tree planted by the II.
rivers of water; a tree, whose branches
the tempest may indeed bend, but whose
roots it cannot touch; a tree, which may
occasionally be itripped of its leaves and
blofloms, but which still maintains its
place, and in due feaoin flouriihes anew.
Whereas the finner, in his prosperity, ac-
cording to the allusion in the book of Job,
resembles the ruJh that growetb up in the
mire*; a slender reed, that may flouriih
green for a while by the fide of the
brook, as long as it is cherished by the
fun, and fanned by the breeze; till the
firit bitter blat breaks its feeble item, roots
it out from its bed, and lays it in the
dust. Lo! such is the prosperity of them
that forget God; and thus their bope Jhall
ptriff.

III. RELIGION forms good men to the

most proper temper for the enjoyment of
prosperity. A little refletion may satisfy

I 2 us,
' Job viii. t.

ER M. us, that mere poffeflion, even granting it
nLV to be secure, does not conttitute enjoy-

ment. Give a man all that is in the
power of the world to bestow; surround
him with riches; crown him with ho-
nours; invest him, if you will, with ab-
solute dominion; but leave him at the
fame time under some secret oppedfion or
heaviness of heart; you bestow indeed the
materials of enjoyment, but you deprive
him of ability to extract it. You set a
feast before him, but he wants the power
of tassing it. Hence prosperity is so often
an equivocal word, denoting merely as-
fluence of poflfffion, but unjustly applied
to the mierable possessor.

We all know the effeats which any

indisposition of the body, even though
flight, produces on external prosperity.
Visit the gayest and most fortunate man
on earth, only with sleepless nights; dif-
order any single organ of his fenCes; cor-
rode but one of his fminalleft nerves; and
you mhall presently fee all his gaiety va-
nifh; you {hall hear him complain, that

he

he is a miserable creature, and express his s E R M.
envy of the peasant and the cottager.-- IIL
And can you believe, that a direafe in the
foul is less fatal to enjoyment, than a
disease in the animal frame; or that a
found mind is not as essential, as a found
body to the prosperity of man ?-Let us
rate sensual gratifications as high as we
please, we {hall be made to feel that the
feat of enjoyment is in the foul. The cor-
rupted temper, and the guilty paffons of
the bad, frustrate the effet of every adr
vantage which the world confers on diem.
The world may call them men of plea-
sure, but of all others they are the great,
eft foes to pleasure. From their eagermed
to grasp, they firangle and destroy it.
None but the temperate, the regular, and
the virtuous, know how to enjoy profperi-
ty. They bring to its comforts the manly
relibh of a found uncorrupted mind. They
flop at the proper point, before enjoy-
ment degenerates into disgust, and plea-
sure is converted into pain. They are
Itrangers to those complaints which flow

from

SE R M. from spleen, caprice, and all the fantastical
"'v difireffes of a vitiated mind. While riot-

ous indulgence enervates both the body
and the mind, purity and virtue heighten
all the powers of human fruition. Mo-
derate and simple pleafurcs relish high
with the temperate; in the midst of his
studied refinements, the voluptuary lan-
guifhes.

Wherever guilt mingles with profpe-

rity, a certain gloom and heaviness enter
along with it. Vitious intrigues never
fail to entangle and embarrass those who
engage in them. But innocence confers
cafe and freedom on the mind; leaves it
open to every pleasing fenlation; gives a
lightnes to the spirits, similar to tde na-
tive gaiety of youth and health; ill imi-
tated, and ill supplied by that forced le-
vity of the vitious, which arises not from
the health, but from the drunkenness of
the mind.

Feeble are all pleasures in which the

heart has no part. The felfi/h gratifica-
tions of the bad, are both narrow in their

circle,

circle, and short in their duration. But SE R M.
prosperity is redoubled to a good man, by IIL
his generous use of it. It is reflected back
upon him from every one whom he makes
happy. In the intercourse of domestic as-
section, in the attachment of friends, the
gratitude of dependents, the esteem and
good will of all who know him, he fees
blessings multiplied round him on every
fide. When the ear heard me, then it blejed
me; and when the eye aw me, it gave wit-
nefi to me: Becaafe I delivered the poor that
cried, tbefatherlefi, and him that had none
to help bim. The blejfg es him that .was
ready to peri/h came upon me, and I caused
the widow's heart to sing for joy. I was
eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame:
I was a father to the poor; and the cause
which I knew not, Ifearched out *.--Thus,
whilst the righteous flouriheth like a tree
planted by the rivers of water, he bring-
eth forth also his fruit in bis season: And
that fruit, to pursue the allusion of the
Text, he brings forth not for himself
alone. He flouriihes, not like a tree in

some
Job xxx. 1,,--7.

SERM. some solitary defart, which scatters its

III blossoms to the wind, and communicates

neither fruit nor thade to any living
thing: But like a tree in the midst of an
inhabited country, which to some affords
friendly fhclter, to others, fruit; which
is not only admired by all for its beauty,
but blessed by the traveller for the shade,
and by the hungry for the fuflenance it
hath given.

IV. RELIGION heightens the prosperity

of good men, by the profpec which it as-
fords them of greater happiness to come
in another world. I ihowed, in the fore-
going discourse, the mighty effet of the
hope of heaven, in relieving the mind un-
der the troubles of life. And sure, if this
hope be able to support the falling, it
cannot but improve the flourishing state
of man; if it can dispel the thickest
gloom of adversity, it mull needs enliven
prosperity by the additional lustre which
it throws upon it. What is present, is
never sufficient to give us full fatifaCtion.

To

To the present we must always join some s E R M1
agreeable anticipations of futurity, in or-
der to complete our pleasure, What an
accession then must the prosperity of the
righteous man receive, when born with
a smooth and gentle gale along the cur-
rent of life, and looking round on all the
bleflings of his state, he can confider these
as no more than an introdusion to higher
scenes which are hereafter to open; he
can view his present life, as only the
porch through which he is to pass into
the palace of bliss; and his present joys,
as but a feeble stream, dispensed for his
occalional refrehment, until he arrive at
that river of life, which flows at God's
right hand?-Such profpets purify the
mind, at the fame time that they gladden
it. They prevent a good man from set-
ting too high a value on his present pof-
feflions; and thereby assist him in main-
taining, amidst the temptations of worldly
pleasure, that command of himself which
is so essential to the wife and temperate
enjoyment of prosperity.

K It

. t

SE R M. It is the fate of all human pleafurcs,

n by continuance, to fade; of most of them,

to cloy. Hence, in the most prosperous
tate, there are frequent intervals of lan-
guor, and even of dejection. There arc
vacuities in the happiest life, which it is
not in the power of the world to fill up.
What relief so adapted to those vacant or
deje&ed periods, as the pleasing hopes
which arise from immortality? How bar-
ren and imperfeA that prosperity, which
can have recourse to no such subsidiary
comfort, in order to animate the Rtagna-
tion of vulgar life, and to supply the in-
fuificiency of worldly pleasures !

Worldly prosperity declines with de-

clining life. In youth, its relih was
brisk and poignant. It becomes more
fober as life advances; and flattens as life
kfcends. He who lately overflowed with
gay spirits and high hopes, begins to
look back with heaviness on the days of
former years. He thin of his od com
panitoa who are gone; and reviews past
scenes more agreeable than any which are

likely

rledy to returh. The activity of pursuit SER M.
is wealkned. The tivacity of amnfement "
is spent. The gratifications of sense lan-
gnih. When his accustomed pleasures,
one after aaother, thus fleal treacherouly
away, what can he, who is an utter ftran-
ger to religion, and to the hope of Heaven,
fubffituwe in their place ?-Btt even in
in tlh drooping period, the promiies and
hpeb of religiot support the fpints of a
good mfl til the latest hour. iis leaf,
it is faM in the Tet, Jhall not wither.
t fiaB st be in the power of time to
bias hit pfrofperity: But old age fliall re
ceive hihm into a qtiet reset, where, if
viid featins fail, g e pleearu re-
main to sooth him. That hope of ima
mortality, which before inproted his ote
enjoymens, now in a great measure sup-
ptis their abfenc. hs importance riles,
in proportion as its objetc draws ner.
He is not forsaken by the world, but re-
tir fitAi it with- dignity; eviming
with a ft ritnd the pmrt which he ba
adted and ttftiag to We pnife es God,

K2 for

SERM. for an approaching reward. Such prof-

pea
p s fihed a pleafmg tranquillity over the
old age of the righteous man. They make
the evening of his days go down uncloud.
ed; and allow the stream of life, though
waxing low, to run clear to the las drop.

THUS I have shown, I hope, with full

evidence, what material ingredients re-
ligion and a good conscience are in the
prosperity of life. Separated from them,
prosperity, how fair soever it may thow
to the world, is insipid, nay, frequently
noxious to the poffefflr: United with
them, it rites into a real blefding bestowed
by God upon man. God gietb to a man
that is good in his fight, wisdom, and bhmw
ledge, and joy; but to tbefinner he giveth
fore travel, to gather, and to heap up, that
he may give to him that is goad before
God *.

ALLOW me now to conclude the sub-

jea, with representing to the prosperous
men of the world, those crimes and mi-

series
* Eyelet: u. )6.

series into which the abuse of their con- SE R M.
dition is likely to betray them, and call- In
ing upon them to beware of the dangers
with which they are threatened.

It is unfortunate for mankind, that those

situations which favour pleasure, are too
generally adverse to virtue. Virtue re-
quires internal government and difci-
pline; prosperity relaxes the mind, and
inflames the passions. Virtue is support-
ed by a regard to what is future; profpe-
rity attaches us wholly to what is present.
The charateriftics of virtue, are modesty
and humility; the most common attend-
ants of prosperity, are pride and pre-
fumption. One hould think, that prof-
perity would prove the stronget incite-
ment to remember and to honour that
God who bestows it. Yet such is the
perverfends of human nature, that it
proves much oftener the motive to im-
piety. The changes of the world call the
attention of men to an Invisible Power.
But a train of events proceeding accord-
ing to their with, leads them to nothing

beyond

SERM. beyond what they fee. The Supeme

Giver is concealed from view by his own
gifts. This instance of fucce1i they ascribe
to a fortonatc concurrence of worldly
causes; that acqifition, to their own
skill and industry; munindful of him
who, from the beginning, arranged that
ferics of caiues, and who placed them in
circumstances where their induttry could
oper with fiucefs. roam forgetting
God, they too often procee to deptfe
him. All tha is light or giddy in their
minds, is set in motion by the gale of
pofperity. Arrogmnce anzd fcdf-ficiency
are lifted up; and their ftat is confider-
ed, as secured by their own fttregth.
Hence that pride of etcae~tr throiagh
which the wicked in dhir profpeity, as
Dbvid obfervcs, refuse to ek after God.
They are described as spacing oftiy, al
setting their muth agai9f the Hisac f.
Tbh take thr timbrel and barp, and rejoa
at tbtford of the oran ; asd ihey fy arro
CGd, Depart fr w r, far we daer, *t th
kbwltdge of tby ways. hat i the A-

mighty,

mighty, that we Jhlud ferv him ? Or SE Rn
what profit hould we have, if we pray un- IM
to him ?

They Jay uato God, Depart from us.-

What an impious voice! Could we have
believed it pofible, that worldly pleasures
flould so far intoxicate any human heart ?
Wretched and infatuated men! Have you
ever confidered on what your confidence
reds ?-You have said in your hearts, lou
fiall never be moved; you fancy yourselves
placed on a mountain whichfiandetbhlrong.
Awalke from those flattering dreams, and
behold how every thing totters around
you! You lSand on the edge of a preci-
pice ; and the ground is sliding away be-
low your feet. In your health, life, pof-
fflions, connections, pleasures, the feeds
of change are sown; principles of de-
ftrution work. The mine advances in
fecre, which saps the foundations, while
you revl on the surface. No mighty es-
so, no long preparation of events, is
needed to overturn your prosperity. By
ow degrees it rose. Long time, much

labour,

SE R M. labour, and the conclrrence of many as
_II sifting causes, were necessary to rear it up;

but one flight incident can reduce it to
nought. Suspicions are infused into the
patron or the prince on whom you de-
pend; and your disgrace ensues. Exer-
cife, or amusement, kindles a fever in
the veins of those whom you loved; and
you are robbed of your comforts and
hopes. A few grains of sand lodge them-
selves within you; and the reft of your
life is disease and misery. Ten thousand
contingencies ever float on the current of
life, the smallest of which, if it meet
your frail bark in the passing, is sufficient
to dash it in pieces.-Is this a place, is
this a time, to swell with fancied security,
to riot in unlawful pleasure, and, by
your disregard of moral and religious du-
ties, to brave the government of the Al-
mighty ? He hath stamped every posses-
sion of man with this inscription, Rjoice
with trembling. Throughout every age,
he hath pointed his peculiar difpleafutr
against the confidence of prefumpion,

I and

and the arrogance of prosperity. He hath S E R M.
pronounced, that wbofhoevcr exalteth him- .
felfJhall be abased. And hall neither the
admonitions which you receive from the
visible inconstancy of the world, nor the
declarations of the divine displeasure, be
sufficient to check your thoughtless career ?
Know, that by your impiety, you mul-
tiply the dangers which already threaten
you on every fide; you accelerate the
speed with which the changes of the world
advance to your deftrucion. The Al-
mighty touches with his rod that edifice
of dull, on which you stand, and boast of
your strength; and at that instant, it
crumbles to nothing.

As men then, bethink yourselves of hu-

man instability. As Christians, reverence
the awful government of God. Insure
your prosperity, by consecrating it to
religion and virtue. Be humble in your
elevation; be moderate in your views;
be fubmilfive to him who hath raised and
distinguished you. Forget not, that on
his providence you are as dependent, and
to the obedience of his laws as much

L bound,

SERM. bound, as the meanest of your fellow-

IL. creatures. Disgrace not your station, by

that grossness of sensuality, that levity of
dissipation, or that insolence of rank, which
bespeak a little mind. Let the affability
of your behaviour, show that you remem-
ber the natural equality of men. Let
your moderation in pleasure, your com-
mand of passion, and your steady regard
to the great duties of life, ilow that you
possess a mind worthy of your fortune.
Eftabliih your character on the bais of
esteem; not on the flattery of dependents,
or the praise of sycophants, but on the
respect of the wife and the good. Let in-
nocence preside over your enjoyments. Let
usefulness and beneficence, not ostentation
and vanity, direct the train of your pur-
suits. Let your alms, together with your
prayers, come up in memorial before God.
So shall your prosperity, under the blef-
sing of Heaven, be as the Jhining light
whicb Jsliteth more and more unto the per-
fed day. So ihall it resemble those cele-
ftial fires which glow above with benefi-
cent, with regular, and permanent lustre;

and

and not prove that mirth of fools, which E R M.
by Soloiion is compared to the crackling I .
of thorns under a pot, a glittering and ser-
vent blaze, but speedily extinct.

On the whole, let this be our conclu-

sion, that both in prosperity and in ad-
verfity, religion is the safest guide of
human life. Conduded by its light, we
reap the pleasures, and at the fame time
escape the dangers, of a prosperous slate.
Sheltered under its protecion, we stand
the shock of adversity with most intrepi-
dity, and susser least from the violence of
the storm. He that defireth life, and loveth
man) days that he may fee good, let him keep
his tongue from evil, and his lipsfrom guile.
Let him depart from evil, and do good. Let
him seek peace with God, and purjie it.
Then, in his adversity, Godjhall hide him
in his pavilion. In his prosperity, heJhall
flourih like a tree planted by the riters of
water. The ungodly are not so; but are
like the chaf, light and vile, which the
the wind driveth away.

L ' SElt-

# SERMON IV. On our imperfect knowledge of a Future State. 1 CORINTH. xiii. 12. For now we see through a glass, darkly. 

SERMON IV.
On our imperfec knowledge of a Future State.

i CORINTH. xiii. 12.

For nuw we fee tbrough a glafd, darkly.-
óERM. T HE Apostle here describes the im-

IV. I perfection of our knowledge with
V relation to spiritual and eternal obje&s.

He employs two metaphors, to represent
more strongly the disadvantages under
which we lie: One, that we fee those ob-
jecs through a glafn, that is, through the
intervention of a medium which obscures
their glory ; the other, that we fee them
in a riddle or anigma, which our tranfla-
tors have rendered by.feeing them darkly,
that is, the truth in part discovered, in
part concealed, and placed beyond our
comprehcnfion.

This

This description, however just and true, s E R K.

cannot fail to occasion some perplexity IV.
to an enquiring mind. For it may seem
strange, that so much darkness should be
left upon those celestial objeds, towards
which we are at the fame time command-
ed to aspire. We are strangers in the
universe of God. Confined to that spot
on which we dwell, we are permitted to
know nothing of what is tranfading in
the regions above us and around us. By
much labour we acquire a superficial ac-
quaintance with a few sensible objects
which we find in our present habitation;
but we enter, and we depart, under a total
ignorance of the nature and laws of
the spiritual world. One fubje& in par-
ticular, when our thoughts proceed in
this train, must often recur upon the
mind with peculiar anxiety; that is, the
immortality of the foul, and the future
state of man. Exposed as we are at pre-
sent to such a variety of afflitions, and
fubje&ed to so much disappointment in
all our pursuits of happiness, Why, it

may

SERM. may be said, has our gracious Creator

1V. denied us the consolation of a full disco-

very of our future existence, if indeed
such an existence be prepared for us ?-
Reason, it is true, suggests many argu-
ments in behalf of immortality; Revela-
tion gives full assurance of it. Yet even
that gospel which is said to have brought
life and immortality to light, allows us to
fee only through a glass, darkly. It doth
not yet appear what we Jhall be. Our
knowledge of a future world, is very im-
perfeCt; our ideas of it, are faint and con-
fuled. It is not displayed in any such
manner, as to make an impression suited
to the importance of the objedt. The
faith even of the belt men, is much infe-
rior, both in clearness and in force, to
the evidence of sense; and proves, on
many occasions, insufficient to counter-
balance the temptations of the present
wbrld. Happy moments indeed there
sometimes are in the lives of pious men,
when sequestered from worldly cares, and
born up on the wingj of divine contem-

plation,

plation, they rife to a near and tranf- S E RM.
porting view of immortal glory. But jV.
such efforts of the mind are rare, and
cannot be long supported. When the
spirit of meditation subsides, this lively
sense of a future state decays; and though
the general belief of it remain, yet when
they return to the ordinary business and
cares of life, good men themselves seem
to rejoin the multitude, and to re-affume
the fame hopes, and fears, and interests,
which influence the reft of the world.

From such reflections, no small difficulty

respecting this important subjed, either
arises, or seems to arise. Was such an
obscure and imperfect discovery of a fu-
ture itate worthy to proceed from God ?
Does it not afford some ground, either to
tax his goodness, or to fufpec the evi-
dence of its coming from him ?-This is
the point which we are now to confider;
and let us confider it with that close at-
tention which the subjed merits. Let us
enquire, whether we have any reason, ei-
ther to complain of Providence, or to ob-
jet to the evidence of a future state, be-

cause

SE R M. cause that evidence is not of a more fen-

IV. fible and striking nature. Let us attempt

humbly to trace the reasons, why, though
permitted to know and to fee somewhat
of the eternal world, we are nevertheless
permitted only to know in part, and to fee
through a glafi, darkly.

IT plainly appears to be the plan of the

Deity, in all his dispensations, to mix
light with darkness, evidence with uncer-
tainty. Whatever the reasons of this pro-
cedure be, the faa is undeniable. He is
described in the Old Testament, as a God
that hideth himself*. Clouds and darkness
are said tofurround him. His way is in the
Jea, and his path in the great waters; his
foottieps are not known. Both the works
and the ways of God are full of mystery.
In the ordinary course of his government,
innumerable events occur which perplex
us to the utmost. There is a certain limit
to all our enquiries in religion, beyond
which if we attempt to proceed, we are
loft in a maze of inextricable difficulties.

Even

* I a l.
xl .

Even that revelation which affords such s E R M.
material inftruaion to' man, concerning lv.
his duty and his happiness, leaves many
doubts unresolved. Why it was not given
sooner; why not to all men; why there
should be so many things in it hard to be
underlfood, are difficulties not inconsiderable
in the midst of that incontestable evidence
by which it is supported. If, then, the
future state of man be not placed in so
full and clear a light as we desire, this is
no more than what the analogy of all re-
ligion, both natural and revealed, gave
us reason to expet.

But such a solution of the difficulty will

be thought imperfeA. It may, perhaps,
not give much fatisfacion, to flow that
all religion abounds with difficulties of a
like nature. Our situation, it will be said,
is so niuch the more to be lamented, that
not on one fide only we are confined in
our enquiries, but on all hands environed
with mysterious obfcurity.-Let us then,
if so much dissatisfied with our condition,
give scope for once to Fancy, and cOnfider

M how

SERM. how the plan of Providence might be

IV. redified to our wish. Let us call upon the

Sceptic, and desire him to fay, what mea-
sure of information would afford him en-
tire fatisfadion.

This, he will tell us, requires not any

long or deep deliberation. He desires on-
ly to have his view enlarged beyond the
limits of this corporeal slate. Inflead of
refting upon evidence which requires dif-
cuflion, which mufl be supported by much
reasoning, and which, after all, he alledges
yields very imperfect information, he de-
mands the everlasting mansions to be so dif-
played, if in truth such mansions there be,
as to place faith on a level with the evidence
of sense. What noble and happy effecs, he
exclaims, would instantly follow, if man
thus beheld his present and his future
existence at once before him! He would
then become worthy of his rank in the
creation. Initead of being the sport, as
now, of degrading passions and childiih
attachments, he would ad solely on the
principles of immortality. His pursuit

of

of virtue would be steady; his life would s E R M.
be undisturbed and happy. Superior to I
the attacks of distress, and to the folicita-
tions of pleasure, he would advance, by a
regular progress, towards those divine re-
wards and honours which were continu-
ally present to his view.- Thus Fancy,
with as much ease and confidence as if it
were a perfet judge of creation, erecs a
new world to itself, and exults with ad-
miration of its own work. But let us
pause, and suspend this admiration, till
we coolly examine the consequences that
would follow from this supposed reform-
ation of the universe.

Confider the nature and state of man.

Introduced into the world in an indigent
condition, he is supported at first by the
care of others; and, as loon as he begins
to at for himself, finds labour and indu-
flry to be necessary for sustaining his life,
and supplying his wants. Mutual defence
and interest give rife to society; and so-
city, when formed, requires distinctions
of property, diversity of conditions, sub.

M 2 ordination

SE R M. ordination of ranks, and a multiplicity

IV. of occupations, in order to advance the

general good. The services of the poor,
and the protecion of the rich, become
reciprocally necessary. The governors, and
the governed, must co-operate for general
safety. Some arts must be studied to cul-
tivate the mind, some to ward off the
evils, and some to provide the convenien-
cies of life. In a word, by the deftina-
tion of his Creator, and the necessities of
his nature, man commences, at once, an
acive, not merely a contemplative being.
Religion affumcs him as such. It sup-
poses him employed in this world, as on
a busy stage. It regulates, but does not
abolilh, the enterprises and cares of ordi-
nary life. It addresses itself to the vari-
ous ranks in society ; to the rich and the
poor, to the magistrate and the subjec.
It rebukes tl;e slothful; directs the dili-
gent how to labour; and requires every
man to do his Own bifihefi.

Suppose, now, that veil to be with-
drawn which conceals another world from

our

our view. Let all obscurity vanimh: Let s Ra
us no longerfee darkly, as thbrough a glifi; ; .
but let every man enjoy that intuitive
perception of divine and eternal objecs,
which thc Sceptic was supposed to desire.
The immediate effec of iuch a difcovcry
would be, to annihilate in our eye all hu-
man objecs, and to produce a total stag-
nation in the affairs of the world. Were
the glory of the celestial state opened to
our admiring view; did the angelic har-
mony found continually in our enraptured
ears; what earthly concerns could have
the power of engaging our attention for
a single moment ? All the Rudies and pur-
suits, the arts and labours, which now
employ the acivity of man, which sup-
port the order, or promote the happiness
of society, would lie neglected and aban-
doned. Those desires and fears, those
hopes and intcreis by which we are at
present stimulated, would cease to operate.
Human life would present no objeds fils-
ficent to rouse the mind; to kindle the
spirit of enterprize, or to urge the hand

of

SE R M. of industry. If the mere sense of duty

I. engaged a good man to take some part in

the business of the world, the talk, when
submitted to, would prove distasteful.
Even the preservation of life would be
flighted, if he were not bound to it by
the authority of God. Impatient of his
confinement within this tabernacle of
dust, languishing for the happy day of
his translation to thole glorious regions
which were displayed to his fight, he
would fojour on earth as a melancholy
exile. Whatever Providence has prepared
for the entertainment of man, would be
viewed with contempt. Whatever is now
attractive in human society, would appear
insipid. In a word, he would be no
longer a fit inhabitant of this world, nor
be qualified for those exertions which are
allotted to him in his present sphere of
being. But, all his faculties being fubli-
mated beyond the ltate of mortality, he
would be in the condition of some being
of superior order, who, obliged to reside
among men, would regard human pur-

suits

suits with inattention and scorn, as dreams, s E R .
trises, and puerile amusements of a day. IV.

But to this reasoning it may perhaps

be replied, that such consequences as I
have now stated, fuppofig them to fol-
low, deserve not much regard.-For what
though the present arrangement of human
affairs were entirely changed, by a clearer
view, and stronger impreflion of our fu-
ture state ? Would not such a change
prove the highest blefling to man ? Is not
his attachment to worldly objects the
great. iburce both of his misery and his
guilt ? Employed in perpetual contempla-
tion of heavenly objects, and in prepara-
tion for the enjoyment of them, would
he not become more virtuous, and of
course more happy, than the nature of hós
present employments and attachments
permits him to be ?- Allowing, for a
moment, the consequence to be such, this
much is yielded, that upon the supposition
which was made, man would not be the
creature which he now is, nor human life
the tate which we now behold. How

far

SE M. far the change would contribute to his

IV. improvement, comes to be confidered.

If there be any principle fully afcer-

tained by religion, it is, that this life
was intended for a itate of trial and im-
provement to man. His preparation for
a better world required a gradual purifi-
cation, carried on by steps of progressive
improvement. The situation, therefore,
here assigned him, was such as to answer
this design, by calling forth all his active
powers, by giving full scope to his moral
dispositions, and bringing to light his whole
characer. Hence it became proper, that
difficulty and temptation should arise in
the course of his duty. Ample rewards
were promised to virtue; but these re-
i wards left, as yet, in obscurity and di-

ftant profpee. The imprefflions of sense
were so balanced against the discoveries
of divine objects, as to allow a conflict
between faith and sense, between con-
science and desire, between present plea-
sure and future good. In this conflic,
the fouls of good men are tried, improved,

and

and strengthened. In this field, their ho- s E RM.
nours are reaped. Here are formed the Iv.
capital virtues of fortitude, temperance,
and felf-denial; moderation in prosperity,
patience in adversity, submission to the
will of God, and charity and forgiveness
to men, amidit the various competitions
of worldly interest.

Such is the plan of Divine Wisdom for

man's improvement. But put the cafe,
that the plan devised by human wisdom
were to take place, and that the rewards
of the just were to be now fully displayed
to view; the exercise of all those virtues
Which I have mentioned, would be en-
tirely superseded. Their very names
would be 4unknown. Every temptation
being withdrawn, every worldly attach-
tnent being subdued by the overpowering
dikeoveries of eternity, no trial of sincerity,
ho discrimination of characters, would
remain; no opportunity would be as-
forded for those acive exertions, which
are the teans of purifying and perfecting
the good, On the competition between

N ,. time

S E R M. time and eternity, depends the chief exer-

IV. cife of human virtue. The obscurity

which at present hangs over eternal ob-
jets, prefirves the competition. Re-
move that obscurity, and you remove hu-
man virtue from its place: You render
human life no longer that slate of difci-
pline, by which imperfect creatures are
gradually fitted for a more persecd Rate.

Where then do we land at lail, but in

this conclusion, that the full display,
which was demanded, of a future state,
would be so far from improving the hu-
man foul, that it would abolish thole vir-
tues and duties which are the great inftru-
ments of its improvement ? It would be
unsuitable to the character of man, in
every view, either as an active being, or
a moral agent. It would disqualify him
for taking part in the affairs of the world;
for relilhing the pleasures, or for difchar-
ging the duties of life: In a word, would
entirely defeat the purpose of his being
placed on this earth. And the question,
Why the Almighty has been pleased to

leave

leave a spiritual world, and the future cx- s E R M.
iftence of man, under so much obfcuritv, "'.
resolves in the end into this, Why there
ihould be such a creature as man in the
universe of God ?-Such is the issue of
the improvements proposed to be made on
the plans of Providence. They add to
the discoveries of the superior wisdom of
God, and of the presumption and folly
of man.

FROM what has been said, it now ap-

pears, that no reasonable objection to the
belief of a future state arises, from the
imperfec discoveries of it which we en-
joy; from some difficulties that are min-
gled with its evidence, from ourfieing as,
through a glass darkly, and being left to
walk by faith and not by fight. It cannot
be otherwise, it ought not to be other-
wife, in our present state. The evidence
which is afforded, is sufficient for the con-
viCion of a candid mind, sufficient for a
rational ground of condudt; though not
so striking as to withdraw our attention

N 2 fron

BE R M. from the present world, or altogether to

IV.V overcome the impression of sensible ob-

jects. In such evidence it becomes us to
acquiefee, without indulging either doubts
or complaints, on account of our not re-
ceiving all the fatisfaion which we fond-
ly desire, but which our present imma-
turity of being allows not. For upon the
supposition of immortlity, this life is no
other than the childhood of existence;
and the measures of our knowledge muf
needs be proportioned to such a slate.
To the successive stages of human life,
from infancy to old age, belong certain
peculiar attachments, certain cares, de-
fires, and interfts; which open, not ab-
ruptly, but by gradual advances, on the
mind, as it becomes fit to receive them,
and is prepared for acting the part to
which, in their order, they pertain.
Hence, in the education of a child, no
one thinks of inspiring him all at once
with the knowledge, the sentiments, and
views of a man, and with contempt for
the ercifs and amusements of child-

hood,

hood. On the contrary, employments SER M.
suited to his age are allowed to occupy IV.
him. By these, his powers are gradually
unfolded; and advantage is taken of his
youthful pursuits, to improve and strength-
en his mind; till, ftep by ftep, he is led on
to higher profpecs, and prepared for a
larger and more important scene of action.

This analogy, which so happily illustrates
the present conduc of the Deity towards
man, deserves attention the more, as it is
the very illulration used by the Apostle,
when treating of this subjeC in the con-
text. Now, fays he, we know in part-
but when that which is perfell is come, that
which is in part hall be done away. When
I was a child, I spake as a child, I under-
flood as a child, I thought as a child; but
wben I became a man, I put away childiJb
things. For now we fee through a glafi,
darkly; but then,face to face: Now I know
in part; but then, IJhall know even as I am
known. Under the care of the Almighty,
our education is now going on, from a
mortal to an immortal ate. As much

light

SE R M. light is let in upon us, as we can bear

_v without injury. When the objets be-

come too splendid and dazzling for' our
fight, the curtain is drawn. Exercised
in such a field of action, as suits the
strength of our unripened powers, we are,
at the fame time, by proper profpecs and
hopes, prompted to aspire towards the
manhood of our nature, the time when
childih thingsjhall be put away. But ffill,
betwixt those future prospects, and the
impression of present objects, such an ac-
curate proportion is established, as on the
one hand shall not produce a total con-
tempt of earthly things, while we aspire
to those that are heavenly; and on the
other, shall not encourage such a degree
of attachment to our present state, as
would render us unworthy of future ad-
vancement. In a word, the whole course
of things is so ordered, that we may nei-
ther by an irregular and precipitate edu-
cation, become men too loon; nor by a
a fond and trifling indulgence, be sufferel
to continue children for ever.

LET

LET these reflecions not only remove SE R M.

the doubts which may arise from our IV.
obscure knowledge of inunortality, but
likewise produce the highest admiration
of the wisdom of our Creator. The ftruc-
ture of the natural world affords innume-
rable intfances of profound design, which
no attentive fpecator can survey without
wonder. In the moral world, where the
workmanfliip is of much finer and more
delicate contexture, fubjecds of still great-
er admiration open to view. But admi-
ration mutt rife to its highest point, when
those parts of the moral constitution which
at firfi were reputed blemishes, which car-
ried the appearance of objecions, either
to the wisdom or the goodness of Provi-
dence, are discovered, on more accurate
inspection, to be adjusted with the most
exquisite propriety. We have now seen,
that the darkness of man's prleent state is
no less essential to his well-being, than
the light which he enjoys. His internal
powers, and his external situation, appear
to be exactly fitted to each other. Those

complaints,

S E M. complaints, which we are apt to make of

IV. our limited capacity and narrow views, of

our inability to penetrate farther into the
future destination of man, are found, from
the foregoing obferrations, to be just as
unreasonable, as the childish complaints
of our not being formed with a micro-
scopic eye, nor furnished with an eagle's
wing; that is, of not being endowed with
powers which would subvert the nature,
and counterac the laws of our present fate.

In order to d jutftice to the subjed, I

must observe, that the fame reasoning
which has been now employed with
refpet to our knowledge of immorta-
lity, is equally applicable to many other
branches of intelleftual knowledge. Thus,
why we are prmitted to know so little of
the nature of that Eternal being who rules
the uniterfe why the manner in. which
he operates ot the aturtl and tnora
world, is whoilly e6We*alte why we are
kept in fueh ignorance with rdtpel to
the extent of his works, to the nature and
agency of spiritual beinga, and ever with

I refpeCd

refpec to the union between our own foul S E R M.
and body: To all these, and several other IV.
enquiries of the fame kind, which often
employ the folicitoub researches of fpe-
culative men, the answer is the fame that
was given to the interesting queffion which
made the subjeCt of our discourse. The
degree of knowledge desired, would prove
incompatible with the design, and the
proper business of human life. It would
raise us to a sphere too exalted; would
reveal objeCts too great and striking for
our present faculties; would excite feel-
ings too strong for us to bear; in a word,
would unfit us for thinking or acting like
human creatures. It is therefore reserved
for a more advanced period of our na-
ture; and the hand of Infinite Wisdom
hath in mercy drawn a veil over scenes
which would overpower the fight of
mortals.

One instance, in particular, of Divine

Wisdom, is so illustrious, and corresponds
so remarkably with our present subjet,
that I cannot pass over it without notice;

0 that

S E R M. that is, the concealment under which Pro-

Iv. vidence has placed the future events of

our life on earth. The desire of penetrat-
ing into this unknown region, has ever
been one of the most anxious passions of
men. It has often seized the wife as well
as the credulous, and given rife to many
vain and impious superstitions throughout
the whole earth. Burning with curiolity
at the approach of some critical event,
and impatient under the perplexity of
conjecture and doubt, how cruel is Pro-
vidence, we are apt to exclaim, in deny-
ing to man the power of fore-sight, and in
limiting him to the knowledge of the pre-
sent moment ? Were he permitted to look
forward into the course of destiny, how
much more suitably would he be prepared
for the various turns and changes in his
life ? With what moderation would he en-
joy his prosperity, under the fore-know-
ledge of an approaching reverse? And
with what eagerness be prompted to im-
prove the flying hours, by feeing the in-
evitable term draw nigh which was to
fufiih his courfc ?

But

But while Fancy indulges such vain de- s E R M.

fires and criminal complaints, this covet- l
ed fore-knowledge mull clearly appear to
the eye of reason, to be the most fatal gift
which the Almighty could bestow. If in this
present mixed state, all the successive scenes
of distress through which we are to pass,
were laid before us in one view, perpetual
sadness would overcast our life. Hardly
would any transient gleams of interven-
ingjoy be able to force their way through
the cloud. Faint would be the relish of
pleasures, of which we foresaw the close:
Insupportable the burden of afflictions,
under which we were oppressed by the
load not only of present, but of antici-
pated sorrows. Friends would begin their
union, with lamenting the day which was
to dissolve it; and, with weeping eye, the
parent would every moment behold the
child whom he knew that he was to lose.
In short, as soon as that mysterious veil,
which now covers futurity, was lifted
up, all the gaiety of life would difap-
pear; its flattering hopes, its pleasing il-

0 2 luions,

S E R M. lusions, would vanish; and nothing but

Iv. its vanity and sadness remain. The fore-

fight of the hour of death would interrupt
the whole course of human affairs; and
the overwhelming profpe& of the future,
instead of exciting men to proper activity,
would render them immoveable with con-
fternation and dismay.- How much
more friendly to man is that mixture of
knowledge and ignorance which is allotted
him in this state ! Ignorant of the events
which are to befall us, and of the precise
term which is to conclude our life, by
this ignorance our enjoyment of present
objects is favoured; and knowing that
death is certain, and that human affairs
are full of change, by this knowledge our
attachment to those objects is moderated.
Precisely in the fame manner as by the
mixture of evidence and obscurity which
remains on the profpeC of a future state,
a proper balance is preserved betwixt our
love of this life, and our desire of a better.

The longer that our thoughts dwell on
this subjed, the more we mufl be convin-

,J ced,

ced, that in nothing the Divine Wisdom s E RM.
is more admirable, than in proportioning Iv.
knowledge to the neceflities of man. In-
ltead of lamenting our condition, that we
are permitted only to fee as through a glafi
darkly, we have reason to bless our Crea-
tor, no less for what he hath concealed,
than for what he hath allowed us to know.
He is wonderful in counsel, as he is excellent
it working. He is wife in heart, and his
thoughts are deep. How unsearchable are
the riches of the wifdorn and the knowledge
of God !

FROM the whole view which we have

taken of the subjeA, this important in-
fltuion arises, That the great design of
all the knowledge, and in particular of the
religious knowledge which God hath as-
forded us, is, to fit us for discharging the
duties of life. No useless discoveries are
made to us in religion: No dilcoveres
even of useful truths, beyond the precise
degree of information, which is subser-
vient to right condut. To this great end

all

B E R M. all our information points. In this center

IV. all the lines of knowledge meet. Life and

immortality are brought to light in the goSpel;
yet not so displayed as to gratify the cu-
riofity of the world with an astonishing
fpedacle; but only so far made known,
as to affilt and support us in the pracice
of our duty. If the discovery were more
imperfet, it would excite no desire of
immortality; if it were more full and
striking, it would render us careless of
life. On the first supposition, no sufficient
motive to virtue would appear; on the
second, no proper trial of it would remain.
In the one cafe, we should think and at
like men who have their portion only in this
world; in the other cafe, like men who
have no concern with this world at all.
Whereas now, by the wife conflitution of
Heaven, we are placed in the most favour-
able situation for acing, with propriety,
our allotted part here; and for rising, in
due course, to higher honour and happi-
ness hereafter.

Let

Let us then second the kind intentions S E R M

of Providence, and ad upon the plan Iv.
which it hath pointed out. Checking our
inquisitive solicitude about what the Al-
mighty hath concealed, let us diligently
improve what he hath made known. In-
habitants of the earth, we are at the fame
time candidates for heaven. Looking up-
on these as only different views of one
confitent character, let us carry on our
preparation for heaven, not by abstract-
ing ourselves from the concerns of this
world, but by fulfilling the duties and of-
sices of every station in life. Living Jo-
berly, righteously, andgodly in the present
world, let us lookfor that blejTed hope, and
the glorious appearing of the great God, and
our Saviour Jesus Chri/t.

Before I conclude, it may be proper to

observe, that the reasonings in this dif-
course give no ground to apprehend any
danger of our being too much influenced
by the belief of a future state. I have
shown the hurtful effects which would
follow from too bright and full a disco-

very

ER M. very of the glory of that state; and in
IV. Ihowing this, I have justified the decree

of Providence, which permits no such dill
covcrv. But as our nature is at present
conllituted, attached by so many Itrong
connexions to the world of sense, and en-
joying a communication so feeble and di-
llant with the world of spirits; we need
fear no danger from cultivating inter-
course with the latter as much as pofliblc.
On the contrary, from that intercourse
the chief security of our virtue is to be
fought. The biass of our nature leans so
much towards fenfc, that from this fide
the peril is to be dreaded, and on this
fide the defence to be provided.

Let us then walk by faith. Let us

strengthen this principle of acion to the
utmost of our power. Let us implore the
Divine Grace, to strengthen it within us
more and more: That we may thence
derive an antidote against that subtle poi-
son, which incessant commerce with the
objects of sense diffuses through our fouls;
that we may thence acquire purity and

dignity

dignity of manners, suited to our divine s E R M.
hopes; and, undefiled by the pleasures of Iv
the world, unfliaken by its terrors, may
preserve to the end one constant tenor of
integrity. Till at last, having, under the
conduc of Christian faith, happily finiih-
cd the period of discipline, we enter on
that state where a far nobler scene liall
open; where eternal objects Ihall ihine in
their native splendour; where, this twi-
light of mortal life being past, the Sun of
ri'hteoufnefs ihall rife; and that which is
perfec7 being cote,' that which is in part
fJall be done away.

' S E R-

# SERMON V. On the DEATH of CHRIST. Preached at the celebration of the Sacrament of the LORD'S SUPPER. JOHN xvii. 1. Jesus lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, The hour is come; 

114

SERMON V.

On the D E A T H of C H R I S T.
Preached at the celebration los the Sacrament

of the LORD'S SUPPER.

J O 1 N Xvii. I.
Jesus lift up his eyes to heaven, and said,

Father, The hour is come;-
BE R M. T HESE were the words of our blessed

v. Lord on a memorable occasion. The

feast of the passover drew nigh, at which
he knew that he was to susser. The night
was arrived, wherein he was to be deliver-
ed into the hands of his enemies. He
had spent the evening in conference with
his disciples; like a dying father in the
midst of his family, mingling confola-
tions with his last instruCtions. When he

had

had ended his discourse to them, he lifted s E R M.
up his eyes to heaven, and, with the words V.
which I have now read, began that solemn
intercessory prayer which closed his mi-
nifir. Immediately after, he went forth
with his disciples into the garden of
Gethsemane, and surrendercd himself to
those who came to apprehend him.

Such was the situation of our Lord at
the time of his pronouncing these words.
He saw his mission on the point of being
accomplished. He had the profped full
before him, of all that he was about to
fuffer.-Father, the hour is come !-What
hour? An hour the most critical, the
most pregnant with great events, since
hours had begun to be numbered, since
time had begun to run. It was the hour
in which the Son of God was to termi-
nate the labours of his important life, by
a death still more important and illuftri-
ous; the hour of atoning, by his susser-
ings, for the guilt of mankind; the hour
of accomplihfing prophecies, types, and
symbols, which had been carried on thro'

P2 a

S E R M. a ferics of ages ; the hour of concluding

V- the old, and introducing to the world the

new dispensation of religion; the hour
of his triumphing over the world, and
death, and hell; the hour of his erecting
that spiritual kingdom which is to last so:
ever. Such is the hour, filch are the
events which you are to commemorate
in the ficrament of our Lord's Supper.
1 shall attempt to set them before you as
proper fubjecs, at this time, of your
devout meditation. To display them, in
their genuine majesty, is beyond the abi-
lity of man.

I. T H I s was the hour in which Chriit

was glorified by his fuffcrings. The whole
of his life had discovered much real great-
ness under a mean appearance. Through
the cloud of his humiliation, his native
lustre often broke forth; but never did it
shine so bright, as in this last, this trying
hour. It was indeed the hour of diftrclf
and of blood. He knew it to be fuich; andi
when he uttered the words of the Text,

lho

he had before his eyes the executioner and s E R M.
the cross, the scourge, the nails, and the v.
spear. But by such prospects his foul was
not to be overcome. It is distress which
ennobles every great characRer; and distress
was to glorify the Son of God. He was
now'to teach all mankind, by his example,
how to fufler and to die. He was to
fland forth before his enemies as the
faithful Witness of the truth ; justifying
by his behaviour the character which he
afiilmed, and fealing with his blood the
doctrine which he taught.

What magnanimity in all his words

and actions on this great occasion! The
court of Herod, the judgment-hall of
Pilate, the hill of Calvary, were so many
theatres prepared for his displaying all the
virtues of a constant and a patient mind.
When led forth to susser, the first voice
which we hear from him, is a generous
lamentation over the fate of his un-
fortunate, though guilty, country; and
to the last moment of his life, we behold
him in possession of the fame gentle and

benevolent

ER M. benevolent spirit. No upbraiding, no
V. complaining cxpreflion escaped from his

lips, during the long and painful ap-
proaches of a cruel death. He betrayed
no symptom of a weak or a vulgar, of a
dilcompoe(ld or impatient mind. With
the utmout attention of filial tenderness, he
committed his aged mother to the care of
his beloved disciple *. With all the dig-
nity of a Sovereign, he conferred pardon
on a penitent fellow-fuffcrer. With a
greatness of mind beyond example, he
ipent his last moments in apologies and
prayers, for thole who were shedding his
blood.

By wonders in heaven, and wonders

on earth, was this hour diftinguifled.
All nature seemed to feel it; and the dead
and the living bore witncfs to its import-
ance. The veil of the temple was rent in
twain. The earth shook. There was
darkness over all the land. The graves
were opened, and many who Jiept arose and
uent into the Holy City. Nor were theli

the
' See John xix. 26, 27.

the only prodigies of this awful hour. SERM.
The most hardened hearts were filbdued V.
and changed. The Judge, who in order
to gratify the multitude passed fcntence
against him, publickly attefled his inno-
cence. The Roman centurion, who pre-
fided at the execution, glorified God, and
acknowledged the sufferer to be more
than man. After heJawu the things which
had palsed, he said, Certainly this iwas a
righteous peron ; truly, this was the Son of
God. The Jewish malefactor, who was
crucified with him, addressed him as a
King, and implored his favour. Even
the crowd of insensible fpecators, who
had come forth as to a common fpeclacle,
and who began with clamours and in-
fults, returned home, smiting their breqa/s.
-Look back on the heroes, the philofo-
phers, the legislators of old. View them
in their last moments. Recall every cir-
cumftance which diftinguiflied their de-
parture from the world. Where can you
find such an assemblage of high virtues,
and of great events, as concurred at the

death

SE RM. death of Christ? Where, so many tclli-

v. monies given to the dignity of the dying

person, by earth, and by heaven ?

II. THIS was the hour in which Chrilt

atoned for the fins of mankind, and ac-
complifhed our eternal redemption. It
was the hour when that great facrificc
was offered up, the efficacy of which
reaches back to the first transgression of
man, and extends forward to the end of
time; the hour, when from the cross, as
from an high altar, that blood was flow-
ing, which waffed away the guilt of the
nations.

This awful dispensation of the Almigh-

ty, contains mysteries which are beyond
the discovery of man. It is one of thole
things into which the angels desire to /o!.
What has been revealed to us, is, T'li;
the death of Christ was the interposition
of Heaven for preventing the ruin of hu-
man kind. We know, that under the go-
vernment of God, misery is the natural
consequence of guilt. After rational crca-

l ~ ~~turc'

tures had, by their criminal conduct, in- s E R M.
troduced disorder into the divine king-'
dom, there was no ground to imagine,
that by their penitence and prayers alone,
they could prevent the deltruuion which
threatened them. The prevalence of pro-
pitiatory sacrifices throughout the earth,
proclaims it to be the general sense of
mankind, that mere repentance was not
of sufficient avail to expiate fin, or to stop
its penal effects. By the constant allu-
sions which are carried on in the New
Teltament to the sacrifices under the Law,
as pre-signifying a great atonement made
by Christ; and by the strong expreflions
which are used in describing the effecs of
his death, the sacred writers show, as
plainly as language allows, that there was
an eficacy in his sufferings, far beyond
that of mere example and inltruAion.
The nature and extent of that efficacy we
are unable, as yet, fully to trace. Part
we are capable of beholding; and the
wisdom of what we behold, we have rea-
son to adore. We discern, in this plan of

Q redemption,

S E R M. redemption, the evil of fin strongly exhi-

V., bited; and the juflice of the divine go-

vernment awfully exemplified, in Christ
fuffcring for finners. But let us not ima-
gine, that our present discoveries unfold
the whole influence of the death of Chriss.
It is conneaed with causes into which we
cannot penetrate. It produces confcquen-
ces too extensive for us to explore. God's
thoughts are not as our thoughts. In all
things, we fee only in part; and here, if
any where, we fee also as through a glafi,
darkly.

This, however, is fully manifest, that

redemption is one of the most glorious
works of the Almighty. If the hour of
the creation of the world was great and
illustrious; that hour, when from the
dark and formless mass, this fair system
of nature arose at the divine command;
when the morning jlars fang together, and
all the sons of God Jhouted for joy ; no lets
illustrious is the hour of the restoration of
the world; the hour when from condemn-
ation and misery it emerged into happi-

ness

ness and peace. With less external ma- s E R M.
jefty it was attended; but is, on that ac-
count, the more wonderful, that under
an appearance so simple, such great events
were covered.

III. IN this hour, the long series of

prophecies, visions, types, and figures,
was accomplished. This was the center
in which they all met: This the point,
towards which they had tended and
verged, throughout the course of so
many. generations. You behold thc Law
and the Prophets flanding, if we may
speak so, at the foot of the crols, and
doing homage. You behold Moses and
Aaron bearing the ark of the covenant;
David and Elijah presenting the oracle
of testimony. You behold all the priests
and sacrifices, all the rites and ordinan-
ces, all the types and symbols, assem-
bled together to receive their confum-
mation. Without the death of Christ, the
worihip and ceremonies of the law would
have remained a pompous, but unmean-

Qz2 ing

S E R M. ing institution. In the hour when he was

V. crucified, the book with thefevenfeals was

opened. Every rite assumed its fignifi-
cancy; every prediction met its event;
every symbol displayed its correspond-
ence.

The dark, and seemingly ambiguous

method of conveying important difcove-
ries under figures and emblems, was not
peculiar to the sacred books. The Spirit
of God, in pre-signifying the death of
Chriit, adopted the fame plan, according
to which the whole knowledge of those
early ages was propagated through the
world. Under the veil of mysterious al-
lusion, all wisdom was then concealed.
From the sensible world, images were
every where borrowed, to describe things
unseen. More was understood to be
meant, than was openly expressed. By
anigmatical rites, the Priest communica-
ted his doctrines; by parables and alle-
gories, the Philosopher inftruted his dif-
ciplcs; even the Legiflatort by figurative
sayings, commanded the reverence of the

people.

people. Agreeably to this prevailing SER M
mode of inftrudion, the whole dificn- V.
fation of the Old Testament was so con-
ducted, as to be the shadow and the
figure of a spiritual system. Every re-
markable event, every diftinguiflied per-
fonage, under the Law, is interpreted in
the New Testament, as bearing some refe-
rence to the hour of which we treat. If
Isaac was laid upon the altar as an inno-
cent viceim; if David was driven from
his throne by the wicked, and rcftored
by the hand of God; if the brazen ser-
pent was lifted up, to heal the people; if
the rock was finitten by Moses, to furnifli
drink in the wilderness; all were types
of Christ, and alluded to his death.

In predicting the fame event, magni-

ficent, but seemingly contradictory, was
the language of ancient prophecy: For it
foretold a Mefliah, who was to be at once
a sufferer and a conqueror. The Star was
to come out of Jacob, and the Branch to
spring from ibe flem of Jefe. The Angel of
the Covenant, the Desire of all Nations, was

to

S E R M. to come fiddenly to his temple; and to him

v. was to be the gathering of the people. Yet

at the fame time, he was to be despised and
rejected of men; he was to be taken from
prifn, and from judgment; and to be led
as a lamb to theflaughter. Though he was
a man offorrows, and acquainted with grief,
yet the Gentiles were to come to his light,
and Kings to the brightnefJ of his rsing. In
the hour when Christ died, those prophe-
tical riddles were solved; those seeming
contradictions were reconciled. The ob-
fcurity of oracles, and the ambiguity of
types, vanilied. The Sun of righteouJneji
rose; and, together with the dawn of
religion, those lhadows passed away.

IV. Tilis was the hour of the abolition

of the Law, and the introducion of the
Gospel; the hour of terminating the old,
and of beginning the new dispensation of
religious knowledge and worthip, through-
out the earth. Viewed in this light, it
forms the most augult aera which is to be
found in the history of mankind. When

Christ

Christ was suffering on the cross, we are s E R M.
informed by one of the Evangelifis, that v.
he said, I thirfi; and that they filled a
fpunge with vinegar, and put it to his
mouth. After he had taqled the vinegar,
knouing that ali things were now accom-
pli/ed, and the fripture fullled, he laid,
It is finihed *; that is, This offered
draught of vinegar was the last circum-
flance predicted by an ancient Prophet f,
that remained to be fulfilled. The vision
and the prophecy are now fealed. The
Mosaic dispensation is closed. And he
bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.

It is finihed-When he uttered these

words, he changed the state of the uni-
verse. At that moment, the Law ceased,
and the Gospel commenced. This was
the ever-memorable point of time, which
separated the old and the new world from
each other. On one fide of the point of
reparation, you behold the Law, with its
priests, its sacrifices, and its rites, retiring
from fight. On the other fide, you behold

the
JohD xix. 28, 29, 30. t PfaL lxL 21.

SE IR M. the Gospel, with its funple and venerable

V. inltitutions, coming forward into view.

In this hour, the veil of the temple was
rent; and the glory departed from be-
tween the cherubims. The legal High
Priest delivered up his Urim and his
Thunmim, his breast-plate, his robes,
and his incenfc: And CILRIST flood forth
as the Great High Priest of all succeeding
generations. By that one sacrifice which
he now offered, he abolihed sacrifices for
ever. Altars on which the fire had blazed
for ages, were now to finoke no more.
Vicims were no more to bleed. Not with
the blood of bull; and goats, but with his
oun blood, he now entered into the Holy
Place, there to appear in the presence of God
for I!s.

This was the hour of aflociation and

union to all the worshippers of God.
When Christ said, It is finihed, he threw
down the wall of partition which had so
long divided the Gentile from the Jew.
He gathered into one, all the faithful, out
of every kindred and people. He pro-

1 ~ ~claimed

claimed the hour to be come, when the S E R M.
knowledge of the true God should be no
longer. confined to one nation, nor his
worship to one temple; but over all the
earth, the worihippers of the Father fliould
fenre him in pirit and in truth. From that
hour, they who dwelt in the utterinot ends
of the earth, firangers to the covenant of
promifi, began to be brought nigh. In that
hour, the light of the Gospel dawned from
afar on the Britith Islands.

During a long course of ages, Provi-

dence seemed to be occupied in prepar-
ing the world for this revolution, The
whole Jewish ceconomy was intended to
usher it in. The knowledge of God was
preserved unextinguifhed in one corner of
the world, that from thence, in due time,
might iffuc forth the light which was to
overspread the earth. Successive revela-
tions gradually enlarged the views of
men beyond the narrow bounds of Judaa,
to a more extensive kingdom of God.
Signs and miracles awakened their ex-
pefation, and directed their eyes towards

R this

S E R M. this great event. Whether God descend-

v. ed on the flaming mountain, or spoke by

the Prophet's voice; whether he scattered
his chosen people into captivity, or re-
assembled them in their own land; he was
still carrying on a progressive plan, which
was accomplished at the death of Christ.

Not only in the territories of Israel, but

over all the earth, the great dispensations
of Providence refpeted the approach of
this important hour. If empires rose or
fell; if war divided, or peace united the
nations; if learning civilized their man-
ners, or philosophy enlarged their views;
all was, by the secret decree of Heaven,
made to ripen the world for that fulnefi
of time, when Christ was to publish the
whole counsel of God. The Persian, the
Macedonian, the Roman Conqueror, en-
tered upon the sage, each at his predit-
ed. period; and, though he meant not so,
neither did his heart think iJ, miniftcred
to this hour. The revolutions of power,
and the fucceflion of monarchies, were so
arranged by Providence, as to facilitate

the

the progress of the Gospel through the S E R M.
habitable world, after the day had arrived, v.
when the Jfone which was cut out of the
mountain, without hands, Jhould become a
great mountain, and fill the earth *. This
was the day, which Abraham Jaw afar off,
and was glad. This was the day, which
many Prophets and Kings, and righteous men,
desired to fee, but could not; the day for
which the earnest expedation of the crea-
ture, long oppressed with ignorance, and
bewildered in superstition, might be just-
ly said to wait.

V. T i i s was the hour of ChriWt's tri-

umph over all the powers of darkness;
the hour in which he overthrew domi-
nions and thrones, led captivity captive,
and gave gifts unto men. The contest which
the kingdom of darkness had long car-
ried on againit the kingdom of, light, was
now brought to its crisis. The period
was come, when the feed of the woman
Jhould bruise the head of the serpent. For
many ages, the most gross superstition had

R 2 filled
Dan. ii. 34, 35

s E R M. filled the earth. The glory of the uncorrupt-

V. ible God was every where, except in the

land of Judaa, changed into images made
like to corruptible man, and to birds, and
beafit, and creeping things. The world,
which the Almighty created for himself,
seemed to have become a temple of idols.
Even to vices and paflions, altars were
railed and what was intited Religion,
was in effect a discipline of impurity.
In the midst of this universal darkness,
Satan had ereted his throne; and the
learned and polified, as well as the fa-
vage nations, bowed down before him.
But at the hour when Christ appeared on
he cross, the signal of his defeat was
given His kingdom suddenly departed
from him; the reign of idolatry passcd
away: He was beheld tofall like lightening
frmn heaven. In that hour, the founda-
tion of every Pagan temple shook. The
statue of every fal&f Goa tottered on its
base. The Priest led from his falling
flrine; and the Heathen oracles became
dumb for ever,

As

As on the cross Christ triumphed over SE R

Satan, so he overcame his auxiliary, the V.
world. Long had it assailed him with
its temptations and discouragements, In
this hour of revere trial, he surmounted
them all. Formerly he had despised the
pleasures of the world. IIe now baffled
its terrors. Hence he is juffly said to have
crucifed the world. By his sufferings, he
ennobled distress; and he darkened the
lustre of the pomp and vanities of life.
He discovered to his followers, the path
which leads, through affliltion, to glory
and to vitory; and he imparted to them
the fame spirit which enabled hii to
overcome. lMy kingdom is not of this ~tW
In tkis world yeJhall have tribulatina.: 'Bd
be of good cheer; I have overeeme tb
world *.

Death also, the last foe of man,, waI

the vicUim of this hour. The formidable
appearance of the Specre. remined; but
his dart was taken awty. For, ia the
hour when Christ expiated guilt, he difi

armed
JIhi xvi. 33,

S E R M. armed death, by securing the refurrcction

v of the just. When he said to his peni-

tent fellow-fufferer, To-day thou fljalt be
with me in paradise, he announced to all
his followers the certainty of heavenly
bliss. He declared the cherubims to be
dismissed, and the flaming sword to be
Iheathed, which had been appointed at
the fall, to keep from man the way of the
Tree of Life *. Faint, before this period,
had been the hope, indistinct the profped,
which even good men enjoyed of the
heavenly kingdom. Life and immortality
were now brought to light. From the hill
of Calvary, the first clear and certain
view was given to the world of the ever-
lasting mansions. Since that hour, they
have been the perpetual consolation of
believers in Christ. Under trouble, they
sooth their minds; amidst temptation,
they support their virtue; and, in their
dying moments, enable them to fay, 0
Death! where is thy sing? 0 Grave! where
is thy viftory ?

VI. TIls
*Gen. iii. 24.

VI. THIS was the hour when our Lord s E RM.

erected that spiritual kingdom which is V.
never to end. How vain are the counsels
and designs of men ! How fllallow is the
policy of the wicked! How ihort their
triumphing ! The enemies of Christ ima-
gined, that in this hour they had success-
fully accomplished their plan for his de-
ftrudion. They believed, that they had
entirely scattered the small party of his
followers, and had extinguifled his name
and his honour for ever. In derision, they
addrefled him as a King. They cloath-
ed him with purple robes; they crowned
him with a crown of thorns; they put a
reed into his hand; and, with insulting
mockery, bowed the knee before him.
Blind and impious men ! How little did
they know, that the Almighty was at that
moment setting him as ICing on the hill of
Sion; giving him the Heathen for his inberi-
tance, and the uttermof parts of the earth for
bis pojffion ! How little did they know,
that their badges of mock royalty were at
that moment converted into the signals of

absolute

S E r M. absolute dominion, and the instruments of

V. irrefiftable power! The reed which they

put into his hands,. became a rod of iron,
with which he was to break in pieces his
tirniies; a sceptre, with which he was to
rule the universe in righteousness. The
cross, which they thought was to stigma-
tize him with infamy, became the ensign
of his renown. Instead of being the
reproach of his followers, it was to be
their boast and their glory. The crol'
was to fline on palaces and churches,
throughout the earth. It was to be as-
fumed as the diftincfion of the molt
powerful monarchs, and to wave in the
banner of victorious armies, when the
memory of Herol and Pilate should be
accursed; when Jerusalem should be re-
duced to athes, and the Jews be vaga-
bonds over all the world.

These were the triumphs which com-

menced at this hour. Our Lorw saw them
already in their birth; heJsaw 'f the tra-
vail of hisfoul, and was satisfied. He bc-
held the word of God going forth, con-

I quering,

quering, and to conquer; subduing to s E R M.
the obedience of his laws, the subduers V.
of the world; carrying light into the re-
gions of darkness, and mildness into the
habitations of cruelty. He beheld the
Gentiles waiting below the cross, to re-
ceive the Gospel. He beheld Ethiopia
and the IJles Jfretching out their hands to
God; the defart beginning to rejoice, and to
blojfom as the rose; and the knowledge of the
Lord filling the earth, as the waters cover
the sea. Well pleated, he said, It is finflh-
ed. As a conqueror, he retired from the
field, reviewing his triumphs: He bowed
his head, and gave up the ghofl.-From
that hour, Christ was no longer a mortal
man, but Head overall things to the Church;
the glorious King of men and angels,
of whose dominion there ihall be no end.
His triumphs shall perpetually increase.
ls nameJhall endure for ever; itfJall last
as long as' the fun; men Jhall be ble/ed in
him, and all nations flall call him blessed.

S Sucei

SE R M. SUCH were the tranfations, such the

v. effects of this ever-memorable hour. With

all those great events was the ihind of our
Lord filled, when he lifted up his eyes to
heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come !

From the view which we have taken of

this subject, permit me to suggest, what
ground it affords to confide in the mercy
of God for the pardon of fin, to truf
to his faithfulness for the accomplishment
of all his promises, and to approach to
him, with gratitude and devotion, in
acts of worihip.

I N thefrjf place, The death of Christ

affords us ground to confide in the divine
mercy, for the pardon of fin. All the
steps of that high difpeniation of Provi-
dence, which we have confidered, lead
direcdly to this conclulion, He that spared
not his own Son, but delivered him upfor us
all, how Jhall he not with him alJo freely
give us all things ? This is the final result
of the discoveries of the Gospel. On this
refts that great system of consolation,

which
* Rm. viii. 32.

which it hath reared up for men. We S E R M.
are not left to dubious and intricate rea- v.
fonings, concerning the conduct which
God may be expected to hold towards his
offending creatures. But we are led to the
view of important and illustrious facts,
which strike the mind with evidence irre-
fifible. For, is it possible to believe, that
such great operations as I have endea-
voured to describe, were carried on by the
Almighty in vain ? Did he excite, in the
hearts of his creatures, such high hopes,
without any intention to fulfil them ?
After so long a preparation of goodness,
could he mean to deny forgiveness to the
penitent, and the humble ? When, over-
come by the sense of guilt, man looks up
with an astonished eye to the justice of his
Creator, let him recollect that hour of
which the Text speaks, and be com-
forted. The signals of divine mercy,
erected in- his view, are too conspicuous
to be either distrusted or mistaken.

IN the next place, the discoveries of
this hour, afford the highest reason to

S 2 trust

SE R M. trudt in the divine faithfulness, for the

v. accomplilhmcnt of every promise which

remains yet unfulfilled. For this was the
hour of the completion of God's ancient
covenant. It was the performance of the merc
promi/cd to the fathers. We behold the
confiunmation of a great plan, which,
throughout a course of ages, had been
uniformly pursued; and which, against
every human appearance, was, at the ap-
pointed moment, exatly fulfilled. .\
.word that is gone out of the mouth of the
lord fl.allfail. No length of time alters
his purpose. No obstacles can retard it.
Towards the ends accompliihed in this
hour, the most repugnant instruments were
made to operate. We discern God bend-
ing to his purpofc, the jarring paflions,
the opposite interests, and even the vices
of men; uniting seeming contrarieties in
his scheme; making the wrath of nan to
prai/j him; obliging the ambition ot
Princes, the prejudices of the Jews, the
malice of Satan, all to concur, either in
bringing forward this hour, or in com-

plcatill

pleating its destined effects. With what SE RU
entire confidence ought we to wait for V.
the fulfilment of all his other promises,
in their due time ; even when events are
most embroiled, and the profped is most
discouraging ? Although thou fayejf, Thou
canst not fee him, yet judgment is before
him ; therefore trufl thou in him. Be at-
tentive only to perform thy duty; leave
the event to God; and be assured, that
under the direction of his providence, all
thingsJhall work together for a happy
issue.

LA STLY, The consideration of this

whole subjec tends to excite gratitude
and devotion, when we approach to
God in ads of worship. The hour of
which I have discoursed, prefients him to
us in the amiable light of the Deliverer
of mankind, the Restorer of our forfeited
hopes. We behold the greatness of the
Almighty, softened by the mild radiance
of condescension and mercy. We behold
him diminiihing the awful diltance at

which

SE R M. which we stand from his pretence, by ap-

V. pointing for us a Mediator and Intercessor,

through whom the humble may, with-
out difmnay, approach to Him who made
them. By such views of the Divine na-
ture, Christian faith lays the foundation
for a worthip which shall be at once ra-
tional and affectionate; a worihip, in
which the light of the understanding lhall
concur with the devotion of the heart,
and the most profound reverence be unit-
ed with the molt cordial love. Christian
faith is not a system of speculative truths.
It is not a lesson of moral inftrucion on-
ly. By a train of high discoveries which
it reveals, by a succession of interesting
obje&s which it places in our view, it is
calculated to elevate the mind, to purify
the affecions, and, by the assistance of
devotion, to confirm and encourage vir-
tue. Such, in particular, is the scope of
that divine institution, the Sacrament of
our Lord's Supper. To this happy pur-
pose let it conduce, by concentering, in
one striking point of light, all that the

Gofpcl

Gospel has displayed of what is most im- s E R M.
portant to man. Touched with just con- V.
trition for past offences, and filled with a
grateful sense of divine goodness, let us
come to the altar of God; and, with a
humble faith in his infinite mercies, de-
vote ourselves to his service for ever.

SER-

# SERMON VI. On GENTLENESS. JAMES iii. 17. The wisdom that is from above, is  gentle 

144

SERMON VI.

On GENTLENESS.

JAMES iii. 17.

The wi;ldom that isfrom above, is-gentle-
S E R . T O be wi{l in our own eyes, to be wife

VI. in the opinion of the world, and

to be wife in the fight of God, are three
things so very different, as rarely to coin-
cide. One may often be wife in his own
eyes, who is far from being so in the
judgment of the world; and to be reputed
a very wife man by the world, is no Ic-
curity for being accounted wife by God.
As there is a worldly happiness, which
God perceives to be no other than dil-
guised misery; as there are worldly ho-
nours, which in his estimation are re-

i proach;

proach; so there is a worldly wisdom SE R M.
which is foolihftmef in his Jight. Of this V.
worldly wisdom the characters are given
in the context, and placed in contrast
with those of the widYonm which is from
above. The one is the wisdom of the
crafty; the other, that of the upright.
The one terminates in felfiflnefs ; the
other, in charity. The one is full offiri/f
and bitter enryings ; the other, of mercy
and ofgoodfi'its. One of the chief cha-
racters by which the wisdom from above
is diffinguifhed, is gentleness, of which I
am now to difcoutfe. Of this there is the
greater occasion to discourse, because it is
too seldom viewed in a religious light;
and is more readily confidered by the
bulk of men, as a mere felicity of nature,
or an exterior accomplishment of man-
ners, than as a Christian virtue which
they are bound to cultivate. I shall first
explain the nature of this virtue; and
(hall then offer some arguments to re-
commend, and some directions to faci-
litate the practice of it.

T I

SE R M. I BEGIN with diftinguiihing true gen-

V. tlenefs from passive tameness of spirit,

and from unlimited compliance with the
manners of others. That paffivc tameness
which submits, without struggle, to every
incroachment of the violent and affum-
ing, forms no part of Christ.ian duty;
but, on the contrary, is deftrutive of ge-
neral happiness and order. That unli-
mited complaisance, which, on every oc-
cafion, falls in with the opinions and
manners of others, is so far from being a
virtue, that it is in itself a vice, and
the parent of many vices. It overthrows
all fteadinels of principle; and produces
that sinful conformity with the world,
which taints the whole character. In the
present corrupted slate of human man-
ners, always to assent and to comply, is
the very worfl maxim we can adopt. It
is impossible to support the purity and
dignity of Christian morals, without op-
posing the world on various occasions,
even though we should fland alone. That
gentleness therefore which belongs to vir-

tue,

tue, is to be carefully diftinguiflhed from s E R.M.
the mean spirit of cowards, and the fawn- VI
ing assent of sycophants. It renounces
no jull right from fear. It gives up no
important truth from flattery. It is
indeed not only consistent with a firm
mind, but it necessarily requires a manly
spirit, and a fixed principle, in order to
give it any real value. Upon this iolid
ground only, the polifli of gentlenels can
with advantage be fuperinduced.

It stands opposed, not to the most de-

termined regard for virtue and truth, but
to harshness and leverity, to arrogance
and overbearing, to violence and oppref-
sion. It is, properly, that part of the
great virtue of charity, which makes us
unwilling to give pain to any of our
brethren. Compassion prompts us to re-
lieve their wants. Forbearance prevents
us from retaliating their injuries. Meek-
ness reitrains our angry pafiions; can-
dour, our severe judgments. Gentleness
correcs whatever is oflenfive in our man-
ners; and, by a constant train of humane

T 2 attentions,

s E R M. attentions, studies to alleviate the burden
VI. of common misery. Its ofiicc, therefore,

is extensive. It is not, like some other
virtues, called forth only on peculiar
emergencies; but it is continually in ac-
tion, when we are engaged in intercourle
with men. It ought to fonn our addrels,
to regulate our speech, and to diffuse it-
lelf over our whole behaviour.

I must warn you, however, not to con-

found this gentle wisdom which is from:
above, with that artificial courtesy, that
studied fmootllnefs of manners, which i,
learned in the school of the world. Such
accomplishments, the molf frivolous and
empty may poffels. Too often they are
employed by the artful as a snare; too
often affectcd by the hard and unfeeling,
as a cover to the bafenels of their mind(.
We cannot, at the fame time, avoid ob-
serving the homage, which, even in iilch
instances, the spirit of the world is con-
straincd to pay to virtue. In order to
render society agreeable, it is found ne-
celfary to afume somewhat, that may at

Icill

least carry its appearance. Virtue is the s r. ;.
universal charm. Even its shadow is Y:
courted, when the fulftance is wanting.
The imitation of its form has been re-
duced into an art; and, in the commerce
of life, the first fludy of all who would
either gain the esteem, or win the hearts
of others, is to learn the speech, and to
adopt the manners, of candour, gentleness,
and humanity. But that gentlenlfs which
is the charadcriftick of a good man, has,
like every other virtue, its feat in the
heart: And, let me add, nothing except
what flows from the heart, can render
even external manners truly pleasing. For
no assumed behaviour can at all times
hide the real character. In that unaffec-
ed courtesy which iprings fiom a gentle
mind, there is a charm infinitely more
powerful, than in all the studied manners
of the most finiflhed courtier.

True gentleness is founded on a fcnfc

of what we owe to the God who made us,
and to the common nature of which we
all share. It arises from reflccion on our

OwP

SER M. own failings and wants; and from julf
VI. views of the condition, and the duty of

man. It is native feeling, heightened and
improved by principle. It is the heart
which easily relents; which feels for every
thing that is human; and is backward
and flow to inflicd the least wound. It is
affable in its ad(lrcis, and mild in its de-
meanour; ever ready to oblige, and will-
ing to be obliged b) others; breathing
habitual kindness towards friends, cour-
tefy to strangers, long-fuffering to ene-
mies. It exercises authority with mode-
ration; administers reproof with tender-
nets ; confers favours with ease and mo-
defty. It is unassuming in opinion, and
temperate in zeal. It contends not eager-
ly about trifles; flow to contradict, and
still flower to blame; but prompt to allay
iliffention, and to restore peace. It neither
intermeddles unnecessarily with the affairs,
nor pries inquisitively into the fecrcts, of
others. It delights above all things to
alleviate ditlreGs, and, if it cannot dry up
the falling tear, to sooth, at lealt, the

grieving

grieving heart. Where it has not the SER M.
power of being useful, it is never bur- VI.
denfome. It seeks to please, rather than
to shine and dazzle; and conceals with
care, that superiority either of talents, or
of rank, which is oppreflive to those who
are beneath it. In a word, it is that fpi-
rit, and that tenor of manners, which the
Gospel of Christ enjoins, when it com-
mands us to bear one another's burdens; to
rejoice with those who rejoice, and to weep
with those who weep ; to please everr one
his neighbour for his good; to be kind and
tender-hearted; to be pitiful and courteous;
to support the weak, and to be ytient to-
wards all men.

Having now sufficiently explained the

nature of this amiable virtue, I proceed
to recommend it to your practice. Let
me, for this end, desire you to confider
the duty which you owe to God; to con-
fider the relation which you bear to one
another; to confider your own interest.

I. Confider the duty which you owe to
God. When you survey his works, no-

thing

S E r. M. thing is to confi)icuous, as his greatness
_1.
v and imajcfty. When you consult his

word, nothing is more remarkable, than
his attention to soften that greatneif, and
to place it in the. mildest and least op-
pretlrve light. He not only charaterizes
hiinltlf as the Cod aofcotfioation, but, with
condlciending gcntlenefs, he particularly
accommodates himself to the situation of
the uilfo:runatc. lie dwelleth with the
humble and contrite. He hideth not his flce
wvhen the afflicel cry,. le healeth the broken
in th.art, and binti.th up their woundt.-
When his Son came to be the Saviour of
the world, he was eminent for the fame
attribute of mild and gentle goodness.
Long before his birth, it was prophefic(l
of him, that he ihould not frive, nor cry,
n9r cralel his voice to be h:ard in tbt frerts;
that the brui/ed reed he Jhould not break,
nor q'tencb the Jfnoaking flax : And after
his death, this distinguishing feature in
his characder, was so univcrfally remem-
liered(, that the Apostle Paul, on occasion
of a request which he makes to the Co-

rinthlians,
Matth. xii. 19, 20.

rinthians, uses those remarkable exprcf- ERM.
sions *, I bejeech you by the nmeekintz and VI.
gentlenef of Cihrfl. During all his inter-
course with men, no harflnefs, or pride,
or flately distance, appeared in his demea-
nour. In his access, he was easy; in his
manners, simple; in his answers, mild;
in his whole behaviour, humble and ob-
liging. Larn of me, said he, for I am
meek and lowly in heart. As the Son
of God is the pattern, so the Holy Ghost
is the inspirer of gentleness. His name
is the Co firter, the Spirit of grace and
peace. His fruits, or operations on the
human mind, are love, meekness, gentleness,
an lowg-fvferirg t.- Thus, by every
discovery of the Godhead, honour is put
upon gcntlenefs: It is held up to our
view, as peculiarly conneced with Ce-
leflial Nature. And suitable to such dif-
coveries, is the whole strain of the Gospel.
It were unneceflary to appeal to any single
precept. You need only open the New
Tefament, to ind this virtue perpetually
inculcated. Charity, or love, is the ca-

U pital
* 2 C'or. x. x t Gal. *. 22.

S E R M. pital figure ever presented to our view;

V1. and gentleness, forbearance, and forgive-

ness, are the founds ever recurring on
our ear.

So predominant, indeed, is this spirit

throughout the Christian dispensation,
that even the vices and corruptions of
men have not been able altogether to
defeat its tendency. Though that dif-
penfation is far from having hit!e:-to
produced its full cffec upon the world,
yet we can cl:-arly tracc it, influence, in
hulnanizing the manners of men. Re-
markable, in this reifect, is the victory
which it has gained over those powers of
violence and cruelty, which belong to the
infernal kingdom. Wherever Chriftia-
nity prevails, it has discouraged, and, in
some degree, abolished slavery. It has
rescued human nature from that ignomi-
nious yoke, under which, in former ages,
the one half of mankind groaned. It has
introduced more equality between the two
sexes, and rendered the conjugal union
more rational and happy. It has abated

the

the ferocioufiicfs of war. It has miti- s E R ,
gated the rigour of despotism, mitigated
the cruelty of punilhments; in a wold, it
has reduced mankind, from their ancient
barbarity, into a more humane and gentle
ftat.----Do we pretend respect and zeal
for this religion, and at the fame time al-
low ourselves in that harfinefs and fcve-
rity, which are so contradictory to its ge-
nius ? Too plainly we flhow, that it has
no power over our hearts. We may re-
tain the Chrittian name; but we have
abandoned the Christian ipirit.

II. Confider the relation which you

bear to one another. Man, as a solitary
individual, is a very wretched being. As
long as he stands detached from his kind,
he is polteffed, neither of happiness, nor
of strength. We are formed by Nature
to unite; we are impelled towards each
other, by the compaflionate inftinds in
our frame; we are linked by a thousand
connections, founded on common wants.
Gentleness, therefore, or, as it is very pror

U 2 perly

s E R M. perly termced, humanity, is what man, as

VI. flch, in every station, owes to man. To be

inacceitible, contemptuous, and hard of
heart, is to revolt against our own nature;
is, in the language of scripture, to hidL
owmrflves from our own fic/h. Accordingly,
as all feel the claim which they have to
mildness and humanity, io all are fen-
sibly hurt by the want of it in others.
On no fide are we more vulnerable, No
complaint is more feelingly made, than
that of the harh and rugged manners
of persons with whom we have inter-
courfi. But how seldom do we transfer
the cafe to ourselves, or examine how far
we are guilty of inflicting on others,
whole sensibility is the fame with ours,
those very wounds of which we so loudly
complain ?

But, perhaps, it will be pleaded by

some, that this gentleness, on which we
now infilt, regards only thole smaller of-
sices of life, which in their eye are not
etfential to religion and goodness. Ne-
gligent, they confess, of the government
I of

of their temper, or the regulation of their s r. r. M.
behaviour, on flight occasions ; they are v
attentive, as they pretend, to the great
duties of beneficence; and ready, when-
ever the opportunity presents, to perform
important services to their fellow-crea-
tures. But let such persons reflect, that
the occafons of performing those import-
ant good deeds, very rarely occur. Per-
haps their situation in life, or the nature
of their connections, may in a great mea-
sure exclude them from such opportuni-
ties. Great events give scope for great
virtues; but the main tenor of human
life, is composed of finall occurrences.
Within the round of these, lie the mate-
rials of the happiness of moss men; the
fubjeds of their duty, and the trials of
their virtue. Virtue muff be formed and
supported, not by unfrequent ads, but
by daily and repeated exertions. In or-
der to its becoming either vigorous or
useful, it muff be habitually active ; not
breaking forth occasionally with a tran-
fient luitre, like the blaze of the comet;

but

SE RkM. but regular in its returns, like the light
VI. of day: Not like the aromatick gale, which

sometimes feasts the sense; but like the
ordinary breeze, which fans the air, and
renders it healthful.

Years may pass over our heads, with-

out affording any opportunity for ads
of high beneficence, or extensive utility.
Whereas not a day passes, but, in the
common tranfadions of life, and eipe-
cially in the intercourse of domeftick so-
ciety, gentleness finds place for promot-
ing the happiness of others, and strength-
ening in ourselves the habit of virtue.
Nay, by seasonable discoveries of a hu-
mane spirit, ye fbmetimes contribute
more materially to the advancement of
happiness, than by actions which are
seemingly more important. There are si-
tuations, not a few, in human life, wherc
the encouraging reception, the condc-
scending behaviour, and the look of sym-
pathy, bring greater relief to the heart,
than the most liberal supplies of bounty.
While, on the other fide, when the hand

of
/0

of liberality is extended to bellow, the want s E R Mr.
of gentleness is sufficient to frufirate the VL.
intention of the benefit. We four tholc
whom we meant to oblige; and, by con-
ferring favours with oltentation and
harshness, we convert them into injuries.
Can any disposition then be held to pof-
fess a low place in the scale of virtue,
whose influence is so considerable on the
happiness of the world ?

Gentleness is, in truth, the great ave-
nue to mutual enjoyment. Amidst the
trife of interfering interests, it tempers
the violence of contention, and keeps alive
the feeds of harmogy. It softens ani-
mofities; renews endearments; and ren-
ders the countenance of man, a refreflh-
ment to man. Baniih gentleness from the
earth; suppose the world to be filled with
none but harih and contentious spirits;
and what fort of society would remain?
The solitude of the desert were prefer-
able to it. The confliic of jarring ele-
ments in chaos; the cave, where fubterra-
neous winds contend and roar; the den,

where

S E R . where serpents hils, and beats of the

VI. forreft howl; would be the only proper

rcprcfcntations of such assemblies of men.
-- tlhat I had wings like a doe ! fr,
then I would fly away, aml be at reft. Lo.'
then, / would wander far of, and remain
in the wilJer-nrf: I would haflen my ejf'apc
fron the windy Jlortm and tempest: l:r I
have fe'n violence and fir-ife in the cit).
_Ilifihif and fJrrowtv are in the midfl of it:
D)eeeit and guile depart not from the lrect .
-- Strange ! that where men have all
one common interest, they ihould so of-
ten, absurdly, concur in defeating it ! Has
not Nature already provided a sufficient
quantity of unavoidable evils for the tate
of man ? As if we (lid not susser enough
from the Itorm which beats upon us with-
out, muds we conspire also, in those focic-
ties where we assemble, to find a retreat
from that fonnr, to harass one another?
-But if the sense of duty, and of com-
mon happiness, he insufficient to recom-
mend the virtue of which we treat, then
let me desire you,

i, ~III. To
* Pfal. Iv. 6, 7, 8.

III. To confider Your own interest. SE R M.

Whatever ends a good man can be sup- VI.
posed to pursue, geritlenefs will be found
to favour them. It prepofl'fles and wins
every heart. It persuades, when every
other argument fails; often disarms the
fierce, and melts the stubborn: Where-
as harshness confirms the opposition it
would fubduc; and, of an indifferent
person, creates an enemy. I-He who could
overlook an injury committed in the col-
lifion of interests, will long and fcvercly
resent the flights of a contemptuous he-
haviour.- To the man of gentleness,
the world is generally dilpofed to ascribe
every other good quality. The higher
endowments of the mind we admire at
a distance; and when any impropriety of
behaviour accompanies them, we admire
without love. They are like some of the
distant stars, whofc beneficial influence
reaches not to us. Whereas, of the in-
tiaence of gentlenef,, all in some degree
partake, and therefore all love it. The
man of this character, riles in the world

X without

SE R M. without struggle, and flouriflies without

{V envy. His misfortunes are universally

lamented; and his failings are easily for-
given.

But whatever may be the cffect of this

virtue on our external condition, its in-
fluence on our internal enjoyment is cer-
tain and powerful. That inward tran-
quillity which it promotes, is the first rc-
quifite to every pleasurable feeling. It
is the calm and clear atmosphere, the fe-
renity and fun-mline of the mind. When
benignity and gentlenels reign within,
we are always Icalt in hazard of being
ruffled from without; every person, and
every occurrence, are beheld in the most
favourable light. But let some clouds
of tdiguft and ill-humour gather on
the mind; and immediately the sIene
changes; Nature teems transformed ; and
the appearance of all things is blackened
to our view. The gentle mind is like the
finooth fiream, which reflects every ob-
jec in its just proportion, and in its faired
colours. The violent spirit, like troubled

waterg,

waters, renders back the images of things s E R 1M.
distorted and broken; and communicates V
to them all, that disordered motion which
arises solely from its own agitation.

Offences munw come. As Toon may the

waves of the sea cease to roll, as provo-
cations to arise from human corruption
and frailty. Attacked by great injuries,
the man of mild and gentle spirit will
feel what human nature feels; and will
defend and relent, as his duty allows him.
But to those flight provocations, and fri-
volous offences, which are the most fre-
quent causes of dilquiet, he is happily
fuperiour. Hence his days flow in a far
more placid tenor than those of others;
exempted from the numberless difcompo-
flres which agitate vulgar minds. In-
spired with higher sentiments; taught to
regard, with indulgent eye, the firailties of
men, the omissions of the careless, the fol-
lies of the imprudent, and the levity of
the fickle, he retreats into the calmness of
his spirit, as into an undisturbed fanctu-
ary; and quietly allows the usual current
of life to hold its course.

X 2 This

S E R M. This virtue has another, and fill more

VL important conncsion with our intcrefl,

by means of that relation which our lrc-
sent bchaviour bears to our eternal slate.
Heaven is the region of gcntlcncfs an!
fricndfllip; hcll, of fierceness and animno-
fity. If then, as the fcripturc infiruas u.,
.cccrdJin' , -wh:t 'weC now /sow, -we 1w!l'
here./tir reap; it follows, that the cultivi-
tion of a gentle temper is nccfcualy to pre-
pare us for future felicity ; and that the
indulgence of harlh (lifpofitions, is the
introduction to future mit`cry. MIcn, I
am afraid, too often fcparate those articls
of their belief which relate to etcrnity,
from the ordinary affairs of the worll.
They connec them with the seasons (t
ferioufnlefs and gravity. They leave them,
with much reflped, as in a high region,
to which, only on great occasions, thcy
resort; and, when they descend into com-
mon life, confider thecfelves as at libcrty
to give free scope to their humours :anu
pafions. Whereas, in fad, it is their hc-
haviour in the daily train of social inter-

courfI,

course, which, more than any other calfc, S r R 'r.
fixes and dctcrinillcs ilCl fpiit:i't.:! clha- V.
racier; gradually inltilling those dilipoi-
tions, and forming tliofl habits, wvhicl
aifltct their evrlafting condition. With
regard to trifles, perhaps, their malig-
nant dispositions may chiefly be indulged.
But let them remember well, that tliofe
trifles, by increasing the growth of pee-
villllels and pafrion, become pregnant
with the most fcrious mifliiefs ; and may
fit them, before they are a;;are, for bling
the future companions of infernal spirits
only.

I mean not to fay, that in order to our

preparation for Heaven, it is enough to
be mild and gentle; or that this virtue
alone, will cover all our fins. Through the
felicity of natural constitution, a certain
degree of this benignity may be pofflfled
by some, whose hearts are in other re-
speds corrupt, and their lives irregular.
But what I mean to alFert, is, that where
no attention is given to the government
of temper, meetnefs for Heaven is nlot

\ct

S E R M. yet acquired, and the regenerating power

>VI of religion is as yet unknown. One of

the first works of the Spirit of God, is, to
infuse into every heart which it inhabits,
that ,rcntle trflomi which is from above.
They wtho are Chritfs, have crucified the
JI/Jh wwith its afclCions and Ihis ; but let
it not be forgotten, that among the..works
of the flcfl, hatred, variance, emulation;,
·wrath,fjlrif', and envyings, are as exprcfsly
enumerated, as unclcannefs, murders, drunk-
cnnfis, and revelling *. They who conti-
nue either in the one or the other, Jhall
not inherit, indeed can not inherit, the
kingldom of God.

Having thus shown the importance of

gentlences, both as a moral virtue, and
as a Chriltian grace, I mhall conclude the
iiubjecl, with briefly ufggefting some con-
fiderations which may be of use to faci-
litate the pracdice of it.

FOR this end, let me advise you to view

your character with an impartial eve;
and to learn, from your own failings, to

give
Gal. v. 1i9, ZC, 21.

give that indulgence which in your turn SE RM.
you must claim. It is pride which fills v
the world with so much harshness and
severity. In the fulness of felf-eftimation,
we forget what we are. We claim atten-
tions, to which we are not entitled. We
ire rigorous to offences, as if we had ne-
ver offended ; unfeeling to distress, as if
we knew not what it was to susser. From
tlofe airy regions of pride and folly, let
us descend to our proper level. Let us
survey the natural equality on which
Providence has placed man with man,
and reflect on the infirmities common to
all. If the reflecion on natural equa-
lity and mutual offences be insufficient to
prompt humanity, let us at least remem-
ber what we are in the fight of God.
Have we none of that forbearance to give
to one another, which we all so earnefily
intreat from Heaven ? Can we look for
clemency or gentleness from our Judge,
when we are so backward to Ihow it to
our own brethren ?

Accustom

S R mI. Accufom vourllves, also, to reflect .

VI the finall moment of those things whic.

are thc ufilal incentives to violence an(i
contention. In the ruffledl and angr.
iour, we view every appearance throughl
a false mc:cium. The moss inconfiderahli
point of interest, or honour, swells into.
momentous objec ; and the flightelt a-
tack fcems to threaten immediate ruil.
But after paflion or pride has fihfildcd(, \c
look round in vain for the mighty nimi-
c'iefs we dreaded. The fabrick, whic!
our diflurbcd imagination Lad reared, t,-
tally d'ifaippcars. But though the catil; cf
contention has dwindled away, its c(;i-
fcquences remain. We have alienatei ::
friend ; we have cmbittered an enemy;
we have sown the feeds of fiuture fufpici::,
malevolence, or difgufit.-Sufpcnd ?:er
violence, I befecch vou, for a molm.c.r,
when caures of discord occur. \ntici-
pate that period of coolness, which, of i:-
self, will soon arrive. Allow yourfelSv
to reflecA, how little you have anyr 1"-
spec of gaining by fierce contention; i-t

I lw.'.'

how much of the true happiness of life S E R M.
you are certain of throwing away. Eali- VI.
ly, and from the fmallelt chink, the bit-
ter waters of firife are let forth; but with
difficulty is their course restrained ; and
when once they begin to flow, they never
fail to poison his cup who was the first to
give them passage.

But gentleness will, most of all, be pro-
moted by frequent views of those great
objects which our holy religion presents.
Let the profpeds of immortality fill your
minds. Look upon this world as a state of
passage. Confider yourselves as engaged in
the pursuit of higher interests; as acting
now, under the eye of God, an intro-
dutlory part to a more important scene.
Elevated by such sentiments, your minds
will become calm and sedate. You will
look down, as from a fuperiour station,
on the petty disturbances of the world.
They are the selfish, the sensual, and the
vain, who are molt subjec to the impo-
tence of paflion. They are lirked so
closely to the world; by so many fides

Y they

SER MI. they touch every objec, and every per-
VI. son around them, that they are perpetu-

ally hurt, and perpetually hurting others.
But the spirit of true religion removes
us to a proper distance from the grating
objecs of worldly contention. It leaves
us sufficiently connected with the world,
for acting our part in it with propriety;
but disengages us from it so far, as to
weaken its power of disturbing our tran-
quillity. It inspires magnanimity ; and
magnanimity always breathes gentleness.
It leads us to view the follies of men with
pity, not with rancour; and to treat, with
the mildnefi of a fuperiour nature, what
in little minds would call forth all the
bitterness of passion.

Aided by such considerations, let us

cultivate that gentle wisdom which is,
in so many relpets, important both to
our duty and our happiness. Let us al-
fume it as the ornament of every age, and
of evcry station. Let it temper the petu-
lance of youth, antd soften the morofi-
ness of old age. Let it mitigate autho-

rity

rity in those who rule, and promote de- s E R M.
ference among those who obey. I con- VI.
elude with repeating the caution, not to
miltake for true gentleness, that flimzy
imitation of it, called polilhed manners,
which often, among the men of the
world, under a smooth appearance con-
ceals much asperity. Let yours be na-
tive gentleness of heart, flowing from the
love of God, and the love of man. Unite
this amiable spirit, with a proper zeal for
all that is right, and jull, and true. Let
piety be combined in your characer
with humanity: Let determined integri-
ty dwell in a mild and gentle breast. A
character thus supported, will command
more real refpec, than can be procured
by the most shining accomplilhmcnts,
when separated from virtue.

Y 2 ESER-

# SERMON VII. On the DISORDERS of the PASSIONS. ESTHER v. 13. Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the King's gate.

172

SERMON VII.
On the DISORDERS of the PASSIONS.

ESTHER V. 13.
Let all this availeth me nothing, so long

as I fee Mordecai the Jew fitting at the
King's gate.

SERM. T HESE are the words of one, who,
VII. I though high in tfation and power,

confessed himself to be miserable. They
relate to a memorable occurrence in the
Pcrfian history, under the reign of Aha-
fuerus, who is supposed to be the Prince
known among Greek historians by the
name of Artaxerxes.- Ahasuerus had ad-
vanced to the chief dignity in his king-
dom Haman an Amalekite, who inhe-
rited all the ancient enmity of his race to

the

the Jewish nation. He appears, from S r. R M
what is recorded of him, to have been a VIi
very wicked miniiter. Railed to grcatncl
without merit, he employed his powcr
solely for the gratification of his paflions.
As the honours which he poffeldl were
next to royal, his pride was every (lay fed
with that servile homage which is pecu-
liar to Afiatick courts; and all the f-r-
vants of the King prostrated thenfelves
before him. In the midst of this general
adulation, one person only stooped not to
Haman. This was Mordecai the Jew;
who, knowing this Amalekite to be an
enemy to the people of God, and, with
virtuous indignation, despising that inib-
lence of prosperity with which he saw
him lifted up, bowed not, nor did him re-
verence. On this appearance of difrc-
f,est from Mordecai, Haman was full of
wrath: But he thought scorn to lay hands
on Mordecai alone. Pcrional revenge was
not sufficient to satisfy him. So violent
and black were his passions, that he re-
solved to exterminate the whole nation to

which

S E R M. which Mordecai belonged. Abusing, for
VII. this cruel purpose, the favour of his cre-

dulous Sovereign, he obtained a decree to
be sent forth, that, against a certain day,
all the Jews throughout the Persian domi-
nions Ihould be put to the sword. Mean
while, confident of fucceis, and blind to
approaching ruin, he continued to exult
in his prosperity. Invited by Ahasuerus
to a royal banquet, which Either the
Queen had prepared, he went forth that
day joyful, and with a glad heart. But be-
hold how flight an incident was fuffi-
cient to poison his joy! As he went forth,
he saw Mordecai in the King's gate; and
observed, that still he refused to do him
homage: le flood not up, mor was moved
fbr him; although he well knew the for-
midable designs which Haman was pre-
paring to execute. One private man, who
delpited his greatness, and disdained sub-
miflon, while a whole kingdom trembled
before him; one spirit, which the utmost
firetch of his power could neither subdue
nor humble, blafled his triumphs. His

who!e

whole foul was ihaken with a 1torm of s E R L
passion. Wrath, pride, and desire of re- Vlr
venge, rose into fury. With difficulty he
refrained himfclf in publick; but as soon
as he came to his own house, he was
forced to difclole the agony of his mind.
He gathered together his friends and fa-
mily, with Zerefh his wife. He told them
of the glory of his riches, and the multitude
of his children, and all the things wherein
the King had promoted him, and how he had
advanced him above the princes and ser-
vants of the King. He said, moreover, 3ea
Esher the Queen did let no man come in
with the King, unto the banquet that Jfle
had prepared, but mrfelf; and to-morrow
als am I invited unto her with the King.
After all this preamble, what is the con-
clufion ?-Yet all this availeth me nothing,
So long as Ifee Mordecai the Jew fitting at
the King's gate.

The sequel of Haman's history I shall

not now pursue. It might afford matter
for much inftrution, by the conspicuous
justice of God in his fall and punishment.

But,

r. R M. But, contcmplating only the fmigular situ-
VEI. ation in which the Text presents him, and

the violent agitation of his mind which
it tlifilays, the following reflections na-
turally arile, which, together with some
practical improvements, Ihall make the
hl)bjec of this discourse. I. How milfr-
able is vice, when one guilty pafion cre-
ates li much torment! 11. How unavail-
ing is prolperity, when, in the height of
it, a lingle dilflapointment can destroy the
relifi of all its pleasures! 111. How weak
is human nature, which, in the ablencc
of real, is thus prone to form to itself
imaginary woes !

I. How miserable is vice, when one

guilty passion is capable of creating so
much torment ! When we dilcourfe to
you of the internal misery of finners;
when we reprelent the pangs which they
susser from violent passions, and a corrupt-
ed heart; we are fonetimes tilfpecded of
chnfing a theme for declamation, and of
heightening the picure which we draw,

by

S .hole miillib e, l)r i.t lrc, liapplily trai.- \

( il, \l lviolc lit.I;.iloll inl lits lCi(riovC(

them fromh the diltltucrl)ic .;'d( tumiul. >of
paflhon1, caln I ardiv coitceive, thi.at as oIng
as the body is at Cal', anld thic xtcr:;i coln-
( itioln 1rul'[Crotlis, ainy thiig w, >ih :; 1i.'s
within tIe Iind tllould I(lait1 iich Icxqil lit
woe. But, lor the truth ot our allirtios,
we appeail I) thc hiltorv o' mankind(. \.'c
might realonl firoin the conltitutloll of the
rational framenc; where the underilandilgl
is appointed to be lipreine, and the pa!-
lions to be ilbhordinate ;. and where, if
this due arrangement of its parts be over-
thrown, miicrv as nccctl'i.ily cnfiues, as
pain is conflquclit in the animal frame,
upon the ditloltion of its members. But
laying ipeculations of this kind aside, it
is 'ufilcient to lead you to the view of
tacts, the import of which can neither
be controverted, nor mifiaken. This is,
indeed, the great advantage of history,
that it is a mirrour which holds up man-
kind to their own view. For, in all ages,

Z human

S E R M. human nature lhas been the flme. In the
V1. circle of worldlv aiffirs, the fame charac-

ters and situations arc perpetually return-
ing; and in the follies and passions, the
vices and crimes, of the generations thar
are palt, we read those of the present.

Attend, then, to the instance now be-

fore us; and conceive, if you can, a per-
flo; more thoroughly wretched, than one
reduced to make this humiliating consel-
sion, that, though surrounded with power,
opulence ant plealitre, he was loft to all
happiness, through the fiercenets of his re-
fentment; and was at that moment flung
by disappointment, and torn by rage, be-
yond what he could bear. All this avail-
eth me nothing, ,f lo, as I fee Mordecai the
Jew fitting at the King's gate. Had this
been a soliloquy of Haman's with himself,
it would have been a sufficient discovery
of his misery. But when we confider it
as a confcflion which he makes to others,
it is a proof that his misery was be-
come insupportable. For such agitations
of the mind, every man strives to con-

ceal,

ceal, because hlie knows they diflonour s E RM.
him. Other griefs and iorrows, lie can,
with freedom, pour out to a confident.
What he 'uffers from the injustice or ma-
lice of the world, he is not alhamed to
acknowledge. But when his ilfrering
arises from the bad dilpolitions of his own
heart; when, in the height of profperitv,
he is rendered milcrable, iolcly by difap-
pointed pride, every ordinary motive for
commur.ication ceases. Nothlig but the
violence of anguilh, can drive him to con-
fess a passion which renders him odious,
and a weakness which renders him del-
picable. To what extremity, in parti-
cular, must he be reduced, before he can
difclole to his own family the infalmous
secret of his misery ? In the eve of his
family every man wiflies to appear re-
fpecable, and to cover from their know-
ledge whatever may vilify or degrade
him. Attacked or reproached abroad, he
consoles himself with his importance at
home; and in domeflick attachment and
refpecl, fecks for some compensation for

Z 2 the

S I R M. the inljufice of the world.-ludge, then,

I of the degree of torment which Hainan

endured, bl) its breaking through all thelc
reltraints, and forcing him to publilh hi,
Ihamc bctborc thole, from whom all me:i
siek molt to hide it. Ilow levcre imilt
havec been the colnfli(t which he under-
went within ihiinfit, before he called to-
gether his wits and all his firiends for
this purp)fe ? Ilow dreadful the agonv
he litlcrcd at the moment of his confeif
lion, when, to the altonillied company,
he laid open the caule of his diltrcs ?

Alilimble ail the evils which poverty,

tlifica1, o:' \io!cnce can inflict, and their
Itings will l)e tfund by) far leis pungellt,
than thol. 5 hicch litcl guilty paliions
dart into the hea.rt. Amidit the ordi-
nary calamlitiLs of the world, the mind
can exert its l owers, and fiiggelt relief:
And the mind is properly the mal; the
furlfrcr, and his iltffclrings, can be liftin-
guilhcd. But thole dliorders of paflion,
by seizing dirclly on the mind, attack
human nature in its Rtrong hold, and

cr'

cut off its last rcourcc. They pcnctlate S EM.
to the vcry feat of linlaitionl; and convert \1I
all the powers of thouTlgt into inltru-
ments of torture.

I,et us remark, in the event tlat is now

before us, the awful hand o f Cod; and
admire his jultice, in thus making the
finner's ow-:n wickcdncJs to rep rove him, r:!i.
his hbcklidiugs to rorriI hlim. Scepticks
rcafon in vain againlt the reality of a di-
vine government. It is not the lillbjcct
of dlilpute. It is a falc wlhich carries the
evidence of fenil, and diifplays itlilf be-
fore our eves. We fee the Almiglhtv ina-
nifeltly pti.f'in the f,nimcr cith Cevil. 'ce
fee him connecting with every signal de-
viation from duty, thofic wounds of tlh
fiirit which occasion the moll cxquifltc
torment. He hath not Inerely promul-
gated his laws now, and delayed the dif-
tribution of rewards and punilliments,
until a future period of being. But the
landions of his laws already take place;
their effecs appear; and with filch infi-
nite wisdom are they contrived, as to

require

S E R M. require no other executioners of jullice
VI. againit the finner, than his own guilty

pailions. God needs not come forth from
his tecret place, in order to bring him to
punifhmcnt. He needs not call thunder
down from the heavens, nor raile any
minilter of wrath from the abyss below.
He need only fay, Ephraim is joited to his
idols; let him alone: And, at that instant,
the finner becomes his own tormentor.
The infernal fire begins, of itself, to kindle
within him. The worm that never dies,
seizes on his heart.

Let us remark also, from this example,

how impcrfectly we can judge from ex-
ternal appearances, concerning real hap-
pinets or misery. All Pertia, it is pro-
bable, envied Haman as the happiest per-
son in the empire ; while vet, at the mo-
ment when we now confider him, there
was not within its bounds, one more
thoroughly wretched. We are seduced
and deceived, by that false glare which
prosperity ibmetimes throws around bad
men. We ai tempted to imitate their

crimes,

crimes, in order to partake of their ima- s E R M.
gined felicity. But remember Haman, 'l
and beware of the snare. Think not,
when you behold a pageant of grandeur
displayed to publick view, that you dif-
cern the ensign of certain happiness. In
order to form any just conclulion, you
must follow the great man into the're-
tired apartment, where he lays aside his
difguile. You muff not only be able to
penetrate into the interior of families,
but you mufft have a faculty by which
you can look into the inside of hearts.
Were you endowed with such a power,
you would molt commonly behold good
men, in proportion to their goodness,
satisfied and easy.; you would behold
atrocious finners, always restless and un-
happy.

Unjust are our complaints, of the pro-

mifcuous distribution made by Provi-
dence of its favours among men. From
superficial views such complaints arise.
The diitribution of the goods of fortune,
indeed, may often be pronmfcuous; that

is,

S E R M. is, (liipoportioend to the mor;ll charac-
U I. tClri ui menl; but the allotment of real

lI.pitilci;, is neve'r 1i. lor to the wicked
then is no peatLu'. Ih.' are like the troubed
Jin i')heC it Cai)inot efi . 'I'. travel wUith
pafin all thitil ys.r. 'rouble and angu!i/h
pic'':.til agaipnl themn. hTrrours make tlhem
f'i.li on ; e'very file . A dread/il /;ind is
iln their elrs; ald they a-re in great feal
where rn fe.ar is.- Hitherto we have
contideredl Haman under the character of
a very wicked man, tormented by crimi-
nal p.afions. I.ct us now confider him,
mcrcly as a child of fortune, a prosper-
ous manl of the world; and proceed to
oblbrve,

II. How unavailing worldly profperitv

is, lince, in the midit of it, a tingle dil-
appointmcnt is sufficient to embitter -all
its pleasures. We might at firll imagine,
that the natural effect of prosperity would
be, to di'll;fi over the mind a prevailing
fatis;facdion, which the letler evils of life
could not ruffle or diflurb. We might

I cxpcil,

expec, that as one in the full glow of SE RM.
health, despises the inclemency of wea- VIi.
ther; so one in poffefflon of all the advan-
tages of high power and station, mhould
disregard flight injuries; and, at periec
ease within himself, ihould view, in the
most favourable light, the behaviour of
others around him. Such effecs would
indeed follow, if worldly prosperity con-
tained in itself the true principles of hu-
man felicity. But t

as it posees them

not, the very reverse of those confequen-
ces generally obtains. Prosperity debili-
tates, inltead of strengthening the mind.
.s mot common effedc is, to create an
extreme sensibility to the fightet wound.
It foments impatient desires; and raises
expecations which no success can satisfy.
It folters a false delicacy, which sickens
in the midst of indulgence. By repeat-
ed gratification, it blunts the feelings of
men to what is pleating; and leaves them
unhappily acute to wLatever is uneasy.
Hence, the gale which another would
scarcely feel, is, to the profpcrous, a rude

A a tempest.

3 E R M. tempcft. Hence, the rofe-leaf doubled
<VIL below them on the couch, as is told of

the eflfminate Sybarite, breaks their reft.
Hence, the difrcliecd ihown by Mordecai,
preyed with flch violence on the heart of
Haman. Upon no principle of reason
can we assign a fuflicient cause for all the
dillrels which this incident occasioned to
him. The cause lay not in the external
incident. It lay within himself; it arosf
from a mind dlitecmpcred by prosperity.

I.et this example correc that blind

eagernes, with which we ruth to the
chace of worldly greatness and honours.
I fiy not, that it should altogether divert
us from pursuing them; since, when en-
joyed with temperance and wisdom, they
may doubtless both enlarge our utility,
and contribute to our comfort. But let it
teach us, not to over-rate them. Let it
convince us, that unlef we add to them
the necessary correciives of piety and vir-
tue, thev are, by themselves, more likely
to render us wretched, than to make ui
happy.

Let

Let the memorable fate of Haman fug- s E R M.

gest to us also, how often, besides cor- Vi.
rupting the mind, and engendering in-
ternal misery, they lead us to precipices,
and involve us in ruin. At the moment
when Fortune seemed to smile upon him,
with the molt serene and fettled alpedt,
fle was digging in secret the pit for his
fall; the was weaving around his head
the web of deftrudion. Success inflam-
ed his pride; pride inspired him with
insatiable thirRt of revenge; the revenge
which, for the fake of one man, lie fought
to execute on a whole nation, incensed
the Queen; and he is doomed to fuflcr
the fame death, which he had prepared
for Mordecai.--IHad Haman remained
in a private tation, he might have ar-
rived at a peaceable old age. He might
have been, I fllall not fay, a good or a
happy man, yet probably less guilty by
far, and less wretched, than when placed
at the head of the grcateft empire in the
Eat. Who ksweth what is good jfr tnan
in this li4e, all the days of his vain life,
which he JcnJPHcth',Js aJJha7ow ?

Aa2 An

S E R M. An extensive contemplation of human
VII. affairs, will incline us to this conclusion,

that among the different conditions and
ranks of men, the balance of happiness
is preserved in a great measure equal; and
that the high and the low, the rich and
the poor, approach, in point of real enjoy-
ment, much nearer to each other, than is
commonly imagined. In the lot of man,
mutual compensations, both of pleasure
and of pain, universally take place. Pro-
vidence never intended, that any state
here Ihould be either completely happy,
or entirely miserable. If the feelings of
pleasure are more numerous, and more
lively, in the higher departments of life,
such also are those of pain. If greatnels
flatters our vanity, it multiplies our dan-
gers. If opulence increases our gratifi-
cations, it increases, in the fame plropor-
tion, our desires and demands. If the
poor are confined to a more narrow cir-
cle, yet within that circle lie most of
those natural fatisfacions, which, after
all the refinements of art, are found to

be

be the molt genuine and true.- 11n a E R M.
slate, therefore, where there is ncither so vI.
much to be coveted on the one hIand, nor
to be dreaded on the other, as at firnt a-
pears, how fubmiflive ought we to be to
the disposal of Providence! how temper-
ate in our desires and pursuits ! how
much more attentive to preserve our vir-
tue, and to improve our minds, than to
gain the doubtful and equivocal advan-
tages of worldly profperity!-But now,
laying aside the consideration of Haman's
great crimes; laying aside his high pro-
fperty; viewing him simply as a man,
let us observe from his hiflory,

III. How weak human nature is, which,

in the absence of real, is thus prone t )
create to itself imaginary woes, All th's
availeth me nothing, Js long as lJee Morc-
cai the Jew fitting at the Kiing's gate.-
What was it, 0 Haman! to thee, though
Mordecai had continued to fit there, and
negleced to do thee homage ? TWoull the
banquet have been on that account the

lcfs

S E R M. Icls magnificent, thy palace less splendid,
VII. or thy retinue Icfs numerous? Could the

dilrcfpec't of an obscure stranger difllo-
nour the favourite of a mighty King ? In
the midst of a thousand fubmiffivc cour-
tiers, was one llllen countenance an ob-
jcl worthy of drawing thy notice, or of
troubling thy repoli: ?-Alas ! in Haman
we behold too jlIt a pic!lure of what of-
ten pafles within ourselves. We never
know what it is to be long at ease. Let
the world ccafi from changing around us.
Let external things keep that situation in
which we moif with them to remain; yet
somewhat from within ihall soon arise, to
disturb our happiness. A A1,rdecai ap-
pears, or seems to appear, fitting at the
gate. Some vexation, which our fancy
has either entirely created, or at least has
unreasonably aggravated, corrodes us in
secret; and until that be removed, all
that we enjoy availet/b us nothing. Thus,
while we are inceflantly complaining of
the vanity and the evils of human life,
we make that vanity, and we increale

tlhole

those evils. Unlkillcd in the art of extrac-- s E R M.
ing happiness from the ohbecis around us, UT.
ouir ingenuity bolcly appears in convert-
ing themi into mifcry.

Nor let it be thought that troubles of

this kind are incident only to the great
and the mighty. Though they, perhaps,
from the intemperance of their pallions,
are peculiarly cxpofed to them, yet the
difeafi itfc!f belongs to humnan nature,
and tipreads through all ranks. In the
humble, and seemingly quiet fliade of
private life, discontent broods over its
imaginary sorrows; preys upon the citi-
zen, no less than upon the courtier; and
often teems with pafflions, equally malig-
nant in the cottage and in the palace.
Having once fcized the mind, it tinges
with its own black colour every fur-
rounding object; it every where searches
out materials for itself; and in no directi-
on more frequently employs its unhappy
activity, than in creating divisions amongst
mankind, and in magnifying flight pro-
vocations into mortal injuries. Those self-

created

s E R M. created miseries, imaginary in the cause,
VIL. but real in the suffering, will be found to

form a proportion of human evils, not
inferiour, either in severity or in number,
to all that we endure from the unavoid-
able calamities of life. In situations where
much comfort might be enjoyed, this
man's superiority, and that man's ne-
glec, our jealousy of a friend, our hatred
ot a rival, an imagined affront, or a mil-
taken point of honour, allow us no re-
pose. Hence, discords in families, ani-
mofities among friends, and wars among
nations. Hence, Haman miserable in the
midit of all that greatness could bestow.
Hence, multitudes in the most obscure
flations, for whom 'rovidence seemed to
have prepared a quiet life, no less eager
in their petty broils, nor lets tormented by
their paflions, than if princely honours
were the prize for which they contended.

FROMl this train of observation, which

the Text has luggelted, can we avoid rc-
flecling upon the difordcr in which hu-

man

man nature plainly appears at present to S E R M.
lie? We have beheld, in Haman, the pic- VIL
ture of that misery which arili:s fiom evil
pations ; of that unhappiness, whhich is
incident to the highest pro1ieritv; of that
discontent, which is common to every
state. Whether we confider him as a
bad man, a prosperous man, or fiml,!y
as a man, in every light we behold rea-
son too weak for paiiion. Tilis is the
source of the reigning evil; this is the
root of the universal difi l Thc story
of Haman only Ihows us what luman
nature has, too generally, appeared to
be, in every age. Hence, when we read
the history of nations, what do we read
but the history of the follies and cincms
of men ? We may dignify those recorlded
transactions, by calling them the intrigue.
of flatefinen, and the exploits of con:(1:r-
ors; but they are, in truth, no oih.r than
the efforts of discontent to escape firomn iis
misery, and the Itruggles of contcndi:ng
passions among unhappy men. The hi-
story of mankind has ever been a conri-

B b nucd

SE. R T. nued tra.gc(d ; the world, a great theatre
vt.^ cexhiiting the fanme repeated fccne, of the

folieis of men lluoting forth into guilt,
and of their pallions fermenting, by a
quick procef;, into milery.

3ut can we )blicvc, that the nature of

man came forthl inl this Ilate from the
hands of its gracious Creator ? Did he
frame this worild, and store it with in-
habitants, solely that it might be rc-
plenilled with crimes and misfortunes?
-In the moral, as well as in the natural
world, we may plainly discern the sign.,
of some violent convulsion, which has
mhattcred the original workmanship of the
Almighty. Amidll this wreck of human
nature, traces frill remain which indicate
its Author. Those high powers of con-
science and rcafon, that capacity for hap-
piness, that ardour of enterprize, that
glow of affleion, which often break
through the gloom of human vanity and
guilt, are like the fcattcrcd columns, the
broken arche.;, and defaced fculpturcs of
some fallen temple, whose ancient fplen-

dour

dour appears amidst its ruins. So con- SE R M.
fpicuous in human nature arc thofi cha- V.
rafers, both of a high origin, and of a de-
graded flatc, that, by many religious fees
throughout the earth, they have been sccet
and confessed. A tradition seems to hlave
pervaded almost all nations, that tic hu-
man race had cither through some of-
fence forfeited, or through i;ome misfor
tune loft, that station of prim.ix-val honour
which they once potlellicT. But wlilc,
from this doctrine, ill'underftood, and in-
volved in many fabulous tales, the nati-
ons wandering in Pagan darkness could
draw no confequcnccs that were juit;
while, totally ignorant of the nature of
the disease, they bought in vain for the
remedy; the lamne divine revelation l hich
has informed us in what manner cur apo-
ftacy arose, from the abufc of our rational
powers, has inftrutcd usalfo how wCe may
be restored to virtue, and to hapl;i::,s:.

LET us, therefore, iludv to improve
the afliftance which this revclation ;tf-

B b 2 fords,

S E R M. fords, for the restoration of our nature,
VT ,and the recovcrv of our felicity. With

humblle andml grateful minds, let us apply
to those medicinal frllngs which it hath
opened for curing the disorders of our
heart and pailions. In this view, let us,
with reverence, look up to that Divine
Perfonagc, who descendcd into this world
on purpose to be the light, and the life or
men; who came, in the fulness of grace
and truth, to repair the dt/kltions of many
generations, to rcelore order among the
works of God, and to raise up a new
earth, nnd new heavens, wherein righteolf-
nies ./joulil dwell for ever. Under his
tuition let us put ourselves; and, amidlt
the storms of passion to which we are here
exposed, and the slippery paths which we
are left to tread, never trust prefumptu-
oufly to our own understanding. Thank-
ful that a Heavenly Conductor vouchsafes
his aid, let us earncfily pray, that from
him may descend divine light to guide
our iteps, and divine strength to fortify
our imind. Let us pray, that his grace

may

may keep us from all intemperate pas- s E RM.
sions, and miltalken iurfuits of plcafurc; vi.
that, whether it liall be his will to give
or to deny us earthly propicrity, he may
bless us with a calm, a iobud, and well
regulated mind; may give us nmodera-
tion in fuccel', and fortitude under dliap-
pointment; and may enable us so to take
warning from the crimes and mifcrics of
others, as to efcapc the snares of guilt.

W H L C we thus maintain a due de-

pendence on God, let us altb exert our-
selves with care in adting our own par;.
From the whole of what has been liid,
this great inference arifce, that the hap-
pincet of every man dcpcnds more uto:n
the Rate of his own mind, than upon any
one external circumstance; nay, more than
upon all external things put together. We
have leen, that inordinate pailions are the
great disturbers of life; and tlat, unlcfs
we possess a good confkicncc, and a we!l-
governed mind, difiontnet will blall eve-
ry enjoyment, and the highest prosperity

will

SE R M. will prove only disguised miiery. Fix
vI., then this conclusion in your minds, that

the deltrution of your virtue, is the de-
firlction of your peace. Keep thy heart
uith all diligence; govern it with the
greatest care; for out of it are the ifues
of lfe. In no station, in no period, think
yourselves secure from the dangers which
spring from your passions. Every age,
and every fiation, they beset; from youth
to grey hairs, and from the peahfnt to
the prince.

At your first setting out in life, efpe-

cially, when yet unacquainted with the
world and its Ihares, when every pleasure
enchants with its finile, and every objec
shines with the gloss of novelty; beware
of the seducing appearances which fur-
round you, and recollecd what others
have filffered from the power of head-
strong dcfire. If you allow any passion,
even though ranked among those which
are innocent, to acquire an absolute as-
cendant, your inward peace will be im-
paired. But if any, which have the taint

of

of guilt, take early pofeffion of your s SER
mind, you may (late fiom that moment Vi.
the ruin of your tranquillity. Nor with
the season of youth does the peril end.
To the impetnofity of youthlul icfire,
succeed the more fober, but no ld daln-
gerous, attachments of advancing years;
when the affions which are connected
with inte ltncl ambitio beegn the
reign, and too frequentiy extend t;,,ir
malignant influence, even over tl:oic pe-
riods of life which ought to be mnoll tra-
quil. From the firt to the laa of nla' s
abode on earth, the discipline mnu. neve
be relaxed, of guarding the heart from th!;
dominion of pailion. Eager pafions, and
violent desires, were not made for man.
They exceed his sphere. They find no
adequate objec.s on earth; and of courte
can be produdive of nothing but misery.
The certain consequence of indulging
them is, that there shall come an evil
day, when the anguifl of diifppoint-
ment shall drive us to acknowledge, that
all which we cnjoy availeth us nothing.

You

s E R Pr. You are not to imagine, that the warn-
VII. ings which I have given in this discourse,

arc applicable only to the cafe of fich
signal offenders as he was, of whom the
Text treats. Think not, as I ant afraid
too many do, that, becaufc your pafTi-
ons have not hlrried you into atrociou;
deeds, they have therefore wrought no
milichicf, and have left no fling behind
them. By a continuel d (eries of loole,
though apparently trivial, gratifications,
the heart is often' as thoroughly corrupt-
cd, as by the commifflon of any one of
thofc enormous crimes which spring from
great ambition, or great revenge. Habit
gives the paslions ftrcngth, while the ah-
fence of glaring guilt seemingly jufifiec;
them; and, unawakened by remorse, tlih
finner proceeds in his course, till he wax
bold in guilt, and become ripe for ruin.
For, by gradual and latent steps, the de-
ftnidion of our virtue advances. Did
the evil unvail itself at the beginning:
Did the storm which is to overthrow our
peace, discover, as it rose, all its horrours,

I precautionb

precautions would more frequently be s E R
taken againif it. Bit we are impercep v-,
tibly betrayed; and from one licentious
attachment, one criminal passion, are,
by a train of cnfequcnccs, drawn on
to another, till the government of our
minds is irrecoverably loft The enti-
cing and the odious passions are, in this
refpec', similar in their process; and,
though by different roads, conduct at
last to th. fame issue. David, when lie
first beheld Bathheba, did not plan the
death of Uriah. Haman was not deli-
vcred up all at once to the madnelf of
revenge. His passions rose with the rif-
ing tid of prosperity; and pride com-
pleated what prosperity began. What
was originally no more than displeasure
at Mordecai's difrefpcd, increased with
every invitation he received to the ban-
quet of the King; till it impelled him to
devise the llaughter of a whole nation,
and ended in a dcgree of rage, which
confounded his reason, and hurried him
a ruin. In this manner, reryr crimi-

Cc nal

S E R M. nal passion, in its progress, swells and
VII. blackens; and what was at first a small

cloud, fich as the Prophet's servant saw,
no bi, er than a man's hand, rsing from the
Jfe *, is soon found to carry the tempef
in its womb.

* Kings wiii. 44.

SER-

# SERMON VIII. On our IGNORANCE of GOOD and EVIL in this Life. ECCLES. vi. 12. Who knoweth what it good for man in this life, all the days of his vain life, which he spendeth as a shadow?

203

S E R M0 N VIII.
On our IGNORANCE of GOOD and

E VIL in this Life.

ECCLES. vi. 12.
Who knoweth what is good for man in this

lif, all the days of his vain liJf, which
he fpendeth as a Jhadow ?
T H E measure according to which S E R M.

knowledge is dispensed to man, as- VIII.

fords conspicuous proofs of divine wis-
dom. In many instances we clearly per-
ceive, that either more or less would have
proved detrimental to his state; that en-
tire ignorance would have deprived him
of proper motives to action; and that
complete discovery would have raised
him to a sphere too high for his pre-

C c 2 sent

SE R M. sent powers. He is, therefore, permitted
VIII to know only in prtt; dnd to fee throgh

a glifi, darkly. He is left in that fate
of conjecure, and partial information,
which, though it may occasionally sub-
je him to diitrefs, yet, on the whole, con-
duces moil to his improvement; which
affords him knowledge sufficient for the
purpoies of virtue, and of active life,
without dilturbing the operations of his
mind, by a light too bright and daz-
zlisg. This evidently holds, with refpeif
to that degree of concealment which now
covers the great laws of Nature, the de-
crees of the Supreme Being, the state of
the invisible world, the future events
of our own life, and the thoughts and
designs which pass within the breasts ot
others *.

But there is an ignorance of another

kind, with refpet to which the applica-
tion of this remark may appear more du-
bious; the ignorance under which men
labour concerning their happinecs in the
present life, and the means of attaining

it,
* ViL .S;r m. IV.

it. If there be foundation for Solomoni's s E R M.
complaint in the Text, wuzl kmnrtb uWht vm.
is good for man in this life ? this confe-
quence may be thought inevitably to fol-
low, that the days of his life must be vauin
in every sense; not only because they are
fleeting1 but because they are empty too,
like the jhadow. For, to what purpofi
bre all his labours in the pursuit of an
objedt, which it is not in his power ti
discover or ascertain ?--Let us then feri-
oufly enquire, what account can be givei
of our present ignorance, refpecing wha'.
is good for us in this life; whethler co-
thing be left, but only to wander ili
uncertainty amidst this darkness, and to
lament it as the fad consequence of ouri
fallen state; or whether such inftruc-ti
ons may not be derived from its as give
ground for acknowledging, that by this,
as by all its other appointments, the wis-
dom of Providence brings real good oat
of seeming evil. I shall, in order to de-
termine this point, firtf endeavour to illu-
trate the do'triLe of the Text, that we knoti

not,

SERM. not, or at most know imperfectly, what
VII. ;is good for us in this lif: Ihall next

explain the ciufes to which this defetl
in our knowledge is owing: And then,
shall show the purposes which it was in-
tended to serve, and the effeCts which it
ought to produce on our condud.

TIE whole hiflory of mankind seems

a comment on the doctrine of the Text.
When we review the course of human
affairs, one of the first objets which eve-
ry where attraCts our notice is, the mil-
taken judgment of men concerning their
own interelt. That fore evil, which So-
lomon long ago remarked with refped to
riches, of their being kept by the owners
thereof to their hurt, takes place equally
with refped to dominion and power, and
all the splendid objects and high ftati-
ons of life. We every day behold men
climbing, by painful steps, to that co-
vetedl height, which, in the end, renders
their fall more revere, and their ruin
more conspicuous. But it is not to high

flation

rations that the doctrinc of the Text is S E RM.
limited. In the crimes by which too of- VII.
ten there arc gained, and in the misfor-
tunes which they afterwards bring forth,
the greater part of every audience may
think themselves little concerned. Leav-
ing such themes, therefore, to the poet
and the historian, let us come nearer to
ourselves, and survey the ordinary walk
of life.

Around us, we every where behold a

busy multitude. Restless and uncafv in
their present situation, they are inceliant-
ly employed in accomplishing a change
of it; and, as soon as their wifi is fil-
filled, we discern, by their behaviour, that
they are as diflatisfied as they were be-
fore. Where they expeced to have found
a paradise, they find a desert. The man
of business pines for leisure. The kifure
for which he had longed, proves an irk-
some gloom; and, through want of em-
ployment, he languishes, sickens, and dies.
The man of retirement fancies no ilate to
be so happy, as that of active life. But

he

UE M. he has not engaged long in the tumults

. and contefls of the world, until he finds

cause to look back with regret on the calm
hours of his former privacy and retreat.
Beauty, wit, eloquence, and fame, are
eagerly coveted by men in every rank of
ife. They are the parent's fondest wish for
his child; the ambition of the young, and
theadmirationof the rId. And yet, in what
numberless instances have they proved,
to those who pofleffed them, no other than
shining soares; feduarons to vice, infti-
gations to folly, and, in the end, sources
of misery ? Comfortably might their day.
have passed. lad they been kefs confpicu-
ous. But the diftincdions which brought
them forth to uotice, conferred Qplendour,
and withdrew happiness. Long life is,
of all others, the moif general, and seem-
ingly the most innocent, objet of desire.
With rcfpe& to this too, we so frequently
err, that it would have becn a blessing
to many to have had their with denied.
There was a period, when thley might
save quitted the stage with honour, and

A UA

in peace. But by living too long, they S r R M
outlived their reputation; outlived their VIIL
family, their friends, and comforts; and
reaped nothing from the continuance of
days, except to feel the prclliure of age,
to taste the dregs of life, and to, behold a
wider compass of human minferv.

Man walketh in a vain Jsew. His fears

are often as vain as his wiffes. As what
flattered him in expectation, frequently
wounds him in possession; so the event
to which he looked forward with an
anxious and fearful eye, has often, when
it arrived, laid its terrours aside; nay,
has brought in its train unexpeted blef-
sings. Both good and evil are beheld at
a distance, through a perfpedive which
deceives. The colours of objecs when
nigh, are entirely different from what they
appeared when viewed in futurity.

TH fact then being undoubtedly cer-
tain, that it is common for men to be
deceived in.their profpecs of happiness,
let us next enquire into the causes of that

D d deception.

E R M. deception. Let us attend to those peculiar
VIII. circnmftances in our Itate, which render

us li'ch incompetent judges of future good
or evil in this life.

Firil, We are not sufficiently acquainted

with ourfclves, to foir.fec our future feel-
ings. We judge by the sensations of the
present moment; and, in the fervour of
desire, pronounce confidently concerning
the desired object. But we reflect not,
that our minds, like our bodies, undergo
great alteration from the Situations into
which they are thrown, and the progrcf-
five stages of life thiough which they
pass. Hence, concerning any condition
which is yet untried, we conjecture with
much uncertainty. In imagination, we
carry our present wants, inclinations, and
sentiments, into the slate of life to which
we aspire. But no sooner have we entered
on it, than our sentiments and inclina-
tions change. New wants and desires
arise; new objects are required to gratify
them; and by consequence our old dil-
fatisfaaion returns, and the void, which

/ was

was to have been filled, remains as great S E R M.
as it was before. VIII

But, next, supposing our knowledge of

ourlilves fiitficient to direct us in the
choice of happiness, yet still we are liable
to err, from our ignorance of the con-
necions which fibfift between our own
condition and that of others. No indi-
vidual can be happy, unless the circum-
stances of thofl around him be so adjusted
as to conspire with his interest. For, in
human focicts, no happiness or misery
stands unconnected, and independent.
Our fortunes are interwoven by threads
innumerable. We touch one another on
all fides. One man's misfortune or fuc-
cess, his wiilom or his folly, often, by its
confequcnces, reaches through multitudes.
Such a flftem is far too complicated for
our arrangement. It requires adjuitments
beyond our skill and power. It is a chaos
of events, into which our eye cannot pierce;
and is capable of regulation, only by him
who perceives at one glance the relation
of each to all.

D d Farther,

E R M. Farther, As we are ignorant of the
VII. events which will arise from the combi-

nation of our circumstances with those of
others, so we are equally ignorant of the
influence which the present incidents of
our life may have upon those which are
future. The important question is not,
What is good for a man one day; but
what is good for him all the days of his

fie ? Not, what will yield him a few scat-
tered pleasures; but what will render his
life happy on the whole amount? And is he
able to answer that question, who knoweth
not what one day trny bring forth; who
cannot tell, whether the events of it may
not branch out into consequences, which
shall alumne a direction quite opposite to
that in which they set forth, and Ihall
spread themselves over all his life to comnc?
There is not any prcfent moment that is
unconnected with some future one. The
life of every man is a continued chain of
incidents, each link of which hangs upon
the former. The transition from cause to
effct, from event to event, is often car-

rid

ried on by secret steps, which our fore- SE RtM
fight cannot divine, and our Ilaacity is VI.
unable to trace. Evil may, at ibnle fu-
ture period, bring forth good; and good
may bring forth evil, both equally unex-
peced. Had the Patriarch, Jolelph, con-
tinued to loiter under his father's fond
indulgence, he might have lived an ob-
fcure and insignificant life. From the pil
and the prison, arose the incidents which
made him the ruler of Egypt, and the fla
viour of his father's houie.

Laftlv, Supposing every other incapa-

city to be removed, our ignorance of the
dangers to which our spiritual itate is
exposed, would disqualify us for judging
soundly concerning our true happiness.
Higher interests, than those of the present
world, are now depending. All that is
done or suffered by us here, ultimately
refers to that immortal world, for which
good men are trained up, under the care
of an Almighty Parent. We are as in-
competent judges of the measures ne-
ceffary to be pursued for this end, as

children

SE R MI children are, of the proper conduct to be
VIII.. held in their education. We foresee the

dangers of our spiritual, fill less than
we do those of our natural state; bccaufi
we are less attentive to trace them. We
are tfill more exposed to vice than to mi-
fery; because the confidence which we
place in our virtue, is yet worse founded
than that which we place in our wisdom.
Can you efleem him prosperous, who.is
railed to a situation which flatters his pas-
sions, but which corrupts his principles,
difordcrs his temper, and, finally, overfcts
his virtue? In the ardour of pursuit, how
little arc these eflccts forefccn ? And yet,
how often are they accompiifhed, by a
change of condition ? Latent corruptions
are called forth; feeds of guilt are quick-
ened into life; a growth of crimes arises,
which, had it not been for the fatal cul-
ture of prosperity, would never have seen
the light. How often is man, boastful as
he is of reason, merely the creature of his
fortune; formed, and moulded, by the in-
cidents of his life!- Hazael, when yet

a

a private man, detested the thoughts of S E tL
cnrelty. Thou JfIalt flay the young men vnl
with the sword, said the Prophet: Thou
fJalt dafis the children, and rip up the wo-
men with child. Is thyfervant a dog, repli-
ed Hazael, that heJflould do these things?
But no sooner was he cloathed with the
coveted purple, than it seemed to taint
his nature. He committed the crimes of
which, at a distance, he believed himself
incapable; and became the bloody ty-
rant, whole characdcr his foul once ab-
horred *.

Such then at prefcnt is man; thus in-
capable of pronouncing with certainty
concerning his own good or evil. Of
futurity he discerns little; and even that
little he fees through a cloud. Ignorant
of the alteration which his sentiments
and desires will undergo from new situ-
ations in life; ignorant of the confe-
quences which will follow from the com-
bination of his circumstances with those
of others around him; ignorant of the

influence
' 2 Kings iii. 12, 13.

SE R M. influence which the prefcnt may have on
VIII. the future events of his life; ignorant

of the effect which a change of condition
may produce on his moral character, and
his eternal interests; How can he know
what is good for him all the days of his
vain li/f, which he fpendeth as a Jhadw ?

Inflead of only lamenting this ignc-

rance, let us, in the last place, confider how
it ought to be improved; what duties it
suggests, and what wife ends it was in-
tended by Providence to promote.

I. L E T this dodtrine teach us to pr6-

ceed with caution and circumfpetion,
through a world, where evil so frequent-
ly lurks under the form of good. To be
humble and modest in opinion, to be vi-
gilant and attentive in conduct, to dil-
trust fair appearances, and to restrain rafli
desires, are inftrucions which the dark-
ness of our present state fliould firongly
inculcate. God hath appointed our situ-
ation to be so ambiguous, in order both
to call forth the exertion of those intelli-

2 gent

gent powers which he hath given us, and s E R IM.
to enforce our dependance on his gracious VI,.
aid. It is not in man that walketh, to dirc:t
his fleps. Surrounded with so many be-
wildering paths, among wllich the wiiUft
are ready to firay, how earnestly flould
we implore, and how thankfully Ihould we
receive, that divine illumination, which is
promised in scripture to the pious and
the humble! The ficret of the Lord is with
them that fear him. He will guide them
with his coutiel. Ie will teach them the
way that they J7Jould chtu. But what
muit be the fate of him, who, amidIf all
the dangers attending human conduct,
neither looks up to Heaven for direction,
nor.properly exerts that realon which
G;od hath given him ? If to the most
diligent enquirer, it proves so difficult a
talk to diftinguilh true good from those
fallacious appearances with which it is
ever blended, how should he diliover it,
who brings neither patience nor attenti-
on to the search, who applies to no other
counsellor than present pleasure, and, with

F.e a

S E R M. a rafl and credulous mind, delivers him-

self up to cvery fuggcftion of dcfire?

'I'his admonition I particularly dircc2

to those, who are in a period of life to,
often characlcrized by forward prediump-
tion, and headlong purfiit. The ielf-con-
ceit of the young, is the great source oi
thoic dangers to which they are expofdl;
and it is peculiarly unfortunate, that thCi
age which stands mofR in need of the
counsel of the wife, lhould be the most
prone to contemn it. Confident in the opi-
nions which they adopt, and in the mca-
filres which they purlue, they seem as if
they underflood Solomon to fay, nor,
lWho llot'weth, but, Who is ignorant of
what is good for man all the dayr of '.s
life ? The blils to be aimed at, is, in
their opinion, fully apparent. It is not
the danger of mistake, but the failure of
success, which they dread. Acivity to
seize, not sagacity to discern, is the only
requisite which they value.- How long
lhall it be, cre the fate of your prcdcccl-
fors in the fame course, teach you wil-

dom

dom ? How long flall the experience of s £ R M.
all ages, continue to lift its voice to you Vi
in vain ? Beholding the occan on which
you are embarked, covered with wrecks,
are not those fatal signals liuflicicnt to ad-
monish you of the hidden rock ? If, in
Paradile itself, there was a tree which
bare fruit fair to the eye, but mortal
in its cfHics, how much more, in this
fallen state, may iuch deceiving appear-
ances be expeded to abound ? The whole
state of Nature, is now become a Icene
of delusion to the leniual mind. Hardly
any thing is what it appears to be: And
what flatters molt, is always farthest froni
reality. There are voices which sing a-
round you; but whole itrains allure to
ruin. There is a banquet spread, where
poison is in every dill. There is a couch
which invites you to repose; but to slum-
ber upon it, is death. In fich a fitua-
tion, be nist bhi v minded, but fear. Lct
sobriety tc!nper your unwary ardour.
Let molelty check your ralh prcfump-
tion. Let wifdorm be the offspring of

E c 2 rcflcction

SE RM. reflecion now, rather than the fruit of
VITI. bitter experience hereafter.

II. LET our ignorance of what is good

or evil, correct anxiety about worldly fuc-
cess. As alfhnefs is the vice of youth, the
opposite extreme of immoderate care is
the vice of advancing years. The doc-
trine which I have illustrated, is equally
adapted for checking both. Since we arc
so often betrayed into evil, by the mif-
taken purfiit of good, care and attention
are requisite, both in forming our choice,
and conducting our pursuit; but lince
our attention and care are liable to be so
often frustrated, they ihould never rile
into trouble of mind.

The ignorance in which we are left con-

cerning good and evil, is not such as to
supersede prudence in conduct: For wil-
dom is still found to excelfolly, as far as
light excelleth darkneJf. But it is that de-
gree of uncertainty which ought to render
us temperate in pursuit; which ought
to calm the perturbation of hope and fear,

and

and to cure the pain of anxiety. Anxiety s E R M.
is.the poison of human life. It is the pa- IIi.
rent of many fins, and of more miseries.
In a world where every thing is so doubt-
fil ; where you may succecd in your
wish, and be miserable; where you may
be disappointed, and be blest through that
disappointment ; what means this refllefs
stir and commotion of mind ? Can your
follicitude alter the course, or unravel the
intricacy of human events ? Can your
curiosity pierce through the cloud which
God hath made impenetrable to mortal
eye ?-To provide against every apparent
danger, by the employment of the moll
promising means, is the office of wiltom.
But at this point, wifilon flops. It com-
mands you to retire, after you have done
all that was incumbent on you, and to
possess your mind in peace. By going be-
yond this point; by giving yourselves up
to immoderate concern about unknown
events, you can do nothing to advance
your success, and you do much to ruin
your peace. You plant within your breast

the

SE R M. the thorn which is long to gall you. To
VIII. the vanity of life, you add a vexation of

spirit, which is wholly of your own crea-
tion, not of God's appointment. For the
dubious goods of this world were never
designed by God to raise fich eager at-
tachment. They were given to man for
his occasional refrelhment, not for his
chief felicity. By letting an excessive va-
lue upon objects which were intended on-
ly for your secondary regard, you change
their nature. Seeking more fatisfacfion
from them than they are able to afford,
you receive lets than they might give.
From a mistaken care to secure your hap-
piness, you bring upon yourselves certain
misery.

III. IET our ignorance of good and evil,
determine us to follow Providence, and to
resign ourselves to God. One of the moll
important leflons which can be given to
man, is resignation to his Maker; and no-
thing inculcates it more, than the experi-
ence of his own inability to guide him-

jclf.

fclf.-You know not what is good for SE R M.
you, in the future periods of life. But ll!
God perfecdly knows it; and if you faith-
fiully serve him, you have reason to believe
that he will always consult it. Before
him lies the whole fuccefficn of events,
which are to fill up your existence. It is
in his power, to arrange and model them
at his pleasure; and so to adapt one thing
to another, as to fulfil his promise of mak-
ing them all work together for good to
those who love him. Here then, amidll
the agitations of desire, and the perplexi-
ties of doubt, is one fixed point of reft.
By this let us abide; and dismiss our
anxiety about things uncertain and un-
known. Acquaint .youm/lves with God, and
he at peace. Secure the one thing need-
ful. Study to acquire an interest in the
divine favour: And you may safely fur-
render yourselves to the divine admini-
ftration.

When tempted to repine at your con-

dition, refled how uncertain it is, whether
you should have been happier in any

other.

S E R Mi. other. Remembering the vanity of many
VII[. of your former wilhes, and the fallacy

which you have to often experienced in
your fcihmes of happincfs, be thankful
that you are placed under a wiser direc-
tion than your own. Be not too parti-
cular in your petitions to Heaven, concern-
ing your temporal interest. Suffer God
to govern the world according to his own
plan ; and only pray, that he would be-
stow what his unerring wiflom fees to
be best for you on the whole. In a ;word,
Commit your way unto the Ljord. Trujf in
hin, and do good. Follow wherever his
Providence lads; comply with whatever
his will requires; and leave all the reft to
him.

IV. LET our ignorance of what is good

for us in this life, prevent our taking any
unlawful ftep, in order to compass our
most favourite designs. Were the finner
bribed with any certain and unqueftion-
able advantage; could the means which
he employs ensure his success, and could

I that

that success ensure his comfort; he might s E R M.
have somewhat to offer in apology for de- VIII
viating from the path of virtue. But the
docrine which I have illustrated, deprives
him of every fich excuse, and places his
folly in the mot striking light. He climbs
the seep rock, and treads on the edge of
a precipice, in order to catch a shadow.
He has cause to dread, not only the un-
certainty of the event which he wishes to
accomplilh, but the nature also of that
event when accomplished. He is not only
liable to that disappointment of success,
which so often frustrates all the designs of
men; but liable to a disappointment itill
more cruel, that of being successful and
miserable at once. Riches and pleas res
are the chief temptations to criminal deeds.
Yet those riches, when obtained, may very
possibly overwhelm him with unforeseen
miseries. Those pleasures may cut ihort
his health and life. And is it for such
doubtful and fallacious rewards, that the
deceiver fills his mouth with lies, the
friend betrays his benefador, the apoftare

F f renounces

S E R M. renounces his faith, and the assassin covers
vwI. himself with blood ?

Whoever commits a crime, incurs a

certain evil, for a molt uncertain good.
What will turn to his advantage in the
course of this life, he cannot with any ai-
furancc know. But this he may know, with
full certainty, that by breaking the divine
commandments, he will draw upon his
head that difplcafure of the Almighty
which Ihall crush him for ever. The ad-
vantages of this world, even when inno-
cently gained, are uncertain blessings;
when obtained by criminal means, they
carry a curie in their bosom. To the
virtuous, they are often nb more than
chaff. To the guilty, they are always
poison.

V. LET our imperfect knowledge of

what is good or evil, attach us the more
to those few things, concerning which
there can be no doubt of their being tru-
ly good. Of temporal things, the cata-
logue of such as belong to this class, it

must

muf be confeflld, is Imall. Perhaps the s E R M.
chief worldly good we flould with to 111
enjoy, is a found mind in a found body.
Health and peace, a moderate fortune, and
a few friends, fum up all the undoubted
articles of temporal felicity. Wife was
the man who addrefred this prayer to
God ; Remove far from me vanity and lies.
Give me neither poverty nor riches. Feed
me with food convenient for me. Left I be
full and deny thee, and fay, who is the Lord?
or lft I be poor and fieal, and take the name
of my God in vain *. He whose wishes, re-
specting the possessions of this world, are
the most reasonable and bounded, is like-
ly to lead the safest, and, for that reason,
the most desirable life. By aspiring too
high, we frequently miss the happinels,
which, by a less ambitious aim, we might
have gained. High happiness on earth, is
rather a picture which the imagination
forms, than a reality which is given to
the possession of man.

But with regard to spiritual felicity, we
are not confined to such humble views.

F f 2 Clear
Prov. xxx. 8, 9.

E RM. Clear and determinate objects are pro-
_Vl. posed to our pursuit; and full scope is

given to the molt ardent desire. The for-
givenefs of our fins, and the assistance of
God's holy grace, to guide our life; the
improvement of our minds, in knowledge
and wisdom, in piety and virtue; the
protection and favour of the great Father
of all, of the blessed Redeemer of man-
kind, and of the Spirit of fancification and
comfort; these are objects, in the pursuit
of which there is no room for hesitation
and distrust, nor any ground for the que-
stion in my Text, Who knoweth what is
good for man ? Had Providence spread an
equal obscurity over happiness of every
kind, we might have had some reason to
complain of the vanity of our condition.
But we are not left to so hard a fate. The
Son of God hath descended from heaven,
to be the Light of the world. He hath re-
moved that veil which covered true bliss
from the search of wandering mortals,
and hath taught them the way which
leads to life. Worldly enjoyments are

fliown

fliown to be hollow and deceitful, with SER M.
an express intention to direc their assec- VIIL
tions towards those which are spiritual.
The fame difcovcries which diminilh the
value of the one, serve to increale that of
the other. Finally,

VI. LET our ignorance of what is good

or evil here below, lead our thoughts and
desires to a better world. I have endea-
voured to vindicate the wisdom of Provi-
dence, by showing the many useful pur-
poses which this ignorance at present pro-
motes. It serves to check prefumprion
and rashness, and to enforce a diligent
exertion of our rational powers, joined
with a humble dependance on divine aid.
It moderates eager pallions refpeteing
worldly success. It inculcates resignation
to the disposal of a Providence which is
much wiser than man. It restrains us
from employing unlawful means in order
to compass our most favourite designs.
It tends to attach us more closely to those
things which are unquestionably good.

It

E R M. It is therefore fuchl a degree of ignorance,
_Vvi, as fiits the present circumstances of man

better than more complete information
concerning good an(t evil.

At the lame tiinc, the causes which

render this obscurity neccflary, too plain-
ly indicate a broken and corrupted ftatc
of human nature. They flow this life to
be a state of trial. They fuggcft the ideas
of a land of pilgrimage, not of the house
of reft. Low minded and base is he, who
aspires to no higher portion; who could
be satisfied to lpend his whole existence
in chafing those treacherous appearances
of good, which so often mock his pursuit.
What lhadow can be more vain, than the
life of the grcatcft part of mankind ? Of
all that cager and bufling crowd which
we behold on the earth, how few difcovcr
the path of true happiness ? How few can
we find, whole activity has not been mis-
employed, and whose course terminates
not in confelrions of disappointment ? Is
this the state, are theflc the habitations, to
which a rational ipirit, with all its high

hope',

hopes, and great capacities, is to be limited s E R M.
for ever ?-Let us bless that God who vlr.
hath set higher profpecs before us;
who, by the death and refirreclion of his
Son Jesus Christ, hath begotten us to the
lively hope of an inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, and that Jldeth not away, re-
served in the heavens. Let us show our-
selves worthy of such a lhone, by si ttiy
our affeflins upons the things above, not upon
things on the earth. Let us walk by f;itlh,
and not by fight; and, amidst the ohbluri-
ty of this faint and dubious twiligllt,
console ourselves with the expectation o' a
brighter day which is soon to open. This
earth is the land of lhadows. But we hope
to pass into the world of realities; wllere
the proper objecs of human desire Illall
be displayed ; where the substance of that
b!iss ihall be fountl, whofi image only we
now purluc; where no fallacious hopes
Ihall any longer allure, no smiling ap-
pearances flall betray, no insidious joys
shall fling; but where truth ihall be in-

separably

S E R M. fcparably united with pleasure; and the
VII. mills which hang over this preliminary

state being diflipated, the perfec know-
ledge of good Ihall lead to the full enjoy-
ment of it for ever.

iX SER-

# SERMON IX. On RELIGIOUS RETIREMENT. PSALM iv. 4. Commune with your own heart, upon your bed, and be still.

233

SERMO N IX.
On RELIGIOUS RETIREMENT.

PSALM iv. 4.
Commune with your own heart, upon your

bed, and be Jfill.
M /UCH communing with themselves s E R M.

there has always been among man- Ix-

kind; though frequently, God knows, to
no purpose, or to a purpose worse than
none. Could we discover the employments
of men in retirement, how often Ihould we
find their thoughts occupied with fubjecs,
which they would be amfamed to own ?
What a large flare have ambition and
avarice, at some times the grQffcft pas-
sions, and at other times the meanest
trifles, in their solitary musings ? They

G g carry

S E R M. carry the world, with all its vices, into

X their retreat; and may be said to dwell

in tlc Ii(lit of the world, even when
they fecm to be alone.

This, furcly, is not that fort of commun-
ing which the IPf alift recommends. For
this is not properly communin with our
heart, bl t rather, holding ficrct inter-
courll' with the world. What the Pfal-
nilt Umeas to recommend, is religious rc-
collclion; that exercile of tho".ght which
i. colillcnced with the precept given in the
)prIccdliig( wnrds, to Jaind in awe, and Jin
not. It is to comnmle with ourlflves un-
der the cliarl.,i cr of ipiritual and immor-
t;l bei g; ;nd(l to poul.ltr tiho paths of our
f;.t which are lieading us to eternity. I
111.ill, in tlhe llt place, llhow the advan-
tages of linch Icl'ous retircmcnt and nmc-
ditation; and ihall, in the feconl placc,
point out some of the principal filjecls
which ought to employ us in our retreat.

The advantages of retiring from! tle

worll, to coimiune zwith our heart, wi!l be
found to be great, whether we regard our

haIppincil

happincfs in this world, or our prepara- s *: R M.
tion for the world to come. 1.

LET us confider them, firfi, with re-

sped to our happiness in this world. It
will readily occur to you, that an entire
retreat from worldly aflairs is not what
religion requires ; nor does it even enjoin
a great retreat from them. Some Ifations
of life would not permit this; and there
are few fiations which render it necefla-
ry. The chief field, both of the duty and
of the improvement of man, lies in active
life. By the graces and virtues which
he exercises amidit his fellow-creatures,
he is trained up for heaven. A total re-
treat from the world, is so far from be-
ing, according to the docrine of die Plo-
milh Church, the perfec'ion of religion,
that, fomc particular cales excepted, it is
no other than the abuse of it.

But, though entire retreat would lay us
aside firm the part for which Providence
chiefly intended us, it is certain, that
without occasional retreat, we must acd

G g that

S E R M. that part very ill. There will be neither
IX. consistency in the condut, nor dignity in

the character, of one who sets apart no
share of his time for meditation and rc-
flcdion. In the heat and bustle of life,
while paflion is every moment throwing
false colours on the objecs around us,
nothing can be viewed in a just light.
If you with that Reafon-ihould exert her
native power, you mull tep afidc from
the crowd, into the cool and silent ihade.
It is there that, with fober an'd steady eye,
the examines what is good or ill, what is
wife or foolish, in human condud; Ihe
looks back on the past, {he looks forward
to the future, and forms plans, not for the
present moment only, but for the whole
of life. How should that man difchargc
any part of his duty aright, who never
suffers his passions to cool ? And how
should his passions cool, who is engaged,
without interruption, in the tumult ot
the world ? This incessant stir may be
called, the perpetual drunkenness of life.
It raises that eager fermentation of fpi-

rit,

rit, which will be ever fending forth the s r R M.
dangerous fumes of raihnefs and fully. IX.
Whereas he who mingles religious re-
treat with worldly affairs, remains calm,
and master of himself. He is not whirled
round, and rendered giddy, by the agita-
tion of the world ; but, from that sacred
retirement, in which he has been convcr-
sant among higher objects, comes forth
into the world with manly tranquillity,
fortified by the principles which he has
formed, and prepared for every occur-
rence that may befall.

As he who is unacquainted with retreat

cannot sustain any character with pro-
priety, so neither can he enjoy the world
with any advantage. Of the two classes
of men who are most apt to be negligent
of this duty, the men of pleasure, and the
men of business, it is hard to fay which,
susser most, in point of enjoyment, from
that neglect. To the former, every mo-
ment appears to be loft, which ;',3takes
.not of the vivacity of amusement. To
conndt one plan of gaiety with another,

is

sr. R . is their sole fludy; till, in a very short

tX. time, nothing remain but to tread the

fame beaten round; to enjoy what they
have already enjoyed, and to fee what
they have often seen. Pleasures thus
drawn to the dregs, become vapid and
taftclefs. What might have pleased long,
if enjoyed with temperance, and mingled
with retirement, being devoured with
such eager haste, speedily surfeits and
difgufls. Hence, theie are the persons,
who, after having run through a rapid
course of pleafurc, after having glittered
for a few years in the foremost line of
publick amusements, are the most apt to
fly at lait to a melancholy retreat; not
led by religion or reason, but driven by
disappointed hopes, and exhausted spirits,
to the pensive conclusion, that all is vanity
and vexation of /irit.

If uninterrupted intercourse with the

world wears out the man of pleasure, it
no less oppreffls the man of business and
ambition. The ftrongell spirits must at
length fink under it. The happiest tem-

per

per mufl be toured by inceflhnt returns SE R M.
of the opposition, the inconfiancy, and IX.
treachery of men. For he who lives al-
ways in the buitle of the world, lives in
a perpetual warfare. Here, an enemy
encounters; there, a rival supplants him.
The ingratitude of a friend flings him,
this hour; and the pride of a iuperiour
wounds him, the next. In vain he flies
for relief, to trifling amunfements. Thcfe
may afford a temporary opiate to care;
but they communicate no flrength to the
mind. On the contrary, they leave it
more soft and defenceless, when the (di-
turbances of life renew their attacks.

Let him who wilies for an effeclual

cure to all the wounds which the world
can inflict, retire from intercourle with
men, to intcrcoursi with God. When
he enters into his cloiet, and liuts the
door, let him Ihut out, at the fame time,
all intrusion of worldly care; and dwell
among objects divine and immortal.
Those fair profpecls of order and peace,
flall there open to his view, which form

the

SE R M. the molt perfect contralt to the confiu-

IX. sion and minifrv of this earth. The ce-

letlial inhabitants quarrel not; among
them there is neither ingratitude, nor
envy, nor tuimult. Men may harass one
another ; but in the kingdom of God,
concordl and tranquillity reign for ever.
-From Ilich objecs, there beams upon
the mind of the pious man, a pure and
enlivening light; there is diffuscd over
his heart, a holy calm. His agitated fpi-
rit re-allimes its firmness, and regains it:,
peace. The world finks in its import-
ance; and the load of mortality and mi-
c:rv loces almost all its weight. The green
ps/lures open, and the fjill waters flow
around him, beside which the Shepherd
of Israel guides his flock. The dilturb-
ances and alarms, so formidable to thofi
who are engaged in the tumults of the
world, seem to him only like thunder
rolling afar off; like the noise of distant
waters, whose found he hears, whose
course he traces, but whose waves touch
him not.- As religious retirement is

lt ti~thus

thus evidently conducive to our happi- SER M.
ness in this life, so, Ix.

IN the second place, it is absolutely ne-

ceffary in order to prepare us for the life
to come. He who lives always in publick,
cannot live to his own foul. The world
lieth in -,iickednefs; and with good reason
the Christian is exhorted, not to be con-
formed to it, but transformed by the rencw-
ing of his mind. Our conversation and
intercourfi with the world, is, in fcveral
relipecs, an education for vice. From
our carlieft youth, we are accustomed to
hear riches and honour, extolled as the
chief polli:fions of man; and proposed to
us, as the principal aim of our future pur-
suits. We are trained up to look with ad-
miration on the flattering marks of di-
ftindion which they bestow. In the pur-
suit of those coveted advantages, we fee
the multitude around us eager and ser-
vent. Principles of duty we may, per-
haps, hear ibmetimes inculcated; but we
seldom behold them brought into compe-

Hi h1 tition

I: R M. tition with worldly profit. The soft nanm
IX . r!1 iplillie colonur-, under which decccit,

'n;i:iliiv, a.ndl r'sngc, arc pl'rc!lted tn
us in common (ldili(orf, weakcn, by dc-
rrecc, our natural fcnfi of the diflinitiion
betvwee go)d ;arldl evil. We of'.t n mec'
with cr.inls authorizcd by high exac;lnl ',
and rewarded with the careldes and tinilcs
of the world. W\e dlcover pcrhaps, at
lall, that thof.c whom we were taught to
reverence, and to regard as our patterns
o(f con:luc't, act upon principles no Iurcr
than those of othcrs.---T hus breathing
habitually a contagious air, how certain
is our ruin, uilc:f we fonetimcs rctreat
from this peftilcntial region, and fcek for
proper correcives of the disorders which
are contracted there ? Religious retirement
both abates the difcafe, and furniflics the
remedy. It Icffnns the corrupting influ-
encc of thc world ; and it gixes opportu-
nity for better principles to exert tlhci
power. He who is accultomcd to turn
alide, and commu:e with himiflt; will,
formetimes at lealt, hear of truths which

thel

the multitude (1o not tell him. A more S E R M.
Ibund inilrucdor wiil lift his voice, an;d Ix
awaken within tl he hart thole latent fig-
geltions, which the world h:ad overpowlr-
ed an(d lipprleled.

The acs of prayer and devotion, the

exerciies of faith anl reptitance, all the
great and peculiar duities of the reli-ion
of Chrilt, neccillv il p,,:;, retirerment
from the lworld. lThis was (oe ( clie; c!il
of their inltitution, that thev init lhe
the means of occafiona;llv It'itc l erin; usj
from that great tcnle of vice a'i(! fil!v,
tihe continued prcfcnce of which i, to
hurttfil. Solitude is the hallowed g;ould
which religion hal'i, in everv age, .loln
for her own. T'here, her in)iiration i,
felt, and her sacred mytclries cv,,tc lic
foul. Ther, ftlls the tear of co;nn:;i,: ;
there, rifes towards heaven the igh of tih,
ihart; tlherc, mclts the foull with all the
;cndernefl of devotion, and po;-.; it;.li
;tilth, before himi who made, and himn
who redeemed it. How cyan any o"e, ,-',,
is unacquainted with Itch empiov::-crr,

1H h 2 ;

s E R M. of mind, be fit for heaven ? If heaven he

Ix. the habitation of pure affecions, and of

intellectual joy, could such a state be re-
lilhed by him who is always immersed
among sensible objecs, and has never ac-
quired any) tate for the pleasures of the
undcrflanding, and the heart?

The great and the worthy, the pious

and the virtuous, have ever been addicted
to fcrious retirement. It is the charac-
tereftick of little and frivolous minds, to
be wholly occupied with the vulgar ob-
jecs of life. Thcfe fill up their desires,
and flipply all the entertainment which
their coarse apprehensions can relish. But
a more refined and enlarged mind leaves
the world behind it, feels a call for higher
pleasures, and seeks them in retreat. The
man of publick spirit has recourse to it,
in order to form plans for general goodl;
the man of genius, in order to dwell on
his favourite themes; the philosopher, to
purfie his discoveries; the faint, to im-
prove himself in grace. Ifiac went out t1
71editatc in the ficl,ls, at the evening iidc.

Davild

David, amidst all the splendour of royalty, s E R M.
often bears witnefis, both to the pleatlre lx.
which he received, and the benefit which
he reaped, from devout meditation. I
comnmned with l y own heart, and my/ ji-it
made dilient farch. I thought oln iy n:.i) s,
and turned my f/ct unto God's teJliniocis. In
the multitude of thoglu hts within vie, lis
consorts delight mny Jfil. Our blefied Sa-
viour himself, though of all who ever li-
ved on earth he needed leatl the afliftance
of religious retreat, yer, by his fiequcnt
pracice, has done it signal honour. ()te:
were the garden, the mountain, a;nd tlh
silence of the night, fought by him, for
intercourse with He aven. IVhen he hadn
sent the multitude a'a.y, he went up in111 a
mountain, apart, to pra'y.

The advantages of religious retire-

ment will still more clearly appear, by
confidering, as was proposed, in the next
place, some of those great objects which
should there employ our thoughts. I
shall mention only three, which are of
the most plain and acknowledged im-

portance ;

SE R M. portance; God, the world, and our own

Ix. character.
vYv

I. WIE N you retire from the world,

commune with your hearts concerning God.
Impreflions of Deity, betides their being
the principle of what is llritly termed re-
ligion, are the great support of all moral
sentiment, and virtuous conduct among
men. But with what difficulty are they
prelfrved in any due degree of force,
amidll the affairs and avocations of the
world ? While the crowd of surrounding
objects is ever rushing on the imagina-
tion, and occupying the senses and the
heart, what is not only absent from view,
but, by its niture, invisible, is apt to va-
nifh like a shadow. Hence it is given
as the characer of wicked men, in scrip-
ture, that they are without God in the
world. They deny not, perhaps, that he
exifis; but it is the fame to them as
though he did not: For having loll him
from their view, his existence has no es-
fed on their conduct. If, at any time,

the

the idea of God rife in their mind, it S E R M.
rifes like a terrifying phantom which Ix.
they haften to expell; and which they
gladly fancy to be an unreal appearance,
hIecaufe they fee it make so little impref-
sion on others around them.

Let him who retires to furious medita-

tion, begin with impressing deeply on his
mind this important truth, that there is
undoubtedly a Supreme Governour, who
presides over the universe. But let him
not imagine, that to commune with his
heart concerning God, is to learch into
the mysteries of the Divine Nature, or to
attempt a discovery of the whole plan of
Providence. Long enough he may be-
wilder himself in this maze, without mak-
ing any proficiency in the pradtical know-
ledge of God. Shall he who knows so lit-
tle of his own nature, or of the nature of
the objects with which he is surrounded,
expect to comprehend the Being who made
him ? To commune with ourselves, to any
useful purpofc, on this fubjecr, is to bring
home to our fouls the internal, authorita-

tive

3 E R I. tive sense of God, as of a Sovereign and

IX. a Father. It is not to speculate about

what is doubtful in his ellence, but to
contemplate what is certain in his perfec-
tions. It is to realize the presence of the
Supreme Being, so as to produce the molt
profound veneration; and to awaken the
earnet desire of as near an approach as
our nature will permit, to that great
Fountain of happiness and life.

After this manner was that holy man

affected, who uttered this ardent wish i,
O that I knew where I might find him, that
I might come even to his feat !- If with
such a frame of mind you seek after God,
be assured that he is not far from you;
and that, though you are not permitted
as yet to come to his feat, you may, at
lealt, reach the footstool of his throne, and
touch the robe that covers him. Ir the
midst of your solitary musings, lift your
eyes, and behold all nature full of God.
Look up to the firmament, and admire
his glory. Look round on the earth, and
observe his presence every where difplaved.

Job x

ii. .If
s Job xxuii. 3.

If the gay landscape, or the fruitful field, s E R M.
present themselves to your eye, behold Zx.
him smiling upon his works. If the
mountain raise its lofty head, or the ex-
panfe of waters roll its tides before you,
contemplate, in those great and solemn
objecs, his power and majesty. Nature,
in all its diversities, is a varied mani-
feftation of God. If you were to take the
wings of the morning, and dwell in the ut-
termoft parts of the sea, even there you
would find him. For in him you live and
move. He fills and animates all space. In
the barren wilderness, as in the peopled
region, you can trace his footsteps; and
in the deepest solitude, you may hear a
voice which testifies of him.

Him, indeed, you are never to confound
with the workmanship of his hands. Na-
ture, in its most awful or molt pleafmg
scenes, exhibits no more than different
forms of inanimate matter. But on these
dead forms is impressed the glory of a
living Spirit. The beauty, or the great-
ness, which appears in them, flows from

I i the

S E R MI. the Fountain of all greatness and beauty;

ViX in him it centers; of his perfecion it re-

lleds an image; and towards him Ihould
lead your view.- In conversing with a
fellow-creature on earth, it is not with his
body we converse, though it is his bo(d
only which we fee. From his words and
adions we conceive his mind; with his
mind, though invisible, we hold corrc-
fpondence, and dircd towards this ipiri-
tual Eflence, our affection and regard. In
like manner, though here we behold no
more of God than what his works dil-
play, yet, in those displays, we are cap-
able of perceiving the Universal Spirit, and
of holding correspondence with this un-
seen Being, in veneration, gratitude, and
love.

It is thus that a pious man, in his re-

tired meditations, viewing natural object
with a spiritual eye, communes with hi,
heart concerning God. He walks among
the various scenes of Nature, as within
the precinCts of a great temple, in the
habitual exercise of devotion. To those

difcovcrici

difioveries of the Supreme Being in his s E R M.
works, let him apply the comment of his Ix.
word. From the world of Nature, let him
follow God into the world of Grace. When
conducted from the outer courts, into this
inmost fanduary of the temple, he fliall
feel himself brought still more nigh to the
Sacred Presence. In the great plan of Di-
vine Wisdom, for extirpating the evils pro-
duced by fin, he flall receive the interpre-
tation of many of the hidden mysteries of
Nature. He thall discover in Christ, the
Deity made, in some degree, visible to
fenfl. In the beneficent works which lie
performed, and the gracious undertaking
which he accomplilied, he flall behold
the brightneJs of the Father's glory, and
shall discern it to be full of grace and
truth.-From the sacred retreat, wherein
his thoughts have been thus employed,
he returns to the world like a fuperiour
being. He carries into active life those
pure and elevating sentiments, to which
the giddy crowd are Itrangers. A certain
odonr of fandity remains upon his mind,

I i 2 which,

S E R M. which, for a while at least, will repell the
vx. contagion of the world.

II. COMMUNE with your heart, in the

season of retirement, concerning the world.
The world is the great deceiver, whose fal-
lacious arts it highly imports us to detect.
But in the midst of its pleasures and pur-
suits, the detection is impossible. We
tread, as within an inchanted circle, where
nothing appears as it truly is. It is only
in retreat, that the charm can be broken.
Did men employ that retreat, not in car-
rying on the delusion which the world has
begun, not in forming plans of imagi-
nary bliss, but in subjecting the happi-
ness which the world affords to a flrict
discussion, the spell would dissolve; and
in the room of the unreal profpecs, which
had long amused them, the nakedness of
the world would appear.

Prepare yourselves, then, to encounter

the light of truth. Resolve rather to bear
the disappointment of some flattering
hopes, than to wander for ever in the

paraditi

paradise of fools. While others meditate SE R M.
in secret on the means of attaining world- Ix.
ly fuccetf, let it be your employment to
firutinize that success itself. Calculate
fairly to what it amounts; and whether
you are not losers on the whole, by your
apparent gain. Look back, for this pur-
pose, on your past life. Trace it from
your earliest youth; and put the question
to yourselves, What have been its halpillef
periods ? Were they those of quict and
innocence, or those of ambition and in-
trigue ? Has your real enjoyment uni-
formly kept pace with what the world
calls prosperity ? As you advanced in
wealth or flation, did you proportionably
advance in happiness ? Has success, almoll
in any one instance, fulfilled your expec-
ations ? Where you reckoned upon molt
enjoyment, have you not often found
leaf ? Wherever guilt entered into your
pleasures, did not its fling long remain,
after the gratification was past ?-Such
questions as these, candidly answered,
would in a great measure unmask the

world,

SE R M. world. They would cxpofe the vanity of

v V, its pretensions; and convince you that

there are other springs than thole which
the world affords, to which you must ap-
ply for happincls.

While you. commune with your heart

concerning what the world now is, con-
fider also what it will one day appear
to be. Anticipate the awful moment
of your bidding it an eternal farewell.
Think, what reflecions lliall most pro-
bably arise, when you are quitting the
field, and looking back on the scene of
action. In what light will your closing
eyes contemplate those vanities which
now {hine so bright, and those interests
which now swell into such high import-
ance? What part will you then with to
have acted ? What shall then appear mo-
mentous, what trifling, in human con-
dud ?-Let the fober sentiments which
such anticipations suggest, temper now
your misplaced ardour. Let the last con-
clufions which you ihall form, enter into
the present estimate which you make of
the world, and of life.

Moreover,

Moreover, in communing with your- SERM.

selves concerning the world, contemplate IX.
it as fubjecd to the divine dominion. The
greater part of men behold nothing more
than the rotation of human affairs. They
fee a great crowd ever in motion; the for-
tunes of men alternately rising and fall-
ing; virtue often difreffed, and profperi-
ty appearing to be the purchase of world-
lv abilities and wifdoin. But this is only
the outide of things. Behind the cur-
tain, there is a far greater scene, which is
beheld only by the retired, religious spec-
tator. Lift up that curtain, when you are
alone with God. View the world with
the eye of a Christian; and you flall fee,
that while man's heart devifth his wa'y, it
is the Lord tho direlleth his fieps. You
Ihall fee, that however men appear to
move and ad after their own pleasure,
they are, nevertheless, retained in secret
bonds by the Almighty, and all their
operations rendered fubfcrvient to the
ends of his moral government. You Ihall
fee him obliging the ,wrath of man to

pra/i

SE R M. praise him; punishing the firmner by mcan;

IX. of his own iniquities; from the trials of

the righteous, bringing forth their reward;
anti to a Itate of seeming universal con-
fifion, preparing the wisest and most equi-
table ifluc. While thefafhion of this world
is pafling fatl away, you shall discern the
glory of another, rising to succecd it. You
thall behold all human events, our griefs
and our joys, our love and our hatred,
our character and memory, absorbed in
the ocean of eternity; and no trace of our
present existence left, except that it shall
be for ever well with the righteous, and
ill with the wicked.-Such a view of the
world, frequently presented to our minds,
could not fail to enforce those solemn con-
clufions; There is no wisdom, nor counJfl,
again/i the Lord. Fear God, and keep his
commandments; for this is the whole os'man.
What is a man profited, if he Jhall gain the
whole world, and loJb his own foul?

III. COMMUNE with your heart, con-
cerning yourselves and your real charac-

I tcter.

ter. To acquire a thorough knowledge of s E R M.
ourselves, is an attainment no less difficult Ix.
than important. For men are generally
unwilling to fee their own imperfections;
and when they are willing to enquire in-
to them, their felf-love imposes on their
judgment. Their intercourse with one
another aflifts the delusion to which, of
themselves, they are prone. For the or-
dinary commerce of the world, is a com-
merce of flattery and falflood; where re-
ciprocally they deceive, and are deceived;
where every one appears under an aflium-
ed form; professes esteem which he does
not feel; and bestows praise in order to
receive it. It is only in retreat, where
those false semblances disappear, and thoil
flattering voices are silent, that a man
can learn to think fobrly of himself, and as
he ought to think.

It has been said, that there are three

characers which every man fuitains; and
these often extremely different from one
another: One, which he possesses in his
own opinion; another, which he carries

Kk in

E R M. in the estimation of the world; and a
,X. third, which he bears in the judgment

of Cod. It is only the ladl which afcer-
tains what he really is.-Whether the
character which the world forms of you,
be above or below the truth, imports you
not much to know. But it is of eternal
consequence, that the character which you
pofllfi in your own eyes, be formed up-
on that which you bear in the fight of
God. In order to try it by this great
Ibandard, you mull lay aside, as much as
poilible, all partiality to yourielves; and,
in the season of retirement, explore your
heart with such accurate scrutiny, as may
bring your hidden defects to light.

Enquire, for this purpose, whether you

be not conscious that the fair opinion
which the world entertains of you, is
founded on their partial knowledge both
of your abilities, and your virtues ? Would
you be willing that all your actions llould
be publickly canvassed ? Could you bear
to have your thoughts laid qpen ? Are
there no parts of your life which you

would

would be uneasy if an enemy could dif- s E R M.
cover? In what light, then, must these Ix
appear to God ? When you have kept
free of vice, has your innocence pro-
ceeded from purity of principle, or from
worldly motives ? Rifes there no envy
or malignity within you, when you com-
pare your own condition with that ,if
others ? Have you been as follicitous to
regulate your heart, as to preserve your
manners from reproach ? Professing your-
selves to be Chriltians, has the Spirit of
Christ appeared in your conduct ? Declar-
ring that you hope for immortality, has
that hope surmounted undue attachments
to the present life ?

Such investigation as this, seriously

pursued, might produce to every man
many discoveries of himself; discoveries,
not pleasing, perhaps, to vanity, but fa-
lutary and useful. For he can be only a
flatterer, but no true friend to himfeif,
who aims not at knowing his own de-
seCts, as well as virtues. By imposing on
the world, he may carry on some plan of

K k 2 fancied

SE R M. fancied profit; but by imposing on his

IX. own heart, what can he propose to gain?

He feedeth of a(hes: A deceived heart
hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver
his foul, nor fay, Is there not a lie in nlm
right hand * ?

Tihus I have set before you some of

those great objecs, which ought to em-
ploy your meditation in religious retire-
ment. I have endeavoured to introduce
you into a proper intercourse with your
heart, concerning God, the world, and
your own character. Let this intercourse
terminate in fixing the principles of your
future conduct. Let it serve to introduce
consistency into your life. Nothing can
be more wavering and disjointed, than the
behaviour of those who are wholly men
of the world, and have never been inured
to commune with themselves. Diffipa-
tion is a more frequent cause of their
ruih, than determined imp:ety. It is
not so much because they have adopted
bad principles, as because they have ne-

ver
+ Iaf. xliv. 20.

ver attended to principles of any kind, SE RM.
that their lives are so full of incoherence Ix.
and diforder.-You hover on the borders
of fin and duty. One day, you read the
scriptures, you hear religious discourses,
and form good resolutions. Next day,
you plunge into the world, and forget
the serious impression, as if it had been
never made. The impreflion is again re-
called, and again effaced; and in this
circle your life revolves. Is such conduct
worthy of creatures endowed with intel-
ligent powers ? Shall the close of life
overtake you, before you have determin-
ed how to live ? Shall the day never
come, that is to find you steady in your
views, decided in your plans, and en-
gaged in a course of action which your
mind approves ?-If you wiih that day
ever to arrive, retirement and meditation
must first bring you home to yourselves,
from the dissipation in which you are
now scattered; must teach you to fix such
aims, and to lay down such rules of con-
dut, as are suitable to rational and im-

mortal

S ER M. mortal beings. Then will your characer

IX. become uniform and refpe&able. Then,

you may hope that your life will proceed
in such a train, as shall prepare you,
when it is finished, for joining the focictv
of more exalted spirits.

SER-

# SERMON X. On DEVOTION. ACTS x. 2. Cornelius  A devout man 

263
SERMON X.

On D r v o T I O N.

ACTS X. 2.

Cornelius-A devout man--
T H A T religion is essential to the SE RM.

welfare of man, can be proved by x.

the molt convincing arguments. But
thele, how demonstrative soever, are in-
sufficient to support its authority over
human conduct. For arguments may
convince the underflanding, when they
cannot conquer the passions. Irrefiftable
they seem in the calm hours of retreat;
but, in the season of action, they often
vaniih into smoke. There are other and
more powerful springs, which influence

the

E R M. the great movements of the human frame.
x- In order to operate with success on the

active powers, the heart must be gained.
Sentiment and affecion must be brought
to the aid of reason. It is not enough
that men believe religion to be a wife and
rational rule of conduct, unless they rc-
lilh it as agreeable, and finld it to carry
its own reward. Happy is the man, who,
in the conflict of desire between God and
the world, can oppose, not only argument
to argument, but pleasure to pleafurc;
who, to the external allurements of sens,
can oppose the internal joys of devotion;
and to the uncertain promises of a flatter-
ing world, the certain experience of that
peace of God which pajfeth underJlanding,
keeping his mind and heart. Such is the
temper and spirit of a devout man. Such
was the character of Cornelius, that good
centurion, whose prayers and alms are said
to have come up in memorial before Gol.
Of this character I intend, through Divine
assistance, to discourse; and Ihall endea-
vour, I. To explain the nature of devotion;

I II, To

II. To justify, and recommend it; and, SERM.
III. To recify some miflakes concerning vX
It.

I. DEVOTION is the lively exercise

of those atflcdions, which we owe to the
Supreme Being. It comprehends fevcral
emotions of the heart, which all termi-
nate on the fame great objec. The chief
of them are, veneration, gratitude, desire,
and resignation.

It implies, first, profound veneration of

God. By veneration, I understand a dif-
position, compounded of awe, and of love;
the disposition which, of all others, it belt
becomes creatures to bear towards their
infinitely perfec Creator. Awe is the
first sentiment which rites in the foul, at
the view of his greatness. But, in the
heart of a devout man, it is a solemn
and elevating, not a dejecting, emotion;
for he glows, rather than trembles, in the
Divine presence. It is not the fuperili-
tious dread of unknown power, but the
homage yielded by the heart to him who

L 1 is,

s E R M. is, at once, the greatest and the best of Bc-

X. ings. Omnipotence, viewed alone, would

be a formidable o!,jcct. But, colfidered
in conjunction with the moral pertetlions
of the Divine Nature, it serves to heighten
devotion. Goodness affecs the heart with
double energy, when residing in one ti;
exalted. The goodness which we adore
in him, is not like that which is common
among men, a weak, mutable, undif-
cerning fondncfs, ill qualified to be the
ground of assured trust. It is the good-
ndfs of a perfect Govcrnour, acting upon a
regular, extensive plan ; a steady principle
of benevolence, conducted by wisdom;
which, subjec to no variableness or J7a-
dow of turning, free from all partiality and
caprice, incapable of being either soothed
by flattery, or ruffled by resentment, re-
fembles, in its calm and equal lustre, the
eternal serenity of the highest heavens.
Thy mercy, 0 Iord! is id tl heavens, an(l
thy faithfilnefs reacheth unto the clouds. 7hr
righteorficfs is like the great mountains, and
thy judgments are a great depth.

Such

Such are the conceptions of the great SE R M.

God, which fill with veneration the heart X.
of a devout man. His veneration is not
confined to ac's of immiediate worihip.
It is the habitual temper of his foul. Not
only when engaged in praver or praif,
but in the silence of retirement, and even
amidfA the occupations of the world, the
Divine Eeing dwells upon his thoughts.
No place, and no objcd, appear to him
void of God. On the works of Nature,
he views the imprefiion of his hand; and
in the actions of men, he traces the ope-
ration of his Providence. Whatever he
beholds on earth, that is beautiful or fair,
that is great or good, he refers to God,
as to the supreme origin of all the ex-
cellence which is any where fcatteredl
through his works. From those cffecs,
he rifes to the first cause. From those
itreams, he ascends to the fountain whence
they flow. By those rays, he is led to
that eternal source of light in which they
centre.

L 1 2 ]DVOTIPN

SERM. DEVOTION implies, secondly, sincere

X. gratitude to God, for all his benefits.

This is a warmer emotion than finple
veneration. Veneration looks up to the
Deity, as he is in himself: Gratitude re-
gards what he is towards us. When ; de-
vout man iurveys this valt universe, where
beauty and goodness are every-whcre pre-
dominant; when he reflecsi on thocf num-
berlefs multitudes of creatures, who, in
their different tlations, enjoy the I)lel-
sings of existence ; and when at the faime
time he looks up to an Universal Father,
who hath thus filled creation with life
and happiness, his heart glows within
him. He adores that disinterested good-
ness, which prompted the Almighty to
raise up so many orders of intelligent
beings, not that he might receive, but
that he might give and impart; that he
might pour forth himself, and communi-
cate to the spirits which he formed, some
emanations of his felicity.

The goodness of this Supreme Bcnefactor
he gratefully contemplates, as displayed in

hi,

his own ilate. le reviews the events of S E , .
his life; and, in every comftit wlhiclh las x
sweetenel it, lie dilierns the l)ivine ]and.
Ioes he remember with aifcction the pa-
rents under whole care he grew up, and
the companions with whom he p lcldi his
youthful life ? Is lie now happy-, in his
family rising around him; in the ifptufl
who loves him, or in the children who
give him comfort and joy ? Into everv ten-
der remcmbrance of the pall, and every
pleaiing enjoyment of the preliint, devo-
tion enters; for in all thotl: beloved ob-
jecs, it recognizes God. The communi-
cation of love from heart to heart, ai an
fifulion of his goonuels. From his inipl-
ration, des1cends all the tfienidihil; which
ever glowed on earth ; and thcrcfore, to
him itjultly returns in gratitude, and ter-
minates on him.

But this life, with all its intercfis, is

but a small part of human exitence. A
devout man looks forward to immortali-
ty, and discovers higher fubjecs of grati-
tude to Heaven. He views himself as a

guilty

3ER M. guilty creature, whom Divine beligiir'

X. has rceived into grace; wholc forfeitL,

hopes it has reclored; and to whom it
has opened the moflt glorious prcfpedcs ol
future felicity. Such generosity ihown
to the fallcn and miserable, is flill more
asseting to the heart, than favours con-
ferred on the innocent. He contemplates,
with aftoniihment, the labIours of the Son
of God, in accolnplilhing redemption for
men; and his foul overllows with thank-
fulncfs to him who loved us, and wqa/fihe
usfrom oar fins in his own bllod.-4WhatJJall
I render to the Iordfor all his benefits ? BleJs
the Lord, 0 myJoull ! ad all that is within
me, bless his holy name ! who forgivetl,
all thine iniquities, and healeth all thy di/-
caife ; who redleeseth thy life from deJtruc-
tion, and crowneth thee with loving kind-
ncfs, and with tender mercies.

DEVOTION implies, thirdly, the dcfire

of the foul after the favour of the Supreme
Being, as its chief good, and final reft.
To inferiour enjoyments, the devout man

al!otb

allots inferiour anMl iccon(arv attach- s R r.
ni:t. IIc dilclaims not cvcrv ecarthlv t- f-

felion. H-Ie pretends not to renounce all
pleasure in the friends, and the cofilro-s,
of his present ftite. Such an unnatural
renunciation humanity forbids, and reli-
gion cannot require. But fiom these he
expects not his fuprcme bliss. He discerns
tile vanity which belongs to them all;
and beyond the circle of mutable objects
which surround him, he afpircs after some
principle of more perfect felicity, which
thail not be subjeA to change or decay.
But where is this complete and perma-
nent good to be found ? Ambition pur-
sues it in courts and palaces; and returns
from the pursuit, loaded with sorrows.
Pleasure seek-s it among fenifial joys; and
retires with the confeflion of disappoint-
ment. The deep faith, it is not in me; and the
feaftith, it is notwith me. It cannot begotten
for gold; neither Jl.allfilver be weighed for
the price thereof. Its place is not in the land
of the living. True happiness dwells with
God; and from the light of his cmntenance,

it

8 E R M. it beams upon the devout nwan. I Ii, voi;c

X. is, Il'bhm have I in heaven but thec? a;t!l

there is none uponl earth that I drftre bcJ;i!,
thee. After exploring heaven and eartl
for happiness, they seem to him a migiltv
void, a wildernefi of lladows, where all
would be empty and unlubflantial with-
out God. But in his favour and love, he
finds what supplies every defest of tem-
poral objeds; and assures tranquillity to
his heart, amidst all the changes of his
exiflence. Thou Jhalt guide me with tf.'
counsel; and thou Jhalt receive me to thy
gpry. MY flesh and myn heart faileth; but
God is theflrength of my heart, and my por-
tionfor ever.

FROM there sentiments and affedions,

Devotion advances, fourthly, to an en-
tire resignation of the foul to God. It is
the consummation of trust and hope. It
banishes anxious cares, and murmuring
thoughts. It reconciles us to every ap-
pointment of Divine Providence; and re-
solves every wilh into the desire of pleas-

ing

ing him, whom our hearts adore. Its SER M.
genuine breathings are to this effect: X.
"Conduct me, O Cod! in what path
"soever ieemeth good to thee. In no-
" thing shall I ever arraign thy sacred
" will. Dost thou require me to part
" with any worldly advantages, for the
"fake of virtue and a good conscience?
" I give them up. Dost thou command
"me to relinquifl my friends, or my
"country ? At thy call I chearfully
" leave them. Dost thou summon me
"awa; from this world? Lo ! I am
"ready to depart. Thou halt made,
"thou haft redeemed me, and I am
" thine. Myself, and all that belongs to
"me, I surrender to ihy disposal. Let
" the men of the world have their portion
" in this life, and be filled with its bidden
"treasures. Be it mine, to behold thyface
" in rigbteoufnefs; and when I awake, to
"befatisjicd with thy likenefl."

This, surely, is one of the noblest ats

of which the human mind is capable,
when thus, if we may be allowed the ex-

I m pression,

SERM. pression, it unites itself with God. Nor

x. can any devotion be genuine, which in-

'pircs not sentiments of this nature. FIor
devotion is not to be confidered as a
tranficnt glow of affection, occasioned by
some cafilal impreflions of Divine good-
nets, which are suffered to remain un-
connected with the conducE of life. It is
a powerful principlc, which penetrates
the inmost foul; which purifies the as-
fecions from debasing attachments; and,
by a fixed and steady regard to God, sub-
dues every sinful passion, and forms the
inclinations to piety and virtue.

Sucii in general are the dispositions

that constitute devotion. It is the uniol
of veneration, gratitude, desire, and re-
fignation. It expresses, not so much the
performance of any particular duty, as
the spirit which must animate all religious
duties. It t(ands opposed, not merely to
downright vice; but to a heart which is
cold, and insensible to fac.ed things;
which, from compulsion perhaps, and a

sense

fcnfe of interest, prelerves some regard to s E R M.
the Divine commands, but obeys them X.
without ardour, love, or joy. I proceed,

II. To recommend this devout spirit

to your imitation. I begin with oblcrv-
ing, that it is of the utnoft confequcnce
to guard againit extremes of every kind
ill religion. We must beware, left, by
seeking to avoid one rock, we sp!it upon
another. It has been long the fubjecl of
remark, that fiiperflition and cnthufiafm
are two capital sources of dclufion; 1u-
lerilition, on the one hand, attaching
men with immoderate zeal, to the ritual
and external part of religion; and enthu-
fiafm, on the other, direcing their whole
attention to internal emotions, and my-
ftical comnmunications with the Spiritual
world; while neither the one, nor the
other, has paid sufficient regard to the
great moral duties of the Christian life.
But, running with intemperate eagerness,
from these two great abuses of religion,
men have negleced to observe, that there

I m 2 are

SERM. are extremes opposite to each of them,

X. into which they are in hazard of precipi-

tating themselves. Thus the horrourof fu-
perftition has sometimes reached so far, as
to produce contempt for all external infti-
tutions; as if it were poflible for religion
to subsist in the world, without forms of
worship, or publick acknowledgment of
God. It has also happened, that some
who in the main are.well affected to the
cause of goodness, observing that persons
of a devout turn, have at times been car-
ried by warm affections into unjustifiable
excesses, have thence hastily concluded,
that all devotion was akin to enthufi-
afm; and, separating religion totally from
the heart and affections, have reduced it
to a frigid observance of what they call
the rules of virtue. This is the extreme
which I purpose at present to combat, by
thowing you, first, That true devotion is
rational, and well founded; next, That it
is of the highest importance to every other
part of religion and virtue; and, lafflv,
That it is most conducive toour happincis.

IN

IN the first place, True devotion is ra- S E R r.

tional, and well founded. It takes its rife X.
from affections, which are elfential to the
human firame. We are formed by Nature,
to admire what is great, and to love what
is amiable. Even inanimate objects have
power to excite those emotions. The mag-
nificent profpecs of the natural world, fill
the mind with reverential awe. Its beau-
tiful kcenes create delight. When we fir-
vey the actions and behaviour of our fel-
low-creatures, the affections glow with
greater ardour; and, if to be unmoved,
in the former cafe, argues a defet of fen-
fibility in our powers, it discovers, in the
latter, an odious hardness and depravity
in the heart. The tenderness of an assec-
tionate parent, the generosity of a for-
giving enemy, the publick spirit of a pa-
triot or a hero, often fill the eyes with
tears, and swell the breafd with emotions
too big for utterance. The objecd of those
affetions is frequently railcd above us, in
condition and rank. Let us suppose him
raised also above us, in nature. Let us

imagine,

SE R M. imagine, that an angel, or any being of

x- fupcriour order, had condeliended to be

our friend, our guide, and patron; no
person, sure, would hold the exaltation of
his benefador's charader, to be an argu-
ment why he Ihould love and revere him
less.- Strange! that the attachment and
veneration, the warmth and overflowing
of heart, which excellence and goodness
on every other occasion command, fliould
begin to be accounted irrational, as soon as
the Supreme Being becomes their object.
For what reason must human sensibility
be extinct towards him alone ? Are all
benefits entitled to gratitude, except the
highest and the bet ? Shall goodness
cease to be amiable, only because it is
perfet ?

It will, perhaps, be said, that an un-

known and invisible Being, is not quali-
sied to raise affection in the human heart.
Wrapt up in the mysterious obscurity of
his nature, he escapes our search, and as-
fords no determinate objecA to our love
or dcfire. We go forward, but he is rot

tie!.;

there; and backward, but

b -e canngt per- S E R M.

c:ive him; on the Ieft hanl, uhere he X.
.torketh, bat we cannrt behold him: IH k
hideth himJelf on th right hand, that we
cannot Jee him *.-. Notwithlandilng this
obscurity, is there any being in the uni-
verse more real and certain, than the Cre-
ator of the world, and the Supporter of
all exiflence ? Is he, in whom we live and
m1ove, too distant from us, to excite de-
votion ? His form and essence, indeed,
we cannot fee; but to be unseen, and
imperfefly known, in many other in-
stances, precludes neither gratitude nor
love. It is not the fight, so much as the
strong conception, or deep impreflion, of
an objed, which affeds the passions. We
glow with admiration of lerfonages, who
have lived in a diltant age. Whole na-
tions have been transported with zeal and
afedion, for the generous hero, or pu-
blick deliverer, whom they knew only bv
fame. Nay, properly speaking, the diret
object of our love, is, in every cafe, invi-
fible. For that on which affetion is

placed,
Job xxxii. 8. 9.

s F RM. placed, is the mind, the foul, the internal
v^j j character of our fellow-creatures; which,

surely, is no lets concealed, than the Di-
vine Nature irielf is, from the view of
sense. From actions, we can only infer
the dispositions of men; from what we fee
of their behaviour, we collec what is in-
visible; but the conjecture which we form,
is, at belt, imperfect; and when their ac-
tions excite our love, much of their heart
remains still unknown. I atk then, in
what refpec God is less qualified than
any other being, to be an object of assec-
tion ? Convinced that he exists; beholding
his goodness spread abroad in his works,
exerted in the government of the world,
displayed in some measure to sense, in the
actions of his Son Jesus Christ; are we
not furnilhed with every essential requi-
site which the heart demands, in order
to indulge the most warm, and at the
fame time the moftrational emotions ?

If these considerations justify the rea-

fonablenefs of devotion, as expressed in
veneration, love, and gratitude, the fame

train

train of thought will equally jultifv it, SER M.
when appearing in the forms of delire, X.
delight, or resignation. The latter arc, in-
deed, the confequcnce of the former. For
we cannot but (dcire some communica-
tion with what we love; and will natu-
rally resign ourselves to one, on whom we
have placed the full confidence of assec-
tion. The aspirations of a devout man
after the favour of Cod, are the effects of
that earnest with for happiness, which
glows in every breast. All men have some-
what that may be called the object of their
devotion; reputation, pleasure, learning,
riches, or whatever apparent good has
strongly attached their heart. This be-
comes the center of attraction, which ha-
bitually draws them towards it; which
quickens and regulates all their motions.
While- the men of the world are thus
classed, and employed, according to the
objects which they severally worship, shall
he only who direts his devotion towards
the Supreme Being, be excluded from a
place in the system of rational conduct ?

N n or

E R M. or be allowed no passions, which, in the
X. course of their pursuit, may melt with

tenderness, or rile into fervour ?-Having
vindicated the reasonableness of devotion,
I come,

IN the second place, to {how its im-

portance, and the high place which it
possesses in the system of religion. I ad-
dress myself now to those, who, though
they rejec not devotion as irrational, yet
confider it as an unnecessary refinement; an
attainment which may be safely left to re-
clufe and sequestered persons, who aim at
uncommon fandtity. The solid and ma-
terial duties of a good life, they hold to
be in a great measure independent of de-
vout affeCion; and think them fufiicient-
ly supported, by their necessary connec-
tion with our interest, both in this and in
a future world. They insist much upon
religion being a calm, a fober, and ratio-
nal principle of condua.-I admit that
it is very laudable to have a rational re-
ligion. But I mull admonish you, that it

is

is both reproachful and criminal, to have S E R MK
an insensible heart. If we reduce religion X.
into so cool a state, as not to admit love,
affetion, and desire, we lhall leave it in
pofeffion of small influence over human
life. Look abroad into the world, and
observe how few aft upon deliberate and
rational views of their true interest. The
bulk of mankind arc impelled by their
feelings. They are attraced by appear-
ances of good. Tafie and inclination rule
their conduct. To diret their inclination
and taste towards the highest objects; to
form a relish within them, forvirtuous and
spiritual enjoyment; to introduce religion
into the heart, is the province of devotion;
and hence arises its importance to the in-
terests of goodness.

Agreeably to this doctrine, the great

Author of our religion, who well knew
what was in man, laid the foundation of
his whole system in the regeneration of
the heart. The change which was to be
accomplished on his followers, he did not
purpose to effef, merely by regulating

N n 2 their

S E RM. their external condud ; but by forming

X. within them a new nature; by taking

away the heart of Jlone, and giving them
a heart of flIjh, that is, a heart relenting
and tender, yielding to the Divine im-
pulfc, and readily susceptible of devout
imprefflons. Thou Jfalt love the Lord thy
God, with all thy heart, and mind, andJfil,
and flrength: This is the firJl and great
commandment. My oJn, give me thy heart,
is the call of God to each of us: And, in-
deed, if the heart be withheld, it is not
easy to conceive, what other offering we
can present, that will be acceptable to
him.

Of what nature must that man's reli-

gion be, who professes to worihip God,
and to believe in Christ, and yet railes
his thoughts towards God, and his Savi-
our, without any warmth of gratitude or
love ? I speak not of those occasional de-
cays of pious affecion, to which the bet
are subject, but of a total insensibility to
this part of religion. Surely, let the out-
ward behaviour be ever so irreproachable,

there

there mull be some essential defec' in a S E R
heart, which remains always unmoved at X.
the view of infinite goodness. The assec-
tions cannot, in this cafe, be deemed to
flow in their natural channel. Some con-
cealed malignity must have tainted the in-
ward frame. This is not the man whom
you would chute for your bofom-friend;
or whose heart you could expec to an-
fwer, with reciprocal warmth, to yours.
His virtue, if it deserve that name, is
not of the moit amiable fort; and may,
with reason, receive the appellation (often
injudiciously beflowed) of cold and dry
morality. Such a person muff, as yet, be
far from the kingdom of Heaven.

As devotion is thus eflential to religion

in its principle, so it enters into the pro-
per discharge of all its duties. It diffuses
an auspicious influence over the whole of
virtue. The prevailing temper of the mind
is formed by its most frequent employ-
ments. Intercourse with Supreme per-
fechion cannot, therefore, but ennoble and
improve it. The pure love of God, natu-

rally

4

8 E R M. rally connels itfilf with the love of man.

x. Hence, devotion has been often found a

powerful inltrument, in humanizing the
manners of men, and taming their unruly
pafions. It linooths what is rough, and
softens what is fierce, in our nature. It is
the great purifier of the afifctions. It in-
spires contempt of the low gratifications
belonging to animal life. It promotes a
humble and chearful contentment with
our lot;. and hubdues that eager desire of
riches and of power, which has filled this
unhappy world with crimes and miferv.
Finally, it beflows that enlargement of
heart in the ferrice of God, which is the
great principle, both of perseverance, and
of progress, in virtue. He who, unac-
quainted with devout affections, sets him-
'elf to keep the Divine commandments,
will advance in obedience with a flow
and languid pace' like one who, carrying
a heavy burden, toils to mount the hill.
But he whose heart devotion has warmed,
will proceed on his way, chearful and re-
joicing. The one performs his duty, only

because

because it is commanded; the other, be- S E R M.
cause he loves it. The one is inclined to X.
do no more. than necellity requires; the
other seeks to excell. The one looks for
his reward in somewhat betides religion;
the other finds it in religion itfclf: It is
his meat and drink to Jo the will of that
heavenly Father, whom he loves and adores.
Which of these two arc likely to make the
greatest improvement in goodness, is eafi-
ly difcrned. Let us now confider,

IN the third place, the influence of

devotion on the happiness of life. What-
ever promotes and firengthens virtue,
whatever calms and regulates the tem-
per, is a source of happiness. Devotion,
as I have jult now ihown, produces those
effects in a remarkable degree. It in-
spires composure of spirit, mildness, and
benignity; weakens the painful, and che-
rilhes the pleasing emotions; and, by these
means, carries on the life of a pious man
in a finooth and placid tenor.

Besides

SE R M. fidelcs exerting this hablitual ifillicllnc

X on the mindl, devotio: opens a fi!l <,

enjoylmcnts, to which the vitions are cnt: c
firangcrs; enjoyments the more valualo'.,
as they peculiarly belong to rctircmien
when the world leaves us, and to :avclr-
fity when it becomes our foe. These airc
the two s.alons, for which every wilfe m;a
would molt wiil to provide lo)me iidden
flore of comfort. For let him be placed
in the molt favourable situation which
the human itlate admits, the world can
neither always amuli him, nor alwavs
thield him fiom dlitrefs. There will be
many hours of vacuity, and many of dc-
jection, in his life. If he be a ttranger to
(od, and to devotion, how dreary wili
the gloom of solitude often prove ? \Vitl
what opprelTive weight will ficknrefs, (lil-
appointmelt, or old age, fall upon hii
spirits ? But, for those pensive periods,
the pious man has a relief prepared. From
the tiresome repetition of the common a-
nities of life, or from the painful corrolion
of its cares and sorrows, devotion tranl-

1 por tr

'orts ilm into a new rcgion; anld iur- SERM.
rollundl lim there witlh Iich olbjcts ars ae X.
tile molt fitted to cheat. the dlejedion, to
calm the tumults, and to heal thie wounds
of hii. heart. If the world has been cmpty
ind.l d(clive, it g'.autdes him with the
profiec of a higlhcr ai!d better order of
tling,,, abolit to aric. If meni have bccn
ungratefull and base, it diipla!s Iefore him
thle fa;tlhfilllncf of thalt SuIpremc MCiing,
who, though every other lsicnld f.il, will
never forsak!e hin.--Conlilt your experi-
ence, ald you will find that the two great-
eft fourccs of in;ward joy, are, the exer-
cife of love dircced towards a d(lecrving
o)jecd, and the exerciie of hope termi-
nating on iome high and assured happi-
nel,. lloth thc are Iciipplied by devo-
tion ; and thereflre we have no reaflfo to
1be furpriled, if, ol flome occasions, it fill
the hearts of good men with a littisfacdion
not to be cxpreflcd.

The refined pleasures of a pious mind,
are, in many refpeds, iupcriour to the

0 o coarse

E R M. coarse gratifications of fcnfe. They are
_X. pleallres which l)clong to the liihlc

powers, and (btll anfc'ions of !thc tfol;
whereas, the gratifications of tfnl refli
in the lowcft region of our nature. To
the one, the boul tloops below its native
dignity. The other, raise it above it-
self. The one, leave always a comfortlci.,
often a mortifying remembrance hcind! l
them. The other, are reviewed with ap-
plause and delight. The pleafurcs of
sense refcmble a foaming torrent, which,
after a difordcrly course, fpcedily runs
out, and leaves an empty and offensive
channel. But the plcalfres of devotion
resemble the equable current of a pIur
river, which enlivens the fields through
which it palces, and (liffifes verdure an;l
fertility along its banks.- To tlhee, 0
Devotion! we owe the highest improvc-
ment of our nature, and much of the cin-
joyment of our life. Thou art the til-
port of our virtue, and the reft of our
fouls in this turbulent world. Thou com-
pofeft the thoughts. Thou calmest t!:'

pafii;ul:.

paflions. Thou exalteft the heart. Thy S E R M.
communications, and thine only, are icn- X.
parted to the low, no lelS than to the
high ; to the poor, as well as to the rich.
Inl thy prcicllcc, worlll di liincions ceafc;
and under thy inllucncc, worldly sorrows
arc forgotten. Thou art the halnl of the
wounded mind. ThIy Ialtnuary is cver
open to the mii rable ; inacccnible only
to the unrighteous and impure. Thou
beginncft on earth the temper of heaven.
In thee, the hosts of angels and blefled
ljirits eternally rejoice.-It now remains,
that,

III. I ENDEAVOUR to correct some er-

rors, into which men are apt to fall con-
cerning devotion. For it is but too ob-
vious, that errors are often committed in
this part of religion. Thefie fiequently
disfigure its appearance before the world,
and subjec it to unjust reproach. Let us
therefore attend deliberately to its nature,
to as to diftinguifli pure and rational de-
votion, of which I have hitherto treated,

0 o 2 from

x. is and adu;(lterated.

In the firit place, It is an error to pla, c

devotion ill the mere performance oft an-
external adt of worlhip. Prayer and
praile, togethrlc with the ordinalnecs pc-
culiar to Clrillian religion, are the ap-
pointed mcans of ralfing the heart towardl
(od. They arc the inltitutcd signs of (!-
votion ; the language in which it ;latr!-
rally exprefcs ittelf. But let us remem-
ber, that they are signs ant( cxprclflio,
only ; and we all know, that, in various
cafcs, thefi mav not correlpond to the
thing significd. It is in the disposition o,
the leart, not in tlhe nlotion of the lilp',
or in the polture of the body, that (tevo-
tion confills. The heart may pray or
praise, when no words arc uttered. But
if the heart be unconcerned or ill affctled,
all the words we can utter, how properly
framed oeveCr, are no other than empty
and(l ulnacceptabl fiounds in the car of tlc
Almighty.

c',!lcciv\ tlhe !ka!ilrs

anlt advaolntdales of £ x.

d!evoti!on, to he ilciileri;l:t!yo op:el to
aill. Devotion, like many parts of reli-
gion, may in lome lights che conmfidered as
a plrivilec, and in others, as a (dtitv. It is
the dluty of all, to love Gold, anld to resign
themlhelcs to his will. But it is the privi-
leg of 7o(,l men only, to rejoice in God,
and to confidel in his fiiendtlip. Hence,
a ccrtaill preparation is rlequit-te, cfr the
enjoyment of devotion in its whole extent.
Not only mult the life be hreftormed ti')Om
gross enormities, but the heart muili have
undergone that clange which the (.ofliel
points out. A competent knowsleijgc of
(;od mutll be acquired. A proper foind-
ation mut l)e laid in ifaith and repent-
ance, for intercourse with Heaven.

They swho would rulil all at once fiom

the arms of the world, into the sacred
retreat of devotion; they who imagine
that retreat to tiand always ready for the
reception of such as betake thcmielves to
it, for no reason, but because every other

refi'uc

SERM. refuge excludes them, betray gross igno-

X rance of this part of religion. They brinl

to it, faculties unqualified to taste its plea-
fures; and they grasp at hopes to which
they are not entitled. By incorporating
with devotion the unnatural mixture of
their unfancified paflions, they defile and
corrupt it. Hence, that gloom which has
often spread over it. Hence, those luper-
ftitious mortifications and auftcrities, by
which the falsely devout hope to purchase
favour from God; haunted by the terrours
of a guilty conicience, and vainly tirug-
gling to lubftitute a servile and cringing
homage, in the room of the pure aficc-
tions of a renewed heart. On such altars,
the hallowed fire of true devotion cannot
burn; nor can any incense ascend from
them, that Ihall be grateful to Heaven.
Bring no more vain oblationi. WaflJ ye, make
you clean, put away the evil of your doings
from before mine eyes, faith the Lord. CcaJe to
do evil; learn to do well. Then draw nilgh
to God, and he will draw nigh to you.-
But though devotion requires a pure

heart,

heart, and a virtuous life, and necclfarily s E RM.
fiplpolis the cxercitf of frequent retire- X
inent, I mult observe,

IN the third place, That it is an error

to conceive it as requiring an entire re-
treat from the world. Devotion, like eve-
ry other branch of religion, was intended
to fit us for discharging the duities of
life. We serve God, by being ufcfil to
one another. It is evident fiom the frame
of our nature, and from our common ne-
ceffitics and wants, that we were designed
by Providence for an acive part on this
earth. The Golpel of Christ, accordingly,
confiders us as engaged in the concerns
of the world ; and directs its exhortations
to men in all the various relations, cha-
racters, and employments of civil life.
AbstraCtion from society, therefore, and
total dedication of our time to devout ex-
ercifes, cannot be the mos proper method
of acquiring the favour of God.

I mean not, however, to throw any
blame on those, who having loft all re-

lifl

SE RIM. lifh for the ordinary purfilits of iife, in

X. coafeluence of great and Icverc wvou1nd,

hlijch they have lilllered froni alFlidion;

who, Ificing thlcnllvcs fi.1dingl alone,
and (lifLcriilng their collncctiois xwiti
thc world to bl in fomc mecaflurc broken

oil, choofc to leek tranquillity in a rcligi-
ous rctirement, and to confccratc their
(lays entirely to God. Situations fObC-
tililcs occur, which both jultify a grcat
degree of retreat from the world, and en-
title it to reli)cpc. But, with regard to the
bulk of mankind, Chrillian devotion in-
sers not, requires not, any filch fcluetlra-
tion from the allairs of men. Nay, for
the modl part, it will be cultivated with
greater filcccl by those who mingle it
with the allivc employlments of life. For
the mind, when entirely occupied by any
one object, is in hazard of viewing it at
lalt through a false medlium. Object%,
especially, lb great and filblime as thole
of devotion, when we attempt to fix upon
them unremitting attention, overffrerch
and diforler our feeble powers. The

i mind,

mind, by being relaxed, returns to thcm S E R M.
with more advantage. As none of our X.
organs can bear intelll/ t:litions, with-
out injury ; as the eye, when (ldaxzled
with overpowering light, beholds imla-
ginary colours, and lol( s the real di-
llincdionl of objectsi; 1b tle mind, when
over-heated by perpetual contemplation
of ccleftial things, has been lomnetimes
found to mitfake the Itrong imprcllions
of f.alcy, for fupcrnatural communica-
tions from above. To tlie cmployments
of devotion, as to all other things, there
are due limits. There is a certain tem-
perate fphcre, within which, it prcerlves
longest its proper exertion, and most filc-
cefsfiilly promotes the purposes for which
it was deligned.

IN the fourth place, It is an error to

imagine, that devotion enjoins a total
contempt of all the pleasures and amuse-
ments of human society. It checks, in-
deed, that spirit of dissipation which is
too prevalent. It not only prohibits plea-

1) p furcs

E R M. fures which arc unlawful, but likcwi\i!
X. that unlawful degree of attacmlllcn: t t,,

plefilures in thillic lves innoccnt, whnill
withdraws the attention of mlen firnc,
what is leCrious and ilmportant, litt i.
brings amulemclnt under due lintitai(io.,
without extirpating it. It forbids it, :,
the bulfinels; but permits it, as the relaxa-
tion, of life. For there is nothing il thll
spirit of true religion, which is hoflilc to
a chearful enjoyment of our situation il
the world.

They who look with a severe and in-

dignant eye, upon all the recreations yv
which the cares of men are relieved, and
the union of society is cemented, are, in
two respects, injurious to religion. Firit,
they exhibit it to others under a for-
bidding form, by cloathing it with the
garb of so much unnecellary aulterity.
And, next, they deprive the world of
the benefit which their example might
afford, in drawing the line between in-
nocent and dangerous pleasures. By a
temperate participation of those which

are

:99

are innocent, thcv might i;ccefC-fullv cx- s E . M.
ert that auh:iritv, which a virtuous and x.
relicet;lle characler always poflieli's, in
rcllraining undue excels. They would
show the young and inwary, at what
point they ought to flop. They would
have it in their power, to regulate, in
some degree, the publlick manners; to
check extravagance, to humblle lprefump-
tion, and put vice to the blulfh. But,
through injudicious leiverity, they fall
llort of the good they might perform.
By an iindifcriminatc ccnilrc of all a-
nufcment, they detrac from the weight
of their reproof, when amusement be-
comes undoubtedly sinful. By totally
withdrawing them'elves from the circle
of chearful life, they deliver up the en-
tertainments of focietv into the hands of
the loole, and the corrupted ; and permit
the blind power of falhion, uncontroul-
cd, to eflablifli its own standards, and
to cxercife its dangerous fwav over the
world.

Pp 2 IN

sE RM. 1 N the fifth place, It is an error to

X. believe, that devotion nouriflies a fiirit

of Ivclritv, in jud;;ing of the m;anners
and charadcr.l of others. Under thlis re-
proach, ine(lccl, it has lo long ftLffered in
the world ; that, with too many, the ap-
pellation los devo(l t, ilgeds lino other chla-
radr-, but that of a four and rcclule
bigot, who delights in centflr. But the
reproach is unjult ; for iuch a spirit is
entilely opposite to the nature of true de-
votion. The very firll traces which it
imprints on the mind, are candour and
humility. Its principles are liberal. Its
genius is unallomingi and mild. Severe
only to itlilf, it miakes cvcrv allowance
for others which humanity can iiggell.
It claims no privilege of looking into
their hearts, or of deciding with relfccl
to their eternal ftate.-If your ilppoled
devotion produce contrary eflccs ; if it
infufc harllinefs into your lcntilenlts,
and acrimony into your fipeech ; yo
may conclude, that, und(er a friotis ap-
pcarnce, ca:rnal airons lurk. And, it

C -;i

ever it 1h:ll so fir lift youl ul with eltf- srt RM.
concc;t, as to make you clablillh ?our X
ovwln cpi:,);is as an infallihle tlmdard
for the whole (:h, ltilan world, and lca(d
you to colsigni to 1erdLtio:1 all who (diTecr
from you, cither in lome tdodlrinal tcncets,
or in the mode of cxpirclin( them ; you
may rct atlilrc:l, that to much pride you
have joincld much ignorance, both of the
nature of devotion, and of the GofPecl of
Christ. Iinailly,

IN the fixtlh pl.ce, It is an error to

think, that perpetual rapture :ad 1i ritual
jov bclonlf to devotion. Ievout IcclI gs
admit very different degrees of w:.rmtith
and exaltation. Some persons, lb tlhc
irame of their minds, are much more
fifcelptille than others, of the tender
emotions. They more readily rcicnt at
the view of Divine goodneii, glow with
a warmer ardour of love, and, by con;c-
quence, rife to a higher elevation of joy
and hope. But in the midif of fill and
calm affections, devo:ion often (dwells;

and

S R . and though it produce no tranljiorts i:,

x, tilce mind, ditlilcs over it a ftcady 1CIC-

nity. Devout fenlftions not only vary
in their degree, according to the franme
of different tempcrs; but, even ainong
the belt difl)olcd, Iuffer much interrup-
tion and decay. It were too much to
cxpcdt, that in the prelfnt llate of human
frailty, those happy feelings Ihould bc
uniform and contlant. Oppretffon ot
worldly cares, languor of lfirits, adl
infirmities of bodily health, frequently
indili)ofi us for the enjoyment of devout
affecdions. Pious men, on tlefe occafionm,
are in hazard of paming judgment on
their own state with too much feveritv;
as if, for ibme great iniquity, they were
condemned by God to final hardness of
heart. Hence arises that melancholy,
which has been seen to overcloud them;
and which has given occasion to many
contemptuous scoffs of ungodly men. But
it is a melancholy which deferevs to b;
treated with tendernels, not with con-
tempt. It is the excesc of virtuous an!i

pioui

pilos fernribility. It is the overflowing of S E R M.
a heart affccted, in an extreme degree, X.
with the humble sense of its own failings,
and with ardent concern to attain the fa-
vour of God. A weakness, howevcr, we
admit it to be, though not a crime; and
hold it to be perfccdly fiparable from
the cfence of devotion. For contrition,
though it may melt, ought not to link
or overpower, the heart of a Chriflian.
Tlhe tear of repentance leads to its own
relief. Religion is a fplring of confola-
tion, not of terrour, to every well inform-
ed mind, which, in a proper manner, relts
its hope on the infinite goodness of God,
and the all-iifficient merit of Christ.

To conclude, Let us remove from devo-
tion all tlofe miliakcs, to which the cor-
ruptions of men, or their ignorance and
prejudices, have given rife. With us, let
it be the worflhip of God in spirit and in
truth; the elevation of the foul towards
him, in simplicity and love. Let us pursue
it as the principle of virtuous conduct, and

of

SE R M. of inward peace. By frcquent and lekri1:.

X. meditation on the great objecd of rIci-

gion, let us lay ourlelves open to its in-
fluence. By means of the iiillttution l,
the Golijel, let us chrilli its imprlclion. .
And, above all, let us pray to C;od, that
lie may fltablill its power in our heart;.
For here, if any where, his atliftance i,
rcquilitc. The spirit of devotion is hlii
gift. From his inlpiration it procecd(!.
Towards him it tends; and in his prc-
fence hereafter, it Ihall attain its full per-
fetion.

r SER-

# SERMON XI. On the DUTIES of the YOUNG. TITUS ii. 6. Young men likewise exhort to be sober-minded.

305

S E R M ON XI.
On the D TIES of the Y o u NG.

TITUS ii. 6.

Y1oung men likewie exhort to befober-ninded.

SOBRIETY of mind, is one of those SER M.
J virtues: which the present condition XI.
of human life strongly inculcates. The
uncertainty of its enjoyments, checks pre-
fumption; the multiplicity of its dangers,
demands perpetual caution. Moderation,
vigilance, and felf-government, are duties
incumbent on all; but especially, on such
as are beginning the journey of life.
To them, therefore, the admonition in
the Text is, with great propriety, dirct-
ed; though there is reason to fear, that

Qbq by

sE RM. by them it is in hazard of being lcall

XI. regarded. Expericncc enforces the ad-

monition on the most giddy, aftcr they
have advanced in years. But the whole
state of youthful views and pafions, is
advcrfe to obbriety of mind. The fcencs
which pretint themfclves, at our entering
upon the world, are commonly flattering.
Whatever they be in themselves, the lively
spirits of the young gild every opening
profpecl. The field of hope appears to
itretch wide before them. Pleasure seems
to put forth its blossoms on every fide.
Impelled by dcfire, forward they ruih
with inconsiderate ardour: Prompt to
decide, and to choose; averse to hefitatc,
or to enquire; credulous, because un-
taught by experience; rath, because un-
acquainted with danger; head-strong,
because unfubdied by difappintment.
Hence arise the perils, of which it is my
design at present to warn them. I illall
take sobriety of mind, in its moQ compre-
henfive sense, as including the whole of
that discipline which religion and virtue

prefcribc

prescribe to youth. Though the words SE RM.
of the Text arc directly addressed to yowng XI
men, yet, as the lame admonition is given
in a prcceeding verse to the other lix, the
initrudions which arise from the Text, are
to be confidered as common to both. I
intend, first, to Ihow them the importance
of beginning early to give serious atten-
tion to their conduct; and, next, to point
out those virtues which they ought chief-
ly to cultivate.

As soon as you arc capable of reflec-

tion, you must perceive that there is a
right and a wrong, in human actions.
You fee, that thole who are born with
the fame advantages of fortune, are not
all equally prosperous in the course of life.
While some of them, by wife and Heady
conduc, attain distinction in the world,
and pass their days with comfort and ho-
nour; others of the fame rank, by mean
and vitious behaviour, forfeit the advan-
tages of their birth, involve themselves in
much misery, and end in being a dif-

Qq 2 grace

SE RM. grace to their friends, and a burden on
X'. society. Early, then, you may learn, that

it is not on the external condition, in
which you find yourselves placed, but on
the part which you are to aA, that your
welfare or unhappineis, your honour or
infamy, depend. Now, when beginning
to ad that part, what can be of greater
moment, than to regulate your plan of
conduct with the molt serious attention,
before you have yet committed any fatal
or irretrievable errors ? If, instead of ex-
erting reflecion for this valuable pur-
pose, you deliver yourselves up, at lb cri-
tical a time, to sloth and pleasure; if you
refuse to liften to any counfellour but
humour, or to attend to any pursuit, ex-
cept that of amusement; if you allow
yourselves to float loose and careless on
the tide of life, ready to receive any di-
reftion which the current of faflion mav
chance to give you ; what can you expef
to follow, from such beginnings ? While
so many around you are undergoing the
fad Confequcnces of a like indilcretion,

^7

for what reason shall not those confe- SERM.
quences extend to you ? Shall you only XL
attain success without that preparation,
and efcapc dangers without that precau-
tion, which is required of others ? Shall
happiness grow up to you, of its own ac-
cord, and follicit your acceptance, when,
to the reft of mankind, it is the fruit of
long cultivation, and the acquisition of
labour and care?- Deceive not your-
selves with such arrogant hopes. What-
ever he your rank, Providence will not,
for your fake, revcrfe its eftab!iislwd or-
der. The Author of your being hath en-
joined you to take heed to your wirls; to
ponder the paths of your feet ; to remimber
your Creator in the days of your youth. He
hath decreed, that they only who feck as-
ter wifdotn frail find it ; that fools f7all
be afflic7ed, becavfi of their tranfgreions;
and that whoso refiifeth inlftrlion, Jrall
destroy his own foul. By listening to there
admonitions, and tempering the vivacity
of youth with a proper mixture of serious
thought, you may ensure chearfulnefs for

the

SER M. the reft of life; but by delitering your-

X. selves up at present to giddiness and lc-

vity, you lay the foundation of lasting
heaviness of heart.

When you look forward to those plans

of life, which either your circumstances
have fuggelted, or your friends have pro-
posed, you will not hesitate to acknow-
ledge, that in order to pursue them with
advantage, some previous discipline is re-
quifite. Be assured, that whatever is to
be your profeflion, no education is more
necessary to your success, than the ac-
quirement of virtuous dispositions and
habits. This is the universal preparation
for every character, and every station
in life. Bad as the world is, refpet is
always paid to virtue. In the usual courei
of human affairs, it will be found, that
a plain understanding joined with ac-
knowledged worth, contributes more to
prosperity, than the brightest parts with-
out probity or honour. Whether fcicnce,
or business, or publick life, be your aim,
virtue still enters, for a principal Ihare, in-

to

to all thofelgreat departments of human s E R it
adion. It is conneCed with eminence Xt.
in every liberal art; with reputation in
every branch of fair and useful business;
with dillindion in every publick flation.
The vigour which it gives the mind, and
the weight which it adds to character;
the generous sentiments which it breathes,
the undaunted spirit which it inspires,
the ardour of diligence which it quickens,
the freedom which it procures from per-
nicious and dishonourable avocations, are
the foundations of all that is high in fame,
or great in success, among men.

Whatever ornamental or engaging en-

dowments you now posiess, virtue is a
necessary requisite, in order to their shin-
ing with proper lustre. Feeble are the
attractions of the fairest form, if it be
fufpeted that nothing within, corresponds
to the pleating appearance without. Short
are the triumphs of wit, when it is sup-
posed to be the vehici of malice. By
whatever arts you may at first attrat the
attention, you can hold the eftcem, and

secure

8ERM. secure the hearts of others, dnly by amip

XL able dispositions, and the improvements ot

the mind. These are the qualities whole
influence will last, when the lustre of all
that once sparkled and dazzled, has palled
away.

Let not then the season of youth be

barren of improvements, so essential to
your future felicity and honour. Now is
the seed-time of life; and according to
what yolu jw, youJflall reap. Your cha-
racter is now, under divine assistance, of
your own forming; your fate is, in some
measure, put into your own hands. Your
nature is as yet pliant and soft. Habits
have not established their dominion. Pre-
judices have not pre-occupied your un-
derftanding. The world has not had time
to contra& and debate your affecions.
All your powers are more vigorous, dif-
embarafied and free, than they will be
at any future period. Whatever impulse
you now give to your desires and passions,
the direcion is likely to continue. It
will form the channel in which your life

5is

i; to run; nay, it may determine its ever- s E R M.
lalting illile. (onlider then the employ- xL
ment of this important period, as the
highelt trult which llall ever be com-
mitted to you ; as, in a great meafire,
decisive of your happiness, in time and
in eternity. As in the succession of the
fcafons, each, by the invariable laws of
Nature, affects the productions of what
is next in course; so, in human life, every
period of our age, according as it is well
or ill spent, influences the happiness of
that which is to follow. Virtuous youth
gradually brings forward accomplished
and flourishing manhood; and such man-
hood paflls of itself, without uneasiness,
into refpecable and tranquil old age.
But when nature is turned out of its re-
gular course, disorder takes place in the
moral, juit as in the vegetable world. If
the Spring put forth no blossoms, in
Summer there will be no beauty, and
in Autumn, no fruit. So, if youth be
trifled away without improvement, man-
hood will be contenptible, and old age

R r miferablc.

S r M. miserable. If the beginnings of life haxv

XI. 'becn vanity, its latter end can be no other

than vexatti ,fJPiit.

Having thus Ihown the importance of

beginning early to give firious attention
to conduct, I come, next, to point out th'
virtues which are molt necessary to be cul-
tivated in youth. What I ihall,

I. RECOMMEND, is piety to God. With

this I begin, both as the foundation of
good morals, and as a disposition particu-
larly graceful and becoming in youth. To
be void of it, argues a cokl heart, deltitute
of some of the best affections which belong
to that age. Youth is the season of warm
and generous emotions. The heart Ihould
then, fpontaneouly, rife into the admira-
tion of what is great, glow with the love
of what is fair and excellent, and melt at
the discovery of tenderness and gooldnes.
Where can any object be found so proper
to kindle those affections, as the Father of
the universe, and the Author of all feli-
city? Unmoved by veneration, can you

contemplate

contemplate that grandeur and majesty, S E R M.
which his works every where display ? XL
Untouched by gratitude, can you view
that profifion of good, which, in this
pleasing season of life, his beneficent hand
pours around you ? Happy in the love
and affecion of thofi with whom you
are conneced, look up to the Supreme
Being, as the infpircr of all the fricnd-
fliip which has ever been fliown you by
others ; himself, your best and moil an-
tient friend; formerly, the supporter of
your infancy, and the guide of your
childhood; now, the guardian of your
youth, and the hope of your coming
years. View religious homage, as a na-
tural exprefiion of gratitude to him for
all his goodness. Confider it as the ser-
vice of the God of your fathers; of him,
to whom your parents devoted you; of
him, whom in former ages your ancestors
honoured; and by whom they are now
rewarded, and blessed in heaven. Con-
nected with so many tender sensibilities
of foul, let religion be with you, not the

R r 2 cold

E R M. cold and barren offspring of fpecnlation,
XL but the warm and vigorous dictate of the

heart.

But though piety chiefly belong to the

heart, yet the aid of the understanding is
requisite, to give a proper direction to the
devout atliecions. You mull endeavour,
therefore, to acquire just views, both of
the great principles of natural religion,
and of the peculiar doctrines of the gospel.
For this end, study the sacred scriptures.
Consult the word of Cod, more than the
systems of men, if you would know the
truth in its native purity. When, upon
rational and fober enquiry, you have efta-
bliihed your principles, susser them not
to be lhaken, by the scoffs of the licen-
tious, or the cavils of the sceptical. Re-
member, that in the examination of eve-
ry great and comprehensive plan, such as
that of Chriilianity, difficulties may be ex-
peded to occur; and that reasonable evi-
dence is not to be rejected, because the na-
ture of our present (late allows us only to
know in part, and to fee through a glqaf darklv.

Imprces

Imprcfs your minds with reverence for S E K M.

all that is sacred. Let no wantonnecf of XI.
youthful lpirits, no compliance with the
intemperate mirth of others, ever betray
you into sallies of profanity. Betidcs the
guilt which is thereby incurred, nothing
gives a more odious appearance of petu-
lance and presumption to youth, than the
affecation of treating religion with levi-
ty. Instead of being an evidence of si1-
periour undcrltanding, it betrays a pert
and shallow mind ; which, vain of the
first smatterings of knowledge, prelilimcs
to make light of what the rcit of mankind

revere.

At the fame time, you are not to ima-

gine, that when exhorted to be religious,
you are called upon, to become more for-
mal and solemn in your manners than
others of the fame years, or to erecd your-
selves into supercilious reprovers of tliofe
around you. The spirit of true religion
breathes gentleness and affability. It gives
a native, unaffeCted ease to the behaviour.
It is social, kind, and chearful; far re-

movc;d

S E R M. moved from that gloomy and illiberal fu-
."" perdition which cloud(l the brow, {arpcins

the temper, dejecIs the lpirit, and teaches
men to fit themselves for another world,
by neglecting the concerns of this. Let
your religion, on the contrary, connecd
preparation for heaven, with an honour-
able discharge of the duties of adive life.
Let it be albociated in your imagination,
with all that is manly and useful; with
wvhatfoever things are true, are jitf, are
pure, are lovely, are of good report; where-
ever there is any virtue, and wherever there
is any praise. Of such religion discover,
on every proper occasion, that you are not
alhamed; but avoid making any unnec''-
fary ostentation of it before the world.

II. To piety, join modesty and docility,
reverence of your parents, and fubmiflio:l
to thote who are your fuperiours in know-
ledge, in station, and in years. Depend-
ance and obedience belong to youth.
Modesty is one of its chief ornaments;
and has ever been esteemed a presage of

rising

rising merit. When entering on the ca- S E RM.
reer of life, it is your part, not to assume XI.
the reins as yet into your hands, but to
commit yourselves to the guidance of the
more experienced; and to become wile by
the widlom of those who have gone be-
fore you.

Of all the follies incident to youth,

there are none which either deform its
present appearance, or blast the prospeCt
of its future profpcrity, more than self-
conceit, prefimuption, and obltinacy. By
checking its natural progress in improve-
ment, they fix it in long immaturity;
and frequently produce mischiefs, which
can never be repaired. Yet these are vices
too commonly found among the young.
Big with enterprise, and elated by hope,
they resolve to trust for liccefs to none
but themselves. Full of their own abili-
ties, they deride the admonitions which
are given them by their friends, as the
timorous figgeftions of age. Too wife
to learn, too impatient to deliberate, too
forward to be reitrained, they plunge,

with

SFR M. with precipitant indicretion, into tl:.

XIL midlt of all the dangers with which hil:

abounds. ScrJ! th;u a young man wiJ/ in
lis 'r.s n conceit ? There is more hope of a:
f;l,/ than of him. Positive as you nov-
are in your opinions, and confident in
your aftertions, be allured, that the time
approaches, when both men and things
.will appear to you in .a different light.
Many characrrs which you now admire,
will, by and by, fink in your elteem; and
many opinions, of which you are at prc-
iL:nt most tenacious, will alter with ad-
vancing years. Ditirult, therefore, that
glare of youthful presumption, which
dazzles your eyes. Abound not in your
own sense. Put not yourselves forward
with too much eagerness ; nor imagine,
that by the impetuosity of juvenile ar-
dour, you can overturn systems which
have been long eltablifhed, and change
the face of the world. Learn not to think
more highly of yourfeles than you ought to
think, but to think Jfberly. By patient and
gradual progrcffion in improvement, you

I may.

may, in due time, command lasting efleem. s E R M.
But by assuming, at prcfent, a tone of fu- XL
periority, to which you have no title, you
will disgust thoie whole approbation it is
most important to gain. Forward viva-
city may fit you to be the companions of
an idle hour. More iolid qualities must
recommend you to the wife, and mark
you out for importance and confidcra-
tion, in subsequent life.

III. IT is necessary to recommend to

you, sincerity and truth. This is the basis
of every virtue. That darkness of charac-
ter, where we can fee no heart; those fold-
ings of art, through which no native as-
fedion is allowed to penetrate, prelent an
objecd, unamiable in every season of life,
but particularly odious in youth. If at
an age, when the heart is warm, when the
emotions are itrong, and when nature is
expected to thow itself free and open, you
can already smile and deceive, what are
we to look for, when you shall be longer
hackneyed in the ways of men; when

S f intcreft

E.RM. interest hlall have compleated the obdu-
XI. ration of your heart, and experience lhall

have improved you in all the arts of guile?
Diflimulation in youth, is the fore-runner
of perfidy in old age. Its firll appearance
is the fatal omen of growing (Iepravity,
and future Ihamc. It degrades parts and
learning; obscures the luftrc of every ac-
complifhmcnt; and links you into con-
tempt with God, and man.

As you value, therefore, the approba-

tion of Heavcn, or the ellecil of the world,
cultivate the love of truth. In all your pro-
ceedings, he direct and confillent. Inge-
nuity and candour lx)pllfs the moll power-
ful charm; they bclpeak univerlal favour,
and carry an apology almoll for every
failing. The lip of truth, Jhall be Jfablired
for ever ; but a lying tongue, i but Jor a mo-
ment *. The path of truth, is a plain and
a safe path ; that of falsehood, is a per-
plexing maze. After the first departure
from finccritv, it is not in your power to
flop. One artifice unavoidably leads on
to another ; till, as the intricacy of thle

labyvrinti'
*P.,,. \;i. ,,..

labyrinth thickens, you are left entangled s L R M.
in your own flare. Deceit discovers a lit- XI.
t!e mind, which flops at temporary expe-
dients, without rising to comprehensive
views of conduct. It betrays, at the fame
time, a dastardly spirit. It is the resource
of one, who wants courage to avow his
designs, or to reft upon himself. Whereas,
openness of chara;ter difllays that gene-
rons boldness, which ought to diftinguiflh
youth. 'TIo Ict out in the world with no
other principle than a crafty attention to
interest, betokens one who is destined for
creeping through the inferiour walks of
life. But to give an early preference to
honour above gain, when they stand in
competition; to deifpife every advantage,
which cannot be attained without dif-
honcft arts; to brook no meanness, and
to stoop to no dissimulation ; are the in-
dications of a great mind, the presages of
future eminence and diftinftion in life.

At the fame time, this virtuous since-

rity is perfectly consistent with the most
prudent vigilance and caution. It is op-

S 1 2 posed

SERM. posed to cunning, not to true wisdom.
XA,. It is not the simplicity of a weak and im-

provident, but the candour of an enlarged
and noble mind; of one, who icorns de-
ceit, because he accounts it both base and
unprofitable; and who fceks no di(guif,
because he needs none to hide him. l.ord!
who flall abide in thy tabernacle ? Whl/o fall
ascend into thy holy hill ? He that walketh
uprightly, and worketh righteouflefs, and
fpeaketh the truth in his heart.

IV. Y o U T H is the proper season of

cultivating the benevolent, and humane
affections. As a great part of your hap-
piness is to depend on the connections
which you form with others, it is of high
importance that you acquire, betimes, the
temper and the manners which will ren-
der such connections comfortable. Let a
sense of justice be the foundation of all
your social qualities. In your most early
intcrcourfe with the world, and even in
your youthful amusements, let no unfair-
ness be found. Engrave on your mind

that

that sacred rule, of doing in all things to SE RM.
others, according as you wji/ that they XL
Jhould do unto you. For this end, impress
yourselves with a deep sense of the origi-
nal, and natural, equality of men. What-
ever advantages of birth or fortune you
possess, never display them with an often-
tatious superiority. Leave the fubordi-
nations of rank, to regulate the intercourse
of more advanced years. At present, it
becomes you to ad among your compa-
nions, as man with man. Remember how
unknown to you are the vicissitudes of
the world; and how often they, on whom
ignorant and contemptuous young men
once looked down with scorn, have risen
to be their fuperiours in future years.

Companfion is an emotion, of which

you ought never to be ashamed. Grace-
ful in youth is the tear of sympathy, and
the heart that melts at the tale of woe.
Let not ease and. indulgence contract your
affections, and wrap you up in felfiih en-
joyment. But go bometimes to the hou/c
of mourning, as well as to the hotuf offeafl-

fig.

S E R M. . in. Accustom yourselves to think of til

XI. diltrcles of human life; of the iblitar

cottage, the dying plarcnt, and the wec,-
ing orphan. 'Ihou Jhalt not hiarden t:;
heart, nor /fl.,t thr hand fom tly poor r I,-
ther ; but thot, JfhaltJiirely give unto .111m ;
the day 'f his need: Alnd thine heart /hall
ntot be griezved when thou giveit unto hn;,
becaujr tlat for this thing, the Lord thl ' G'.1
/hall bl/ls thee in all thy ittars . NeverI
liort with pain and diilrcis, in an! of
your amuiiements; nor treat evcn tic
mcaneft inicd, with wanton cruelty.

In young minds, there is common-

lv a Itrong propensity to particular in-
timacies and friendships. Youth, in-
deed, is the kealon when friendlhips arc
fometinies tormed, which not only con-
tinue through succeeding life, but which
glow to the lalt, with a tendernels un-
known to the connections begun in cooler
years. The propensity therefore is not to
bedifcouraged; though at the fame time it
mult be regulated with much circumipec-
tion and care. Too many of the pretended

fricnd(lhips
* )cit. xv. %, c.

friendf(lips of youth, are mere combina- s R M.
tions in plcalilre. Often they are found- XL
cd on capricious likings; fudldenly con-
tracaed, and as ftuldenly diflolvcd. Some-
tines they are the eflec of interelled com-
plaifancc and flattery on the one lide, and
of credulous foindncl on the other. Beware
of such ralll and dangerous colneeions,
which may afterwards lo:tl vou witl dif-
honour. Remember, that by the charac-
tr' of thole whom you clioolc for 'our
friends, your own is likely to be fo:nmed,
and will certainly be judged of by tih
world. Be flow, therefore, and cautious
in contracting intimacy; but when a vir-
tuous friendlllip is once eftabliflcd, con-
id(lr it as a sacred engagement. Expose
not yourselves to the reproach of lightnels
and inconitancy, which always bespeak,
either a trifling, or a base mind. Reveal
none of the secrets of your friend. Be
faithful to his interelis. Forsake him not
in danger. Abhor the thought of ac-
quiring any advantage by his prejudice
cr hurt. 7I:rC is a frierd that loveth at

all

8 E R M. all times, and a brother that is born for ad-

XL verfity. Thine ouwnfriend, and tly fathlerC

friend, forsake not *.

Finally, on this head; in order to ren-

der yourselves amiable in society, subdue
all harshness of behaviour. Let that cour-
tely appear in your demeanour, which
springs not Ib much from studied politc-
ness, as from a mild and gentle heart.
Follow the customs of the world in mat-
ters indifferent; but flop when they be-
come sinful. Let your manners be fin-
ple and natural; and of course they will
be engaging. Affectation is certain dc-
formity. By forming themselves on fan-
taftick models, and vying with one ano-
ther in every reigning folly, the young
begin with being ridiculous, and end in
being vitious and immoral.

V. LET me particularly exhort youth,

to temperance in pleasure: Let me admo-
nith them, to beware of that rock on which
thousands, from race to race, continue to
split. The love of pleal'ure, natural to

I man
Prov. xvii. 17. xxvii. 1o.

man in every period of his life, glows at s E RM.
this age with excessive ardour. Novelty X'.
adds fresh charms, as yet, to every grati-
fication. The world appears to spread a
continual feast; and health, vigour, and
high spirits, invite them to partake of it
without restraint. In vain we warn them
of latent dangers. Religion is accused of
insufferable severity, in precluding enjoy-
ment; and the old, when they offer their
admonitions, are upbraided with having
forgot that they once were young.-And
yet, my friends, to what do the restraints
of religion, .and the counsels of age, with
refped to pleasure, amount ? They may
all be comprized in two words, not to
hurt yourselves, and not to hurt others,
by your pursuit of pleasure. Within there
bounds, pleasure is lawful; beyond them,
it becomes criminal, because it is ruinous.
Are these restraints any other, than what
a wife man would choose to impose on
himself? We call you not to renounce
pleasure, but to enjoy it in safety. In-
stead ; abridging it, we exhort you to

T t purfic

S E R M. purfile it on an extensive plan. We pr,-

XI. pose mnafures for securing its poflcflion,

and prolonging its duration.

Consult your whole nature. Confider

yourselves not only as sensitive, but a,
rational beings; not only as rational, but
social; not only as social, but immortal.
Whatever violates your nature in anv of
these refpeds, cannot afford true pleasure;
any more than that can promote health,
which undermines an essential part of the
vital system. For the truth of this con-
clufion, we appeal not merely to the au-
thority of religion, nor to the teftimonv
of the aged, but to yourselves, and your
own experience. We ask, Whether you
have not found, that in a course of cri-
minal excess, your pleasure was more
than compensated by succeeding pain;
Whether, if not from every particular
instance, yet from every habit, at least,
of unlawful gratification, there did not
spring some thorn to wound you, there
did not arise some consequence to make
you repent of it in the issue? iHtvw long

thel,

then, yeCfimple ones! wil,' !: 'fin.plicit. ? S r R M.
How long repeat the fame ro, d of per- XL
nicious folly, and tamely cxpoie your- 'r
selves to be caught In the fame ilare ? If
you have any consideration, or any firm-
ness left, avoid temptations, for which you
have found yourselves unequal, with as
much care, as you would Ihun pestilential
infecion. Break off all conncctions with
the loose and profligate. Mhen frnners entice
thee, con/unt thou not. ookA not on the wOile
when it is red, lhen it giveth its colr' in
te cup ; for at the 1,I, it biteth lile a fJr-
pent, and iingeth likc an adder. Remncve
thy way from the Jirange woman, and come
not nigh the door of her houfi. let not thine
heart decline to her wars ; for her house is
the wua to hell. Thou goeJf after her as a
bird hfjleth to the fitrc, and knoueth not
that it is for his liJ.

How many amiable and promising qua-

lities in youth, are extinguished by the un-
happy exceflls of irregular pleasure! How
many flattcring hopes of parents, and
friends, are cruelly destroyed ! Who but

T t 2 mufi

s E R M. must drop I c1 ., o er the ruins of human

XI nature, 0
ill., !,' beholds that morning

which ail.., 'u bright, fltting in such
untimelh iarknes ; that good humour
which once captivated all hearts, that vi-
vacity which liJarkled in every company,
thofi abilities which were fitted for ihin-
ing in the highest station, all sacrificed at
the fllrine of low sensuality ; and one who
was formed for running the fair career of
life in the midlt of public elteem, cut off
by his vices at the beginning of hib
course, or funk, for the whole of it, in-
to insignificancy and contempt !--Theic,
0 sinful Plcafure! are thy trophies. It
is thus, that, co-operating with the foe of
God and man, thou degraded human ho-
nour, and blafteft the opening profpecls
of human felicity.

VI. DILIGENCE, industry, and proper

improvement of time, are material duties
of the young. To no purpose are they
endowed with the best abilities, if they
want activity for exerting them. Un-

availing,

availing, in this cafe, will be every direc- E R M.
tion that can be given them, either for XL
their temporal or ijliritual welfare. In
youth, the habits of industry are most
ealily acquired. In youth, the incentives
to it are firongeft, frocm ambition and fiom
duty, from emulation and hope, from all
the profpeCls which the beginning of
life affords. If, dead to these calls, you
already languifl in slothful inaction,
what will be able to quicken the more
fluggilh current of advancing years ?

Indutry is not only the inltrument of

improvement, but the foundation of plea-
lure. Nothing is so opposite to the true
enjoyment of life, as the relaxed and
feeble icate of an indolent mind. He
who is a Iranger to industry, may pofrfes,
but he cannot enjoy. For it is labour
only which gives the reliih to pleasure.
It is the appointed vehicle of every good
to man. It is the indifpenfible condition
of our poffelling a found mind, in a found
body. Sloth is so inconsistent with both,
that it is hard to determine whether it be

a

S E R M. a grcater foe to virtue, or to hcalth and

X", happiness. Inactive as it is in itfclf, it:

effccts are fatally powerful. Though it
appear a slowly flowing Itream, yet it un-
dernsines all that is ftablc and flourilhing.
It not only saps the foundation of every
virtue, but pours upon you a deluge of
crimes and evils. It is like water which
firlt putrifies by stagnation ; and then
fends up noxious vapours, and fills the
atmotiphere with death.

Fly, therefore, from idlenets, as the

certain parent both of guilt and of ruin.
And under idleness I include, not mere
inaction only, but all that circle of tri!l-
ing occupations, in which too many
saunter away their youth; perpetually
engaged in frivolous locicty, or public
amusements, in the labours of (rcels, or
the ostentation of their person.- Is this
the foundation which you lay for future
uficfulne's and esteem? By s'uch accom-
plithments, do you hope to recommend
yourselves to the thinking part of the
world, and to answer the expectations of

yOUi

your friends, and your country ?- A- SE RM.
inm.lfmcnts, youth requires. It were vain, I.
it were cruel, to prohibit them. But
though allowable as the relaxation, they
are most culpable as the business, of the
young. For, they then become the gulf
of time, and the poison of the mind. They
foment bad passions. They weaken the
manly powers. They fink the native vigour
of youth into contemptible effeminacy.

Redeeming your time from fich dan-

gerous waste, seek to fill it with em-
ployments which you may review with
1atisfation. The acquisition of know-
ledge, is one of the most honourable occu-
pations of youth. The desire of it, dif-
covers a liberal mind, and is connected
with many accomplifliments, and many
virtues. But though your train of life
Should not lead you to study, the course
of education always furnishes proper
employments to a well-difpofed mind.
Whatever you pursue, be emulous to ex-
ceil. Generous ambition, and fenlibility to
praise, are, especially at your age, among

the

SE R I. the marks of virtue. Think not, tha:

XI. any affluence of fortune, or any elevation

of rank, exempts you from the duties 0;'
application and induitry. Indufiry is thl
law of our being; it is the demand of Na-
ture, of Reason, and of God. Remember
always, that the years which now palt
over your heads, leave permanent memo-
rials behind them. From your thought-
less minds they may escape ; but they re-
main in the remembrance of God. Thec
form an important part of the register ot
your life. They will hereafter bear tefti-
mony, either for or againfi you, at that
day, when, for all your actions, but par-
ticularly for the employments of youth,
you must give an account to God.

Tlius I have set before you, some of

the chief qualifications which belong to
that fober mind, that virtuous and religi-
ous character, which the Apostle in my
Text recommends to youth; piety, mo-
defty, truth, benevolence, temperance, andl
induitry. Whether y )ur future course is

l ~ ~deftinel

destined to be long or fliort, after this S E R M.
manner it should commence ; and, if it XI.
continue to be thus conducted, its con-
clufion, at what time fbever it arrives,
will not be inglorious or unhappy. For,
Iyogurable age is not that which Jiandcth in
length of time, or that which is lncajilrcd ly
number of years. But wiftom is the gira)
hair to man, and an uifp.:ted liJf is old nge.

LET me finifl the subjec, with recalling

your attention to that dependance on the
blefling of Heaven, which, amidst all your
endeavours after improvement, you ought
continually to preserve. It is too common
with the young, even when they resolve
to tread the path of virtue and honour, to
set out with presumptuous confidence in
themselves. Tnifting to their own abilities
for carrying them successfully through
life, they are careless of applying to God,
or of deriving any afliftance, from what
they are apt to reckon the gloomy difci-
pline of religion. Alas how little do they
know the dangers which await them

U u Neither

s E R M. Neither human wisdom, nor human vir-

XI. tue, unsupported by religion, are equal

for the trying situations which often occur
in life. By the shock of temptation, how
frequently have the mort virtuous inten-
tions been overthrown ? Under the pref-
sure of disaster, how often has the grcateft
constancy funk ? Every good, and every
perfetl gift, is from above. Wisdom and
virtue, as well as riches and honour, come
from God. Detfitute of his favour, you
are in no better situation, with all your
boasted abilities, than orphans left to wan-
der in a tratlefs desert, without any guide
to conduct them, or any (helter to cover
them from the gathering fIorm. Correct,
then, this ill-founded arrogance. Expec
not, that your happiness can be indepen-
dent of him who made you. By faith
and repentance, apply to the Redeemer of
the world. By piety and prayer, seek the
protection of the God of heaven. I con-
clude with the solemn words, in which a
great Prince delivered his dying charge to
his son; words, which every young pcrfbn

ought

ought to confider as addresscd to himself, S E R M.
and to engrave deeply on his heart. Thou XL
Solomon, ,m Jfon, know hou the God of thy
fithers; andJlrve him wilh a perfect heart,
and with a willing inid. For the Lord
/i'arreth all hearts, and underflatdcth all
tec imaginations of the thoughts. If tholi
sick him, he will be found of thee ; but if
thtou /f1,Jikc hIm, he will ca/f the off' for

* C ron. xxvlii. 9.

U 2 SER-

# SERMON XII. On the DUTIES and CONSOLATIONS of the AGED. PROV. xvi. 31. The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.

340

S E R M ON XII.
On the DUTI ES and CONS O . AT ION

of the AGED.

PROV. xvi. 31.
The hoary head i. a crown of glory, if it

be found in the way of righteoufnefi.

S E R M. T O fear God, and to keep his command-
XI. l ments, is the rule of our duty, in

every period of life. But, as the light
which guides our steps, varies with the
progress of the day, so the rule of reli-
gious conduct is diversified in its appli-
cation, by the different flages of our prc-
sent existence. To every age, there be-
longs a diftind propriety of behaviour.
There arises from it, a series of duties pe-
culiar to itself.

Of

Of thofc which are incumbent on youth, s E R M.
I have treated in the precceding difcouric. XI.
As we advance from youth to middle age,
a new field of action opens, and a diffe-
rent charactcr is required. The flow of
gay and impetuous spirits, begins to ihb-
fide. Life gradually assumes a graver cart;
the mind, a more sedate and thoughtfil
turn. The attention is now transferred
from pleasure to interest; that is, to plea-
sure diffused over a wider extent, and
measured by a larger scale. Formerly,
the enjoyment of the present moment
occupied the whole attention. Now, no
action terminates ultimately in itself, but
refers to some more distant aim. Wealth
and power, the initruments of lasting
gratification, are now coveted more than
any single pleasure. Prudence and fore-
fight lay their plans. Industry carries
on its patient efforts. Acdivity pushes
forward; address winds around. Here,
an enemy is to be overcome; there, a ri-
val to be displaced. Competitions warm;
and the strife of the world thickens on

every

SERM. every fide. To guide men through thiw
XLv busy period, without loss of integrity; to

guard them against the temptations which
arise from mitsakcn, or interfering, inter-
cts; to recall them from worldly pur-
suits, to serious thoughts of their spiritual
concerns, is the great office of religion.

But as this includes, in a great mea-

fitre, the whole compass of moral duty;
as the general nrain of religious exhorta-
tion, is addressed to those who are in thi.
fealon of life; a dclineatidn of the virtues,
properly belonging to middle age, may ap-
pear unneccflary, and would lead us into
too wide a field. Let us therefore turn
our view to a bounded profpce ; and
contemplate a period of life, the duties of
which are circumiifribcd within nan'owcr
limits. Old age is a flage of the human
course, which every one hopes to reach;
and therefore the consideration of it, in-
terests us all. It is a period jufly entitled
to general refpet. Even its failings ought
to be touched with a gentle hand ; and
though the petulant, and the vain, may

decfpill

defpifc the hoary head, yet the wisest of SERM.
men has affirted in the Text, that when XI.
/und in the way of righteouJhefs, it is a
crown of glory. I lhall, first, offer some
counsels, concerning the errors which are
most incident to the aged. Secondly, I
Ihall suggest the peculiar duties they
ought to pracifec; and, thirdly, Point out
the consolations they may enjoy.

I. As the follies and vices of youth,

are chiefly derived from inexperience and
presumption; so, almost all the errors of
age, may be traced up to the feeblencfs
and distress peculiar to that time of life.
Though, in every part of life, vexations
occur; yet, in former years, eitherbufinef,
or pleasure, served to obliterate their im-
preflion, by supplying occupation to the
mind. Old age begins its advances, with
disqualifying men for relishing the one,
and for taking an active part in the other.
While it withdraws their accustomed sup-
ports, it imposes, at the fame time, the ad-
ditional burden of growing infirmities. In

the

SE RM. the former stages of their journey, hope
XII. continued to flatter them with many ;a

fair and enticing profpecl. But in pro-
portion as old age increafcs, those pleasing
illusions vanilla. Life is contracted with-
in a narrow and barren circle. Year after
year, steals ibmewhat away from their
flore of comfort; deprives them of some
of their ancient friends, blunts some of
their powers of sensation, or incapacitates
them for some function of life.

Though, in the plan of Providence, it

is wifely ordered, that before we are
called away from the world, our attach-
ment to it should be gradually loosened;
though it be fit in itself, that as in the
day of human life, there is a morning
and a noon, so there should be an evening
also, when the lengthening shadows ihall
admonish us of approaching night; yet
we have no reason to be furprized, if they
who are arrived at this dejeding season,
feel and lament the change which they
susser. The complaints therefore of.the
aged, should meet with tenderness, rather

i than

than censure. The burden under which S ER M.
they labour ought to be viewed with XII.
sympathy, by those who mufi bear it in
their turn, and who perhaps, hereafter,
may complain of it as bitterly. At the
fame time, the old fllould confider, that all
the seasons of life have their fevcral trials
allotted to them; and that to bear the in-
firmities of age with becoming patience,
is as much their duty, as it is that of the
young to resist the temptations of youth-
ful pleasure. By calmly enduring, for the
short time that remains, what Providence
is pleated to inflic, they both expre's a
resignation most acceptable to God, and
recommend themselves to the esteem and
affiltance of all who are around them.

But though the querulous temper im-

puted to old age, is to be confidered as a
natural infirmity, rather than as a vice;
the fame apology cannot be made for that
peevish disgust at the manners, and that
malignant censure of the enjoyments of
the young, which is sometimes found to
accompany advancing years. Nothing

X x can

SE R M. can be more unjust, than to take offence
XI. at others, on account of their partakin,

of pleasures, which it is past your time to
enjoy. By indulging this fretful temper,
you both aggravate the uneasiness of age,
and you alienate thole on whose affedion
much of your comfort depends. In order
to make the two extremes of life unite in
amicable fbciety, it is greatly to be wish-
ed, that the young would look forward,
and confider that they {hall one day be
old; and that the old would look back,
and remembering that they once were
young, make proper allowances for the
temper and the manners of youth.

But instead of this, it is too common

to find the aged, at declared enmity with
every thing that is present; perpetually
complaining of the growing depravity ot
the world, and of the astonishing vices
and follies of the rising generation. All
'things, according to them, are ruffling
fast into ruin. Decency and good order
have become extincA, ever since that hap-
py discipline, under which they spent

their

their youth, has passed away.-Part, at SE RM.
leait, of this difplealure, you may fairly XII
impute to the infirmity of age, which
throws its own gloom on every surround-
ing object. Similar lamentations were, in
the days of your youth, poured forth by
your fathers; and they who are now
young, shall, when it comes to their turn,
inveigh, in the like firain, against those
who succeed them. Great has been the
corruption of the world in every age.
Sufficient ground there is for the com-
plaints made by serious ohfervcrs, at all
times, of abounding iniquity and folly.
But though particular modes of vice pre-
vail in one age, more than in others, it
does not follow, that on that age all ini-
quity is accumulated. It is the form,
perhaps, more than the quantity of cor-
ruption, which makes the diftintion. In
the worst of times, God has aflured us,
that there shall be always a feed whoJhall
jerve him *. Say not thou, What is the cauSf
that the former days were better than the/e ?

X x 2 for

Pfa.
v r i:. 30.

E R M. for thou dof] not enquire wifely concernint
XI. this. Be not righteous o¶'er-nmch ; neither

make thlyelf over-wvj *+. Former follies
pass away, and are forgotten. Those
which are present, firike observation, and
sharpen censure. Had the depravation of
the world continued to increase in propor-
tion to thofl gloomy calculations, which,
for so many centuries past, have eftimat-
ed each race as worse than the preceeding,
by this time, not one ray of good enfle,
nor one spark of piety and virtue, must
have remained unextinguified among
mankind.

One of the vices of old age, which ap-

pears the most unaccountable, is that co-
vetous attachment to worldly interest,
with which it is often charged. But
this too, can naturally be deduced from
the sense of its feebleness and decay.
In proportion as the vigour both of bo-
dy and mind declines, timidity may
be expeted to increase. With anxious
and fearful eye, the aged look forward

to
' Ecclcf. vii. ic, 16.

to the evils which threaten them, and S £ R
to the changes which may befall. Hence, XIjI
they are sometimes apt to over-value
riches, as the inftrumcnt of their de-
fence against these dangers, and the most
certain means of securing them againit
solitude and disrespect. But though their
apprehensions may justify a cautious fru-
gality, they can by no means excuie a
fordid avarice. It is no lecs absurd,
than it is culpable, in the old, from the
dread of uncertain futurity,to deny them-
selves the enjoyment of the present; and
to increase in anxiety about their jour-
ney, in proportion as it draws nearer to
its close. There are more effecual me-
thods of commanding refpet from the
world, than the mere poffeflion of wealth.
Let them be charitable, aud do good.
Let them mix beneficence to their friends,
with a chearful enjoyment of the com-
forts which befit their state. They will
then receive the returns of real refpecl
and love. Whereas, by their riches,
they procure no more than pretended

demon-

S E R M. demonstrations of regard; while their ill-

X judged parsimony occalions many iecrct
wifles for their death.

As increasing years debilitate the bo-

dy, so they weaken the force, and dimi-
nifh the warmth of the aflfcions. Chill-
ed by the hand of time, the heart lofcs
that tender sensibility, with which it once
entered into the concerns and sorrows of
others. It is, in truth, a merciful ap-
pointment of Providence, that as they
who fee many days, must behold many
a fad scene, the impreflions of grief upon
their heart flhould be blunted by being
often repeated; and that, in proportion
as their power of advancing the pro-
fperity of others decreases, their parti-
cipation of the misfortunes of others
m1ould also lessen. However, as, in eve-
ry period of life, humanity and friend-
ship contribute to happiness, it is both
the duty and the interest of the aged, to
cherish the remains of the kind assec-
tions; and, from the days of former
years, to recall fucl impressions as may

tend

tend to soften their hearts. Let them SERM.
not, from having fuftfered much in the XIL
course of their long pilgrimage, become
callous to the fuffcrings of others. But
remembering that they flill are men, let
them itudy to keep their heart open to
the sense of human woe. Praclifed in
the ways of men, they are apt to be
suspicious of design and fraud; for the
knowledge, and the diltruit of mankind,
too often go together. Let not, how-
ever, that wary caution, which is the
fruit of their experience, degenerate into
craft. Experience ought also to have
taught them, that amidlt all the false-
hood of men, integrity is the best de-
fence; and that he who continueth to
the end to walk uprightly, fliall continue
to walk surely. Having thus offered
some admonitions concerning the errors
molt incident to age, I proceed,

II. To point out the duties which pe-
culiarly belong to it.

The

SERIM. The firll, which I ihall mention, is, a
XII. timely retreat from the world. In cvery

part of life, we are in hazard of being;
too deeply immerfid in its cares. But,
in former periods, the impulse of acrivc
spirit, the neceflary business of our fia-
tion, and the allowable endeavours to ad-
vance our fortune by fair industry, ren-
dered it difficult to observe due modera-
tion. In old age, all the motives of
eager pursuit diminish. The voice (of
Nature then calls you, to leave to others
the bustle and contest of the world; and
gradually to disengage yourselves from
a burden, which begins to exceed your
llrength. Having born your ihare of the
heat and labour of the day, let the even-
ing of life be pafied in the cool and
quiet shade. It is only in the Ihade,
that the virtues of old age can flourish.
There, its duties are discharged with
most success; and there, its comforts are
enjoyed with greatest fatisfacion.

By the retreat of old age, however, I
do not mean, a total cessation from evcrv

I ~ ~ worldly

worldly employment. There is an error s E R M.
in this, as well as in the opposite ex- XI.
treme. Persons who have been long
harassed with business and care, some-
times imagine, that when life declines,
they cannot make their retirement from
the world too complete. But where
they expeced a delicious enjoyment of
leisure and ease, they have often found
a melancholy solitude. Few are able,
in any period of their days, to bear a
total abftration from the world. There
remains a vacancy, which they cannot
fill up. Incapable of being always
employed in the exercises 6f religion,
and often little qualified for the en-
tertainments of the understanding, they
are in hazard of becoming a burden to
themselves, and to all with whom they
are connected. It is, therefore, the duty
of the aged, not so much to withdraw
entirely from worldly business, as to con-
traft its circle; not so much to break
off, as to loosen, their communication
with acive life. Continuing that train

Y y of

S E RM. of occupation to which they have been
XII. most accustomed, let them purfuc it with

less intenfenels; relaxing their efforts, as
their powers decline; retiring more and
more, from publick observation, to dome-
stick fcencs, and serious thoughts; till, as
the decays of life advance, the world flhall
of iSfelf withdraw to a greater distance
from their view; its objeds shall gradu-
ally yield their place to others of more
importance; and its tumults {hall found
in their ears, only like a noise which is
heard from afar.

If it be the duty of the old, to retreat

betimes from the fatigue of worldly care,
it is still more incumbent on them, to
quit the pursuit of such pleasures as are
unsuitable ta their years. Chearfulnefs,
in old age, is graceful. It is the natural
concomitant of virtue. But the chear-
fulness of age, is widely different from
the levity of youth. Many things are
allowable in that early period, which, in
maturer years, would defcrve censure;
but which, in old age, become both ridi-

culotu

culous and criminal. By aukwardly as- S E R M.
feEing to imitate the manners, and to XII
mingle in the vanities, of the young, as
the aged depart from the dignity, so they
forfeit the privileges of gray hairs. But
if, by follies of this kind, they are de-
graded, they are exposed to much deeper
blame, by descending to vitious pleasure,
and continuing to hover round those
sinful gratifications to which they were
once addiced. Amusement and relaxa-
tion the aged require, and. may enjoy.
But let them confider well, that by every
intemperate indulgence, they accelerate
decay; instead of enlivening, they op-
press, and precipitate, their declining tfate.
Ease, safety, and refpecl, are the proper
enjoyments of age. Withif these bounds
let it remain, and not vainly attempt to.
break through that barrier, by which Na-
ture has separated the pleasures of youth,
from the comforts left to the concluding
years of life.

A material part of the duty of the aged
consists, in fludying to be useful to the

Y y 2 race

S E R M. race who are to succeed them. Here
XIL. opens to them an extensive field, in which

they may so employ themselves, as con-
fiderably to advance the interests of reli-
gion, and the happiness of mankind. To
them it belongs, to impart to the young
the fruit of their long experience; to in-
ftrud them in the proper conduc, and
to warn them of the various dangers, of
life; by wife counsel, to temper their pre-
cipitate ardour; and, both by precept and
example, to form them to piety and virtue.

It is not by' rigorous discipline, and

unrelaxing austerity, that they can main-
tain an ascendant over youthful minds.
The constraint which their presence
will impose, and the aversion which
their manners will create, if the one be
constantly awful, and the other severe,
tend to frustrate the effed of all their
wisdom. They must assume the spirit of
the companion, and the friend; and mix
with the authority of age, a proper de-
gree of indulgence to the manners of
the young. Instead of lessening the re-

flpCCt

fpiec due to their years by such condefcen- s E R M.
sion, they take the furell method to in- XII
crease it. Old age never appears with
greater dignity, than, when tempered by
mildness, and enlivened with good hu-
mour, it acs as the guide and the pa-
tron of youth. Religion displayed in
such a character, strikes the beholders,
as at once amiable and venerable. They
revere its power, when they fee it adding
so much grace to the decays of nature,
and shedding so pleasing a luflre over
the evening of life. The young willi to
tread in the iame steps, and to arrive at
the close of their days with equal ho-
nour. They liftcn with attention to
counsels, which are mingled with ten-
dernefs, and rendered refpeclable by gray
hairs For, notwithstanding all its pre-
fumption, youth naturally bends before
fuperiour knowledge and years. Aged
wisdom, when joined with acknowledged
virtue, exerts an authority over the hu-
man mind, greater even than that which
arises from power and flation. It can

check

SER M check the molt forward, abafli the mofl
XvI., profligate, and strike with awe the mofl

giddy and unthinking.

In the midst of their endeavours to be

useful to others, let not the aged forget
those religious employments, which their
own ltate particularly requires. The first
of these, is, refledion on their past beha-
viouir, with a view to discover the error.s
which they have committed; and, as far
as remaining life allows, to amend and
repent.-Long has the world bewildered
you in its maze, and imposed upon you
by its arts. The time is now come, when
this great seducer should mislead you no
more. From the calm flation at which
you are arrived, sequestered from the
crowd of the deceiving, and the deceiv-
ed, review your condut, with the eye of
Christians and immortal beings. After
all the tumult of life is over, what now
remains to afford you solid fatisfadion ?
Have you served God with fidelity, and
lifcharged your part to your fellow-
creatures with integrity and a good con-

science ?

science ? Can you look forward, without S E R M.
terrour, to that day which is to dissolve XII
your connection with this world, and to
bring you into the presence of him who
mad* you, in order to give account of
your ations ?-The retrofped of life is
seldom wholly unattended by uneasiness
and ihame. Thofgh, to the good and the
bad, it presents a very different scene;
yet, to all men, it recalls much guirt in-
curred, and much time mifpent. It too
much resembles the review, which a tra-
veller takes from some eminence, of a bar-
ren country, through which he has pas-
fed, where the heath and the desert form
the chief profpet; diverfitied only by a
few scattered spots of imperfec cultiva-
tion.

Turn then your thoughts to the proper

methods of making your peace with God
through Jesus Christ; and implore, from
Divine grace, that new heart, and right
spirit, which will fit you for a better world.
Let devotion fill up many of those hours,
which are now vacant from worldly bu-

finess

S E RM. finess and care. Let your affections dwell
XII. among divine and immortal objects. In

silent and thoughtful meditation, walk
as on the Ihore of that vast ocean, upon
which you are soon to embark. Summon
up all the considerations which ihould
reconcile you to your departure from life;
and which may prepare you for going
through its lalt scene, with firmness and
decency. Often let your thanksgivings
arcend to God, for that watchful care
with which he hath hitherto conduced
you, through the long journey of life.
Often let your prayers be heard, that, in
what remains of your pilgrimage, he may
not forsake you; and that, when you en-
ter into the valley of the Jhadow of death,
he may there support you with his Jlaf,
and defend you with his rod.- Amidst
such thoughts and cares, let old age find
you employed; betaking yourselves to a
prudent and timely retreat; disengaged,
both from the oppressive load of bufi-
ness, and from the unseasonable pursuit
of pleafurc; applying yourselves to form

1is ~ the

the succeeding race, by your counsels to S E RM.
virtue and wisdom; reviewing seriously Xi.
your past life; by repentance and devo-
tion, preparing yourfclves for a better;
and, with humble and manly composure,
expecting that hour, which Nature cannot
now long delay. It remains,

III. To suggest the consolations which

belong to old age, when thus found in the
way of righteousness.

I must introduce them with observing,

that nothing is more reasonable in itself,
than to submit patiently to those infirmi-
ties of Nature, which are brought on by
the increase of years. You knew before-
hand what you had to expec, when you
numbered the successive Summers and
Winters, which were passing over your
heads.. Old age did not attack you by
furprize, nor was it forced upon you
against your choice. Often, and earnest-
ly, did you wish to fee long life, and many
days. When arrived at the desired period,
have you any just cause to complain, on

Z i account

E R M. account of enduring what the conftitu-
XII. tion of our being imposes on all ? Did

you expet, that, for your fake, Provi-
dence was to alter its eftablilhed order ?
Throughout the whole vegetable, fenfiblc,
and rational world, whatever makes pro-
grefs towards maturity, as soon as it has
passcd that point, begins to verge towards
decay. It is as natural for old age to be
frail, as for the corn to bend under the
ripened ear, or for the autumnal leaf to
change its hue. To this law, all who
went before you, have submitted; and
all who mhall come after you, must yield.
After they have flouriihed for a season,
they hall fink, like you, into the vale of
life, and bow under the pressure of years.

During the whole progress of the hu-

man courfi, the principal materials of our
comfort or uneasiness, lie within ourselves.
Every age will prove burdensome, to those
who have no fund of happiness in their
own breast. Preserve them, if you could,
from all infirmity of frame. Bestow upon
them, if it were poflible, perpetual youth;

ftll

still they would be restless and miserable, s E R M.
through the influence of ill-governed pas- XI.
sions. No wonder that such persons are
peevish and querulous, when old. Unjustly
they impute to their time of life, that mi-
fery with which their vices and follies em-
bitter every age. Whereas, to good men,
no period of life is unsupportable, because
they draw their chief happiness from
sources which are independent of age or
time. Wisdom, piety, and virtue, grow not
old with our bodies. They susser no decay
from length of days. To them only be-
longs unalterable and unfading youth.
Tbofe that be planted in the houe of the
Lord, fJall flouri/h in the courts of our
God. TheyJhall lill bring forth fruit in old
age; they fJall be fat, and flourfl/hi1g *.

You are now, it is true, past rclifhing

many of those pleasures which once a-
mused you. Your sensations are less quick
than formerly; your days, more lan-
guifling. But if you have quitted the
region of pleasure, in return, you poffcfs
that of tranquillity and repose. If you

Z z 2 are
c Pfal. xcii. 13, 14.

s E R M. are firangers to the vivacity of enjoyment,
vXI you are free, at the fame time, from the pain

of violent and often disappointed desire.
Much fatigue, much vexation, as well as
vanity, attend that turbulence of life, in
which the younger part of mankind are
engaged. Amidst those keen pursuits,
and seeming pleasures, for which you en-
vy them, often they feel their own misery,
and look forward with a wishful eye to
the season of calmness and retreat. For,
on all fides of human life, the balance of
happiness is adjusted with more equality
than at first appears; and if old age
throws some new distresses into the scale,
it lightens also the weight of others. Many
passions, which formerly created you much
diflurbance, have now subsided. Many
competitions, which long filled your days
with disquiet and strife, are now at an
end. Many afflictions, which once rent
your hearts with violent anguish, are now
softened into a tender emotion, on the
remembrance of past woe. In the begin-
nings of life, there was room for much

appr:-

apprehenlion concerning what might be- s E R M.
fall in its progress. Your fccurity was XIL
never untroubled. Your hopes were dif-
turbed with many anxieties and fears.
Having finifled the career of labour and
danger, your anxiety ought of course to
lessen. About to enter into the harbour,
you can look back, as from a secure tla-
tion, upon the perils you have escaped,
upon the tempest by which you was tof-
fed, and upon the multitudes who are still
conflicting with the fiorm.

If you have aded your part with inte-

grity and honour, you are justly entitled
to relpecl, and you will generally receive
it. For rarely, or never, is old age con-
temned, unless when, by vice or folly,
it renders itself contemptible. Though
length of time may have worn off super-
ficial ornaments, yet, what old age loses
in grace, it often gains in dignity. The
veneration, as was before observed, which
gray hairs command, puts it in the power
of the aged, to maintain a very important
place in human society. They are so far

from

S ER M. from being insignificant in the world,
XI. that families long held together by their

authority, and Societies accustomed to be
guided by their counsels, have frequently
had cause to regret their loss, more than
that of the most vigorous and young. To
success of every kind, the head which di-
reas, is no less essential, than the hand
which executes. Vain, nay, often dan-
gerous, were youthful enterprise, if not
conducted by aged prudence. IfJaid, Days
Jhould speak, and multitude of years Jflould
teach wisdom *. Therefore thou Jbalt rife
up before the hoary head, and honour the
face of the old man, and fear thy God t.

Though, in old age, the circle of your

pleasures is more contracted than it has
formerly been; yet, within its limits, ma-
ny of those enjoyments remain, which
are most grateful to human nature. Tem-
perate mirth, is not extinguished by ad-
vanced years. The mild pleasures of
domeftick life, still chear the heart. The
entertainments of conversation, and social
intercourse, continue unimpaired. The

desire
* Jb XXiii. t. t Lev. xix. 32.

desire of knowledge, is not abated by the SE RM.
frailty of the body; and the leisure of old XII
age, affords many opportunities for grati-
fying that desire. The sphere of your
obfcrvation and refledion, is so much en-
larged by long acquaintance with the
world, as to supply, within itself, a wide
range of improving thought. To recall
the various revolutions which have oc-
curred since you began to aft your part
in life; to compare the characters of past
and present times; to' trace the hand of
Providence, in all the incidents of your
own lot; to contemplate with thoughtful
eye, the successive new appearances which
the world has assumed around you, in
government, education, opinions, cuf-
toms, and modes of living; there are
employments, no less entertaining, than
inftrutive to the mind.

While you are engaged in such em-

ployments, you are perhaps surrounded
with your families, who treat you with
attention and respect; you are honoured
by your friends; your charater is efta-

blifled;

S z RM. bliflied you are placed beyond the reach
XII. of clamour, and thefrife f ftongues; and,

free from diftrating cares, you can at-
tend calmly to your eternal interests. For
such comforts as these, have you not
cause molt thankfully to acknowledge
the goodness of Heaven? Do they not as-
ford you ground, to pass the remainder of
your days in resignation and peace; dif-
posing yourselves to rife in due time, like
satisfied guests, from the banquet that
has been set before you; and to praise
and bless, when you depart, the great
Matter of the feast ? To a man that is good
in his fight, whether he be young or old,
God gveth wu,iJdom, and knowledge, andjoy.
For every season of life, the benignity of
his providence hath prepared its own satis-
faaions, while his wisdom hath appointed
its peculiar trials. No age is doomed to
total infelicity; provided that we attempt
not to do violence to Nature, by seeking to
extort from one age, the pleasures of ano-
ther; and to gather, in the Winter of life,

/ l those

those sowers which were destined to blo- s E R M.
fom, only in its Summer or its Spring. XII.

BUT perhaps it will be said, that I

have confidered old age, only in its first
stages, and in its most favourable point of
light; before the faculties are as yet much
impaired, and when disease or afflicion
has laid no additional load on the bur-
den of years. Let us then view it, with
all its aggravations of difrefi, Let us
suppose it arrived at its utmof verge,
worn out with infirmities, and bowed
down by fickaefs and sorrow. Still there
remains this consolation, that it is not
long ere the wean Jhall be at rejl. Having
paied through £o many of the toils of life,
you may now, surely, when your pijgri-
mage touches on its close, bear, without
extreme impatience, the hardships of its

ncluding stage. From the inestimable
romifes of the Gospel, and from the gra-
ious presence of God, the afflidions of
d age cannot seclude you. Though your
art hould begin to faint, and your fleJf to

3 A fail,

E R M. fail, there is One, who can be the flrp gth
XII. of your heart, andyour portionfor ever. Even

to your old age, faith the Lord, I am He;
and even to hoary hairs, will I carry you.
I have made, and I will bear; even I will
carry, and will deliver you *. Leave tlh
fatherless children; I will preserve then
alive; and let thy widows trust in me t.

There is undoubtedly a period, when

there ought to be a fatiery of life, as there
is of all other things; and when death
should be viewed, as your merciful dif-
mission from a long warfare. To come to
the grave in a full age, like as a Jhock of
corn cometh in, in its season $, is the na-
tural termination of the human course.
Amidst multiplying infirmities, to pro-
long life beyond its usual bounds, and to
draw out your existence here to the last
and foulest dregs, ought not to be the
wish of any wife man. Is it desirable, to
continue lingering on the borders of the
grave, after every tie which connets you
with life is broken; and to be left a soli-

tarv
' Ifa. xlvi. 4. + Jer. xlix. 1l. t Job . :6.

tary individual, in the midlt of a new ge- s E R M.
neration, whose faces you hardly know ? XII
The shades of your departed friends rife up
before you, and warn you, that it is time
to depart. Nature and Providence fum-
mon you, to be gathered to your fathers.
Reason admonishes you, that as your pre-
deceffors made way for you, it is just that
you lhould yield your place to those, who
have arisen to succeed you on this busy
tlage; who, for a while, mhall fill it with
their a&cions and their sufferings, their
virtues and their crimes; and then shall,
in their turn, withdraw, and be joined to
the forgotten multitudes of former ages.

Could death indeed be confidered in no

other view, than as the close of life, it
would afford only a melancholy retreat.
The total extinction of being, is a thought
which human nature, in its most diftref-
fed circumstances, cannot bear without
dejection. But, blessed be God! far other
profpeas revive the spirits of the aged,
who have spent their life in piety and vir-
tue, To them, death is not the extinction,

3 A 2 but

s E R M. but the renovation of the living principle;
XII. its removal frori 'the earthly house of this

tabernacle, to the houft not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens. Havring fought the
ood fight; havgfing Jhed their corse, and
kept the faith; there is laid up fr them, the
crown of righteotfneJi. The Saviour of the
world, hath not only brought ifnt#ortality
to light, but placed it within the reach
of their hope and trust. By making
atonement for their guilt, he hath pre-
pared their way within the veil; and
secured to them, the possession of an in-
heritance, incorruptible and undefled, refirv-
ed in the heaven.----Such are the hopes
and profpeds, which chear the sorrows
of old age, and surmount the fear of
death. Faith and piety are the only ade-
quate supports of human nathre, ih all
its great emergencies. Aftr they have
guided us through the vtaious trials of
life, they uph6Od us, at last, amidst the
ruins of this fallihg frame; and when
the fjler cord is juJf ready to be lIofcd,

ann!

and the golden bowl to be broken ; w-hen S E R
the pitcher is broken at the fountain, and XIL
the wheel broken at the cifern ; they en-
able us to fay, 0 Death! where is thy
ling ? 0 Grave! where is thy vicfory?

SE R-

# SERMON XIII. On the POWER of CONSCIENCE. GENESIS xlii. 21, 22. And they said, one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us; ...

374

SERMON XIII.
On the POWER of CONSCIENCE.

GENESIS xlii. 21, 22.

And they said, one to another, We are verily

guilty concerning our brother, in that we
saw the anguijh of his foul, when he
be/ought us; and we would not hear:
Therefore is this distress come upon us. And
Reuben answered them, faying, Spake I not
unto you, faying, Do not fin againfi the
child; and ye would not hear? Therefore,
behold also, his blood is required.

S E R M. T HIS book of Genesis displays a more

^ .
I singular and interesting scene, than

was ever presented to the world, by any
other historical record. It carries us back
to the beginning of time; and exhibits
mankind, in their infant and riling slate.

It

It (hows us human manners in their pri- SE R R
mitive simplicity, before the arts of refine- XlII.
ment had polithed the behaviour, or dif-
guised the characers of men; when they
gave vent to their paflions without dif-
simulation, and spoke their sentiments
without reserve. Few great societies were,
as yet, formed on the earth. Men lived in
scattered tribes. The tranfadions of fa-
milies, made the chief materials of hifto-
ry; and they are related in this book,
with that beautiful simplicity, which, in
the highest degree, both delights the ima-
gination, and assets the heart.

Of all the patriarchal histories, that of

Joseph and his brethren is the most re-
markable, for the characters of the ators,
the inftrudive nature of the events, and
the furprizing revolutions of worldly for-
tune. As far as relates to the Text, and
is necessary for explaining it, the story is
to the following purpose.- Joseph, the
youngest, except one, of the sons of Jacob,
was distinguished by his father with such
marks of peculiar afition, as excited the

envy

SE R M. envy of his brethren. Having related to
XII. them, in the openness of his heart, cer-

tain dreams which portended his future
advancement above them, their jealousy
rofT to such a height, that they unnatu-
rally conspired his deftrudion. Seizing
the opportunity of his being at a distance
from home, they firit threw him into a
pit, and afterwards fold him for a lave;
imposing on their father, by a false rela-
tion of his death. When they had thus
gratified their resentment, they loft all
remembrance of their crime. The fami-
ly of Jacob was rich,and powerful; and
several years pased away, during which
they lived in prosperity; without being
touched, as far as appears, with the least
remorse for the cruel deed which they
had committed.

Mean-while, Joseph was safely condut-
ed, by the hand of Providence, through a
variety of dangers, untill, from the lower
condition, he rose at last to be chief fa-
vourite of the King of Egypt, the mood
powerful monarch at that time in the

xi ~ world.

world. While he possessed this high dig- s E R M.
nity, a general famine distressed all the XIII
neighbouring countries. In Egypt alone,
by means of his foresight, and prudent ad-
miniltration, plenty (till reigned. Com-
pelled to have recourse to that kingdom
for supply of food, the brethren of Joseph,
upon this occasion, appeared in his pre-
fence, and made their humble application
to him, for liberty to purchase corn; lit-
tle fufpeding that the Governour of the
land, before whom they bowed down their
faces to the earth, was him, whom, long
ago, they had fold as a save to the Ifh-
maelites. But Joseph no sooner law, than
he knew his brethren; and, on this un-
expeied meeting, his heart melted with-
in him. Fraternal tenderness arose, in all
its warmth; and totally effaced, from his
generous breast, the imprcsion of their
ancient cruelty. Though, from that mo-
ment, he began to prepare for them a fur-
prize of joy; yet, he so far constrained him-
self, as to assume an appearance of great
severity. By this he intended, both to ob-

3 B lige

S E R M. lige them to bring into Egypt his youngest
Xi., and most beloved brother, whose prefencc

he instantly required; and also, to awaken
within them, a due sense of the crime
which they had formerly perpetrated.
Accordingly, his behaviour produced the
designed effect. For, while they were in
this situation, strangers in a foreign land,
where they had fallen, as they conceived,
into extreme distress; thrown into prison
by the Governour, and treated with ri-
gour for which they could assign no
cause; the refletion mentioned in the
Text arose in their minds. Conscience
brought to remembrance, their former
fins. It recalled, in particular, their long
forgotten cruelty to Joseph; and, with-
out Lefitation, they interpreted their pre-
sent distress, to be a judgment, for this
crime, inflicted by Heaven. They aid, one
to another, We are verily guilty concerning
our brother, in that we saw the anguih) of
his foul, when he besought us; and wue vould
not hear: Therefore is this distress come upon
us.-Behold also, his blood is required.

From

From this infirudive pafiage of hiflo- S E R M.

ry, the following observations naturally XII
arise. I. That a sense of right and wrong
in conduct, or of moral good and evil,
belongs to human nature. II. That it
produces an apprehension of merited pu-
nifhment, when we have committed evil.
III. That although this inward senti-
nent be stifled during the season of
prosperity, yet, in adversity, it will re-
vive. And, IV. That when it revives,
it determines us to confider every distress
which we susser, from what cause soever
it has arisen, as an actual infliction of
punishment by Heaven. The confide-
ration of these particulars, will lead us
to a very serious view of the nature of
man, and of the government of God.

I. There belongs to human nature, a

sense of moral good and evil, or a fa-
culty which diftinguiffes right from
wrong, in action and condut. Theyfaid,
one to another, We are verily guilty.-In
an age, when the law was not yet given,
when no external revelation of the Di-

3 B 2 vine

E R M. vine will subsisted, except what had been
XIII. handed down among the Patriarchs, from

one generation to another; the brethren
of Joseph reasoned concerning their con-
duc, upon the fame moral principles,
and were affected by the fame feelings,
of which we are conscious at this day.
Such sentiments are coeval with human
nature; for they are the remains of a
law, which was originally uwritten in our
heart. In the darkest regions of the
earth, and among the rudetl tribes of
men, a diftindion has ever been made,
between just and unjust, between a duty
and a crime. Throughout all the inter-
course of human beings, these diftindions
are supposed. They are the foundation
of the mutual truit, which the tranfac-
tions of life require; nay, the very enter-
tainments of society constantly appeal to
them. The Historian, who fludies to
magnify his hero, by representing him as
just and generous; the Poet, who lecks
to interest the world in his ficions, by
engaging the heart in behalf of diftrefilc

virtue,

virtue, are fufficicnt to confute the Sceep- SE RM.
tick, who denies any natural perception <XlI,
of a diftinclion in acions.

But though a sense of moral good and

evil be deeply imprcffed on the heart of
man, yet it is not of sufficient power to
regulate his life. In his present corrupt-
ed slate, it is both too general to afford
him full direction in condut, and too
feeble to withfland the opposition of con-
trary principles in his nature. It is often
perverted, by ignorance and superstition:
It is too easily overcome, by passion and
desire. Hence, the importance of that
Divine revelation, which communicates
both light and strength; which, by the
inftrucive discoveries it makes, and by
the powerful assistance it supplies, raises
man to a flation, infinitely fuperiour to
that which he possesses under the mere
light of Nature.

It is of consequence, however, to re-

mark, that this revelation necessarily sup-
poses, an antecedent sense of right and
wrong to take place in the human mind,

It

SE R M. It addresses itself to men, as possessed of

vx such a faculty; and, when it commands

them, in general terms, to pursue what-
soever things are true, whatsoever things
are honefI, uhatoever things are juJi, pure,
lovely, or of good report, if there be any vir-
tue, and if there be any praise, it plainly
appeals to the native dicates of their
heart. Nay, unless men were endowed
by Nature, with some sense of duty, or
of moral obligation, they could reap no
benefit from revelation; they would re-
main incapable of all religion whatever.
For, in vain were a system of duty pre-
fcribed to them by the word of God;
allegiance were in vain required towards
their Creator, or love and gratitude en-
joined towards their Redeemer; if, pre-
vioufly, there was no principle in their
nature, which made them feel the obliga-
tions of duty, of allegiance, and of gra-
titude. They could have no ideas cor-
responding to such terms; nor any con-
viction, that, independently of fear or in-
terest, they were bound :o regard, either

him

him who made, or him who redeemed s E R M.
them.-This, therefore, is to be held as a XII.
principal fundamental to all religion, That
there is in human nature, an approving
or condemning sense of conduc; by
means of which, they who have not the
law, are a law unto then/elves *. They,
who from a mistaken zeal for the honour
of Divine revelation, either deny the ex-
iftence, or vilify the authority, of natural
religion, are not aware, that, by disallow-
ing the sense of obligation, they under-
mine the foundation, on which revela-
tion builds its power of commanding
the heart.

The Text leads us to observe, that one

of the cafes in which the natural sense of
good and evil operates most forcibly, is,
when men have been guilty of injustice
or inhumanity. We saw the anguijh of
our brother's foul when he besought us, and
we would not hear. An inward principle
prompts us to do good to others; but
with much greater authority, it checks

and
*Rom. ii. 14.

SE RM. and condemns us, when we have done
XII., them injuries. This part of the human

constitution deserves particular remark,
as a signal proof of the wisdom of its Au-
thor, and of the gracious provision which
he has made for the welfare of mankind.
We are all committed, in some mealurc,
to the care and afliftance of one another.
But our mutual influence reaches much
farther, with refpedt to the evils, than
with refpecl to the enjoyments, of thole
around us. To advance their prosperity,
is often beyond our ability; but to in-
slid injuries, is almost always within our
power: And, at the fame time, felf-intc-
reft very frequently tempts us to commit
them. With the utmost propriety, there-
fore, we are so framed, that the influence
of the moral principle ihould be mosl
authoritative, in cafes where its aid is molt
needed; that to promote the happinels
of others, should appear to us as praifc-
worthy, indeed, and generous; but that,
to abstain from injuring them, should be
felt as matter of the ftrideft duty.-

1 ~ ~Amidit

Amidst the distress which the Patriarchs s E R M.
tufiered in Egypt, had only this fuggef- XlI.
tion occurred, " We law our brother
" beginning to prosper, and we contri-
" buted not to his advancement," their
minds would have been more easily quiet-
ed. But, when their reflection was, We
saw his anguijh when he beought us, and
we would not hear, then, compunction
turned upon them its iharpeft edge. I
proceed to obfcrve,

II. THAT our natural sense of right

and wrong, produces an apprehension of
merited punishment, when we have com-
mitted a crime. When it is employed in
surveying the behaviour of others, it dif-
tinguifhes some actions, as laudable and
excellent; and disapproves of others, as
evil and bale. But when it is directed
upon our own condut, it assumes a
higher office, and exercises the authority
of a judge. It is then properly termed,
Conscience; and the sentiments which it
awakens, upon the perpetration of a crime,

3 C are

SE R M. are ftilcd, Rcmorfl. Ihererfore, siid tlhe
Y-lv brethren of Jofcph, is this dijrefs coi.!e

upon us; behold al;s, his blood is re-
quired. They acknowledged, not only
that they had committed, a wrong, but :
wrong for which they were jultly doonl-
ed to Itfler.

Did not conscience fuggeit this natural

relation between guilt and punilhment,
the mere principle of approbation, or dif-
approbation, with refpedt to moral con-
dud, would prove of small efficacy. For
disapprobation attends, in some degree,
every conviction of impropriety or folly.
When one has atcd unsuitably to his
interest, or has trespassed against the rules
of prudence or decorum, he reflects upon
his conduct with pain, and acknowledges
that he deserves blame. But the diffe-
rence between the lense of misconduct,
and the sense of guilt, consists in this,
that the latter penetrates much deeper
into the heart. It makes the criminal
feel, that he is not only blameable, but
justly puniflable, for the part which he

has

has acecd. With reference to this office S E R M.
of conscience, the inspired writers fre- XII
quently speak of it in terms borrowed
from the awful folcmninies of judicial
procedure; as, bearing vwitlnej Jor or agaitlt
us; accusing or excusing, judging and con-
demning. It will be found, that in the
the languages of most nations, terms of
the fame import are applied to the opera-
tions of conscience; expressing the sense,
which all mankind have, of its passing
sentence upon them, and pronouncing
rewards or punishments to be due to
their actions.

The sense of punishment merited, you

are further to observe, can never be fe-
parated from the dread, that at some time,
and in some way or other, punishment
shall be actually inflicted. This dread is
not confined to the vengeance of man.
For, let the finner's evil deeds be ever so
thoroughly concealed from the knowledge
of the world, his inward alarms are not
quieted upon that account. Now, punimh-
ment is the fandion of a law. Every law

3 C 2 supposes

S E R I. supposes a rightful fupleriour: And therc-

XI tfore, when confiecnce threatens punllh-

ment to Iecret crimes, it manifcrtly recog-
nizes a iilprcine (Governour, from whoml
nothing is hidden. The belief of our be-
ing accountable to him, is what the moll
hardenedl wickcdne(is has never been able
to eradicate. It is a belief which ariies,
not merely from realfning, but from the
powerful impression of Natire. Con-
science is felt to act as the delegate of an
invisible Ruler; both anticipating lis
sentence, and foreboding its execution.

-ence arise the terrours, which so of-

ten haunt guilt, and rife in proportion to
its atrocity. In the history of all nati-
ons, the Tyrant and the Oppressor, the
bloody and the flagitious, have been ever
pointed out as fearful, unquiet, and refl-
le; ; Ifbl jed to alarms and apprehenlions
of an unaccountable kind. And furcly,
to live under fiuch difluictude, from tlhe
dread of merited puniliment, is already
to undergo one of the molt severe puniih-
ments which human nature can iilfclr.

\Yhllt

When the world threatens us with any SE R M.
of its evil., we know the extent, and dil- XIl.
cern the limits of the danger. \Ve fee tile
quarter, on which we arc exposed to its
attack. \Ve measure our own tlrength,
with that of o:ur advcrfary ; and can take
precautions, either for making refiflance,
or for contriving cicape. But when an
awakened confcicnce places before the
filner, the juflt vengeance of the Al-
mighty, the prospect is confounding, be-
cause the danger is boundless. It is a
drk unknown which threatens him. The
arm that is tfretched over him, he can
neither fee nor resist. On every fide, he
dreads it; and on every object which
surrounds him, he looks with terrour, be-
cause he is conscious it can be employed
against him as an infrument of wrath.
No wonder that the lone7some solitude,
or the midnight hour, fllould frike him
with horrour. His troubled mind be-
holds forms, which other men fee not;
and hears voices, which found only in
the car of guilt. A hand appears to come

forth,

SERM. forth, and to write upon the wall over
XI. against him; as it did of old, in the fight

of an impious monarch. He Jhall find
no ease, nor rej7. For the Lord Jball give
him a trembling heart, andfailing of eyes,
andforrow of mind: And his lifeJjall hang
in doubt before him; and he laall fear da'y
and night, and have none assurance of his life.
In the morning heJhallfay, Would to God it
were even; and at even he Jhall fay, Would
to God it were morning, for the fear of his
heart wherewith he Jhall fear, and for
the fight which his eyes Jhall fee. His
life Jhall be grievous unto him *.-Adver-
fiy ! how blunt are all the arrows of
thy quiver, in comparison with those of
guilt !- But if such be the power of
conscience, whence, it may be alked,
comes it to pass, that its influence is not
more general, either in restraining men
from the commifilon of fin, or in lead-
ing them to a timely repentance ? This
brings me to observe,

III. TIHAT,
· Dcut. xviii. 65, 66, 67. Ifa. xv. 4.

III. THAT, during a course of profpe- SERM.

rity, the operations of conscience are of- XII.
ten suspended; and that adversity is the
leafon which restores them to their proper
force. At the time when crimes are com-
mitted, the mind is too much heated by
passion, and engrossed by the object of its
pursuit, to be capable of proper reflec-
tion. After this tumult of spirits has
subsided, if a train of new paflions be at
hand to employ its activity, or a fuccef-
sion of pleasurable objects occur to en-
gage its attention, it may for a while re-
main, though not entirely free from in-
ward misgivings, yet unconscious of the
degree of its guilt. Dissipated among the
amusements of life, the finner escapes, in
some measure, from his own view. If he
reflects upon himself at all, the continu-
ance of prosperity seems to him a strong
justification of his conduct. For it will
be found, that in the hearts of all men,
there is a natural propensity, to judge of
the favour of the Supreme Being, from
the course of external events. When they

are

SE R M. are born with a finooth gale along the
XI1. stream of life, and behold every thing

proceeding according to their with, hard-
ly can they be brought to believe, that
Providence is their enemy. Balking in
the fun-lhine of prosperity, they filppolc
tlhemfelves to enjoy the finile of indul-
gent Heaven; and fondly conclude, that
they are on terms of friendthip, with all
above, and with all below. Easy the)
find it, then, to spread over the groflelt
crimes, a covering, thin, indeed, and
flight, yet fulficielnt to conceal them from
a flperficial view.

Of this we have a very remarkable in-

fiance, in thole brethren of Joseph, whose
history we now conlider. Not olily the
silence of the inrflirl-c writer, gives us
ground to conclude, that their remoris
was stifled until the present period ; but,
at a former one, when, in the time of
their prosperity, they were contriving the
deftruclion of Joseph, we find Judah fay-
ing to his brethren, Ilhat profit is it, if
we flay our brother, and conceal his blood ?

Lit

Let us fell h1im to the fJJmaelites ; and let s E R M.
nrt our hland be uplon him; for he is our bro- XII.
tber and our flteJ: :And his brethren twrce
content t. Here you behold them jutfi-
fying their crime, by a fort of pretended
humanity; and making light of felling
their brother for a slave, because they did
not take away his life. How firangely
are the opinions of men altered, by a
change in their condition ! How different
is this lfntimcnt of the Patriarchs, from
that which they afterwards entertained of
the fame aclion, when, as you fee in the
Text, the remembrance of it wrung their
hearts with anguifl !

But men, in truth, differ as much from

themfielvcs, in prosperity, and in adversity,
as if they were different creatures. In pro-
iferity, every thing tends to flatter and
deceive. In adverlity, the illulions of life
vanifli. Its avocations, and its pleasures,
no longer afford the finner that flielter
he was wont to find from conscience.
Formerly, he made a part of the crowd.
lie now fcels himself a solitary individual,

3D left
Gen. xxxvii. 26, 27.

SE R M. left alone with God, and with his own

L mind. His spirits are not fhpported, a,

before, by fallacious views of the f;avo:ur
of Heaven. The candle of the ,ord llhinc
not on his heid ; his pride is humbled ;
and his affecions are softened, for receiv-
ing every serious impression. In this situ-
ation, a man's iniquity is Jire to find kin:
out. Whatever has been notoriously cri-
minal in his former conduc, rites as a
Ipectre, and placcs itself before hilm. The
increased sensibility of his mind, renders
him alive to feelings which lately were
faint; and wounds which had been ill
healed, bleed. afrelh. \hen men take th:
timbrel and the harp, andl rejoice at thebfond
of the organ, they J;Iy, What is the Almig ht
that we Jflouldfcirve him ? But when the;
are holden in the cords of affliilon, then h.'
Jheweth them their work, and their tran/f
grefion, that they have exceeded. I:C open-
eth alJ their ears to dJ'ipline; and coi-
nmandeth, that thre return from iniquit'.

Ience, we may perceive the great ufc-
fulness, and propriety, of that interchange

'It

of conditions, which takes place in lu- S F R M.
man life. By profiperity, God gives xII
scope to our p alions, and makes trial of
our dispositions. By adrierfity, lh revives
the serious principle within. Neither the
one, nor the other, could be born entire
and unmixed. Man, always prosperous,
would be giddy and insolent; always as-
flicted, would be fullen and defpondlelt.
Hopes and fears, joy and sorrow, are,
therefore, so blended in his life, as both
to give room for worldly pursuits, and
to recall, from time to time, the admo-
nitions of conscience. Of the proportion
in which they Ihould be mixed for this
purpose, we are very incompetent judges.
From our ignorance of the degree oi ;f-
cipline, which the fpfiritual slate of others
requires, we often tax Providence un-
justly, for its feveritv towards them:
And, from the vanity and raihnefs of
our wihes, we complain, without rea-
son, of its rigour to ourselves. While
we conlult nothing but our ease, God
attends to our Ipiritual improvement.

3 D 2 When

SE R M. When we feck what is pleasing, he fends
XII. what is useful. When, by drinking too

deep of worldly prosperity, we draw in a
secret poiion, he mercifully infuses a mc-
dicine, when he troubles and embitterc
the waters. It remains now to observe,

IV. That when conscience is tho-

roughly awakened, it determines the fin-
ner, to confider every calamity which he
fiffers, as a positive infliction of puniflh-
ment by Heaven. As it had before
alarmed him with threatenings of Di-
vine displeasure, it tells him, when he
falls under distress, that the threatened
(lay of account is come. Afflictions, on
tome occasions, rife directly out of our
fins. Thus, diseases are brought on by
intemperance; poverty springs from idle-
ness; and disgrace, from presumption.
In such cafes, the punishment is so clote-
ly connected with the crime, that it is
impossible to avoid discerning the rela-
tion which the one bears to the other.
But the appointment of Providence,

which

which we now confider, reaches farther S E Tl M
than this. God has framed us fb, that Xll.
(lifireses, which have no perceivable
connecction with our former crimes, are,
neverthleles, interpreted by conscience, to
be inflicted on their account. They
force themselves upon our apprehension,
under this view. They are made to car-
ry, not only that degree of pain which
properly belongs to themselves, but that
additional torment altl, which arises
from the belief of their being the ven-
geance of the Almighty.

Let a man fall unexpectedly into frome

deep calamity. Let that calamity be
brought upon him, either by means
which the world calls fortuitous; or by a
train of incidents, in which his own
mifcondl-t, or guilt, has apparently had
no part; yet one of the first quellions,
which, in such a situation, he puts to
himself, is, What have I done to dcferve
this ? His reflection is, almost inftinc-
tively, drawn back upon his former life;
and if, in the course of that retrofpec,

any

S E R M. any flagrant gu:ilty deed occur to linite
XiYv. his conlcicnce, on this he cannot avoid

rcfling with anxiety and tcrrour, and
connecing it in his imagination with
what he now suffers. He sccs, or thinks;
that he fees, a D)ivine arm liftcd up; and
what, in other circumflances, he would
have called a revcrfe of fortune, lie now
views as a judgment of Heaven.

When the brethren of Joseph, confined

in the E gyptian l)rifon, were bcwailiniv
the distress into which they had fallen,
there was no circumstance which point-
ed out any relation between their preifnt
misfortune, and their former cruelty to
their brother. A long course of years had
intervened, during which they flouriih-
ed in wealth and ease. They were now
far from the fene of their crime; in ;.
foreign land, where they believed them-
selves utterly unknown, and where they
had done nothing to offend. But con-
science formed a connecdion between
events, which, to the ordinary apprehen-
sion of men, had none. It made them

rccollcci,

recolle, that they, who once had been s E R M.
deaf to the supplications of a brother, XII.
were now left fiiendleft and forlom, im-
ploring pity in vain fiom an unrelenting
(Governour; and that they who had firit
confplired to kill their brother, and aftcr-
wards fold him for a slave, were them-
selves deprived of liberty, and threatened
with an ignominious death. How unde-
fervedly soever these evils befell them on
the part of men, they confessed them to
be just on the part of Providence. They
concluded the hour of retribution to be
arrived ; and, in the person of the Go-
vernoui of Egypt, they beheld the Ruler
of the world calling them to account for
guilt. .Th71ere/;c is this diftrefi cotn upon
us. Behold atlb, his blood is required.

Similar sentiments, on like occasions,

will be found not uncommon among
mankind. Pious men, there is no doubt,
are at all times disposed to look up to
God, and to acknowledge his hand in
every event of life. But what I now ob-
serve, is, that where no habitual acknow-

ledgment

S E R NI. ledgment of God takes place; nay, where
XI I. a daring contempt of his authority lhi,

prevailed, conscience, neverthcleif, con-
llrains men, in the day of their ditlef ,
to recognize God, under the most awfull
of all characters, The avenger of pall
guilt.

Herein the wisdom of God appears in

such a light, as jultly to claim our highell
admiration. The ordinary course of his
Providence, is carried on by human means.
He has fettled a train of events, which
proceed in a regular succession of caufis
and effecs, without his appearing to in-
terpofe, or to ac. But these, on proper
occasions, are made to assec the human
mind, in the fame manner as if he were
beheld descending from his throne, to
puniffi the finner with his own hand.
Were God to suspend the laws of Nature,
on occasion of every great crime that was
committed on earth, and to govern the
world by frequent interpositions of a mi-
raculous kind, the whole order of human
affairs would be unhinged; no plans of

1 actifon

action could be formed; and no scope S E R M.
would be given for the probation and(l i
trial of men. On the other hand, were
the operation of second causes allowed
to conceal a Divine hand totally from
view, all sense of filperiour government
would be lofl; the world would Iem to
be void of God ; the finner would per-
ccive nothing but chance and fortune, in
the ditfrelTes which he suffered. Whereas,
by its being so ordered, that several in-
cidents of life, liall carry the fame force,
and strike the mind with the fame im-
pression, as if they were supernatural in-
terpofitions, the fear of God is kept alive
among men, and the order of human as-
fairs is, at the flame time, preserved un-
broken. The firmer fees his diltrefs to
be the immediate efdct of human vio-
lence or oppression ; and is obliged, at
the fame moment, to confider it as a Di-
vine judgment. His conscience gives to
an ordinary misfortune, all the edge and
the iting, of a visitation from Heaven.

3 E FROM

S E R M. FROM the train of thought which the
XlII. Text has suggested, several inferences na-

turally follow. But I shall confine myltlf
to two, which claim your particular at-
tention.

The firit is, the clear evidence which

the preceeding observations afford, of a
Divine government, now exercised over
mankind. This most important and aw-
ful of all truths, cannot be too often pre-
sented to our view, or too strongly im-
pressed on our mind. To the imperfect
conviction of it, which obtains in the
world, must be ascribed, in a great mea-
sure, the prevalence of fin. Did men
firmly believe, that the Almighty Being,
who formed them, is carrying on a fy-
ftem of administration which will not
leave guilt unpunithed, it is impossible
that they could remain so inattentive, as
we often behold them, to their moral
conduc. But the bulk of mankind arc
giddy and thoughtless. Struck by the
superficial appearances of pleasure, which
accompany licentiousness, they enquire

no

no farther; and deliver themselves up to s E R M.
their senses, and their passions. Where- xII.
as, were they to reflect, but for a mo-
ment, upon that view which has now
been given of human nature, they might
soon be satisfied, that the moral govern-
ment of God is no matter of doubtful
discussion. It is a fad, no less obvious
and incontefable, than the government
exercised by those earthly rulers, whom
we behold with the ensigns of their of-
fice, before our eyes.

To govern, is to require a certain

course of acion, or, to prescribe a law;
and to enforce that law, by a suitable
difiribution of rewards and punithments.
Now, God has not only inveRted con-
science, as we have seen, with authority
to promulgate, but endowed it also with
power to enforce, his law. By placing
inward approbation and peace on the fide
of virtue, he gave it the fandion of re-
ward. But this was not enough. Pain
is a more powerful principle, than piea-
sure. To escape misery, is a stronger mo-

3 E 2 tive

S E R M. tive for aCtion, than to obtain good. God,
Xvll. therefore, so fiamed human nature, that

the painful sense of ill-defert fliould at-
tend the commission of crimes; that this
sense of ill-dlei:rt ihould necessarily pr,-
duce the dread of punishment; and that
this dread fiould so operate on the mind,
in the time of ilttrefs, as to make the
finner conceive Providence to be engaged
againfl him, and to be concerned in in-
flicting the punifiunent which he suffers.
All tlhefe impressions he hath flampc(l
upon the heart with his own hand. He
hath made them constituent parts of our
frame; on purpole, that by the union of
so many strong and pungent sentiments,
he might enforce repentance and refor-
mation, and publilh to the human race
his detestation of fin. Were he to speak
to us from the clouds, his voice could not
be more decilive. What we discern to
be interwoven with the contexture of
human nature, and to pervade the whole
course of human affairs, carries an evi-
dence not to be refietd. We might, with

a;

as much reason, doubt whether the fin sER M.
was intended to enlighten the earth, or XIL
the rain, to fertilize it; as whether he,
who thus framed the human mind, in-
tcnded to announce righteoufneil to man-
kind, as his law.

THE second inference which I make

from the foregoing discourse, rcfpects the
intimate connection, which those opera-
tions of conscience have, with the pecu-
liar and diflinguifhing doctrines of the
Gospel of Christ. They will be found to
accord with them so remarkably, as to
furnifl an answer to tome of those ob-
jec'ions, which superficial rcafoners are
apt to raise against the Chriitian revela-
tion. In particular, they coincide with
that awful view which the Goli el gives
us, of the future confeqnences of guilt.
If the finner is now conflrained by con-
science, to view the Almighty as pur-
suing him with evil for long-forgotten
crimes, how naturally mull he conclude,
that, in a iubfequent period of existence,

the

S E R M. the Divine administration will procced
X1lI. upon the fame plan, and complete what

has been left imperfecc here ? If, during
this life, which is only the time of trial,
the displeasure of Providence at fin is
displayed by tokens so manifest, what
may be apprehended to follow, when ju-
itice, which at present only begins to be
executed, lhall be carried to its confum-
mation ? What conscience forebodes, revc-
lation verifies; alfuring us, that a day is
appointed, when God will render to ever)
man according to his works; to them, who
by patient continuance in well-doing, Jrek for
glory, honour, and immortality; eternal lift:
But unto them that are contentious, and obey
not the truth, but obey unrighteorifnef; in-
dignation and wrath, tribulation and an-
guijh, upon every foul of man that doth evil,
of the Jew firJf, and a!so of theGentile. For
there is no refpec? of perfois with God. For
as many as have finned without the law,
Jhall alo peri/Jl without the law; and as
many as have finned in the law, fJJall be
judged by the law *.

While
* Rom. ii. 7,-- 3.

While the threatenings of confcicnce SERM.

thus flrengthcn the evidence of the icrip- X.
ture doctrine concerning future punillih-
ments, they likcwife pave the way for
the belief of what is revealed concerning
the method of our dclivcrance by Chrill
They fuggcft to the finner, oIine deep
and dark malignity contained in guilt,
which has drawn upon his head such
high displeasure from Heaven. They
call forth his most anxious cfforts, to avert
the effects of that difpleafurc, and to pro-
pitiate his offended judge. Some atone-
ment, he is conscious, must be made;
and the voice of Nature has, in every age,
loudly demanded suffering, as the proper
atonement for guilt. Hence, mankind
have conflantly fled for refuge to such
fubfiititions, as they could devise to place
in the room of the offender; and, as by
general content, victims have every where
been slain, and expiatory sacrifices have
been offered up on innumerable altars.
Wherewith fJlall I come lbfore the Lord,
and bow 7m.flf bef/re the ,,oft high CGod ?

Shall

S . R M. Shall I cotc bir s(re him with burnt ,',i -

'_V inis, and cailvcs of a rear old? Ii' l
t 1/.:

Lord be plei/dll with thoindlls of ramls,
or with ten thoulml of rivers of oil ? Or,
Jlall I give mty jiri [ 9rl /Jfo ' 1n 1 trrynJ-
gre9ion; the fruit of nmy body, J1, the Jist
of ny JIul ? Theli perplexities, and agi-
tations of a guilty conscience, may be
termed preludes, in some measure, to the
Golpel of Chrilt. They are the pointings
of unenlightened Nature, towards that
method of relief, which the grace of God
has provided. Nature felt its inability
to extricate itself from the consequences
of guilt: The Gospel, reveals the plan of
Divine interposition and aid. Nature
confelred some atonement to be necef-
fary: The Gospel, discovers that the ne-
ceflarv atonement is made. The remedy
is no sooner presented, than its suitable-
ness to the difealf appears; and the great
mystery of redemption, though it reaches,
in its full extent, beyond our comprehcn-
sion, yet, as far as it is revcaled, holds a

XI ~ ~ visible
Micall vi. 6, .

visible congruity with the fentimcnts of S E R M.
confceence, and of nature. Xlll.

Natural and revealed religion proceed

from the fame Author; and, of course,
are analogous and consistent. They are
parts of the fame plan of Providence.
They are conneced measures of the fame
system of government. The serious be-
lief of the one, is the best preparation for
the reception of the other. Both concur
in imprefling our mind with a deep sense
of one most important truth, which is
the result of this whole discourse, that as
wie sow now, we mtfi reap ; that under
the government of God, no one fllall be
permitted, with impunity, to gratify his
criminal passions, and to make light of
the great duties of life.

3F SER-
ós

# SERMON XIV. On the Mixture of JOY and FEAR in RELIGION. PSALM ii. 11. Rejoice with trembling.

4(0

S E R M ON XIV.
On the Mixture of JoY and F:l:At il

REI. IGION.

PSALM ii. II.

Rejoicc with trembling.

S ER M. J 0 Y and Fear, arc two great spring1
XIV. of human action. The mixed con-

dition of thi, world, gives scope for
both; and, according as either predo-
minates, it influences the general tenour
of our conduca. Each of them poffncll
a proper place in religion. To fcr-ve the
Lord with gladness, is the exhortation of
the Psalmist David ". To serve hi m with
reverence and godly fear, is the admoni-
tion of the Apostle Paul l. But, under
the present imperfection of human n:l-

turl.
" Pfal. r. 2. t led). xii. 2S.

ture, each of theleI principles may be car- s E R M.
ried to a dangerous extreme. When the XV,
whole of religion is placed in joy, it is
in hazard of rising into unwarrantable
rapture. When it rclls altogether on
fear, it degenerates into iuperflitlous ser-
vility. The Text enjoins a due mixture
of both; and inculcates this important
maxim, That joy, tempered with fear, is
the proper dilpofition of a good man.
In discoursing of this subjeI, I fllall
endeavour to fliow, firfi, That joy is
eifential to religion ; and next, That, for
for various reasons, this joy ought to ba
mixed with fear; whence, we lha!l be
able to ascertain the nature of that fleady
and composed spirit, which is most suit-
able to our present condition, and most
acceptable to the God whom we serve.

I. JoY is efl:ntial to religion in two

refpeets; as religion infpircs joy, and as
it requires it. In other words; To rejoice,
is both the privilege, and the duty, of
gbood men.

3 F Ix

SE RM. IN the firlt place, religion inspires joy.
XIV. It affords just ground of gladncfs, to all

who firmly believe its doctrines, and iin-
ccrely study to obey its laws: For it con-
sers on them, the two most material re-
quifites of joy; a favourable situation of
things without, and a proper (litpofition
of mind within, to rclifli that favourable
situation.

When they examine their situation

without, they behold themselves placed
in a world, which is full of the influence
of a gracious Providence; where beauty
and good are every where predominant;
where various comforts are beflowed;
and where, if any be with-held, they have
reason to believe, that they are with-held
by parental Wisdom. Among the crowd
that encompals them, they may be at a
loss to difccrn, who are their friends, and
who their enemies. But it is sufficient to
know, that they are under the protcction
of an invisible Guardian, whole power
can keep them from every evil. All the
steps of his conduct, they may be unable

t(

to trace. Events may befall theml, of S E R M.
which they can give no account. But as XIV.
long as they are litilfic(l, that the fyflcm of
I)ivine government is founded on mercy,
no prclent occurrences are able to destroy
their peace. For he trhoJjared not his ownu'
Son, but d, livcrct him up for them, how
fiall he n:t with hinl, frieely gie thm all
things ? If their nature is frail, Divine
afliftance is promised to strengthen it. If
their virtue is imperfect, a dispensation is
opened, which gives them the hope of
pardon. If their external circumflances
be in any rcfpecd unfavourable, it is be-
cause a higher interest is consulted. .ll/
things, they are aflured, Jlall work toec-
ther for their good. On their proiperity
refts, the blessing; on their advcrfity, the
fanclifying spirit, of the Almighty. Old
age may advance, and life decay; but
beyond those boundaries of Nature, faith
opens the prospect of their lasting felicity.
Without anxiety, they pass through the
different periods of their present exiltence,

because

s, r. I.. because thci know it to be no more than

. an introluction to immortality.

As such a iituation of things without,

lays a iolid foundation for joy, lo the dil-
polition which religion forms within, pro-
motcs the relith of it. It is inleed from
within, that the chief sources of cujoy-
ment or trouble rile. The minds of bad
men arc always ditbrd(crl ; aind hence
their lives arc fL generally uncaly. In vain
they takL te e timbicl and the atrp, and cn-
deavour to rrjoice at the foiund ?f the ogln.
Spleen anld ifgult purfuc them, through
all the haunts of amusement. Pride an!
ill humour torment them. Opprefiied
with difcontcnt, their Qiirits flag; anti
their worn-out plcafurcs, allbrd them cn-
tertainment no more. But religion sub-
ducs those malignant pallions, which are
the troublers of human repoll ; which
either overcast the mind with the gloom of
peevithnefs, or diifluiet it by the violence
of agitation. It infuses, in their room,
those mild and gentle dispositions, whotl:
natural effecl is to finooth the tenour of

the

the foul. Benevolence and candour, mo- S E r 14.
cleration and temperance, wherever they XIV.
reign, produce chearfulnefs and iercnitv.
The conlcioufilefs of integrity, gives cafe
and freedom to the mind. It enables
good men to extract from evcnr objet,
the whole fatisfation which it is capable
of yieldinrg; and adds the flavour of in-
nocence, to all their external pleasures.

I N the second place, As religion natu-

rally inspires jov, so, what it infiires, it
commands us to cherish. As a neceffarv
proof of our finccrity, it requires chear-
fulness in the performance of our duty;
because, if this be wanting, our religion
difcovcrs itldf not to be genuine in prin-
ciple, and in practice it cannot be stable.

Religious obedience, destitute of joy, is

not genuine in its principle. For did
either faith or hope, the love of God, or
the love of goodness, rule the heart; they
could not fail to produce fatisfacion in
piety and virtue. All those calfes of joy
which I have mentioned, would then ope-

rate;

s r R M. rate; and their native ellecd on the mind,
XIV. would follow. The profipecs which re-

ligion opens, would gladden, and the at-
fecdions which it inspires, would sooth
the heart. We serve with pleasure, the
benefacor whom we love. We rejoice
in every fludy and pursuit, to which we
;ire sincerely attached. If we serve not
God with pleasure, it is because we know
him not, or love him not. If we rejoice
not in virtue, it is because our affection
is alienated from it, and our inclinations
are depraved. We give too evident proof,
that either we believe not the principles
of religion, or that we feel not their
power. Exclude joy from religion; and
you leave no other motives to it, except
compulsion and interest. But are theft
suitable grounds, on which to reft the
whole of our obedience to the Supreme
Being ? AMy son give me thy heart, is the
call of God. Surely if there be no plea-
sure in fulfilling his commands, the heart
is not given to him; and, in that cafe,

I the

the multitude rof flri/ices, ar:,d brt oflr- S E R M.

i;.fs, is brought to his altar in vain. XIV.
As religion, dellitute of joy, is imperfect
in its principle, to, in practice, it mull be
unitable. In vain you endeavour to fix
any nmal to the regular performance of
that, in which he finds no pleafule. Bind
him ever so fast by interelt or fear, he
will contrive f method of eluding the
obligation. Ingenuity is never io fertile
of evasions, as where pleasure is all on
the one tide, and mere precept on the
other. He may Iludy to save appearances.
lie may lilremble and conitrain himself.
But his heart revolts in secret; and the
weight of inclination, will, in the end,
draw the practice after it, If perseverance
is not to be expected, still leit can zeal
be looked for, fiom him, who, in his re-
ligious duties, trembles without rejoicing.
Every attempt towards virtue which he
forms, will be feeble and awkward. He
applies to it as a talk; he dreads the talk-
mailer; but he will labour no more, than
necessity enjoins. To cfcape from punifl-

, ; mIllenlt,

SE R . ment, is his tole aim. He bargains for
XIV. immunity, by every dulty which he per-

forms; and all beyond, he esteems fil-
perfluous toil.-Such religion as this, caIn
neither purify the heart, nor prepare for
heavenly bliss. It is the refuge of an al-
ject mind. It may form the ritual of the
monk, or priccribe the penance of the
idolater; but has no concern with the ho-
mage of him, who wolJifips the Flther i.!
pirit and it truth. His character is, tlhat
the joy of the Lord is his firength a. It at-
taches his heart to religion. It inspires his
zeal. It fiipports his constancy; and ac-
celerates his progrcls.

There is no man, but has tome object

to which he cleaves for enjoyment; Ibme-
what that flatters him with diflant hope,
or affords him present pleasure. Joy is
the end towards which all rational beings
tend. For the fake of it, they live; it re-
fembles the air they breath, which is ne-
ceffary for the motion of the heart, anti
all the vital functions. But as the breath-
ing of infeced air proves fatal to life; in

the
' Ncl. viii. is

the fame manner, joy drawn from a cor- s E R M.
rupted lource, is dltructive, both of vir- XIV
tue, and of true happiWn:cl . When you
have no pleafurc in gooncls, you may
with certainty conclude the reason to be,
that your pleasure is all derived frc m an
opposite quarter. You have exhaulted
your afleion upon the world. You have
drunk too mlch of its poisoned vaters,
to have any relilh for a pure ipring.

Etimate, therefore, the genuincnefs of

your religious principles, eitimate the de-
gree of vour liability in religious prac-
tice, by the degree of your fatisfation in
piety and virtue. Be afl(rcd, that where
your treasure is, there will your delight
be also. The worldly nian rejoices in his
poffelfions; the volhptuous, in his plea-
fures; the social, in his friends and com-
panions. The truly good man, rejoices in
dsin' ju/lly, lovitnr meir-cl, and walking
humbly with th e Lord his God. He is hap-
py, when employed in the regular dif-
charge of the great duties of life. Spon-
taneous and chearful, they flow from the

3 G _ affctions

E R M. affections of a pure heart. Not only
XIV. from the keeping of the Divine conm-

mandlnents he expeCts, but in the kecpi'm
f' them, lie enjoys, a great revward.-Ac-
cordingly, in the fcntiments of holy men
recordcd in flripturc, we find this spirit
cvery-where prevalent. Their language
was; iy fjiatintes have I taken as mine he-
ritage for ever ; Jr they are the rejoicing ol
my heart. They are myfongs in the h1ouJb o'
my pilgrimage. 7her are iveeter than hone),
and the honey comb. Whom have I in hea-
ven but thee ? And there is ;sne upon earth
that I desire besides thee. They did not re-
ceive theipirit of bondage, but the Jpirit of
adoption. They uwcre filled with peace and
joy in believing. They rejoiced in hope of the
glory of God. As toon as the Athiopian
eunuch received from Philip the light of
the Gospel, that light revived and chear-
cd his heart. A new fun seemed to arise;
a new glory, to ihine around him. Every
objec brightened; and he vwent on his
way rijoicing *. After the fame manner

ihould
Acs viii. 31,

should every good man proceed in his s E nTR
journyc through life, with a fercne and XIV.
chcarful Ijpirit. Conttcrnation and de-
jeclion let him leave to the slaves of guilt,
who have every thing to dread, both firom
this world, and the next. If he appear
before others with a dliiirited aspec, he
dilhonours religion; and affords ground
for ifhlicion, that he is either ignorant
of its nature, or a flrangcr to its power.

Thus I have ihown joy to be eilintial

to religion. It is the spirit which it in-
spires, and which it requires, in good
men. But in our prefcnt ftatc, the best
principles may be carried to a dangerous
excess; and joy, like other things, has
its due limits. To serve God with un-
mixed delight, belongs to more advan-
ced spirits in a happier world. In this
region of imperfection, some infusions
from a different cup, must of ncceflity
tincture our jov. Let us then,

II. TURN to the other fide of the ar-
gument, and confider the reasons which

reldC,.t'I

S E R M. render it proper, that when we rejoicc,
XIV.we lhliould irejoice uith trembling.

In the firlt place, becauie all the ob-

jects of religion, which afford g ound
for joy, tend to inspire, at the faime time,
reverence and fear. We fcrve a Bene-
factor, it is true, in whom we have rca-
son to delight; whose purpofcs are gra-
cious; whole law is the plan of our
happiness. But this Benefacor, is the
King eternal, immortal, and invisible ; at
whose presence, the mountains fhakc,
and Nature trembles. Every good, and'
every perfcie gi/f come dovwn romn him.
But the hand which confers them, we
cannot fee. Myflerious obscurity refts
upon his essence. He dwelleth in the Ji-
cret place of thunder; and clouds and
darkness surround him. IHe is the
Hearer of prayer; but we lift our voice
to him from afar. Into his immediate
presence no access is permitted. Our
warmest devotion admits no familiarity
with him. God is in heaven, and thb'
Vpon earth; therefore, let thy ',ords be

J1':v.

few. If his omnifienc adminiflers corn- S R M.

)frt in our secret dliftrefs, it likewise fills XIV.
with awe, the heart that is conscious of
guilt. For, if he knows our frame, and
remembers we are duljI; our iniquities, also,
are ever before him; our secret fins, in the
light of his countenance.

Throughout all his dispensations, great-

ness, in conjunction with goodness, strikes
our view; and, wherever we behold the
Parent, we behold the Legislator also. The
death of Christ, in the behalf of a guilty
world, is the chief ground of religious
hope and joy. But it is no lets the
ground of reverence; when, in this high
tranfadion, we contemplate God, as at
once trict in justice, and great in mercy.
I the Lord keep mercy for thousands of them
that fear me. Iforgive their iniquitr, tranf-
grefoiol, and fin; but I will by no means
clear the guilty. When we open the book
of the Law, we find promises and threat-
enings mingled in the fame page. On
the one fide, we fee Heaven displayed
in all its glory: On the other, Hell

opening

SE R M. opening its terrours. In fliort, in what-
XIV. ever light we view religion, it appctr;

solemn and venerable. It is a temple
full of majelly, to which the worfllipp)cl
may approach with comfort, in the hope
of obtaining girace, and flinling mercy; but
where they cannot enter, without being
imprefled with awe. If we may be per-
mitted to compare spiritual with natural
things, religion refcmblcs not those fcence
of natural beauty, where every oljecl
miniles. It cannot be likened to the gay
lantllcape, or the flowery field. It re-
iemlbles more the auguil and sublime ap-
pearances of Nature; the lofty mountain,
the expanded ocean, and the Htarry firma-
ment; at the fight of which, the mind
is at once over-awed and delighted; and,
fiom the union of grandeur with beau-
ty, derives a pleasing, but a serious, emo-
tion.

IN the second place, As joy, tempered

by fear, suits the nature of religion, tb,
it is requisite for the proper regulation of

I the

the conduct of man. Let his joy flow SERM.
from the best and purest source; yet, if it XIV.
remain long unmixed, it is apt to become
dangerous to virtue. As waters which
are never stirred, nor troubled, gather a
sediment, which putrifies them; so, the
undisturbed continuance of placid sensa-
tions, engenders disorders in the human
Ioul. It is wifely ordered in our present
state, that joy and fear, hope and grief,
ihould ad alternately, as checks and ba-
lances upon each other, in order to pre-
vent an excess in any of them, which
our nature could not bear. If we were
subjed to no alarms of danger, the
wisest would soon become improvident;
and the most humble, presumptuous.
Man is a pilgrim on earth. Were his
path to be always smooth and flowery,
he would be tempted to relinquish his
guide, and to forget the purpose of his
journey. Caution and fear, are the
Shields of happiness. Unguarded joy
begets indolence; indolence produces fe-
curity; security leads to rashness; and

3 H raflmefs

SE R M. rashness ends in ruin. In order to rc-
XIV. joice long, it is necelliry that we rejoin

with trembling. Had our first parents
observed this rule, man might have been
fill in Paradile. He who faith in his
heart, My mountain flands Jirong ; I flaall
never be moved; may be aflured that his
state already begins to totter. Religion,
therefore, performs a kind office, in giv-
ing us the admonition of the Text. It
inspires chearfulnefs in the service of
God. It proposes joy, as our chief spring
of adion. But it supports joy, by guard-
ing it with fear; not suppressing, but
regulating its indulgence; requiring us
to rejoice, like persons who have obtained
a treasure, which, through want of vigi-
lance, they are exposed to lose. De-
pendent beings are formed for fubmif-
sion; and, to submit, is to stand in awe.
Becaafe the Lord reignetb, let the earth be
glad. We are the fubjecs of God; and
therefore may justly rejoice. But till we
are subjects; and, therefore, trembling
must mix with our joy.

IN

IN the third place, the unstable condi- s E R M,

tion of all human things, naturally in- yv.
spires fear in the midst of joy. The
spirit to which 'religion forms us, must
undoubtedly. corrcfion(l to the slate in
which we are placed, and to the part
which is assigned us to ac. Now, the
first view under which our present state
appears, is that of fallen creatures, who
are undergoing, in this world, probation
and trial for their recovery; and are com-
manded to work out tbeir Jalvation with
fear and treibling. This view of our
condition, infers not habitual dejedion
of mind. It requires not melancholy
abftradion from the affairs, or total con-
tempt of the amusements, of life. But it
inspires humility. It enforces dependance
on Divine aid; and calls forth the voice
of supplication to Heaven. In a situation
so critical, and where interefis so import-
ant are at flake, every reasonable person
muff confess, that seriousness ought to
temper rejoicing.

3 H 2 Were

E RM. Were there in human life any fixed
xv. point of stability and reft, attainable by

man; could we, at any one moment, as-
sure ourselves, that there remained no la-
tent source of danger, either to our tem-
poral, or our spiritual state; then, I ad-
mit, we might lay trembling aside, and
rejoice in fill security. But, alas! no
such safe station, no such moment of
confidence, is allowed to man during his
warfare on earth. Vicissitudes of good
and evil, of trials and consolations, fill
up his life. The bell intentioned, are
sometimes betrayed into crimes; the mol
prudent, overwhelmed with misfortunes.
The world is like a wheel incessantly re-
volving, on which human things alter-
nately rife and fall. What is past of our
life, has been a checquered scene. On its
remaining periods, uncertainty and dark-
ness reft. Futurity is an unknown re-
gion, into which no man can look for-
ward without awe, because he cannot tell
what forms of danger, or trial, may meet
him there. This we know well, that, in

cverv

every period of our life, the path of hap- SE R M.
piness ihall be found iteep and arduous; XIV.
but swift and easy, the dcfccnt to ruin.
What, with much exertion of care and
vigilance, we had built up, one unwary
adion may, in an evil hour, overthrow.
The props of human confidence are, in
general, insecure. The sphere of human
pleasures is narrow. While we form
schemes, for strengthening the one, and
for enlarging the other, death, in the
mean-while, advances. Life, with a swift,
though insensible course, glides away;
and, like a river which undermines its
banks, gradually impairs our state. Year
after year, steals something from us; till
the decaying fabrick totter of itself, and
crumble at length into dult. So that,
whether we confider life or death, time
or eternity, all things appear to concur
in giving to man the admonition of the
Text, Rejoice witb trembling.

I HA V E now fiown, in what refpels
religion both promotes joy, and inspires

ferioufilcfs.

SE R M. seriousness. It places us in the molt fa-
_IvY vourable situation, which human life as-

fords, for joy; and it gives us every as-
fiftance, for relithing that joy. It renders
it our duty, to cultivate the fatisfation
which it yields. It demandb a chearful
spirit, in order to ascertain the sincerity
of our principles, and to confirm us in
good practice. At the fame time, the
joy which it inspires, is tempered with
fear, by the genius of religion itself,
by the dangers to which unguarded joy
would expose us, and by the impropriety
of indulging it, in a situation so mixed as
the present. The trembling which is here
enjoined, is not to be understood as fig-
nifying a pusillanimous dejeaion. It im-
ports no more than that caution and so-
briety, which prudence dictates, as be-
longing to our state. By conneting fucl
trembling with our joy, religion means
to recommend to us, a chearful, but a
composed, spirit; equally remote from
the humiliating depreflion of fear, and
the exulting levity of joy. Always to re-

joice,

joice, is to be a fool. Always to tremble, S E R M.
is to be a flaae. It is a modest chearful- XIV.
ness, a chastened joy, a manly ferioufilefs,
which becomes the servant of God.

BUT is this, it may perhaps be said,

the whole amount of that boasted satis-
faction which religion bestows? Is this
all the compensation which it makes, for
those sacrifices it exads ? Are not the
terms which vice holds out, far more
enticing, when it permits us to gratify
every desire; and, in return for our fur-
mounting the timorous scruples of con-
science, promises us a life of gaiety, fe-
ftivity, and unrestrained joy ?- Such
promises, vice may indeed make; but,
how far it fulfils them, we may safely
refer to the determination of the greatest
sensualist, when he has finiffed his ca-
reer, and lo,.ks back on what he has en-
joyed. Ask him, Whether he would re-
commend to his children, and his friends,
to hold the fame course; and whether,
with his dying breath, he dare assure

them,

SERM. them, that the gratifications of licenti-

XIV. oufnefs afford the greatest enjoyment ot
V'V life ? Whatever hopes vice may at the

beginning inspire, yet, after the trial is
made, it has been always found, that
criminal pleasures are the bane of happi-
ness; the poison, not the cordial, of our
present slate. They are pleasures, com-
penfated by an infinite overbalance of
pain; moments of delight, succeeded by
years of regret; purchased at the expencc
of injured reputation, broken health, and
ruined peace. Even abftrading from
their pernicious consequences, they are,
for most part, in themselves treacherous
pleasures; unsound, and disturbed in the
moments of enjoyment. In the midjf of
such laughter, the heart is forrou ful. Of-
ten is the smile of gaiety assumed, while
the heart akes within: And though folly
laughs, guilt will fting. Correfting this
pernicious phrenzy of pleasure, and re-
ducing it to a more fober and regulated
lsate, religion is, in truth, no other than
wisdom, introducing peace and order into
the life of man.

i \VWhilc

While religion condemns such plea- S E RM.

flres as are immoral, it is chargeable XIv.
with no improper aultcrity, in reliect of
those. which are of an innocent kind.
Think not, that by the cautious difci-
pline which it prelcribes, it excludes you
from all gay enjoyment of life. With-
in the compass of that fcdate spirit, to
which it forms you, all that is innocent-
ly pleasing will be found to lie. It is a
mistake to imagine, that, in constant es-
fusions of giddy mirth, or in that slut-
ter of spirits which is excited by a round
of diversions, the chief enjoyment of our
state consists. Were this the cafe, the
vain and the frivolous would be on bet-
ter terms for happiness, than the wite,
the great, and the good. To arrange
the plans of amusement, or to preside in
the haunts of jollity, would be more dc-
firable, than to exert the highest effort of
mental powers for the benefit of na-
tions. A consequence tb absurd, is fuffi-
cient to explode the principle from which
it flows. To the amusements and lesser

3 I joys

SE RM. joys of the world, religion afligns their
XIV. proper place. It admits of them, as relax-

ations from care, as infirulnents of pro-
moting the union of men, and of enliven-
ing their social intercouriC. But though,
as long as they are kept within due bounds,
it does not censure nor condemn them;
neither does it propofc them, as reward,
to the virtuous, or as the principal ob-
jects of their pursuit. To such, it point.
out nobler ends of action. Their felicity
it engages them to seek, in the discharge
of an ufcful, an upright, and honourable
part in life; and, as the habitual tenour
of their mind, it promotes chearfulnels,
and dii'courages levity.

Between thele two, there is a wide di-

ftindion; and the mind which is most
open to levity, is frequently a stranger to
chearfulnefs. It has been remarked, that
transports of intemperate mirth, are of-
ten no more than flaihes from the dark
cloud; and that, in proportion to the vio-
lence of the effulgence, fucl is the fuc-
ceeding gloom. Levity, may be the for-

cc(!

ccd producdtion of folly or vice; chcar- SERI4.
fulnels, is the natural offspring of wis- XIV.
dom and virtue only. The one is an oc-
cafional agitation; the other, a perma-
nent habit. The one degrades the cha-
racter; the other, is perfelcly confitent
with the dignity of reason, and the
steady and manly Ipirit of religion. To
aim at a constant fucceflion of high and
vivid sensations of pleasure, is an idea of
happiness altogether chimerical. Calm
and temperate enjoyment, is the utmost
that is allotted to man. Beyond this, we
ltruggle in vain to raise our state; and, in
fad, depress our joys, by endeavouring
to heighten them. Instead of those vain
hopes of perpetual festivity, with which
the world would allure us, religion con-
sers upon us, a chearful tranquillity. In-
fRead of dazzling us with meteors of joy,
which sparkle and expire, it fleds around
us, a calm and feadv light. By mixing
trembling with our joy, it renders that
joy more solid, more equal, and mare
lating.

, I 2 In

ER M. In this spirit, then, let us serve God,
xvr. and hold our course through life. Let

us approach to the Divine Being, as to
a sovereign of whom we tland in awe,
and to a father in whom we trust. In
our conduct, let us be cautious and hum-
ble, as those who have ground to fear;
well pleased and chearful, as those who
have cause to rejoice. Let us flow the
world, that a religious temper, is a tem-
per, fcdate, not fad; that a religious be-
haviour, is a behaviour, regulated, not
Itiff and formal. Thus, we lhall noe the
world, as not abusing it;, we ihall pals
through its various changes, with the
leadt difiompofure; and we shall vindi-
cate religion, from the reproaches of those
who would attribute to it, either enthufi-
aftick joys, or slavish terrours. We ihall
Ihow, that it is a rational rule of life,
worthy of the perfection of God, and
suited to the nature and state of man.

SER-

# SERMON XV. On the Motives to CONSTANCY in VIRTUE. GALAT. vi. 9. And let us not be weary in well-doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

437

SERMON XV.
On the Motives to CONST ANCY in

V RT U E.

GALAT. Vi. 9.

And let us not be weary in well-doing;

for in due season we /fJall reap, if we
faint not.
D ISCONTENT is the most general of s E R M.

all the evils which trouble the life

of man. It is a disease, which every-
where finds materials to feed itself; for,
if real distresses be wanting, it fubllitutes
such as are imaginary in their place. It
converts even the good things of the
world, when they have been long enjoy-
ed, into occasions of disgust. In the
midfl of prosperity, it disposes us to com-
plain; and renders tranquillity tirclomc,

only

S E R M. only because it is uniform. Thcrc i:, no
xv. wonder, that this spirit of refllefllefs and

diffatisfadion, which corrupts every ter-
rcitrial enjoyment, should have sometimes
penetrated into the region of virtue.
Good men are not without their frailties;
and the perverseness incident to human
nature, too readily leads us, who wears
of all other things, to weary, also, inj
'well-doing.

Let me put a cafe, which, perhaps,

will be found not unfiequent in ordinary
life. Suppose a person, after much com-
merce with the world, to be convinced of
its vanity. He has seen its mot flat-
tering hopes to be fallacious. He has felk
its most boasted pleasures to be unllt-
tisfacory. He resolves, therefore, t)
place his happiness in virtue; and, dif-
regarding all temptations from intcreft,
to adhere to what is right and honour-
able in conduct. He cultivates acquaint-
ance with religion. He performs, with
seriousness, the offices of devotion. He
lays down to himself, a rational and

ufcful

uliful plan of life; and, with fatisfac- s E R M.
tion, holds on for a while in this reform- XV.
ed course. But, by degres, discourage-
ments arise.. The peace which he hoped
to enjoy, is interrupted, either by his
own frailties, or by the vices of others.
Passions, which had not been thoroughly
subdued, struggle for their accustomcd
gratification. The pleasure which he ex-
peced to find in devotion, Sometimes
fails him; and the injustice of the world,
often fours.and frets him. Friends prove
ungrateful; enemies misrepresent, rivals
supplant him: And part, at least, of the
mortifications which he suffers, he begins
to ascribe to virtue.-ls this all the re-
ward of my serving God, and renouncing
the pleafurcs of fin ? Vcril), in vain, I
have cleansed my heart, and uwaJhed my
hands in innocency. .'bold, the ungodly
prosper in the world, and have more than
heart can wijh; while, all the day long,
lam plagued and chajtened every wmoning.-
To such perions as these, and to all who
are in hazard of being infected with their

spirit,

S E R M. spirit, I now address myself. In reply to

XVM their complaints, I purpose to show, That

in no state they can choose on earth, by
no plan of conduc they can form, is it
possible for them to escape uneafnefs and
disappointment; that in a life of virtue,
they will susser less uneasiness and fewer
disappointments, than in a course of vice;
they will poffcfs much higher resources
and advantages; and they will be as-
fured of complete reward at the end.
From these considerations, I hope to make
it appear, that there is no sufficient rea-
son for our wearying in well-doing; and
that, taking human life upon the whole,
virtue is by far the molt eligible portion
of man.

I. Uneasiness and disappointment, are

inseparable, in some degree, from every
state on earth. Were it in the power of
the world, to render those who attach
themselves to it, satisfied and happy, you
might then, I admit, have some title to
complain, if you found yourselves placed

Xi ~ upon

ypon worse terms in the service of God. SERM.
But this is to far from being the cafe, xv.
that, among the multitudes who devote
themfelvcs to earthly plcafure, you will
not find a single pcrfin who has com-
pletely attained his aim. Enquire into
the condition of the high and the low,
of the gay and the firious, of the men of
business and the men of pleasure, and
you ihall behold them all occupied, in
supplying tome want, or in removing
tome dittrefs. No man is pleased with
being precisely what he is. Every-where
there is a void; generally, even in the
mnoft prosperous life, there is some corner
pofleffed by fbrrow. He who is engaged in
business, pines for leilure. He who en-
joys leisure, languilles for want of em-
ployment. In a tingle tate, we envy the
comforts of a family. In conjugal life,
we are chagrined with domeftick cares.
In a safe station, we regret the want of
objects for enterprise. In an enterprizing
life, we lament the want of safety. It is
the doom of man, that his fkcy should

3 K never

S R M. never be free from all clouds. He is, at

MXV present, in an exiled and fallen slate.

The objects which surround him, are be-
neath his native dignity. God has tin-
ged them all with vanity, on purpose to
make him feel, that this is not his reft;
that here he is not in his proper place,
nor arrived at his true home.

If, therefore, you aim at a condition

which {hall be exempted from every dif-
quiet, you pursue a phantom; you in-
crease the vanity and vexation of life, by
engaging in a chace so fruitless. If you
complain of virtue, because there is inci-
dent to it a portion of that uneasiness
which is found in every other state, your
complaint is most unreasonable. You
claim an immunity from evil, which be-
longs not to the lot of man. Recon-
cile yourselves, then, to your condition;
and, inflead of looking for perfect hap-
piness any where on earth, gladly embrace
that state which contains the fewest for-
rows.

II. THOUGHI

II. THOUGH no condition of human SERM.

life is free from uneasiness, I contend, XV
that the uneasiness belonging to a sinful
course, is far greater, than what attends a
courti of well-doing. If you weary of
the labours of virtue, be alfured that the
world, whenever you try the exchange,
will lay upon you a much heavier load. It
is the outside, only, of a licentious life,
which is gay and smiling. Within, it con-
ceals toil, and trouble, and deadly sorrow.
For, vice poisons human happiness in the
spring, by introducing disorder into the
heart. Those passions which it seems to
indulge, it only feeds with imperfect
gratifications; and thereby strengthens
them for preying, in the end, on their
unhappy victims.

It is a great mifiake to imagine, that

the pain of feif-denial is confined to vir-
tue. He who follows the world, as much
as he who follows ChriR, must tab up bis
croft; and to him, atfuredly, it will prove
a more oppressive burden. Vice allows all
our paiions to range uncontrouled; and

3 K 2 where

S E R M. where each claims to be fiperiour, it is
XV. impossible to gratify all. The predomi-

nant desire, can only be indulged at the
expence of its rival. No mortification:,
which virtue exacls, arc more severe than
those, which ambition imposes upon the
love of ease, pride upon interest, and
covetousness upon vanity. Self-denial,
therefore, belongs, in common, to vice
and virtue; but with this remarkable
difference, that the paflions which virtue
requires us to mortify, it tends to wea-
ken; whereas, those which vice obliges
us to deny, it, at the fame time, strength-
ens. The one diminihles the pain of
felf-denial, by moderating the demands
of passion; the other increases it, by ren-
dering those demands imperious and vio-
lent.-What distresses, that occur in the
calm life of virtue, can be compared to
those tortures, which remorse of confci-
ence inflicts on the wicked; to thole
severe humiliations, arising from guilt
combined with misfortunes, which fink
them to the dult; to those violent agita,

tioni

tions of ihame and disappointment, S E R M.
which sometimes drive them to the most XV.
fatal extremities, and make them abhor
their existence? How often, in the midift
of those disastrous situations, into which
their crimes have brought them, have
they cursed the fedudions of vice; and,
with bitter regret, looked back to the day
on which they first forsook the path of
innocence!

But, perhaps, you imagine, that to fucl

miseries as these, great criminals only are
expoed ; and that, by a wary and cautious
management, it is possible to avoid them.
Take vice and virtue, then, in the molt
general point of view. Compare God and
the world as two malters, the one or other
of whom you mull obey; and confider
fairly, in whose fervicc there will be rea-
son for your wearying oboneft, and repent-
ing most frequently. The world is both
a hard, and a capricious mailer. To sub-
mit to a long servitude, in the view of a
recompense from which they are excluded
in the end, is known to be often the fate

of

S E R M. of those, who are devoted to the world.

X. They sacrifice their present ease, to their

future profpcds. They court the great,
and flatter the multitude. They prolti-
tute their conscience, and diihonour their
character: And, after all their efforts, how
uncertain is their success! Competitors
juflle, and outatrip them. The more art-
ful deceive, the more violent overthrow
them. Fair profpcds once finiled; but
clouds soon gather; the sky is darkened;
the scene changes; and that fickle world,
which, a moment before, had flattered,
the next moment, forgets them.

God is never mistaken in the character

of his servants; for he feeth their hearts,
and judyeth according to the. truth. But
the world is often deceived in those who
court its favour; and, of course, is unjult
in the distribution of its rewards. Flattery
gains the ear of power. Fraud supplants
innocence; and the pretending and as-
fuming, occupy the place of the worthy
and the modest. In vain you claim any
merit with the world, on account of your

good

good intentions. The world, knows thefi S E R M
not; 'egards them not It judges of you, xv.
solely by your actions; and, what is
worse, by the success of your actions,
which often depends not on yourselves.
But, in the fight of the Supreme Being,
good intentions supply the place of good
deeds, which you had not the opportu-
nity of performing. The well-meant en-
deavours of the poor, find the fame ac-
ceptance with him, as the generous ac-
tions of the rich. The widow's mite is,
in his eye, a costly offering; and even he
who giveth to a disciple a cup of cold water,
when he can give him no more, goeth not
-without his reward.

As the world is unjust in its judgments,

so it is ungrateful in its requitals. Time
speedily effaces the memory of the greatest
services; and when we can repeat them
no more, we are neglected, and thrown
aside. It was the faying of a noted great
man of the world, on the fall of his
fortunes, " Had I served God, as faith-
"fully as I have done my King, he

"would

SE Rt I. " would not have cast me off in my old

x. " age." Unfaithfulness, and ingratitude,

are unknown to God. With him, no
new favourites arise, to usurp the place, or
to bear off the rewards of his antient fir-
vants. Even to your old age, I am He; and
even to hoary hairs, I will carry you. I have
made, and I will bear; even I will carrl,
and will deliver you, faith the Lord Al-
mighty *.-Since, then, in our several de-
partments, we mufft labour, What com-
parison is there, between labouring for
God, and for the world ? How unjust are
they, who weary so much sooner in the
service of God, than they do in that of the
mos severe, and imperious of all masters !

111. THE resources of virtue, are much

greater, than those of the world; the com-
penfations which it makes for our diftref-
fes; far more valuable. Perpetual fuccelb
belongs neither to the one, nor the other.
But under disappointments, when they
occur, virtue bears us up; the world al-
lows us to fink. When the mind of a

I ~ ~good
* Ua. xlvi. 4.

good man is hurt by misfortunes, reli- SER M.
gion adininifters the cordial, and infuses XV.
the balm. Whereas, the world inflics
wounds, and then leaves them to feftcr.
It brings sorrows, but it provides no con-
folation. Consolation is entirely the pro-
vince of religion. Supposing religion to
be inferiour to vice in external advan-
tages, it must be allowed to possess inter-
nal peace, in a much higher degree. This
is so certain, that almost all men, at some
period or other of their life, look forward
to it, as to a desirable retreat. When the
ends of their present pursuit ihall be
accomplished, they propose to themselves
much fatisfadion in an honourable dif-
charge of the duties of their station,
amidst those moderate passions, and tem-
perate pleasures, which innocence allows.
That which all men agree in holding to
be second in importance to the pursuit
which they follow, may be safely esteem-
ed to be the first in real worth; and it
may be concluded, that if they were not

3 L blinded

S E R . blinded by som:e prevailing paflion, tlic

V. would dilcern and adopt it as lilch.

It is the peculiar ciect of virtue, to

make a man's chief happinicfs arilf firou
himself, and his own conduLc. A bad
man is wholly the creature of the world.
He hantgs upon its favour, lives by it>
finilcs, and is happy or miferablc, in pro-
portion to his licccls. But to a virtiuou
man, luccels in worldly undertakings i.,
but a iecondary objec. To (lifcharge hii.
own part with integrity and honour, is
his chief aim. If he has done properly
what was incumbent on him to do, his
mind is at reft; to Providence he leaves
the event. Uls witnrc is iin heaven, an'
his record is on liih. Satisfied with the
approbation of God, and the teftimonv
of a gocd conflicnce, he enjoys himself,
and ldelpiiis the triumphs of guilt. In
proportion as such manly principles rule
your heart, you will become independent
of the world ; and will forbear complai!l-
ing of its difcouragcments. It is the im-
perfecion of your virtue, which occasions

you

t-on to Za71 y in i/H-,in"'. It is bccaufe s E r ,.
,our hcarts remain divided between God xv-
andl the world, thist 'ou are 1; often dil-
contented ; partly wilhing to dil'harge
your dutv, a;:d artly fleking your happi-
nefl from inomewhat that is repugnant to
your duty. Study te be more confiltent in
principle, and more uniform in pracice,
and your peace will be more unbroken.

Though virtue may appear at first fight

to cor.trac the bounds of enjoyment, voll
will fin!l, upon reflecion, that, in truth, it
enlarges them. If it relra;ins the cxcefs
of some pleafilres, it favours and increases
others. It precludes you from none, but
iuch as are either fantafiick and ima-
ginary, or pernicious and deflrudive.
Whatever is truly valuable in human en-

joyment, it allows to a good man, no left
than to others. It not only allmrs him
such pleasures, but heightens them, by
that grateful relilh which a good con-
fiience gives to every pleafire. It not
only heightens them, but adds to them
.dfo the peculiar fatisfacdions which flow

3 IJ 2 from

S E R M. from virtuous sentiments, from devour
XVM affeLcions, and religious hopes. On how

much worse terms is the finner placed,
in the midit of his boasted gratifications?
His portion is confined to this world.
His good things are all of one fort only;
he has neither knowledge, nor relilh, of
any thing beyond them. His enjoyment,
therefore, refts on a much narrower basis,
than that of the servants of God. En-
large, as much as you please, the circle of
worldly gratifications; yet, if nothing of
the mind and the heart, nothing of a re-
fined and moral nature, enter into that
circle, and vary the enjoyment, languor
and weariness soon succeed. Among
whom do you hear more peevifl expref-
sions of difcontcnt, or more frequent
complaints of low spirits, than among
the professed votaries of worldly pleafurc ?

Vice and virtue, in their progress, as in

every other refpeft, hold an oppofitc
course. The beginnings of vice are en-
ticing. The first fleps of worldly ad-
vancement, are flattering and pleating.

But

But the continuance of success, blunts SE R M.
enjoyment, and flattens desire. Whereas, xv.
the beginnings of virtue are laborious.
But, by perfeverancc its labours dimi-
nilh, and its pleasures increase. As it
ripens into confirmed habit, it becomes
both linoother in practice, and more com-
plete in its reward. In a worldly life, the
termination of our hopes always meets our
view. We fee a boundary before us, be-
yond which we cannot reach. But the
proliedts of virtue, are growing, and
cndlefs. The righteousJjall hold on in his
way; and he that hath clean hands,Jhall
wax lronger and frotnger. The path of the
juJf is as the Jhining light, that Jhineth
more and onre unto the peifedl day. This
brings me to confider,

IV. TIE alfured hope, which good

men enjoy, of a full reward at last. I
have endeavoured, by several confidera-
tions, to correct your impatience under
the present discouragements of virtue.
I have fliown many high advantages,

which

s r R Ar. which it already poflnllcs. lint now,

X` laying all thlcl atide; sllhpIoli. ng virtce t;)

have brought you no advantage, biut to
have only en.gaged you in perpetual
ftrugglea with an evil world ; thc Tcxt
filggels what is sufficient to anowcr e-.e-
ry objeclion, and to silence every colm-
plaint; in idu: J.e/;'z *.rt ./hal l reap, if
vyon t/;ilt not. It is not a loose encourag;e-
ment, or a dublious hope, which is held
forth to us. A direct and explicit decla-
ration is made bv the Spirit of God, that
piety and virtue, how dlifouragcld oevcr,
or opprelrel, they may be for a while,
lhall not be frultrated of their rewardl;
but, that in due fiJ/on, wh!en the period
which is fixed by the Divine decree thall
come, all who weary not in t'cIl-doing,
though they may hve J;wn in tears,J,;/ll
reap in joy. As this great principle of
faith, is so essential to our present argu-
ment, and is indeed the foundation of
all religion, it will he proper that we
now take a view )f the grounds on which

it

it refts. B1y fixing our attention, both SE Rs.
on the proofs which re;ason fuggcfls, and xv.
the d'ilcovcries which rcvelation has made,
of a flare of fiture rewards, we Ihall take
an cfTdltl, metlhod of conrirming our
adherence to religion; and of batiingi
those tcnptations which might lead us
to icary} in it'ccll-,i;.i.

TIE first, and most olvious prefimp-

tion, which rc;fon aflords in elhalf of
future rewards to the rigilitous, arises
fiom the imperfect distribution of good
and evil in our prefcnt ftatc. Notwith-
iandinlg what I have advanced con-
cerning thle pleafircs and advantages of
virtue, it cannot be denied, that the hi:p-
pinfcs of good men is often left inco;-.
plete. The vitious poflUs advantages, to
which they have no right; while the
confcicntious susser for the fake of virtue,
and groan under ldictrclhs which thcy
have not meritedl fiom the world. In-
deed, were the ditl-ibuttiti of good and
cvil, in this lifc, altogether promifiluous;

could

SERM. could it he said, with truth, that the

XV. moral condition of men had no influence

whatever upon their happiness or miferv;
I admit, that from such a state of things,
no presumption would arise, of any future
retribution being intended. They who
<Ilight to aggravate the miseries of life,
and the distresses of virtue, do no service
to the argument in behalf of Providence.
For, if total disorder be found to prevail
now, suspicions may, too justly, arise, of
its prevailing for ever. If he who rules
the universe, entirely neglecs virtue here,
the probability must be small, of his re-
warding it hereafter. But this is far
from being the true state of the fat.
What human life presents to the view
of an impartial observer, is by no means
a scene of entire confusion; but a slate of
order, begun, and carried on a certain
length. Virtue is so far from being ne-
glected by the Governour of the world,
that from many evident marks, it ap-
pears to be a chief object of his care.
In the constitution of human nature, a

I ~ ~foundation

foundation is laid, for comfort to the SERM.
righteous, and for internal punilhment to xv.
the wicked. Throughout the course of
the Divine government, tendencies to-
wards the happiness of the one, and the
misery of the other, constantly appear.
They are so conspicuous, as not to have
escaped the notice of the rudest nations.
Over the whole earth, they have diffilfed
the belief, that Providence is propitious
to virtue, and adverse to guilt. Yet these
tendencies are, sometimes, disappointed
of their effect; and that which Provi-
dence visibly favours, is left, at present,
without an adequate reward.

From such an imperfet distribution of

happiness, what are we to conclude, but
that this system is the beginning, not the
whole of things; the opening only of a
more extensive plan, whose confumma-
tion reaches into a future world? If God
has already fit his throne for judgment:
if he has visibly begun to reward and
tu punish, in some degree, on earth, he
cannot mean to leave the exercise of go-

3 M vernment

E R M. vernment incomplete. Having laid the
xv. foundation of a great and noble tlruc-

ture, he will in due time rear it up to
perfection. The unfinished parts of the
fabrick, evidently show, that a future
building is intended. All his other works
are confiructed according to the most full
and exac proportion. In the natural
world, nothing is deficient, nothing re-
dundant. It is in the moral world, only,
that we discover irregularity and defect.
It falls short of that order and perfection
which appear in the reft of the creation.
It exhibits not, in its present slate, the
fame features of complete wisdom, jus-
tice, or goodness. But can we believe,
that under the government of the Supreme
Being, those apparent disorders shall not
be rectified at the lat ? Or, that from
his condud towards his rational creatures,
the chief of his works, the sole objec-
tion against his perfecion Ihall rife, and
be allowed to subsist for ever?

On the supposition of future rewards
and puniihments, a satisfying account

can

can be given, of all the difordcrs which S E R M.
at present take place on earth. Chriftia- XV.
nity explains their origin, and traces
them to their issue. Man, fallen from
his primaval felicity, is now undergoing
probation and discipline for his final
state. Divine justice remains, for a fia-
son, concealed; and allows men to aft
their parts with freedom on this theatre,
that their characters may be formed and
ascertained. Amidst discouragements and
afflictions, the righteous give proof of
their fidelity, and acquire the habits of
virtue. But, if you suppose the events
of this life to have no reference to an-
other, the whole state of man becomes,
not only inexplicable, but contradictory,
and inconfiflent. The powers of the in-
feriour animals, are perfectly suited to their
station. They know nothing higher than
their present condition. In gratifying
their appetites, they fulfill their destiny,
and pass away. Man, alone, comes forth
to ad a part, which carries no meaning,
and tends to no end. Endowed with ca-

3 M 2 pacities,

SERR. pacities, which extend far beyond his
xv- present sphere; fitted by his rational na-

ture, for running the race of immorta-
lity, he is flopped flort in the very en-
trance of his courcf. He squanders his
activity on pursuits, which he discerns to
be vain. He languishes for knowledge,
which is placed beyond his reach. He
thirdis after a happiness, which he is
doomed never to enjoy. He fees, and
laments, the disasters of his state; and
yet, upon this supposition, can find no-
thing to remedy them.-Has the eternal
God any pleasure in sporting himself
with such a scene of misery and folly, as
this life, if it had no connexion with an-
other, must exhibit to his eye? Did he
call into existence this magnificent uni-
verse, adorn it with so much beauty and
splendour, and surround it with those
glorious luminaries which we behold in
the heavens, only that some generations of
mortal men might arise to behold these
wonders, and then disappear for ever?
How unsuitable, in this cafe, were the

habitation

habitation to the wretched inhabitant ? SE R M.
How inconfiltent the commencement of xv.
his being, and the mighty preparation of
his powers and faculties, with his defpi-
cable end? low contradictory, in fine,
were every thing which concerns the
fiate of man, to the wisdom and perfec-
tion of his Maker ?

Throughout all ages, and among all

nations, the persuasion of a future life
has prevailed. It sprung not from the
refinements of fcicnce, or the fpecula-
tions of philosophy; but from a deeper
and stronger root, the natural sentiments
of the human heart. Hence it is common
to the philosopher, and the favagc; and is
found in the molt barbarous, as well as
in the molt civilized, regions. Even the
belief of the being of a God, is not more
general on the earth, than the belief of
immortality. Dark indeed, and confused,
were the notions which men entertained
concerning a future state. Yet till, in
that itate, they looked for retribution,
both to the good, and the bad; and in

the

S E R M. the perfection of such pleasures, as they
XV. knew belt, and valued most highly, they

placed the rewards of the virtuous. So
universal a content seems plainly to in-
dicate, an original determination given
to the foul by its Creator. It lhows this
great truth, to be native and congenial
to man.

When we look into our own breasts,

we find various anticipations and pre-
fages of future existence. Mot of our
great and high passions, extend beyond
the limits of this life. The ambitious and
the felf-denied, the great, the good, and
the wicked, all take interest, in what is
to happen after they ihall have left the
earth. That paflion for fame, which in-
spires so much of the adivity of mankind,
plainly is animated by the persuasion,
that consciousness is to survive the dif-
solution of the body. The virtuous are
supported by the hope, the guilty tor-
mented with the dread, of what is to take
place after death. As death approaches,
the hopes of the one, and the fears of the

other,

other, are found to redouble. The foul, S E RM.
when illuing hence, seems more clearly Xv.
to discern its future abode. All the
operations of conscience, proceed upon
the belief of immortality. The whole
moral conduc of men refers to it. All
legislators have supposed it. All religions
are built upon it. It is so essential to
the order of society, that were it eras-
ed, human laws would prove ineffectual
restraints from evil, and a deluge of
crirnes and miseries would overflow the
the earth. To suppose this universal and
powerful belief to be without foundation
in truth, is to suppose, that a principle
of delusion was interwoven with the
nature of man; is to suppose, that his
Creator was reduced to the necessity of
impressing his heart with a falsehood, in
order to make him answer the purposes of
his being.

BUT though these arguments be strong,

yet all arguments are liable to objection.
Perhaps this general belief, of which I have

spoken,

S F. R M. fpokcn, has been owing to inclination
XV. and desire, more than to evidence. Per-

haps, in our reasonings on this subjec
from the Divine perfections, we flatter
ourselves with being of more confc-
qucnce than we truly are, in the fyflem
of the universe. Hence the great impor-
tance of a discovery proceeding from
God himself, which gives full authority
to all that reason had suggested, and
places this capital truth beyond the reach
oi suspicion or distrust.

The method which Christianity has

taken, to convey to us the evidence of a
future tfate, highly deserves our atten-
tion. Had the Gospel been addressed, like
a system of philosophy, solely to the un-
derfianding of men; had it aimed only at
enlightening the itudious and refleding,
it would have confined itself to abftrac
truth; it would have simply informed us,
that the righteous are hereafter to be re-
warded, and finners to be puniihed. Such
a declaration as that contained in the
Text, would have been fuflicient: Be not

i weaw;'

,weary in d'ell-diug;

for il ,le .fi'9an dyou S E RM.

Jh,11 reLp i, if you si t. But the c;os- XV.
pcl has not Itoppcd, at barely announcing
life and immortality to mankind. It was
calculated for popular edification. It was
intended to be the religion, not merely of
the few, wh'ole underiLtiding was to be
inormicld; but of the mlany, allo, whose
imagination was to be impreiled, and
whole palions were to be awakened, in
order to give the truth its due influence
over them. Upon this account, it not
only reveals the certainty of a future
slate, but, in the perlon of the great
Founder of our religion, exhibits a liries
of sacs relating to it; by means of which,
our fciels, our imagination, and pallions,
all become intcrelted in this great objedt.

The rclilrretioi of Chrilt from the

grave, was deiigned to be a I:nifible evi-
dence, that deathl inlers not a final ex-
tinction of the living principle. He rose,
in order to ihow, that, in our name, he
had conqucred death, andl was Jccw ,:c the
sirs fruits ' then, tlt Jit /. Nor (lid he

3 N onlv

S E R M. only rife from the grave, but, by ascend-
XV. ing to heaven in a visible form, before

many witnesses, gave an ocular fpeci-
men of the transition from this world,
into the region of the blessed. The em-
ployments which now occupy him there,
are fully declared. As our fore-runner,
he hath entered within the veil. He ap-
pears in the presence of God for us. He
maketh perpetual intercefon for his peo-
ple. I go, said he, to my Father and your
Father, to my God and your God. In my
Father's house are many manflons. I go to
prepare a place for you. I will come again,
and receive you to myself, that where I am,
there ye may be alob The circumftanccs
of his coming again, are diftincly fore-
told. The founding of the last trumpet,
the refurre&ion of the dead, the appear-
ance of the Judge, and the solemnity
with which he lhall discriminate the good
from the bad, are all described. The very
words in which he mhall pronounce the
final sentence, are recited in our hearing:
Come, ye ble/idl of my Father! inherit the

kingdom

kingdom prepared for you, from -the founda- S E R M.
tion of the world. Then shall the holy and xV.
the just be caught up in the clouds, to meet
the Lord in the air. They shall enter wAith
him into the city of the living God. They
thall possess the new earth, and new hta-
vens, wherein dwelleth righteoifnefs. God
Jhall wipe away all tears from their eyes.
They Jhall behold his face in righteoufnej,
and befatisfied with his likenef for ever.-
By recording such a train of striking cir-
cumftances and fads, the Gospel fami-
liarizes us in some measure with a future
state. By accommodating this great dif-
covery, in so useful a manner, to the
conceptions of men, it furnishes a ffrong
intrinfick evidence of its divine origin.

THus, upon the whole, whether you

consult your reason, or liften to the dif-
coveries of revelation, you behold our ar-
gument confirmed; you behold a life of
piety and virtue, issuing in immortal fe-
licity. Of what worldly pursuit can it be
pronounced, that its reward is certain

3 N 2 Lock

BE R M. Look every where around you, and you
xv. Ihall fee, that the race is far from being

always to the fuift, or the battle to the
firong. The molt diligent, the most wife,
the molt accomplilhed, may, after all
their labours, be disappointed in the end;
and be left to susser the regret, of having
spent their Jfrength for nought. But, for
the righteous, is laid up the crown of life.
Their final happiness is prepared in the
eternal plan of Providence, and secured
by the labours and sufferings of the
Saviour of the world.

Cease, then, from your unjust com-

plaints against virtue and religion. Leave
discontent, and peevilhnefs, to worldly
men. In no period of distress, in no mo-
ment of disappointment, allow yourfelvcs
to fufpeC, that piety and integrity are
fruitless. In every state of being, they
lead to happincfs. If you enjoy not
at present their full rewards, it is, because
the season of recompence is not yet come.
For, in due season, youJtall reap. There is
a time which is proper for reward; and

there

there is a period which belongs to trial. SE RM.
How long the one Ihould lalt, and when xv
the other fiould arrive, beloAgs not to
you to determine. It is fixed by the
wiel, though unknown, decree of the A1l
mighty. But, be assured that He that
cometh, Jiill come, and will not tarry. He
lhall come, in dueJfia/on, to restore perfect
order among his works; to bring rell to
the weary, comfort to the afflided, and just
retribution to all men. Behold, faith the
faithful and true Ilitnefs, I come quickly,
and my reward is with me. To him that
overcometh, will Igive to eat of the tree of
lfe, which is in the miJfi of the pamra!i/i of
God. I will give him the morningfrJ . I
will make imn a pillar in my temple. He
Jhall lbe cloathed in white raiment ; and
Jhall fit down with me on my throne*.

* Rev. xxii. 12.-ii. 7, 28.-iii. 12, 5, 21.

F IN IS.
