S ER M ON S,

HUGH BLAIR, D. D. F. R. S. ED.

ONE OF THE MINISTERS OF THE HIGH CHURCH·,

AND

PROFESSOR OF RHETORIC AND BEL~LES LEffTREIP

INL T3HE UNIV~ER~sITT OF; EDINVBURG;H.

A
i NE Wi EDITIONT.

V O L.1.

D)UBLLIN:

·WILLAM JONES, N~o. 86, DAME-STRaEIET.

If94-·

-3 FL JNJ:

c9 1977 '

# THE CONTENTS.

% H~E

CONTEN T S.

SERMhiON I.

On the Causes of M~en's being weary of Life.

JoB x. J. My4 J/ul is weaRIy of liny i~fe. Page I

S ER O II.~o

J

On1 Charity as the End of the Comm~llandment.

E TiM or a i. 5. No~w the endI if ther com-

manldment is cl wrl v~ jme of a ; ure heart, anzd
of a good cornJf lnne, azd of faith unfeignzed. I 4

SER M ONI III.

On our Lives beingr in the Hand of G~od.

Pireached at the beginning of a New Year.

PSA LM XXX1. If . iMyr tbimes ae 172 /Ilfr /janr.--- 2

SER~MONh IV.

On th~e Mlixture of Bad IMen with the Goo~d in

hurnan Society.

1VIAT TH. Xill. 3O. Let blith grow~ togcther· until

the harvec/1.-- 4I

SERMON V.

On the Relief which the Gospel affordss to the

Diffreffed.

Preached at the celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's.

Supper.

1MAT TH. xi. 28. Come urto me a~llye tkat la-

bour and ar~e heavyr laden, and I will give
youl ref, "5

S E R M ON VI.

On Luxury and Licentioufners.

ISAI An V. I 2. The barpand the tiol, t~e tabr.Et

and the pie and wine are in their feafs; but
~they r-egar-d nrot the work of the Lord, neit~cer
conJFder the operation of kis hands. 7e

SE~RMON VII.

On the Pres~ence of God in a Future State.

PSALbt XVi. II. Ttroff WiltpeUI at de pas a

life ; in thy pre/enlce is fulness of jo~y; at th~y
right hanad themr are plea/ur~es fr evetrmrule. 86

SE~R~MON

S E· h

R ON VI.

On Curiosity concerning the Affairs of others.

JoHN xxi. 2 I, zz. Peter feeing kim, faith to

fefus, Lord, and what fiall this man dEo 7Z
Jesus faith unto kim, If I ·will that be ta-rry
till I come, whato is tkat to thec ? Alowka thoue me. 99

SER M ONS X.

On our pres~ent Ignorance of the Ways of God.

JoHN Xiii. 7. f efus an/wuered and said ucnto him,

Wh~at I do thou knowef~ not now o; but thou ,/alt
Know kerEeafter·. I 13

SER~MON X.

On the Slavery of Vice.

2 PETER ii. I 9. While thley promise them liber·-

ty, they themftelves are the fervuants of corruption;
for- of whom a man is osvecome, of the fame
is kc brought in botndage. I 28

S ER M O N X

On the Importance of Public Worth~ip.

PsALMxxxvi. 8. Lor'd, I hlav~e loved thte babita

tion of t/p kou/e, and thre place where thline hoa-
nourl dwellethr, I 43

SERM~ON

S ER M ON " XII.

On the Fathlion of the World passing away.

r CoxRwr a. vii. 31.--Tle faJ3ion of th~is *worl~d

pafet awvay. 160

SERMhiON XIII[.

On Tranquillity of Mind.

PSALM XV. 5. He thatr doth these thingj //all

never be moved. z? 4

S ERM

~ O N Xlrv.

On the Maisfortunes of Men being chargeable on

themsel~ves.

PROVE RBS XiK. 5. 7/teJoal;Jfist of stan per-

yerteth kis wayr, and kis 7;eart fretteth agan;nJ
the Lord. 2 88

SER1MON XV.

On Integrity as the Guide of Life.

Paov. xi. 3. The in~tegrity of the upright }Z~all

guieLLL t~emt.--- 2o1

S ERM~O NXVI

On Subnitiron to the Divine WMill.

Jon ii. I c. --Skall cue receire gaoo at the handJ

of God, and/kell ?uee not receiv;e evlj ? 2I

SERMON>~L

SERIM ONr\ XVII.

On Friendship.

PRo v. xxvii. I o. Thine own friendt, adrt thy

father's fri-; ~ Len fo?-fake not. s3o

SER~M ONr XVIII~.

On the ConduaZ to be held wfith regard to Future

]Events.

PR ov. xxvii. I. BoafZ not thyself of to-m~or~row ;

for throu knzowef not Iwhat a day mayv bring folrt. 243

S E R MION XIX.

On following the Multitude to do Evil.

ExroDvs xxiii. 2. Thouf~alt ntot follow a 2Mul-

Oitucde to do evil.- 25

SEIRMRON XX.

On the 'Wifdom of God.

2 TIMOrav i. Z7. Now unto the King Eter-

nal, immortal, insiible, th~e only urye God, be
konour and gbloyfor ever anrdever. Amen. z 7

4

·r7

# SERMON I. On the Causes of Men's being weary of Life. JOB x. I. My soul is weary of my life.

SER M ON L

On the CA USES Of MEN S. being weary of LIPE,

Jos x. I.

Afy fo~ul is eapr~ry of my i~fe.----

;OB, in the Brim part of his days, was the gre2at
gs all the men of the Eaf. His poffffi~ons were large;
his family wras numerous and flourithing ; his own
chara~ter was fair and blamnelefs. Yet this man it
pleased God to visit with extraordinary reverses of
fortune. He was robbed of his whole fizbitance.
His sons and daughters all perished;; and he himself,
fallen from his high eflate, childless and reduced to
poverty, wyas smitten with fore disease. His friends
came about him, s~eemingly with the purpose of ad-
miniffering comfbrt. But from a harfhl and ill-
founded confiruiftion of the intention of Providence
in his disasters, they only added to his sorrows by
unjust upbraiding. Hence those many pathetic la-
mentations with wh~ich this book abounds, poured
forth in the most beautiful and touching firain ·of

vox.. Iv. B Oriental

Oriental poetry. In one of thofec hiours of lamenta-
tion, the sentiment in the text wa~s uttered; My74 /jul
is weary of mgy I~fe ; a s~entim~ent, whichl furelyr, if any
situation can juffify it, was allowable in the cafe
of Job.

IN si-tuations very di~Ffrent from that of' Job, un-

der calamities far les~s severe, it is not uncommon to
find fach a sentiment working in the heart, and
fometimess b~e~aking forth from thle lips of men.
Mlany, very many there are, who on one occasion or
other, have experienced this w~eariness of life, and
been tempted to with that it wtould come to a close.
Let tis now examine in w-hat circumfitances th~is feel-
ing may be deemed exculable; in what it is to be
held sinful; and under what reftri~ions we may, on
any occasion, be permitted to fay, My foul is w~eary
of my life.

I sunr.L confider the words of the text in three

lights; as exprefling,, Sis1~, T]he fecntiment of a dif-
contented man; Secondlyv, The sentiment of an as-
flifted man; Thirdly, The sentiment of a devout

man.

I. LE`T US confider the text as expreirng the fen-

timent of a dis~contented man ; with whom it is the
effufion of sp~leen, vexation, and diffatisfa~tion with
life, arising from causes neither laudable nor juffifi-
able., There are chiefly three classes of men who are
liable to this disease of the mind : the idle ; the luxu-
rious; the criminal.

- Si t/,

Firy?, Turrs wearinefsi of life: is often foulnd am~ong

the idle : perso~ns ·commonly in easy; circumnftances
of fortune, wtho are no~t engaged in any of the labo-
rious occupations of the world, and whio are, at the
fame time, without energy of m~ind to call them~ forth~
into any other line of a~ive exertion. In this lan-
gu~id, or rather tozrpid slat~e, they have so many vacant
hours, and are so much at a loss how- to fill up their
time, thaZt their fpilrits utterly finik; they become
b~urdeafo~me to t'aemfelves, and to every one ar·ound
them; and~ drag with pain the load of existence,
Wh~at a convincin~g proof is hereby afforded, that
man wcas designed by his Creator to be an adtive
being, wh~ose happiness is to be found not merelyr in
rets, but in occupation and purfilit ? The idle are
d!oomed to ifuffer the natural punithment of their in-
a~eivity) andc folly; anld for their complaints of the
tirefomrenef~s of life ther-e is no remedy but to awTake·
fr-om the dream of sloth, an~d to fill up wtith proper
emnployment the miserable vacancies of their days.
Let them study to become ufefull to the w-orld, a~nd
they fhadll soon become less bulthenfome to them-
feslves. They thall beginn to enjoy existence; they
thlall r~eap the rewards wlhich Providence has annexed
to virtuous adtivity ; and have no more cause~ to fay,
Olyr3 foul is wel-ary of my, i~fe.

NeT~, TH E luxurious and the diflipated forml ano-

ther class of men, among whom fitch complaints are
still more frequent. W~ith them they are not the
fruit olf idleness. Thes~e are men w4ho have been

Bs bui

bufiedl enough; they have run the whole race of
pleafulre; but they have run it with such inconfide-
rate speed, that it terminates in weariness and vexa-
tion of spirit. By the perpetual course of dissipation
in which they are engaged; by the excesses which
they indulge; by the riotous revel, and the midnight
or rather morning hours to which they prolong their
festivity; they have debilitated their bodies, and worn
out their spirits. Satiated with the repetition of their
accuffomed pleasures, and yet unable to find any
new ones in their place; wTandering round and
round their former haunts of joy, and ever returning
disappointed; weary of themselves, and of all things
.about them, their spirits are oppress~ed with a deadly
gloom, and the complaint burits forth of odious life
and amiferable world. Never are these complaints
more frequent than at the close of rounds of amuse-
ment, and after a long repetition of feital pleasures;
when the spirits which had been forced up, as by
some intoxicating drug, to an unnatural height, fiub-
fide into profound dejettion. What encreafes the
evil is, that it is not among the infirm and the aged,
but among the young, the gay, and the prosperous,
who ought to be reputed the happiest men, that this
drifafte oflife most frequently prevails.

WHEx persons of this defeription, in their peeviih

and splenetic hours, exclaim, My foul is wear~y of my
i~fe, let them know, let them be affiured, that this is
no other than the judgment of God overtaking them
dFor their vices and follies. Their complaints of mi-

fery

fey are entitled to no compafiion; nay, they are
sinful, because: they arifie from a sinful cause ; from
a mind broken and debased by luxury and: corrulpi-i
on. They are the authors of their own misery, by
having thrown away on the follies of the world thos~e
powers which God had beffowed on themn for nobler
ends.--Let them return to the duties of men and
Christians. Let them retreat from frivolity, and
abitain from exces~s. Let them fludy temperance,
moderation, and felf-command. By enter-ing on a
virtuous and manly course of amion, and applying
to the honourable discharge of the fuJnAions of their
flation, they wvill acquire diffe~renlt views. They~:
will ob3tain mlore real enjo1'ymet f 11. ndbeom
more wrilling to prolong it.--Bunt, after the warn-
ings which God has given them of their mnifbehaviour
by th~e inward mile-y they fulffer, if they iti11 continue
to run the famle intemperate roucnd, andl to drain
pleasure to the last dregs, it thatl com7e to pals, that
they who now contema life, and ar~e impatient of
its continuare;e, thall be the perfonsl most eager to
prolong it. When they behold it in reality draw in g
towards a clos~e, and are obliged to look forward to
what is to corne after it, they thall be rendered
aw~fully se~nsible of its value. TIhey will then grasp
eagerly at the flying hours ; anxious to flop them if
they could, and to employ every moment that remains
-in repairing their part errors, and in making their
peace, if possible, with God and heaven. .According
ats thley havep~wn, they now reap. They are reduced
to eat· the fr'uit of thern own ways, and to be filled with
thirct ownIR devlices.

THBERE

THERE TOrean DStfill a third class of those who

from dis~content are become weary of life; such as
have embittered it to themselves by the confcioul-
ness of criminal deeds. They have been, perhaps,
urnntatral to their parents, or treacherous to their
friends; they have violated their fidelity ; have en-
fulared and ruined the innocent ; or have occasioned
the death of other~s. There is no wonder that such
persons fllould lose their re~lish fo~r iife·. To whntetver
arts they m:ay have recourse~ for procuring a deceit-
ful peace, conficirence will at times exert its native
powver, and thatke over themn its terrific s~courge.
The internal mise~ry th~ey endure has sometimes arisen
to fulch a heiight, as has made them terminate, with
their owvn hands, an exiffence which they felt to be
infu~pport:able.-T'lo the complaints of such persons
nlo remredy can be fulrnithe~d, except what arises from
the bitterness of sincere and deep repentance. We
can do no more than exhort themn to atone as much
as is inl their power for the evils they have commit·-
tedi; and to fly to the divine mercy through Jesus
C~hriB for pardon and forgiveness. Let us now,

II. TUx x to persons of another defeription, and

coalider the sentiment in the text as extorted by situ-
ations of diffref~s. There are to variously multiplied
in the wYorld, and2 often: so opprefi~ve and heavy, that
afibruedlyr it is not uncommon to hear the afflifted com-
plain that they are weary of life. Their complaints,
if not always allowvabi, y'et certainly are more exi-
cala~rble than those which flow from the sources of

diffatisfa~tionp

dlifatisfaalon already mentioned. They are fu~ffe·-
ers, not so much th~rough their own mifcondua, as
through the appointment of Providence : andl there-
fore to persons in this situation it m~ay f~eemn more Ileed-
ful to offr consolation, than to give a mioni ion.
H-owever, as rthe evils w~hich prorduce this: im~patience
of lifJe are of different for~ts, a diffidtion^ mus;t be made
as to the situations which cal mloft excule it.

SOiMET'IMES, the ex~clamation in the text may be

occasioned by de~ep and overwhelming grief. When
they whom wre had most af~fedionately loved, and in
whom we had placed the felicity of our days, are
takEen awiay, ou~r conne~tion writh life appears to be
dissolved. ( W~hy thlould we survive thos~e co whom
(( our fouls were tied ? Would to God we had died
ac before them ! No w wh~en they are gone, all plea-
": fare and hope is gone as to us. To us the fuin no
i: longer thines with his usual brightness. No lon-
cc ger cheerfulnels invests the face of nature. On
ct every objeat a fad gloom appears to reft; and
ir every employment of life is become an oppr~effv
i' burden.'" With the feelings of thos~e who are thus
diffreffed we naturally ijympathile. They are fre-
quently the feelings of th~e mot't vir~tuous rand amiable
minds: And yet such persons must be told, that
grief may be indiulged so far as to become immo-
derate and improper. There are bounds wrhich are
preferibed to it both by reason and by religion. A
Christian onght not to mrozurn like thFofe who ha~ve no
hope. While he feels his s~orrows as a man, he thould

alfro

also fludy to bear them like a man, with fortitude;
and not abandon hims~elf to feeble and fruitleirs me-
lancholy. Let him have recourse to a firenuous
dis~charge of the duties of his flation, and confider it
as incumbent on him to make the best improvement
that he can of those comforts which Providence has
nill left in his poff'efiron.

AGAIN j it iOmetimes happens that, apart from

.grief, great reverses of worldly fortune give rife to the
lamentation in the text. This was the cafe with Job
himself. A s~udden fall from opulence into indigence
and want; some undes~erved disg~race incurred, or
some unexpelled cloud thrown over former reputa-
tion and fame; the unkindness and desertion of
friends, or the insolent triumph of enemies, are apt
to overwhelm the mlinds of men with gloom, and to
reduce them to be weary of life. To persons under
such calamities, sympathy is due. That sy~mpathy,
however, will be proportionedi to the degree in which
wve confider them as free from blame in the misfor-
tunes which they f~uffer. As far as, through their
own miifcondluA and vice, they have been the authors
to themrieives of those misfortunes, we withdraw our
pity. The burthen which they have brought onl
th~emselves we leave them to bear as they canl; and
with little concern we hear them exclaim that their
sa~uls ar-e welarly of I~fe.-Not only so, but even in cafes
where calamities have fallen on the innocent, to the
pity wihich we feel for them will be joined a secret
contempt, if we perceive that together with their

pros~perity,

prosperity, their courage anld fortitude have also for-
faken them. To abandon themselves to dejelbt~on
carries no mark of a great or a worthy mind. I~n-
Read of declaring thrat his foul is wreary of his i~fe, it
becomes a brave and a good man, in the evil day,
with firmness to maintain his post; to bear up againit
the flor-m; to have recourse to those advantages
w~hich, in the worit of times, are always left to in-
tegrity and virtue ; and never to give up the hope that
better days may yet arise.

IT is good for persons in fach situations to remarkB

that, though Job was for a long: while severely tried
Sby a varietyr of distresses, yet his condition was not
left fin~ally unhappy. On the contrary, the goodness
of that G~odt wh-om he had se~rved returnmed at lall, to
thine upon him with greater brightness than ever.
Hlis riches were reflored to him twyofold. The losses
in his family wer-e repaired by a new offspring.
His namre became again renowned in the East; and
the latter end of fob, w·e are told, w~as mollre le~ tann
the kg innin g.

Bv- still, it mayr be afkied, wil~l not the continu-

ance of long and severe disease jufitfy the exclam..:lon
in the text, My f~oul is woeary of ;nyl lyc P To persons
waho are forsaken by all the bleflings of hiealth, and
who have no prof~ped3 left, but that of lin~gering under
sicknes~s or pain, Job's complaint may atfuredly be
fo~rglven more than to any others. Thlough it mig~ht
he fulggefiedi to them, tF at even in old age and sic k-

B 3 ne E,

ne~ss, except in very extreme cafes, some resources
are always left, of which they may avail themselves
for relief ; yet it muff be admitted, that lawfully they
may with their fufferings to be brought to an end.
Still, however, they muff remember, that resignation
to the pleasure of heaven continues to be their duty
to the last. As long ais any part remains to be adted,
as long as their continuance in the world can serve
any valuable purrpofe, it is more honoulrable to bear
the load with magnanimity, than to give way to a
querulous alnd dejeated spirit. It remains,

III. To address myself to another order of men,

among whom, though more rarely than among those:
wthom I hrave described, the fentimnent of the: text is
to be found. They are persons who have no parti-
cular complaint to make of the injuffice of the world,
or the affli~ions of their slate. But they are tired of
the vanity of the world, of its insipid enjoyments,
and its perpetuall~y revolving circle of trifles and fol-
lies. They feel thems~elves made for some hing
greater and nobler. They are difguffed. and hurt
with the ferenes of wickedness that are often passing
before their eyes. Their hearts are warmed with the
thoughts of a purer and more perse& existence de-
signed for man; and in the moments of as~piration
after it, the exclamat~ion boreaks; forth, My fo~ul is
Iweatyv of my life.--O that I and wings like a deve !I for
'ten I would fly awaY and be at rs~. La thenl I wUould
weandr rfar ofP and remain in the wilder nef . I w~ould
kajien m~yef"cape f rom th~e windy fll~orm and tempthej. ~For

I have

I have seen violence and firyje in the city. Wickedne;~ is
inr the mid; throf ; dreet and guile dearr t ort fnrm ker
frects, "-- n th'is view the sentiment in the text may
sometim~es be that of a devout man. But fulch per-
sons I muf1 admonish~, that their de~votion, how fin-
cere however, is not altogeth~er of a rational and:
chastened ktind. It was from this temper that, in
former agres of the church, the numerous race fp-ruJng
of anchorets, hermits, and all the various orders whor
voluntarily abandoned the world, to p~eople the lone-
1y defalrts and the monailic retreat. The ordinary
course of things seemed below them as candicates
for heaven. The concerns of the world appeared
ulnworthy of their attention, and dangerous to their
virtue. Br~eathing after a higher slate, they imagined
th~at th~ey could not abitrad themfrelves too much
from every earthly amdIem~ent, as long as they ·were
forced! to remain in this place of exile.

LET us b~eware of all ruch im~aginary refinements

as produce a total dlifclifh of car p~resent condition.
Tiey are, for the most part, graftedt either on diftp-
pointed purfaits, or on a melancholy and fplIenetic
cait of m~ind. Theyr aire far f·rro contri"buigt
happiness, and are inconSIstent with all the active
virtues of man. Trhis life deserves not indeed to be>
Put in competition with that blefiibd immortality to
which God has raised our hopes. But such as it is,
it is the gift of God.' It is the fpjhere in which his
wisdom has placed us, and appointed us to aB our
parts. As long as it lasts, we iunu neither flight the

duties

*r P~al~r. Iv.6,- r

duties which it requires, nor undervalue the innocentr
enjoyments which it offers. It belongs to a man to
live among men as his brethren; which he who de-
clares himfieff weary of life is not qualified to do with
propriety.

THUS I have placed before you, in various views,

the sentiment in the text; and have thlewn in what
circumfftances, and from what causes, that dif~relifhz
ofC life arises which is often found among mankind.
On a review of the whole, we cannot but acknow-
ledlge, that it is oftener to be ascribed to our own
vices and follies, than to any other cause. Among
the multitudes in the world, to whom at this day life
is burthenfome, the far greater number is of those
who have rendered it to to themselves. T~heir idle-
ness, their luxury and pleasures, their criminal deeds,
their immoderate passions, their timidity and baseness
of mind, have deje~ted them in s~uch a degree, as to
make them weary of their exiflence. Preyed upon
by discontent of their own creating, they complain
of life when they ought to reprehend themselves.

VARIOUS aREiRioDS there doubtless are in the

world; many perso~ns with whom we have cause to
fy:mpathile, and whom we might reasonably forgive
for wishing death to close their sorrows. But of the
evils which embitter life, it muff be admitted, that
the greater part is such as we have brought on our-
selves; or at least such as, if we were not wanting to
ourselves, might be toleraibly supported. W~hen we

c ompu te

compute the numb ers of thofet who are diipof~ed to
fay, IMy foul is *wearyv of my i~fe, some there are to
wihom this sentiment is excusable; but many more
amone whom it is in no waya juffifiable. I admit
that, among the worthiest and the best, there may be
dark moments in which some feeling of this nature
may be apt to intrude upon their minds. But with
them they are only moments of occasional and passing
Sgloom. They soon reca~llthe vigour of their minds ;
and return with fatisf2Adion to the discharge of t~he
duties, and to a participation of the enjoyments oaf

life.

ON E great cRuie Of meD'S becominig weary of life

is grounded on the mifiaken views of it which they
have formed, and the fals~e hopes which they have
entertained from it. They have expeded a scene of
enjoyment ; and when they meet with disappoint-
ments and diffreffes, they complain of life, as if it
had cheated and betrayed them. God ordained no
such poffeffion for man on earth as continued plea-
sure. For the wife~t purposes he designed our slate
to be checquered with pleasure and pain. As fisch
let us receive it, and make the be(1 of what is doom-
edto be our lot. Let usremain perfunded, that ilm-
ple and moderate pleasures are always the best; that
virtue and a good conscience are the surest foundati-
ons of enjoyment; that he who serves his God and
his Saviour with the purest intentions, and governs
his pafiions with the greatest care, is likely to lead
the happiest life. Following these principles, we

sha~ll

# SERMON II. On Charity as the End of the Commandment. I TIMOTHY i. 5. Now the end of the commandment is char yout of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

th~all meet with fewer occaflons of being wteary of
life; we sh~all always find fame faitisf-aaions mixedt
with its crosses; and thall be enabled to wait with a
humble and'contented mind till the Almighty, in his
appointed time, finish our slate of trial, and remove
us to a more blessed abode.

SERMON II.

On CAnrrTY as the End of the COMMANDMENT.

I TIMOTHY i. 5-

NOwL the end of the comnmandme~nt is char~it~y out of a pure~

heart, andl of a good con/cience, an1d of faith unfepignedt.

IT appears from this chapter, that one design of the
Apoitle, in writin: to Timnothiy, was to guard him
agains~t certain corrupters of Chriftin d'ie h
had already aris~en in the chrurch. To their false re-
presentations of religion he opposes that general view
of it which is given in the texct. Such fulmmaries of
religion frequently occur in the sacred writings ; and
are extremely us~eful. ]By the com~prehensive energy
with which they express the great lines of our duty,
they both imprint the a on our memory, and br-ing
them home to our cons~cience with force. In the

progress

progreis of this discourse, I hope to make it appear,
that the words of the text afford a most enlarged and
infirudive: view of religion in all its chief parts.

THE Apofile pronounces charity to be the enld

or icope of the comrmandme~nt, that is, of the law of
God. At the fame time, in order to prevent mif-
takes on this most important fubje~t, he fubjoins to
charity certain adjunats, as necessary to qualify it,
and to render the -Christian char~aer complete.
T hefe are the pure heart, the good confiencel, and faith
#ufeigned. In treating of there~, I thall thew the na-
ture of their connexion with charity, and the impor-
tance of their being always united with it.

The end of th~e commandmernt is charityr. Charity is

the fame with benevolence or love; and is the term
uniformly employed, in the New Tefiament, to de-
note all the good affeAions which we ought to bear
towards one another. It consists not in speculative
ideas of general benevolence floating in the head, and
leaving the heart, as speculations too often do, un-
touched and cold. N~either is it confined to th~at
indolent good nature, wvhich makes it reft s~atisfied
with being free from inveterate malice, or ill-w·ill to
our feltowt-creatures, without prompting us to be of
service to any. True charity is an a~tive principle.
It is not properly a single virtue; but a difpolition
residing in the heart, as a fountain whence all the vir-
tues of benignity, candour, forbearance, generosity,
compassion, and liberality, flow, as so many native

firearn

fireams. From general good w~ill to all, it extends
its mnfluence particularly to thos~e with whom· we fland·
in nearest conneltion, and who are direaly within
the [phere of our good offices. From the country
or community to which we belong, it descends to
the smaller associations of neighbourhood, relations,
and friends; and spreads itself over the wYhole circle
of social and domefitic life. I mean not that it im-
ports a promiscuous undiflinguiflhing aff~e~ion, which
gives every man an equal title to our love. Charity,
if we thuould enldeavour to carry it 10 far, would be
rendered an impra~ticable virtue, and would resolver
itself into mer-e words, without affedrinlg the heart.
True charity attempts not to ihut our eyes to the
diftindion between good and bad men ; nor to warm
our hearts equally to those who befriend and thoee
who injure us. It reserves our eff eem for good men,
and our complacency for our ferieds. Towards our
enemies it inspires forgiveners- and humanity. It:
breathes universal candour, and liberality of senti-
ment. It forms gentlenes~s of temper, and didtates
affability of manners. It prompts correlponding
lympathies with them who rejice and them who-
weep. It teaches us to flight and des~pise no man.
Charity is thle comforter of the afflieted, the protec-
tor of the oppressed, the reconciler of ditTerences, the
intercessor for offenders. It is faithfulnef~s. in the
friend, public spirit in the magoiffrate, equi~ty and
patience in the judge, moderation in the sovereign,
and loyalty in the fubjea. In parents it is care and
attention s in children it is revecrence and fu~bmillio-n.

In

In a word, it is the foul of social life. It is the fun
that enlivens and cheers the abodes of men. It is
like rke· dero of Hermon, fay s the Pfal mist, and the dleco
that J~de/ndt on the mountains of Zion, *wkere the Lord
comwranded theo b~leing, euen lfe for evermore*.

SUCn charity, says the text, is the end of the com-

man Imenrt. This assertion of the Apostle is undoubt-
edly conf'onant to all that reason can su~ggest on the
fubjeA of religion. For, on considering the nature
of thle Supreme Being, reason gives us much ground
to believe, that the chief design of all the command-
ments which he has given to men , is to promote their
happ'inei's. Independent and felf-fufficient, that
Supreme Being has nothing to exaA from us for his
own inltereft or felicity. By our services he cannot
be brenefited, nor by our offences injured. When
he created the world, it was benevolence that moved
him to confer existence. Wfhen he made himself
knowns to his creatures, benevolence in like manner
mov ed him to give them laws for their condlult.
Benevolence is the [pring of leg~islation in the Deity,
as much as it was the motive of creation. He ifTued
his commands on earth on purpose that by obedience
to thlem, his creatures might be rendered happy
amonlg themselves in this life, and be prepa~red for
greater happiness in another. Charity, especially
w~ho ajoined wYith purity, good conscience, and faith,
is ob~viously the great infirument for this purpose;
and therefore must needs possess the chief and primary
place in thle laws of God.

ACCORDkNG LY,

* P;Cat, exxill. 3*

AcnCODTmcL~y, thlrOUghout thle N~ew Teflamntc·

it is u n iformly prefeated to us in~ the fame lighit in
which it is pilaced by the text. Th~iis is knowln to all
who have any acqua~intanlce withi the sacred books.
Ch·arity is term~ed t~ze / ling~ of te lawv, and the
bond of peJLr&&nef. It wa2s affilm~ed by our blessed
Ltord as the cha~rad;~erift: eal dif inl:-on of his difrcisl~es
and in thait mangafilcent e;I ogium1? whlich the Ap.:fr e
raul1 iTnrnun1ceS , , ,

''--roa1 it, in t ue turriteen~th chaIpter of

the Bs epiftie to the Corinth~ans, it is exprersly pr"efer-
reds by himn to faith andi Ccoe. This deserves to be fe-
rioufly considered b y th~ose wJho are ap~t to undervalue
ch'arity, as an appenda;ge of whazt they coiitempitu-
oufly call MIorality; w-hile they confinie true religion
to fomre favourite tenets and oble~rvances of thie~r
own, which they confider as comprehiending the fumi~-
of what is acceptable to God. Such pe~rsons nhow
-themselves pr.ofoundly ignorant of the nature of re-
ligion, and may too often be fufpedted of boeino-
firangers to its influence. For, as the apostle Jobsr
reaso3ns, lb thats loved~ not hi brother, whoum be Lait een,
how canY be love that GodC whocm be X·ah not feen" 7

ATr the fame time, while I aicribe to charity that

high place mn the iyllem of religion, which jufily
belongs to it, I am nlot to'be und!eritood ·as confinincr
all religion to this difpolOition alone. Wiith much
wii dm and propriety, the text hath annexed to it
certain adjundts, without which neither the cha?-afer
of a good man can be completed, not charjly its~elf
exercised to advantage. To the consideration o~f

* I Johnl iv. P0 ter

on thiis branch of· the ifubjeA, as there is ground to
belie~ve, that mlany pretenld to) poii~efs charity, without
propeprly underftandi:;ig its nature and emlcacy. There
hans been ?:lways anl unhappi'iy tendency amiong m~en
to runl to extremesr, on on;e fidre or other, in matters
of reli ion. As one ret of me·n, who eniploy ail
their zeal on righ t b~elief, are prone to uncer~va ne
Sood pmacice:; so anlotlter ·et, w1ho with to be efreem!-
ed r~ational. ChlritianTs, are inetinied to reft the whole
of their duty on char itabler deedsl, while they overlook
certain difpoGlitins and habics wlhich ought always to
accompany them. It is therefobre of importance,
that the m;tiakes of both these clatfes of men thould
'oe reatified, in order that religion may be held forth
to the world in its complete form, and in its full and
unldiminifhed luff~re.

THE first qualification of charity pointed out in

the text is purity; chrarity outof a sure he~art. Purity
includes the virtues which belong to the individual,
considered in himself, and with refpeLa to the govern.
ment of his desires and pleafulres. It hath its feat in
the heart; but extends its influence over so, much of
the outward condua, as to form a great and material
part of the chara~er. They are only the pure in Leart
we are told by our Saviour, cJake can f-ee God*. It is
also true, that they are only the pure~ ineanrt who can
properly discharge their duties towards mankind.
Inordinate love of pleasure, intemperance, fen~ibah.
ty, and a course of irregular life, are inconsistent,

not

a Matth. u. 8.

not only with the general charafter of a good man,
but also with the peculiar exercises of charity and
benevolence. For nothing is more certain, than that
habits of licentious indulgence contribute to stifle all
the good affettions ; to harden the heart; to nourifhl
that felfifh attachment to our own vicious pleasures
wrhich render~s us insensible to the circumffances and
wants of others. A profligate man is seldom found
to be a good hu~sband, a good father, or a beneficent
neighbour. How many young persons have at sirs1
set out in the world with excellent difpolitions of
heart; generous, charitable, and humane; kinld to
their friends, and amiable among all with whom they
had intercourse ? And yet how often have we seen
all those fair appearances unh~appily blaited in thle
progress of life, merely through the influence of loose
and corrupting pleafilres; and those very persons
who promised once to be bleflings to the world, funk
down, in the end, to be the burthen and nuisance of
society The profusion of expence which their
pleasures occasion, accounts in a great mearlre for
the fatal reverse that takes place in their charafter.
It not only drains thle sources whence the fireams of
beneficence thould flow, but often obliges them to
become oppreflive and cruel to those whom it wasj
their duty to have patronised and fiypported.

Pa rr Y Of heart and condud5t m~uff therefore be

held fundamental to charity and love, as well as to
general piety and virtue. The licentious, I know,
ar~e ready to imagine, th~at their occaiionlal deeds of

hounty;

bounty and liberality will atone for many of their
private disorders. But, besides that such plans of
compensation for vices, by some supposed virtues,
are always fallacious, the licentious may be alifured,
that it is an appearance only of charity, not the
reality of it, to which they can lay claim. For that
great virtue consists not in occasional a~tions of hu-
manity, in fits of kindness or compassion, to which
bad men may be prompted by natural inftinQ; but
in the fleady and regular exercise of thos~e good affec-
tions, and the dis~charge of thos~e important duties
towards others, for which the licentious are in a: great
measure disqualified. Their criminal propenrities
direa their inclinations to very different objeas and
p'urfuits; and often determine them to s~acrifice the-
juff rights of others, s~ometimes to fagcrifice the peace
and the reputation of the innocent, to the gratifica-
tion of their pafions. Such is the pernicious influ-
ence wrhich the love of pleasure has on the good qua-
lities of its devoted votaries. The impure heart is
like the stagnant and putrifying lake, which sends
forth its poisonous exhalations to corrupt and wither
ev·ery plant that grows on its banks.

THE second qualification annexed to Charity, in

the text, is, that it be ofa good conf~ience. By this I
undeditand the Apostle to mean, that charity be in
full confiffency with juffice and integrity; that the
con/cience of the man who purposes to perform altions
of benevolence, be free from the reproach of having
negleated the primary duties of equity. For, un-

doubtedly

doubtedly, juffice is a virtue primary to charity ;
that is, it muff: go bef'ore it in all its exertions. One
muff frirt do jugly before he can pretend that he lwes
merc~y.--Religion, my friends, in order to render it
useful to mankind, m~uff be brought down by its
teachers fr~om the sublimity of fp>eculation to the
funccions and occupations of ordlinary life. It is
my duty to adn onifh you, that you muff, in th'e
firfl place, be fair in all your dealings wilth others;
you muff discharge the debts you owe; you must
pay the wrages due to your servants and dependants;
you muff provide for your own family, and be just
to the claims of relations; then,, and then only, you
can, from a good con/cience, as the text en joins, perform
cats of generofty and mercy.

TmIs leads to a refle~ion which here deserves oulr

attention; that, in order to fulfil that chr2~it~y whLick~
is theL end of thre commnandmenlt, oeconomy, and good
order in private life, ought to be carefully fludied by
sll Christians. This ismore closely connedted with
a good con~cien~ce, t~han many seem inclined to admit.
(Economy, when prudently and temperately con-
du~ted, is the safeguard of many virtues; and is in
a particular manner favourable to the exrertions of be-
nevolence. He who by inconsiderate conduA is
mnjuring his airculmfances, will probably in time
lose the inclination, and Lertainly is depriving trim-
self of the means of being ferviceabie to his brethren.
Some important exertions, indeed, there are of cha-
rity, wthich have no conne~5ion with giving or be-

flowing

flowing. Candrour, forgiveness, gentlenrers, and fympa-
thy, are due to our brethren at a~lltimefs, and in ever~y
situation of our own fortune. The poor have op-
portunities for displaying ter~e virtues, as well as thez
rich. They wrho have nothing to give, can often
afford r~elief to others, by imparting wrhat they feel.
But, as far as benefxcence is included in charity, w~e
ought always to remember, that juffice muff, in the
first place, be held inviolably sacred.

THE wifdtom of scripture remarkably appears, in

the connexion pointed out by the text between chiarity
ank'g~ood conf-lence or integrity; a connexion whlich I
apprehend is often not attended to so ~much as it de-
se~rves. Among the frugal and industrious, gr~eat re-
gard is commonly paid to juffice. They will not
defrauld. TPhey will not take any unlawvful advan-
tage in their dealings : and satisfied with this degree
of goodconf/cience, they are firangers to that charity,
which isthe ed of te cormmndtment. They ~are hard
and unfeelinlg. They are rigid and severe in their
dtemands. They' know nothing of humanity, for-
givenefs, or compaifion.--Among another class of
men, who have been more liberally educated, and
whio are generally of a higher rank in life, juffice is
apt to be considered as a virtue less noble than chari-
ty; and which may, on some occasions be dispensed
with. They are humane, perhaps, and tender in
their feelings. They are easy to their dependants.
They can be liberal, even to profusion. While, at
the fame time, they are accumulating debts, which

they

they know thems~elves unable to discharge. Their
affairs are allowed to run into confuiion. (Econo-
my and good order are negleaed. The innocent,
in great numbers, f~uffer materially through their
mifmnanagement : And all the while they aiffrme to
themselves the praise of being generous and good-
hearted men. This surely is not that char~ity which
the Gospel en joins ; and which, in its very essence,
involves god con/~cience and integrity. He who pre-
tends to do good to his brethren, without first doine
them juffice, ·cannot be accounted their real friend.
True charity is not a meteor, which occasionally
glares; but a luminary, which, in its orderly andd
r~egular courf'e, dispenses a benignant influence.

THE third and last adjund connetted in the text

with charity is, that it be of faith unfeignred. Faith,
io the scripture sens~e of it, inlcludes the whole of
rehigious principles refpeaing God, and refpeping
Christ. Good principles, without good pradice, I
confers, are nothing; they are of no avail in the
fight of God, nor in the effimation of wife men.
But pradtice not founded on principle is likely to
be always unitable and wavering; and, therefore, the
faith of religious principles enters, for a very confi-
derable thare, into the proper discharge of the duties
of charity.

ITr will be admitted that, without faith, our du-

ties to~wards God cannot be properly performed.
You may be afirued that your duties towards mnen

will always greatly fulffer from the want of it. Fai~th,
when pure and genuine, iipplies to ever~y part of'
virtue, and in particular to the virtue of charity,
m~any motives and affzif~ances, of which the unbe-
liever is deffitute. He who aAs from Ifaith aats upon2
the high principle of r~egard to the God wIho hath~
made him, and to the Saviour who redeems him;
w·hich w~ill often fimirulate him to his duty when other
prinlciples of benlevolence become faint and lan guid,
or are crof~ed by opposite interests. When he con-
fiders himself as pursu~ing the approbation of that
divine Being, from wh~om love descends, a sacred
enthufiafin both prompts, and consecrates, his cha-
ri tabledilpofitions. Regar-dless of men, orof human
r~ecompence, he is carried along by a higher imnpulfe.
He aAs w\ith the spirit of a follower of the Son of
God, who not only has enjoined love, but has en-
forced it by the example of laying down his life for
m~rankind. WThatever he does in behalf of his fellowv-
creatures, he considers hiimfelf as doing, in s~ome
degree, to that divine Petrfon, who hath said, Inaf-
nar ch ai s ye have d~one it ulnto one' of thre Ilea of tkefe mtY
br~c//~Edren ye hav~ce dIone it un~tO me*1. Hence charity is
wiith hiim not only a moral virtue, but a Christian
grace. It acquires add~itional dignity and energy
fr~om beinec conneEted w~ith the heavenly state and the

heavenly~ ~ ~

inaians e mingles with beings ofa

hligh~er order, while he is discharging his duty to his
fellow·-creatulres on earth , and by joining: faith and
piety to good works, he comnpletes the charader of
a Chrtitian.

vol.. Tv. C TausE

r M~atth. nyv. 40.

THUs I have endeavoured to explain the full sense

of that comprehensive view of religion which is given
in the text. I have thewrn in what refpeats chanrity
joined with th~e pure beart, the gaood conscience, and fairth
ucnfeigned, formls the end of thre commandrment. Let us
ever keep in view those essential parts of a virtuous
charader, and preserve them in their proper union.
Thus fhalll our religion rife into a regular and wlell-
proportioned edifice, where each part gives firmness
and support to another. If any one of those mate-
rial parts be wanting in the firumure ; if, out of our
fyfilem of charity, either purity, or jufitce, or faith,
be left, there will be cracks and flaws in the building
which prepare its ruin.

Turs is indeed one of the greatest and most fre-

quent errors of men, in their m~oral condudt. T'hey
take hold of virtue by pieces and corners only.
Few are so deprav~ed as to be without all sens~e of
duty, and all regard to it. To some moral qualities,
which appear to them am~iable or efiminable, almost
all men lay claim ; and on there they reft their worth
in their own efimi~ation. But there scattered pieces
of virtue, not unitinga into one whole, nor forming a
confiffent charafter, have no powerful influence on
their general habits of life. From various unguarded
quarters they lie open to temptation. Their lives are
fullof contradi~tion, and perpetually flu £uate be-
·tween good- and evil. Virtue can neither- rif~e to its
native dignity, nor attain its proper rewards, until
all its chief parts be joined together in our charader,
sand eert an equal authority in regulating our condu:C.

SER~MON

# SERMON III. On our Lives being in the Hand of God. Preached at the beginning of a New Year. PSALM xxxi. 15. My times are in thy hand.

S ERM~O N III.

O~n our LIVES being in the Hand of Gob.

(Preacked at the beginning of a New Ye~ar." J

Ps aL as xxxi. I J.

Afyr timesr are in dyv hand.---

JIHE fun that rolls over our heads, the food that
w·e receive, the reit that we enjoy, daily admoniIh
us of a superior power, on whom the inhabitants of
the earth depend for light, life, and fliblikence.
But as long as all things proceed in their ordinary
course·; when day returns after day with perfeB
timilairity ; when our life- seems itationary, andl no-
thing occurs to warn us of any approaching change,
thle religious s~entiments of d~ependence are apt to be
forgotten. The great revolutions of time, when they
come round in their Rtated order, have a tendency to
force foome impressions of piety even on the moR uni
tlrinkin~ minds. They both mark our exiitence on
earth to be adivancing towards its close, and exhibit
orur condition as continually changing; while each

Ct returningo

a January tith, I71931

returning year brings along with it new events, and
at the fame time carries us forwards to the conclusion
ofall. Wfe cannot, on such occasions avoidl per.
ceiving, that there is a Supreme Beinlg who holds in
his hands the line of our existence, and measures "out
to each of us our allotted portion of that line. Be-
yond a certain limit, we know that it cannot be ex-
tended ; and long before it reach that limit it may be
cut asunder by an invisible hand, which is firetched
forth over all the inhabitants of the world. T-hen
-naturally arises the ejaculation of the text, My times
`O God, aret inr thfy hand. "L My fate depends on thee.
CL The duration of my life, and all the events which
"L in future days are to fill it, are entirely at thy dif-
"C pofal."-Let us nowi, when we have juff s~een
one year close, and another begin, meditate s~eriously
on this f~entimnent. Let us confider what is implied
in ozur imes bei'ng inz~ thre hand of Godt; and to what im-
'provement this meditation leads.

THE text evidently implies, firit, that oucr timzet

are not in our owun hand; that, as our continuance
in life depends not on ourselves, so the events which
are to happen, while life remains, are unknown to
us, and not under our own direrfion. Of this we
may behold many a proof, when we look back on
the tranfa~ions of the year which is juff finished.
Recolle~tion will readily pref~eat to us a busy period,
filled up with a mixture of business and amusement,
of anxieties and cares, of joys and sorrows. We
have talked, perhaps, and aded much. We have formed

many

many a plan; in public or in private life, we have
been en~raged in a variety of pudiisits. Let me now
afkc hour small a pr sportion J1s all that has happened
could have been foreseen, or foretold by us~ ? How
many things have occurre ,d of which we had no
expeEtation ; fame, per aps ,hthv ucee
beyond our hopes; many, ai, ta aebfle
us contrary to our w~i How often were each of
us admonithed that there are s~ecret wheels, which,
unseen by us, bring about the revolutions of human
affairs; and that, while man was devising his way,
Providence was direaling the event ?

T~a icne s nw lofed. The tale of that

year has been told. We look forward to the year
wvhich is beginning; and what do we behold there ?
-All1, my brethren, is a blank to our view: A dark
unknown presents itself. We are entering on an
untried, undiscovered country, where, as each f~uc-
ceeding month comes forward, new [cenes may
open ; new obje~s mray engage our attention;
changes at home or abroad, in public or in private
affairs, may alter the whole slate of our fortune.
N~ew conne~tions m~ay be at hand to be formed, or
old ones just about to be dit'olved; perhaps, we may
have little mor~e to do with this world, or with any
of its conne~tions; we may be flanding on the verge
of time and life, and on the point of pafiung into a
new· region of existence. In thor~t, the profpeAt
before us is full of awYful uncertainty. Life and
death, profp'erity and adverfityI, health and ficknels,

Joy,

joy and trouble, lie in one undiftingulfhable mass,
where our eye can defecry nothirig through the obfcu.
rity that wraps theni up.

WHILE it is tilUS Certaill that our at~ies are not at

our own difpof~ai, we are taught, by the text, that
they are in thec kand of Godt. This may be considered
in two niews. Our times are in the hand of God,
as a rlipreme Difpofecr of events. They are in the
hand of God as a G~uardian and a Father.

Our times, I fay, ar-e in the Itand of God, as a fu·

premne irrefifltible Ruler. All that is to happen to us
in this and the fulcceeding years of our life,--if any
facceeding years we shall be allowed to fee,-has
been foreknown and arranged by God. The firi:
viewr, under which human affairss present thems~elves
to us, is that of confused and irregular succession.
The events - of the world seem thrown together by
chance, like the billows of the sea, tumbling and
tossing over each other, without rule or order. All
that is apparent to us is the flu~tuation of hu-man
caprice, and the operation of human paffiocns.. We
fee the firife of ambition, and the etfforts of firatagem,
labouring to accompifhh their f'everal purposes among
the societies of men. But it is no more than the
surface, the outside of things, that we behold.
Higher counsels, than it is in our power to trace,
are concerned in the tranfadions of the world. If
we believe in God at all, as the Governor of the
universe, we: ruit~ believe that without his provi-

denace,

dence, nothing happens on earth. He over-rules,
at his pleasure, the pafi'ons of men. He bends all
their designs into subserviency to his decree. H~e
makes thes wrath of man to pratfe him ; and reflrains, in
what measure he thmnks fit, the r~main~der of scratk*."
He brings forth in their course all the generations of
men. When the time is come for their entering
into light, they appear on the flage ; and wYhen the
time fixed for their dimiio~:n a~rrivces, he chaghgcs
tjieir. coulLnulnace, andi feuds themn aw~ay. The tcime
of our appearing is now come, after our anceffors
had left their place, and gone down to the duff.
We are at present permitted to art our part freely,
and without confi~raint. N~o violence is done to our
inclination or choice. But afiruredly ·there is not a,
day of our life, nor an event in that day, but was
foreseen by God. That fucceffionn of occurrences,
which to us is full of obs~curity and darknes~s, is all
light and order in his view. He fees from the be-
ginning to the end ; and brings forward every thing
that happens, in its due time and place.

Oulr times a~re altogether in his hand. L~et us take

notice, that they are not in the hands either o~f our
enemies, or of our friends. It is not in the power
of man to thor-ten or to prolong our life, more or
less than God has decreed. Enemies may employ
craft or violence in their attacks; friends mayT em-
ploy fkiill and vigilance for the preservation of our,
healthl and safety ; but boteh the one and the othe~r

can have effeQ only as far as God permits. They
wrorkc mn subserviency to his purpose. By him they
ar-e hleld in invisible bonds. To the exertions of all
human agents he s~ays, H-i~therto.;Slt~ thu comne, ard no

TVTE are to observe nlext, that ourP times at e rn ithe

Klarnd of God,~ not only ~as an almihty Dilpof~er, but
as; a merciful Guardian and Father. We are by no
means to imagine, that from race to race, and from
y-ear to year, God sports with the lives of succeeding
generations of men, or, in the mere w·antonnels of
arbitrary· powecr, brings them forth, and sends them

away. o I if' we have any cojnfidence in what

eithier the light of nature su~ggests to all men, or wha~t
the revelation of the gospel has confirmed to Chris.
tians, w~e have full ground to believe, that the ad-
m~inistration of human affairs is conduc'ed with
infinite wis~dom and goodness. The counsels of the
Almighty are indeed too deep for our limited un-
delrrandings to trace. His path~, may often, as to
u1s, be in de sea, and his footyeps in the mighty watelrs ;
while, nevertheleifs, all his paths ar-e mercY and tnruth.
He who, from the benignity of his nature, ereded
this world for the abode of men ; He who furnished
it so r; bly; for our accommodation, and flored it
with so much beauty for our entertainment i He
who, since firit we entered into life, hath followled
us with such a variety of mercies, s~urely can have
no pledrure in our disappointment and diffrefs. He
knows our frame ; ke rememrbers we are duf ; and looks

to frail man, we are aiftwed, wfith Jich pity as a ~fatZlr
beareth to htis chlildrens.~ To him we mlay safely com-
mit ourselves, and all our concerns; as to one wlho
is beit qualified, both to direA the incidents pr'oper
to happen to us in this world, and to judge of the
time when it is fit for us to be removed from it.

EVEN that ignorance of our future deffiny in life,

of which we sometimes complan, is a signal proof
of his goodneis. He hides from us the view of fu-
turity, because the view would be dangerous and
ovierpowlering. It would either dispirit us with
villons of terror, or intoxicate us byv the disclosure of
falccefs. The veil which covers from our fight the
events of ·this and of succeeding years, is a veil
wocve~n by the hand of mercy. Our times are~ in his
haznd; and we have reas~on to be gl~ad that in his hand
they are kept, thut out fromn our view. Submrit to
hiis pleasure as an almighty Ruler we must, becaus~e
w~e cannot refifl him;. Eqlual reason there is for
trussing inlhim as aGuardian, under whole disposal

SUCH is the import of thle t~ext, that out rtimies ar~e

in thec hand of G~od. Our timnes arei unknown to us,
and niot unider our owrn directtioin. Th1·ey are in the
hands of G~od as a Go·:vernior aind Ruler: in the
ha~nds of God as a: Guardian and F~ather. T~hese
separate viewvs of the text r~equire, on our part, fepa-
r~ate unprovemients.

C 3 SLEING

*F Pf'alm clii. I 3, t4.

SEEING Ottr times are n~ot in our own handt,

feeing futurity is unknow~n to us, let us, firit, check
the vain curiosity of penetrating into what is to
come. ConjeAure about futurity we often muf1;
butt upon all conje~tures of what this year is to pro-
duce, let us lay a proper restraint. Let us wait till
Go0d thall bring forward events in their proper
course, without withing to discover what he has
concealed ; left, if the dlifcovery were granted, we
thould fee many things, which we would with not
to have seen.

TSHE IDOl COmmon propensity of mank~ind is to

flore futurity with whatever is agreeable to them ;
.especially in those periods of life when imagination
is lively, and hope is ardent. Looking forward to
the year now beginning, they are: ready to promnife
themfetlves much fromn the foundations of prosperity
which they have laid; from the friendships and con-
nleaions which they have secured; from the plans
of conduta which they have formed. Alas ! how
deceitful do all these dreams of happiness often
prove? W~hile many are saying in secret to their
hear ts, To-morrow f ~all beas thris day, and more abun-
antnly, w~e are obliged in return to fay to them,
Boafr not tilyfelf of to-morr~owt, for th~ou kno~Wef not whuat
a dayC maigt br-ilg forth~. I do not mean, that in the
unknowrn profpedc which lies before us, we thould
forebode to ourselves nothin~r but: misfortunes.- -
MP~ay it be the pleas~ure of Heaven that this year· run
un in a placid and tranquil tenor to us all!-But

t~hi~s

this I fay, that in such foresight of fulturity as we
ar~e allowed to take, we may reckton upon it as cer-
tain, that this year shall prove to us, as many past
have proved, a checquered s~cene of some comforts
and some troubles. In what proportion one or
other of there shall prevail in it ; whether, when it
ends, it fhlall leave with us the memory of joys or as
sorrows, is to be determined by him in whos~e handis
our trimes tare. Our wisdom is, to be prepared for
whatever the year is to bring; prepared to receive
comforts with thankfulness, troubles with fortitude;
-and to improve both1 for the great purposes of' virtue
andt eternal life.

~NOT HER important infiru~tion which naturally

arises f'rom our times not being in our o~wn hands
is, that we ought no longer to trifle with what it is
not in our power to prolong; but that w'e thould
make haste to live as wife men ; not delaying till
to-mnorrow what mnay be done to-day ; doing nowo withZ
~nall - nzou-r mg ackrateyer our hand fadetth to do; befobre
that night come2cthL tole.Erei no man can work.

As ross the uncertainty of the events which· are

bepfor~e us, there is one thinlg w~e have too much
reason to believe, namely, that of us who are now
affemnbled in this congregation, and wTho have seen
the year begin, there are some who shall not s~urvive
to fee it close. Whether it shall be you, or you, or
I, w50 thall be gathered to our fathers before the
revolving year has finifhled its round, God alone

knowrs.

knows. Ocr· times ar-e in his hrand : But to our
place, it is more than probable that s~ome of us
thall have gone. Could we foretell the month or
the day, on which our change was to happen, how
diligent would we b- in setting our house in order,
and preparing ourselves to app:ear before our M1akerz
Surely, that ought to be prepared for with mos1 care,
concerning which we are ignorant how soon it is
to take place. Let us therefore walk~ cir~cum/pealy,
and redeem the time. Let us difmnifs those trivial and
s~uperfluous cares which burden or corrulpt our life,
in order to attend to what is of higheflt importance
to us as men and Chlriflians. The beginning of each
year thould carry to us all a solemn admonition of
our folly, in negle~ing to improve faitably the
years that are past. It thlould call up mifpent time
into our view; and be like the hand coming forth
upon the wall, in the days of Belshazzar, and wri-
ting in legible charadiers over against us, "L O man !
"C thy days are numbered; thou ar~t weighed in the
" balance, and found wfanting ; take care left thy
"L kingdom be on the point of departing from
CC thee.

Wa/HEN we confidei· in the next place, that our

times, as I before illufftrated, are in the hand of God
as a fe~vereig~n Disposer, it is an obvious inference
fronl this truth, that weR thould prlep~are our~elves to
fit bmrit patiently to hI-s pleasure, both as to the
events which are to fill up our days, and as to the
time of our continuing in this world. To contend

with him we know to be frulit els. Th~e word that
is gone out of his moulth muff fland. In the path
which he has marked out for us, whether it be short
or long, rugged or fmnooth, we muf1 wralk. Is it
not then the diAate of wisdom, that we thould pre-
vioufy reconcile ourselves -to this sovereign ordina-
tion, and bring our minds to harmonize with what
is appointed to be our destiny ? Let us fortify this
temper, by recalling that reficAion of thle wife man;
Who knowuethr what is ood for man in this lfe ; all the
da'ys of kris yain lye whoick be fendeth,, f as a/l~adowz *

To enjoy long life, and fee many days, is th'e

universal wIith; and, as thle with is pr~ompted by
nature, it cannot be in itifelf unlawfu~l. At the
fame time, several circumstances concur to temper
the eagernes~s of this wifhl; anld to thow us that it
thould alwrays be formed undcer due fubmiflion to
thle wfifer judgment of Heaven. Who among us
can tell, wh~ether, in wrfh~ing for the continuance of
many ytars on earth, wre may not be only wiflung Tor
a prolongation of d.firefs and misery ?--You might
live, my friends, till you had undergone lIngering
rounds of fervere pain, from whichi death would have
proved a feafonlable deliverance. You might live
till your br-easts w~ere pierced with many a woundi
from public calamities or private sorrows. Y'ou
might live tdll you beheld the death of all of whom
you hiad loved; till you f~urvivred all those whor love
you; till you were left as desolate firangers on earth,

* Eccle f. vi. I 2.

in the midfl of a new race, wvho neither knew you,
nor cared for you, but who withled you off the flage.
-Ors a nature to ambiguous are all the prof~pefts
which life sets before us, that in every with we form,
relating to them, much reason we have to be fatis-
fled th~at our times are in the hands of God, rather
than our owrn.

THIS consideration 'is greatly firengthened when,

in the last place, we think of God afling, not as a
forereign only, but as a Guardian, in the disposal
of our times. This is our great conso~lation in look-
ing forward to futurity. To God as a wife Ruler,
calm fuabmiiron is due ; but it is more than furb-
miiron that belongs to him as a merciful Father;
it is the spirit of cordial and affe9tionatee codelnt to
his will. Unknown to, us as the times to come are,
it Thlould be fufficient to our fu~ll purpos~e that they
are known to God. The day and the hour which
are fixed in his counsels for our dimilnilion from life,
we ought to be persuaded are fixed for the betl;
and that any longer we thlould not with to remain.

WHEN we fee that last hour drawing nigh, though

~our spirits may be composed on our own account,
yet, on account o~f our friends and families, no
little an xiety and sorrow may be sometimes apt to take
pofeilion of the mind. Long we have enjoyed the
comfort of their society, and been accuffomed to
confider them as parts of ours~elves. To be parted
from them for ever is, at any rate, a bitter thought;

but

but to the bitteurnes of this, is over and above
added the apprehenflon of their fufffering m~uch by
our death. We leave many a relation, perhaps may
leave young children, and a helpless family, behind
us, to be exposed to various dangers, and thrown
forth on an unfriendly wol. Such virtuous
anxieties often oppress; the tender and feeling heart
at the closing periods of life.-MRy brethren, look
up to that God, in whole hands thie times of your
fathers were ; in wrhole hand the timtes of your pof-
terity shall be. RecolleA, for your comfort, the
experience of ag~es. WThen wrere the righteous utter-
ly forlaken by God in times pait ? Why thould they
be forla~ken by him in times to come ? Well did he
govern the world before you had a being in it :
WTell shall he continue to govern it after you are no
more. NLo cause have you, therefore, to oppress
your minds with the load of unknown futurity.
Commnit your cares to a Father in heaven. Sur-
render your life, your friends, and your family, to
that God, who hath, said, Tle clr;dren of Lis feruants
Jhall continu~e, andr threir feed /7all be efn6ial/ced before
him*~.-- Leavc thyr fa~tlerle/ child·en, I willl preferorl
;&em alive ; and let thy caid~ows trl-/ in me -t.

I HAVE thus show n what the import is, and what

the improvement thlould be, of the do~rine of the
text, that our- times are in the hand of God. IZt asserts
a faat, the truth of which can be called in question
by none; a faBt which, whether persons have any

s~entiments

* Psalm dii. s S. (f Jeremiarh 2dix, I I.

s~entiments of rel~gion nr notI, is calculated to make
a Serious impreffi nI ·n e'-ery mlind eTrpcially at
seasons when the rev nc!.onl ofyers gives us w rn-
ing tha3t our dul:rll(, :.n eart is ru~eal~ed, and ad-
vances towards ;;s pe'iod. To persons who are
religiously difpofedi, whlo Itit y to improvle li e to
its proper p'urpde's, to do; their diuty towjrds God
and man; anld through the mer-its of thleir`Redeemer
to obta n grace and I-avour fromn Heaven?, the doc-
trine of tihe text is ftlid mor-e important. Amolng·
them it telnds to awar~ken imprfiios ihar o
only feirious, but, as I have fhlown, salutary and
comfor~ting to the h~eart.-Trhankful that our times
are in the hiand of a Sovtre!gn, who is both waife
andt gracious, let us prepare ours~elves to m~eet the
approach:nig events of life w~ithl becoming refigna-
tion, and at t .e f~amie time with manily con~tancy,
and firm truti in God. As long as it thall p-lease
him to continue our abode in the world, le~ us e,,
main faithful to our duty ; and when it shall please
him to gi~ve the command for our removal hence,
let us utter only this voice : "' in thy hand, O my
" God, my times are. Thou art cab~ing mTe awayv.
'L IHere I am, ready to obey thy call, and at thy
"' sig~nal to go forth. I thank thee that I have beenl
" admitted to partake so long of the comforts of
"L life, and to be a f~pe~tator of the wisdom and
"' goodnes~s displayed in thy wo~ks. I thank thee
" that thou haft borne so long with my infirmities
" and provo~cations; haft allowed me to look up to
"L thy promis~es in the gospel, and to hear the wlords

"t ofi

# SERMON IV. On the Mixture of Bad Men with the Good in human Society. MATTH. xiii. 30. Let both grow together until the harvest.

trof eternlal life uttered by rny great Redeemer.

WrVCith gratitude, faith, andl hope, I comm~itt my
[r dul to thee. Lordl, nowe lettefp l thu tky ferrant de-

** par~t in peance ; for mine eyes hace /ren thyr jal'JationY."
-Such are th~e f~entirn~ents with which every pious
and good man thoould conclude his life. Such mn-
deed are the f~entimrents which he ought to carry
through every part of life. WKiith thlefe mnay we
begin, and with thes~e conclude, every fucceedmgp
year which God shall thilnk fit to add to our earthaly
existence !

S ER M ON IV.

On the Mixture of B AD MEN with the Goon i·

HoMNs SOCIETY.

M ~ATr a. xill. 30.

Let both grrow~L to~gether until the b~arveft.--

THIE para"ble, of which thefie words are a part,
contains a prophetical defeription of the slate of
thie church. Our Lor-d prediccts that the s~ocieties

of

of Chriflians were to be insetted with persons of.
loose principles and bad difpolitions, whom hie
Ilkens to tares fipringing up among wh~eat. H-e in-
timates that there thlould arise some whlofe officious
zeal would prompt the desire of e xtermlinating im-
mediately all such evil men; but that this were con-
trary to the designs of providence, and to the spirit
of Christianity ; that a complete separation was in-
deed to be made at last betwreen the good and the
bad; but that this separation was to be delayed till
the end of the world, when, in the stile of thre pa-

rbe, the tares thould be entirely gathered out from

among the wh~eat. Let both~ growz together until thez bar-

WH Ex we lookr around us, nothing is more con-

i[picuous in the state of the world, than that broad
mixture of the religious and thle impious, the virtuous
and the wicked, which we find taking place in every
faciety. Strong obje~tions seem hence to arise
·against either the wis~dom or goodnes~s of divine pro-
vidence; especially when we behold bad men not
only toler~ated in the world, but occasionally exalted
in their circumfiances, to the depression of the juff.
Why, it will be said, if a Supreme Being ex'ift, and
if his juffice rule the univerf'e, does he allow su~ch
infamous persons as the records of hillory often pre-
se:nt, to have a place, and even to make a figure in
his world ?' Why sleeps the thunder idle in his hand,
when it could so eafly blast th~em ? What thall we
think of one who, ~having the power of extermi-

nrati ng

nating them always at his comrmand, permits them
to proceed without diflurbance; nay, sometimes
a earls to look on them with complacency -Ilt
bpecomes highly worthy of our attention to confider
what anfwYer can be made to thefeobeon;t
inquire whether any reasons can be given that serve
to juffify this difpenfagtion of Providence, in allow-
ino a mixture of bad men to continue on the face
of thze earth until the end of time. This inquiry
thall make the fubjeA of the present discourse, to-
gether with such refleaions as naturally rife from
surveying the slate of human affairs.

BUT, before entering dire~t~ly on fach inquiry,

it may be pr~oper to take notice, that, in our efti-
mation of w ho are the good, who are the bad,
we~C are often in hazard of committing mistakes.
The real charafter~s of men are known only to God.
They frequently depend on the secret and unseen
parts of life. AS in judging of themselves men are
alwvays partial, so in judging of others they often
err, through the imperfert infrormation which they
have gathered, or the rafcth p~rejudices which they
have formed. They are too apt to limit the cha-
rafter of virtue to those who agree with them in
sentiment and belief ; and to exaggerate the fadl-
ings of thos~e against whom they have conceived
dislike, into great and unpSardonable crimes. Were
it left to the indilcreet· zeal of some to extirpate from
the earth all those whom they confider as bad men,
there is g~rotund to apprehend that, initead of tares

thet

the wheat: would often be rooted out-Ait the fame
time, we readily admit the fa~t, as too manifef1 to
be demied, that a multitudie of g'rofs and notorious
sinners ar-e now mixed with t~e followers of God and
virt ue. Let us proceedi then to confider how far
this is confident with the juffice and wsif~dom of the
Governor of the world.

Ir is a principle in which ail serious and reflec2-

ing persons have agreed, and which by many argu-
ments is confirmed, that~ our pres~ent slate on earth
is designed to be a slate of discipline and improve-
ment,, in order to fit human nature for a higher and
better slate which it is to attain hereafter. NTow
this principle being once admitted, we fay, that the
mixture of virtue and vice which here prevails, is
calculated to anfivuer this purpose better than a more
unmixed anld perfeait tate of society would have
done.

So x, in the firfl place, the crimes of the wicked

give occaffon to the exercise of many excellent
diofpoitions of heart among the righteous. They

bngforth all the fulffering virtues, wvhich other-

wife would have had no field ; and by the exercise
of which the human ch~ar~t~er is tried, and acquires
folme of its chief honours. Waere there no bad men
In the world to vex and diffrefs the good, the good
might appear in the light of harmless innocence -
but couldI have no opportilnity of displ~aying fide-
lity, magnanimlity, patience and fortitune. One

half

bialf of virtue, and not the least· implortant half,
would be loft to the world. In1 ou:r present imper-
se~t slate, any virtue wvhich is never esercif~ed is in
hazard of becoming extina' in the human breast.
Ifgoodlnefs conflantly proceeded in a fmlooth and
flowery path; if, meeting with no adversary to
oppos~e it, it were s~urrounded on every hand with
acclamation and praifie, is there no ground to dreadi
that it mighrt be corrupted by vanity, or might
fin'k into indolence ? This dangerous calm must
therefore be interrupted. The waters muff be
troubled, left they th~ould flagnate and putrify.
When you behold wicked men multiplying in num-
ber, and increating in power, ima~gine not that
Pr·ovidence particularly favours them. No; they
are fuffered for a timue to prosper, that the m nay
fulfil the high designs of heaven. They are emi loy-
ed as infiruments in the handl of God for t e improve-
ment ofhisferv~znts. They are t~e rods wBith which
he chaftens the virtuous, in order to rode~ them
from a dangerous slumber; to form them for the day
of' adversity, and to teach thlem howv to fuffer honour-
ablyr.

IN the next: place, the mixture of the bad among

the good fesrves not only to give exercise to the
paive graces, but also to improve the adive powers
and virtues of man. It inures the righiteous to vi-
gilance and exertion. It obliges them to fland forth,
and aA their part with firmness and conflancy in
evil times. It gives occasion for their virtues to

thaine

flhine with consp~icuous luffre ; and makes them ap-
pear as thte lig~ts of' thre aoorld amnidft surrounding
darkness. Were it not for the dangers that arise
from abounding iniquity, there would be no oppor-
tunity for courage to aAt, for wis~dom to admonithl,
for caution to watch, nor for faith to exert its~elf
in overcominrg the wuorld. It is that mi xture of difpo-
fitions which now takres place, that renders the
theatre on which we aA so busy and flirring, and to
much fitted for giving employment to every part
of man's intelligent and moral nature. It affords
a complete field for the genuine difplIay of chara~te·s ;
and gives every man the opportunity to come forth
and t~how what he is. W-~ere the tenor of hum~an
conduA altogether regular and uniform, interrupted
by no follies and vices, no cros~s difpoiltions and
irregular passions, many of our adive powers would
find no exercise. Perhaps even our life would lan-
guifh, and become too flill and insipid. MCan is
not yet ripe for a paradise of innocence, and for
the enjoyment of a perfed and faultless society.
As in the natural world, he is not made for perpe-
tual spring and cloudless lkies, but by the wintry
florm muff be called to exert his abilities for pro-
curing thelter and defence; so in the moral world,
the intermixtulre of bad men renders many an ex-
ertion necessary, which in a more perfeA slate of
the world would find no place, but which in the
present slate of trial is proper and ufeful.---The
exiflence of vrice in the world aiffiredly teftfires our
present corruption; and according to the degree of

'its

its prevalence, is alw~ays, mor~e or les~s, the source
of misery. It is a flanding proof of the fall and
degeneracy of man. But as long as that fallen irate
continues, the wrifdom of Providence emninently
appears in making the errors 8ad frailties of the
wicked subservient to the improvement of the juff.
Tarezs are for that reas~on f~uffe-red at preiieat to grow
up amonIg thle Wkteal.

THESE oblervations on the wifdoml of Providence

in this disp~ensation will be rarther illuffrated, by
considering the useful infiru~ions which we receive,
or which at least every wife man may receive, from
the follies and vices of those among whom we are
ob-liged to live.

Fir/1, They furnish~ infiruffion concerning thle

[nares and dangers againf1 which we ought to be
rnoft on our guard. They put it thereby in our
power to profit by the errolrs and mifcondua of
others. By obs~erving from what finall beginnings
the erreateft crimes have arisen - obfervinwr how bad
compn))'y has seduced this man from his original
principles and habits; how a careless indulgence
of pleasure has blended and intoxicated that man;
how the negledt of divine inflitutions has, in another,
gradually paved the way for open profligacy ; much
salutary infirudian is conveyed to the virtuous.
Tracing the dangerous and slippery paths by which
so many have been insensibly betrayed into ruin,
their views of human nature are enlarged; the sense

of their own imibecility is firongly impressed upon
them; accomp>anied with the conviaion of the
neced~ity of a conflant dependence on the grace and
afTfifance of heaven. All the cr-imes which they be-
hold drifurbing society ar~ound them, serve as signals
hung out: to them, beacons planted in their view,
to prevent their ma~kinlg thlipwreck among those
rocks on which others have Tplit. It has been juffly
fraid, that not only fr-omi the adtvices of his friends,
but from the reproaches of his enemies, a wife man
rnay draw inftru~ion.- In the fame manner, it is
not only by the examples of good men, but likewis~e
by those of the wicked, that an attentive mind may
be confirmed in virtue.

Nextr, THESE examples of bad men, while they

admonith the virtuous of the dangers against wlhich
they are to guard, are farthler profitable by the viewls
which they exhibit of the evil and the deformity of
fin. Its odious nature never appears in so st-rong a
light as..~, when ,,~: diplye in,:,,

th ie f th~e wick-

ed. It is true that, w~hen vice is carried only to a.
certain degree, and disguised by plausible colours,
i;t may pass ulnreproved, and even for a wYhile seem
popular in the world. But it is no leifs true that,
when it becomes open and flagrant, and is deprived
of the thladow of virtue, it never fails to inrcur ge-
neral reproach, and to become the objeca either of
contempt or of hatred. How often, for inflance,
have the greatest abilities, whnich ~once drew efleem
and admiration, f~unk, in a thort time, into the mos2

humiliating

dant which corrupted inclinations and low habits.,
had acquired over their poffefabc How often have
the rising honours of the you~ng been blasted, by
their forsaking the path of honour on which they
had once entered, for the blind and <'rooked tra~s
of depravity and folly ? Such fpec~acles of the in:-
famy of vice, fulch memorials of the disgrace at-
tending it, are permitted by Providence for general
infirua~ion ; and afilTredly are edifying to the wvorld.
It was neceifary, for moral improvement, that the~
beauty and excellence of virtue, and the deformity
ofyice, thould be firon~gly impressed on every in-
telligent mind. This could never be done with so
great advantage as by the firiking contrasts of both
w~hich are produced by the living examples of evil
meni intermixed with the good. It is in this mirror
that we clearly contemplate hiow much the r-ighteous
is mor~e xcerPjlle than kh' neighbour-.

THYE fame purpoie ofr important initrualon- is

farther promotedi by th;e inflances of misery which
theIt(te of wicked men on ea:tht afford~s. In dmit
that the worldly fuccers~, which fon~etirn~es attends
them, may blind and seduce the unwcary ; but a little
more refleaion enables men to diftinguith between
apparent faiccefs and real happiness. The condi-
tion of' worthless men, wIhatePver sp~lendid riches
m y throwr aroulnd them, is easily diicerned to be a
refizlefs and mriferab;le one ; and the mif~e;y w-hich
they ffixfr, to be derived from their vices. In· that

vo L. I v. D ' great

g~reat corYruptedi crowd which su~rrounds us, what
incessant buffle and flir, what agitation and tumult
take place ? What envy and jealousy of one another
How much bitterness of refeatment do we behold
among them; mutually deceiving and deceived;
supplanting and supplanted; ever pursuing, but
nlever s~atisfied ? There are not matters of rare obf~er-
vation, or which require nice s~crutiny to difrcover
them. We need only open our eyes to behold the
wicked tormented by their passions, and far removed
from that fagn £uary of calmness and tranquillityp
which is the abode of real happines~s. Nlay, when
we appeal to bad men thems~elves, after they have
run the whole round of vicious pleas~ures, we will
often find them obliged to confess, that the wretched
result of their pursuits has been Yanityv and vexation of
fpiritr; and that the happiest days they have enjoyed
we~re in the times of innocence; before criminal
desires and guilty pailions had taken poffefiron of
their breasts. Such pra £1ical demonfirations as
these of the infelicity of fin are yielded by the ex-
amples of evil doers whom we fee around us. By
attending to their situation, the misery, as well as
infamy of guilt is realised, and rendered sensible to
our apprehension.

TaUS, upon a fair inquiry, you. behold how the
wrays of God may, in this remarkable cafe, be juffi-
fied to man. You behold what important ends are
advanced, by permitting the itares at present to grow~
together- withr the wheat. The intermixture of evil

men

men in human society, serves to exercile the fidffering
graces and virtues of the good; by the diversity of
charaders among those with w~hom they have inter-
course, it serves to bringa forth and improve their
aAive powers and virtues, and to enlarge the circle
of ofeful oc cup ations ; it serves to infiruc? them in
the temptations against which they are to guard, to
reveal to them all the deformity of vice, and to
make its mis~eries pass conspicuously before their
eyes. W~hen we confider them as adors on the
theatre of the world, they are thereby improved in
the part they have to perform. Whenl we confider
them as i[peaators of what is pafiTng on that threatre,
their minds ar~e thereby infitu~ted; their viewls rec-
tified and enlarged by th~e objjeAs that are s~et befbr~e
them.

Fa on there impyortant truths, reveral refleczions no

less important arise.

WE, are naturally taught, in the firit place, never

to be hasty in finding fault with any of the arrange-
ments of Providence. The present permillion of
moral evil on the earth s~eemed, on the first view, to
furnithz a flrong objeation agaainf1 either the wis~dom
or the goodness of the Author of nature. After be-
holding the us~eful purpoies which are anfivered by
that permission, how cauztious thould we be in ad-
vancing any of our rathh fpeculati'ons sagainft his
government and condua ! To our confinled andl
humble flation it belongs not to cediure, but to

Ds submit~,

furbmit, trufc, and adore; satisfied that the farther
we inquire, the rettitude of his ways will appear the
mlore; thankrful for the dis~coveries of them which
have been imparted to us; and persuaded that, where
our difrcoveries ~fail, it is not because~ there is no
more wifdiom or goodness to be seen, but becaule
our pre~sent condition allows us not to fee more.

IN the recond place, let us be taught with what

eye we are to look upon thtofe bad men whom we
find around us inl the w~orld. Not fulrely with an
eye of envy. Whatever prosperity they may seem
·to enjoy, they are flill no more than tares, the weeds
of the field ; contemptible in the fight of God ;
tolerated by his providence for a while on account
of the righteous, to whose~ improvement they are ren-
dered subservient. The parable informs us that, in the
lend, they are to be gatheredl togethrer and bur-nt. In
this life only they have their good tkings. But their
prosperity is transitory. They are broulghlt into deveila-
tionj in a moment, a~nd utterly con/hzmed with terrors. As
a dreamr when one awakethL, so,· O God, wholen throu
awakeft, throu salt de/pife their image*.-W~hen we
confider their unhappy Rtate, it becomes us to be-
hold them with the eye of pity. Let us remember
that, in the raidft of their errors, they ~are by na-
ture still our brethren. Let us not behave to them
in the spirit of bitternels. Insult not their follies.
Pride not yours~elves on superior virtue. Remember
that, as bad men are mixed with the good, so, in

the

* Psalm 1xx~i. I9, so.

the best men, vices are at present mixed with vir-
tues. Your own charadier, good as you may efleem
it, is not free from every evil taint; and in the
charafters of those whom you reprobate as vicious,
there are always some good qualities mixed with
the bad ones. Study, as far as you can, to reclaim
and amend them; and if, in any degree, you have
been- profited by their failings, endeavour, in re-
turn, to profit them, by good counsel and advice;
by advice, not adminiffered with officious zeal, or
felf-conceited superiority, but with the tenderness of
compailion and real jfriendfhip.

IN the third place, in whatever proportion the

admixture of vice may seem to take place in the
world, let us never despair of the prevalence of
virtue on the whole. Let us not exaggerate, beyond
meafare, the quantity of vice that is found in the
mixture. It is proper to observe, that in the parable
now before us, after the owner of the field had
Ja~n his good f~ed, no reason is given us to think,
that the good feed was entirely choked up by tares.
On the contrary, we are told that the blade prung· up,
an2d brought ~forik~fr.uit; and, though the tares also
arose, yet, in the end there was a hrarviep, when the
whuleat was reaped and gathered into the barnl. In the
most corrupted times, G od never leaves himself
without many witnesses on earth. He is always
attentive to the cause of goodness; and frequently
supports and advances it by means which we are
unable to trace. He nourithes much piety and

virtue

virtue mn hearts that are unknown to us; and behold's
repentance ready to spring up among many whorn
wve confider as reprobates.--I know that it has
alwYays been common for perfonls to represent the
age in which they live as the worit that ever appear-
ed; and religion and virtue as juff on the point of
vaniflhing from among men. This is the language
sometimes of the serious; often of the hy pocritical,
or of the narrow-minded. But true religion giv~es
no fanLdi~on to s~uch severe censures, or such gloomy
views. Though the tares mull be at all times Ipring-
ing up, there is no reafion for believing that they
thall ever overfipread the whole field. The nature
of the weeds that spring up may var-y, according to
the nature of the foil. Different modes of iniquity
may diftinguith different ages of the world; while
the fum of corruption- is nearl-y the fame. L~et not
our~judgments of men, and of the times in which
we live, be hasty and pres~umptuous. Let us trult
in the grace of God; and hope the bell of man-
kind.

IN the fourth and lait place, let us keep our eyes

ever fixed on that important period, which is alluded
to in the text, as the conclusion of all. Let bot#
growo together until th~e Lnartej. T he great spiritual
year is to be closed by a /arry, when the boufekolder·
is to gather the wheat into Al;i barn; when, at the end
of the worldl, the final diftindion of men and cha-
radters is to take place. The confused mixture of
good and evil, which now prevails, is only a tem-

porary

porary dispensation of Providence, accommodated
to man's fallen and imperfeat state. Let it not tempt
us for a moment to diftruff the reality of the divine
government; or to entertain the remotest sus~picion
that moral good and evil are to be on the fame terms
for ever. The frailties of our nature fitted us for nlo
more at present than the enjoyment of a very mixed
and imperfect faciety. But when our nature, puri-
fied and refined, thlall become ripe for higher ad-
vancement, then thatthe [pirits of the just, difen-
gaged from any polluted mixture, undiflurbed by
fin or by sinners, be united in one divine assembly,
and rejoice for ever in the pretence of him who
made them. Lookiing forward to this glorious ifirue
with fledfaft faith, let no cross appearances ever
discomfit our hopes, or lead us to fuipea that we
have been serving God in vain. If we continue
faithrful to thle death, we may reft affired, that in du~e
time we f halll receive thec cr~owtn of life.

# SERMON V. On the Relief which the Gospel affords to the Distressed. Preached at the celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. MATTH. xi. 28. Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, 

"S. E RMON V.

On the RELIEF Which the GOSPEL RifortlS to the:

D)ISTRESSED,

Preached at the Celebration of th~e Sacramentn of the

Lord's Sucpper.

MaATT·s H. XI. 8.

Come unrto mre, all ye that labour, andJ are beasy laden,

an~d I wz~ill giv~e you r·e/.

TH~E life of man on earth is doomed to be
clouded with various evils. Throughout all ranks,
the affid~ed form a considerable proportion of the
human race; and even they who have a title to be
called prosperous, are always, in some periods of
their life, obliged to drink from the cup of bitter-
ness. The Christian religion is particularly entitled
to our regard, by accommod'ating itself with great
tendierners to this diffreffed condition of mankind.
It is not to be considered as merely an authoritative
fyfiem of precepts. Important precepts it indeed
delivers for the wife and proper regulation of life.
But the fame voice wvhich enjoins our duty, utters

the

the words of consolation. Thle gosp-el deserves to
be held a difpyenfation of relief to mnank~ind under
both the temporal and spiritual difireffes of their
iRate.

THIs am~iab-le and compafironate s~pirit of our re-

ligion conspicuously appears in the charaater of its
great Author. It th~one in a~llhis a~ltions while he
lived on earth. It breathed in all his dis~courses;
and, in the words of the text, is expressed with much
energy. In the preceding verse, he had given a
high account of his own person and dignity. All
liingj are delivered unto me us my Father ; and no mar
kno-meth the Son but ile FathiEr ; neithere knoweth any man
the Fathrer, frvej the Son, and be to wkompeser tie .Son
wuill Ireveal Aint. But leaf1 any of his hearers thlould
be discouraged by this inylterious representation of
his greatnels, he instantly tempers it with the most
gracious benignity; declaring in the text, the mler-
ciful intention of his mission to the world, Comep unto
me, a~llye thrat labour, and ar~e eavyr lade~n, andr I woill
pi-ve you I-res.

THE tiirH thing wvhids claims our attention in these-

weords is, what w·e are to undierfland by comling zlnto
Chrry. This is aphrafe which has: often givezi oc-
cation to controverfvr. By theologi~cal writers it has
beenl involved in much needles~s mytery, while the
meaning is in itrelf plain and easy. The very mne-
taphor that is here used serves to explain it. In the
ancient world, disciples flock~ed round their different

D3. teachers,

teachers, and attended them wherever they went; in
order both to teffify their attachment, and to imbibe
more fully the dottrine of. their masters. ComingR
unto Chry, therefore, is the fame with resorting to
him as our declared Mailer; acknowledging our-
selves his disciples, believers in his domrine, and
followers of his precepts. As Christ is made known
to us under the chara~er botih of a Teacher and a
Saviour, our cominlg to Rim imports not only s~ub-
mifflon to his infiruaions, but confidence also in his
power to save. It imports that, forlaking the cor-
ruptionsj of fin and the world, we follow that course
of virtue and obedience which he points out to us;
relying on his mediation f~or pardon of our offences,
and acceptance with heaven. This is what is im-
plied in the s~cripture term Fa~ithz; which includes
both the assent of the underflanding to the truth of
the Christian religion, and the concurrence of the
WHl 18 TecCCVIDg It.

TVHaAT uext occurs in the text to attraft our no-

tice, is the defecription of those to wh~om the invi-
tation is addressed. All those who ·labour·, awn are
Acavuy ladlen, that is, who, in one way or other, feel
themselves grieved and distressed, are here invited to
come to Chrift.--Now, from two s~ources chiefly
our distresse~s aAife; from moral, or from natural
ca~uses.

Fi'?, TH E Y may arise from inward moral caures;

·from certain feelings and refle~ions of the mind,

wvhich

which occasion uneasiness and painl. A courfie of
fin and vice always proves ruinous and deflruutive
in the iflibe. But its tendency to ruin is often not
perceived, while that 'tendency is advancing. For
as fin is the reign of patfion and pleasure, it forms
men to a thoughtless inconsiderate slate. Circum-
fiances, however, may occur, and frequently, ux
the course: of life, do occur, which diklofe to a
vicious man the ruin which he is bringing on him-
self, as an offender agPainft the God who made him.
When some occasional confinement to solitude, or
f'ome turn of adverse fortune, direfts his attention
immediately upon his own chara~ter; or when",
drawing towards the close of life, his paffons sub-
fide, his pleasures withdraw, and a future slate comes
forward to his view·; in s~uch situations it often
happens, that the past follies and crimles of such a
man: appear to him in a light most odious and th~ock-
inar ; and not odious only, but terrifyring to his
he rt. He considers that he is undoubtedly placed
under the government of a juff God, who did not
fend him into this world for nought; that he has
negleated the part assi.gned to him;i has contemned
the lawcs of heaven; has d~egraded his own nature;
and inficad of being useful, having been hurtful
and pernicious to those among whom he lived, is
about to leave a detestable memory behind him.--
What account thall he give of himself to his Maker ?
Self condemned, polluted by so many crimes, how
can he expeat to find mercy in his fight ? Hence,
an overwhelmed and dejeEted mind; hence, difinal

forebodings

forebodlings of pulnithment; hence, that wo~unde~d
/jirit~, which, when it is deeply piercedl, becomes
the for~est of all humana evils, and has sometimes ren-
dered existence a burden whlich could not be en-
dured .

SUnH distresses as these, arising from moral in-

ternal caus~es, may be made light .of by ~the giddy
a id the vain ; ·and reprefeented as confined to a few
p-rf~ons only of diftemper~ed imagination. But to
th~ose whole profeffions give them occasion to fee
m~en under various circumfitances of affl~iaon, they
a~re knowvn to be far from being unfrequent in the
world; and, on many more occasions than is com-
monly imagined, to throw over the human mind
the blackei gloom of which it is susceptible. Re-
ligious feelings, be afibred, have a deep root 'in the
natulre of man. They form a part of the human
conflitution. They are interwoven with many of
those fears and hopes w~hich aduate us in the chang-
'ng situations of fortune. During the gay and
aftive periods of life, they may be finothered; but
with most men, they are f nothered rather than to-
tally obliterated: And if any crisis of our condition
hall aivaken, and bring them forth, in their. full
force, upon a conscious guilty heart, woe to the
man, who, in some dis~cons~olate season, is doomed
to fuffer their extreme vengeance !

Burt, while under such diffreffess of the mind not

a few may be said to labour anrd to be Leasy laden,

greatcr

greater s~till is the multitude of those who, fromn na-
tural external cau~ses, from the calam~ities and evils
of life, undergo much ifuffering and miiery. The
life of man is not indeed wholly comlpofed of mi-
fery. IEtadmits of many pleasing fceees. On the
whole, there is reason to believe that it aff~ords more
Joy than grief. A4t the fame time, the unfortunate,
as I before obfervedt, form always a numerous class
of mnankInd; *and it may be said with truth, that
fore travJel is ordain~d for de se~ns of men. T hou gh
the burden is not equally laid on all; s~ome there
always are, on whom it falls with oppressive weight.
--Unexpe~ted difappointmlents have cruthed their
hopes, and blasted the plans which they had form-
ed for comfort in the world. The world hasd, per-
haps, smiled upon them once, only to give them a
sharper feeling of its miseries at the las1. Struggling
with poverty, unable to fulpport their families whom
they fee languithling around them, they, at the fame
tim~e, are obliged by their situation in society to
conceal their necessities; and under the forced ap-
pearance of cheerfulness, to hide from the .world a
brokren heart. They are flung, perhaps, by the
unkindness of friends; cast off by those in whom
they had truffed; or torn by untimely death from
real friends, in. conlnexion with whomn they might
have flourithed and been happy ; at the fame time
borne down, it may be, with the infirmities of a
sickly body, and left to drag a painful life without
assistance or relief.-How many fad scenes of this
nature, on which it were painful to insist, does the
world afford ?

WYHE N

WHEN We turn to those who are accounted prof-

perous men, we th:Ill always find many sorrows
minrgled with their p~leasures; many hours of care
and ve~xation, wherein they acknowledgae themfielves
claired w ~th tho~se wvho labour anrd are beazsy laden.
In enterrog into fonse· gay feffive assembly, we be-
hold affcetted chearfulnefs displayed on every coun-
tenanc~e; and might fancy that we had arrived at
the temple of unmixed pleas~ure and gladnes~s of
heart. Yet, ev-en there, coulld we look into the
bosoms of there apparently happy persons, how often
would we find theml inwardly preyed upon by some
tormenting suspicions, some anxious fears, some
s~ecret griels, which either they~ dare not dis~close to
the world, or from wihich, if dis~closed, they can
look for no relief?-In short, amidst that great
company of pilgrims, who are journeying through
life, many there are whose journey lies through a
valley of tears; and many to whom that vailey is only
cheared'by transient glimpr~es of joy.

To these class~es of mankind is addressed the invi-

tation of the text. To them, it is in a particular
manner addressed ; overlooking the giddy and difiG-
pated multitude. Come untfo me all ye thcat laboutr,
andt are heavfy laden·1. Not as if our Saviour were
always ready to accept that fort of piety which is
merely the consequence of diffre~s ; or made all those
welcome, who are driven by nothing but: fear or danger
to have recours~e to him. His words are to be under-
flood as intimating, that the heart which is humbled

and

and s~oftene~d by affhalion, is the objeA of his com-
passionate regard; that he will not rejeft us merely
because we have been cast o~ff by the world; but
that, if with proper difpoltions and fetntiments we
apply to him in the evil day, we shall be sure of
meeting with a gracious reception. It now remamns
to show, what that reception is which we may look~
for; what that r-ef is which Christ hath promis~ed to .
confer on those who come to him ; whether their dif-
tress arise from moral or from natural causes. Comea
rnto me and I wrill giroe you ref.·

I. CantsrT affords reft to the diflurbed mind that

labours under apprehenflons and fears of guilt. Let
those who fuffer diffrefs of this nature comre to Chry,P
that is, with contrition and repentance, have re.
course to him as their Saviour, and they ihall re-
gain an~ietnefs and peace. Foolish and guilty they
have been, and juffly lie under dread of puniihment ;
burt the penitent s~orrow which they now feel, implies
their difpoltion to be changed. It implies, as far
as it is genuine, that, sensible of their folly, they
now desire to become good and wife; and are de-
termined for the future to hold a virtuous course,
could they only hope to obtain pardon for the past.
In this situation of mind, let them not be cast down
and despair. Christ has brought with him from
heaven the olive branch. He carries in his hand
the signal of forgiveness. The declaration which
he publilhes is, Let the wicke forsake kis way, and th-e
urnrighteous mann his thoughts; and let him returrn to the

Lord,

Lord, and Ae will ,bave· mercy upon kim ; and to, our God,
for be will abundantly pardon*. I as f licient though
our own repentance be, to procure pardon from
heaven, we are informed, that an all-f~ufficient atone-
ment has been mazde by Chriid. Neither the num-
ber nor the atrocity of offences excludes, from for-
giveneis, the penitent who returns to his duty. To
all wvho come under thi5 defeription, thie offer of
mercy extends, without exception. He that /pared
nPot Ars ownm Son, but deliverred him up for us all, htowo
.#all Ae nrot with kim also freely give us all tikngst I

THIs discovery of divine government, affordled

by the Gospel, is perfealy calculated to scatter the
gloom which had overcast the defponding heart.
The atmosphere clears up on every fide; and is il-
luminated by chearing rays of celeffial mercy,
Not only is hope given to the penitent, but it is
rendered sinful not to indulge that hope. PWe are
not only allowed and encouraged, but we are com-
manded to truit in the divine clemency. We ar~e
commanded to believre that none whro comie unto Chri/1'
ke w:11 in any wrife caf out t+. As I live, faith the Lord
God, I kase no plea/ure in rthe death of tke wiickedl, bct
that the wiked turnfromr kis wa~y an~dlive; trn ye, turen
ye from your evil ways ; so wl~y will ye die, O Irou/e of
IfrazellII` -Such is the relief which the religion of
Christ brings to them who labour and ar~e heav laden
under the imprellions of guilt and divine displeasure ;

a relief~

* Isaiah ly. 7r. R om. rill. 34.
$ John vi* 37* 11 Ezek. xxxiii. I I.

a relief which nothing can render ineffe~tual to the
heart , except the most gloomy fuperfkition, found-
ed on gros misconceptions of the nature and attri-
butes of God. Let us now,

II. Confider what re/t the religion of Christ gives·

Sto them whole diffrefs arises not from inward and
moral, but from natural and external causes ; from
adverse fortune, or any of thos~e numerous calamities
to which we are at present expos~ed. To such per-
sons, it may seem more difficult to promise any es-
feaual relief. In the former cafe, the diffrefs lay
entirely in the mind. As ~o~on as its views ~are
reaified, and its apprehensions quieted, the evil, is
re~moved, and the cure effeAed. Here, the dliffrefs
arises from without; and the religion of Christ as-
seAs not the course of external events. But though
it removes not all the evils of life, though it pro-
mises no continuance of undiflurbed prosperity,
(wrhich indeed it were not salutary for manl always
to enjov) yet, if it mitigates the evils which necef-
farily belong to our slate, and supports us un~der
them, it may juffly be iaid to give r~ep to thlemn *wk
labour and are heavyladen. When much that is ma-
terial and important is effe~aed, we have nlo cause
to complain, though all that we desire be not ac-
complifh~ed.--In this part of the discourse, I am to
be confxdered as addressing myself not merely to such
as are at prefeat fuffering any severe calamity. I
nowr speak to many, who, in the midst of health and
afflu~ence, enjloy the various comforts of life. But I

muff

muR deire such persons to look forwardl to wYhat
may one day bl their slate. Let them refled how
important it is to prepare themselves for the future
unknown vicilirtudes of the world. For, if a manr
wie many years, and rejoice in themn all, yet Ip let im re-
mrember the days of daridne/s, for they flall be many".--
Now, either in the profped of future diffrers, or
under prefeat fuffering, I fay, that the religion of
Chria gives repto the heart, by the fortitude which
~rr~infpre and by the confolationis which it as-

~Fief, IT inspires fortitude. It discovers a fu-

preme adminiffration, so friendly to the intereits of
goodness, as never to allow the followers of Christ
to dread, that,~ in any lituation of fortune, thev
'hall be negleded by Heaven. From the abitrad2
clonfideration of the divine perfeaions, men had
o ways some ground to believe, that the general
Rule rof the univerie twaes conreu tedoy nidtisviduast
might be obhiged to yield, or, in many cafes mi ht

berariicdtotis general order, they were left

altogether in the dark. Her th gie Cr

comes~ to u i, by the explicit aifilrance which

it gives, that, mn the great fyfiemn of Providence, the
welfare of every single good man is particularly in-
cluded. All things, we are expres~sly told, are made
to work togethrer, not merely for the order and per-
section of the whole, but aliflgofotrotln godt hmrdio

lowe

*EccleT. xi. 8.

lozve God*. The life of every person, who comes
under this defeription, forms a iyfiem complete
within itself ; where every ev'ent that happens to hun
poff~effes its deffined place, and forms a link in that
great chain of cadies, which was appointed, from
the beginning of things, for carrying on his im-
provement and felicity. Such an arrangement of
the affairs of the world, may appear allonifhing to
our narrow capacities; yet surely implies no effort
beyond the reach of infinite power, joined with in-
finite wisdom and goodness.

HENCE aris~es a degree of fortitude and conflancyr

to good men, which can upon no other grounds be
attained. Faith, in these principles of the gospel,
eretts for them a fortress, impregnable to the assaults
of the world, into which they can at all timres re-
treat. Sitting under the thlelter of divine proteion,
they calmly hear the storm, when it blows with its
utmoftviolence around them. The food; kave hyfted

up her vic ;they have hyfted up all their w~aves. But

the Lord on higkr is mtightrier than the noye of many wa~ters :

aO thAsn the· mighty w~aves of the fea~t. Of the man
vho poffeffes such principles, it is justly said. His
hcar-t is efablfed; hre all not be afraid of eufd t;idmgs;
kris bear-t is fxued, trlryi2g in theL Lei-d . T ranquillity,
order, and magnanimity, dwell witbh lm; while
all is conlfufion and trepidation among those, who
have nothing to look to but the apparent disorders
of the world. THE

*c Rom. viiL 08. p Pfal. xcill* 34.
$ Pfal, exii. 7, 8.

thil manner, withl fortitude agaL off t aproach ofi

evl , ut, supposing evils to fall urpon us wIith
their heaviest preflibre, it lightens the load by mnn
consolations to wt~hich others are firangers. wa~hile
bad men trace, in the calamities wvith which they
are yifited, the hand of an offended foeein
Christians are taught to view them as twovere-i n,
tended chaftif~iements of a merciful Father. They
hear amidst them, that flf voice which a good can-
rc ace brings to their ear; F ear not, for I amI With
'r; de not difmayedfor I am tXY God * The
apply to themselves the comfortable promises wit
which the goilpel abounds. They dis~cover in there
the happy drfue decreed to their troubles ; and wait
with patience till Providence thall have accomplith-
ed its great and good designs. In the mean time,
devotion opens to them its blessed and holy fandu
ary : That fanauary in which the wounded heaurt
is healed, and the weary mind is at reft; where the

prefenitr; where a more serene Ikv thines, and
fiveeter and calmer lightr beams on the afflifted hearra

n tofemoments of devotion, apious manl pour-

inga out his w~ants and sorrows to an almighty Sup
porter, feels that he is not l1eft solitary and forlaken
tea aoIy Goi weare ovt with him ad, thortghah

* Itaiah xli. r o. xo

thourld be bereaved of every carthly friend, hre can
look up in heaven to a Friend who will n~ever die.

To these present consolations, the religion of

Christ adds the joyful profl eAt of that future slat~e,
w her-e etenrnal r ty? remainetth for- thed peple of God. T his
life they are taught to confidrr as only thle bouse of
their pilgrimac~ge ; the temporary mansion of p~ainful
though necessary dis~cipline. But let them endure
for a little, and the pilgrimage thall end, the difci-
pline thall be finithed; and atl the virtuous be al-
fembled in thos~e blis~sful regions which are prepared
for their reward. Such a profp-edt chears thie d'arkeR
h~ours of life ; and: aff~ords a! remedy to every tr-ouble.
The fufeving-s of~ thij prlefw time are not worthy to be
compared$ wuit thre glr~cy wich f all be· rveta~led". Trhey
appear in this comparative view, as no more than
a diffreifing dream of the night, from which on'e
awakes into health, and light, and joy.--Peculiar
is this high consolation to the religionl of' Christ.
It is what all nations had eagerly wished for ; what
all philosophy had anxiously f~ought to discover ; but
what no research, no philosophy were able to af~cer-
tain to mankind, till Christ broughnt the aiffirance
of life and immortality from heaven ; and conferred
on his disciples this noble and ineffi'mable gift.

TaUS, on the whole, the Chriftlan doltriine is

found to be the great Medicine of life. It is the
balm ofhuman sorrows and cares. In our present

Itate,

* Rom. r ~iii. r8.

slate, where to rnany are fuffering aduttal diffrers, of
onle kmnd or othler, and wher~e all hlave reas~on to
dread the approach ofdiffrefs, it is religion only that
can all~eviate the b'urdens of life, and iimooth our
passage through this evil wvorld. ILet this: view

of-- relgon pruade us to imnprove the fagcred ordi-

nance of our Lord's Tiupper for rcming unto Ch;/1, in
the way before explained * that is Jonn our

-ve

to him as his disciples; his disciples, not in words
aind profeffionss only, but in heart, and in truth -
tanirg upon as is yoke, as is added in the words im-
rnediately following the text; zfnd lEarning of /rim whL~
as meek and.lowuly in beart. Let those who labour
under the s~ens~e of remembered follies and crimes

com utoC/Zr; with penitent dirpolitions, and they

thall obtain pardon. Let those wlho labour under
the fufferingg of present, or the appreh~ension of fu-
ture sorrows, come unto Chriff, and they th~all receive
consolation. All who are in any sense keavy laden,
coming unto him, thall find re] to their fouls.

BEFORE concluding this discourse, there is another

sett of men, not yet mentioned, to whom I must
also address ·the exhortation in the text : those I
mean, who labourin~g under none of the diffrefsful
burdens of life, are surfeited with its pleasures; who
labour under the burden only of languid ease,
and the load of insipid pros~perity. You drag, my
friends, but a miserable existence. Oppressed by no
sorrow, you feel vacuity and diffatisfaEtion within -
yiou are often weary of life; and in your solitary

I· hours,

hours, are? difpofesd to contfe~s~ that all you have ex-
perienced is vanity. Wherefore thould you any
longerr /pend yorsr mone~y for that zkirck is not bre·ad, and
Your labour for diar t wick fatisfieth not ? Come to the
waters whijck ar~e now oferedC to you, andl drinlk. Hear,
and your fouli./kll live. Retreat from the cor~rupting
vanities of the world, to Christ, to religion, and to
virtue. Nfew sources of enjoyment thall then be
opened to you. A world yet unt.-ied shall display
itself to your view. You thall be formed to a relish
for the quiet and innocent pleafiures of piety and
devotion; of friendship, and good affeaions; of
useful knowrledge, and virtuous acdivity;· of calm
society, and seasonable retirement; pleasures of
w~hich at prefetnt you have no conception; but
wrhic'h, upon trial, you th~all find superior .to the
trifling, or turbulent amulements, in which you
have hitherto passed your days.-Tlhe true fatisfac-
tion of the human mind is only to be found in reli·
gion and goodness, in a purified neart, and a vir-
tuous life. All other plans- of happiness are fallaci-
ous, and pregnant with disappointment. It is only
by arquainting oursel~ves with God that we can PAd
peace : And those w ho are woeary and keasy laden
now, thall be wzeary and hea~vy laden to the end, unless
they: come to him who only can give themn Ires.

SERIMON

# SERMON VI. On Luxury and Licentiousness. ISAIAH v. 12. The harp and the viol, the tabret and the pipe and wine are in their feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation 

S ER M ON VI.

On Luxvar and LrcnICENTOUNEsSc

ISAIAH V. 12,

The karp and the viol, the tabret and pipe and ruine are

in threir feafs; but they regar-d not the aoork of thle
Lord, neitherI con~FdEr~ thre operaztion of Al hands.

T~ appears from many passages in the writings

of this prophet, that in his days great corruption
of manners had begun to take place among the
p~eople of Israel. Originally a sober and a religious
nation, accustomed to a limple and pafforal life,
after they had enliarged their territories by conquest,
and acquired wealth by commerce, they gradually
contrasted habits of luxury ; and luxury soon in-
troduced its usual train of attending evils. In the
history of all nations, thle fame circulation of man-
ners has been found; and the age in which we live
refiembles, in this refped, the ages which have gone
before it. Forms of iniquity may vary; but the
corrupt propensities of men remain at all times much
the fame ; and revolutions from primitive simplicity
to the refinements of criminal luxury have been

oftee

often exhibited on the flage of the world. The re-
proof dire~ed in the text to the Jews of that antient
age, will be found equally applicable to the manners
of many, in modern times. In dis~coursing from
it, I th~all firt confider the ch~arad~er of thos~e who
are defecribed in the text, and show the guilt that
is involved in it. I: shall next confider the duties
which persons of that ch~arader are supposed to
have negleL~ed ; to regard thle wo~frk of the Lord, and to
confider the operation of hris ha~nds.

I. TVMEN We take into view the charaaer point-

ed at in the text, it is evident that what the prophet
means to reprove is, the spirit of inconsiderate difli-
pation, of intemperate indulgence, and irreligious
1ux ury . It is not the seas~ and the wtine, thre hacrp andt
thte rolol, wlhich he means to condemn. Music and
wine are, in themselves, things of innocent nature :
NJay, wh~en temperately enjoyed, they may be em-
played for ofeful purposes ; for affording relaxation
from the opprellive cares of life, and for por~omoinga
friendly intercourse amlong men. The opulent are
not prohibited from enjoying the good things of this
world, wThich Providence has bleffowed upon them.
Religion neither abolifhles the diftindion of ranks,
(as the vain philosophy of some would teach us to
do) nor interferes wit~h a modest and decent indul-
gence of pleaf~ure.-I--t is the criminal abule of
pleafiure whlich is here: centulred; that thoughtless
and intemperate enjoyrment of it which wholly ab-
fo~crbs the time and attention of men ; w·hich ob~lite-

VOL.. IV. E ates

rates every serious thought of the proper buiinefs of
life ; and effaces the f~ede of religion and of Gfod.

I~r may be proper ~to remark, that it is not open

and direa impiety, which is laid to the charge of the
persons here charAaerifed. It is not said, that in
-their feasts they f~coffed at religion, or blasphemed
the name of God. To this summit of wickedness
these persons had not yet arrived; perhaps, the age
in which they lived gave not its countenance to this
wantonnes~s of impiety. It is merely a negative
·crime of w~hich· they are accxufed ; that tlhey regardAed
not thre reor~ of the Lord, neithe confdereed thie oper~ation of-
Al iands. But this ablence of all reigious impressions
is here pointed out, as fufficient to ithgmatife their
charadters with guilt. As soon as the sense of a
·Supreme Being is loft, the great check is taken off
which keeps under restraint the paffionss of men.
IMean desires, and low pleafirres, take place of the
greater and nobler f~entimlents which reason and re-
ligion inspire. Amidst the tumullt of thze ruine and
the seas3, all proper views of human life are forgotten.
The duties which, as men, they have to perform,
-the part they have to alk in the world, and the dif~-
tresses to which they are exposing themselves, are ba-
nithed from their thoughts. To-morrowr fiall be as
jtkisJ dar, cand more abucndanrtl, is the only voice. In-
flamed by society, and circulated from one loose
companion to another, the spirit of riot grows and
(wells, till it end in brutal excess.

W1;E 2E

WYERE fulch disorders rare r ed occallonal merely,

they might perhaps be forg~otten and forgiven. But,
nourithed by repetition and habit, they grow up
among too many, to become the business and oc-
cupation of life. By these unfortunate votaries of
pleasure, they are accounted essential to happiness.
Life appears to flagnate without them. HaLving no
resource within themselves, their pibrits fink, and
their very being seems annihila~ted, till the return
of their favouritepilea~ures awraken within them some
transient s~parkles of joy.-I~dlenefs, eafle, and prof--
perity, have too na~tural a tendency to generate the
follies and vices now described. B~cau/e they hav~e tio
ha~nges, said 'the PaBl mif 1, hrkefore~l th~ey fearnot Godt.*
They are the dark and solitary hours of life, which
recal men to recolle~ion anld wifdtoms They thzow
to the unthinking what this world really is, and what
may beexpeaed from it. But the day that is always
bright and unclouded, is not made for men. It
flatters them w7ith the dangerous illusion, that it is in
their power to render life one scene of pleasure; and
that they have no other business~ on earth, but to
spread the seas, and ·call rthe harp and thre viol to
found. B3ut the examples ar~e so freque~nt. of thke
dangers and the crimes which arise from an intempe-
rate abules of pleasure, that -on this part of the fab-
jeA it seems ne~edles~s to i~nsist any longer. I proc~eed
therefore,

II. To confider the duties which men are~ acculed

ES of

*F Pfa~lr iv. I g.

of having negle~ed ; .nd which, it is here su~pposed,
if duly attended to, would have adted as the correc-
tives of dissolute and irrelig~ious luxury; thes~e are,
to r·egardthe worg'L0k of thie Lor-d, and to confder thle ope-
tration of his harnds.--By recommending such duties, I
do not meana to represent it as requisite that the featl
thould be turned into an aft of worship : that the
countenances of men thould be always grave ; or
that, in the hours ofamufement and of social feffi-
vity, no fubjeAt may employ their thoughts and their
dis~course, except God and a future slate. All ex-
tremes in religion are dangerous; and, by carrying
aufferity too far, we are in hazard of only promoting
hypocrisy. But though some, in the lafit age, might
be prone to this extreme; yet, at the p~refeat day,
there is not much occasion for warning men against
it.-WVthat J now insist upon is, that all our pleasures
ought to be tempered with a serious sens~e of God ;
that scenes of gaiety and enjoyment thould irever
make us forget that we are fulbjedts of his govern-
ment,: and have a part allotted as to aft in his world ;
that on no, occasion they should be prolonged so
much, repeated to often, or ifufered to transport us
to far, as to lead us to break any of the divine lawvs,
or to adt inconsistently with the charader of men
and Christians. A prevailing sense of God. on the
mind is to be ever held' the forest guard of innocence
and virtue, amidst the allurements of pleasure. It
is the faglutary mixture which must be infulfed into
the cu of joy, in order to render it safe and in-
noxious.

TuIS

Tars sense of God thould lead us, in the language

of the prophet, to regaard the reork of tke Lord, and to
confner the op~eration of kis hands; which exprefirons
may be underflood as requiring us to have God upon
our thoughts under two views; to regardt kis wcovr, as
the Author of nature ; and to confd~er the operationr of
hiis hand~s, as the Governor of the world. Let us at-
tend more particularly to each of thele views of the
Supreme Being.

IN the fiPrf place, we are to view God as the Au-

thor of nature, or to r-egard the ·roork of tke Lorda.
With his works we are in every place fairrounded.
We can cast our eyes no where, without dikerning
the hand of Him who formed them, if the grossne~ss
of our minds will only allow us to behold Him~.--
Let giddy and thoughtless men turn aside a little
from the haunts of riot. Let them stand IHill, and
contemplate the wondrous works of God; and miake
trial of the effe~tt which such conte~plation wvouldl
Produce.--It were good for them that, even inde-
pendently of the author, they were more acquainted
with his works ; good for them, that from the faci-
eties of loose and dissolute mnen, they would retreat
to the scenes of natuzre; would oftener dwnell among
them, and enjoy their beauties. This would form
them to the relish of uncorrupted, innocent plea-
fu~res; and make them feel the value of calm enjoy-
ments, as superior to the nolfe and turbulence of
licentious gaiety. From the harmony of nature, and
of nature's works, they would learn to hear fiveeter

founds than what arise from the Yiol, the tabret, andl

B wr to higher and more serious thoughts these

works of nature give occasion, when considered in
conjun~tion with the Creator wIho made them. Let
·me call on you, my friends, to catch s~ome interval
of refle~tion, some serious moment, for looking
wvith thoug~htful eye on the world around you. Lift
your view to that imm~ense arch of heaven which en-
compasses you above. Behold the fun in all his
splendor rolling over your head by day ; and the
mtoon, by night, in .mild ana serene majefly, fur-
rounded with that host of flars which ·present to your
imagination -an innumerable multitude of worlds.
Listen to the awcful voice of thunder. Listen to the
r·oar.fthe temlpeft; and the ocean. Survey the won-
ders that fill the earth which you inhabit. Contem-
plate a fleady and powerful Hand, bringing round
spring and summer, autumn and winter, in regular
course; decorating this earth with innumerable
beauties, diversifying it with innumerable inhbabi-
tanlts ; pouring forth comforts on all that live; and,
at the fame time, overawYing the nations with the
violence of the elements, wrhen it pleases the Creator
to let them forth.-After you have viewed yourselves
as surrounded with such a scene of wonders; after you
have beheld-on every hand, s~uch an affonifhing dif-
play of majefly united with w~isdom and goodness;
are you not seized with s~olemn and serious awe ?I~s
there not something which whrifpers you within, that

to this great Creator reverence and homage are due
by all the rational beings whom he has made ? Ad-
mitted to be fpettators of his works, placed in the
midst of so many great and intereffing objeats, can
you believe that you were brought hither for no pur-
pole, but to immerse yourselves in gross and brutal,
or, at best, in trifling pleasures; loss to all sens~e of
the wonders you behold; loft to all reverence of that
God who gave you being, and who has ere~ted this
amazing fabric of nature, on which you look on y
with flupid and unmeaning eyes -No : Let the
scenes which you behold prompt correspondent feel-
ings. Let them awaken you from the degrading in-
toxication of licentioufnels, into nobler emotions.·
Every objeaf which you view in nature, whether
great or imall, serves to infiruQ you. The flar a~nd thie
infe£1, the fiery meteor and the flower of spring, the
verdant field and the lofty mountain, all exhibit a
Supreme Power, before whtich you oulght to tremble
and adore; all preach the do~rine, all inspire the
Epirit of devotion, and reverence. Regarding, then,
thre wolrk of ~the Lord, let rising emotions of awe and
gratitude call forth from your fouls fo~ch featimens~s
as thefe:-"L Lord, wherever I am, and whatever I
" enjoy, may I never forget thee as the Author of
"L nature ! M~ay I never forget that I am thy crea-
"( ture and thy f~ubjea!i In this magnificent temple
'j of the univerfie, where thou haft ptlaced- me, me y
"' I ever be thy faithful worshipper ; and may the
r' reverence and the fear o~f God be the first fienti-
"' ments of my heart !'! It is to fuich confiderationIs

of God I would now recal your thoughts, from the
w~ine and1 tre fearji, as proper to check the spirit of le-
vity and folly; and to inspire manly and becoming
fenltiments, in the place of criminal dissipation.
Bu t,

rit the second place, there is a consideration of a

nlature still more serious, to be employed for the fame
purpose; the consideration of God as not only the
Author of nature, but the governor of his creatures,
While we regard thre Dor.k of the Lolrd, we are also to
cogid~e~r the never ceaina operat~ion of /i~s hands. We
are to look up to ari awful and irresistible Providience,
firetchinga its arm over our heads ; direding the fate
of men, and dispensing at its pleairre happiness or
misery. In the giddy moments of jollity, the wan-
ton and thoughtless are apt to ay : "c Let trs cat andE
" drik, for· to-morrozo weU dlie. Nothing is better for
" man, than to rejoice as much as he can all the days
" of his vain life; and to keep himself undiflurbed
'L by fu~perflitious terrors. He who· fitteth in the
"L heavens beffows no minute attention on the sons
" of ear~th. He permits all tkrings to come alike to all;
" one eventt to lappen to the r·igkteous and to di~e wrick~d."
-Be aiffied, my brethren, it is not so. You great-
ly deceive yourselves, by imagining that your Creator
and Governor is indifferent to the part you are now
iating ; or that the diffribution of good and evil,
which now takes place, has no relation to your mo-
ral conduat. In some inflances, <that relation may
not be apparent, because the moral government of

God

God is not completed in this world. But a multi-
tude of proofs thow governmtent to be already begun ;
and point out to you the train in which you may ex-
p~ed it to proceed.

In the hiff~ory of all ages and nations, you cannot

but have observed a thousand initances, in whrlic .k th
operations of tke divine hand has been displayed ; over-
taking evil doers sooner or later with punithment,
and bringing on their own heads the ruin they had
devised for others. You are not to imagine that this
displeasure of Providence is exerted only against, the
ambitious, the treacherous, and the cruel, who are
the authors of extensive misery to the world. Un~der
this idea, perhaps, you may be desirous to thelter
yourselves, that your excei~es are of a harmleis kind;
that you seek nothing more than the enljoyment of
your owin pleasures ; that your sea/2 and your mruie
interfere not witht the order of the world ; a~nd that
therefore you have done nothing which thould
awaken the sleeping thunder, and bring it dlown from
heaven on your heads. Though not flained with t-he
blackest colours of guilt, your conduat may neverthe-
less be highly offenfive to the Ruler of the world.
His government is not of that indolent inattentive
. kind, which allows impunity to every lesser crimu-
nal. He beholds with displeasure the behaviour of
those who degrade their nature by vitious disorders;
and contaminate, by their example, every society
with which they are conneaed. Htis meafirres are
taken, that in one way or other, they fhalll fulf~er.

E 3Loor

LOOK around the circle of your acquaintance,

and observe, whether they ar~e not the sober, the in-
·duffrious, and the virtuous, who visibly prosper in
the world, and rife into reputation and influence;
observe whether the licentious and intemperate are
not confkantly humbled and checked by some dark
reverse either in their health or their fortune ; whe-
Sther the irreligious and profligate are ever f~uffered .to
escape long, without being marked with infamy,
and becoming objedis of contempt.--I ask, to what
cause this is to be ascribed, but to that operation of
the hand of God, which I am now calling you to con-
fider ?Does it not obviously carry the marks of a
plan, a fyfiem of things, contrived and fore-ordain-
ed by Providence, for rewarding virtue, and pu-
nifhing vice in every form of its disorders ?-The
Governor of the world need not for this purpose
Itep from his throne, or put forth his hand fr-om the
clouds. W7ith admirable wis~dom he hath so order-
ed the train of humlan affairs, that, in their natural
course, men's own lwickerdnes p/all reprove threm, atnd
thleir· backfi~rding corred~ them ; that tTe~y/Jlall be made to
cat he fnrit of therdirgJ din nd to fall into the pit wh~iick
;tlJnflelves Lad diggedi.

T~HESE things have been always To apparent to

observation, that though a man may have been set-
duced into irregular and evil courses during his life,
yet, at the close of it, it seldom happens but he dif-
cerns their pernicious nature, and condemnns hims~elf
for them. Ntever, perhaps, was there a father, who,

aIftetr

after he had spent his days in idleness, diifipation,
and luxury, did not, when dying, admomfih the
children whom he loved, to hold a more honourable
course, to follow the paths of virtue, to fear God,
and to fulfil properly the duties of their Ration.--
To yourselves, indeed, I can confidently appeal,
whether what I am now saying, be not confirmed byr
your own testimony. After you have been guilty of
some criminal aAs, in the course: of thofie riotous
pleasures which you ind'ulge, have you not, at cer-
tain times, felt the ifings of remorse ?j Were you not~
obliged to confess to yourselves that a fad profpef
of misery was opening before you, if such excelf~s
were to continue ?Did you not hear an inward voice
upbraiding you for having funk and degraded your
chara~ter so far below that of many of your equals
around you ?--My friends, whiat wyas this but the
voice of God, ifpeaking, as the Governor of his cre~a-
tures, within your heart ; testifying loudly that your
course of life was displeasing to him; and· warninga
you of punishments that were to follow ? If his
displeasure agaainft you is already begun. to' be tefiti-
fied, can you tell w~here it is to flop, or how" lon i

may~. cotiu to pursue youn throughout future flages

of your existence? Whro knowzeth th power of kis
wrath ?--To this awfutl, this warning voice, will
you not be perfuaded'reverently to listen ? Impressed
by the dread authority whi ch it carries, thall you not
fall down on your knees before your Maker, im-
ploring his mercy to pardon your past offences, and
his grace to reAify your future way i Secu

SUnH ought to be the effeats of the consideration

of God as the Governor of the world. It leads to
thoughts of a very serious nature. When we regard
the luood of th Lord, and contemplate him as the au-
thor of the universe, s~uch contemplation prompts
devotion. But when we confider· the operation of kis
hands in providence, and contemplate him as the
Governor of mankind, such contemplation prompts
h~umiliation before him for offences committed.,
I. The former addresses itself to the ingenuous s~enti-
ments that are left in the heart ; and awakens a sens~e
of our unworthinefls, in negleAing the Author of
nature, amidst our riotous pleas~ures. The latter
addresses itrelf to our regard for safety and happiness;
and awakens fear and dread, from conf~cioufnels of
the guilt we have con~traated. Hence springs up in
every thoughtful mind, an anxious concern to avert
the difpleafulre, and regain the favour of that Su-
preme Being to whom we are all f~ubjeat. This,
among unenlightened nations, gave rife to sacrifices,
expiations, and all the rites of humble, tho~ugh ~u~-
perftitious worship. Among. nations, who have
been infir~uL~ed in true religion, sentiments of the
fame nature pave the way for prayer, repentance,
faith, and all those duties, by means of which we
may hope, through a divine Mediator and intercef-
for, to be reconciled to heaven. Natural and re-
vealed religion here appear in concord. We behold
the original di~ates of the human heart laying a
foundation for the glad reception of the comfortable
tidings of the goipel.

I sAYs

I HA4VEr thus endeavoured to thew in what manner,

by r-egarding the· wzork of the Lor~d, andl confidecring thec
operationr of hlis hands, we may prevent the dangers
arising from a thoughtless indulgence of pleasure ; we
may be furnished with an antidote to the poison
which is too often mixed in that intoxicating cup.-
Human life is full of troubles. We are all tempted
to alleviate them as much as we can, by freely en-
joying the pleasurable moments which Providence
thinks fit to allow us. Enjoy them we may : But, if
we would enjoy them fifely, and enjoy them long,

t let us temper them with the fear of God. As soon

as this is forgotten and obliterated, the found of the
harp andt the Yiol is changed into the signal of death.
T he serpent comes forth from the roses where it had
lain in ambush~, and gives the fatal fling. Pleasure
in moderation is the cordial, in excefsj it is the bane,
of life.

SERMON~3

# SERMON VII. On the Presence of God in a Future State. PSALM xvi. II. Thou wilt shew me the path of life; in thy presence is fulness of joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

[ 86 ]

S E RM ON VII..

On the PRESENCE of GOD in a Future State.

PS ALM XVi. I I,

Thou wilt/dew, me tre paths of` lie : In thy presence isr

fulneJ; of joy : at t~y rig1t hand therre are pleafuere for

ever-more.

THIE apofile Peteh in a discourse which he
held to the Jews, a~pplies this paffagae, in a mvitical
and prophetical ifenfe, to the Mefia~h*. But, in its
literal and primitive meaning, it expresses the ex-
alted hopes by which the Psalmist David supported
himnfelfamridit the changes and revolutions, of which
his life was full. By these hopes, when flying be-
forle Saul, when driven from his throne, and perse-
cuted by an unnatural Con, he was enabled to pre-
serve his virtue, and to maintain unsh~aken trust in
God.-Iln that early age of the world, those explicit
dis~coveries of a slate of immortality, which we en-
joy, had not yet been given to mankind. But
though the Sun of righte'ou/hefs/ was not arisen, the
dawn had appeared of that glorious day which he

" Ad~s ii. 25S-28.wa

was to .introduce. Even in those antient times,
holy men, as the spofile writes to the Hebrew~s, Sw
the promises afar of andt weruet pev/rfuaed of themr andt
emb~raced thlem ; and confefing tharct .thley were fr'angers
a~d pilgr-imson earth, declared that they fought after a
beltete country, that is an heajenlry-*L. Indeed, in every
age, God permitted such hopes to afford firpport and
consolation to those who served him. The full
effeat of them we behold in thos~e triumphant ex-
preffions of the text, which are to be the fubjeA of
this discourse. They lead us to confider; firit, The
hope of the Psalmist in his present slate; Throu woilt
pewv me the path of lyse. And, secondly, the termi-
nation of his hope in that future slate, where in thre
pr~esence of God is fulne/s of joy, and at hlis righzt hand
skere ar~e pleasur-es for evertmore.

I. Thour wilt/Aewo me the pathts of life. This plainly

imports that there .are different parks or courses of
condua, which may be purs~ued by men in this
world; a path which leads to life or happines~s, and
a path which iirues in death or deftruaion. These
opposite lines of condula are determined by the
choice which men make of virtue or of vice; and
hence men are divided into two great classes, ac-
cording as their inclinations lead them to good or to
evil. The path of life is often a rough and difficult
path, followed only by a few. The opporite one is
the broad way, in which the multitude walk ; seem-
ingly faxooth, and firewed with flowers; but lead-

* Heb. xi. I 3,"' 6.

ing in the end to death and misery. 7Zle pathr of lyse
condudts uts up a sleep ascent. The palace of vir-
tue has, in all ages, been reprefeated as placed on
the summit of a hill; in the as~cent of which labour
is requisite, and dijiculties are to be fulrmounted ;
and where a condudtor is needed, to direAt our way,
andl to aid our fleps.

Now, th~e hope which good men entertain is,

that this pathr of fre thall be thewn them by God ;
that, when their intentions: are upright, God will
both infirua them conlcerning the road which leads
to true happines~s, and will afifit them to purfuea it
fulccefsfully. Among nations where any suitable
ideas of God or of virtue began to be formed, hopes
of this nature also begaan to be entertained. It was
consonant to the nature of man, to think that the
Supreme Being was favourable to virtue. Accord-
ingly, in the writiisgs of some of the ancient philo-
fophers, we find various obscure traces of this belief,
that there was a benign heavenly sp~irit, wvho illumi-
nated the minds of the virtuous, and afiftied their
endeavours to obtain wifdomr and happines~s. They
even asserted, that no man became great or good
witho'ut some inspiration of heaven.

BarrI what they indistinc~tly conceived, and could

not with confidence rely upon, the doEtrine of Chris-
tianity hath clearly explained and fully confirmed;
expressly and frequently teaching, that not only by
he external discoveries of revelation, but by- the in-

warYd

ward operations of his Spirit, he fows to the humble
anld virtuous the pathr of Ijfe. While, by his word,
he infiruats them in their duty, by the influence of
his grace he afflifts them in the performance of it.
In all revelation there is certainly no do~trine more
comfortable than this. It isto~ good men a noble
and pleasing thought, that they are purfuuag a path
which God has dis~covered and pointed out to them.
For they know that every path, in which he is their
condudtor, must be honourable, must be safe, muff
bring them in the end to felicity. They follow that
Skqepker of Ifiael, who always leads his flock into
greetln papre, andi makes them lie dowzn bepde the pill
waters At the fame time, they ktnow that, if there
be truth in religion at all, on this principle they may
securely reft, that the Divine Being will never desert
those who are endeavouring to follow out, as they
can, the path which he has thewn them. He be-
holds them here in a slate of great imbecility; fur-
rouWnded with much darkness; exposed to number-
lefTs dangers, from the temptations that assault them
without, and the fedu~tion of misguided and difor-

; derly passions within. In this situation, can they

ever f~ufped that the Father of mercies will leave his

h~ill of virtue, without stretching forth a compafflion-
ate arm to aid their frailty, and to guide them through
the bewdldering pat us oflife ; Where were then the
God of love P Where, those infinite compaffions of
his nature, in which all his worshippers have been
encouraged to truRt ?-No : He will /end forthli

lye/t and his truthL to bring them to his koly klill. For the
rigkteouks Lord louleth righrteoupSe/s, and his countsnance
beholde/th the upright. With him there is no oblique
purpos~e, to turn him afide~from favouring the cause
of goodsers. No undertaking to which he has
given his countenance shall prove abortive. No
promsife that he has made fhlall be allowed to fail.
Whom he loveth, he lovethto he end~. TKe secret of d~e
Lord is wDithl them that far himn, and b willfew~ them kis
cove~nan. The meek wll ke guide n judgment, and them
-w:11 k teack Als ayq. His gtzrace fall be }#cientr for-
them, and kis fength be made pept41 in thei weakne;s
Th~ey gofrom fength toJ~rengtd ; evuery one of ~the ap-
pearet~h before God in Zion s*.-S uch are the hopes with
which good men in a present life set forth on a cour~se
of piety and virtue. T~,,o/ku wlt~ewmete pathos life.
Let us now proceed,

II. To confider the termination of there hopes in

a future slate. In ~y prefance iS fulnefr of jcy ; at tl5y
righ~t hand threre ar·eplea/ures for eer Emore2. All happi -
ness aizuredly dwells with God. The fountain o.lf ye
is juffly said to be wuith khim. That supreme and in-
·dependent Being muff necessarily po~sses wvithin him-
self every .principle of beatitude; and no cause from
without can possibly affett his untroubled felicity.
Among created dependent beings, h~appinlefs flows
an fCcattered and feeble fireams; if reams that are often
tinged with the-blacknefs of misery. But from before
the throde of God iss~ues t~he river of life, full, unmixed,

* Pfal.Exy. r 4> . 3 Cor. Xii.9. Pfal. lxxxiV.7. an

and pure; and the pleasures which now in (canty
portions we are permitted to taite, are all derived
from that s~ource. Whatever gladdens the hearts of
men or angels, with any real and fatisfattory 30y,
comes from heaven. It is a portion of the pure infu-
ene sowing from theglory of the Almighty ; a ray guiin~g
from thle brightne/s oftker everla/fingb lie. It is manifei,
therefore, thiat every approach to God m-ui be an
approach to felicity. The enjoyment of his imme-
diate presence muit be the confulmmation of felicity;
and it is to this pr~esence that the Pfalmiit here ex-
presses his hope that the path of I~fe was to condua2
hi.1.

THE whole of what is implied in arriving at the

presence of the Divinity, we cannot expedt to com-
prehend. Such expressions as these of scripture, be-
Addi~ng the face of God ; Bling made glad with thre light
of kis coucntenance, and fatsisf d wzith his likene-; ; feing
light In his light; feeinrg no Conger darkly as thr~ough a glass,
but face to face; feingh Iim asheL'is; arle exprefirons
altogether my~terious, conveyinlg fulblim~e though
obscure ideas of the most perfeA happiness and high-
eit exaltation of human nature. This we know,
that the abs~ence of God, the distance at which we
are now placed from any communication with our
Creator, is one great source of our infelicity. Faith
exerts its endeavours, but often ineffeAually, to raile
our fouls to him. He is a God that kid~eth kim~efe
His wa s seem intricate and perplexed. We fre-
cquently cannot recon~cile theml to the conceptions

wvhich

which we had formed of his nature; and with many
a fufipicion and doubt they perplex the inquir~ing
mind. His works we s~urvey with affonithment.
We wonder andadore. But w~hile we clearly trace
the footiteps of their great Author. his presence we
can never discern. We gofor~ward, but he is not threre;
and bjackwavrd, but we cannot perceirve hrim : on the left
hrand, where hre wrorked~, but woe cannot behold h~m : hie
kide~th kimfelf on thre r·i'gt hand, thant wI·e cannrot/ee krime.
Hence amidst the various sorrows and dis~courage-
rnents of the prefient slate, that exclamation of Job's
is often drawn forth from the pious heart, O thant I
knew skere I migkt find hrim, that I might come eve~n to
ri~S eat ! ·f

iSURROUNDED by fiuch diffreffing obs~curity, no
hope more transporting can 'oe opened to a good
man, than that a period is to come, when he thall
be allowed to draw-nearer to the Author of his exist-
ence, and to enjoy the fed~e of his presence. In1
order to convey some faint idea of that future bliss~,
by fach an image as we can now employ, let the:
image be taken from the most glorious representative
of the Supreme Being, with which we are acquain:-
ed in this wo~rld, the Surn in the heavens. As that
resplendent luminary chears and revives the univerf'e,
when, after the darkness of a tempeltuous night, it
comes forth in thle morning with its bri ghte~ft luffre,
and inspires every heart with gladness; as ascending
gradually through the heavens, it converts that

whlofe

* Job xxilk. 8, 9. ·f· Job xxill, 3

whole vast extent, over which its beams are diffulfed,
into a region of light ; and thus changes entirely the
slate of objeAs, by arraying all nature in beauty,
and transforming it into the image of its own bright-
nefs:-Some su~ch change as this, though in a degree:
infinitely superior, we may conceive the revelation
of the Divine Pre~e~nce to produce upon the human
foul. I will behloldthyface int righteoufne; ; I flall be

i Jnftisfed, ·klen I awak~e, vidth th likenre/.--But without
i endeavouring farther to unfold mfiteries which we

cannot explore, there are two fiublime and expressive
viewYs,of the Divine Essence given us in s~cripture, on
which it may be edifying that our thoughts thlould
reft for a little, in order to aid our conceptions of the
blessedness of good! men hereafter, in the presence of
God. It is said, God is -ligtJ ; God is lov~e-j. Let
us confider wYhat fulne/s ofjoy muff arise from fitch
manifestations of the Divine Essence to the blef-
fed.

God is lighrt. The revelation of his pretence, in-

fers of cours~e, a complete diffuflion of light and
knowledge among all who partake of that presence.
This unquestionably forms a primary ingredient of
happiness. Ignorance, or the want of light, is the
source of all our present mif~conduat, and all our
misfortunes. The heart of man is dark ; and in thie
darkness of his heart is the f~eat of his corruption.
He is unable to dis~cern wthat is -truly good. Perpe-
tually employed in se~arch of happiness, he is perpe-

tually

' * john i. ·j

f John iv. 8.

tually milled by falf'e appearances of it. The errors
of his underftlauding impofep upon his pafflons and,
mn consequence of the wrong dire~tion which his
pa~irons take, he is betrayed into a thousand difor-
ders. Hence feduaality, covetoufners, and all the
violent contests with others about trifles, which oc-
calion so much misery, and to many crimes in the
wiorld. He feedlethof a.0s :l adeeived beart bath urn-
eddn himafd, that be cannot deliverv Alsr oul, nor/ay, Is
ther~e not a lie in my right handu' *?- Once open to
hi~m the perfe~t sources of k nowledge and truth ; sup-
pose him placed in the presence of that God who irs
Light; suppose him illuminated by light derive'd im-
mediately from the Supreme Being; presently· all his
former errors would fly away as mists are dispelled
by the rising fun. His whole nature would be changr-
ed and reformed. The prejudices which obscured
his underflanding would be rem~oved. The feduai-
ons of his passions would disappear. Redlitude and
virtue, having nothing now to obitrua their entrance
would take entire poffeffion of his heart. Angels are
<happier than men, because they enjoy more enlarg-
ed knowledge and views; becaus~e they labour gunder
none 'of our unhappy deceptions ; but fee the truth
as it is in itself; fee it, as it is in God. Sharing: the
fame light whirh illuminates them, good men in a
future itate wyill sh~are in their felicity.

MOREOVER, the light that flows from the presence

of Him who is the original source of light, not only

b~anithes

" Ilfeiah xliv. 20.

banifbes miseries wvhich were the effec'ts of formecr
darknes~s, but affo confers the mos1 exquisite enjoy-
ment. The knowledge afforded us at pres~ent serves
to su~pply our moit pressing wants; but: it does no
more. It is always imperfed and u'nfatisfaatory ;
nay, much pain and anxiety it often leaves. N~ar-
row is the [phere within which the mind can fee rat
all; and even there it can fee only da> kly as througk
a gla/s. But when it thall be enlarged beyond this
dusky territory, let loose from this earthly prison,
and in God'~s light permitted: to/ee ligh~t, the most mag-
nificent and glorious fpedacles muff open to the
view of the purified spirit. What muff it be to be-
hold the whole flupendous scene of nature unveiled,
and its hidden myf teries disclos~ed ! To trace the wife
and juff government of the Almighty, through all
those intricacies which had so long perplexed us !
To b~ehold his hand conduating ten thousand worlds,
which are now unknown to us; and throughout all
the regions of botmndlef~s space, to view w~isdom and
goodness perpetually adting, and diversifying its ope-
rations in forms of endlers variety ! Well may such
discoveries inspire that long of the blessed, which
the ap~oile John heard as th~e voice of maaany wzater~s, and
azs the voice of: mkLeAY than17derings, sa~ying, Aleluiak !
For thre LordZ Godt omnipooten t rignethr. Greatr and~ mar--
cellous are~ thy works, Lord Godt Almighty; jus/ andt truze
are t/y ~way, thou I~ing ~of faintJ. ! As God is Lighrt,
fro also it is s~aid lin Ecripture,

God is love. His presence must of course~ diffuf~e

love

+ Rev. x'ix. 6. xv. g.

love, among all who are permitted to d wrell in it.
He thazt loveth~ not, knowreth not God. He that dweolleth
in love, dwelletc rin God, and God in kim *. Were
man a single, solitary being, the fulll enjoyment of
light might fuffice for his happiness; as the perfe~ti-
on of knowledge would re~tify and improve to the
highest all his faculties. But, both here and hereafter-
he is conne~ted with other beings. Heaven implies
a society; and the felicity of that society is confli-
tuted by the perfe~tion of love and goodnel~s, flowing
from the pres~ence of the God of love.

HENCE foll0ws the entire purification of human

nature from all those malevolent palihons, which have
so long rendered our abode on earth the abode of

mifry.We greatly deceive ourselves, when wle

charge our chiefdiffreffes merely to the account of
our external condition in the wtorld. From the dif~-
advantages attending it, I admit, that we may often
have been exposed to fuffer.· We may have met
with disappointments in our pursuits. By the ar-
rows of misfortune we may have been wounded.
Under infirmities of body we may have languished.
But on this we may depend, that the worst evils of
our prefeat condition arise from the want of good-
seies and love ; from the disorders of felfith pafi~ans;
from the irritation which there occallon wh-en wlork-
ing within ours~elves, and the diffrefs which they
produce when breaking out upon us from others;
in a word, from that corrupted slate of temper, and

that

* 1 John ly. 8, I 6,

that reciprocation of jealouffes, fulp~icions, and in-
juries, whbich is ever takting place among the societies:
of men. Could you banish diffruft, craft, and un-
charitablenes~s, from the eartha, and form all mankind
into an asse~mbly of the just and the benevolent;
could you inspire every heart with kind aff'eaions,
and render every one friendly and generous to his
neighibour; you wrould baniih at once thie most as-
liftive tribe of human evdls. Seldom would the
voice of comp~laint be heard. A'll nature would as·-
fume a diff~erent afpieat. Ch~eerfulness would be feenr
on every counteniance. Par-adise w~ould returni.
The wildernlefs wvould finile; thet defr~lt rej~oicep and
bkfi~~mnas thle ~o/e.--Now farch are the effets wh:ich;
thle presen~ce of the Godl of love m~uff produce on the
inhabitants above. B;:koldting his grlor:y, the~y ar chang-';~
ed intlo the Jun/fe image. In that temple of eternal love,
which his presence has hallowed and conse~crated, no
found but the voice of harmony is ever h~eard - no
app~earances ever prelent themflelves but thos~e of:
peace and joy.

TaUS, considering God under there two illuffrious

characaers, which are given of him in s~cripture, as
Li~lft, and as Lo-,e, it followvs that in his presence
there muff he fulne/s of joy. But I am far fromt sav-
ing that theP fewv imnprfed hints I have~ ~nows given,
exhauff-, or even approach to, the fulm of those
plea/hL~fres f r evemor-e ed~ick ar~e atf God'S riget handn.
Ten thousand pleafoures are there, wh~ich nowv we
have neither faculties to comprehecnd, nor powers to

voL. rv, F enjoy.

enijoy. Behind that myfierious cloud, which covers
the habitation of eter~nity, the view of mortals can-
not penetrate. Content wvith our humrble and dif-
tant situation, we mTuff as yet remain. Faith can
only look to those glories from afar. In patient
silence, we muff wait, truss, arnd adore.

SUPPOSING the ideas which I have set: before you,

in this discourse, to be no more than the fp~ecula-
tions of a contemplative mind, such as were wont
of old to be indulged by the philosophers of the
Platonic s~chool, itill theyv would defertre attention,
on account of their tendency to purify and elevate
the mind. But when they are considered in con-
neafion with a revelation, which, upon groilmds the
most unquestionab~le, we believe to be divine, they
are entitled to command, not attention only, but
reverence and faith.--They pr~esent to us su~ch high
exp~edations as are f~ufficient to determine every rea-
fonable man to the choce of virtue; to su~pport him
under all its prefeat difcouragements, and to comfort
him in the hour of death.. Juffly may they exscite in
our hearts that ardent aspiration of the Psalmist :
sMy foul tkirJfeth for God, for· the living~ God ; O wh~en
f7all I comre and appear befor-e him p!--But, with thisa
with in our hearts, never, I beseech you, let us for-
get what was set forth in the first part of this djif-
course ; that, in order to arrive at the presence of
God, the path of lfe must previoutly be thewn to us
by him, and that in this path we muff pers~evere to
the end. Thiefe two things cannot be disjoined, a

virtuours

# SERMON VIII. On Curiosity concerning the Affairs of others. JOHN xxi. 21,22. Peter seeing him, faith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do? Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry fill I come, 

virtuous life and a happy eternity. Whrlo Jfll a/cendl
urnto the kill of the Lordr ?p and whuo Jlall ]ndJ in his holjr
place 7 He only who hadl clean bands and a~lure h~eart.
Between a corrupted heart and the God of light and
love, there never canl be any conne~ion. But of
this we may reft affizred, that the path of piety and
virtue, pursued with a firm and constant spirit, will,
in the endi, through the merits of our blessed Re-
deemer, bring us to that pres~ence, wrhere is fUlne/1. of
joyv, and where ar~eplea/r~1es for everm17ore.

S ERMnIO N VIll.

On CURI~oscrY concerning the AFFAIRS Of

others.

JoHN x xi. 2 1, 2 2.

Peter f-eeing kim, faith to fJu~is, Lord, andl wh~at f rall

thlis man d'o?3 JzeuSfaithl unto hlim, If I wi~ill that he~
tarr~y till I come, wh~at is thazt to tlhee Follow th~ou

T HES E words occurred in a conference which
our Lord held! with Simon P~eter, after his refurrec-

F; 2 tion

tion from the dead. Confel~ous of th disg~race wh~lich
hie had incurred by his late denial of his Master, Petrc
must at this timne have appeared before h-im with
thlame. Our Lord, after a tacit rebuke, impliedl in
the question which he repeatedtly puts to him, Simon,
Jn of fonas, lovey thou me 7 reflores him, with gr~eat
benignlity, to his office as an apostle, by giving the
commandment to feed hris /deep; and intimates atlfo
that it thould be his lot to f~uffer death in the cause
of his Master. The Apofile John, diftingulfh7edi
here by the deno~minatlon of the d~ifcpe wkum·· fejks
loved, being present at this conversation, Peter, who
was always eager and forward, looking to John, puts
this question to our Saviour, Lord, and whait fall tisi
man do " What shall be his employment ? what
cc his rank and flation in thy kingdom ? what his
"L future fate in life ?"-BIy what principle Peter
was moved to put this unseasonable and improper
question to his Malter; whether it arose from mere
curiosity, or from some emotion of rivalfhip and
jealousy, does not appear; but it is plain that our
Lord was diffatisfied with the enquiry which he
made ; and presently he checks Peter's curiosity, by
a severe reply ; Whzat is that to there 7 " What is it to
"c thee what tkis man fall do ; what thall be his rank;
a or what the circumitances of his life or his
" death ? Attend thou to thine own duty. Mind
rr thy proper concerns. Fulfil the part which I
(( have allotted to thee. Follow throu ne·."--The m-
firuttion which aris~es from- this conversation of our
Lord's with Peter, is, That all: prymng mnquiries mnto

the

obje ia of his miantento, wi cacte f others. Th lllrat

Tn or id~le cudmriofity, that nutit eer~ ainai fd

i

rhe figb lieow hiic chg tr adbe kes tc c oune ae lo
interrupths thte gb on, sioi~

or rd nd ourithesfeveralg

focit~yflins.It raw mten s

afi e

from a roprati-

hin-Tr into lerrps " '

k dto e

.,oleae of oiety. In"l m thswolwe arl~e sin te g'e

TnA i~rcuioties Whliqnte arebu d

by dut, nd w

ther by m~clany me t pr mutualh affdir f tne,
a ~nous i- 70dr hefire 1 tfio theo each uthe. dBt
ithofpt te

frie dy offies, ar dbease perform too h

fcey tge when we ravod to ntefr nuncearilys hxeansh

ca ~Toncrs. of our wmneihor Eve rym ma p' ilt h

tentioa totedihasg fheis own interf o o

ow n enpats to a y, th which, hi bes n heigb

paffir of hcisy own thi o rnan deaelne o

hasi no call or fcrtinc'l size. Huma lfe othen rocee s

ion its most nurl and Srourd ery trainwe vr

one keeps within~ the bou;:nds ofi hi; prop'er proY:nce,

wh~enl, as long as his purs~uits are fair and lawful, he
is allowved, without diflurbance, to conduc? them in
his own way. Tlrat ye fludy to e quiet, and to do your
own" buffnefs*, is the apoffolical rule, and indeed thle
great rule, for pres~ervation of harmony and order.
But so it is, that, in every age, a set of mnen have
exiited, who, driven by an unhappy a~ftivity of fpi-
rit, oftener perhaps than by any fettled design of
dfoing lo n oie fabto ritrf

I 'lo

n oie f miino neer

love to intermeddle where they have no concern, to
2nqture into the private affairs of others, and from
the impedred information which they collea, to
form conClusions concerning th~eir circumfiances
and charafter. There are they who, in scripture,
are charaderifed as tatlers, anrd bu/y bodiesi in othe~r
mnen: matters, and from whom we are called to turln

THOUGH persons of this defeription thould be

prompted by nothing but vain curiofiiy, they are,
neverthlelefs, dangerous troublers of the world.
While they conceive th~emselves to be inoffenfive,
they are sowing dissention and feuds. Croffling the
hines i mwh ch others move, they create cohfufion,
and awvaken resentment. For every man conceives
himself to be injured, when he finds another intru-
ding into his aff~airs, and, without any title, taking
upon him to examine his condu&A. Being improper-
ly and unnecess~arily diflurbed, he claims the right of
diiflu~bing in his turn those who wvantonly have trou-

'bled

* x The(T. iv. xr,

bled him. Hence, many a friendship has been
broken;i the peace of many a family has been over-
thrown; and much bitter and1 lating~ discor~d has been
propagated through society.

WHILE this [pirit of meddling curiosity injures so

considerab~ly the peace and good order of the world,
it also nourithes, among individuals who are ad-
dilaed to it, a multitude of bad passions. Itsj most
frequent source is mere idleness, which, mn itle ha
vice, never fails to engender many vices mnore. Te
mind of man cannot be long without some food to
nourish the aAivity of its thoughts. The idle, who
have no nourishment of this fort within themselves,
feed their thougrrhts with inquiries into the conduat
of their neighb ours.1 Llv5~ 1-The inquisitive and curious
are al~ways talkative. Wha"t they learn, or fancy
themselves to have learned, concerning others, they
are generally in haste to divulge. A tale which the
malicious have invented, and the credulous have
propagated ; a rumour which, arising, among the
multitude, and transmitted by one to another, has,
in every flep of its progress, gained fresh additions,
becomres in the end the foundation of conndent as-
fertion, and of rath and severe judgement.

IT is often by a spirit of jealousy and rivalry,

t~hat the researches of such persons are prompted.
They with to discover something that will" bring
down their neighbour's charaderr, circumitances, or
re utation, to thie level of their- own; or that wl

2 flatter

Hatter them with an opinion of their owvn superiority.
A secret malignity lies at the bottom of their inqlui-
ries. It may be concealed by an affet~ted show of
candlour and impartiality. It may even be veiled
wlith th~e appearance of a friendly concern for the
interests of others, and with affeded apologies for
their failings. But the hiddlen rancour is easily dif-
covered.--While, therefore, persons of this deferip-
tion trouble the peace of society, they at the fame
time poison thieir own minds wtith malignant pas-
hions. Their difpolition is entirely the reverse of
that amiable spirit of charity, on which our religion
lays so great a firefs. Charity coveredr the· multitude of
fins; bu;t this prying and medding ipirit seeks to
diiovrer and divulge them. Char~ity thinkethr no evil;
but this temper inclines us alwrays.to ~fuFpef the
w\orst. · Charity > cjoiceth ntot in iniquityv; this temper
triumphis in the discovery of errors and failings.
Chlarity, like the furn, brightens every ob'ed on
w~hich it thines; a censorious difpolition casts every
chara~er in the darkest fhlade it will bear.

IT ~is to be farther obfierved, that all impertinent

curiosity about the affairs of others tends greatly to
obffru~t personal reformation; as it draws mens
thoughts aside from what ought to be the chief ob-
jeR of attention, the improvement of their own
heazrt and life. They who are so officioufly occupi-
ed about their neighbours, have little leifiire, and
less inclination, to observe their own defcEa~s, or to
mind their ow·n duty. From their inquisitive re-

f earches,

searches, thley fin~d, or imnagine" the"y fid'd, in othe
behaviour of others, an ap'ology for their o:-n ad~-
ings: A~nd the favourite reul ofter nu rie
nerally is, to reft satisfied whih themselves. They
are at least as good, they think, as others around
them. The condtemnation wvhich they pass on the
vices, ofC their neighbour , r bey interpret to be a fen-
timent of virtue in themse~lves. TFhey become thlofe
hypocrites diefcribed by our- Lord', who fee clearly
the maste that is in? th r· nIghbIlOUr's eye, wIhle teY~ dy-em)
not fthe beam that is in their. r'on.

IN opposition to fach a chara-~ter as this, the doc-

trine p ainly inculcated by th~e text is, that to every
m~ian a particular charge is gciven by his Lord and
MatPer, a part is assigned him byv Providenlce to it·;
that to th~is he oug.ht to bendl his chriefateto :a
instead of fecrutinifing the chareAter or slate of othrs
ought to think of himself, and leaive them~ to stand or
fall by their owrn master. What fall this man do ?
faEid Pe2ter. Whant, replies our Lord, is that to thee .

Fjlort ll~ow l

~tho .

HFERE persons poiffefs any inp~ortant flation, or

diftingujlfhed rank, in the world, thle application of
this droarine to them is manif~ef. I hyhv n
candour, th~ey cannot refuse to akoweg that
God and the worldl have a title to expe8 fron thlem
a hillgent attention to their proper part in -life , andi
that to waste their time in idle inquiries abJout otl ers,
wvith w~homn they have nothing to doi is re~preilenable:

F 3 and

and sinful. But there are multitudes of mankind, to
whom this appears in a very different light. They
are humble and private men, who are willing to
conceive themfrelves as of little importance in t-he
world. Having no extensive influence, and no call,
as the-y think, to diflinguilh thems~elves by altive
exertions in any sphere, they imagine that they may
innocently lead an idle life, and indulge their curio-
fity, 197 canvassing at pleas~ure the charaater and the
behaviour of those around them. With perforts of
this des~cription every Iociety too much abounds.--
My brethren, no one ought to confider himself as
insignificant in the fight of God.

IN our se~veral flations we are all sent forth to be

labourers in God's viney'ard. Every man has hlis
work allotted, his talent committed to him; by the
due improvement of which he might, in one way or
other, serve God, promote virtue, and be useful in
the world. Occupy~ till I come, is the charge given to
alfl Christians wlithoutE exception. To be entirely
ulnemnployed and idle is thle prerogative of no one, in
any rank of life.

E VEN that sex, whlofe talk< is not to mingle in the

labours of public and a~tive business, have their
own: parts assigned thern to a~t. In the quiet of do-
mrellic thade, there are a variety of virtues to be ex-
ercifed, and? of important duties to be discharged.
Mul~ch depends on them for the maintenance of pri-
vate aeconomry and order, for the education of the

you~ng,

young, and for the relief and comfort of thos~e w~hose
funalons engage them in the toils of the world.
Even wrhere no s~uch female duties occur to be per-
formed, the care of prepa~ring for future ufefulnefs,
and of attaining fulch accomlpliihments as procure
juff efleem, is laudable. In fach duties and cares,
how far better is time employed, than in that search
into private concerns, that circulation of rumours,
those discussions of the conduat, and defcants on
the charafter of others, which engross converfatsoan
so much, and which end, for the most part, in feve-
rity of cenfiire !

IN whatever condition we are placed, to ac2 al-

ways in chara~ter thould be our const~ant rule. H~e
who a~ts in charsaer is above contempt, though his
station be low. Hfe who aAs out of chara~ter is
desp~icable, though his flation be ever so high.
Wh/at is that to thee, what this man or that man does
Think of w bat thou oughteft to do thylelf ; of what
is suitable to thy chara~ter and place; of what the
world has a rtite to exp~ea from thee.- Every excur-
sion of vain curiosity about others, is a fubtra~ion
from that time and though'rt which was due to our-
selves and due to God. Ha~ving g~fts, sa~ys the
APostle Paul, difering accor-ding to the rac tht
given us, wh~llethe minij~ry, let us wLait on our maingfring ;
or- be that teacketh~, on teaching·; or he that exkortethl, on
exhortation. Her that givetth, let himn do it w~ith jimiplicity ;
Be that rurlethr, with diligence ; hre that/kewethmercy, writh
cheerifulne/sl *. IN

* Rom.~ xil. 6,---9,

IN th~e great circle of human aiffaire there is room

for every onie to be b ofy and well employed in his
own prov'ince, without encroaching upon that of
others. It is the province of superiors to direst; of
inlferiors to obey ; of the learned to be infirudive -
of the Iglnorant to b~e doi~~le; of the- ol t b m
municativei of Ethe young to be advifeable and di-
ligent. Art thou poor ? Show thyself aldive and
indutrrlious, peaceable and contented. Art thou
wealthy ? Show thyself beneficent and charitable,
condes~cending and humane. If thou livest much
mn the worlds, it is thy cduty to makre the light of a
good examp~le thinle consp~icuously before others.
If: thou liveit private and retired, it is thy busines~s
to imuprove thine own mind, and to add, if t~hou
canfi do no more, one fa~ithf'ul fubjeAt to the Mef~-
fiah's kingdom. There is indeed no man so fe-
queffered from aEtive life, but within his own nar-
row sphere he may find some opportunities of doing
good; of cultivating friendihlp, promoting peace,
and d~ifcharginlg many of these lesser offices of hu-
manity and kindinefs, which are within the reach of
every one, and which wye all owe to one another.
In all the various relations which fiibiift among us
in life, as husband and wife, mailer and servants,
parents and children, relationis and friends, rulers
and fubjeals, innumerable duties stand ready to be
performed; innumerable calls to virtuous adivity
pr'efent themfe~ives on every hand, fufficient to fill
ulp with advantage and honour the whole time of

!ft~=THERE

THE=*RE is, in particular, one gr~eat and compre-

henfive objeA of attention, which, in the text, is
placed in direa opposition to that idle culriofity re-
pr-ehendedr by our Lordt; that is, to folonw Christ.
Follow thzou me·. Wihat this manl or th:at m~an does ;
how he employs his time ; what use he ·makes of his
talents; how he f~ucceedt s in the wTorld; are mratters,
concerning which the information we receive can
never be of great importance to us; often, is of no
importance at all. But howv our Saviour behaved
while he was on earth, or how, in our situation, ne
would have behaved, are matters of the highest mo-
mlent to every Christian.

THE commandment given in the text, to followu

him, includes both obs·erv~ance of his words, and
imitation of his example. The words of Christ con-
tain, as we all know, the Htanding rule of our life.
His example exhibits the gr-eat mnodel on which our
conduct ought to be formed ; and it is to this that the
precept here delivered direc~!y refers.--Examples
hrave ocea·t iniuence on all. But by all humnan ex-
amples, we are in danger of being occasionally mif-
led. HTe are evenobligred to be on our guard, left
the admiration of what is e~stimable, betray us mnto
a resemblance of what is blemithled and faulty. For
the moit perfed human charaEters, in the midst of
their brightness and beauty, are always marked with
fomne of thos~e dark s~pots which slain the nature of
man. But our Lord poffeffed all the virtues of the
areateft and best men, without partaking any of

their

their defe0Es. In him, all was light without a thade,
an; beaulty without: a ftain.-A~t the fame time, his
examl·ple is attended wlthm thls f ngular advantage, of
being more accommodated than an~y other to general
imitationi. It was diithnguifhled by no unnatural
aufferities, no affetted singularities; but exhiibits the
plain and sim~ple tenor of all those virtues for which
we have moss frequ~ent occasion in ordinary life. In
order to re~nder it of- more ess~ential benefit, our Lord
fixed his residence in no partic-ular place; he tied
himself down to no particular calling or way of liv-
ing; but gives us the opportunity of viewing his
behaviour, in that variety of lights whtich equally
and indifferently regard all mankind. His life w~as
divided between the retired and the aative slate. De-
votion and busines~s equally shared it. In the dif-
charge of that high office with which he was vefied,
we behold the perted' model of a public chara~er;
and we behold the most beautiful example of private
life, when we contemplate him among hiis disciples,
as a Father in the midst of his family.--By su~ch
means he has exhibited before us ipecimens of ever~y
kind of virtue; and to all ranks and claifes of men
has afforded a pattern after wrhich they may copy.
Hardly is there any emergency which can occur in
life, but from some incidient in our Saviour's con-
du&t, from some feature displayed in his charader,
we are enab~ledl to fay to oulrfelves, "C Thus Christ
"L would have ipoken, thus he would have afted,
" thus he would have ifufered, if he had been cir-
"C cumftanced as we are now."

IN STEA 9,

INS TEA D, thereforle, of thinking of thy neigh-

bours around thee, and of inquiring hlow they behave,
keep Christ in thine eye, and in thy whole conduat
follow him. Follow ktim in his fleady and conf~cien-
tious discharge of duty, amidst opposition from evil
men, and a corrupted world. Follow him in his
patient f~ubmifiron to his Father's will, and the calm-
ness of his spirit undera~lltrials. Follow him in his
a~ts of difintereited benevolence, in hiis compaiffon
to the unhappy, in his readines~s to oblige, to assist,
and to relieve. Imitate the mildnes-s and gentlenefis
of his manners. Imitate the affab~ility and conde-
f~cenflon which appeared in his behaviour. Imitate
the uncorrupted simplicity and purity which diftin-
guiihed his whole life.

THESE are much worthnier and nobler objefts of*

your attention, than any of those trifling varieties
which you can explore and dis~cover in the charalters
of those among whom you live. By lifting your
view to so high a flandard, you w~ill be preserved!
from descending to those futile and corrupting emn-
ployments of thought, which occupry the idle, the
vain, and the malignant. It is incredible, how
much time and attention are thrown away by men,
in examining the affairs of others, and dif~-
cufi~ng .their condutt. W~ere their time and
attention thrown away only, the evil would, in some
degree, be les~s. But they are worse than thrown
away ; they are not merely fruitless, but produ~tive
of much mischief. Such a habit of thought is con-
ne~ted with a thousa8nd vices. It is the conflant

fourc e

fourlce oC rath andl feveA confur~e. It ;yries from
envy andJ y lady~. It foments if natulre and p~ride.
It propog r::es mifundrerft and~r i ng and d hacrd. All
those evils wro id~ be prevented, if the reproof which
our L~ord adminriffers in the text came of-~ener hoeme,
with proper authorlty, to h~e reflexi::n of mren :
~i~nat is thzat ·t thee f 'Iach~ of us have mrore m~aterial
and iniFOrtant l'iatnefs of our o~wn to fulfil. Our
talk is af~gnell; o~r pa~rt allottedf. Did we suit~ably
examine how that part wvas ner~formed, we thould be
less, disp~osed to bujry ourfelives about the concerns of
others. W're woculfd discover many a difobrder to b~e
corr-eaed at hom~e; many a weed to b~e pulnled out
from ou~r owvn grounds; muchi remaining to be done,
in order to cendier ourse~lves usef~ul in this world, and
fit for a world to com~e.-W-~Vherefore, ini~tead of be-
ing critics on others, let us employ o~ur criticism on
ourselves. Leaving oth~ers to be judged by Hiim who
fearcheth th~e "leart, let us implre his afifi8ance for
enabling us to aft well ou~r ownr part, and to follow
C hrift.

SERMON~10~5

# SERMON IX. On our present Ignorance of the Ways of God. JOHN xiii. 7. Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter.

[ II3 1

S E RMiON IX.

Onl our Present IGwoun~cE of the Warhs of

Geov

Jons xiii. 7.

ffSus an/wrioed and faidl unto kim, What I doa, throu

knowyP not no~w ; burt throu salt knor kerveafter.

THESE wiords of our Lord were occasioned
by a circumilance in his behaviour which appeared
myfierious to his disciples. When about to cele-
brate his last pairover, he meant to give them an
infh~uaive lef~on of condefcenrion and humrility.
The mode which he chose for delivering this in-
Itruaion, was the emblematical sacion of wrathing
thleir t-eet. When Simnon Peter fagw his master ad-
drefling himse2lf to the performance of so mnenial an
office, he exclaimas with the greatest fiirpr-ife, Lordt
dayi? thouu oalk mIy feet ? Our L~ordl repics, in thet words
of the text, Wharrt I do thou .inomy?~ not nowu, but thou]
/Jalt kn~aow Ae> after. ( Mly behiaviour in this in-
"; stance· may feemn unaccountable to you at p~re-
"' sent * but you thall afterwards r-eceive a fatisfac·

"L tory

"L tory explication of the intent of that symbol which
"' I nlow employ."

THE~ expre~irons of a divine person, on this occa-

sion, can very naturally and properly be applied to
various infltances, where the conduat of Providence
in the adminification of humanl affairs, remains dark
and myfierious to us. What I do, thou knoctevef Rot.
nose. We m?7uff for a while be kept in ignorance of
the deiigns of heaven. But this ignorance, though
necefrary at present, is not always to continue. ~tA
time shall come when a commentary shall be affordi-
ed on all that is now obscure; when the veil of myf-
ter~y shall be removed; and full fa~tisfaaion be given
to every rational mind. Thou .Alialt kn~o'Uo kereaftEr.
This is the dottrine wYhich I purpo~e to illuffrate inz
the following discourse~.

I. OUR x aviour's words lead us to observe, that

many things in the condua~ of Providence are at
present myfierious and unintelligible. The truth
of this observation will not be called in queffion.
It is indeed very readily admitted by all; and ever
since the beginning of the world has been the foun-
dation of many a complaint, and of much feepticiifm
concerning the government of heaven.--That hu-
man affairs are not left to roll on according to mere
chance, and that Providence interposes in them to
a certain degree, is made evident by various tokens
to every candid mind. B3ut the perplexity and trou-
ble of the thoughtful inquirer arises from obl`erving

thlat:

that Providence appears not to pursue any regular
or consistent plan. An unaccountab~le mixture of
ligrht and darkness prd~ents itf'elf to us, when we
attempt to trace the affairs of the world up to any
wife and ri hteous adminiffration. W~e fee juffic~e
and order begun ; but on many occasions they seem
to be deserted. The rayr of light which we had
traced for a while, suddenly forlakes us; and, where
we had looked for the continuance of order, we meet
with confution and di fappointment.-FIor inftance;i
when we examine the constitution of the human
mind, we dis~cern evident marks of its being framed
with a view to favour and reward virtue. Conl~ci-
ence is endowed writh signal authority to check vice.
It brings home uneasiness and remors~e to the bad ;
and it fooths and supports the righteous with s~elf-
approbation and peace. The ordinary course of
human things is made to coincide in s~ome degree
with this constitution of our nature. The worthy
and the good are, in general, honoured and efleem-
ed. He thiatwalketh uphrightly, is, for the most part,
found to wcalk farely. The chief misfortunes that:
befal us in life can be traced to s~om~e vices or follies
which we have committed;i andl it almost never hap-
pens but the Jinner's own1 wUickedne/SS i made, s0ooner
or later, to Irprove hima, and his backf~lidigj to corrled
kim.

AL L this carries the impress of a just Providence,

of a wif~e and a benevolent adminiffration of the
universe. We cannot avoid perceiving that the

Almnight~y

Alm ighty hath ft his thrrone for judgmernt. At the fame
time, when we purfuie our enquiries, the Almighty
appears to bolrd back the face of hris /krone, andt to /pr~eadr
kis· cloud upo~n it.* For in lookling abroad into the
world, how many scenes do we behold, wrhich are
far from corresponding with anly ideas wye could
form of the government of Heaven ? Many nations
of the earth we fee lying in a slate of barbarity and
misery ; funIk in such gros~s ignorance as degrades
them below the rank of rational beings ; or abandon-
ed to be the prey of cruel oppression and t~yranny.
Wrhen we look to the state of individuals around us,
we hear the lamentations of the unhappy on ever-y
hand. We meet with weeping parents and mourn-
ing friends. We behold the young cut off~ inl the
Alower of their days, and the aged left des~olate in the
midst of f~orrowis. The ufefull and virtuzous are
fwvept away, and the wrorthlef~s left to flouriah. The
lives of the best men are often filled with dis~courage-
ments and difagppointed hopes. Merit langulfhes in
neglefied solitude; and vanity and presumption gain
the admiration of the wrorld. Fromn the scourge of
calumny, and from the hand of violence, the in-
jured looks up to G~od as thle Avenlger of thleir ca~use;
but often they look up in vain. H~e is a God hant
kideth~ krimplfZ He d welleth, as to them, in t~he fe-
Scret place of do ~knels; or, if he dwellethl in lIgh!t,

it is in lig~lt to wA'J;ckl no mnrI cani a~IPproaZcJ. Refi gnati-
on may feal up their lips ; but in silence thety dr~op
the tear, and mrourn whlile they adore.

SucH,

+ Job xxivi. g.

SecH, it muff not be dissembled, are the diffic~ut-

ties wvhich encounter us wrheni we attempt to trace thiE
present w~ays of G~od. A~t thle f~ame timne, uponr re-
fle~tion, we may~ be satisfied that cauies can be al-
signed for things appearing in this unfavourable
light ; and that there is, no reason~ to be fiirlrrifed at
the divine conduAt being mysterious at present.

TH E monarchy of the universe is a gr-eat and

com~p~lcated fyfitem. It comprehends numberles~s
generations of men, who are brought forth to act
their parts for purposes unknown to us. It inclue es
twro worlds at once; the world that now is, and
w·hich is only a small portion of existence ; and a
world that is to come, which endures for ete nity.
To us, no more than the beginnings of things are
visible. W~e fee only some broken parts of a great
whole. W~e trace but a few links of that chain of
being, which, by secret conneations, binds toge-
ther the prefenlt and the future. Such know~ledge is
affordedi us as is \fufficient for iApplying the exigen-
cies and wants of our pres~ent slate; but it does no
more. Peeping abroad from a dark corner of the
univer~se, we attemPt in vain to explore the counsels
that governl the world. It is an attempt to found at)
unfa ~homable d~eep writh a f'canty line ; and with a
feeble wing to af'cend above the stars. In any comn-
plicated workr, even of human art, it is found ne-
ceffar to be acquainted with the diefign of the whole,
in order to judge of the fitnes~s of its parts. In a
s~cheme to complex as the adminifiration of the

wITorld ,

world, where all the part~s refer to one another, and
wvhere what: is seen is oftenl fbordainalte to wihat is in-
visible, how is it pofirble but our judgments muff be
often erroneous, and our complaints ill-founded ? If
a peasant or a cottager be incapable of j udg'ing of the
government of a mighty empire, Is it s~urprising that
we thould be at a loss concerning the conduAt of the
Almighty towards his creatures ? Wh~-at Id0 rthou kntow-
eJ3not nowr.

But, on this argument flill more can be said for

our fatisfal~ion. We are to observe, that complete
information refpeding the wvays of God, not only
was not to be expedfed here; but, moreover, that
it would have been hurtful, if granted to us in our
present slate. It would have proved inconsistent
with that slate; writh the adions which we have to
perform in it, and the duties we have to fulfil. It
would indeed have overthrown the whole design of
our being placed in this world. We are placed
here under the trial of our virtue. Ignorance of the
events that are ordained to befal us, ignorance of the
plans and the decrees of heaven, enter neceSsarily
into a slate of trial. In order to exercis~e both our
intelleAual and moral powers, and to -carry them
forward to improvement, we muff be left to find
our way in the midst of difficulties and doubts, of
hardships, and f~ufferings. We muff be taught to
aAt our part with conflancy, though the rewrard of
our conflancy be difiant. We must learn to bear

wRith

wYith patience wYhatever our Creator judges proper to
lay upon us, though we fee not the reason of the
hardsh~ips he infliftj. If we were let into the se~cret
of the whole plan of Providence; if the justice of
Heaven were, in every flep of its procedure, made
manifest to our view, man would no longer be the
creature he now~ is, nor would his present slate anlwer
any purpos~e of dis~cipline or trial.

MYSTERY and darknes~s, therefore, mnuft of ne-

eeffity now take place in the course of things. Our
present slate can be no other than a state of twilight
or dawn, wlhere dubious forms shall often prefeat
themselves to us, and w·her-e we fhalll find ourselves
in a middle condition between complete light and
total darkness. Had we enjoyed no evidence of a
juff Judge ruling the eart~h, and of his providence
interposing in our affairs, virtue would have been
altogether deprived of its encouragemrent and support.
Had the evidence, on the other hand, been so firong
as to place the hand of the Almighty conftantlyi be-
fore our eyes, the intention of our present existence
would have been defeated, and no trial of virtue
have remained. Inficad, therefore, of complaining
of the obscurity which at prefeat covers the condult
of Providence, we fee that, on the whole, we have
reason to furbmit and adore.

II. The text: fugg~efis that, though what God is

doing, or what he intends to do, we kn2Ow not nowv, yet
there is ground to believe, that at some future period

wr~te

we fhalll r~eceive inlformation. WhaT~lrt I do thou~ kntow~-
SI/1 not no o, but Iikou~rl salt· know hl~Eree.. The queflion
hzere arise~s, wYhat that hereaftrnS is to wrhich we are to
look for the solution of our present dfoubts

IN the first place, herL~enaft may, on some occafi-

ons, refer to the subse-quent course of events in this
world. It ofteen happens that the conse~quences of
things t~hrow light on the defignls of Godi. The his~-
tory of P-r~ovidence, in proportion as it advanres,
dif~embroils itself. Though ouzr present: condition
forbids extensiv~e and complete inf~ormation, yet as
much is sometimes allowedi to appear as gives us fa-
vourable openings into the righteous and benevolent
cou~nsels of heaven.--T~hus, in the public a~ffairs of
the world, it: has been frequently seen, that from the
most unpromising causes important and beneficent
effeits hav e, in the fiequel, arisen. In our own
country, at one period, the violent pas~sions of a
prince gave beginning to the Reformation. At
another perioi, - arbitrary attempts against religion
and liberty occasioned that hai-ppy Revolution which
has formed thie cera of national prosp~erity. In many
instances, thre cr·th cf mann has been made to pr-aiS
GodJ. Those wlars and commotions that thake the
moral world have anfwleredl fmila~r purpofe~ts w~ith
tempests in the natur~al w5orld, of purging the air
from noxious vapours, and r~estoring it to a tempe-
rature more f~ound and wholefomne. From the midst
of confusion order has been made to spring, and fromn
temporary mifchiefs, lastin7g advantages to arise.---

In all cafes of this nattire, with which sacred and
civil hiffory abounds, secret deligns of heaven were
going on, which were unfolded in the end. The
wheel was always in motion. The hand of the
clock was advancing with unperceived progress, till
the moment came of its firiking the appointed! hour.

hr like ynanner, with ref~pedt to individuals, there

is often a ker~eafter in the course of their lives, which
discloses and juftfi~es the ways of God. Not to meni-
tion the good effe~ts which misfortunes are found to
produce on ·the miruis of men, by checking their
vices, and correaing their errors, innumerable ex-
empfifcations can be given, of misfortunes paying
their way to future advancement in the world. W1;e
are always querulous and impatienmt when designs
succeed not according to our wtithl. Ignorant of
\lhat futurity is to bring forward, occupied with no-
thing but the prelent, we exclaim, Wher~e is God
WC~here the feeptre of righiteoufners ? Habth he forgottnt
to be gracrious or doth he indeed fee, and is there
knowledge in the Mqoft High ?-God f~eeth not as mran
feethJ : He looketh not merely to wrhat you fuffer,
but to wvhat the effeit of ther~e fufferings is to be.
Confider only in how different a light the Patriarch
Joseph would view the ev~ents of his life after he had
s~een in what they had terminated, from the light in
which he saw them, when led away by the lifmae~ltes
as a slave, or when throwYn b~y Potiphar into the
Egyptian prison. We murmur against Providence,
just as the impetuous youth frets againfi his infru~c-

v o 1. Iv .Gt0.

tors. and-tutors, who are keeping him under a firia,
and as he thinks a needless, discipline. He knows
not that, by their infiru~tion and discipline, they
are laying( the foundation of his future fortunes; of
the ealth which he is to acqluire, and of the ad-
vancement to which he is to riife in the w~orld.
What may justly be falid to him by his tutors and in·
firudors, is equ~ally applicable to us all under our
present: (tate of education; ~·; hat I doJ, throu knosevef
not nove, but throur *flt kno~re herea~fter. Regarding,
then, the unknown it~ue of all worldly events in this
life, let us never defplir; let us never think difho-
nourably of thle government of God; but have pa.-
tience till his providence accomplifhl its designs ux
its own wayi, and at its own time. Althought thou6
say-s throu Jalt not f~e him, yet judgment is before him ;
there~fore triy~ rkoui in kliin?.'

IN the second place, the exprefion of heretafter in

the text muff be und'erflood to refer, in its full ex-
tent, not to future events in this life, but to a s~ub-
f'equent slate of being. For this life is no more than
the beginning of the mighty and extensive plans of
Providence. The feeds are only now sown, of
what, is to ripen and come forth, at the harvest of the
world; when the revolution of the great moral year
thall be finished, and the government of God thall
obtain its f~ull cormpletion It is the chief scope of
religion to direa our view to this period ; and it hath
often taught us that the knowledge of the ways of

* Job xxxy., I4*

God, the~n enjoyed by the bleffedt, thiall conf~itute a
chief article of their felicity. Nlowv we Jfe thy oUghL a
gla,/s darkly; but thenface to face. Now". we Know in
part ; but then'f weC fall know ev·en as wre ar-e knowrn.
Wh~jlen thrat ?Lichr i, pe~fed is come, then that whick is inr
parlt JAall be do9ne awa·y. In God's lights we flall fee
io3~t*. The reasons that required obscurity to re-
main for a wh·ile on the ways of God no longer s~ub-
sift. The education of good men is completed ; and
the intention of those iteps of education, which· once
they could not comprehend, now becomes apparent.
-Why this man was prematurely ·car~ried awnay from
the worrld in the beginningr of a promising course;
why that deserving family wer lft over w h~elmed
with grief and despair, by the los~s of one wEho w~as
their sole benefa~tor and support; why friendships
cemented by tender ties were fuiddenly torn as~under
by death: There are inquir~ies to which we can now
make no reply; and which throw a dark gloom over
the condual of the A4lmighty. Bu~t the spirits of the
just above, who are admitted to a lar·ger viewv of the
ways of God, f~ee the reasons of su~ch counsels.
Thzey fee that one man was s~easonably taken away
from; dangers and evils to come, which, unknown
to him, were hovering over his head. They· fee that
Providence was in secret preparing unexpeEted blef-
sings for the family who appeared to be left difcon-
solate and ho elefs. They fee that it was time for
friendsh~ips to be dissolved, when their longer conti-
a~uance would to s~ome of the parties have proved a

Gs ia~re.

* 1 Cor. xxtii.· ICS I a Psalm xxxtvi. 9.

snare. Where we behold nothing but the rod of
power (1retched forth, they dis~cern an interpolition
of the hand of mercy.

LEr us wait till thils promis~ed Aerleafter· arrive,

and wre sh~all in like manner be satisfied concerning
thle events that now diflurb and perplex us. We
fhll ~then know why so~ much darkness and misery
hrave been so lon permitted to remain on the earth,
and To; much oppression and tyranny to prevail
amnong the nations. We shall fee rising, as from
the athess of thle old. world, a new and beautiful firuc-
ture ; 1aew keavens and a newz earth ; ·wheeren dw~elleth
trigh~teogre/1. As wide as is the difference between
the ap'pearance of the wYorld, when it lay in its pri-
mitive cha~os, woithout formt and voidE, and the appear-
afice it has now affirmed, when resplendent with the
light of the fun, anld decked with thte beauties of
nature; farch is the difference between the divine
plans in their beginnings, and inl their full comple-
tion. At the coaclufion, and not till then, the
glory of the L~ord thall become m~anifest to all; and,
as it is deferibed in the book of the Revelation, a
voice (hall be hieard fr~om eyver cretaturle wrhick is in hea-
yen avnd on thre earth, andI under thre earthr, sa~ying, Blefing,-
and honour, and-powrer;, ard gloryl, be to himz that fttethr
on the throne. Grepatand mar~ve~llus ar-e thy wo-ks, Lord
God AlmiBgty; jai and true are thLy wa~ys, thou King
o~f fa~intJ .

AreIxcATIos

* R~ev, v. I 3-xy* 3*

ArrLIAcoIon of the dontrines that have been

illuitrated: may be made to two classes of men.

Firji, To fceptics ; who, fromn the present: myfte-

rious condua of Providence, hastily draw the con-
clufion, that no government is exercised over human
affairs, but that all things are firff~ered indiferimninate-
ly to come alike to all men.--I have fhol n that from
the inadequate viewrs which wve are at prelent able
to take of the general system, fach mysterious app'ear-
ances of Providence must be expeated to take place.
Not only so, but I have also fhowg it to be fit and
necefnary that this mixture of obscurity thouldd nowv
remain; as a full display of regular juffice and order
would· be inconsistent with the moral improvement
of men in this life.--Let me defirle the fceeptic to look
to the slate of the natural world. When he thinks
of the order and magnificence that prevail in it, he
will, perhaps, be unwilling to pronou~nce it th~e
mere produa~ion of chance. He cannot but recog-
nife the hand of Intelligaence, and acknowuledge it
to have proceeded from a designing Cause. I alk
him, Whether in the natur~al wYorld he dis~cerns not
as many,, myfirious11 and\C puzzl.7ing appearances as are
to be found in the moral world ? re not deftruttive
florms, burning mountains, uninhatbitable, defertsi
as difficult to be reconciled to his pre-conceived
ideas of fupremre w·isdom~ and goodness in the
Creator, as the i-fferin~gs and affi~ioins wvhich in
the course of Providence befal the just ? The natu--
ral and! mrnual orld are, in th~is refpea, counterparts

to one another. Both are marked wi~th the faBme
chara~ters, and carry the impress of the fame pow-
erful and gracious hand. In both, it is ev/idently
the int~ention of the first Author not to render every
thing level to our capacity ; but in the midfl of high
design and order, to allow certain objeAs to appear,
which contradia~ the ideas we had formed, andi
mock our vain researches. Now, if we are obliged
to admit that the order and beauty of the natural
world fufficiently prove it to be the work of a wife
Creator, notwithf'tanding the seeming deformities
which it exhibits; are we not led, by the fame train
of reafroning, to conclude thlat: the moral world is
under the direcdion of a wife Governor, though
much of what he now does we cannot ~fatisf~acorily
expl~ai ?

Second~ly, TH E donr~ine of the text is to be applied

not only for silencing fe:eptics but for comforting
the pious.· Never let them be dejeaed by the dark-
ness which now covers the w~ays of the Almighty.
If he wich~draws himself fro~Tm their view, it is not
because he negleas them; but becaule they are in-
capable of cocmprehending his designs; because it
were not for their good that all his designs were re-
vealed to them.-I·nftead of perplexing themfelives
about wha~t is obsCUr~e, let them reft on the cle~ar
and authentic discoveries that have been given of
the divine good~ness. Let them reft on those~ great
ant figlgal faa~s that prove it; particularly on that
illu~flriouls faA, th~e redemption of th~e world by Jefuls

C hrifti,

C hriig, He that/pared nrot his own Son, but gaveh femul,

fov u 11l will affiuredly not always concealhn-fl
rom those who serve him. Though w'hat he does
the~ knowo not now, thle time approache hnte

Jpal
now Arefrr.Till that time come, let them

believe and truit; let them hope and adore. From
this conclusion let them never depart, that to fear
God andr keep his commtandments is in every situation the
trueit wisdom; that, if there be government in t el
universe at all, the virtuous and the worthy are lovelt
and proteclted by Heaven ; that in due season tA~ hey jk
r.eap fy thev faintl not ; for the' cae of them is writhb ke·
Lordt, and their· r'eward wLith thte Mos High.

S ERM ON

# SERMON X. On the Slavery of Vice. 2 PETER ii. 19. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage.

S ER M ON X.

On the SLAVERY Of VICE.

2 PETER ii. Ig .

ICkile thety pr~om;S thtem IlertyI, tr7ey tJ1enfJl~ves ar~e rte

se~rvants of crsaruptionr ; for of skolm az man is ovJerome,
of de famie is bre brought in bondage.

BONDAGE and fubjenion are disagreeable
founds to the ear, disagreeable id~eas to the mind.
The advocates of vice, taking advantage of those
natural imprefions, have in every age employed
them for difecrediting religion. They represen~t it as
the bondage and confinement of the free- born foul of
man ; as a slate of perpetual confiraint, formled by a
fyfiem of severe rules, which designing men have
contrived to impos~e as fetters on the m~ultitude. On
the other hand, they paint a licentious course to
themselves, and hold it out to the world, as the gay
and pleas~urable en~joyment of life; where, having
surmounted the prejudices of education, and the
timiorous femrples of conscience, men can think andi
aCa bt pleafoure, and give full scope to every withl of
the heart.--But what if those pretended sons of free-

dom~

dom be themfeilves held in miserable fubjeS'don, and
their boasts of liberty be nlo more h n the fwellinlg
word~s of -anity ? The Apofile asser-ts in the text, that
while they promrfe liber~ty to· others, they are th~e ser-
wants, or sl~aves, of conrrption, ov~erome·, andi Brought
into bondage by, It. This assertion of the Apofile I
purpose to illuffrate. I thlall endeavour to ma e it
appear, that no true liberty can arise from vice;
that bad men undergo the worf1 f~ervitudte; and that~
no onie is free, but he who is virtuous andi good.

Ir; is neeffTary to begin with rmnovjig falle ideas

of liberty, and h~ewinlg in w~hat it truly coniifis.
WVe are not to imagine thiat to be. free. im1por~ts our
beineg se~t loose fr~om r~flicaint o:- rule of every kind.
No man, in any condition of life, is at liberty aEt
a~lways as hie please~s, and to gr-atifyr every with hei
forms. The nature, of the hu~man itate necelfarily
impos~es on.all men various reffraints. The laws of
society allow no one to indulge himse~lf irrpurfuits or
pleasures that are injurious to his neighlbour. Even
our own nature limits our pleasu~res writhi'n certain
bounds. All.our desires cannot be gratified toge-
ther. They: frequently interfere, and require him
wyho would indulge one fatvourite passion, to deny·
himfielf inanother. Diftin~tions, therefore, must be
made, preferences be. given, and some general re-
gulation of condutt be observed, by every one who
consults his own welfare. If there be any regula-
tion which ens~ures us of fafety·and· happiness, to be
dilengaged from the obs~ervance of that regulation is

GJ 3 no

no article of liberty ; at leafs of such liberty as a wife
man would with to enjoy. It is in effeA to be
turned loose to our own ruin. It is furch liberty as
a blind man enjoys, of wandering at random, and
firiking into every devious path, without a guide to
dire&t his fleps, and save him from deftru~tion.

THAT unbounded licent~ious~nes~s, therefore, which

si~nners prefer to every regulation of conduA, is al-
together different from true freedom. It is in moral
beha~viour the f~am·e as anarchy is in a slate, where
laid and order are extina. Anarchy, fiirely, is no
less incompatible with true liberty th'an abiolute def-
potiths ; and of the two it is hard to f~ay which is
the least eligible, or the most mis~erable slate. Li-
berty by no means furppofe~s the ablence of all go-
vernment. It .only suppos~es that the government
under which we are placed is wife; and that the re-
ftraints to which we voluntarily su~bmit ourselves have
been contrived for the general interest.

To be free, therefore, imports, in general, our

being placed in such circumffances, that within the
bounds of juffice and good order, we can aA accord-
ing to our own deliberate choice, and t'ake such mea-
f~ures for our conduft as wre have reafion to belrieve
are conducive to our welfare; without being ob-
ftruffed either by external force, or by violent inter-
nal impulse. This is that happy and diignified state
wi~hich every wife man earnefily withes to enjoy.
The advantages which result fro~m it are chiefly these

three ;

three; freedom of choice; independence of mind;
boldness~ and security. In opposition to these dif-
tinguifhing charalters of liberty, I now proceed to
thow that, in the. sirs} place, vice deprives bad men
of free choice in their a~tions ; that, in the s~econd
place, it brings them under a slavish dependence on
external circumflances and that, in the third place,
it reduces them to that abjeB, cowardly, and dif-
quieted slate which is essentially c~harafteriflic of
bondage.

I. VICE is inconfiffent with liberty, as it deprives

sinners of the power of free choice, by bringing.
t'hem under the dominion of pafirons and habits.-
Religion and virtue addrefrs themfielves to reason..
They call us to look round on every fide; to, think·
w~ell of the consequences of our a~tions ; and, before
we take any fiep of importance, to compare the good
wtith the evil that may ensue from it. H~e therefore
who follows their didates, aits the part of a man
who freely consults, and chufes, for his own inte-
reft. But vice can make no pretensions of this k~ind.
It awai~ts not the test of deliberate comparison and
choice; but overpower:s us at once by som-e firiking~
imprefi~on of present advantage or enjoyment. It
hxirries us with the violence of pafiron; captivates
us by the allurements of pleafiure ; or dazzles us by,
the glare o~friches. T~he inner yields tothe impuls~e,
merely because he cannot resist it. Reason remon-
firates; cons~cience endeavours. to check him l; but
all in vain. Having once allowed some, itrong pas-

sion;

sion to gain the afrcendant, he has thrown hjimfelf
into the middle of a torrent, against which he may
sometimes faintly struggle, but the impetuosity of
the fiream bears him along. In this situation he is
so far from being free, that he is not master of him-
self. He does not go, but is driven ; tossed, agi-
tated, and impelled ; passive, like a thip to the vio-
lence of the waves.

*AFTER pafiron has for a while exercised its tyran-
nical fivay, its vehemence may by degrees fuLi~de.
But when by long indulgence, it has established ha-
bits of gratification, the iinner's bondage becomes
then more confirmed, and more miserable. For
during the heat of pursuit he is little capable of re-
fledlion. But, when his ardour is abated, and ne-
verthelefs, a vitious habit rooted, he has full leifulre
to perceive the heavy yoke he has brought upon him-
self. How many laaves do we fee in the world to
intemperan~ce, and all kinds of criminal pleasure,
merely through the influence of cuffoms which they
had allowed to become to inveterate that it was not
in their power to alter them ? Are they not often re-
duced to a condition so wretched, that when their
licentious pleasures have btcome utterly insipid, they
are itill forced to continue them, solely becaus~e they
cannot refrain; not because the indulgence gives
them pleas~ure, but because abstinence would give
them pain; and this too, even when they are obliged
at last to condemn their habits of life, as injuring
their fortune, impairing their constitution, or dif-

gracin~g

gracing their charafter Vice is not of s~uch a na-
ture thrat we can fay to it, Hitherto fralt thou1 com· anrd
no furthe~r. Having once ent~ered into its territories,
it is not in our power to make a retreat whlen we
please. He that commaitteth~_~n is the ervant of fin. No
man who has once yielded up the government of his
mind, and given loose rein to his desires and paffi-
ons, can tell how far these may carry him. He mayt
be brought into such a desperate slate, that nothing
thall remain for him but to look back with regret
upon the forsaken path of innocence and liberty;
and, severely conscious of the thraldom he fuffers,
to groan under fetters which he despairs of throwing
off. Can the E tkliojianl changec his Jfin, or- rthe leohard kiis
/pots? thlen may ye also do good who are accufJomzed to do

VIcE confirms its dominion, and extends it still

farther over the foul, by compelling the finner to
support one crime by means of another. Not only
is he enslaved to those vices which take ;their rif~e
from his own in clination, but they render others ne-
ceffary, to which, against his inclination, he muff
submit; and thereby firengthen1 the commanding
power of iniquity within him. The immoderate love
of pleasure, for inflance, leads him into expence
beyond his fortune. In order to fiipport that ex-
peace, he is obliged to have recourse to low and dif-
honourable methods of gain, which originally he
defp~iled. To cover there, he is forced upon arts of

dissimulation

" eremiah xiii. 23*

dillimulation and fraud. One inflance of fraud
obliges him to liipport it by another; till, in the
end, there arises a chara~er of complicated vice ;
of luxury thooting forth into basenes~s, diihoneflyv,
injuffice, and perhaps cruelty. It is thius that one
favourite pamoin brings in a tribe of aux'il~aries to
complete the dominion of fin. Among all our cor-
rupt passions there is a firong· and intimate connec-
tion. When any one o~f them is adopted into our
family, it never quits us until it has fathered upon
ris all its kindred.-B-Iy foch means as these, by
the violence of paffians, by the power of habits, and
by the connedlion of one vice with another, fin efla-
blifhes that servitude over the will, wvhich deprives
had men of all power of free choice in their a~tions.

II. THE slavery produced by vice appears in the

dependenceunder which it brings the finner, to cir-
cumitances of external fortune. One of the fLvou'-
rite charaders of liberty, is the independence it
bellows. He who is truly a freeman is above all
s~ervile compliances, and abjeA f~ubjec~ion. He is
able to reft upon himf'elf ; and while he regards h~is
superiors with proper deference, neither debases him-
self by cringing to them, nor is tempted to purchas~e
their favour by difhlonourable means. But the finner
has forfeited every privileg~e of this nature. H-is pas`-
fions and habits render hlim an absolute dependant
on the world, and the world's favour ; on the un-
certain goods of fortune, and the ficklet humours of
men. For it is by these he s~ublists, and among

these

these his happiness is fought ; according as his pas-
lions determine him to purilie pleasu~res, riches, or
preferments. Having no fund within himself whence
to draw enjoyment, his only resource is in things
without. His hopes and fears all hang upon the
world. He partakes in all its vicissitudes ; and is
moved and thaken by every wind of fortune. This
is to be in the firifteft sens~e a slave to the world.

-RE LIGION and virtue, on the other hand, confer
on the mind principles of noble independence. The·
ulpright.man is- satisfied from himSPlf. He despis~es not
the advantages of fortune; but he centers not his
happinefls in them. Wi5ith? a moderate share of them
he can be contented; and contentment is felicity.
Happy in his own integrity, confrcious of the esteem
of good men, reposing firm truss in the providence,
and the promises of God, he is exempted from servile
dependenee on other things. He can wrap himself
rip in a good conscience, and look forward, without
terror, to the change of the wor-ld. Let all things
th~ift around him as they pleafie, he believes that, by
the diivine ordination, they fhlall be made to work to-
gether in the ifiruefol r isr good : A4nd therefore, having
much to hope from God, and little to fear from the
world, he can be easy in every slate. One who pof~-
feffes within himse~lf s~uch an establishment of mind,
is truly free.--But shall I call that man free, who
has nothing that is his own; no property afirured;
whose veryv heart is not his own, but rendered the
appendage of external things, and the iport of for-

tunge

tune ?Is that man free, let his outward condition
be ever o, splendid, whom his imnperious pafiionls de-
tain at their call, whom they fend fort~h at their plea-
sure, to drudge and tail, and to beg his only enjoy-
ment from the cafiialties of the world Is he fr·ee,
who muff flatter and lie to compass his ends; who
must bear with this man's caprice, and that man's
scorn; mufft pr~ofeifs friendfhlip where he hates; and
refpedk where he contemns; w~ho is not at liberty to
appear in his own colours, nor to speak. his own
s~entiments; who dares not be- honest, left he thlould
be poor?-BeI~lieve it, no chains bind so hard, no
.fetters are so heav y, as those which fasten the cor-
rupted heart to this treacherous world ; no depen-
dence is more contemptible than that under which
the voluptuous, the covetous, or the ambitious rnan
lies to the means of pleasure, ga,-in, or pow~ter. Y'et
this is the boasted liberty, which vice promises, as
the recompence of setting us free from the falutaryv
reitraints of virtue.

III. ANOTHER charaater of the slavery of vice,

is that mean, cowardly, and difquieted slate, to
which it redures the finner. Boldnefsandt magnani-
mity have ever been accounted the native effe~ts of
liberty. He who enjoys it, having nothing to ap-
prehend from oppreffivl powter, performs the offces,
and en joys the comforts of life, with a manly and
u11ndiflurbed mind. Hence his behaviqur is di'gni-
fled, and his s~entiments are honourable; while he
who is accuffomed to bend under servile firbjeion1,

has always been found mean-fpirited, timorous and
baf~e.-Compare, in ther~e refpea's, the virtuous and
the vicious man, and you will easily fee to which of
them the charaderiftics of freedom most juffly be-
long. The man of virtue, relying on ,a good con-
s~cience and the proteaion of Heaven, acrs with
firmness and courage; and in the discharge of his
duty, fears not the face of man. The man of vice,
conf~cius of his low and corrupt aims, th~rinks be-
fore the fledfaft and piercing eye of integrity ; is ever
looking arou nd him with anxious and feariul circum-
iipeaion, and thinking of subterfuges, by wyhich he
may es~cape from danlger. The one is bold as a lion,
'the other ~flieth when no man purfueth. To the one,
nothing appears contemptible, by which he can pro-
cure any present advanta~ge. The other looks with
disd~ain on whatever would degrade his charader*
" I wr~ill not," says he, " so demean mys~elf, as to
": catc~h thle favour of the greatest man, by this or
"6 that lo w art. It thall not be said or thought of me,
"L that I did what was boafe in order to make my for-
.Ltune. Let others sloop To low, who cannot be
" without the favours of the world. But I can wTant
"L thFeml and theref~ore at such a price I will 'not
" purc~hase them." Trhis is the voice of true liberty,
and sp3eaks that greatness of mlind. which it is formed
to in spire.

CORRESPONDING to that abjeA difpolition which

chara~terifes a bad man, are the fears that haunt
him. The ter~rors of a slave dwell on his mind, and

often

often appear in his behaviour. For gult is never
free from fulipicion andi alarm. The finner is af·raid,
sometimes, of the partners of his crimes, left they
betr~ay him ; sometimes, of those who have iifufered
by his crimes,.left they revenge themselves; fr~equent-
ly, of the world around him, left it dete~t him; and
what is worit of all, he is reduced to be afraid of
himself. There is a witness within him that teffifies
against his misdeeds ; and threatens him in secre~t,
when other alarms leave him. Co~nscience holds up
to his view the image of his past crimes, with this
infeription engr~aved upon it, "L God *wfll bring eve~y.
work~i into judgmrent." How opposite is s~uch a flarte as
this, to the peaceful security arising from the liberty
enjoyed by the virtuous ?--Weee there nothing
more in the circumstances of sinners to affix upon
them the marks of s~ervitude, this alone would be
fufficient, that, as the scripture expresses it, thr~ougk
fe~ar of Jeark they ar~e all thcir' i~fetime fabjeEI to bon-
dage*. Death s~ets all other captives free. Th~e slave
who digs in the mine, or labours at the oar, can re-
joice in the profpei2 of laying dlown his burden to-
gether with his life; and tastes the hope of being at
last on equal terms with his cruel oppressor. But to
the slave of guilt there aris~es no hope from· death.
On the contrary, he is obliged to look forward with
conflant terror to this most certain of all events, as·
Sthe concL~iton of all his hopes and the commence-
ment of his greatest miseries.

I HA~VE

* Heb. ii. I 4.

I HAVE thus set before you such clear and.un-

equivocal marks of the ser~vitude undergone by fin-
ners, as fully verify the affeation in the text, that a
slate of vice and corruption is a slate of bondage.
In order to perceive hov se~vere a bondage it is, let
uls attend to some peculiar circumstances of aggra-
vation which belong to it.

FIR st, It is a bondage to which the mind itself,

the native i~feat of liberty, is fubjeaed. In other
caf~es, a brave mnan can comfort himself with refleft-
ing that, let tyrants do their worit, let prisons or
fetters be his lot, his mind r·emains unconquered and
free. Of this liberty they cannot rob him ; here he
in-oves in a higher sphere, above the reach of oppref~-
sion or confinemient. But: what avails the show of
external liberty, to one who has loft the govrernmnent
of himfeilf ? As our' Saviour reasons, in another cafe,
If tke light that is in thiee be darkne/s~, how grePat is that
darKne/r· 7 So we may reafbn here, if that part of thy
nature, thy mind, thy will, by which only thou
callft enjoy and relish liberty, be itself in bondage
to evil pafirons and habits, how miserable muff be
that bondage

NEXYT, It is aggravated by this consideration, that

it is a bondage which we have brought upon our-
selves. To have b~een for-ced into slavery, is mis-
fortune and mnierYv. But to have renounced; our
liberty and chosen~ to be slaves, is the greatest re-
pr'oach added to the greatest misery. Mlroments there

frequently

frequently muff be, when a finner is sensible of the
degradation of his slate; when he feels writh pain
theilavial dependence under which he is br~ought to
fortune and the world, to violent passions and fettledi
habits, and to fears and apprehensions ariling from
conscious guilt. In: such moments, how cruel is the
refleazon, that of all this disgrace and misery he has
been the author to himself ; that by voluntary com-
phiance, he has given to his passions that haughty
as~cendant which they r;ow exercise over himn; has
forge~d the chains with which he is bound; and fold
knufelf to do iniquity !

LAsTLY, The servit~ude of vice is accompanied

with this farther aggravation, that it is fiubje~tion to
our own s~ervants. There desires and pafie~ns, which
the finner has raised to lawless rule, were given u~s
as instruments of felf-prefervation ; but were plainlly
designed to be under the dire~ion of a higher po wer.
Of thems~elves, they are headitrong and blind ; the~y
hear all the marks of intended fiabordinoation ; anid
conscience is invefied with every enlign of authority
and s~upremacy. But fin inverts th~e whole frame of
human nature. It compels reason to bowt dowrn be-
fore those pations which it wIas formed to command -
and leads it, as it were in triumph, to grace the.
thameful conlqueft of its miniffer~s and s~ervants. It
has b~een always ob~served that none are so insolent
in power, as they who have ufilrped an authority to
ivhich they had no right ; and so it is found to hold
in this inflance. The defies and passions of a vi-

tiours

tious man, having once obtained an unlimited fivay,
trample him under their feet. They make him feel
that he is f~ubjeAt to divers, and contradidtory as well
as imperious masters, who often pull him different
ways. His foul is rendered the receptacle of many
repugnant and jarring difjpolition~s ;and resembles
fonle barbarous country, cantoned out into different
principalities, who are continually waging war on
ene another.--- Such is the slate into which sinners
have brought .themifelves, in order to be free from
the fipypofed .confinement of virtue. Where they
had promised themselves nothing but ease, and pica-
ifure, they are made to experience restraints more fe-
vere, and mortifications more painful, than an~y
which they would have undergone under the difci-
pline of religion.

I~r will perhaps be contended by some, tshat al-

tboug~h the representation which has now been given
of the slavery of fin holds true in certain inflances,
yret that it is applicable only to those who come un-
der the defeription of atrocious sin~ners. They ima-
gine that a certain moderate course may be' held in
vice, by means of which, men, without throwing
altogether aside the restraints of reason, may enjoy
an easy· and pleasurable life.---By reasoning thus,
mny friends, you flatter and deceive yourselves to
your own deficu~tion. Be aifured, that, by every
w itious indulgence, you are making an approach to
a Rtate of complete slavery ; you are forfeiting a cer-
tain share of your liberty; how soon the whole of it

m~ay

may be forfeited, you are not aware. It is true that
all which has now jeen said of the f~ervitudle of fin,
applies only to a chrarafter corrupted in the exrrtreme.
But, remember that to this extrem-e no man ever arrives
at once. He paiffs through many of those intermediate
stag~es, in one of wvhich you are now perhaps fou~nd.
Vrice always creep~s by degrees ; and inf~enfi'oly
twines around us thos~e concealed fetter~s by which
we are at lait completely bo~und.-Ais you value
therefore your liber~ty and your happiness, avoid every
approach to evil. Confider all vitious pleasures as
enchanted ground, by entering on which, you w~ill
be farther and farther ens~nared within thle magric
circle, till at length you are precluded from all re-
trea~t. The most pure and virtuous man is always
the freest. The religion of Christ is juffly entitled
the perfe/'tI aw of lIber-ty*. It is onlyv when the Son~
mrakes ls fr~ee, that wue are free indeed : and it wras wtith
reason the Psalmist said, I will wualk art ibert~y, for· I
seek thdy pre~epts-f.

*C James i. zJ. -j- Psalm exix. 43.

SERMONS

# SERMON XI. On the Importance of Public Worship. PSALM xxvi. 8. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth.

SERMON XI.

On the IMIPORTANCE Of Puntr ic Woasale

PsAL I.xxxvi. 8.

,Lo~rd, I have bloedl thep baBitati'on of~ ~; IItZ/· y~~I boul ndt

place mbere- ti;ne· honouo·r dwelletk.

G OD is a Spir-it, and they~ that wagjip kIrm, ma/t
rwagip kLim~ in firiti andr in trutht. That religion chiefly
consists in an inward principle of goodneifs, is be-
yorld -dispute, and that its value and effcacy are de-
ri-ved fi-om its effeEts in purifying the heart, and re-
forming thelife. All external services, which have
not this tendency, are entirely insignificant. They
degenerate into mere fuperitition, equally u nac ceptable
to God, and unprofitable to man. Hence they are to
often treated in ficripture with high contempt, when
fubitituted in the room of the important duties of a
virtuous life.

NOTWITHSTANDING this, it is certain that exter-·

nal services have their own place, and a considerable
one too, in the tyfiem ofreligion. What their pro-

per~

per place is no one can be at a loss to discern, who
will only make a juff diftinition between the m~eans
and the end, in religion. It is evident there is dan-
ger of men's erring here, either on one ride or other
and It is certain that they have erred on both. After
it was obierved, that mankind were prone to lay too
much weight on the external parts of religion, it
began to be thought, that no weight was to be al-
lowed to them at all. The time wvas, when all re-
ligion centered in attending the duties of the church,
and paying veneration to whatever was accounted
s~acred. This alone fandified the charater, and
compensated every blemithl in moral conduA.
From this extreme, the spirit of the age seems to be
running fast into the opposite extremle, of holding
every thmng light that belongs to public worthip. But
if fuperflition be an evil, and a very great one it
undoubtedly is, irreligion is not a smaller evil: And
though the form of godline/s may often remain, when

rkeo~oe o i i ~ratlg, yet the porcerv cannot well

fizbiift where the form is altogether gone.--The holy
P~salmist, wYhol~e words are now before us, discovers
much better principles. E xpreffing always the high-
eft regard for the laws of God, and the precepts of
virtue, he brea~thes, at the fame time, a spirit of
pure devotion. Though loaded with the cares of
royalty, and encircled with the splendor of a court,
he thought it well became him to show refped to the
great Lord of nature; and on many occaffons ex-
presses, as he does in the text, his delight in the pub-
he s~ervice of the temple. Lord, I hav~e lov'ed thE Aa.

Jisation~

bittionin of thy house, andt the plac -wrcle thline honrour
dwuelle~th. In discoursing from which wor~ds I pur-
pose to theww the importance of the public worship,
of God, and the benefits refillting from it. I th~all
confider it in three lights ; as it r·efpeats God; as it
refp~eAs the world; as it r~efpea~s ours~elves.

I. LET US COnfider it with refpeQ to God. If

there exrifi a Supreme. Being, the Creator of the world,
no consequence appears more natural and direat than
this, thlat he ought to be w8orth~ipped by his crea-
tures, with every outward expreffionm of fubmifiron
and honour. W~e need only appeal to every man's
hear~t, wYhether this b~e not a principle which carries
along w~ith it its own obligation, that tol Him who is
the Fountain of our life, and thle Father of our mer-
cles; to Him who has raifetd up that beautiful firuc-
tur~e of the univers~e in wihich we dwell, and where
we are s~urrounded with so many blessings and com-
forts : solemn ack~nowledgments of gratitude thlould
be made, praises and pr-ayers thould be offered, and
all fixitable marks of dependence on him be ex-press-
ed.-This ob~Gation extends beyond the silent and
secret sentiments of our hea.rts. Besides private de-
votion, it naturally leads to associations for public
worhip;; to open and declared profeffions of refpe~t
for the Deity. Where ble!fi~ngs are received in com-
mon, an obligation lies upon the community, joint-
ly to acknowledge them. Sincere gratitudle is alwYays
of open and diffutive nature. It loves to poulr itself

vol.. Ivu. Hfrh

fiorth; to give free venlt to its emontions; and~, b~efore
the world, to acknowlledge and honour a be~nt·lhaor .

So consonant is thiis to the natuiral fentimrents of

-mankind, ·that all the nations of~ the ·earth have, as
with one cons~ent, agreed to infi~tutne folme for~ms of
worthip; to hold meetings, at certain times, in ho-
cfour of their deities. Survey the s~ociet~ies of men in
their rudest slate; explor~e the African dfefarts, the=
wtilds of America, or the difiant islands of the ocean;
and you will find that over all the earth s~ome religi-
·ous ceremonies have ob~tained. You will every
where trace, in one form or other, the temple, the
priest, and the offering. The prevalence of the most
;absurd fTuperf~titons furnithes this testimony to th·e
truth, that in ·the hearts of all men the prmnc ple is
engraved, of worthip being due to that invisible
Power who rules the world.-H-ere~in consists the great
excellencyv ofChriftian religion, that it hath infirua-
ed us in the simple and spiritual nature of that wor-
ship.. Difencumbered of idle and unmeaning cere-
~nunies, its ritual: is pure, an'd worthy of a divin~e
Author. Its politive infitiutions are Tfew in number,
most significant of Epiritual things, and direatly con-
ducive to good If~e and praAice. How inexcusable
then are we, ·if placed in such happy circumitances,
the sense of those obligations to the public worsh~ip
of God thall be obliterated among us, which the
light of nature inculcated, in some measure, on the
snof wild~ and bar~barouns nations ?i

TrH E

THE TCfinements of false philosophy have indeedt

f~uggfied this thadow of objellion, that God is too
great to fland in need of any exuternal service from
his ci-~eliures ; that our~expreffions of praise and ho-
nour'arte.m~ifplaced w~ith reiped~ to him, who is ab~ove:
all honour and all praile ; that in his fight the homage
we seek to pay mnuit appear contemp~tible; and is
therefoire in its~elf fulperflu~ous and trifling.---But
who hath taught those vain reafoners, that all ex-
preflions of gratitude and honour toward~s a superior
become unsuitabl~e, merely becaufre that s~uperior
needs not any r·eturns ? Wlere they ever indebted to
one whose favours they hadt it not in their power to
repay ; and, d~id th~ey, on ·that account, fe~el them-
selves set lookc from every~ oblligation to acknowledge,
anld to praiife their benefafolor n thle contra:ry,
the m~ore· diiinterefted his b~eneficence was, did nlot
gratitude, in any ingenuous ruind, burn with the
greater ardour, and promapt them the more eagerly· to
seize every opportunity of pubicly teffifying the
feelings of their hearts ?--A~lmighty Gcid, 'it is
true, is too great to need our service or homrage.
But he is also too good not to accept it, when it is
the native exp~reffionn of a grateful and generous mind.,
If pride and felf-fiit Hciency f~rifle all sentiments <if
dependance on our Jetretor ; if levity, a nd attach-
ment to worldly pleafuEres, render us totally negilea-
ful of expr~efirngr our thankfulnes~s to Him for his
blefirngs; do wes not hereby discover fixch a want of
proper feeling, such a degree of har~dnels and cor-
ralption in our affedions, as thlow~s us to be immr~ora

HeI E-· d

and unw~orthy ; and muff juffly expose us to thec
high displeasur~e of heaven ? On the contrary, ac-
cording to every notion which we can form of the
Father of the univelrfe, muff it not be acceptable to
him to behold his creatures properly affedted in heart
towards their great benefador; assembling together
to express. in aAs of worsh~ip, that gratitude, love,
and reverence which they owe him ; and thus nou-
-rithing andi promoting in one,,~, anohe ,an afeionat
sense of his g·oodnes~s? Are nlot such difpoitions,
.and furch a behaviour as this, intimately conne~ed
wvith all virtue ?

O Come, let us woL~rldp and Jow dowtn ; let us kneel~

defore the Lorrd our maker. F~or he is our God ; and wre
are thre fock of his paf~ure. ~Enter· into hij gates withl
rIrank/givring and his courts wrirth age. The prayerof the
upr-ight is his dc~lig ht. It comIethJ before him a; inceng~,
and the urplifting of their. handsl as thre eve~tning/Sacrjf ce.--
Having thus sh~own the reasonablenes~s of public wor-
thip with refped to God, let us now,

II. CONSIDER itS importance in another view, as

it refpeAs the world. When we s~urvey the general
~state ofmankind, we find them continually immer-
fed in worldly affairs; busied about providing the
nlecef3aries of life, occupied in the pursu~its of their
plieatures, or eagerly pros~ecuting the advancemnent
of their intereth~. In fischa lituation of things, a
ima~ll meafirre of reflexion m~ight convrince any on~e,
that without some returns of sacred days, and some

foellemn

solemn calls to public worthlip, it were impoflible to
preserve in the world any sens~e of objeLas, so foreign
to the general current of thought as an invisible Go-
vernor, and a future slate. If it be of impjortance to
the peace and good order of society, that there thould
prevail among men the belief of One in the heavens,
who is the proteator oflrighteoufnel~s and the avenger
or crimes ; if it be of importance that they be taught
to look forward to a day of judgm~ent, when they are
to be brought to account for their' most f~cret
ac~ions, and eternally rewarded or punished, accord-
ing as their conduat has been good or evil; if fulch~
princip~les as these, I fay, be of consequence to the
public welfare, they certainly enforce the authority
of public worship, and prove the necessity of religious
infirud~ion.

I SPE AK HOW particularly· with a view to thie

multitude, the great mass and body of the people.
We all know, how seldom from education, or pri-·
vate infiruation, they have the advantage of deriving
s~entiments of religion or morality. Early obliged to
Sabour for their bread, they would remain all their
days in gross: ignorance of every moral or sacred prin--
ciple, were it not for thos~e public airemblies in which
they hear of G3od, and Christ, and judgment, and
heaven and hell. Shut up those temples to wrhich
they resort with reverence ; exclude them from thle
orpportunities t'hey now possess of r·eceiving religious
infiruAion, and imbibing religious ideas; ands what
can y'ou exped them to b~ecom1e ? no other than a

f rc~.ot

fer·ocious rabbl~e, who set free fr~om checks of con-
feIence, anld fears of divine vengeance, wosuld be
prone to every outrage which they could commit with
imrpunity. It is w~ell knowrn that, in the early ages
of the world, sages and legislators who endeavoured
to tame and to associate the barbarous hordes of men,
foundi it necessary for this purpose to have recourse to
religion. B3y bringing the rude multitudes to wyor-
thip together, and at flatedl times and places, to join
inl hymns and fougs to their deities, they gradually
retlrained them from violence, and trainred them to
fulbordination and civilized life.

DURING the progress of faciety in afte~r periods,

religious assemblies at church continue, I am per-
inaded, to have a very considerable influence on the
civi ization and improvement of the people. Even
mndependent of effed upon their moral principles, by
leading nu~mbers of them to mdeet together _in an or-
derly way, andi in their mott decent appearance, they
tend to humanize and polith their manner·s. They
firengthen the facial conneAions, and promote
friendly intercourse among thos~e who are in the
fame neighbourhood, andl in the fame lines of life.
It muff at the fame time, be agreeable to every hu-
mane mind to think, that one day in seven is allotted
for refi to the poor from their daily labours, and for
such enjoyments of ease and comfort as their flation
affcords. It is the only day which gives them occa-
lion to feel thiemfelves as belonging to the fame class
of beings with their fiiperiors ; wlhen joining with

athem

them in the fame aats of worship, and recognizing a
common Lord. Amidst those diftinAlons which
the difference of ranks necessarily introduces into
human s~ociety, it is surely fit that there be some oc-
cations when man can meet with man as a brother,
in order that the pride of the great may be checked;
and the low may be taught that, if they dikcharge
properly their appointed part, they have reason to
expeat, from the L~ord of the univers~e, the fame re-
wardis with th~e ri~ch and the mightyt.

ITr will, I believe, be generally admitted that forms

of public worship, and means of religious infirudion ,-
are important, on several accounts, for the body of
the people, and belong to the maintenance of public
faifety and order. But many who admit this are apt
to think, that to the common people alone they may
be left. To persons of liberal education and enlarg-
ed minds, what benefit can arise from hearing what
they already know ;. and what, perhaps, is to be in-
culcated on them. by those who are of inferior capa-
city to themferlves ?--Admitting this plea of fu-
periority which their vanity forms, and s~etting aside
for the prefeat any personal- obligation they are un-
der to worship God, I must afkr such persons, how
they can expelt that religious assemblies will be long
refpe~ted by the lower ranks of men, if by men of
rank and education they are dif~countenanced and.
foriaken ?Do not they know, that those lower ranks
are ready to copy the manner·s, and to follow the ex-
ampleof their superiors in all things; but aiffiredly

Ifre froml restraint, and to gratify licentiouniefs
WhVlile they acknow~ledge the importanlce, and even
thze necessity, of public religion to certain classes of
mlen, dio they, nevertheles~s, contribute by their be-
haviour to defeat the end of public religion, and to
annihilate that: importance which they aferibe to it ?

--They are employed in framing laws and st~atutes

for preventing crimes, and keeping the disorderly
m~ultitude withmn bounds; and at the fame time, by
personally dificountenancing public wor~ihip, they
are wetakening, they are even abolifhling, among the
mnult~itude, that moral reffraint, which is of more ge-
neral minluence upon manners than all the laws they
fr-iame. In vain they complain of the dithonefly of
servants, of the ins~olence of mobs, of the attacks of
the highwvaymnan. To all there disorders they hiave
themselve~s been accerfary. By their open disr~egard
of sacred~ mn:ilttions, they~ havI e dJiffemlina^ted pro-
fhgacyr among the people. Th~ey h~ave broken down

the;" floolgate whichn feve t reir~ain thle torren-t -

they have let it loose to overflow the land ; and by
the grrowing deluge may themse~lves be iwept awvay.
--But I muff nlext argue Upon a different ground;
and proceed,

III. To set forth the importance of the public

worfilup of God to every individual, in every rank
of life. Whatever his flation be, he is Hilil a man -
and has the duties of a m~an to perform. W~ere his
attendance on divine9 worship of no other effelt, than

to add countenance to a salutary inflitution, this
alone would render it his duty. But moreovei*, wve
aifert it to be his duty on his owln account; if it be·
the duty of every man to ofe the proper means of
p-eferving and fortifying his virtue. All the ChrisT-
tian inflitutions hiave a dire&z tendency to thiis end.
They all fetrve to give wrarmth to piety, andO to add
s~olemnity to moral virtue. A4 very high opinion,
indeed, that man muff have of his owrn chara~ter,
wvho imagines that, amidfl all thle follies anid cor-rup~-
tions of the world, he fltands in need of no a-fifilance
for enabling him to aLas his par-t with p~opr.iety and
dignityv.

*THE )ueltionn is not, wh~ether persons of rank and!
edu~cation are to learn any thing that is new to them,)
by frequentling thie plaes of public worfb~ip. Th~e
great principles of piety and m~or-aity are obvious
and eafly known; and we thalil readitly admit, that:
there are many to whom no newv infi~ru~ionn is com-
municated in the hoofe of God;. Blut, my fr~iends,
the purpose: of you~r going there IS to have know~n ir~uths
r~ecalled to your mind, and their dormantr influence
awiakened; is- to have f~eriouls meditatio~ns fi-~ggefied ;
to~has-e go~od difpiofiirons raiifed; to have thie h~eart
adjuffed to a compose~d and tranqluil framine. Is th~ere
any man11 of reaso~n andl refleCionl, who1 wtill not ac-
knowliedge such effeacs, as far as thecy follow from17
attendance on religious ord~inances, to be of the m-ost
beneficial naturez There occallonal cefrations from
the cares and anxieties of life, these interruptIons to

H 3 the

the buille and the passions of the world, in order to
think and hear of eternity, are both a relief and an
improvement to the mind. By this retreat fr~om its
ordinary circle of thoughts, it is enabled to return,
with more clearneilsand more vigour, to the burinefs
of the world, after a serious and proper pause.

But I must afke the persons with whom I now

reason, whether there be no other call to come to
God's house, than to hear infirualion there ? Is not
the devoult adoration of the God of heaven the prin-
cipal object of our religious assemblies; and is this
what any manl of reflettion, and of sober mind, dare
to make light of ?In the temple of the Lord, the rich
and the poor, the prince and the peasant, appear as~
fuppliants alike for the protellion and favour of the
Almig~hty.--Great and flourith~ing as thou mayst
think thyself, know that thou flandeft as much in
need of that prote~tion, as the meanest of the crowd
whom thou ~beholdeft worthlipping, with lowly re-
verence, the God cif their fathers. The fim of prof-
perity thines at pr~eient on thy head, and the favour-
able gale carries thee softly along the fiream of life.
But the Almighty needs only to give the word, and
inflantly the tempest shall rife; and thy frail bark
fhaall be driven into the ocean, and whelmed in the
d eep. In my pr~o/erity1 I aid I Aiall nerrr?1 be moved~.
Thou,) Lord, didjt side thy face, anrd I was troubled.
--Look up, with dread, to that awful hand of Pro-
vidence which is firetched over your heads: Re-
member the instability of allhuman things 3 Remem-

ber

ber it, and tremble, ye who derpire the devout ac-
knowledgment of him who delpofecs of the human:
fate ! Though ye live many years and retjice inr them all,
r~emember thre da~ys of darkhne/s ; for they f all be many.

Biut after all that' has been urged on this fubje&,

I: am sensible it may be obje~ted, that many who
make consc~ience of paying firiA regard to· the in-
Ititutions of religion, do not appear to have derived
mluch benefit from them. They; are not, it will be
said, more improved in moral c~ondutt, and in the
proper dis~charge of the several dut~ies of life, than·
others who have been apparently- negligent of the
services of the church. On the contrary, a formal
regard. to these· appears to be fubilituted by many·, in·
the room of the weightier matters· of the law.----
Though this thould be admitted, it goes no farther
than to thew that human weakness, or corruption,
may defeat the purpos~e of the most promiiing means
of moral improvement. TIhat a fulperftitious atten-
tion to external worthflip has too often ufuirped the
charader, and supplanted the place of real virtue,.
will not be denied. Admonitions against so danger-
ous an error cannot be given too olftejn. But becad~e
the best things have been often milapplied and
a-bused, no argument thence arises for their being
undervalued, and thrown aside. So also reason,
infiruEtion, and ditcipine· of every kind, have been
frequesntly perverted to bad ends; and yet their in--
trinikr w;or-th and ufefulnef~s remain untou~ched and

acknowledged

s Ecc~lef' ii. S.

acknowledged.--Befides this, it cannot be admit.
ted that, becaule religriouinfituin produce:,, not_
all the good that might be wilibed, and hoped for,
.they therefore do no good at all. This were a raill
and ill-founded concluffon. If the morals of men
are not always amended by them as they ought to
have been, there is reason, however, to think that
they would have been worse without them. Some
check is always given by them to open profligacy.
Some afif~tance is furnished to good difpolitions of
heart; at lead, to decmecy of mannlers. Even mo-
mentary imprefilonss of seriousness made on the
thoughltlefs by the folemnities of religion, ar-e not
without their fruit. They leave generally som~e trace
behind them; and whlen the traces are often renew-
ed, they may be hoped, through the divilner bleiling
to fiorm at last a deep imlprellion on the mind.

Atr the fame time, I do not fay that religious in-

ititutions work upon the mind like a charm; and
that mere bodily attendance on them will alwvays en-
lure us of some profitable effedt. Let the means that
are employed, for the improvement of rational beings,
be ever so powerful in themselves, much of their filec
c-ers wvill always depend on the manner in which they
are received' and applied. I thall therefore conclude
mly reasonings on this flibrjeft, with a few obfervra-
tions· concernling the dif~politions requisite on our
part, for deriving benefit fronm thepulicorinace
of religion.

ToH F

THE end~s for which~ we assemble in the house of

God are two; to worship God, and to liffen to reli-
gious infiruttions.

THE public worship of God is the chief and most

sacred purpole of every religious assembly of Chrjiti-
ans. Let it here be remiemrbered, that it is not the
uttering, or thle hearing of certain words, that con-
ftitutes the worship of the Almighty. It is the heart
that praises, or prays. If the heart accompan~y not
the words that are ripoken or heard, wee of~er, the fa-
crificeof fools. By the inlattentive thought, and the
giddy and wandering eye, we psrofane the temple of
the Lord, an~d turn the app~earance of devotion into
insult and mockery.

Wrr a regard to religious infiru~tion, attention

and reverence are unquestionably due. All1 religious
and moral knowledge comes from God. It is a light
from heaven, first tranfmnitted to man by the originlal
conflitution of his nature, and afterwards made to
tlhine with fairer and fuller lustre by the revelation of
the gospel in Jesus Christ. Its brightness may some-
tim~es be fironger, and sometimes weaker, according
the mediums by which it is conveyed. But itill, as
far as the infiru~kions delivered from the pulpit are
illuminated by the ray from heaven, they are the
truths of God, and ough-t to be received as such.
Refinements of vain philosophy, or intricate
f~ubtilities of theological controverly, are undoubt-
edl~y not entitled to fitch regard. But: when the great

prmnciples

principles of natural or revealed religion are difcufed ;
when the important deaQrines olf the go~Fel concern·
ing thelife, and fufferings, and death of our blessed
Redeemer are displayed; or useful infiruations re-
gaprding the regulation of life, and the proper difT
charge of our several duties, are the f~ubjedis brought
into view ; it is not then the human speaker, but the
divine authority that is to be regarded.

IN the Ipeaker, many imperfedtions and infirmi-

ties may be discovered.~ The discoveries ofthe gof-
pel are reprefeated in fecripture, as a h:dden trea-
s~ure brought to light; but, by the appointment of
God, wee have tdis treaj~re inl eartken~ yrgels. Jt is
not the ifpir~it of curiosity that ought to bring us to
church. Too often, it is to be feared, we assemble
there merely as critics on the preacher; critics on
his f~eatiments, his language, and his delivery. But,
s~uch are not the dif~politions wvhich become us on so
serious an occasion. It is with humility, with fair--
ness, an~d candour, with an intention to improve
ours~elves in piety and virtue, with a view to make
personal application to our own chara~ter, that we
ought to hear the word of God.---When we enter
the sacred temple, let us ever confluer ourselves as
creatures surrounded with darkness, feekinl illumi-
nation from heaven; as guilty creatures, im~ploringr
forgiveness from our judge; as frail and mortal crea-
tures, preparing for that eternal habitation into
which we know not how soon we are to pass.

" z Corinth, 4. 7,

IF, with fuich sentiments and imnpreffions, we join

in the worship of God, and the ordinances of reli-
glon, we may juilly hope that they thall be accom-
panied to us with te divine bleffng. It is the express
precept of God, not to for/ake the apmbling~ of owf~elves
together". Gathet togethert1 the people, men, women, and
children, th~at they may hear, and that they may l~avrn, and
fear- the Lord your God, and ob/ere to do all the words
of this law-j. Enter kis gates with thankgeivingv, and
his courts wzith fratfe~. Gizve unto the Lord the gloryv due
to kij name. Thus hath God commanded, and he
never commanded his people to seek his name in
vain. For, w~kere two or thrlee ar~e gather ed together in
his name, our Lord hath told us that he is in the mid/1 of
them. $ God ~hatbaid that h loucethte gates ofZion more
than all the dwrellings of facob. B The pr-ayer of the up-
right is his delight. Both in their temporal and fpiri-
tual concerns, they may be most expe61ed to prof..
per,.who can fay with the Psalmist in the text, Lor~d,
1hase lovted the babitation of thly houe, and the place where
thine honour6 dWelle'th.

*~Heb. Io. 25. Z Watth. xvill. so.
·j- Deut. xxxi. I 2. 4 Palm 1xxxvii. 2.

SER~MON~

# SERMON XII. On the Fashion of the World passing away. I CORINTH. vii. 31.  The fashion of this world passeth away.

S ER M ON XII.~

On the FASntlow of the WORLD passing away,

2 Cox. vii. 3I.

---Ttrefaf !on of this wverld pafeth aw~ay.·

TO afe this~ orld to as no t toabyiit one of·
the moss imnportant, and at the fame time on1e of the
most difficult lessons which religion teaches. By so
many desires and pafiTons w~e aire conneaed with the
objeirts around us, that our attachmnent to them is
alwayis in hazard of becoming excessive and sinfuL,
Hence religion is often employed in mroderating this
attachment, by re~tifying ou~r erroneous opinions,
and initruding us in the proper value we ought to
set on worldly things. Such was particularly the
scope of the Apostle in this context. H-e is Iputting
the CorInthians in mind that their timen is fro~t ; that
every thing here is transitory :and therefore, that
in a.1 the diffe~rent occupations of huLman life, in
wreeping and recjo~icing,) and bujying and poffiing, thiey
were ever to keep in viewv this consideration, that

the

the fa/Aio nS f tis wiOr.L Zn.ld pat Way. T he original
expref~ionn import's, the figure or form under which
the world presen~ts itfrelfto us. The mneamang is,
All that belongs to this visible slate is continually
changing. N~othing in human affairs is fixed or
flable. All is in msotion and fluduation; altering
its appearance every moment, and pafin~g into some
new form·. Let us meditate for a little on the s~erious
view which is here given us of the world, in order
that we may attend to the improvements which it

J. The fad~on of theZ wOrild pap-th a3WaY, as the opi-

nions, ideas, and manners of men are always chang-
ing. We look in vain for a flandard to ascertain and
fix any of these; in vain expedc that what has been
approved and eflablifheid for a while, is always to
endiure. Principles which were of high authority
among our anceffors are now exploded. Syitems ,of
philosophy which wrere once universally received,
·and taught as infallible truths, are now obliterated
and forgotten. Modes of living, behaving, and
employing time, the purfits. of the busy, and the
entertainiment-s of the gay, hlave been entirely chang-
ed. They were the off'spring of fashion, the chil-
dren of a day. When they had run their course,
they expired; and were fitceeded by other modes of
living, and thinking, and afting, which the gloss of
novelty recommended for a while to the public
taste.

1V~ HE N

WHE N WCe ftl nn accoutit Of tilt InannerS and;~

occupations, of' the fludies and opinions, even of
our own countr~ymlenl, in some remote age, wle feeml
to be reading the hiflory of a different wvorld from
wvhat wie nowy inhabit. C~oming downwards thr~ough
some generations, a n~ew face of things appears.
Men begmn to think, and aA, in a different trajin ;
and what we call refinement gradually opens. Ar-
riving at our own times, we confider ourselves as
having widely enlarged the Ephere of knowledge onl
every Grde, having formed juff ideas on every fujb-
je~t ; having attained the proper flandard of manner~s
and behaviour; and wonder at the ignorance, the
uncouthnef's, and rufficity of our forefathers. But;
adlas ! what appears to us to perse ft tall in its turn
pass away. The next race, while they th~ove us off
the flage, will intrtoduce their favourite difooveries
and mnnovations; and what we now admire as thle
height of impraoement, may in a few ages hence be
considered as altogether rude and. imperfe,?. As
one wave effaces the ridge which, the former had
made on the Iand by the s~ea thlore, so every flcceed-
ing agre obliterates the o inionj and$ modes of the asi
which had gone before it. Th~e faflon of dep wuorld:
is ever pass~ing away.

L~ET us only think of the changes which our own

ideas and opinions undergo in the progress of life.
One man dliffrs -anr more from another, than the
fame man varies from himself In different periods of
his age, and ux. differe~nt fiitualions of fortune. Jo

yo utt ,

vouth, and in opulence, every thing appears fmiil-
ing and gay. W1e fly as on the wings of fancy ; and
survey beauties wherever we cast our eye. B3ut
let some more years have paSsed over our heads, or
let disappointments in the world have depressed our
spirits; andi wrhat a change takes place ? The plea-
sing illusions that once ihonee before ~s ; the splendid
faborics that imagination had reared ; the enchantin~g
maze in which we once wandered with delight, all
vanish and are forgotten. The world itself remains
the fame. But its form, its appearance, and afp~ed
is changed to our view; its falion, as to us, hath
pa~fdr~ away.lr

II. WHILE OUY Opinions and ideas are thus chang-

ing within, the condition of all external things is, at
the fame time, ever changing without us, and around
us. Wherever we cast our eyes over the face of
nature, or the monuments of art, we difoern the
marks of alteration and vicifiitude. We cannot
travel far upon the earth, w~ithout being presented
withc manyt a firiking memorial of the changes made
by time. What was once a flourish~ing city, is now
a neger~ed village. Where caffles and palaces flood,
fallen towers and ruined walls appear. Where the
malgnificence of the great thone, and the mirth of
the gay refounded, there, as the prophet Isaiah de-
fcribies, the owl azndtkre raven now dwell, rkorns comwe up,
and thel nettl and th~e bramb~le gr-ow in th~e courtr.-
When we read the hiffory of nations, what do we
read but the hiffory of incessant revolution and

change ?b

ch~ange ? Wte behloldl kingdoms altertnately rising andi

fling; peace and w~ar taking place by turn s

pr'inces, heroes, andi fl~atermen, coming fojrth in
ulcce~ion on th~e flage, att~rad~ing our attention for
difittle by the splendid figure they make, and thien

wor~ pa u na

all at enret fear s,thae da icn als to

t emn, pafug awayn~.

Bu'r to hifforical annals there is no occallon for

our having recourse. L~et any one, who has made
fame prog~ress in life, recolledt only what he has be-
held passing before him, in his own time. We have
eecn our country rife triumphant among the nations ;
andi we have seen it also humbled in its tur-n. We
have seen in one hemis~phere of the globe new do-
minions acquired, and in another hemnifpie-e, oulr

·od omnon li. t home, we have seen fadti-.

ons and parties his-t through all their different forms -
and admuuffrlations, in fuccel~ion, rife and fall.

What were once thle great themes of eager difcullion,
anrd political contest, are now forgotten. Fathers
recount thern to their ch~ildren as the tales of other
times. New a~tors have corne forth on the fla
the world. N~ew objeAs have attrafted the atten~,ou
and new intrigues engaged~ the pafflons ojf men.
N~ewt memlb ers fill the feats of juffice; newv minis-
ters the temples of religion ; and a nea world, in
tho~rt, in the course of a few years, has gradualiv and
inf~eniibly rifee around us.

1VHEN fY'Oi th~e public kene we turn our eye to

our own private cornnedions, the changes which
have taken place in the fa/blion of thle wor31ld, m~uff touch
every refle~ing mlindd with a more tender sensibility.
For w~here are now, many of the companions of our
early years ; many of those with whom we first began
the race of life; and whose hopes and prop~eats
were once the fame with our own ?In recolleaing
our old acquaintance and friends, wrhat devaffations
have been made by the hand of tine ? On the ruins
of our former conne~tions, new ones have aris~en;
new relations have been formed ; and the circle of
thos~e among whom we lIve is altogether changed
from what it once wlas. Comparing our prefeat si-
tuation with our former condition of life; looking
back to our father's house~, and to the s~cenes of
youth; remembering the friends by whom we were
trained, and the fam~ily in which we grew up ; who,
·but with inward emotion, recolleAs those days of
former years, and is disposed to dr~op the silent tear,
when he views the fa/ion of the woorldl thus always
pCaffng aWay !

III. No r only our conner~ions with all things

around us change, but our own life, through all its
Flagaes and conditions, is ever pafirng away. HPow
juff, and how af-feaing is that image, employed in
the s~acred writings to deferibe the slate of man, we~
fperd our years as a tale· that is -otol ! * It is not to any
thing great or lasting that human life is compared ;

not

-* Pfal. xc. g.

not to a monument that is built, or to an inferiptionr
that is engraved; not even to a book that is written,
or to a hiffory that is recordled; but to a tale, wlhich
is listened to for a little ; wherre the wordls are furgitive
and passing, and wyhere one incident su~cceeds anld
hangs on another, till, by ins~ensible tradnitions, we
aire brought to the close ; a tale, which inl some pas~-
fai~ges may be amusing, in othlers, tedious; but whe-
ther it amuifes or fatigues, is soon told, and soon
forgotten. Thus, year fleals upon us after year.
Life is never flandling flill for a moment; but con-
tinually, though infenlibly, flidingo into a new form.
Infancy rises up faf 1 to childhood ; childhood to
youth; ycuth passes quickly into manhood; and
the grey hair and the faded look are not longr of ad-
monifhing us, that old ageisat hand. In this course
all generations run. T'he wvorldl is made up of un-
cealing roulcndsoftranfitory exiffnce. Some gene- *
rations are coming for ward into being, and others
hastening to leave it. The ir~eam which carries us
all along, is ever flowing with a quick current,
though with a till and noiseles~s course. The dwell-
mng place of man is continually emptying, and by a
fresh fuccefr~on of inhabitants, continually fillino-
anew. The memrory of man pafth~ awaya, like the re-
membranzce of au guefl who bath/ tcarried but one night.

As the life of man, considered in its duration,

thus fleet@ and passes away, so during the time it
lasts, its condition is perpetually changing. It as-
fords us nothing on which we can set up our reft;

nolt

no enjoyment or poffEflion which w~e can properly
call our own. When we have begun to be p~laced
inl such circumst~ances as we~ desired, and with our
lives to proceed in the fame agareeable tenor, how
often comes some unexpelled event across, to diT-
concert all our s~chemes of happiness? Our health
declines ; ouzr friends die ; our families are fcazttered ;
f~ouething or other is not long of occurring, to fhowr
Us that the wheel muff turn rou~nd; thie f-n~ion of the
world must pas- aw~ay. Is there any man who dares
.to look to fixturityr with an eye of confident hkope ;
.and to fay, that against a year hence, he canl promise
being in thle fame condition of health or fortune, as
he is at pres~ent ?The fe~eds of change are every
wrhere [own in our slat~e; anid the very causes that
seemed to~ promise us security, are often secr-etly un-
dermininga it. Great fame provokes the attacks of
envy and reproach. High he;alth gives occasion to
intemperance and dis~ease. The elevationof the
mighty never fails to render their condition tottering;
·and that obscurity~ which shelters the mean, -expoles
them, at the fame time, to become the prey of op-
preflion. So completely is the faft~ion of this world
mlade by Providence for change, and prepared for
pafu~g awany. In the midst of this inllability, it were
so~me comfort, did human pros~perity decay as slowly
as it ris~es. By flow degrees, and by many inter-
vYeninga steps, it rises. But one day is f~ufficient to
£catter, and bring it to nought. I might add,

IV~. Ta AT the waorld itfielf in which wre dw~ell,

the

the basis of all our prefeat enjoyments, is itse~lf con~-
tr1ived for change, and defignled to pass away.
While the generations of men come: forth in their·
turns, like troops of fulcceeding pilgr-ims, to ac2
their part on this globe, the globe on wh2ich they nai
is tottering under their feet. It was once overflow-
ed by a deluge. It is thaken by earthquakes; it is
undermined by subterraneous fires ; it carries man y
a mark of having f~uffer~ed violent convulsions, andi
of tending to dissolution. Rievelation informs us,
that there is a day approaching, in w~hich1 thle~ Acanve
//tall pa/s awayn eoith a greaPt noiSe ; the elementrs lall mel/
?aid s~-et rvent t ; and th~e eartih and thle works thEle~rin
pall be bulrt p. When this def~ined hour arrives,
the fnafton of thre wourld fhalll have finally pa/1 awarol.
Immortal spirits th~all then look back upon this
world, as we do at prelent on cities and empires,
which were once mighty and Hlourifh~ing, but now
are fwvept from existence, and their place is no more
to be found.

I sHAuL insist no longer on this representation of

thin gs. `Enough 'has been said, to show that the
faftion of the wLorldt in every sense, pajgs away.
Opinions and manners, public affairs and private
concerns, th~e life of man, the conditions of for-
tune, and the earth itself on which we dwell, are all
changing around us.--I-s every thing, then, with
which we are conne~ted, passing and transitory ?
I[s the wholefltate of man no more than a dream or
fleeting vision ? Is he brought forth, to be only the

chi di

child of a day ? Are we throwtn into a river, where
all flows, and nothing stays; wvhere we have no
means of resisting the current;; nor can reach anly
firm ground, on which to reft our foot ?-NRo, my
brethren ; man w~as not doomed to be so, unhappy ;
nor made by his Creator to mruch inl vain. There
are three fixed and p~ermanent obje~ts, to wh~ich I
Epuff now call your attention, as the great fulpports
of human conflancy amidst this fugaitiv~e slate.
Though this world changes and passes away, virtue
.and goodness never change; God never changes;
heaven and immortality pass not away,

Fir/2, VIRTIUE and gaoodnefs never change. Let

opinions and manners, conditionas and situations, in
public and in private life, alter as they will, virtue
is ever the f~ame. It rests o-n the imimoveable b~asis
of Eternal Truth. Among all1 the revolutions of
hum-an things it maintains its ground; ever poffeffng
the veneration and efleem7 of m~ankind, and confer-
ring on th;e heart, w8hich enjoys it, fatisfattion and
peace. C~onsu~lt the most r~emote antiquity. Look
to the most savage nations of the ea~rth. Hlow wild,
and how fluacuatingo soever the ideas of men may
have been, this opinion you will find to have always
prevailed, that probity, tlruth, and beneficence,
formn the honkour anld the excellency of mian. In
this, the philosopher and the sa~vage, the w~arrior
andl the hermlit, join. At this altar all have wor--
th~ipped. Their offerings may hav·e been uns~eemly.
T'heir niotions of virtue mnay hav-e b~een rude, and

vol.. Iv. I occallonall!y

occ~ionally· tainted by ignorance anE flilperflition;
but the fundum~enltal ideas of moral worth have ever
remainled the famne.

HERB then is one point offliability, affelled by

no vicissitudes of time and life, on which wre may
reft. Our fortunes may change, and our friends
may die ; but virtue may still be our owns and as
long as this remains, we are- never miserable. 1711
I die I will not r.emoveL my integr~i~y from m/e. As
rightreou/ne/s I / dd faf

, and will not le it go. My Aeart~

pall no t epr~oack me f longa as I lIve.*~ He who, with
the holy man of old, can holdi this language, may
with undiflurbed mind survey time flying away, life
decaying, and the whole fafhlion of the world chatng-
ing around him. He hath within himself, a source
of cons~olation and hope, independent of all earthly
obje~ts. Every terrestrial glolry sparkles only for da
little, with transient briglhtnef~s. But virtue thlines
with eternal and unalterable splendour. It derives
its origin from heaven; and partakes lioth of the
luffre, and the stability, of celeffial objecis. It is
the brightne/s of tke everlafling Igh~t ; the ur/pottfed mirror
of God, and the imnage of kij gSoodnefJ;.

IN the fcond place, God never changes. Amidst

the uncealing vicissitude of earthly things, there re-
mains at the head of the universe an eternal protec-
tor of virtue, whose skrone is efabl~ledforYever. With
him there is no va~riableneJs, neith~er anty adoiw of tuvrn-

ing" ;

* Job xxvii* 5, 6.

ing; no inconflancy of purpose, and no dec~ay of
wrifdiom or of power. W~e k~now that he lovedl
righteousnes~s from the beginnling of days, and that
he will continue to lov~e it unalterabljy to the last.
Foreseen by him was eve-ry revolution which the
course of ages has produced. All the chanlges wrhich
happen in the slate of nature, or th~e life of men,
wFere comprehend~ed in his decree. H~ow much
foevrer worldly thlings may change in themselves,
they are all unit~ed in his plan; they conflitute one
great fyfcem or w\hole, of which he is the Authior ;
and wThich, at its final completion, shall appear· tol
be p~erfeA. His dom~inion holds together, in a con-
tinued chainr, the fliccefi~ve variety of hum~an events;
gives flability to things thrat inl thems~elves are fluitll
Sating ; gives conitancy evenl to the fa,0ionr of' the
woorldk while it is pfnuig awayj. Wh~erefore, though
all thin~gs change on ear-th, and we ours~elves be in-
volved in th~e general mutability, yet as long
as, with trull andi hope, wre lo~ok up to this Su-
preme Being, we reft on the r-ock of ages, andl ar~e
safe amidfi, ever·y change. W'e posses~s a fortrefrs to
wrhich we canl have recourse in all dangers; a refu~ge
under all flormns ; ao dwl~linglj plare in nll genert-ionrs.

Tw- the third! and last: place, HIeaven and imm-or-

tality pass~ not aw~ay. Thle fleeting s~cenes of thijs
life are to be considered as no more than an intro-
du~ion to a nobler and more perm~anent order of
things, when man shall have attained the maturity
of his being. This is wlhat reafocn gave some ground

Iz 2 o

to expeEt; what revelation hlas fullry confirmned ;
and in confirming it, has agreed with the sentiments
and anticipation of thle good and wife in every age.
We are taught to believe, that w~hat we now behold,
is only the first flage of the life of man. We are ar-
rived! no farther than the threfhlold; wfe dwell as in
·the outer courts of exiffence. Here, tents only are
pitched; tabernacles ere~t~ed for the s~ojourners of a
day. But in the region of eternity, all is great, fla-
ble, and unchanging. There the mnjio~ns of thle juff
·are prepatred : th~ere, the city whl~cic brath foulndations is
built; there is efrablith~ed, the kingdom whtickr cannotr
Be move~d. Here, every thing is in flir and flu~tua-
tion ; becaus~e here good men continue not, but pas~s
·onward in the course of being. There, all is
serene, fleady, and orderly ; because there remaineth
·the final re; of the eople of God~. Here, all is corrupt-
.ed by our folly and gulilt ; and of course muff be
tranfiient an~d vain. But there, purchdlied by the
death, and secured by the refiurrettion of the son of
God, is an inkeritance intcorruptible, ucnd~efld and that
fadedrl not awLay. There reigns that tranquillity which
is never troubled. There thines that f~un which ne.
ver sets. There flow's that river of pleas~ures, wr~hich
is always unruffled and pure. Looking forward to
those divine habitations, the changes of the pre~featt
world difappealr to the eye of faith ; and a good man
becomes ashamed of fuffering himself to be deje~ted
by what is to soon to pass away.

.SZTn are the obje~ts you ought to oppose to the

transient

transient fa/Zion of the wuolrld; Virtue, and God, and
Heaven. Fixing your regard on there, you will
have no reason to complain of the lot of man, or the
world's mutability.--- The design of the preceding
representation which I gave of the world, was not to
indulge vain declamation; to raise fruitless melan-
choly; or to throw an unneceifary cloud over human
life. B3ut to fhloww the moderation requisite in our
attachment to the world; and at the f~ame time to
point out the higher objetts both of attention and
consolation which religion affords.---Pafirng and
changeable as all human things are, among them,
however, we must at present adt our part ; to thern
we muff return from religious meditation. They
are not below th~e regard of any Chriflian ; for they
form the scene wthich Providence has appointed at
present for his aaivity, and his duty. Trials and
dangers they may often pref~en to him; but amidit
these he will safely hold his course, if, when engaged
in worldly affairs, he keep in view those divine ob-
jeats which I have been setting bef'ore him. Let
him ever retaini conneEtion with Virtue, and God,
and H~eaven. By them let his conrdua~ be regulated,
and h~is conflancy fuupported. So thlall he u/~e thlis
wiorldl without abu/linig it. Hle ifhall neither droop un-
der its misfortunes, nor be valiny elated by its ad-
vantages; but t;.rough all its chang~es fhlall carry an
equal and fleady mind ; andi in the end shad1 receive
the accompliflunent of the p-romise of fer~ipture, that
though thie wLorldpafeth awayv, and thre Illa/ thrilef, hie
fJkat dloth the ill

UI Of GodAa~!l arbide lfor ever*.~

* L John ii. I7. SEiR M;ON"J

# SERMON XIII. On Tranquillity of Mind. PSALM xv. 5. He that doth these things shall never be moved.

, 7 1

S E R M· O N X III.

On TRANCyzzILLIry of MalND.

-He thlat daot& ,nk taing:s.Gl7l nL·evr be mo~ved

PrRANQZUILLITY o.f mind, or, in the words
of the text, a mi'nd not moved or difquietedl by the
accidents of lifE, is undoubtedly one of the greateit
bleffinlgs that we canl polffers on earth~. It is here
mentioned as: the reward of the man, whlol chiarac-
ter had been deferibed in this psalm, as leading a
virtuous lifce, and dtifcharginlg his duty towads: God
anld his neighbour. It is inldeed the ultimate aim,
to which the wishes of the wife and reflefing have.
ev~er been direlled, th~at wtith a mind undiflurb~ed by
anxieties, cares, and fe~ars, thery m'ght pass their
day;s in a pleafingferenity. Thlev justly concluded

--thant, by enljoying th~ernielves in peace, they wouldi

c-iioy, to the greasreft adivanitage, all the comforts of
Ilife that came within thetir reach.

Tar s happy tranquillity-, th~e m~ultitude conceive

to b~e most readily attainabler by means of w9ealth, or,

at least, of an easy fortune; whiichl they imagine
woullld set th~em abo e all the ordiniary diflrurbances
of life. That it: has som;e effec't for this purpose,
cannot be denied. Poverty and ficattened circumn-
frances, ar~e often incon~fi ent wlith tranquidity. To
be destitute of those conveniencies that suit our rank
in the world; to be burdened with anxiety about
m~aking provilionl for ever~y day w~hich passes over
our head; inflead of bringing comfort to a family
who look up to us for aid, to behold ourselves f~ur-
rounded wTit~h their wtants and complaints, are cir·
comitances which cannot fail to give much uneatx--
nes~s to every feeling mind. To take meafores,
therefore, for attaining a competent fortune, by
laudable means, is wife: and proper. Entire negli-
gence of ou~r atFiirs·, and indiffetrence about our
worldly circumstances, is, for the most part, the
cons~equence of some vice, or some follr.--At the
fame time, I mu~ff obser-ve, th~at the aittainment of
opulence is no certain method of attaining tranqjuil-
lity. Em1barraffinrents;; nd vexations often attendl it;
and long experience has shown,1 that tranquillity is
f.r foam bein g always fo' Iund among the rich. NEay,
the higher thalt me:n rife in the wIorldl, the greater de-
grees of p~ower and difriin £1iion wihich they ac qu~ire,
they ar~e of~ten the Ear~ther removed from inter.nal
p~eace. Thre wiorld alo`rd~s toi mn~ry n~i ances of
mis~eries abouznding~ in thec highFer ranks of life, that It
were needless i:o eniarge onl a topic so genierally knownl
anid admitiitedg

AhssuMTNc

Assy MING it, therefore,

for( an 1do~ilbtedl truth,

that thle mere poffeffiion of the goods of for~tune may
be confillent writh th~e want of inw~ardt tr-anquility,
we muff look around for other m·1ore cer~tain groundls
of it. Wre muff enquir·e whetier any line of con-
duR can be pointed' out, w1hich, independent of
external situation in the worldI, thlall tend to make us
easy in mind; halnl either beffowr, or aid, that tran-
quillity which all men desire. The remain:ing part
of this discours·e shall be em~ployed in fu~ggeffing, with
great plamnnefs of Sp~eech, ilnch direfionls as app~ear to
use the most material on this important fubjecl.

THE sis dire 10n, which I h~ave to fulggeft, is

that wre imitate thie charad~er of the manl who is die-
fcribed in this pfailm as wanlking up~ighl~y, wcorking
righcteoupe/1, and f eanking e truth, as /re ILinkedfr in his
bea~t ; that w~e fludy to p~reserve a clear confrcience,
and to lead a virtuous andi honourable, at least an in-
offeafive and innocent, life. Of foich a man only
it canl be said, that doing~ theye things he pall nevyer be:
mrovedr. So great is the power of conscience over
every human being, that the remembrance of crimes
never fa~ils to overthrow tranquillity of mind. Be
affured', that he who defrauds his neighbour, who
has ensnared the innocent, has violatedl his truss
or betrayed his friend, thalnl never en~joy within him-
self undiiturbed quiet. Hlis evil deeds will at times
recur to his thoughts, like ghoffs rising up in black
array before himl to haunit his couchi. Even the
fEde~i of a foolish~ and trisluin con~duft, of a life past

;in idleness anld difli!·ation ; by which, though a
man has not been guilty of great crimes, he has how-
ever wrafted: his fulbitance, mifp-enlt his time, and
brought upon himfielf juff reproach ; even this, I fay,
is fufficient to create much unleatinefs and djiquiet
to the hear~t. Let him, the:refore, wfho wiihes to
enjoy tranquillity, fludy above all things to aAt an
irreproachable part. WTith comnfort he will reft his
head on his p~illowc at night, wfhen he is conscious
that throughout the day he has been doing his duty
towards God and man ; when none of the tranfalti-
ons of that day come back, in painful remembrance,
to upbr-aid him. To this teffimony of a good con-
sc~ience, let hiim be able,

IN the p'ond iplace, to join humble truf1 in the

favour of God. As, after the best endeavours we
can use, no man's behaviour will be en~ltirly fault-
less, it is essential to peace of mind, that w-e have
some ground for hope in the Divine mnercy, that,
through the merits of Jesus Christ, our defetts shall
be forgiven, and grace be shewn us by Heaven.
This includes all the duties of faith and repentance
that are required by the Gofplel; the faithful dif-
chartre of whlich duties is abfoclutely neceff'ary for de-
liveringr us from those fears of another world, whichl,
if not allay-ed, are f ,flicient to banish~ all tranqux lity
from the heart. Our religious principles muff at the
fame timre be found and pure; and carefully pre-
served from thle tainlt of superstition, whose gloomy

horors taingpaidlon of weak and ill-formned

I 3 mninds,

min s, convert wYhat thley mnillake for religion, inlto
a sour~ce of mifery.--Moreover, it is necethry, that
wve b~e a ble to plIace. truss in God, not onlyl as our
future Judge, but as the present Governor of human

affirs Sounertin s he continuance of every

earthly comfort, that hie, who reposes nlo confidence
mn the Supreme Disposer of ev.ents, muff be often
difquieted and dejeaed. He alone poffeffes firm
tranquillity, w~ho, amidit all human vicifit~udes,
looks up with fettled truss, to an almighty Rueler, as
to one under whose conduLa he is safe. To him
alone belongs that happy privilege, deferibed by the
PFal mist : Hep J4all noiit bc aji~aidZ of eil tidings ; /lis dheart
a 'fx~edl ; trayfingb int the Lor-d.

I HAVE pointed out the primary aind ei~ential

foundations of cranquillity ; virtuous conduet, good
principles, and pious difpolfitions. At the fame
timer, a ma-n m~ay be both pious and vir~tuouis, and
. ye1t, thr·ough some defCeas inl the management~ of his
m~ind and temper, may not possess that happy fere-
nity anda felf-enjoyment~, which ought to be the por-
tio~n of virtu~e an~d piety. Inifa~nes of this wijll occur
to evercy one wh;o is acqulainlted w~ith the world.

We oo fte bcold pers~ons, wh~!ose principles, and
whi oa co-ndaGl~, are inl the mi-,-n unexucenltion-

able, leading anl Ilucomfotable life; through fret-
fulness of temper, p~etvillnefls of mranner-s, or ful-
lennlefs of difpolitionl. Ther~e is, thereforc, fomle

aci:p ine to be fludied!; th-ere are fomre fub~diar·y

* Psalm
exil. 7

p~arts of chara~er· to be· ended to, in order to give:
piety and virim their full eLRt for conferrin~g tran1-
qujility. 'To the confideratrion1 of these fecondanry
rneins I now proceed. Let me thlen advise you,

In' the :IirdJ place, to attend to the culiture and

improvement, of your minds.. A fu;nd of defu~l
kinowledge, and a flocke of ideas, at'rd mr-uch ad-
v~antage for· the enjoymilent of tranqcui~iy. I d~o n~ot
mean, th~at every malrn m-u~t fl~udy to becornle deelply
lea~rnedC ~ Th~~e tuationl of' manyr wnouldf not allow
iti. Thes taste, and the habits o~f othiers, prev·ent it.
ButL what I m!e ~n is, that evenry m~an- who w-iibet s to
lea:'i a :omfor~~-;table li~r:fe thudi provjde ~for· himfec~ls,
as m~ch as~ he can, byl meanst of obie-rvation!, retad-
ing, and~ refi3eR ng, a -largEt fie~ld of udeful tho::ghts.
In a min~d ab~jiutely vacbnt, t!ranquil~ity js :PelCSom;
fo·und. The v-acancy) too~ oft~en, w111 be filled upzi by
bad efi.^.Re and paIons. WT~herei;S the 1:lld of a
wvie man is a king~domn to itsel~f. In his lonely, or
mnelancholy hours, h~e findJs always reso~urces wvithin
himself-, t3 whjich h-e can turn for reiief. As thre:·
aIre mlany occaflons wvhen extern~al objeAs affo~rd no
pleafalre, it: uisoly by~ being able to reft onl the en1-
tertainlrnents afford-ied to himfel~rf by his m~Ind, thlat
any~ one. canl pefs his days whhil felcf-enjoymeni·!t. Let
mes recommend1;~. I or·1 th fano pu~r P 7?-l.e,

IN the j.~ixrd pllce, that w~e be alw~ays ca~reful to

proviie p;·oser emplIioymnent for our t~ime. Regular
indiultry andl.abour, with interval.s of ease, is p~er-

hap~Fs

hraps the slate most conducive of any to tranquillity.
If our flation give no call to induffry, it will be
profitable that w~e fludy to have some end or objeA
in view, to which our attention thall b~e dire~ted.
Relaxation from intense, or incelfant purs~uit, is re-
quilite for comfort. But if relaxation degenerate
into total idleness, it becomes in a high degree ad-
verse to tranquillity. Every man by his nature, is
formed, more or less, for adion. In a mind that
is entirely quliefcent, and that has no objeat to put
it into motion, infleadi of felf-enjoyment, there will
be conflant languor, tediousness, and miiery. Life
flagnaltes in firch a situation, like a pool of dead
waters;- and the man becomes a burthen to himself.
Violent and dangerous pursuits, which diffraa and
embroil those who are engaged in them, I cannot be
\Inderflood to recommend. Every one fees how
foreign -there are to a state of tranquillity. But in
the ordinary tenor of calm and easy life, I would ad-
vise every one to have fonse end before him; some
objear which thall bring the mind into a~ion, and
Till up the vacuities of time. Provided the objett
..be innocent, and of no unsuitable or degrading na-
ture, it may anfwver this purpose, though it 'hlould
not be inl itelfl- of high importance. It is better for
the mind to ha ·e s~ome determinate direlfton given
it-, than to be alwiays left floating, as it were, in
emplty fparce.--But abo~ut whatever objeAs we are
emla~~lyed, it is still mor~e material to tranquillity that,
in the

FyMi

FI~k place, we learn to govern our paifions.

These are the most frequent diflturbers of our peace.
Necessary as their impulse is to give aativity to the
mind, yet if they are not kept in firbordination to
reason, theyv speedily throw all things into confusion.
Such of th~em as belong to the malignant and unfo-
cial class, evidently tend to produce vexation and
disquiet. Ag;ainst fuffering these to gain poffeffion
of the heart, admonition is fe-arcely necess;ary. But
I muff admonifhl you, that even those which are ac-
counted of innocent nature, and which therefore
may lay hold of virtuous minds, if they obtain the en-
tire maftery,are fuffcient to overthrow the tranquillity
of life. Let every one, therefore, who values that
tranquillity, fludy to retain moderation and self-
command, even in the midst of pafirons which have
a fair and bland appearance. He will finld that the
gratification of any one of them, compensates not
that perpetual ~slavery to which it will reduce him,
wrhen it becomes inordinate.

-I HAVE farther to admonish you, that this self-

command is particularly necessary in all that relates
to habitual temper. Even where firong patiions
are out of the quefion, those slighter emotions
which ruffle or four the temper, are fufficient, by
their frequlent recurrence, to poison all felf-enjoy-
ment. He wyhowould poilfs a tranquil slate, must,
above aillthings, cultivate calmness and gentleness
of difpolition. He ought especially to cultivate it
in that society, whether domeltic or social, with

which

which h,7 has moss fr~equetnt intrercourfe~. We all
know, that there ar-e thodefnds wrho in p!ublic, and?;
in formral companies, appear to be all gentleneis andc
iiweetleefs, but who, at home, and among thieir
nearest re~ations, give vent, with freedom, to the
m~os harth~ and peevifhl difpoltions. Such perfrons
are not likeiy to enjoly much r~eal cojmfort. F~or it
is in the, daily and familiar int~ercours~e of life-, that
tempIer chiefly exerts its power, eith'er for prom7oting
or for diflurbing, the tranquiility of our days. On
occaffrons whlel menn come clofelt togeth~er, if, in-
flea~d of meeting inl finooth conta8t, thley rub andi
gmrteon one ano:ther, the feelings produiced on btoth
sides zare of th~e inoulc offenfive andl difpefn id
No~thing canl be zlilmned as a more certain axio-m,
thanl tha t~ he who: al~ows eith~e r inordi~ate pamllons,
or a crlols temiper·, to grovern hiji,: mufft, thougrh he·
thould- puf.r s all thati flour-inhlng fortune can befr-owi,
bDe a firange~r to tranquiiity.

In the r~fixhplace, let me advise yrou ner.er to ex-

pe£1 too muc~h from the wor ld. H~igh hopets, and
flod d view-s, are great enemies to tranqulidity.
W·Then rahlyll indulgedl, th~ey are coni:tan~tly p~ro-
ducinlg difappyoint

! ne nts. Thtir induilgence, inl tire

mean time, occasions djfcont-ent with~ our pr;efeat
situation; and be who1 is dif~oostlente cannoj(t be
happy. Onle of thle Edi~t le~bus, bot1 of r-eligionl
andu of fdm is, to moderate ouir ex:ellations and
haopes; and not to se~t forth on thre voyrage of life i'ke
mern who expet to be always carried forw~ar-d wiith1 a

fav\rourable

fav~ourable gale. Let your viewrs be falited to your
rank and flation in the world ; and never soar fan-
taftically beyond them. Content yourselves with
sober pleafirres, and form your relish to them. Be
thankful when you aire friee from pa~in, thoulgh you
be not in the midfl of high enjoyment. Be satisfied
if the path youl tread be easy and smooth, though
it be not ftrewsed with flowers. Human l.ife admits
not of continued pleafolre ; nor is it alwa~ys rendered
hap'py by. great exaltation. Remember, that it is a
m~iddle~ region which is ther native station of tran-
quillity. It neither afpiires to th~ose heights of the
atmofCphere where the thunider is fourmed; nor creeps
always on the gro~und. A c oo vr ca
sion, to put yoursel!ves fo~rw\ardt. Be conlten~t to re-
tire sometimes into the th~ade; and allow others to
take their proper plac-e.---lt w-ill be caiiy seen,
rthat I speak not now to the ambitiou~s and afpiiring;
but to those whorc value tranlquillity mlore than fplen-
did appearance in the world.

SUCa persons I also abVile, whj~e they expe=A not

too muchl from the world, neilther, also, to form~ too
high exrpeaastions from the chara~ers of those on
whole friendship they reft~, and with w~hom it is
their lot to be conneaed, either in social or dome:ici
relations. If you have look~ed for perfei;~on any
where, you will find yourfielf difsp~po~rn:ed; and the
consequence of th;s dlifappointmnent wrill be, that
friendthi~p wiill cool, and difgaf t fceced. If you
with to enljoy co~mfort in any of your conn1eaions, take

take your fellow-creatures as they are, and look for
their imperfeAions to app'ear. You knowY you have
your own; bear with those of others, as you expeRt
that they are to bear wyith you. As no one is with-out
his failings, few also are void of amiable qualities.
SeleAt for your companions, throfe who have the
greatest share of such qualities ; and value them ac -
cordingly.-In a word, make the best of this world
as y ou find it. Reckon both on the slate of huma~n
life, and on the society of men, as mixed, and
chequered with g~ood and evil. Carrying al-
ways in your eye such views of things, you
will be best formed to those equal s~pirits, and that
reasonable difpolition of mind, which make the bafia
of tranquillity. I thall only add as my

SeventhrR and last advice on the fubjeeA, to mix

retreat wfith the a~tive business of the world, and to
cultivate habits of serious thought and recolled5ion.
I before advised thiofe who are not particularly en-
gaged in a~ive life, to form to themselves some ob-
je8 of pursuit, in order to furniih proper employ-
rnent to time and thought. But the great multitude
of men are in a differ-ent situation. Induffry is re-
quired of them ; business: and cares pr~ess; and adive
purs~uits occupy their closest attention. He, who,
in this situation, pours himlfelf forth incefrantly on
the world, cannot escape partaking much of its dif~-
turbance and trouble. Amidst buffle, intrigue, and
dissension, h~e muff pass many an uneafyr hour.
Here an enemy encounters him ; there, .a rival meets

him. A fulp~iciouls friend alarms him one hour; an
unrgrateful one provokes him the next. I do not re-
commend, that for these reasons, he who fludies
tranqilliilty thlould retire from all public business,
and forsa8ke the haunts of men. This were the re-
treat of, a monk, not of a good and a wife man.
Tranquillity were too dearly purchased by the ne-
gleA of those duties which belong to a man, and a
Chriflian. Nuor indeed in .absolute seclusion from
the world is tranquillity ever found. OnI the con-
trary, when the human mind is cut off from those
employments for which it was designed by nature
and Providence, it preys on itself, and engenders
its own misery. Tranquillity is always most
likely to be attained, wlhen the buf~t3inef of the world
is tempered with thoughtful and serious retreat.
Commune withk your hieartr on your bed, and be ;ill.
Leaving this world to itself, let there be seasons
which you devote to yourselves, and to God. Re-
fleaion and meditation allay the workrings of many
unquiet passions; and place us at a difiance from
the tumults of the world. When the mind has either
been rut~ed or cast down, in intercourse with God
and heaven we find a fanduary to which we can
retreat. In the hours of contemplation and devo-
tion, a good man enjoys himself in peace. Hle be-
holds nobler objetts than whlat w·orldly men can
behold. He affmes a higher charadter. He listens
to the voice of nature and of God ; and from this
holy fanauary coines forth with a mind fortified
againf1 the little disturbances of the world. Such

habits,

Ilabits, therefore, cannot bie too munch recom~mend-
ed to thle lovers of tranlquillity·, as p'owerful fulbfidi-
ary means for attainling thlat happy slate.

SHAvE thus p'ointed! out what appears to me the

dif~ciphine of religion and wjifdom for tranquillity of
m;ind . Hie ~that r thpef things .; all never be~ movLedE.
-Dauring the early periods of life, vivid sensations
of pleasure are the sole objedis thought worthy of
pursuit. Mere ease, and calmness are defpiledrf as
the portion of the aged only and the feeble. Some
longer acquaintance wYith the world, with its dif~-
appointed hopes and fallacious pleasures, teaches
alm-ost all men, by degr'ees, to w~ith for tr nquiity
and peace. But you muff not imagine, that there
are blessings which will drop oni men of their ow~n
accord, as foun as they begin to desire them. No -
The thoughtless, and the profligate, will ever remnain
firangers to them. They w~ill remain the sport of
every accident that occurs to derange tlheir mrinds,
and to di turb their li~e.----The three grea: e~nemies
to tranquility are, Vice, querljition, and Idienefs :
Vicet, whrich poiso~ns and diflurbs the mind with
bad patiions; .Superflition, which fiils it wiith imai-
ginary terrors; Idleness, which loads it wiith tedi-
oufn"Es and diifguR. It is only by f~ollowvin the~
patti w·!uch Eter~nal Wifl~ldom has poinlted outi- that
we can arrive at the blesse~d temple of Tranquiity-
and obtain a Itation the> e: B~y doinga, or at least en-
deavouring to do, our duty to God and man - by
acquiring a buml~he trass in thle mercy and favour of

God through Jesus Chlrift; by cultivating our
minds, and properly emp~loying our time and
thoughts ; by governing our pafirons and our tem-
per; by correa~ing all unreas~onable expe~ations
from the world, and from men; and in the midfk
of worldly burinefs;, habituating ourselves to calm
r~etreat and ~serio~us recolleation.--By such` means as
these, it may be hoped, that, thr~ough the divine
blei~ng, our days fhlall flow in a fiream as unruffled
as the human slate admits. Thre w~ickedr are like the
tr~oubled sea, svken it cannot rrfi. But thle work of
righteou/i fs is peacc ; anzd the efecrt of r-ig te~oufaefs is-
quietnzep anrd af-1anrae for ev~er*.

* JIfiah xxxii, la.

SERON98

# SERMON XIV. On the Misfortunes of Men being chargeable on themselves. PROVERBS xix. 5. The foolishness of man perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord.

1 I88 J

S ER M ON XIV.

On the MISFOnRTUNES Of MEN being chargeable

on themselves.

f~ROVERBS XiX, 3.

The fool~ne/s of mant pet-trv~erte Ais way,1 and klij earmt

f·erettet againI rthe Lord.~

H O W many complaints do we hear from everyr
quarter, of the misery and diffrers that fill the world !
In ther~e the high and the· low, the young and the
a ~ed, join ; and since the beginning of time, no
topic has been mor~e fertile of declamaition, than the
vanity and vexation which man is appointed to sus--
ser. But are we certain that this vex;:tlon, and this
vanity, is altogaether to be ascribed to thie appoint-
ment of Heaven ? Is there no ground to fulped that
man hims~elf is the chief and immediate author of his
own fulfferings ? What the text platinly furggefts is,
that it is common for men to complain groundlefly
of Providence ; thiat: they are prone to accuse.~ God
for the evils of life, when in reason they ought to
accule thems~elves; and that after their fooll/Ane/s hath

pet rvrlted

perv-etrted threir wayi, and made theml undergo the con-
sequences of their own mifconduR, they impiously
freZt in hearts again/?~ thre LordI. This is the do~-rine
which I now purpose to illuffrate, in order to silence
the feceptic, and to check a repining and irreligious
f irit. I halll for this end make some observations,
firit, on the external, and next, upon the internal,
condition of man; anld then conclude with such fe-
rious and useful improvement as the fubjea will na-
turally s~uggest.

I. LE T us confider the external condition of man.

We find him placed in a world, where he has by no
means the disposal of the events that happen. Ca-
lamities sometimes befal the wor-thiest and the best,
which it is not in their power to prevent, and wher~e
nothing is left them, but to acknowledge and to s~ub-
mit to the high hand of Heaven. For such vifitati-
ons of trial, many good and wife reasons can be as~-
signed, which the prelent fabjea leads me not to
difcuts. But though those unavoidable calamities
make a part, yet they make not the chief part of the
vexations and sor-rows that diffref~s human life. A
multitude of evils bese~t us, for the source of which
wce must look to another quarter.-N~ro sooner has
any thing in the health, or in the circumitances of
men, gone cross to their with, than they begin to
talk of the unequal diffribution of the good things
of this life ; they envy the condition of others ; they
repine at their own lot, and fret against the Ruler of
the wtorld.

FU 1. ,

Fuz.I of there featiments, one man pines under a

broken conflitution. But let us ask him, wvhether
hre can, fairly and hloneftly·, afign no cause for this
but the unknown decree of Heaven ? Has he duly
valued the bleifing of health, and always observed
the rules of virtue and s~obriety ? Has he been mo-
derate in his Ilie, and temperate in all his plealitres ?
If now he be only paying the price of his former
perhaps his forgotten, indulgences, has he any title
to complain, as if he were futfering unjaftly' ? Were
you to survey the chambers of sickness and diffrefs,
you would Eind them peolpled with the viEtims of
intemnpe·ranc andl fenfality, and w·ith the children
of vit~ious indolence and sloth. Among the thoiu-
sands wyho languith there, you w~ould find thle pro-
portion of inlnocent fu~fferers to be hnall. You w;ould
fee faded yourth, prematur-e old age, and the profr-
peA of an untimely grave, to be the portion of mul-
titudes wh~o, in one wyay or other, have brough~t
those evils on themselves; wvhile yret these martyrs
of vice and folly have the aiiarance to arraign the
hard fate of man, and to~fret agaby?~ t~e Lordn.

BUTr you, perhaps, complain ofhardfhlips o~f ano-

th~er kind ; of the injuffice of the wvorld ; of the po-
verty wrhich you fuffer, and thie dif~couragements
under w~hich you labour; of the crosses and difap-
pointments of wthich your life' has been doomed to
be full. B-efore you give too mulch scope to your
disc~ontent, let me delire you to refled impartially
upon your past train of life. Have not sloth, or

pride,

pride, or· ill temper, or finfull patfions, milled y·ou
often from the path of found and wifie condulEt ?
Have you not been wranting to your~selves in im-
proving those opportunities which Providence offekr-
ed you, for bettering and advancing your slate ? If
you have chosen to indulge your humour, or your
taste, in the gratifications of indolence or pleasure,
can you complain because other~s, in preference to
you, have obtained those advantages w~hich naturally
belong to us~eful labours, and honourable pursuits ?
Have not the consequences of some fals~e Rteps, into
wh'ichL your1 pfiLLonsl orI yourI p-leafiires, have betray-
ed you, pursu~ed you through much of y-our life;
tainted, perhaps, your charzaer, involved, you in
embarrafinients, or fu~nk, you int~o neglea. ? I-t
is an old sa:ying, that every man is the ar-tificer of
his own fortune in the w-orld. It is certain that the
world s~eldom turns wholly againf1 a man, unless
through his own fault. God~lineJi is, in general, ;r-o-
stable unto all tkings. Virtue, diligence and induffry,
joined with good temper and prudence, have ever
been found the s~urest road to prosperity ; and w~here
men fail of attaining it, th-eir wiant of s~ucces~s is far
oftener owing to their having deviated from that
road, than to their having encountered insuperable
bars in it. Some, by being too artful, forfeit the
reputation of probity. Some, by being too open,
are accounted to fail in prudence. Others, by be-
ing fickle and changeable, are diff-ruffed b~y all.---
The cafe commonly is, that men seek to aiferibe
their disappointments to any caus~e, rather than to

their

their own mifeonduAt; and when they can devise
no other cause, they lay them to the charge of Pro-
vidence. Their folly leads them into vices; their
vices into misfortunes ; and in their misfortunes
they fretagain/?the Lordl. They are ~doubly unjuff
towards God. In their prosperity, they are apt to
ascribe their fixcefs~ to their own diligence, rather
than to God's blessing; and in their adv~erfty, they
impute their diffreffes to his providence, not to th.eir
owxi misbehaviour. W~hereas, thle truth is the very
reverse of this. Eveurygood and zelvpery eLrife grtcomefth
frolm above ; and of evil and mi~sery~, man is the author
to hims~elf.

WTHEN from the condition of individuals, wet

look abroad to the public slate of the world, wIe
meet with mor~e proofs of the truth of this afrertion.
We fee great societies of men torna in pieces by in-
teftine disse~nsions, tumults and civil commiotions.
We fee mighty armies going forth, in ~formidable
array, against each other, to cover the earth with
blood, and to fill the air wyith the cries of widows
and orphans. Sad evils these are, ·to which this
miserable wrorld is expofed.---But are there evils, I
bes~eech you, to be imputed to God ? Was it he
wYho sent forth slaughtering armies into the field, or
who filled the peaceful city with massacres and
blood ? A~re these mise~ries any other, than the bitter
fruit of men's viokent and disorderly praffions Ae
they not clearly to be traced to the ambition and
vices of prinaces, to the qjuarrels of the great, and to

the

the turbulence of the people ?---Let us lay them
entirely out of the account, in thinking of Provi-
dence; and let us think only of the foolylefs of menr.
Did man controul his passions, and form his conduEU
according to the diliates of wisdom, humanity and
virtue, the earth would no longer be desolated by
cruelty; and human societies would~ live in order,
harmony and peace. In those scenes of mischief
and violence which fill the world: let man behold,
with hkame, ·the pi~ture of his vices, his ignorance,
and folly. Let him be humbled by the mortifying
view of his own perverfene/s; but: let not hris kear~t
fr~et againf the Lordt.-From the external condition,
let us proceed,

II. To confider the internal slate of. man. It is

certain that much disquiet and misery may be found
there, although his outwlard condition appear un-
diflurbed, and eafyr. As far as this inward dif-
quietude aris~es from the flings of conscience, and
the horrors of guilt, there can be no doubt of its
being felf-created misery ; which it is altogether im-
possible to impute to Heaven. But, even, when
great crimes, and deep remorse, are not the occa-
fions of torment, how often is poison infused into
the most flourithling conditions of fortune, by thle
follies and the pafirons of the prosperous ? We fee them
peevish and restless; corrupted with luxury, and ener-
vated by ease; impatient of the finalleft disa8ppoint-
ment; oppressed with low spirits, and -complaining
of every thing around them. How many Hamans,

v ox. Itv. ~KHazachl,

Hazaels, and Her~os, are there in the world, who,
from what they fuffer within, pass their days in more
vexation and misery, than they who undergo the
hardihips of poverty ?Dare such men, in their most
discontented moments, charge the providence of
Heaven with miseries of their own procuring ? Pro-
vidence had put into their hands the fairef oppor-
tunity of passing their life with comfort. But they
themselves blasted every comfort that w as offered;
and verified the prediaion, that t~he pro/perity of foolr
fall dPgfroy tkem*.w·

As it is man's owan foolginefs which ruins his prof-

perity, we must not omit to remark, that it is the
fame cause which aggravates and embitters his ad-
verfity. That you f~uffer from the external afflic-
tions of the world, may' often be owing to God's
appointment; but when, in the midst of ther~e, you
also fuffer from the disorders of your mind and pas-
fions, this is owing to yourselves; and they are
those inward disorders which add the severest fling to
external affliL~ions. Many are the resour~ces of a
good and a wife man, under all the disasters of life.
In the midst of them, it is alway's in his power to
enjoy peace of mind, and hope in God. He may
fuffer; but under f~uffering he will not fink, as long
as all is found within.. But when the spirit has been
wounded by guilt and folly, its wounds open, and
bleed afreth, upon every blow that is received from
the world. The mind becomes sensible and fore

;to

* Proo. L as.

to the slightest injuries of fortune ; and a small reverse
is felt as an insupportable calamity.

ON the whole; the farther you search into human

life, and the more you obs~erve the manners and the
condua of men, you will be the more convinced of
this great truth, that of the diffreffes which abound
in the world, we are the chief authors. Among the
multitudes who are, at this day, bewailing their con-~
dition and lot, it will be found to hold of far the
greater part, that they are reaping the fnrut of their orunf
doings; ; teir iniquities are r~eprovYing tkem, and their
backBJidings cotrrealing them. Unattainable objeas
foolithly purtued, intemperate paffionss nourithed,
vicious pleasures and desires indulged, God and
God's holy laws forgotten; these, these are the great
fcourges of the world; the great causes of the life
of man being so embroiled and unhappy. ·God hath
ordained our state on earth to be a mixued and im-
perfea slate. We have ourselves to blame for its
becoming an insupportable one. If it bring forth:
nothing to us but vexation and vanity, we have
sown the feeds of that vanity and vexation; and as
we have sown, we muff reap.-1s now proceed to-
make improvement of those truths which we have
been considering.

IN the fit place, let us be taught, to look upon

fin as thefource of all our miseries. It may some-
times alfume the gentler names of folly, irregularity,
or levity ; but under whatever form it appears, it

Ks always

always imports a deviation from that sacred law
which ought to regulate our condua. It is flill the
r-oot that beareth gall and worm~wood* ; and in exat pro-
portion to the quantity of this poisonous weed,
which we ours~elves have in~fused into our c up, we
muff exped_ to drink the waters of bitterness. if the
fooi~lne/ of man did not ~pervett kis waysr, his heart
would have no occafiion to fr~e againp the Lord. He
would enjoy competent faisfadtion in every futuation
of life ; and under its unavoidable evils, would de-
rive consolation from religion and virtue. Indeed,
of everyevil which we now endure, of thos~e evils
which we look upon to be the appointment of pro-
vidence, as well as of others, fin is ultimately the
cause; as it was man's revolt from God, which gave
rife originally to those evils, and which rendered the
chastisements we undergo, in this slate of diftipline,
necefrary, even for the son; of God.-----But at pres~ent,
-we confine our observation to those miseries of which
;men are the immediate procurers to themselves; and
from them alone, we find fufficient reafocn to confi-
der fin as the capital foe to man; as the great troubler
and diflurber of his life. To Providence, then,
-let us look up with reverence. On fin let our in-
dignation be vented.; and, what ·is of more confe-
quence, against fin and all its approaches, let our
utmoftcaution be employed. As we proceed through
the different paths of life, let us accuffem ·ourselves
to beware of fin, as the hidden inake lurking among
the grais, from whose fatal .touch we must fly in
haste, if we would not experience its fling.--Too

* Deut. xxix. r . an

many have no juff apprehenflons of this danger.
Faook, said the wife man, make a mock atfnI. A fool
indeed he muff be, who dares to think lightly of it.
He shows not only the depravity of his heart, but,
what perhaps he will be more ashamed to be charged
with, he shows his ignorance of the world. He
thlows that he knows not, he underflands not, even
his worldly interest, nor the interest and happiness
of human s~ociety.

IN the second place, let us learn from what has

been set forth, one of the most awful and important
of all truths, the reality of a divine government ex-·
ercifed over the world. ·Blind mult that mlan be,
who discerns not the moss firiking marks of it, in·
the doArine which has been under our review. If
there be a feeptic, who contends, that unrestrained
liberty in the gratification of desire is given to man;
that in the fight of his Creator, all attions are equal ;
and that no rule of moral conduA hath been pre-
fcribed, or by any penalty enforced ; in order to
confute s~uch a man, we have not recours~e to rea-
fonings, but simply appeal to plain and obvious
faats. Wte bid him look only to the life of man ;
and take notice how every vice, is by the conflitu-
tion of things, conneAed with misery. We bid
him trace the hiffory of any one, with whos~e condu £6
he had particular occasion to be acquainted; and
observe, whether the chief misfortunes which pur-
sured him were not brought upon him by his own
misbehaviour. WTe bid him remark in the hiffory of

nations,

nations, whether public virtue has not always ex-
alted them ; and whether licentioufaefis and crimes
have not paved the way for their ruin. These are:
testimonies to the truth of religion, which cannot
by anly fophiitry be evaded. This is a voice, ivhich
sp~eaks its warnings loud and firong to every heart.

THE system upon which the divine government

at prefeat proceeds, plainly is, that men's Oown ·wick-
edne~sf tould be appointed to correll themr; that fin·
ners thiould be fared in the orlOk of thEir haINds, anld
funk in thie pit wktic~k them/elves haLd dizgged; that tre, back-
flirder in~ feart fould be filed withr ALs own ways.---Of
all the plans which could have been devised for the
governmegt of the world, this approves its~elf to real
son, as the wifeit and most worthy of God; so, to
fr~ame the conflitution of things, that the divinle laws
thrould in a mantner execu~te themse~lves, and carry
their fan~tions in their own bofam.1 Wthen the vices
of men require pun~ithment to be infliated, the Al-
mighty is at no los~s for miniflers of juftiibe. A
tho~usand infiruments of vengeance are at' his com-
mnand; innumerable arrows are always in his quiver.
But such is the profound wildom of his plan, that
nlo peculiar interpofals of power are requilite. He
has no occasion to fiep from: his throne, and to inter-
rupt the order of nature. With that majesty and
solemnity which befits omnipotence, He pronounces,
Ephr~aim is joined- tol kis idch ; let biost alone * ; He
leaves transgressors to their own guilt, and punith-

RICRe

* Holea iv. r 7.

ment follows of course. Their fins do the work of
juffice. They lift the s~courge ; and with every
itroke which they infliA on the criminal, they mix
this severe admonition, that as he is only reaping the·
fruit of his own acdions, he deserves all that he sus-
fers.--From what has been faid', I might take oc-·
cation,

IN the third place, to mhow the injuffice of our·

charging Providence with a promis~cuous and une-
qual distribution of its favours, among the good and
9the bad. That unequal diffribution takes place in
appearance only, not in reality. The whole con-
dult of Providence fufficiently marks, which of those
classes of men it blesses and protests. The prosperity
of sinners is no more than a deceitful thlow. The
great materials of happiness are provided for the vir-
t~uous; and evil never fails to perrfue th~e icked. I shall
clos~e the dis~course with observing,

IN the fourth and last place, the neceffty which

plainly aris~es from our present condition, of looking
up to God for direccion and aid, in the conduat of
life. The result of the whole do~trine I have now
delivered is, that man's happiness or misery is, in a
great measure, put into his own hands. In vain he
com-plains of Providence. If his breart fret again]
the Lord, it is only because kis fdolynre/s had perverted
k;; way : for on himself, and his own behaviour, it
depends,. to be free of those uniferies wvhich harrafs
the wicked.--But alas i when we, fay that this de-

pends

pends upon man, on what uncertain ground do we
place his security ?Is man, when left to himself,
equal to this high truss that is reposed in him, this
important charge that is committed to him, of attain-
ing happiners, by wife and irreproachable condu~l
Inconstant as he is in virtue, variable in his refolu-
tions, soft and yielding in his nature to a thousand
temptations; how thall he guide himself through such
slippery and dangerous paths as those of human life;
where many h~idden precipices surround him; many
false lights lead him affray; and where the confe-
quence of every flep he takes may be deftruflion and
ruin ?-Thankful let us be to heaven, that ini this
situation, a merejful guide firetches out his hand to
aid us; that a celeflial light thlines upon us from
above; that a divine Spirit is promised to illuminate
and firengthen us. Let us humbly request of Hea-
ven, that this Spirit of the Almighty may ever be
our guide; never 9ref~umptuoufly trussing in our
own wifiomn; but liffening attentively to the voice
of God ; and in all our· eays ackno~wledginrg Him who
only can dtires our peps.--Upon the whole, let us
hold fail the perfuation of there fimndamental truths;
-tchat in all his difpenfations, God is juff and good ;
that the cau~e of all the troubles we fuffer is in our-
selves, not in him; that virtue is the surest guide to
a happy life; that he who forsakes this guride, enters
upon the path of death; but that he who -eall-eth
urprightly, ·ealketh surely ; and that he who keepethr the
comml~andmeint, kt~~eyed /;is own foul.

SER~MON

# SERMON XV. On Integrity as the Guide of Life. PROV. xi. 3. The integrity of the upright shall guide them.

[I zor ]

SE R MON XV.

On INTIEGRITY as the GUIDE of LIFE..

PRO VER BS 11. J .

Thre integrity of the ucpright all guride tem.--

RIGHTEOUSNESS and fin are, in this book
of Proverbs, frequently contrasted with each other,
and the advantages of the former disp~layed.. The
righteous man is Ihown to be mor~e excellent than kis
nieighbourr, as the ways in wh~ickz he walks are ways of
pleafantnefi, while the way of tr-aggrefrsg is ha-ad.
Honour is represented as attending the one, while
thame is the portion of the other. The path of the
one leads to life; that of the other to defiruttion.
In thetext, an advantage of righteous~ness is fpeci-
fied, which is not commonly attended to, and:
which some will not readily allow that it poffeffes.
We are told by the wife man, that it affords light and'
direttion to conduft,.and will prove our bes1 guide
throughi all the intricacies of life. Thre integrity of the
upr~igh~t fall guide them ; or, as it is ad ded, to the
fame purpose, in a followring verse, the righte~ouge/s
of tke petrfed f all direA kis wayq. T here are many

K 3 who

who will admit, that integrity is an amiable qua-
lity ; that it is entitled to much refpe&t, and in most
cafes ought to influence our behaviour; who ne-
verthelefs are un willing to allow it the chief place in
the direation of their worldly condua. They hold,
that a certain artful sagacity, founded upon know-
ledge of the world, is the belt condudtor of every
one, who would be a fuccef~sful adventurer in life;
and that a firift attention to integrity, as his only
guide, would often lead him into danger and distress.
In opposition to tenets of this kind, I now purpose
to thew, that amidit all perplexities and dangers,
there is no guide we can choose to safe, and so f~uc-
cef~sful on the whole, as the integrity of an upright
mind; and that upon every trying occasion, princi-
ples of probity and honour will conduat a good man
through life with more advantage, than if he were to
a&t upon the most refined ryfiemn of worldly wisdom.

Ir will not take much time to delineate the

charafter of the man of integarity, as by its nature it
is a plain one. and eailly underflood. He is one,
who makes it: his conflant rule to follow the road of
duty, accordling as the word of God, and the voice
of his confc~ince, point it out to him. He is not
guided merely by affedlions, which may sometimes
·give the colour of virtue to a loose and unflable
charadter. The upright man is guided by a fixed
principle of: mind, which determines him to
efleem nothing but what is honourable; and to
abhor whatever is base and unworthy, in moral con-

du&.

du&t. Hence you find him ever the fame; at all
times, the trafty friend, the affeaionate relation, the
confdcentious man of bufiners, the pious worihipper,
the public spirited citizen. He affirmes no borrow-
ed appearance. He seeks no mask to cover him; for
he a~s no flupid part; but he is in truth what he
appears to be, full of truth, candour, and humanity'.
In all his pursuits, he knows no path but the fair
and dire& one; and would much rather fail of firc-
cess, than attain it by reproachfid means. He never
thows you a fniling countenance, while he medi-
tates evil againit you in his heart. He never praises
you among your friends ; and then joins in traducing
you among your enemies. You will never find ore
part of his charader at variance with another. Dr
his manners, he is simple and unaffeated ; in all his
proceedings, open and confitent.--Such is the
man of integrity spoken of in the text. Let us now
proceed to show, in what manner, and with what
effeA, integr~ty serves for the guide of his life.

E VER Y One, who has begun to make any progress

in the world, will be sensible, that to condua him-
self in human affairs with wifdiom and propriety, is
often a matter of no fmnall difficulty. Amidst that
variety ofcharaders, of jarring difpolitions, and of
interfering interests, which take place amlong those
with whom we have intercourse, we are frequently
at a stand, as to the part most prudent for us to chufe.
Ignorant of what is passing in the breasts of those
around us, we can -ferm no more than doubtful con-

jecures

jeatures concerning the events that are likely to hap-
pen. They may take some turn altogether different
from the course In which we had imagined they were
to run, and according to which we had formed our
plans. The slightest incident often thoots out into
important consequences, of which we were not
aware. The labyrinth becomes to intricate, that
the most sagacious can lay hold on no clue to guide
him through it: He finds himfelfembarraffed, and
at a loss how to aB.--In public and in private life,
in managing our· own concerns, and in dire~ting
those of others, the doubt flarted by the Wife Man
frequently occurs ; Who knowedA what is good for mnan
in tkis i~fe?--While thus fatigued with conjeature,
we remain perplexed and undetermined in our choice;
we are at the fame time pulled to different sides, by
the various emotions which belong to our nature.
On one hand, pleasure allures us to what is agreea-
ble; on the other, interest weighs us down towards
what feemns gainful. Honour attratts us towards
what is ifplendid; and indolence inclines us to what
is easy. In the consultations which we hold with
our own mind, concerning our condua, how often
are we thus divided within ourselves; puzzled by
the uncertainty of future events, and diffraded by
-the contest of different inclinations ?

IT· is in fulch situations as these, that the principle

of integrity interpolces to give light and dire~ion.
While worldly men fluauate in the midit of thofb
perplexities which I have des~cribed, the virtuous

man

man has one Oracle, to which he resorts in every
dubious cafe, and whos~e deciiions he holds to be
infallible: He consults his conscience. H-e listens
to the voice of God. 'Were it only on a few occa-
fions that this Oracle could be consulted, its value
would be less. But it is a midtake to imagine, that
its Responses are seldom given. Hardly is there any
material tranfa~tion whatever in human life, any im-
portant question, that holds us in f~ulpEence as to
pradtice, but the difference between right and wrong
will thow itself ; and the principle of integrity will,
if we listen to it impartially, give a clear decision.
W~henever the mind is divided within itself, con-
s~cience is s~eldom or never neutral. There is always
one fide or other to which it leans. There is always
one s~cale of the balance, into which it throws the
weight of some sirtue ; or· some praiye ; of something
that is jufl and true, lovely, Acnefi, and of g-ood repor~t.
These are the forms, which rife to the obs~ervation
of the upright man. By others they may be unse~en,
or overlooked; but in his'eye, the luffre of virtue
outfhines all other brightnes~s. Wherever this pole
star dire £ks him, he fleadily holds his course.---
Let the ifflie of that course be ever so uncertain ; let
his friends differ from him in opinion , let his ene-
mies clamour ; he is not moved; his purpose is fix-
ed. He asks but one question of his heart, what is
the most worthy and honourable part ; what is the
part most becoming the flation which he poffeffes,
the charalter which he wishes to bear, the expecta-
tions which good men entertain of him ?Being once

decided

decided as to this, he hesitates no more. He thats
his ears against ever~y solicita~tion. He purs~ues -the
direa line of integrity, without turning either to thet
rightr hand or· to the left. "L It is the Lord who call-
"C eth. H~im I follow. Let him order what .feeml-
"~ eth good in his fight."-I--t is in this manner that
the bitegrityr ofthe uprightl a~s as their guid~e.

But as, upon a superficial view, it may appear

hazardous to place ourselves entirely under such a
guide, let us now proceed to confider what can be
f'aid in defence of this plan of condud, and what
advantages serve to recommend it.

IN the frfl place, I affirm, that the~ guidance of

integrity is the fafeft under which we can be placed ;
that the road in which it leads us is, upon the whole,
the freest from dangers. PerfeA immn~unityv from
danger is not to be expeded in this life. We can
chufe no path, in which we may not meet with dif-~
appointments and misfortunes. Our life, at the
best, is a pilgrimage, and perils fiirround it. Against
these perils, the men of the world imagine that craft
and dexterity fmirrih the best defence; and if, in
any inflance, they over-reach the upright, they con-
fider it as a manifest decision in favour of their plan.
But infkead ofrefting on a few inflances, let us take
an extentive survey of the cours~e of human affairs.
Let us enquire who the persons are that, in all t'he
different lines of life, have gone through the world
with most s~uccess; and we thall find, that the

mien

men of probity and honour form by far the most con-
fiderable part of the lift; we thall find that men of
plain underfianding, a~ting upon fair and dire £
views, have much oftener prospered, than men of
the <leepeft policy, who were devoid of principle.
How few are the instances of pers~ons who by fide-
lity, worth, and fledfaft adherence to their duty,
have either loft their fortunes, or incurred general
difpleafare, in times when human affairs were pro-
ceeding in their ordinary train ? But how numerous
and frequent are the examples of those whole prof-
petts have been blaned, whose circumflances have
been ruined, and their names funk into contempt by
vice and dish~onesty ?

THE man of the world aims at higher things, and

more rapid fulccefs, than the man of moderation and
virtue. But, at the fame time, he incurs greater
rifques, and dangers. Nuo calculation of probabili-
ties can ensure fagfety to him who is a £ing a deceitful
part. Amidst the unforeseen vicifiitudes of the
world, he has to dread, not only disappointment to
his plains, but the miseries also which dete~ed failla-
cies may bring on his head. ~e walks on the edge
of precipices, where a single falfie step may be fatal.
He follows a wandering light, which, if it fail of
guiding him by a thort path to the palace of ambition,
lands him in the pit, or the lake. Whereas he who
follows the guidance of inte~grity, walks in the high
road on which the light of the fun thines. He fees
before him the Habitation of Peace to which his

iteps

Iteps are diretted;I and if he be longer of arriving at
it, he is fitre of neither wandering far affray, nor of
meeting on his road with any forms of unus~ual terror.

-Let it be always remembered that the principle

of integrity which direacs a good man, is far from
excluding prudence in the condua of life. It im-
plies no improvident or thoughtleis simplicity. On
the contrary, it Is closely connetted with true wis-
dom. A man of enlarged capacity, and extensive
views, is always upright. Craft is merely the s~up-
plement of inerior abilities. It charaderizes a nar-
row comprehension, and a little mind.--As the path
of integrity is on the whole the fafeil path of con-
du & ; so,

IN the jlcond place, it is unqueflionably the moss

honourable. Integrity is the foundation of all that
is, high in chara~er among mankind. Other nua-
Iities may add to its fpltendor ; but if this essential
requisit~e be \vanting, all their hlufre fades. Werre I
drawing the characzer of one who claimed the ad-
miration of the world; and after I had aferibed to
him eloquence, valour, and every endowment that
ie most thining and captivating, did I add, that he
was a man of too much art to be truffed, I appeal
to every one, whether, by this single firoke, the
whole charadter would not be funk and degraded
An interefied and crafty man may perhaps rife in'to
influence and high station ; he may be a rich and a
p~owerful, but will never be a great, man. He may
be feared, and externally honoured and courted;

but

but: in the s~ecret thoughts of men he finds no refpeat.
We all feel, that magnanimous sentim~ents cannot
dwetll in the faLme breast with f~elfifh~nefis and deceit.

HE who rests upon an internal principle of virtue

and honour, will aA with a dignity and a boldness, of
which they are incapable who are wholly guided by
interest. He is above those timid fuf~ipicions, and
cautious restraints, which fetter and embarrals; their
cond-ua. That firmnes~s which the confciodinef~s
of redlitude inspires, gives vigour and force to his
exertions on every great ·occasion. It adds double
weight to all the abilities of which he .is pofieft.
It even supplies the place of those abilities
in which he is defe~ive. Theys who oppos~e him
are obliged tohonour him. They look up to him
with a s~ecret awe, as to one who moves above them
in a fiiperior s~phere ; regardless of their good or ill
opinion, of their promises or their threatenings;
like one of those celeffial luminaries which holds its
course through its orbit, without being affetted by
any commotions among the elementsdbelow. Such
a man is truffed, and relied upon, as well as efleem-
ed, becaus~e all knowt where to find him, and upon
what Cvftem he ac~s. He attaches friends and fol-
lowers to himself, without courting them; and
though his progress towards fame ithould be flow,
and interrupted at first by crooked arts, it is never-
thelefs certain and s~ure. The public may be misled
for a while, in judging of real merit ; but it is fel-

dom unjuff at the lafl. As persons continue to come
forward to view, and to ai& their part in trying cir-
cumitances, their charaaers are at length fully
afcertainedl; and, almost always, rated as they de-
serve. How corrupt soever the world may be, they
cannot with-hold approbation from him, whole
conduA is marked by uniform integrity anld honour.
]Enemies he will have; but the public favours him;
the multitude of men with him success; and destine
him, in their thoughts, to every fiep of his prefer-
ment, before he arrives at it.

IN the third place, the plan of condu&t, on which

the man of integrity proceeds is the most conforma-
ble ; that is, attended with the greatest i atisfa~tion in
a man's own mind. Amidit the various and per-
plexing events of life, it is of singular advantage to
be kept free from doubt, as to the part most proper
to be chosen. He who consults nothing but world-
ly interest muff, upon every turn of fortune, under-
g~o much painful fuipence. He is obliged to liffen
with anxious ear to every whirper of report; and
upon every new afpelt which the face of affairs as-
fumes, muff study how to place himself in a new
posture of defence. But the man of principle is a
firanger to these inward troubles. His time is not
loft; nor his temper fretted by long and anxious
consultations. One light always thines upon him
from above. One path, the path of integrity, al-
ways opens clear and diftin&f to his view, But: this
is not his only advantage, to' be freed from embar--

- ra ffments,

raffments, by having placed himself under the charge
of one conflant guide. He is also rewarded with the
sense of having chosen his guide well and wifely.
He is delivered from all inward: upbraidings, from all
misgivings of mind, from all alarms founded on the
dread of dis~covery and disgrace. A good conscience
enables him to look back on the part which he has
aaed with fatisfadion; and to look forward to the
illbe whichit may bring, without concern. It is in
the cafe of one iirue only, that the man who a~ts
from worldly interest can enjoy fatisfadtion; that is,
when his designs have succeeded according to his
with. But it is the felicity of the man, who ats
unlder the dire3ion of integrity, that in every iifue,
he has something to comfort him. Though success
has failed him, the consolation remains of having
done his dut , and fludied to approve himself to'
God.,

Tnts reference of all his at'ions to divine appro-

batiorn, furniates another source of fagtisfation and
peace. He looks up, with pleasing hope, to a Pro-
teEtor in the heavens, who lueveth righrteorgnef, and

woecsuntenrance behohleth the upright. The man of

wordliy wrifdom is conscious of having no title to
the favour of that high adminiffration which rules the
ulniverfe. By q~uitting the path of righteousnes~s, he
has left that firaight road, in which God had appourt-
ed him to walk. He has taken the dire~tion of his
wray to hi-melf ; and chosen to be his own guide
and malter. To his own abilities, therefore, such

as they are, he muff trut; and is become wholly
res~ponsible for the if~ue of his condudt. But the man
of virtue hath conmmited kis way to thre Lord. He fol-
lows the divine signal. He co-operates with the di.
vine purpose. The power which Cways the universe
is engaged on his fide. By natural consequence, he
has ground to exped, that any seeming dis~appoint-
ments which he may now incur, thall be over-ruled
at the end to some salutary effett. Hence, that
peace of God keeping the Acart, to which worldly men
arefitrangers. Hence a degree of firmness and refo.
lution in condua, which it is impoilible for them to
posses~s. Especially when we add,

IN theJOkrthA and lail pike, that he who thus pur-·

sues a course of integrity, has alwvays in his view the
profpjed of immortal rewards. That fulrdy is the
wisest d·Ire~ion of condudt, which is most amply
recompenfed at last. But what recompence can
worldly wisdom bestow, comparable to what is pro-
miied by the golpel to them who, by patient continuance
in welldoing, look for gloryr, honour, and irmmortali~ty--..
The recompence indeed is difiant; but the hope of
it is present; and hope is one of the most powerful
p'rinciples of human adtion. Let a man be firm in
the belief that he is aaing under the immediate pro-
teaxion of Heaven, and that through all etern~ity he
thall be rewardrd for what he now performs; and,
as far as this belief is prevalent, his conduA w2ll be
Ready and determined. Wherever religion dlireas~
hun to hold his courf'e, he will adv·ance wrtith intre-

pidity

pidity. He will s~ubmit to restraints without reluc-
tance. He will meet dangers without fear. To
every motive which reason suggests in favour of
virtue, the hope of eternal life adds supernatural
firength.-Accordingly, in the behaviour of many
holy men, under the most trying circumstances of
diffref~s, we behold this effea eminently exemplified.
It appears, with niuch luffre, in the spirited and
magnanimous sentiments of the Apoflie Paul, when
he· had the profpeAt of death before him. Bclbold I
go bound inr the piritt to fe~rufalemr, not know~ing the thini~gs
thIat frall befal me there, facve that thre Holy Gkcji wit-
nethP-~/ th2at bonds and afidions abide me. But none of-
thefethinzgs move me ; neithrer coucnt I my life dear unto
myself, so that I may 1fn;z~ my course withr joy*.-----
I am kowr read~y to be of~er~ed, and the time of my de~par-l
ture -is at handt. I hrave foughlt a good ;fght ; I hav~e
finlhed my courfre I hrave kept thle faii/t. Henceforth
-tkere isS laidt UP for me at cr'own~ Of'~of riteOUpneSI ICkjick t~e
Lor~d, thre rizghteous fudge, fall give me at thlat da~y-s.

TaUS I have endea'~voured to h~o~w in w~hat man-

ner the integrity of thle uprtight guides threm ; and what
the advantages are of placing ourselves under its gui-
dance. If it be the line of safety, or the line of ho-
nour, which we chufe to purule ; if we consult our
present comfort, or look forward to future rewards;
in all these refpeAs, the cours~e which integrity
points out is by far the most eligible.

IT

.+ Acts xxr. ss. .t -j*s imothy, iv. 6.

ITr is a great recommendation of the guidance

offered to us by integrity, that it is eaiily underflood
by allmen. Plans of worldly policy are deep and
intricate; and experience ihows how often the ablest
persons are mittaken in the meaCures which they
adopt for carrying them on. But when men's in-
tentions are fair and upright, it wiill be found, that
a moderate thare of understanding and attention is
all that is requisite, for conduaing themselves with
safety and propriety. Providence never int~ended,-.
that the art of living happily in this world thould
depend on that deep penetration, that acute fagaci-
ty, and those refinements of thought, which few pof~-
fess. It has dealt more graciously with us; and
made happiness to depend on uprightness of inten-
tion, much more than on extent of capacity. For
the most part, the first sentiment which firikes a
good man, concerning what he ought, or ought not
to do, is the soundest, and suggests the best and
wisest counsel. When he hesitates, and begins to
deliberate how far his duty, or his honour, can be
reconciled to what seems his lintereft, he is on the
point of deviating into a dangerous path.--At the
fa8me time, it is of great consequence, that he who
seeks to surrender his condua to the dire~tion of in-
tegrity, thould be well apprized of what true inte-
grity requires. Let him guard againit burdening
conscience unnecefl~arily ; left a foperfitions regard
to trifles lead him to relax in matters of higher obli-
gation. Let him avoid minute scrupulosity, on the
one haind. Let him keep at a difiance from loos~e

cafiuiry,

# SERMON XVI. On Submission to the Divine Will. JOB ii. 10.  Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?

cauiffiiry, on the other. But when he is satisfied that
his cons~cience has been well informed, let himn,
without wavering, adhere to its didtates in the whole
of his condua. This will prove the truest wifdonti
both for this world and the next. For h~e whok walketh
up,,rigtywalketh surely. The pathr of tre ju/i is as the
fkining light : And it thall./ine mor-e and more unto the:
pesfe/I dag.

S ERMON XVI.

On ScantssIon to the DIVINE 'ILL.

Jo a ii. I O.

--Shall see reci~ve good at the hand of God, and fall

eve no~t receive~ evil t

FE W fubjeAs of religious exhortation are of
more general concern than those which refped the
.diitretres incident to human life. For no faciety,
no family, no person, can expedt to be long exempt-

ed from them; and ~when we speak of the prosperous,
we can only mean thos~e who are more rarely fubjett
to them than others. Now, under those diffreffes,
religion performs two offices : It teaches us how we
ought to bear them; and it assists us in thus bearing
them. Materials for both are found in the words
of the text, which contain a featiment to natural
and juff, as to carry convi~tion to every reasonable
mind. They were the words of Job, at a time when,
to his other calamities, this domeffic affli~tion was
added, that one, who ought to have aff~unged and
soothed his sorrows, provoked his indignation by
an impious speech. T~ou /peakeft, Job replies, as
one of the fool~ women/peaketh : IVt~a t ? fall w~e reeive·
good at the h/andof God, and/Aall wue not t'reciue evil 7--
Three· infirudlions naturally~ aris~e from the text :
First, that this life is a mixed slate of good and evil :
Secondly, That both the goods and the evils in it
proceed from God : And, thirdly, That there ar~e
juff reasons for our receiving with patience the evils
of life, from the fame hand which beffows its goods.

I. Ta~s life is a mixed slate of good and evil.

This is a matter of fall, which will be denied by
none, and on which it is not necessary to beffow
much illuffration. It is evident to the slightest in-
fpe~tion, that nothing here is unallayed and pure.
Every man's slate is checqyered with alternate griefs
and joys, disappointment and s~uccess. 'No condi-
tion is altogether flable. No life preserves always
the fame tenor. The vicii~tudes of th~e world some-

tirues

times bring forward the affli~ed into mlore comnfort-
able circumstances; and often trouble the joy of the
prosperous. This is the train in w-hich human as-
fairs have ever been found to proceed; and in which
we may expeat them always to go on.

BUT though this be universally admitted in f~pe-

culation, and often confeffed in dis~course, the mis-
fortune is, that: fewJ think of applying it to their
own caf~e. The bulk of mankindi difrcover as much
confidence in prosperity, and as much impatience
under the least reverf-ie, as if Providence had frirt
given them affiirance that their prosperity was nev·er
to change, and afterwards had cheated their hopes.
Whereas, what reason ought to teach us, is, to ad-
just our mind to the mixed slate in which we find
ourselves placed; never to presume, never to despair;
to be thankfull for the goods which at present we
enjoy, and to expeclt the evils that may succeed.--
Thou haft been admitted to partake of the feast of
lifet. Its good things are diffributedl, in variou~s por-
tions, among the guests. Thou haft had thine al-
lotted fhlare. Complain n ot, when thy portion is
removed. It is not permitted to any one, to remiainr
always at the banquet.

II. WE are taught by the text, that both the

goods and the evils w~hich compose this mix~ed slate,
come fromn the hland of God. A little refleztionl may
convince us, that, in God's world, neither good
nor evil can happen by chance. If ther~e wtere anly one

V O L. Vt, LI~

moment, in which God quitted the reins of the
universe, and ilffered any power to interfere with
his adminiffration, it is evident, that, from that
moment, the measures of his government muff be-
come disjointed and incomplete. He who governs
all things, muff govern continually ; and govern the
leafs things js well as the greatest. He never flumbelrs
nor fleepj. Ther~e are no void spaces, no broken
plants, in his adminiffration; no blessings that drop
upon us without his intention; nor any crosses that
vilit us,, uns~ent: by him. I am the Lo~rd, andc thre is
none else. Ifotrm thelight, and create rdarkleji. I make
peace, and create evil. I the Lord doall th/e thing~s*

How it has come to pass, that this life thould

contain such a mixture of goods and evils, and that
the mixture too thould be of God's appointment,
gives rife to a diffcult inquiry. For how can any
thing but what is good proceed from the God of
love Can darkness idire from the sour~ce of light ?
or can it be any fatisfaition to the F~arker of mercies,
to behold the sorrows of creatures whom he has
.made ?-Here there was room for much perplexity,
till revelation informed us, that the mixture of evil
in man's estate is owing to man himself. Had he
continued as God originally made him, he would:
have received nothing but good from his Creator.
His apoftafyr and corruption opened the gates of the
tabernacle of darkness. Misery ifizued forth, and
has ever since purs~ued him. In the prefeat condi-

tio n

* Ifai;Jh xly. 6, 7.

tion of his nature, that misery is partly puninhment,
partly trial. He is become incapable of bearin~g
uninterrupted prosperity ; and by the mixture of
evils in his lot, merciful designs are carried on for
hlis improvement and refforation.

WHAT the text leads us at: prefeat to confider is,

the effe~tt that will follow from imitating the example
of Job, and referring to the hand of the Almighty,
the evils which we futffer, as well as the goods whichr
we enjoy. Such a reference of the diftrefsful eventsj
of our life to the appointm~ent of Heaven, not only
is a duty which piety requires, but tends also to mi-
tigate diffrefrs, andl to suggest co~nsolation. For to
dwell, as is too commonly don~e, upon the inifiru-
ments and s~ubordinate means of our trouble, is fre-
quently the cause of much grief, and much fin.
When we view our fuiferings as proceeding mere-
ly from our fellow-creatures, the part which they
have aded in brinlging them upon us, is often more
grating than the fuffering itself. 'The unreafosnable-
ness, perhaps, of an enemy, the treachery of a
friend, the ingratitude or ins~olence of one whom
we had much obliged, add weight to a load laid
upon us by means to provoking. The thoughts of
their malignity, or of our owvn negleca in guar·ding
against it, s~erve to poison the fore. Whereas, if in-
flead of looking to men, we beheld the cross as
coming from God, these aggravating circumstances
would affefti us less; we wot(uld feel no moret:hanl
our proper burden; we wIould fulbmlit to it mior.E

L, 2, patie~ntly· ;

patiently; and many res~ources would open to us, as
thall in a little time be ihown, from thinking of the
hand that lays it on. Had Job, whzen despoiled of
all his fithffance, thought of nothing but the Chal-
deans and Sabeans wyho robbed him, with what
violent passions would he have been transported,
and with what eager delires of revenge tormented
Whereas, considering them as rods and infiruments
only in the divine hand, and receiving the corre£1ion
as froxy thle Almighty himself, the tumumlt of his
mind fbfided; and with refpe £ful composure he
could fay,~ Thle Lolrd gave; and the Lor~d hath takent
awauny : Blefe~d be the name of the For-d. This leadls
m e,

III. To colniderY the last, and most important %2-

firu~tion, ariting from the text; nlamely, that there
are many reasons why we, who receive good from the
hand of God, thould receive with patience the evils
which he is pleased to inflift. This is firongly con-
veyed by that interrogatory form of ifpeech, in
which the sentiment of Job is expressed : Wha~t 7 Aall
woe receive good~ at the fiand of Godc, and fl7all we not r-e-
ceiv-e evoil 7 In order to unfold all that is contained in
this appeal made to every man's confclience, let us
confider,

IN the fifl place, that the good things which

God has bestowed, afford fufficien~ti evidence for our
believing, that the evils which he sends, are not
caurelefsly or wantonly inflidled. Did we live in a

wiorld

wforld which bore the marks of a malicious or crulel
governor, there might be reas~on for diftruiting ever'y
Rtep of his conduA. But in the world which we in-
habit, we behold, on the contrary, plain marks of
predominant goodness. We behold the firu~ture of
the universe, the order of nature, the general course
of Providence, obviously arranged wvith a benevolenlt
regard to the welfare of men. All the art and con-
trivance of which the divine works are full, point to
this end; and the more they are explored, create the
firmer belief, that the goodness of the Deity gave rife
to the iyltem of creation. Wihat is the conclusio~n
to be thence drawn, but that in such parts of the
divine adminification as appear to us harth andc fe-
vere, the famne goodlnefs continues to preside, -though
exercis~ed in a hidden and mysterious manner ?

LE T me desire you to confider, whether, if some

POwerful friend had placed you in an opulent: and
comfortable ta~tion, and, in the general conduc't of
your affairs, had discovered the most difinterefied
kindness, you would not as~cribe anly occasional dil-
couragements you received, to some unknown rea-
son or cause, rather yhan to his unfaithflnefsei or
cruelty ? Ought not the experience wvhich we have
had, and the discovery wlhich all nature affords, of
the divine goodness, leadi us to put a like confirudh-
on onl the evils which nve ifufer from a hand that
hath so frequently loaded us wiith good; ?Have
we forgotton, in the mlidR of our coomplaints, who
brought us unto the light of day; i who watched

over our helpleis infancy ; wPho reared our growing
chI-ildhoodi; and through ten thousand sur~roundi~ng
d a1nger~s, has been our prote~tor and guardian unltil
clus day How often has he res~cued us from sick-
ness and death, and made our hearts glad with un-
expeded comforts ? Now, that s~ome cloud is throwfn
over our prosperity, or some blefirng withdrawn, in
which for a time we had rejoiced, can we imagine
that there is no good caus~e for this change of his
proceeding ? Shall we fulped that his nature is en-
tirely altered ? Had~ God forg~otten to be grac~ious ?

Hat kenanrge~r.Aut up his tener imer~cies t N 0, let us

fay woith the Psalmist, T~is is mly in~frmity ; but I will
r-emembzer the workJ1S Of thre LOrd. I Will remember the
year of the right hand of the mo/i Hight.---One signal
work of the mofl: High, at least, let us remember,
and rejoice in the remembrance of it ; even that
final remedy which he has provided for all the evils
occasioned by fin, in the redemption of the world
accompith~ed by JTefus Christ. He wko/paredt not hisi
owun Son, but delivered im rp for us all, w ill he, in
any care, wantonly affiiA the children of men with
fup'erfuous and unnecefrary s~orrows ?Is not this a
proot so fatisfaaory, so express and demonfirative,
of the gracious purpoies of God, as thould dif ofe
us to ta te. in good part, every thing which proceeds
from-r ilim? C'onfider,

x th~e /erond place, that the good things wre re-

ceive from God are undes~erved, the evils w·e fuuffer

are.

* Pi'alm 1xxvii. 9, I0.

are juffly merited. Every reasonable person muff
feel the weight of this consideration, for producing
patience and fulbmiiflion. For, though to futfer at
any rate be grievouls, yet to f~uffer unjuffly, is doubly
galling. Whereas, when one receives a mixed por-
tion, whereof the goods are above his deserts, and the
evils below his des~erts, to complain, in such a cafe,
is unreasonable; there is more ground for being
thankful. All, it is trute, have not deserved evil
equally. Y et all of us deserve it more or less ; and
to deserve good at the hand of the Lord, is what none
of us can pretend. At the best we are but unpr·oftable
ser~vants. Even this is more than we are entitled to
claim. For if God were to enter into judtgment with
us, who could fland before him ?who could juffify
himself in his fight~ ? When the most inoffienfive
compare their conduA with God's holy law ; when-
they refleat upon the duties they have omitted, and
the a~tual guilt they have contrasted, they will find
more reason to accuse themselves, than to complaux
of the divine chastisement. Whatever innocence
any of us may plead, nay, whatever merit we may
claim with refpea to men and the world, wre fuffer
no more than what we deserve from the Governor
of the world; and olf his dif pleas ure, we know that
the wrath of man is no other than the infirument.

Nor only all of us have done e~vil, but w~hat

ought to be particularly attended to, Godi has a just
title to punifhI us for it. Although a man kn~ow th~at
hne deserves punishment, yet he will not allowl every

One~

one to infliB it. A child will submit to his parents,
a servant to his matter, a fubjea to the magiffrate,
when he would not bear correaion from another
hand. But no parent can have so complete a right
to authority over his children, no malter over his
servants, no magistrate over his f~ubjeAs, as the Al-
mighty hath over us. When we were born, we
brought nothing with us into God's world. During
our continuance in it, we have lived on the good
thmngs which God has pleased to lend us; and of
wvhich, God and oulr own conscience knowv that we
have made but a sorry improvement. When he
thmnks proper to take any of them away, no wrong
is done us ; for they were not ours. To have enr-
joyed them so long, was a favour. To enjoy them

stways, was w at we neither des~erved, nor had any
title to exped.

IN the third 'place, the good things which at dif,

ferent times we have received and enjoyed, are much
greater than the evils which we f~uffer. ·Of this farct
1 am s~ensible it will be didicult to perfitade the as-
flided. But would they weigh, in a fair balance,
the whole of their circumitances, they would find
it true. Whatever persons feelat the present, makes
so fironga an impreflion upon them, as very com-
monlly to obliterate the memory of all the past.
When one is oppressed with some painful disease in
bis body, or wrung with Some fore diffrefs of mind,
every former comfort, at that moment, goes for no-
thing. Life is beheld in all its gloom. A dark cloud

feemns

se~ems to hang over it; and it is rev;Ied, as nlo other
than a cene of wretchedness and forrowc. But this
is to be unjuff to human life, as w\ell as ungrateful
to its authlor. - Let me only desire you to th~ink
how many days, how many months, how manyr
years, you have passed in health, and ease, and com-
fort ; how many pleasurable feelings you have had ;
how many friends you have enjoyed ; how many
bleflings, in short, of different kindcs yol have
tasted; and you will" be" forcedto acnowlege, that
more materials of thcnkfgiving present themselves
than of lamentation and complaintr,--There blef-
sings, you will fay, are past. But though palt,
ought they to be gone from your remembrance ? Do
they merit no place, in Lhe comnparative effimate of
the goods and evils of your slate ? Did you, could
you, expse~t, that in this mutable world, any tempo-
ral joy was to lail for ev er- Has gratitude no in flu-
ence to form your m~inds to a calm~ acquic~ence in
your Benefa~tor's appointments ? W'hat canl be more
reasonable than to fay, " Ha~ving in former· times
"( received so many good things from the hand of
"' God, thlall I not now, without mrurmuring, re-
"L ceive the few evils which it pleases him to fe~nd ?"

IN the four~th place, not only the goods of life are

upon the whole g~reater than its evils; Ijut thle rrn s
which we fuffer are seldom, or neiver, w~ithoutt fmne
mixture of good. As there is no condliton < n earth
of pure unmixred fe~licity, so there is nonle so mile-
rable, as to be destitute of evrery comfort. Entire

L 3 and

anrd complete misery, if ever it take place, is of our
own proc uring, not of` God's sending. None but
the most gross and atrocious sinners canl be in such a
iituation, as to discover no ray of relief or hope. In
the ordlinary d~iffreffes of li e, it is generally our own
folly and infirmity whicht upon the loss of famne
onle ble~fing that we had .highly prized, deprives us
of fatisfa~tion in all other things. Mlany of our ca-
1-amities are purely imaginary, and felf-created; ari-
sing from rivalfhip or competition with others, and
from false opinions of the importance of obje~ts, to
which cuffom and fashion have annexed an ideal
value. Were these mistaken opinions once corrett-
e~d by reason, the evil would disappear, and con-
tentment would resume its place. With refped to
those calamities which are infli~ted by God, his
Providence has made this wife~ and merciful confli-
tution, that, after the firfit thock, the burden by
degrees is lightened. Time brings a gentle and
powerfull opiate to all misfortunes. What is very
violent cannot last long; and what lasts long we
become accuffomed to bear. Every lituation that
is permlanent, at length is felt to be tolerable. The
mind accommodates idfelf to it; and by degrees re-
ga;ins its usual tranquillity. Hence the g~reatest part
of the evils of life are more terrible in the previous
apprehenfolo, thanl in the a £1ual feeling ; and it f~el-
dom1 happens but, in one corner or other, fomSething
is found on which the mind can lay hold for· its relief

H-owv many, for inflance, do we behold around

us, fir:.itened in their worldly circumilances, and
yet findling the means to live chearfully w'it a
poverty and peace in the f~ame habitation ?' If w~e are
deprived of fr'ends wh1omT we tenderly loved, are
there not it:;l some remaining, from whom we may
expea much comfort ?If our bodies are affliAed
with f~ore difeaf~ie, have wIe not reaso~n to be thankful
that our mind c.·ntinues vigorous and entire ; that
we are in a situation to look around us for wihatever
can afford us eat~ ; and that after the decay of this
frail and mou~ldering~ tabernacle, we can look for-
wrard to a boupjt n-t made w~ith haciind, eternal inl the
heaen·En: -In the mid~it of rll difiteiferst there remains
to every sincere Christian, that mixture of pure and
<renuine con~ola:ion, which pr-ings from the pro-
miles and hopes of the gospel. Confider, I beferech
youl, wVha't a fi-lgularly hap..y d~ifin? :ion this miakes
in your fituadlon, beyond the fi-ate of those who,
under the variou-.s trronbies of life, are -left withfrout
ho~pe, annd wcith~out God n~ thIe w~or·./ ; without any thing
to look to, but a tra~in .i unknown caufets and ac-
cidetnts, in whIch they fee no light nor comfo~rt.--
Thank the Fath-er of mlercies, that into all thie evils
he foo''ds, he infdets :his joyful oethth j er

dor glory that fllall Be ret~-caIledr Iin the end, to the virtu-
ous anrr o-od.

Isu the j~it/land las1- place, as the evils which we

fuffer are thlus alleviated by a mixture of good; so
we have reaso~n to believe, that the evils thiemfelfves

are,

are, in many refpecds, good. When borne with
patience and dignity, they improve and ennoble our
char~aEter. They bring into exercise several of the
manly and heroic virtues; and by the conflancy and
fidelity with which w~e support our trials on earth,
prepare us for the highest rewards in heaven. It has
always been found, that the pref~eat conflitution of
human nature cannot bear uninterrupted prosperity,
without bemng corrupted by it. The poisonous
weeds which spring up in that too luxuriant foil, re-
quire the hand of ad verfity to extirp~ate them. It is
the experience of s~orrow and diffrefs that s~ubdues
the arrogance of pride, tamres the violence of passion,
softens the hardnes~s of the f~elfilh heart, and human-
izes the temper to feel for the woes of others. Many
have had reaso~n to fay, that it ans goodfor them to be
affidedSE. Wh~en men take the timbrel and the karpb, and
rejoice at tke founfd of fthe orygan, they are apt to f~ay
unto God, Depart fi-ro us, for wet defr~ie not the Knowiledge
of thy ayvs. Whatis the A~mighty~l~ that we /ould serve
Aim .F Butl wken thetY are Iholdecn inr~ cords of afbtiliion, thecn
be fl~ewTeth them th~eir wo~rk, and their trany greflon that
thiey have exceedErd. He opened al;& their ear to difciplineq
and commantdtht that theyr return rfrom inlziquity-. Is his
caf~e to be deplored as highly calamitous, who, by
forfe~itinga some transient enjoymnent of the world,
purch~ases laiting improvement in piety and virtue,
andc exchanges a few of the good things of this life for
the better things of another ?

INS LUENC ED

*C Plahn~ exijx. cyr, . * Job xri. I a--xxxrvi. 8.

INFLUENCED by such considerations as there, let

us look up with reverence to the great Disp:oser of
events; and under any diff-rers with which he is
pleas~ed to vifxt us, let us utter no other voice but
this ; Sklall w~e receive good at thre h;and of God, and fall
weu not r·eceive evJ i 7-Men are too often mngenious in
making themselves miserable, by aggravating to their
own fancy, beyond bounds, all the evils which they
endure. They compare tnemfelves with none but
those whom they imagine to be more haply ; and
complain that upon them alone has fallen th~e whole
load of human foorrows. Would they look with a
more impartial eye on th.e worldl, they would fee
themfelclves s~urrounded with fuffesrers;; and find that
they are only drmnking out of that mixed cup, which
Providence has prepared for all.-" I will restore
** your daughter again to life," fadid the eastern sage,
to a prince who grieved immoderately for the loss of
a beloved child, " pzrovidedi you are able to engrave
c' on her tomb the names of three persons who have
c' never mourned." The prince made inquiry after
such persons ; but found the enquiry v~ain, and was
silent. To every reasonable person, who retains the
belief of religious principles, many alleviating cir-
cumitances, and many arguments for patience, will
occur under every diffrefs. If we reft on this firm
perf~uation that there is a wife and just Providence
wvhich disposes of all events, we shall have reason
to conclude, that nothing h~appens to us here with-
out some good design. Trussing that a happy ter-
mination shall att last arrive to the disorders of our

present

# SERMON XVII. On Friendship. PROV. xxvii. 10. Thine own friend, and thy father's friend, forsake not.

present fliate, we sh~all be enabled, amidf} all the va-
rieties of fortune, to preserve that eqluanimity which-
befits C,;riftians; and under ever~y tridt to fay, It is
the Lor·d ; let himt do wha~t/eemetti good inhis fghr.

S ER MOI .N XVll..

On FRIENDSHIP.

PROVERBS XXVii. IO.

Thine ownf,-lend, anld thy fat~er's/-iend, forsake not.--

WHATEVER relates to the behaviour of mlen in

their social charar~ter, is of great importan~e in re-
ligion. The duties which spring fromn that chatrac-
ter, form many branches of the gre~at law of char~ity,
which is the favourite precept of chriftianityv.
They, therefore, who would separate fiich duties
from a religious sp~irit, or who at moss treat them
as only the inferior parts of it, do realinjur~y to reii-
gion. They are miffaken friends of piety, who, un-
der the notion of exaltingo it, place it in a fort of in-

fu lated

fillated corner, dis~joined from the ordinary affairs of
the world, and the conne~tions of mjen with one
another. On the contrary, true piety influences
them all. It ats as a viviiving Jpirit, which ani-
mates and enlivens, which rerftifies and condu~ts
them. It is no less friendly to men than zealous for
the honour oif God ; andi by the generous affeAions
wYhich it nourithes, and the benificent in~fluence
which it exerts on the whole of conduA, is fully vin-
dicatedi from every reproach which the infidel would
throwv upon it.--In this view, I am nowv to dlifcourfe
on the nature and duties of virtuous friendfihip, as·
cloiely conneA~ed with; the true spirit of religion. It
is a f~ubjea~ which the insp~ired philosopher who is the
author of this book of P'roverbs, has thought worthy
of his repeated notice ; and in many palthges has be-
flow;ed the highlef eulogiums on friendship among
good men. As ointment and perfume rej~oice ther he art,
so dothL the freeetneJ; of a man's friend by heart~y cou~nsel.
As iron /ar~penetht iron, Soan mannp;Srpeneth tze countelnance
of kis friend. 1Make sure of thy vfriend ; for faithfed~ ar-e
the woun~s of a friend. Afr~iend lo~veth at all timles; anrd
a br~otker- is bor'n for adEve/i'ty. There is a fr-iend tatln
ficketh closer- thann a b·rother.--Thinte ozon fiendt, and th~y
father·'s friendt, it is said in the text, foirake not.

I unsT beg'n the firbjeA, by observing, that there

are among mankind friendsh~ips of different kinds,
or, at least, connexions which affumne that name.
When they are no more than confederacies of bad
men, they ought to be called .conspiracies, rather

than

than friendships. Some bond of common interest,
some league againf1 the innocent and unfufpe~ting,
may have united them for a time. B~ut -i:<y are held
together only by a rope of sand. At bottom they
are all rivals, and hoffile to one another. Their
friendihip can sublist no longer than interest cements
them. Every one looks with a jealous eye on his
s~upposed friend; and watches the first favourable op-
portunity to defetrt, or to betray.

FRIENDSHIPS f00 there are of a different kind, and

of a more refoe~able nature, formed by the con-
neftion of political parties.. It is not, perhaps, on
f~elfifh or crooked dlefigns that s~uch friendsh~ips are
originally founded. Men have been associated to-
gether by some public interest, or general cause, or
for defence againit s~ome real or imagined danger;
and connexions thus formed, often draw men into
close union, and inspire soy a fCeaf~on no small de-c
gree of cordial attachment. When upon juff and
honourable principles this union is founded, it has
proved on various occasions, favourable to the cause
of liberty and good order among mankind. At the
fame time, nothing is more ready to be abused than
the name of public spirit, and a public cause. It is
2' name, under wc·hich private interelt is often th~el-
tered, and felfifh designs are carried on. The un-
wary are allured by a s~pecious appearance; and the
heat of faition ufurps the place of the generous wIarmth
of frienldfhip.

I-r is not of fulch friendflilps, whether of the la-u-

dable or the suspicious kind, that I am now to dif-
courle; but of private friendsh~ips, which grow nei-
ther out of interefied designs, nor party zeal; but
which flow from that similarity of difpolitions, that
correfi'onding harmony of minds, which endears
some person to our heart, and makes us take as much
part in his circumstances, fortunes, and fate, as if
they were our ow n. The foul of fonathas wuas Rrit
wuith the foul of David ; and 7onatranr loved him as his
owin foul*. Such friendships certainly are not unreal;
and for the honour of human nature, it is to be
hoped are not altogether unfrequent among man-
kind. Happy it is, when they take root in our
early years; and are engrafted on the ingenuous~fen-
fibility of youth. Friendships then contra~ted, re-
tain to the last a tenderness and warmth, feldoml pof~
sessed by friendthips that are formed in the ripjer pe-
riods of life. The -remembrance of antient and
youthful connexxons melts every human heart, and
the dissolution of theml is, perhaps, the most painful
feeling to which we are exposed here below. -But
at whiatever period of life friendships are formed, as
long as they continue sincere and affettionate, they
form, undioubtedly, one of the gr~eatest blessings we
can enjoy. By tnle pleating communication of all
our sentiments which they prompt, they are juffly
sa3id to double our pleasures, and to divide our for-
rows. They give a brighter funflhine to the gay
incidents of life; and thiey enlighten the gloom of its

dlarker

P r. Sam~uel xvau, r,

darker hours. Afwdl~lfulfr~iend, it is juffly and beau-
tifully said, by onle of the Apocryphal writers, is the
medicinle of fife* A variety of occaiions hap'pen,
when to pour forth the heart to one whom we love
and trust, is the chief comfort, perhaps the only re-
hief, we can enj'oy. M/iserable is he wYho, thut up
withmn the narrow inclof~ure of felfithl interest, has
no person to whom he can at all times, wVith full con-
fidence,. expand his foul.

SIncE cordial friendihip is to great a biefirng to

human life, let us proceed to confider what duties it
requires, and by what methods it may be cultlivated
to moss advantage. The fundamental qulalities of
true friendship are, conflancy and fidelity. With-
out there material ingredients, it is of no value. An
inconifant man is not capable of friendship. He
may perhaps have affeitions which occasionally glow
in his heart; which excite fondness: for amiable
qualities; or conned him w~ith seeming attachmnent
to one whom he esteems, or to who~m he has been
obliged. But after these feelings have Jafted for a
little, either fancied interest alienates him, or some
new objedt attr~afs him; and he is no longer the
tiime person to those whom he once loved. A man
of this incoanflnt mind cannot be said to have any
mi~nd atall. For w~here there is no fixedinefs of mno-
rai principle, occasional feelings are of no value -
mind is of nlo effett; and with such persons it is.
never desirable to· have any conneftion. W~here

confflancy

* Eclellatficus avi. I 6*

constancy is wanting, there can be no fidelity, which
is the other basis of friendship. For all1 friendsh~ip
fulppoles entire confidenlce and truss ; fiippofes the
f~eal of secrecy to be inviolable; supp~oses promises
and engagements to be sacred; and no advantage of
our own to be purs~ued, at the expence of our friend's
honour. An inconstant man, is delpicable. A
fa~ithles~s man, is bas~e.

BThr flippofing neither conflancy nor fidelity to

be altogether wanting, flill however friendfhlip is in
hazard of fuffering from the follies, and unreasonable
humours, to whichi all of us are liable. It is to be
regarded as a tender plant in .an unfavourable foil,
which, in order to its flourithing, requires to be
rearzed and nursed with care. The following direc-
tion's may be of use for promoting its cuiltivation, and
preserving it from whiatever might be apt to blast and
wither it.

IN the sis place, let me advire you not to exped

perfe~tion in any with whom you contra&r friend-
thip.. It holds in general, with refpeA to all world-
ly purfaits, that the more moderate our expe~tations
are, they are likely to be the more fucc~efsful. If, in
any firuation of life, wle hope to poss~ess com~plete
happiness~, we may depend onl receiving mortificati-
ons. If, in any person, we truss to find nothing
but perf~eAion, we may be afilured that, on longer
acquaintance, we thall meet with disappointments.
ITn th~e cafe of friendship,, this admonition is the

mlore

mnore neceflfary to be g~iven, as a certain warmth and
enthufiafmn belong to it, which are apt to carry us
beyond the bouinds of nature. In young minds, es~-
pecially, a difpolition of this kinld is often found to
take place. They form to thems~elves romantic ideas,
gathered perhaps from fi~titious hiffories, of the high
and heroic qualities which belong to huJman naturre.
All thos~e qualities they ascribe, without reserve or
limitation, to the person with whom they with to
enter into intimate friendihip; and on the least fai-
lure app~earing, alienation ins~tantly follows. Hence
many a friendship, hastily perhaps contrasted, is as
haffily diifflved, and difguff facceedis to violent at-
tachment.-Reme~mber, my friends, that a faultlies
charafter on earth is a mere chimera. 1Many failin s
you experience in yours~elves. Be not flu prife~d,
wfhen you djifoover the like in others, of whom you
had! formed the highest opinion. The best and anoft
effimable persons are they, in whiom thle fewest ma-
terial defeats are f~oun~ ; and whole great and solid
qualities counterbalance the commrron infirmities of
men. It is to these qualities you are to look in form-
ing friendfhlips; to good sense ad;nc prudence, which
conflitute the ba~s of every refpeEtabie charader; to
virtue, to good temper, to fleadincefs of affe~ion ,
and accordiing to thep union of those diplitions,~~ es-
teem yourselves happy in the friend whom you chuf~e,

IN the SpconId place, I muff admomflh you not to

be hurt by differences of opinion arising in inter-
course with your friends. It: is imnpoffible for these

no t;

not to occur. Perhaps no two per~sons were ever
cast so exaatly in the falme mould, as to think always
in the fame manner, on every fubjeA. -It was wifely
contrived by Providence, that diversity of sentiment
thouldd take place among men, on purpos~e to exercis~e
our faculties, and to give variety to human life.
Perpetual uniformity of thoulght would become mo-
notonous and infipid.---When it is with regard to
trifles that diversity or contrariety of opinions fhrows
itself, it is childish in the last degree, if this become
the ground of eltranged affeaion. When from such
a caufethere arises any breach of friendfhlip, human
wteaknefs is then discovered in a mortifying light.
In matters of f'erious moment, the fentimlents of the
best and worthiest may vary from those of their
friends, according as their lines of life divergae, or as
their temper, anldhabits of thought, pref~eat objeats
under different points of view. But~ among candid
and liberal minds, unity of affeation will fili be pre-
served. No man has any title to ereA his own opi-
nions into an universal and infallible flandard : And
the more enlarged that any muan's mind is, the more
readily he will overlook difference in lentiments, as
long; as he is perfunded that the mind of his friend is
upright, and that he follows the didates of confci-
ence and integrity.

Tw the tk~ird place, It is material to the preferva-

tion of friendship, that opennes~s of temper and man-
ners, on both hands, be cultivated. N~othing more
certainly dissolves friendship, than the jealousy

which

which arises from darkness anld concealment. If
your situation oblige you to take a different fide fromn
your friend, do it openly. Avow your conduet;
avow your motives; as far as honour allows, dilclofe
yourselves frankly; seek no cover from unnecessary
and m~yfierious secrecy. Mutual*tonfidence is thde
foul offriendfhip. As soon as that is destroyed, or
even impaired, it is only a show of friendship that
remains. What was once cordial intimacy, dege-
nerates first into formal civility. Confiraint on both
sides next s~ucceeds; and dlifguff or hatred soon fol-
low.--The ma xim that has been laid down by cer-
tamn crooked politicians, to behave to a friend wit~h
the fame guarded caution as we would do to an ene-
my, because it is possible that he may one day become
such, djifcovers a mind which never was made for
the enjoyments of friendship.. It is a maximl which,
not unreasonably I admit, may find place in those
political and party friendships, of which I before
ifpoke, where personal advancement is always in viewv.
But it is altogether inconsistent with the s~pirit of those
friendfhlips,, which are formed, and underflood to be
nourithed, by the heart.

THE fotr/At advice which I give is, To cultivate,

in all intercourse among fr~iends, gentle and obliging
manners. It is a common error to fulppofe, that
famdliar intimacy supersedes attention to the leffrr
duties of behaviour ; and that, under the notion of
freedomn, it may excuse a careless, or even a rough,
demlean our. On the contrary, an intimate con,.

ne £1ion

nedtian canl only be kept up, by a conflant withl to
be pleasing and agreeable. The nearer andi closer
that men are brought together·, the more frequent
that. the points of contaA between them become,
there is the greater neceity for the su~rface being
finooth, and every thing being removed that can
grate or offend.--Let no harfhneefs, no appear-
ance of negled, no supercilious affedation of f~uperi-
ority, occur in the intercourse of friends. A tart
reply', a proneness to rebuke, a captious and con-
tradi~titious spirit, are often known to embi~tter do-
meffic life, and to s~et friends at variance. In those
iimaller articles of behaviour, where men are too apt
to be careless, and to indulge their humour without
ref~raint, the real charafter is often underflood to
break forth, and thew itself. It is by no means
enough, that, inl all mlatters of serious interest, we
think ours~elves ready to prove the sincerity of our
friendship. These occur more rarely. The ordina-
ry tenor of life is composed of iimall duties and offices,
which men have occasion daily to perform; and it
is only by rendering daily behaviour agreeable, that
we can long preserve the comforts of friendship.

'I[N the Ffthr place, let me caution you not to liflen

rati~hly to evil' reports againfl your friends. W'hen·
upon proper grounds you have formed a conne~ti-
on, be flow of believing any thing against the friend
wrhom you have chos~en. Remember, that there is
among mankind a fplirit of malignity, which too
aften takes pleasure in diflurbing the society of those

=who~

who appear to enjoy one another. The s~cripture
hath warned us, that there is a why~iper~el r wo feparareth
chie~f riendls ; there is a sal/e wuitne/s whoa foweth~ dy~ordA
among br~ethren. Give not therefore a ready ear to the
officious insinuations ofthofe who, under the guise
of friendly concern, come to admonish you, that
you ought to fland on your guard against those whom
they fee you disp~osed to truss. Confider, whether,
under this fair appearance, ther~e may not lurk some
secret envy and rivalry, or some concealed interest.
Chafe not every flying report. Suffer not the poison
of jealousy easily to taint your mind, and break your
peace. A wide differencee there is between that weak
credulity which allows itself to be imposed! upon blind-
ly, and that dark and s~uspicious spirit which is
always inclinled to the evil fide. It forms part of the
charatter of a wif~e and good man, that he is not
prone to take up a r-epr-oack again; kcis neigh~bour.

IN thle Fxth and last place, let me exhort you not

to desert your friend in danger or diffref~s. Too
many there are in the world, whole attachment to
those they call their friends is confined to the day of
their prospe~rity . As -long as that continues, they
are, or appear to be, affeitionate and cordial. But
as soon as their friend is under a cloud, they begin
to withdraw, and to separate their interests from his.
In friendships of this fort, the heart, assuredly,, has
never had much concern. For the great test of true
friendship, is constancy in the hour of danger, adhe-
ren~ce in the season of diff~refs,--When your friend

isJ caluimniated, thien is thle time, openlly andi boldl\y
to efp'oufe hiis caus~e. W-hen hiis situation is ch~ang -
ed, or his fortunes are falling, then is the timne or
affording prompt anid zealous aid. W~hen fickne!J
or infirmity occasion himil to be negle~ted by others,.
that is the opportunity which eve·ry real fr·iend vi~l
se~ize, of redoubling all the affe~tionate attention-s
w~hich love fuggefteis. There are the importan~t d~--
ties, the faced claims of friendsh~ip, which religionr
and virtue enforce on every worthy mnind.--T~ ifhow
yours~elves warml, after this manner, in the cause ofr
your friend, commands efleem, even from those
who have persona~l interei) in oppoling him. This
honourable zeal of fr~iendship, has, in every age,
attra~ted th~e veneration of ma~nkind. It has con:-
fecrated to the latest potterit~y the namles of those who
have given up their fortunes, and have even expose~d
their lives, in behalf of the fr~ien~ds wThomi they loved ;
while ignominy and disgrace have ever been the por-
tion of them, wTho des~erted their fr-iends in the evil
dfay. Thine owzn f;iend forI/~akeE njt.

BE FOR E COncluding, it miuft not be forgotten,

that: the injun~tion of the Wyife MaIn in the text, ic;
accompanied wyith thiis remrnkable exprefiion; not
only thine Own fj~rTiend but also, dy fahero's friendi for.-
fake not. ibThefe w~ordis bl-rig ba-ck to our re:;nem-
brance th1e days of formet~r yarns ; and~ suggest a fen-
timent, wvhich cannot but touch ever-~y feeinS hear~t.
ThIne owtn friend may be dear; th~y fathler's friend
ought to be sacred. As long as lIfe remain~ils in anty

vor. Iv. u,

human breast, the memory of those antient ties
th~ould remain, wh~ich conneccted us once with· our
father, anid.our fath~er's houfe.--Thy f~ather has per-
haps, long ago, gone dowln to the dull. But when
you recal the innocent days of childhood and. youth;
when you think of those family trans~aCtions wvhich
once gladfdened your hearts; your father's friend, in
the m1ids~t of these, wrill rife· to your remembrance.
There was a time when you accosted him with refpeaki,
or looked up to him writh fondness, and ' was made
happy by his kindly notice. Does su~ch a one now
su~rvive, and thall he not receive from yo~u some
portion of filial reverence and honour To difr~e-
~gard and negleft him, is to spurn your father's me-
moryy ; is to inlfult the afhles of him w·ho now· sleeps
in thle grave; is to tranfinit yours~elves to those who
thall f.cceed you, as unfeeling and basE. Thine ozwn
f i;end, anrd t~y fathler's frie~nd, folrfake not.

I HAVE pointed out some of the.chief duties wrhich

belong to virtuous friendship? ; and some of the prin-
cipal means by w~hich this sacred bond thould be
preserved unbroken; this holy flam-e thould be kept
alive in thne human breast. The spirit, and senti-
ments, which I have studied to inspire, are fulch as
virtue breathes, and sauch as true piety thlould in-
crease. It is thus we fulfil that great law of love,
which oulr divine Malter taught. It is thus we pre-
par~e ours~elves fo~r· hose happy regions, there chtatityr
never failerk ; wh·ere, irn the presence of the God of
ove, eternal and invariable friendfihips unite together

# SERMON XVIII. On the Conduct to be held with regard to Future Events. PROV. xxvii. I. Boast not thyself of to-morrow; for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth.

all the blessed; frieindlfhips, wthich, by no humann
infurmity diflurbed, b~y death never separated, shall
conflitute throughout endleils ages, a great and dif-
tinguifhed portion of the celestial f'elicity.

S ER M ON XVIII.

O0n the CoKonor to be held with regard to fuiture

EVENTS.

PROVERBS XXVUi. I.

B'oa/2 not thypJ;lf of t~-om~orro ; fOr thouL knorwy ?0 T~nowa

a da~y mayn brinbg forth~.

FROM there words I purpose to discourse of
the proper conduat which w·e ought to hold w~ith
regaard to futurity, am~ridit the present unertainties
of life. Tim~e and life are alwtays going on, and to
each of us are prep~aring changes in our slate. WChat
these: may be, whether for the better or for the worse,
w3e cannot tell; as it: hath pleaf~ied the wiitfom of
provid'en ce to cover futurity writh? a veil wh!ich· no

ME z mnortal

monrtal can lift up. In the mean timie, none of us
canl avoidt forming designs, and laying plants for the
time to come. The present moment is never f~uffi-
clent to give furll employment to the a~ive mind of
man, without some excursions into futurity ; and
in these excudfians, the present is often wholly spent.
It is therefore of the highest cons~equence, that a
proper direilion be given to the mind, in its employ-
ments of thought relating to futurity. Otherwise, in
the profpeEts which wve take of that unknown region,
faclfe hopes, or ill-gr~ounded fears, shall flatter or tor-
m~ent us in vain. If?~ knowo not, as the W7ife MIan
tells us, whlat a dany many bring forthj. It may, very
probably, produce something that we had not look-
ed for; and therefore inficad of boain~lg owfJleboes of·
to-morow'~ot, as the multitude are apt to do, it becomes
us to be disciplined and prepared, for whatever it
may bring.

ITr is needless to spend much time in confirming

the truth, which is th~e fouindation of the admoniti-
on in the text ; in proving, either that change and
mutability belong to our present slate, or that the
changes of it cannot be foreseen by us. These~ are
truths so obvious and confeff~ed, that an attempt to
confirml them is like proving, that all men are to die.
At the fame time, obvious as they are, it were to be
withed that the thoughts of men dwelt upon them
more. For, by afirange but prevailing deception,
it would seem, from the general conduAt of mankind,
that almost every one thinks his~own cafe an excep-

tiona

tion from the general law; and that he may build
plans with as much confidence on his present fitua-
tion, as if fomne allirance had been given him that
it wtere never to chanlge. Hence it has been often
oblerved by serious persons, that there is no more
general cause~ to which the vices of men can be
ascribed, their forg~etfulnefs to God, and their ne-
gleft of duty, than to their prefizming upon the con-
tintuance of life, of pleafine-, and profpterity.

LOOK but a little w~ay, my friends, into your ow~n

state; and you must unavoidably perceive that, from
the beginning, it has been to contrived by Providence,
that there thlould be no permanent flability to man's
condition on earth. The feeds of alteration are every
where sown. In your health, life, poffeffions, can -
neftions, pleasures, there are causes of decay imper-
ceptibly work-a~ing ecretly undermining the foun-
dations of what appears to you the mast flable; con-
tinuaslly tending to abolish the prefeat form of t~hin gs,
and tobring forward new a~ppearances, and ner ol--
jeAs in their order: So that nothing is or can be,
flationary on erth. All changes, and passes. It is
a fiream w:hich is ever flowring; a wheel which is
ever turnmng round. W4hen you behold the tree
~rcve~red with blloffoms in the3 spring, or loaded whh'i
fruit in the autumn, as w~ell may you imagine, that~
those blossoms, or that fruit, are to rema,;in in their
place through the whole year, as believe that human
affairs are to continue, for to iay ancd to-morrow,
for this year and th~e nex.t, p:seroceding inl the fanle

tenor.--To render this refledtion fijll mor~e serious,
think, I pray you, on wthat iFmall and inconfidera-
ble causes those chianges depend, whichi affecr the
fortunes of men, throughout their whole lives.
H-ow soon is evil done!i There needs no great buffle
or stir, no long preparation of events, to overturn
what fetems moss secure, and to blast what appears
mloff flourithing. A gale of wind ris~es on th~e ocean;
and the vleii~el wlhich carrlied our friends, or our for-
tulnes, is overwvhelmed in the deep. A fp~arkr of a
candle falls by night in some negaleited corner ; and
the whole funbiance of families is confinied in flames
b~efore the morning. A cafulal blow, or a Riidden
fafll, deranges s~ome of our internal parts; and1 the
refit of life is distres~s and misery. It is aw\ful to think
at the mercy of how many fkeeming contingoencies we
p)erpetually lie, for what w~e call happiness~ in thiis

IN the midit, howiever, of all there apparent con-

tingencies, plans and designs for the future are ever-y
day formed; pursu~its are undertaken ; and life pro-
ceeds in its ufrizatrain. Fit and proper itis, that life
thouldt thus proceed. For thie uncertainty of to-m~or-
row was never designed by Providence, to deter us
from a~ting or planning to day; but only to admo-
niih us, that we olgrht to plan, and to aft, soberly
and wifely.-W~hat that wife and sober condua is
which becomes us, what the rules and precautions
are, which, in fuech a slate as ours, refped~c fiturity,
I now proceed to Ilhowi. They mlay be comnprehend-

ed in th~e followring direfrions. Boatr not thyself of
to-morrow ; Delpair. not of tol-m~orrow; Delayv not
till to-morrow wVhat is proper to be done to-day-;
Prepare thyself fo~r wha~tever to-morrow may bring
forth ; BUiild thy~ hoses of happ~iness on something
rnore s~olid a~i nd lainlg thian whtat eith~er to-dlay or to-
miorrowY w\ill produce.

I. IN the w~ords of the tcext, Boa,4 not tbv/ll~f of to-

marr~ow; that is, never presume arrogantly on futu-
rity; in the moss fair and promising slate of fortune,
beware of pride and vanity ; beware of resting
whiolly upon yourselves, and forgetting Him who
dire£1s the changes of this mutable slate. If there
be any virtues, wrhich the uncertain condition of
the world iniculcate on man, they are, afruredly, mno-
deration and humility. Man was, for thlis end,
placed in a world, where he knows so little of what
is before him, that he might be impress~ed with a
sense of his dependence on the Ruler of thle world ;
that he might feel the importance of acquir~ing favour
and proteEtion from Heaven, by a life of piety and
virtue; anid that, not knowling how fnon his own1
condition may be the fame writh tha~t of thle mo'"
wretched, he might be prompted to ac't towrards all
his brethren the humane and friendly part.-Thie fa-
vours w\hich Providence beffowvs upion him: at p~re-
feat, he ought to recei·e wvith t~l~h:nkldnefs, andi
may enjov with c .earfullnefis. Th~ough commnandl-
ed not to boy? kiirlf` Fs t'-o-inorrw, l~e mTe ning of
t~he pr~eceptE is not, that he= mus~t he ttd to day. Re-

;aice he mayi in th~e day of prosperity : but cerltainly,
(ryouc writhr trembing, is the inscription that thould be
wvritten on all human plearltres.

As for them wiho, intoxicated with those pleafilres,

bhecome giddy and insolent ; who, flattered by the
illutions of prorFerit~y, make light of every serious
admonition which the changes of the world give
thiem, whlat can I fay too strong to alarm them of
theie dang~r ?--Thecy have iaid to themfielves, Iry
mount/lain la'. N cd s frow

g,, ancd all never be moved. To-

mOlorrowdall beas this day, and more abudantly. Idall
never fee advervtiy.-Rath and wretched men i are
youi sensible how impious such words are ? To the
wvorld, perhaps, you dare not utter them; but they
speak thle Irecret langunage ofC yorh. hear. no
you are ufurping upon Providence ;you are se~tting
H-eaven at defiance; you are not only prepanrng
tharper stings for yourselves, when the changes of
life shall come, but you are accelerating th~ofb
changes ; you are fait bringing ruin upon your own
heads. For God will not fu ffe~r pride in man ; and
the experience of all ages hath ihowrn, how car~eful
he is to check it. In a thoufandi memorableinfkances,
the coiurfe of his gover~nment h~as been v'fibly point~
ed against it. Hie /demeth /?rcagth withfJ kiS armlr, and
/'catterethl the pr oud in the imaginatios ps teirb Beart .i
77ze dayJ oJ t/j LorJ is. LOnI e~VerY one thant is proud and~
lfted up ; to humbd~r l~e teI~f looks /f maN, and to fl~ai
th'e pridJe of all gl ory> Some of the miniffers of di-

VcineC

*F Luk~e i. I c; Ifaiahii. xxhii. 9,

vin disp~leasure are commillionc- to go orth; and
to humb e, \. ithout elayr, thF· boafele ofl · mor-rowc.

JI. As we are not to boait, to neither ar·e wIe to·

despair, of to-m·orro:v. The former admonition
was direEted to those wrhom prosperity had elated
with vain hopes. This is designed for thos~e whom
a more adverse situation in life has failled with fCears
and alarmis of what is to come. T~Phe reason of both
admonitions: is the fame; thou knowyj~ not whatr a da~y
may bring forth. It m~ay br~ing; forth some agunIexpet-
ed mIsfortune; and therefor-e thou thoulZdit be humn-
ble in prosperity. It may bring forth some unfore-
seen relief ; andl therefor~e thou thoul-'dft hope under
diffrefs.---It is too comnmon with mankind, to be
totally engrossed, and overcome, byJ prei'ent ervents.
Their prese~nt condrtion, wthatev·er it is, they are aict
to imnaine, will never change ; and hence by prof~-
perity thley are lifrted up, and by adv~ersity ar-e dfejet-
ed and brokten; prone, in the on~e cafe, to forget
God,' i- the other, to repinle againf1 him1. Whe~re-
as, the doAz ine, which the chatrnges of the wiorld
per'petually inculcate is, that no sla~te of external
things thlould app~ear so important, or thould so as-
ferd and agitate our spirits, as to dieiprive us of a calm,
anl equlc~ anld a fleadiy mind. Ma~n knowreth nei-
the;- the good, nor the evil whlich is before himl. In
your patien~ce, therl efor~e, Pogy.F- your Soals : truffting, in
the"-- da oorrow~.~ , that God hath not cf~,rgotten to be
graio/s ; and that thourgh ro;?eringa may enur~e fo,-r
night, joyr comet to the uprigfht in thle' mIo'itrni.

AI 3 DJSISTRE~s

DrISTEss not yourselves, then, w~ith anxious

fears about to-morrow. Le-t me exhort you to dif-
miss all solicitude, which goes beyond the bounds
of prudent precaution. Anxiety, when it seizes
the heart, is a dangerous difetafe, produative both of
much fin, and much mis~ery. It a~s as a corrosive
of the mind. It eats out our present enjoyments,
and f~ubffitutes, in their place, many an acute pain.
--The Wife MIan, in the text, has advised us not to
boas ofto-morrowv; and ·our Saviour has infiruated us
to take nro thzought for. to-morrovo*~. Both there d irefti-
ons, properly underfrood, are entirely conriftent;
and the great rule of conduAt, refpeccing futurity,
is compounded of them both; requiring us, neither
arrogantly to presu~me on to-morrow, nor to be
anxiously, and fearfully solicitous about it. Thle
worr~~ow, says our Saviour, .;@all take thought ~for the
?kingps of iit~fl We (h~all be better able to judge of
the cours~e most proper for us to hold, when events
have begun to come forward in their order. Their
pres~ence often furggefts wcif~er couns~els, and more-
-raccefs~ful expedients, than it is possible for us to
contrive at a difiance. By excess: of solicitude be-
fore hand, w·e f'requ~entlIy introduce that confusion of
m~ind, and that huirry and disorder of spirits, which
bring us into thle most Inflavourable slate for judtging
soundly.- Whereforel-e never indulge either anxiety
or defp~dair, ab~olt: futur'ity. Affright not yourselve~s
with imagrinary terror~s. Anticipate not evils, whlichI
perhaps may never come. M~ake the best which you;

" M~atth. vi* 33·

can of this day, in the fear of God, and in thle prac-
tice of your duty ; and, having don so, leave to-
morrowY to itse~lf. Safiielt forl~ theda, wvhen it: comes,
wvill be the evil ther~eoft

III.D3;ELA.Y Ottill to-mroTTOW anv thil~in cwhich

is fit and proper to be done to-dayv. Riemember,
that t~hou- art not the lord of to-mlorro v. Th~ou art;
so far f; om having ny; title to dispose of it, that thou;
art ignorant of the roof m-aterial circumffances re-
lating to it; not only of' what it thall bring fo~rth,
but whlether thou th~..P live to fre i: -N-lotwi thf~tand-C~
ing the i ncontrovertible evidlence ·>f this truthi, p;ro-
crafinirationi has, th rorg hou r~l everyv age b~ een the
ruin of mankind. Dwieing am~idIt- endef roea
of wuhat they are hereafter to do, they cannot toc pro-
perly be said to live, as to be alwy a

'~V bout to lIv~e ;

and the future has ever been the o-ulPh in w~hich the
present is ihallowed up and loft-enice arise ma-
ny of those mnisfortunes whi~ch bef~al m-en in th~eir
worldly concerns. WChat m-ight. at prefealt be r--
ranged in their circumstances w~ith adlvanita r be-
ing delayed to another op~portunlity, canrnot be ar-
ran -ed at all, To-morrowv beina loaded w~ith the
concerns of to-day, in addi~tion to its ow\n, is clog-
gaed ani emnbarrra fed Affis which, had been po
poned,? mutip>ly and crowdi up~on one anothr ;ti
at lInt, thley pr~ove s4o i~t~ricat~e and I"perplexd, andl·
the preth~re of business~ beco~mes s~o or~eat, that~ no-
thing is left, but to fink under the buralen. Oc h~im·,
theref~ore, who1 inldulges this lingering~ andl~ del;!yin·

fphiit in worldly mantters, It is eafyr to prognofficase
t~hat t-he ruin is not far off.

EvILs of the fame Sind, ariring from t'· e fame

cause, overtake men, in their moral and spiritual
interests. There are few, but who are sensi:ble of
some things in their charafter and behaviour, which
ought to be correded, and which, at one tim~e or
other, they intend to correAt; fame headitrong pas-
lion, which th~ey design to Eubdue; some bad habit,
which they purpose to reform; some dangerous con-
neation, w:hich t;:ey are resolved to break off. Bu1t
the convenient feeaoin for these ref~ormations is not
-yet comre. Certain obtacles are in the way, which
they exped by and by to falrmount; and therefore
they go on in pePace for the present, in their usual
courses, trussing, at a futur-e day, to begin their de-
ilgnedi improvement. In the mean time, the angel
of death descends; and in the midit of their difiant
plans, exiecurtes his comm~ii~on, and carries them
a wYay.-Guiard? aIgainft delusions of this kind, which
have been fatal to so many.--Thou art now in tran-
qu~ility, in health, in poffeilion of a calm mind.
Impirove thefel advantages, for performing all that
becomes thee, as a man, and as a Chri~stian; for
wh~o canl tiel how lon~g thou thalt be permitted to en-
joyr them~ ?New alterations of fortulne may be juif
coaming forwardi.; new troubles in public, or in pri-
v-ate life, abiout to rife; new exigencies ready to
::hrow~ thee into some condition, which fhlall leave
:tc· neitherr· leffere n~or pportunity, to execute any

of the good purpofies thou haft at prefeat in thy
mind. Whlerefore, trifle no longer with what is so
serious, and what may be so critical; but to dayr,
whril it is calle'd to day, liffen to the voice of God,
and dio his wYorkrs. Do nolo, as the Wif~e Man advises,
woithr thY mights whxfSoever thyf han~d~ndeth to ~o ; for th~ere
is no work, nour evice, nor wi~dom, in the grave wholether
thour gor/f.--- Infiead of delaying till to-morro~w
what ought to be done to-day, let me exuhort you,

IV. To be every day prepared for whatever to-

morrow may bring forth. There is a certain prepa-
ration for the vicifirtudes of life, in which the miulti-
tude are f~ufficiently busied ; providing, as thiey
think, against wyhatever may hap;.en, 'oy increasing
their riches, and firePngthening themfelvecs by friends,
conneAions, and worldly honours. But these bul-
warks which they ered-, are totally inf~uffcient
against the dreaded florm. It is to some other quar-
ter we must look for our defence; for when it is the
world its~elf, whos~e chanlges we have reason to dread,
the world, and the things of it, cannot afford us
proteAion. The best preparation for all the uncer-
tainties of futurityz con~ifts, in a well ordered m~ind,
a good cons~cience, and a chearful f~ubmillion to the
wvill of Heaven. You know not wthat thall be on
to-m~orrowY. ~But there is One who knows it well;
for his decree hath fixed it. To him look up with
reverence ; and fay, "' Not mty will, burt thine be dote ;
'C what thou appointeft is ever wife, and juff, and

" good.'

* EccleS. ix. I0.

" good."' Seek to fulSI the part which he hath as-
signed! you ; to do the tnings wthich he hath com-
mianded you to do; and leave all the reft to him.
Whatever to-m~orrowv brings forth, let it findt youl
employed in doing ja/lly, loving mercyv, and wanlking
Irumbly wuith your Gud; and then you thlall meet to-
morrow without fear, when you meet it witlcout the
upbraidinlgs of guilt.

Is it shall bring forth to you any unexpeEtedi good,

prepare to receive it with gratitude, tempe~rlance, an~d
modefly. If it thall bring forth evil, prepare to re-
ceive it with mlanlyy fortitude. L~et no events of anyr
kind, derange your equanimity, or th~ake your cond-
flancy. Contradt your desires, and mod rate your.
hopes. Expeit not more fromn the world than it is
able to afford you. Takre it for granted that w~hat
is natura~ll mutable, will one day change; that
whlat was designed to be transient, wyill pass aw\ay.---
LIook forwrard to futurity wYithout impl~atieice.` Be
not desirous to know it. It belongs to God. Let
him bring forward the events of the w1orld, in his
own way. Imagine that you continually hear those
wvords, which our Lord once addressed to Peter,
wheln he wvas inquiring about what was to happ~en to
a fellowY-difciple, Whant is that to ;thee ? Fd~low th/out -
mie. AmTidfl all the uncertainty of fu~ture events,
this roadt of clear and plain durty lies befor~e !-ou;
follow Christ, and inrquire no farther. Seek no
crooked path, inl order to avoid impending dangers.
Thr~n not to the. right hand,(1 nor to the left ; but coilm.it

thy waly unto theC Lord ; trYU also in hlim, nan be fall bring~
to pa/s thez defr~jes of` thy keart.

V. But to your hopes of happiness on somewhat

more solid and laiting, than wIhat either to-day or to-
morrow are likely to produce. From what has been
fCaid, you may clearly perceive, that he who rests
wholly upon this world, builds his house upon the
sa~nd. Tfhis life, by means of wifdCom1 and virtue,
may be rendered to a good mnan, a tolerable, nav a
comfortable, state. But he who expeAs complete
happiness from it, wvill be greatly deceived. M~an,
in his moss flourifhiing condition, w-ere much to be
pitied, if he was destitute of any higher hope. Roll-
ing from change to chiange, throughout all the days
of his life, wvith a dark and unknowlin prolpe&t alw·ays
before him in futurityr, what would avail a few thlort
interrupted glimps~es of happiness, which, from time
to time, he wars permitted to enjoy ?" Can we believe
that only for su~ch a slate as this, manl was designed
by his great and good Creator ?-N~o : Let us bleyj
th~e G·Jodr a ~ndFther- L/Our Lord Jefus~C Chr0.~ wh~lo, 6alccrd
intg to hits abuirndant mercyv, jbtrk bEgottent us; again inlto a
livet3 klyhpe, b~y the refrr

t.J~11. ion of Chrifl J~from tho ~e~adZ, to

ani inke~ritance incorruptt~ible, unde~le, andl ta~t fadeth~
not awaya. H~ere is the Rock on w7hich the mind,
however toft by the florm~s of life, can securely reft~.
Here is the objeat to whlich a wife ma-n will bend his
chief attention, that, after having aL~ed his part on
earth withz fdelity and honour, he may be enabledf,
shrough th~e me;ris of his Saviour·, to lookr for a place

in the manians of eternal anod untroub~led p-eace.
This p-rofpedt is th~e great corrreaive of the present
vanity o>f human life. Ir gi··es significancy and im-
portance to its most transitor~y scenes; and, in the
midit of its mutability, dilcovers one fixed point of
reft. He who is habitually influenced by the hope
of immortality, will be able to look without difmlay
on the changes of the world. He will neither boaff
of to-morrowY, nor be afraid of it ; but w ill pass
through the varieties of life witu a manly and unlbro-
ken mind; with a noble sup~eriority to thos~e fears
and expeaations, thafe cares and sorrows, w-hsch
agitate the multitude.--Such are the native effet~As of
Christian sith and hope. To them alone it belongs,
to fulrmount all the dif~couragements to w·hich w~e are
now exposed; to render our life comfortable, and
our die,,th ble-ssed; nay, to make the dany of ourr deathl
better· thlan the~ day of our birth.

# SERMON XIX. On following the Multitude to do Evil. EXODUS xxiii. 2. Thou shalt not follow a Multitude to do evil.

SERMON XX

On following the iMUI.TITDE to do Evt1..

Exobus xxiii, 3.

Th~ou~fl~t notfoSllaow a multitude to do evil.--

SN this world, we are placed as companions and
afifitants to one another. Depending, for most of
the comforts of life, on mutual intercourse and aid,
it was necessary, that we thould be formed to deiire
the company, and to take pleature in the good will
of our fellows. But this faciability of man, though~
effeatial to his preient condition, has, like many
other good principies, been unhappily warped from
its original purpose; and, in the present state of the
world, has proved the cause of much evil. For, as
vice has abounded in every age, it hath propagated
itself much more easily by the afillance of this social
disposition. W~enatur-ally mould ourselves on the
patternl of prevailing manners ; and corrulption is
commu:nicated from one to another. By mutually
giv·ing, and taking, the example of finfuli li'erties,
licentiodnhefs s~preads and grows ; each justifies him-
self by his neighbour; and the multitude of finlners
theng~then one anoth~er's hands to commit iniquity.

In all ages of the world, cutcom has had m-ore power~
than reason. Fewy takeL the trouble of enqluirilg·
whalTt is the right path; thie greater part content
themselves w8ith following that in which the miulti-
tude have gone before them. No exhortatiota, there-
fore, is more neceff'ary to be frequently given, andi to
bDe fetrionfly inforced, than that which we receive
fr-om the text ; Thlat th~ou eajlt n~ot %l~low a multitudfe .to
do~ evil.

To acquire a full view of any danger to- which

we are exposed, is the Birit measure to be taken, in
order to our safety. Let us then begin the fabjeet,
with considering how much we are in hazard of be-
ing milled into vice by the general manners wrhichr
we behold around us.-N~ro virtue is more necefllry
to a Christian, but fearcely is there any mor~e difficult
to be put in pra~tice, than that firmnes-s of mind
which can enable a man to maintain his principles,
and to fland his ground againf1 the torrent of cuffom,
faihion, and example. Example has upon all minds
a secret and insinuating influence, even when we
ourselves are insensible of its operation. We imnper-
ceptibly slide into s~ome resemblance of the manner s
of those with whom wre have frequent intercourfb.
This often shows itse~lf, in the most indifferent things.
But the resemblance is flill more readily contra £1ed
when there is something within ourfelve's, that leans
to the famne fide which is countenianced by the prac-
tice of others. We are always glad to find any apo-
logy for indulging our inac~liations and pafironls; andi

t~he

the examplye of the multitude too readily s~uggest~s that
apology. Even before corruption has made great
progress in our hearts, sometimes, mere complai-
fance and good nature incline us to fall in with the
ways of other~s. Sometimes timidity and false thame
prevent our differing from them : F~requently, ex-
peatation and interest impel us strongly to comply.
How great is the danger we incur, when, in times
of prevailing vice, all there principles of imitation
and compliance unite together against our v irtue ?~

THE world is too juffly said by fCcripture, to lie

ine wizckedne/s. It is a s~chool wYherein every vice is
taught, and too eaiily learned. Even from our ear-
lieft childhood, false sentiments are inftilledi into our
minds. We are bred up in admiration of the exter-
nal thow of life. WTe are accullomed, as soon as
wve canl underffand any thing, to hear riches and ho-
nours spoken of as the chief goods of men, and pro-
posed to us as the objeats to which our future pur-
s~uits are to be direcded. Wre fece the m~easures of
outward rerfeRt and deference taken from there
alone. Religion and virtue are recommended: to us,
In a formal manner, by our teachers and infiruAors;
but all improvements of the mind and heart, are
visibly placed by the w~orld, in an inferior rank to
the advanltages of fortune. Vices, that chance to
b~e faihionable, are treated as flight failings;i and co-
loured over, in common discourse, with those focft
and gentle names which extpref~s no condemnation.
W'e enter, perhap~s, on the world, with good p-rin-

c 2ple s,

Biples, and an averflon to downright vice. But
when, as we advance in life, we become initiated in
that myfiery of iniqu~ity, wchich is called, the way
of the worldi; when we meet with dieceit anld artifice
in all ranks of men ; wYhen we behold iniquity au-
thorifed by great names, and often rewarded with
faucefs and advancement, our original good im-~
pretions too soon decay. The prac~ice of the mul-
titude rendrers vice familiar to our thoughts; and
gradually wears off the abhorrence with which we
once beheld it. WVe begin to think, that what is to
very general, cannot be highlyr criminal. The ma-
lignity of fin appears diminished, by to many beings
sharers in the reproach; and instead of mens vices
detrad~ing, as they ought to do, from our good opi-
nion of the men, our attachment to the men oftencr
reconciles us to the vices of which they are guilty.

Toe countenance which fin receives from the

praaice of the multitude, not only removes the re-
ftraints which are imposed by modesty and thlame;
but, such Is the degeneracy of the world, that thamne
is too often employed against the cause of religion
and virtue. The ridicule of the giddy and unthink-
ing bears dowrn the conviation of the sober and mo-·
deft. Against their own belief, they appear to adopt
th-e notions of the infidel; and against their ow·n
choice, they join in the vices of the libertinle; thatt
they may not be reproached as perfonIs of a narrow
mind, and Hil e-ntiaved to the p~rejudices of educa-
tion. How much reason is there to believe that,

merely

merely fromr this timidity of temp~er, m~ally, vhol~e
principles are on the fide of religion andl virtue, ar-e
neverthele-ls found wanlking3 in thre wayL of fnucri·-, and~
faiing in~ the ch2air of threcov~rnfd ?-Interest, too, often
coincides with this weaknes~s of difpolition, in tempt-
ing: such perfonis to follow the multitude. To fall
in with the prevailing taste, to suit themselves to the
patirons of the great, or to the humours of the low,
with whom they chance to be connedled, ap~pears
the readiest wvay to rife in the wrorld. Hence they
are nraturally led to relinqu'ifi the firmness of an up-
right chara~ter, for that su~pple and! verf~able turn,
which accommodates itself to the times, and aifumes
wthatev-er appearance seems most convenient for in-
tereft.--Such are the dangers to wIhich we are ex-
posed, in times of corruption, of followzing the~ multi-
ftudc to dIo evJil; dangers which require our moss fe-
rious attention and care, in order to guard ours~elves
againf1 them.-I· proceed to lay such considerations
before ~you as may be useful for that purpose.

IPY the ff~i place, Let us remember that: the mul-

titude are very bad guides; are to far from having, a
title to implicit regard, that he who blindly follows
them, may be pres~umed to err. For pr·ejudice and
,afi~on, are known to fwvay the crowd. They ar-e
flruck by the outside of things ; they inquire super-
ficially, admire false appearances, and pulrfle false
goods. Their opinions are for the mof1part, haffily
f'ormed, and of course: are variable, floating, and.
inconfiicaet. In every age, how fmlall is the num-

ber

ber of those w~ho are guidled by refobre, and calm
enquiry ? H-ow few do we find, who have the wil-
dom7 to iaink and judge for themselves, and have
fleadinefs to follow out their own judgment ? Igno-
rance, and low education, darken the views of the
vulgar. Fathion and prejudice, 1 :nity andi plea-
su~re, corrupt the f~entimrents of the great. The exu-
ample of neither, aff·,rds any flandard of wlhat is
right and wife. If the philosopher, wrhen employed
in the pursuit of truth, findls it necessary to disr-egard
established prejudices and popular opinion, thall we,
in the more imp~ortant enquiry after the r·ule of life,
submit to fiich blind guidance as the praftice of the
many; efleeming whatever they admire, and fo~llow-
ing wherever they lead ? Be aflured, that he who sets
up the general opinion as the flandard of truth, or
the general praAice as the measure of right, is likely-,
upon such a foundation, to build no other su~per-
firuitture except vice and folly.-I-f the prac~ice of
the multitude be a good pa~ttern for our imitation,
their opinions s~urely thould be as good a rule for
our b-elief. Upon this principle, we muff exchange
Chrif11anity for Paganifmn or Mahometanifin, and
the lighit of the Reformation for the f~uperl~itions of
Popery ; for these latter have ever had, and flill have,
the numbers and the miultitude on their fide. Our
Saviour has fulfficiently characoerifed the wray of the
wuorldi, when he deferibes the bronload roa in wthich
the multitudes go, as the road whickr leds to d/rudi-zr`
onI; and the path which leads to happiness, as a s~na--
row path, which fewer find. From which it is an

eafyr

ealyr infer~ence, that to have thle mnultitudle on our
fide, is so far fr~om affording any prefutmptionl of oulr
being safe, that it th~ould lead us to i~fuleal: that w~e
a7re holldi ng theC coutrfet of da ngcer.

IN the/econdJ place, as the pra~tice of the multi-

tude is no argumrent of a good pra~tice, so it cannot
afford us either justification, or safety, in w·hat is
evil.--It affords us, I fay, no juffification. Trruth
and error, virtue and vice, are things of immutable
n~ature. The difference betwreen them is oarounded
on that basis of eternal reas~on, which no opinions
or cuffomns of men canl asse~t or alter. WVhether vir-
tue be esteemed, or not, in the world, this makes it
neither more nor less effimable in itself. It carries
always a divine authority, which men cannot im-
pair. It th~ines with an essential luffre, which praise
cahnot brighten, nor reproach tarnish. It has a r~ight
to regulate the opinions of men; but by their opi-
nions cannot b~e controlled. Its nature continues
invariably the fame, though all the multitude of
fools thould concur in endeavouring to turn it into
ridicule. li~o ucnt thecm, says thle prophet Isaiah, thatn
call evi:l, gOOdI ; andr good, e-vil : th~at put dar-kne/S for
Ight, andi light for· dar.kne/s; that pult brittr for /wLeet,
and/weet rfor· bitter.- Th-rleir- root fanll be as roattenne/s,
and their blojgm f ll go up as dtry?; becau/e thecy have
ca;? awaoy the law of dthe Lordl of birJs, and de/PJtfd the
wordn of the· holy, one of Ifiael;.

As

1* Isaiah v. s o, 24.

As the praftrice of the multitudie furnishes no jus-

tification to the fine~r, so neither does it afford him
any safety. Religion is aIltogether a matter of per-
fonal conc~ern. God hath delivere~d to every manl
the rule of life; and every man mufft think and ac~t
for himfe'lf ; because for hims~elf h~e is to anfiver. If
others be~wicked, it will be the worse for them ; but
it will not on that account, be the better for us, if
we dlhall be evil affTo. Let vice be ever so prevalent,
it: is stiLl that evil thingtak ~lickl the Lord abborred~ ; and
Ibthogk kand join in hantd, the wicked shall not escape
unpunished. So far is the number of offesnders fr-om
furnishing any ground of safety, that it calls more
loudly for divine juffice to interpose. It is as easy
for the A4lmighhty arm to crush a whole guilty foc iety,
as to punish a single individual; and9 when the dif-
obedienlt fub~jets of God countenance and firength-
en onle another in licentioufnels, by trans~gressing in
troops and bands, it becomes high time for his go-
vernment to exert itself, and let its vengeance forthr.
--One could fe~arcely think that any profeffor of
Christian faith would fancy to himself any apology
from the way of the world, when he knows that the
d~eclared design of his religion was, to diftinguiih
him from the world, wvhich is said to le in ,£n; and
that Christ came to call out for himself a peculiar- peo-
ple, wr~hofe chara~ter it thould he, not to be conform~ed
to thle wot:ld, buct tran~forme~d by the r-esering of their-
mi~znds.-S~o little, indeed, can the pra~tice of the
wvorld either juffify or extenuate vice, that it dieferves
our serious consideration,

IN the thir·d place, whether there be not several

circumitances, which peculiarly aggravate the guilt
of those who follow the multitude in evil. Do you
not, thereby, firengthen the power of fin, and per-
petuate the pernicious influence of bad example .a
By firiking off from the corrupted crowd, you might
be eminently useful. You might animate and reco-
ver many, whom weakness and timidity keep under
bondage to the cuffoms of the world ; whereas, by
tamely yielding to the current of vice, you render
that current fironger for carrying others along; you
add w~eight and flability to the bad cause ; you lend
to the multitude all the force of your example, for
drawing othPer a~fter the~m to the commiiron of evil.
--While you are thus accefrary to the ruin of others,
you are, at the fame time, flamping your own cha-
radler with the foulest and deepest impreifions of cor-
ruption. By surrendering your judgment and your
con cience to the multitude, you betray the rights,
and degrade the honour of the rational nature. No,
thing great or worthy can be expe~ted of him, who
inflead of considering what is right in itself, and
what part it is fittest for one in his flation to aAt, is
only considering what the world will think, or fay
of him; what fort of behaviour will pass with the
fairest thow, and be most calculated to please the
many. When a man has thlus given up the liberty
and independence of his minld, we can no longer
reckon upon himn in any thing. We cannot tell how
far he may be carried in vice. There is too much
ground to dread, that he will lie, dissemble, and be-

SOL . IV hT t ea 1:

tray ; changing himself, without s~cruple, into every
th~ape that will find favour among those whom he
seeks to gain.--While this servility to the world in-
fers basenes~s towards men, it involves also the high-
eft impiety towasrds God. It thowss that we yield to
wotrld that reverence and f~ubmiiron which is only
due to the divine law. We treat the government of
the Almighty with scorn; as if his precepts deserved
to be obeyed only when they s~uit~ed the caprice and
the follies of the multitude ; and were entitled to no
regard, as soon as they contradided the reigning
cuffoms and fashions of the wrorld.--While s~uch con-
du61 carr-ies in it so much wickedness and folly, let
SUS obs~erv~e,

IN the fourth place, that the most excellent and ho-

nouraible charader which can adorn a man and a
Christian, is acquired, by resisting the torrent of
vice, and adhering to the cause of God and virtue
against a corrupted multitude. It will b~e found to
hold in general, that all those, who, in any of the
great lines of life, have diftingui'hed themselves for
thinking profoundly, and ading nobly, have depifiied
popular prejudices, and departed, in several things,
from the common ways of the world. On no occa-
sion is this more requisite for true honour, than
where religion and morality are concerned. In times
of prevailing licentioufnels, to maintain unblemifh--
ed virtue, and uncorrupted integrity; in a public
or a private cause, to fland firm by what is fair and
juff, amidst difcouralgements and opposition; def-

pifing

pifing groundles~s cenfulre and reproach; difdlaining
all compliance with public manners, w~hen they are
vicious and unlawful; and never afhiamed of the
pun~tual dis~charge of every duty towiards God and
·rnan;--this is what sh~ows true greatness of spirit, and
will force approbation even from the degenerate
multitude themselves. "C This is the man," their
cons~cience wvill oblig~e them to acknowledge.,
"~ whomm we atre unable to bend to mean condefcen-
"C fions. We fiee it in vain either to flatter or to
"L threaten him ; he rests on a principle within, which
"S cannot thake. To. this man you may, on anly
"L occasion, s~afely comm~it your cause. He is inc~a-
"C pable of betraying his trust, or deserting h~is
"' friend, or denying his faith." Thus hisright~steou
neji comtes forth as the 1:'gkt, and hidsjud~gmnt~ as to
soon- daY.

Ir· isi accordingly, this fl~eady inflexible virtue,

this regard to principle, s~uperior to all cuffom and
opinion, which peculiarly marked the chara~ters of
those, in any age, who have fhlone as faints or he-
roes; and has consecrated their memory to all pof-
terity. It was this that obtained to antient Enock
Sthe most singular teffimony of honour from heaven.
He continued to wualk wi bt God, wIhen the world
apoitatifed from him. He pleased God, and was
beloved of him ; so that, living among Cinners, he
was translated to heaven without feeing death; Yea,
speedily was be taken away, ly?~ wikednte/s /Joulld have
alte·red ktis undeyf~andting or deceit beguiled his~, foutl*.

Ns W~hen

* Wisdom of Solomon iv. r I.

W1~hen Sodtom could not fu~rnith~ ten righteous mnen
to save it, Lot remained uns~potted amidst the conta-
Sgion. He lived like an angel among spirits of dark-
ness;; and the defltroying flame was not permitted to
go forth, till the good man was called away by a
heavenly messenger from his devoted city. When
all se/A kad colrrupted their way ucpon the earth, then lived
Noakr, a righteous man, and a preacher of righteous~-
ness. He flood alone, and was fcoffed by the pro-
fane~ crew. But they by the deluge were fivept
away; while on him, Providence conferred the im-
mortal honour, of being the refforer of a better race,
and the father of a new world. Such examples as
these, and fach honours conferred by God on them
who withflood the multitude of evil doers, thlould
often be prefient to our minds. Let us oppose them
to the numbers of low and corrupt examples, which
we behold around us; and when we are in hazard
of being fivrayed by such, let us fortify our virtue,
by thinking of those who, in former times, thlone-
like flars in the n~didt of firrrounlding darkness, and
aire now thining in the kingdom of heaven, as the
b~righltne/Jsof the frm~ament, for everu and ever.-A~s our
bonour is thus deeply concerned in our a~ting a fled-
fast and virtuous part, let us also confider,

IN the ffth place, How little, in point of interest,

can be gained by the favour of the multitude, and
how much wijll certainly be loft, by following them
to do evil. WTemay, thereby, render ourselves more
sgreeable to trrome with whom~ we are connettad;. and

by artful compliances, may please ourielves with the
pr'ofped of promoting our fortune. B7ut these ad-
vantages, such as they are, remnain doubtfu~l and un-
certain. Trhe wind of popular opinion is ever thlift-
ing. It will often leave us at a loss what course to
fleer; and, after all our trouble and anxiety to catch
the favourable gale, it may on a fuldden forsake us.
For thle versatility of charadter, the meanness and
inconsist~ency of conduet, into which a dependent
on the multitude is betrayed, frequently rendier him,
in the en~d, an objett of contempt to thlofe whom he
fought to please. But s~upposing him fu~ccefsful in
his viewys, no worldly advantages, which are pur-
chas~ed by dishonourable means, can be either folidl
or laffingr. They bring no genuine fatisfamton to a
man, who is conscious to himifelf of having givena
up his principles to serve the world. As long as he
could be satisfied with his own cond~uA, he might
bear up under undeserved. discouragem~ent; but when
he becomes delpicable in his own eyes, worldly he-
nours lose their luffre. -What can the mnutltiude do
for you, after you have followaed th~em in evil
They cannot reffore to you the peace of an innocent
mind, nor heal the sorrows of a wounded spirit, nor
thield you from the displeasure of God. They can
do little to s~upport you in the hour of a~iiietion, andi
nothing to deliver your fouls in the day of death.
Forsaken and dif~cornfolate, the wvorld, for the mlof3;
part, casts off its votaries in thle end ; and when yvou
compute the ~final amount, it wdll prove a vrery iiall
consolation, that, as you have had~ sharers in guilt,
your tall have companions also in punithment.

3Loore

LOOK forward to the ifliue of things. The mul-

titude: of men posses~s now, in a great measu~re, the
diffribution of praise and cediure, of s~ucces~s and
disappointment, according to their caprice. But
this confused and promlifcuous difftribution is not
always to fubflt. The day cometh, when we all are
to appear before a more discerning Judge, and a
more impartial tribunal. The day cometh, when
our Lord Jesus Christ, fhalll desc~end from heaven in
all the glory of his Fath~er, to unveil every ch-araEter,
and to rend~r to every man accor-ding to ktis wor-ks. At
that day, how shall he lift up his head, who hath
been all his life the slave of the world's opinion;
who hath moulded his princip les and his prati ce, solely
to please the multitude; w~ho hath been a/Ja7mpEd of his
Sraviou- andr kis ·roordsr; and to gain favour with men,
hath apostatised from the native sentiments and dic-
tates of his heart ?-To sav all in one word - there
is a contest now between God and the world. There
form the opposite sides which divide mankind. Con-
fider well, to which~ ofthefe, you will chufe to adhere.
On the one fide, lie your allegriance, your honour,
and~ your interest; on the other, lie your guilt and

you thme.For th~e one, cons~cience and reason,

for the othier, pa'Ha~n and inc~lination, plead. On
the onie hand, ar.e the~ appy sbati~on of God, immortal
honlour, and diivinle rewa;rd·s: on the other,--remem-
ber- aind bewrarei,--are the fl~ings of conf~icienlce, end-
less, punish~ment, andc endles~s infamyv.

SER~ZMON

# SERMON XX. On the Wisdom of God. I TIMOTHY i. 17. Now unto the King Eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

S ER M ON XX.

On the 'WisooM of GoD.C

r TxnoravY i. t7.

g~o unto the King· Eternal, immortal, iney~ble, he only

IFe God, be hbonour and glory, for ever and e·ver. Amen.

TT is of the higheit importance to religious condub,
that our mninds be filled with suitable conceptions of
the attributes of God. They are the foundations of
our reverence for him ; and reverence is the founda-
tion of religion. All the divinre perfe~tions are ux-
terefting to man. Almightyr power, in conjunAion
withz Eternity and Omnipresence, naturally mfparies
solemn awe. Infinite Goodness relieves the mind
from that oppression which Power alone would pro-
duce ; and, fr~om our experience of prelent benefits,
anld our remembrance of the patl, creates love, gra-
titude, and truit. In the middjle betweenl these,
flands the contem~plation of divine Wvtifdom, which
conjoins impreflions of awe with those of comfort ;
and while it humbles uis into profound fixbmbiion.

enicouralges,

*; This concluding ditcourfe is chiefly intended to be a gene-

ral recapitulationof initances of the wifdlom of Providence, fe,~
veral of which have been more fully illultrated ia other discourse
Eoutained in thi s, or in some of the precedin~g volumes,

encourages, at the fame time our reliance on that
Kig eteral, imnmortal, andi invi/'le who is juffly
If iled in the text, thre only Yif re God.

AM~ONG men, wifdlom is a quality entirely'different

from cunning or craft. It always fuppoles good and
fair mntention in the person who poffeffes it s and im-
ports, that laudable ends are purfiued by proper and
justifiable means. In like manner, wisdom in the
Supreme Being cannot be separated from the redlitude
of his nature. It is, in him, an exertion of benevo-
lence; and imports, that the purposes of juffice and
groodnef~s are carried on and accomplished,, by m~eans
the mos1 effe~tual. To meditate on some of those
instances in which this divine wifdlom is displayed,
cannot but be highly favourable to the imprefiions
both of piety and of virtue.

IT· is difficult to fay, whether the natural, or the

mnoral, world, afford the most conspicuous and
firiking displays ofthe wisdom of God. Not one,
nor many discourses, nor indeed the fludy and labour
of a whole life, were, in anly degree, fuff~icient to
ex~plore them. Of thle proofs of wisdom which the
natural world affords, I cannot attemlpt now to dif~i-
cour~e~. Any illu~ffration of these would lead to diif-
cuffions of a scientific kind, which more properly
belong to the philosopher ; and on which philosophy
has often employed itself, with much utility and ho-
nour. I thlall only take notice that, in proportion as
human knowledge. hath enlarged its sphere of research

and

and difovery, in the famie proportion, hath the wiT-
dom of the Creator firuck the minds of all inqui~rers
an~d observers, w~ith the highest admiration. All na-
ture is in truth a scene of wonders. Inl the difp~·oft on
of the heavenly bodies, and the general arrangem~ent
of the fy i~em of the univer~e : in the fIruAture of the
earth; in the endless variety of livring creatures that
fill it; and in the proviflon~ made for them all, to en-
able themn to f'ulfil the end~s of their being, it: is not
eafyj to detenrmine, whether power, wtifdom, or good-
nes~s h-e mnoft conspicuous. I: belong~s not only to
the heav-ens to declare the glory of Godt, andi to the f mazcmettl
to &< fe; tk his ha ndty wrtork ; in the ifmallefit and rnoft
inc~onsiderable, as wecll as in the mcof1 illui'trious wovrks
of G~od, equal mnarks apypear of prEof~ound dlefign~ and

conumiat at.It hars been just~ly faiid, that th1P~ee

is no~t a vegetable tha~t g~rowvs, nor an infedt thlat m-oves,
but wvhat is fi-dricient to confound th·e rotheift, and to
affordc th;e candid observer endiefs mater~ials of devout
adoration andi praise.

~T HEN Wef turn 10 tEhe n10Yai wor~ld, lthe field of ad-~

mniration which op:ens to us is no less extensive and
firiiking~. I can on3ly mlenltionl a feivr inzlances of that
ex ifiq~te w~ifliiom wn,~ica evry-l· wherle mee t us.

IN the~iyi place, let us attend to the- conflitution

of human nature. Tnough· wee are taugh~t by revela-
tion, to cofiider it as now imipaired by the, fnll, yiet,
as it flands, we beholdi the traes of a noble firac-
tu~re, planned and excuted witih the highest Ikill.

NJ 3 All

All the powers and faculties beff~owed on man are
su~ch as perfeAly fait his condition, and adapt him to
the purpole~s for which he was defigned.--Senfies
were given him, that he might diatnguilfh what is
necessary for t-he preservation and welfare of his body.
Now, suppos~e that any one of those senses, the fight,
for inftLane, or the hearing, or the touch,· had been
in a confideratble degree either more blunt, or more
acute, than it is at present, what an unhazppy change
would this have made upon our slate ? On the one
hand, greater· imperfeAion of the organs, would have
deprived us of all the comfort and advantage which
we no~w enjoy from such powers. On the other hand,
a greater degree ofexquifite ~enfibility in them, woulld
have rendered life a burden to us. Our senses, in-
flead of being inlets to knowledge and pleasure, would
then have become conflant avenues to unetafinefs and
pain. Their powers, therefore, are fkcilfully adjust-
ed to that meafirre of strength, which allows them to
answer the purposes of health, s~afety, and comfort ;
wvithourt either falling thort of this line of uf~efulnefs,
or improperly, and ·hurtfully, firetching beyond it.

IN the mind appetites and paflions were placed, as

the moving power~s of the foul, to impel its aaivity.
Bu~t as their impulse required regulation and restraint,
reason was, at the famne time, conferred as th-e di-
reding power.-O~f all our paflions, felf-love, and
athe desire of felf-preervrtation, were, with the utmost
~propriety made the firongeft, for a reas~on which the
·neaneft capacity may comprehend. Every m7an is

a.mos

most immediately committed by Providfence to h~is
own care and charge. He knlows his own fituationl
bes1; andl has more opportunities of promoting hi~s
ow~n happines~s, than he can have of aidvancing the
happiness of any other person. It wEas therefore fit
and wife, that, by the firongeft inflinA, he thlould
be promp'ted to attend to himfelf.--At the farme time,
as no man flanding alone is fixffcient for his own
welfare, it was necessary that, by mutual Cympathy
and social iniitinccts, we iThouldl be drawn to give aidl
to onle another. H-ere it dleferves our particular nor-
tice, that the force of thos~e social: inftineas Is, wiith
admlirable propriety, proportioned bry Pr·ovidence to
the degree of their ufefulners and importance-'f. Tkhu~s
that parental affeaion, which the helples~s fltate of in-
fancy andl childhood renders so need'ul, is: madie the
11rongeft of th·em all. NYext, come th~ose ties of:
blood, which prompt mutual kindness among thofet
who are intimately joined togethler by broth~erhood,
and other family connea~ions. T'o there lucceeds
that valuable Inftlnat of pity, whiich impels us to
affTift the distressed, wherever wie behold them~. To
take part w~ith others in their good fortune belongs to
rnan's fcial nature, and increase~s the flunl of hppi)P-
ness. A4t the thme time, to take part with th~e prof-
perous is less nece"'9r-y than to fymlpathile: w~ith thle
unhappy; anld therefor·e the principle wihichl prompts
usj to r~ejoice w~ith them thant rejocice, is made not to b~e o
firong as that whic~h imp~els us to woeep wi~th them~ thant

BUP

* See Serm, II. Vol, ill.

Bv-r they are not only the laudlable andt important

par'ts of our difpolition, which dif~covfer the wis~dom
of the Author of our frame; even our imperfeftions
and follies, are by him rendered subservient to useful
ends.--Amidft thos~e inequalities of condition, for
inflance, which the slate of human life required, where
it was necessary that some thould be rich, and others
poor, that some thould be eminent and diflinguilhed,
and others obs~cure andi mean, how seasonable is that
good opinion which every one entertains of himself ;
that f~elf-complacency writh which he compares him-
self to others; and that fond hope, which is ever plea-
sing him w8ith the profpCeaLt of future pleasures and ad-
vam~ages in life? W~ithout those flattering sens~ations,
v-ain as they often are, how totally inf~ujpor~table
w(rouldf this world become, to many of its inhabitants
WQs*hereas, by means of them, Providence hath con-
trived to balance, in a great meafrure, the inequ~alities
of condition amonr mankind. It hath c~ontrived to
diffrfe pleduiire through all ranks; and to bring the
hligh and the low nearer to a level with each other,
thanl might at firfi be s~upposed. It hath fmnoot~hed the
moR rugged trafts of human life; and hath gilded
wicih rays of borrowed light its most dreary scenes.

ONE~r initatCe Of Divine wyifdomr, in framing our

nature, is so remnarkable as to demand particular at-
tentlion ; that is, thes meas~ure according to which,
G~od hath diflpenf~ed knowledge and ignlorance to man.
Tfhere is nothingr of which wre are more ready~ to comr-
plain, than of our narrow and confined views of nap

turI·e,

ture, and of Providence, and of all things around us :
And yet, upon examination, it will be found, that
our views extend on. every fide, juff as far as; they
ought; and that, to fee and know more than is allow-
ed us, inficad of bringing any advantarge, would
produce certain mifetry*.--We pry, for inflance,
with impatient curiosity, into future events. Hap-
pily for us, they are veiled andl covered up; and one
peep behind that veil, were it pecrmitted, would be
fufificient to poiso~n th-e whole comflort of our days,
by t he anticipation oif sorrows to comne.-Julnike man-
ner, we often with wvith eagerness to penetrate into
the secrets of naturte, to, looki into the invisible wYorld,
and to be mnade acquaintedr w1;ith the whole deitiny of
man. Our wish is denied; we are enivironed on all
hands wciith myliery ; and that mystery is; our happi-
nei;. Fo'r were thiofe great invr~ifble objeais fully
dif~clofed~c, the ~ight of rtoem would confound and
ov-er whelmr us. It would either totally derange our
feeble facultics ; or wou~ld engross our attention to
such a dcgr ee, as to lay uts atfide from the business
andi cornc~erns of this :world. It would have th-e fame
effed~, as if we were carrietd away from the rarth, and
mingled amnong the inhabitants of s~ome other planet.
-Th~e knowledgoe that is allowed to us, was designed
to fit us for ading our part in our pres~ent slate. At
the exaat point, therefore, where ufefulnefs~ ends,
knlowledge flops, and ignorance commences. Light
thines upon us, as long as i it fr~ves to guide our path ;
but forl~akes us, as fCoon as it becomes noxious to the

eye 5

* See Serm. IV, Vol. i, and Serm, IX. Vol. iv.

eye; and salutory d~arkness is appoilntrd to close the
fcene.---Thoughtlers and flupid must that man be,
whio, in all this furniture of the human mind, in this
exaA adjustm~ent ofits several powcers to thle Lgreat
purposes of life, discerns not the hand of adorable
wisd~om, as well as of infiuite Goodness.

IN the/eond place, Let us contemplate the fam~e

wIifdom, as exhibiting itself to us in the moral govern-
mrnet of the world. We are informed by revelation,
that this life is designed by Providence to be an in-
tkodudory part of existence to inteiligent beinlgs ; a
~slate of education and discip~line, wher~e creatures fall-
en from their original rank, may gradually recover
thtir re~titude and virtue. Under this view, which
is in itself perfea~ly confonanzt to all that reas~on dlfco-
vers, we~ fhiall frind clthegeeal course of humanl~ affairS,
confided as it may sometimes appear, to h-ave been
ordered w:ith exquisite wifdom.-I-t was neceil'ary to
such a state, that all the ac'tive powe~rs of man th~ould
be brought forth into exercise, and compnletely tried.
It became proper, th!erefore, that there fhlould be a
mlixture of charad~ers in the world ; and that men
thlould be thewn in a variety of fituations*c. Hence,
that diversity of tempers and difpolitions which are
found in society; those inequalities in rank and fla-
tion which we fee taking place; and those~ different
talents and inclinations wthich promnpt men to different
purs~uits. By thes~e means, every department in so-
ciety is filled up; andi every man has some sph~ere pre-

pared

" See Serm., IV. Vol. iv,

pared for him, in whichz he can art. He is brought
forth as on a busy flage, where opportunity is given
for his chara~ter to dis~play itself fully.-H~is life is, with
great propriety, varied by interchanges of prosp~erity
and advetfity. Always pros~perous, he would become
difirpated, indolent, and giddy : Always afflided, he
would be fretful, dej'e~ted, and sullen. Th~ere are few
persons, therefore, or none, whos~e lot thares not of
both th~ese slates ; in order that: every difpiolition of
the heart meiy be explored, and every mean of im-
provemrent afforded.-As man is ultimately designed
for a higher slate of exiftnce than the present, it w\2as
not proper that this worli thould prove a paradise to
him, or thould afford himn that complete fa8tisfa~tion
which he incef~hatly purs~ues. Difappoimrments, there-
fore, are of'ten made to blaf1 his hopes; andl, even
while the comforts of life last, they are always mixed
with some troubles ; in order that an excefirveattach-
m~ent to this world may gradually be loosened. The
course of things is evidenltly so ordered by Providence,
that occurrences ihall be always happening, to bring
down the maoft prosperous to a level with the reft of
his brethren, and to raise up, in their turn, the low
and the diffreffed.

In the midst of those vicifirtudes, which are to ob.

vioufly conducive to improvement, both wisdom
and goodness required, that the firpreme Go'vernor of
the world thonuld be seen to proteat the interests, and
favour the fide of virtue. But: in the degree of evi-
dence, with which this was to be shown, it was no

less

less requifxte, that a proper temilerament thlould be
oble ·vedl. Had v~irtue beeni I'dways~ copley e
wardedl, and mrade happy onr earth, men would no
longer have hadl a motive for asp-iring to a more bless-
ed ilate. In the clie of every crime, had dijvin~e jus-
tice interp~ofedl to bring complete pun;fhmsent on the
head of the criminal; or had all the felicity w1hich is
prepared for the juff in a futuLre wYorld, and all the
m~isery which thlere aw~aits the wicked, been alreadyv
difpiayed to the view, and renderedl fe`niiblet to th~e
feelings of men, there would have been an end of
that Rtate of tr-ial, for whichour whole conldition on
earth w·as ntendled. It was necessary-, therefor·e, that
at pres~ent, we thlould Jet throng a gla/3 drlriRy. A-
certarn degree of m-ystery and obscurity wa~s, w~ith.
per-fe(t wiidom,r left on the conduiEt of th~e Ainmightve
-B~ut, amidst that obfrcurity, fu~ficient enc~our·age-
ment and su~pport is in the mean time given to vir-
tue ; futficient ground is afforded for the full belief,
that it is what the D~eity loves, and will" finaly reward.
His approbation of it is fignifiedl to every man by the
voice of conscience. Inward fatisfaEtion and p~eae are
made always to belong to it ; anld gener~al efier~n and
honour, for the mos1 part, to attend it. On the
other hand, the wicked, in no situation of life, are
allowed to be tru:y happy. Their vices and their
paffons are madep tor troubhletheir pr-osperity; and
their punithment to grow out of their crimes. Let
any one attentively recolleft the material incidents;
of his life; and he will, for the most part, be able

* See Serm.IXV. Vol, i.

to trace the chief misfortunes which have befallen
hlim, to s~ome guilt he has contraded, or some folly
h~e has committed*k. Such is the profound wisdom
with which Providence condults its couns~els, that,
although it does not appear to interpose, men are
made to reap from their a~ions, the fruits which they
hlad dleferved ; their iniquities to cor~red thlem, and
threir- backfidings~· to reprove thecm ; and while they s~us-
ser, they are forced to acknowledge the juffice of'
thei r p~uni fh ment.--There are not matters o f rare or
occasional obfetrvation ; but deeply interwoven with
the texture of human affairs. They discover a regu-
lar plan, a formed iyfiem, according to which the
wvhole train of Providence proceeds; and which
manifests to every serious obs~erver the consu~mmate
wisdom of its Author.-A4s thus, in the conflitution
of hum-an nature, and in the moral government of
the world, divine wisdom [o~ remarkably appears, I
m~uff observe,

IN the third place, That in the redemption of the

wiorldi, and in the aeconomy of grace, it th~ines no
less consp~icuously. The fubjeAt which opens to us
h~ere is too extensive to b~e fully illuflrated at pr~esent;
but the great lines of it are obvious-t.-Iln carrying
on a plan, by which forgivenes~s wlas to be dispensed
to an offending race, wifddom required that thle au-
th-ority of the legislator thmould be fully preserved,

and

*See Serm. XIII. Vol. iv.

-t See Serm. V. Vol. i.--Serm. V, Vol, ii.-Serm. XV,

Vol, iii,-S~erm. V, Vrol. iv.,

and no fach relaxation be introduced into Sovern-
nient, as might give licence or encouragement to
offenader~s. Accordingly, thq most admirable provi-
sion was made for these important purpol~es, by the
interposition of the Yon of God firffering and dying
for finaers. The sovereIgn awe of juffice is maing
tained, while j~uffice is tempered with mercy. MT~en
are boumd to righteousness, under the highest ~fanc-
tions ; andi ample s~ecurity and conifotion are, at the
fame time, afforded to the penitent. By the infiruc-
tions, and example, of their Saviour, they are in-
firu~ted in their duty ; and through a IMediiator and
Intercessor, they are encouraged to offer their w2or-·
thipp and prayers to the Aimighty. They are assured
that, in wrhatever is too arduous for humran nature
to perform, they th~all be afif-~ted by a Divine Spirit ;
and under all trials and difficulties, they are fiipport-
ed by the expres~s promise of that eternal life, which
is bro-ught to light by the gofp~el.-It is not possible
for the understanding to conceive any miethod of fa-~1
vation, planned with more goodness~, and executed
with more wifdiom, than what is fhowTn in the golpel
of Christ. The confiderattion of' this confi;tation
alone, gives us full reason to join in that exclam~a-
tion of the Apostle : O the depth~ of the r~idjes bothl of the
*wpo~m and the knowled~ge of GodC. !~c 1w un/crckanble~
ar-e kis ju~d~gmnt, .and hris wayICS pas fu~ling out ! *t

FaoM this tho~rt survey which we have taken of

VDivine Wisdom, as discover-ing itlelf, in the w hole

com ale

* * I togx~. li*S S

·omple~x frame of the moral world ; in the conflitu-
tion of human nature ; in thle government of human
affairs; and in the redemption of the human race;
we cannot but perceive how much reason we have
to proffrate ourselves before God, and with all humi-
lity to worthip and adore.--When we view that
immrenfe firdinure of the univers~e in which we dwell;
when we thinkt of Him, whos~e wisdom has planned
the whole ryfiem of being; whos~e mind compre-
hends, whole counsels direEt, the whole course of
events, from the beginning to the end of time, by
whom nothing is so inconsiderable as to be overlook-
ed, or so transient as to be forgotten ; who attends to
the concerns of the poor man in his cottage, while
he is f~reering the fun and the moon in th-eir course
through the heavens; inlto what affonifhlment and
f'elf-annihi~lation do we fall! Before him all our
boasted knowledge is ignorance, and our wisdom is
folly. Wherever we cast our eyes on his works and
wiays, we find all things adjuffed in numzber-, weightl,
and mea/ure ; and after all that we can s~urvey, Lo !
these are but a part of his ways; and k'owv/mall a por-
tion is hear~dof kim !

IT~ is the power of God, which produces among

the multitud~e of men any impressions of religion.
W-~hen thunder roars in the hieavens, or an earthquake
th~akes the ground, they are itruck with awe, and
disposed to worthip an invisible power. But such
imprefirons of Deity are occallonal, and transitory.
The lating reverence of a Supreme Being arises, us~

a well

a well informed mind, from the dlifplay of that infi-
nite wisdom which all the univelrfe prelents. Its
op'erations are conflantly, though silently, goinlg on
around us. We may view it in the peaceful and f~e-
date slate of the universe, as well as in its greatest~
commotions; we behold it in every infed~ that
moves on the ground, at the fa~me time that we ad-
mire it in the revolutions of the celestial bodies,
H~appy for us, if the contemplation shall nourith
that temper of habitual devotion, w~hich so well be-
comes dependent beings, and is so intimately con-
ne~ed with all virtue. *

'BUr the chief effeat that ought to be produced by

meditation on the divine wisdom, is perf(et refigna-
tion to the Governor of the universe, and entire truit
in his adminiffration. Our private m~isfortunes and
disappointments are too often the fubjed5 of querulous
compiaints, and even of un~juff f~ulicious of Provi-
-dence. But when in the whole natural and mnoral
world, we behold an arrangement of things w~hich
plainly disc~overs the most cons~ummate wifdiom, can
we believe, that in the arrangement of our petty
concerns, this wis-dom is dormant and negleafuil ?
H~ow much more reas~on is there to think, that our
ignorance of the divine plans misleads our judgment,
than that the wisdom of the A~lmighty has erred! inl
diredhing our private affairs?-D-livinle w\isdom, as
I obl~erved in the beginning, is an exertion of divine
ben~evolence. It has, it can have, no other fco eP

than-

SSee Seral, XIX. Vol, ii~i,

than to accomplish the belt ends, by the most proper
means. Let the Wisdom, therefore, and the GTood-
neifs, of the Deity, be ever conjoined in our idea.
Let every new discovery of divine wisdom, be a newv
ground of hope, of joy, and of cordial submission,
to every virtuous man. Let him be thankfmd that
he lives in a world, where nothing happens to him
by chance, or at random ; but where a great, a wife,
and beneficent Mind continually fuperintends every
event.

UNDERC the faith of this great principle of religion,

let us proceed in the course of our duty, with fledfaft
and undismayed mind. Let us retain faithtul alle-
giance to our C~reator and our Redeemer ; and th:en
wye may always hope the bes1 ; and ca/1 our carre uon
k~im wh~o caeth for us. Iyait on the Lord ; be of good
courage, and He fal raPengthen your Aeart. Abb~ough
throu fayef, thoul can/2 not/e~e him, yet judlgme nt is befor-e
him ; therefore tryuJ thou in hrim.---Let us begin every
undertaking, with humble dependence on his assist-
ance for enabling us to prosecute it to the end.
W~hen our undertakingas are finithed, and the clos~e
of life approaches, with praise: to him let us conclude
all our labouars.

Unto th~e King Eternal, immffortal, inc~idle, the only

rl7'ife GodE, be honour- andrglory for ever and eer. Amnen.

FINPI S.
