SERMONS,

B Y

HUGH BLAIR, D.D.
One of the MINISTERS of the HIoH CHURCHAi

AND
PROFPSSOR of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTRES

in the University, of Edinburgh,
THE SEVENTH EDITIO*.

LONDON:
Printed for W. STRAHAN; and T. CADELL, in the Strand;

and W. C B E c H, Edinburgh,

M,DCC,LXXIX,

'; I ,

# THE CONTENTS.

THE
C O N T E N T S9

Page

SERMON I.

On the Union of Piety and Morality.
ACTS X. 4. Thy prayers and thine

alms are come up for a ntemorial
before God. I

SERMON II.
On the Influence of Religion upon

Adversity.
PSAL. xxvii. 5. It the time of trou-

ble, he Jhall hide me in his pavilion;
in the secret of his tabernacle Jjall he
hide me; he Jhall set me .up upon a
rock.

A 2

PagSe

SERMON III.
On the Influence of Religion upon

Prosperity,
PSAL. i. 3. He Jhall be like a tree

planted by the rivers of water, that
bringethforth hisfruit in hisfeafon;
his leaf alfoj hall not wither, and
uwhatfoever he dothJhall prosper. $8

SERMON IV.
On our imperfeCt Knowledge of a

Future State.

T CORINTH, Xiii. 12. For now iwt
fee through a glass, darkly- 8S

SERMON V.

pn the Death of Christ.
JOHN xvii . Jefi lift up his eyes

to heaven, and Jaid, Father! the
qour is come - I

Page
SERMON VI.

On Gentleness.
JAMES iii. 17. The wjfdomr that is

from above, is-gentle- I45

SERMON VII.

On the Disorders of the Passions.
ESTHER V. 13. ret all this availeth

me nothing, so long as Ifee AMordecai
the yewfitting at the King's gate. I73

SERMON VIII.
On our Ignorance of Good and Evil

in this Life.
ECCLESIAST. Vi. 12. Who knoweth

·what is goodfor man in this life, all
the days of his vain life, which he
fpendetb as aJhadow ? 204

Page

SERMON IX.

On Religious Retirement.
PSAL. iv. 4. Commune zwith your own

heart, upon your bed, and beJZill. 234

SERMON X.

On Devotion.
ACTS x. 2. 'Cornelius-a devout man. 264

SERMON XI.

On the Duties of the Young.
TITUS ii. 6. Yoiung men likewiSe ex-

hort, to be fober- minded. 306

SERMON XII.
On the Duties and Consolations of

the Aged.
PRov, xvi. 31. The hoary head is a

crown of glory, if it be found in the
way of righteousness. 341

4

Page

SE R M O N XIII.

On the Power of Conscience.
GENESIS xlii. 21, 2°. And theyfaid

one to another, WFe are verily guilty
concerning ourt brother, in that we
Jaw the anguJfh of his foul, when
he besought us; and we would not
hear: Therefore is this difrefs come
upon us. And Reuben answered them,
faying, Spake I not unto you, faying,
Do notfin againl the child; and ye
would not hear ? Therefore, behold
als his blood is required. 375

S E RM O N XIV.
On the Mixture of Joy and Fear in

Religion.
PSAL. ii. II. Rejoice with trembling. 412

Page

SERMON XV.
On the Motives to Constancy in

Virtue.
GAL. vi. 9. And let us not be weary

in well-doing; for in duefeafon we
Jhall reap, if wefaint not. 439

SER-

# SERMON I. On the Union of PIETY and MORALITY. ACTS x. 4. Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God.

S E R M 0 N I.
On the Union of PIETY and MORALITY.

ACTS X. 4.
Thy prayers ald thine alms are come uip for

a memnorial before God.

Fl'" HE High and Lofty One who S ERM.

: T inhabiteth eternity, dwelleth also _-A
k^iS; with him that is of humble
aid contrite heart. In the midst of
his glory, the Almighty is not inatten-
tive to the meanest of his fubjeds. Nei-
ther obscurity of station, nor imperfec-
tion of knowledge, finks those below his

B regard,

s E R M. regard, who worship and obey him. Every
-.---i .prayer which they fend up from their fe-

cret retirements, is listened to by him;
and every work of charity which they per-
form, how unknown soever to the world,
attracts his notice. The text presents a
signal inflance of this comfortable truth.
In the city of Cafarea, there dwelt a
Roman centurion, a military officer of
inferiour rank, a Gentile, neither by
birth nor religion entitled to the privi-
leges of the Jewish nation. But he was a
devout and a benevolent man; who, ac-
cording to his measure of religious know-
ledge, fludied to perform his duty, prayed
to God always, and gave much alms to the
people. Such a character passed not un-
observed by God. So highly was it ho-
noured, that to this good centurion'an
Angel was sent from heaven, in order to
direa him to the means of full inftruc-
tion in the truth. The Angel accofis him
with this salutation, Cornelius, Thy prayers
and thine alms are come up for a memorial
bsfore God.

It

It 'is to the conjunction of prayers and s E RM.

alms, that I purpose now to direCt your __
thoughts, as describing the refpcctable
and amiable character of a man, as form-
ing the honour and the blessedness of a
true Christian; piety joined with charity,
faith with good works, devotion with mo-
rality. These are things which God hath
connedRed, and which it is impious in
man to separate. It is only when they
remain united, that they can come up as
a grateful memorial before God. 1 fliall sirs
endeavour to flew you, That alms with-
out prayers, or prayers without alms, mo-
rality without devotion, or devotion with-
out morality, are extremely defective;
and then shall point out the happy effects
of their mutual union.

LET us begin with confidcring the cafe

of alms without prayers; that is, of good
works without piety, or a proper fenle
of God and Religion. Examples of' this
are not uncommon in the world. With
many, Virtue is, or at least is pretended

B 2 to

S E R M. to be, a refpetable and an honoured

L^ ^j name, while Piety founds meanly in their

ears. They are men of the world, and
they claim to be men of honour. They
reft upon their humanity, their publick
spirit, their probity, and their truth.
They arrogate to themselves all the manly
and the acive virtues. But devout assec-
tions, and religious duties, they treat with
contempt, as founded on shadowy fpecu-
lations, and fit to employ the attention
only of weak and fuperflitious minds.
Now, in opposition to such persons, I
contend, That this neglect of piety ar-
gues depravity of heart; and that it in-
sers an irregular discharge of the duties of
morality.

FIRST, It argues internal depravity;

for it discovers a cold and a hard heart.
If there be any impreflion which man is
formed by nature to receive, it is a sense
of religion. As soon as his mind opens
to observation and reflection, he discerns
innumerable marks of his dependent state.

He

He finds himself placed, by some fupe- s E R M.

I.

riour power, in a valt world, where the _--
wisdom and goodness of the Creator are
conspicuous on every fide. The magni-
ficence, the beauty and order of nature,
excite him to admire and adore. When
he looks up to that omnipotent hand
which operates throughout the universe,
he is impressed with reverence. When
he receives blessings which he cannot a-
void ascribing to divine goodness, he is
.prompted to gratitude. The exprelfions
of those affections under the various forms
of religious worllip, are no other than
native effusions of the human heart. Ig-
norance may mislead, and superstition may
corrupt them; but their origin is derived
from sentiments that are essential to man.

,Cast your eyes over the whole earth.
Explore the most remote quarters of the
east or the weft. You may discover tribes
of men, without policy, or laws, or cities,
or any of the arts of life: But no where
will you find them without some form of
religion. In every region you behold the

B 3 proitrate

SERM. proflrate worfluipper, the temple, the al-

tar, and the offering. Wherever men have
existed, they have been sensible that some
acknowledgment was due, on their part,
to the Sovereign of the world. If in their
rudest and most ignorant slate, this obli-
gation has been felt, what additional force
must it acquire by the improvements of
human kriowledge, but especially by the
great discoveries of the Christian revela-
tion ? Whatever, either from reverence or
from gratitude, can excite men to the
worship of God, is by this revelation
placed in such a light, as one should
think were sufficient to over-awe the most
thoughtless, and to melt the most obdurate
mind.

Canst thou, then, pretend to be a man

of reason, nay, a man of virtue, and yet
continue regardless of one of the first and
chief ditates of human nature ? Where
is thy sensibility to what is right and fit,
if that loud voice which calls all nations
throughout the earth to religious homage,
has never been heard by thee ? Or, if it

ha,

has been heard, by what firange and fall s R M.
refinements halt thou stilted tholi natural -
sentiments which it tends to awaken?
Calling thyself a son, a citizen, a friend;
claiming to be faithful and affctionate
in these relations; haft thou no sense of
what thou oweft to thy first Parent, thy
highest Sovereign, thy greatest Benefac-
tor ? Can it be consistent with true virtue
or honour, to value thyself upon thy re-
gard to inferiour obligations, and yet to
violate that which is the moot sacred and
the most ancient of all ? When simple in-
flinct teaches the Tartar and the Indian,
together with his alms and good works to
join his prayers to that Power whom he
confiders as the source of good, fliall it be
no reproach, in the most enlightened state
of human nature, and under the purest
dispensation of religion, to have extin-
guifhed the sense of gratitude to Heaven,
and to flight all acknowledgment of the
great and the true God ? What does such
conduct imply, but either an entire want,
or a wilful suppression, of some of the best

B 4 and

S E R M. and mos generous affetions belonging to
L-J-e human nature ?--Surely, there must be

an essential defect in that heart which re-
mains cold and insensible, where it ought
to be affected most warmly. Surely, such
a degree of depravity murf be lodged there,
as is sufficient to taint all the .other fpriogs
of pretended virtue.

BUT besides this, I must contend, in

the second place, That where religion is
negleced, there can be no regular nor
feady pratice of the duties of morality.
The character will be often inconsistent;
and Virtue placed on a basis too narrow
to support it, will be always loose and
tottering. For such is the propensity of
our nature to vice, so numerous are the
temptations to a relaxed and immoral
condut, that fironger restraints than
those of mere reason, are necessary to be
imposed on man. The sense of right and
wrong, the principle of honour, or the
inftina. of benevolence, are barriers too
feeble to withstand the firength of.paffion.

In

In the tranquil seasons of life, these natu- s E R AI.
ral principles may, perhaps, carry on the
ordinary course of social duties with some
regularity. But wait until some trying
emergence come. Let the conflict of pas-
sions arise. Let the heart be either wound-
ed by fore distress, or agitated by violent
emotions; and you shall presently fee, that
virtue without religion is inadequate to the
government of life. It is destitute of its
proper guard, of its firmest support, of its
chief encouragement. It will fink under
the weight of misfortune; or will yield to
the solicitation of guilt.

The great motives that produce con-

flancy and firmness of action, must be of
a palpable and striking kind. A divine Le-
giflator, uttering his voice from heaven;
an omniscient Witness, beholding us in
all our retreats; an almighty Governour,
firetching forth his arm to punish or re-
ward, disclosing the secrets of the invisible
world, informing us of perpetual reft pre-
pared hereafter for the righteous, and of
indignation and wrath awaiting the wicked:

These

S ERM. There are the considerations which over-

awe the world, which support integrity,
and check guilt. They add to virtue that
solemnity which ihould exer charaCterize
it. To the admonitions of confciencs they
give the authority of a law. Co-operating
with all the good dispositions of a pious
man, they strengthen and insure thei in-
fltence. On his alms you can ihave no
certain dependance, who thinks not of
God, nor has joined prayer to his chari-
table deeds. But when humanity is fe-
conded by piety, the fpiing from which
it flows is rendered, of course, more re-
gular and conftant.-In short, withdraw
religion, and you shake all the pillars of
morality. In every heart you weaken the
influence of virtue: And among the mul-
titude, the bulk of mankind, you over-
throw its power.

HAVING thus lhewn that morality

without devotion is both defective and un-
flable, I proceed to confider the other ex-
treme, of prayers without alms, devotion
without morality.

2 In

In every age the practice has prevailed, s ;,

of fubfiituting certain appearances of piety .-....
in the place of the great duties of huma-
nity and mercy. Too many there have
always been, who flatter themselves with
the hope of obtaining the friendlhip of
their Creator, though they neglect to do
justice to their fellow-creatures. But such
persons may be assured, that their supposed
piety is altogether of a spurious kind. It
is an invention of their own, unknown to
reason, unknown in the word of God. In
Scripture we are ever direced to try our
faith by our works, our love of God by our
love of men. We are direaed to confider
piety as a principle which regenerates the
heart, and forms it to goodness. We are
taught, that in vain we address any aas of
homage to Christ, unless we do the things
which heJfaith; and that love, peace, gen-
tlenefs, goodness, meekness and temperance
are not only the injuntions of his law, but
the native fruits of his spirit *. If, there-

Luke vi. 46. Gal. v. 22.

fore,

SE R M. fore, while piety seems ardent, morality
_*-^-/ shall decline, you have full reason to be-

lieve, that into that piety some corrupting
ingredients have entered. And if ever
your regard to morality Ihall totally fail;
if, while you make many prayers, you
give no alms; if, while you appear to be
zealous for God, you are false or unjust to
men; if you are hard or contracted in
heart, severe in your censures, and oppref-
five in your conduct; then conclude with
certainty, that what you had termed piety
was no more than an empty name. For
as soon, according to the scripture fimili-
tude, will bitter waters flow from a sweet
fountain, as such effects be produced by
genuine piety.

What you -have called by that name,

resolves itself into one or other of three
things. Either it is a hypocritical form
of godliness, assumed in order to impose
on the world; or, which is the most fa-
vourable supposition, it is a transient im-
pression of seriousness, an accidental melt-
ing of the heart, which pales away like

the

the mornling cloud and the early dew; or, s E R M.
which I am afraid is too often the cafe, '- -'
it is the deliberate refuge of a deluded
and superstitious, but at the fame time
a corrupted mind. For all men, even the
moif depraved, are subject, more or less,
to compunCtions of conscience, It has
never been in their power to withdraw
totally beyond the reach of that warning
voice, which tells them that something is
necessary to be done, in order to make
their peace with the Ruler of the world.
But, backward at the fame time to resign
the gains of difhonefly, or the pleasures
of vice; averse from fibmiffion to that
sacred law which enjoins rightcoufnefs
in its whole extent, they have often at-
tempted to make a fort of composition
with Heaven; a composition, which,
though they dare not avow it in words,
lurks in secret at the bottom of many a
heart. If God will only dispense with
some articles of obedience, they will re-
pay him with abundant homage. If they
fail in good pradice, they will fludy to

r~5 ~ be

S E R M. be found in belief; and, by the number of
'-v ' their prayers, will atone, in some measure,

for their deficiency in charitable deeds.

But the attempt is as vain, as it is im-

pious. From the simplest and plainest
principles of reason it must appear, that
religious worship, disjoined from justice
and virtue, can upon no account what-
ever find acceptance with the Supreme
Being. To whnt purpose is the multitude
of your fjcrfices unto me ? faith the Lord.
Bring no more vain oblations. Incece is an
abomination unto me. The new moons and
sabbaths, the calling of aflemblies, I cannot
away with; it is iniquity, even the Solemn
meetings '.-- Cease, foolish and impious
man ! Cease to confider the Almighty as a
weak or vain-glorious being, who is to
be appeased by thy devout prostrations,
and thy humble words; or to be gratified
by the parade and ostentation of external
worship. What is all thy worship to him?
Will he eat the fleflJ of thy sacrifices, or
drink the blood of offered goats ? Was wor-

* Ira. i. II. 14.

flip

ship required of thee, dost thou think, s E R M.
upon his account, that thou mighteft :--'
bring any increase to his glory and feli-
city by thy weak and insignificant praises ?
Sooner mighteft thou increase the fplen-
dour of the fun by a lighted taper, or add
to the thunder by thy voice. No: It is
for the fake of man, not of God, that
worship and prayers are required; not that
God may be rendered more glorious, but
that man may be made better; that he may
be confirmed in a proper sense of his de-
pendent state, and acquire those pious and
virtuous dispositions in which his highest
improvement confifis.

Of all the principles in religion, one

should take this to be the most evident;
and yet frequent admonitions arc needed,
to renew the impression of it upon man-
kind. For what purpose did thy Creator
place thee in this world, in the midst of
human society, but that as a man among
men thou mighteft cultivate humanity;
that each in his place might contribute to
the general welfare; that as a fpouflc, a

brother,

SERM. brother, a son, or a friend, thou mighteft

L- ' aft thy part with an upright, and a tender

heart; and thus aspire to resemble Him
who evet consults the good of his crea-
tures, and whose tender mercies are over
all his 'works ? And dared thou, who haft
beeh sacrificing unfufpicious innocence to
thy loose pleasures; thou, who haft been
disturbing the repose of society by thine
ambition or craft; thou, who, to increase
thy treasures, haft been making the wi-
dow and the orphan weep; dareft thou
approach God with thy worship and ,thy
prayers, and entertain the hope that he
will look down upon thee in peace ? Will
the God of order and justice accept such
poor compensation for his violated laws ?
Will the God of love regard the services
of one who is an enemy to his creatures ?
Shall a corrupter of the society of men
aspire to the habitations of pure and blef-
fed spirits ?-Believe it, He that faith he
loveth God, muff love his brother aso. Cease
to do'evil; learn to do well. Seek judg-
ment; relieve the opprefed, judge the fa-

therlefS,

Draw nigh to God, and he Tvilll draw nigh -,-~J
to thee; call uponl him in thfJ dtiy (/ trlbk,',
and he ,will anJfwer tlee. Thy prayers
and thine alms ihall then ascend, in joint
memorial before the Mofl High.

I HAVE now flown the evil of maim-

ing and splitting religion; of dividing
asunder two things, which though in
theory they may be separated, yet in prac-
tice muff always co-exifR if either of them
be real, Devotion to God and Charity to
men. Let us confider next the happy es-
feds of their union.

Their union forms the confifdent, the

graceful, the refpeaable characer of the
real Christian, the man of true worth.
Ifyou leave either of them out of your
system, even though you excel in the
other, you can stand trial only in one
point of view. It is only on one fide
your characer is fair; on the other, it
will always be open to much reproach.
And as you diflonour yourselves, ob you

C do

SE R . do great injustice to religion. For, by
A_^ dividing its parts from one another, you

never fail to expose it to the censure of
the world: And perhaps, by this fort of
partial and divided goodness, religion has
suffered more in the efleem of mankind,
than by open profligacy. The unbeliever
will scoff at your piety, when he fees you
negligent of moral duties. The bigot will
decry all morality, when he fees you pre-
tending to be a follower of virtue, though
you be a despiser of God. Whereas he
who fears God, and is at the fame time
jufi and beneficent to men, exhibits reli-
gion to the world with full propriety. It
shines in his conduct with its native fplen-
dour; and its rays throw a glory round
him. His character is above reproach.
It is at once amiable and venerable. Ma-
lice itself is afraid to attack him; and even
the worst men respect and honour him in
their hearts.

This too is the man whose life will be

most .peaceful and happy. He who fails
materially either in piety or in virtue, is

always

always obnoxious to the anguifl of re- SE R M.
morse. His partial goodness may flatter
him in the day of fupcrficial observation;
but when solitude or diflrefs awakens the
powers of refletion, he shall be made to
feel, that one part of duty performed,
atones not for another which is negleaed.
In the midfl of his prayers, the remem-
brance of injustice will upbraid him with
hypocrisy; and in the difitibution of his
alms, the prayers which the poor put up
for him, will make him blufl for his ne-
gled of God. Conscience will supply the
place of the hand coming forth to write
over against him on the wall, Thou art
weighed in the balance, and art found want-
ing *. Whereas he who holds both faith
and a good cofcience, who attends equally
to the discharge of his duty towards God
and towards man, enjoys, as far as human
imperfecion allows, the sense of fairness
and confiflency in conduct, of integrity
and soundness of heart.

The Man of mere morality, is a stranger
to all the delicate and refined pleasures of

·Dan. v. a7.

C 2 devotion.

SERM. devotion. In works of beneficence and

-- mercy, he may enjoy fatisfadtion. But

his fatisfaftion is deflitute of that glow of
affection, which enlivens the feelings of
one who lifts his heart at the fame time
to the Father of the universe, and confi-
ders himfell as imitating God. The man
again who refts solely on devotion, if that
devotion open not his heart to humanity,
not only remains a firanger to the plea-
fures of beneficence, but must often un-
dergo the pain arising from bad passions.
But when beneficence and devotion are
united, they pour upon the man in whom
they meet, the full pleasures of a good
and pure heart. His alms connected him
with men; his prayers with God. He
looks without dismay on both worlds.
All nature has to him a benign asped.
If engaged in ative life, he is the
friend of men; and he is happy in the
exertions of that friendship. If left in
retirement, he walks among the works of
nature, as with God. Every object is en-
livened to him by the sense of the Divine

~~~~I ~ presence.

presence. Every where he traces the be S E RM.
neficent hand of the Author of nature; _
and every where, with glowing heart, he
hears and answers his fecrct voice. When
he looks up to heaven, he rejoices in the
thought that there dwells that God whom
he serves and honours; that Saviour in
whom he trusts; that spirit of grace from
whose inspiration his piety and his charity
flow. When he looks around him on the
world, he is soothed with the pleasing re-
membrance of good offices which he has
done, or at least has studied to do, to many
who dwell there. How comfortable the
reflection, that him no poor man can up-
braid for having with-held his due; him
no unfortunate man can reproach for hav-
ing seen and despised his sorrows; but that
on his head are descending the prayers of
the needy and the aged; and that the hands
of those whom his protection has support-
ed, or his bounty has fed, are lifted up in
secret to bless him !

Life passed under the influence of such
dispositions, naturally leads to a happy

C 3 end.

SERM. end. It is not enough to fay, that faith
I-v-j and piety, joined with active virtue, con-

ffitute. the requisite preparation for hea-
ven. They in truth begin the enjoyment
of heaven. In every slate of our existence,
they form the chief ingredients of felicity.
Hence they are the great marks of Chri-
flian regeneration. They are the figna-
ture of that Holy Spirit, by which good
men are said to be Jfialed unto the day of
rcdemzption.-The Text affords a firiking
proof of the estimation in which they are
held by God. Amidst that infinite va-
riety of human events which pass under
his eye, the prayers and the alms of Cor-
nelius attracted his particular notice;. He
remarked the amiable dispositions which
rose in the heart of this good man. But
he saw that they were yet imperfec,
while he remained unenlightened by the
principles of the ChriRfian religion, In
order to remove this obitruCdion to his
rising graces, and to bring him to the full
knowledge of that God whom he fought
to honour, he was favoured with a super-

natural

natural mefage from heave:l. Whil the " Itli.
princes of the earth were left to act by --,-
the counsels of their own wisdom; while,
without interposition from above, Gene-
rals conquered or fell, according to the
vicissitude of human things; to this good
Centurion an Angel was commissioned from
the throne of God.

What can I fay more or higher in praise

of this blessed character, than that it is
what God delights to honour? Men single
out as the objects of diftindtion, the great,
the brave, or the renowned. But he who
feeth not as man feeth, pafling by those
qualities which often thine with false fplen-
dour to human observation, looks to the
inward principles of action; to those prin-
ciples which form the essence of a worthy
character; and which, if called forth,
would give birth to whatever is laudable
or excellent in conduCt.-Is there one,
though in humble flation or- obfure life,
whofeareth God and worketr ri2h`eoitff;
whose prayers and alms, proceeding in re-
gular unaffected tenour, beli'cak the up-

C 4 right,

S E R M. right, the tender, the devout heart ?-
i_-^- Those alms and prayers come up in me-

morial before that God who is no refpeleri
of pejfons. The Almighty beholds him
from his throne with complacency. Di-
vine illumination is ready to inftrut him.
Angels minister to him. They now mark
him out on earth as their future associate;
and for him they make ready in paradise,
,the white robes, the palms, and thefceptres
of the just.

To this honour, to this blessedness, let

our hearts continually aspire; and through-
out the whole of life, let those solemn and
sacred words, with which I conclude, found
in our ears, and be the great directory of
our condua :* He hathJhewed thee, 0 man,
what is good; and what doth the Lord
thy God require of thee, but-to dojuflly, and
love mercy-and to walk humbly with thy
Qod?

* Micah vi. 8.

S E R-

# SERMON II. On the Influence of RELIGION upon ADVERSITY. PSALM xxvii. 5. In the time of trouble, he shall hide me in his pavilion; in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me up ...

[ 25 ]

S E R M N II.
On the Influence of RELIGION upon

ADVERSITY.

PsALM1 xxvii. 5.
In the time of trouble, he Jhall hide me in

his pavilion; in the secret of his taber-
znacle Jhall he hide me; he Jljall Jet me
up upon a rock.
'Tg H E life of man has always been a s ER iM.

very mixed ltate, full of uncertain- ,.

ty and vicissitude, of anxieties and fears.
In every religious audience, there are
many who fall under the denomination of
the unfortunate; and the reft are igno-
rant how soon they may be called to join
them. For the prosperity of no man
on earth is liable and assured. Dark

clouds

s i R M. clouds may soon gather over the heads of
L-v- those whose sky is now most bright. In

the midst of the deceitful calm which
they enjoy, the storm that is to over-
whelm them has perhaps already begun
qo ferment. If a man live many years, and
rejoice in them all; yet let him rememnber the
days of darkness, for they fiall be many *.

Hence, to a thoughtful mind, no study

can appear more important, than how to
be suitably prepared for the misfortunes
of life; so as to contemplate them in pro-
fpe& without dismay, and, if they must
befal, to bear them without dejetion.
Throughout every age, the wisdom of the
wife, the treasures of the rich, and the
power of the mighty, have been employ-
ed, either in guarding their slate against
the approach of distress, or in rendering
themselves less vulnerable by its, attacks.
Power has endeavoured to remove adver-
fity to a diflance. Philosophy has studied,
when it drew nigh, to conquer it by pa-
tience.; and Wealth has fought out every

* Eccles xi, 8.

pleasure

pleasure that can compensate or alleviate S E R M.
pain.

While the wisdom of the world is thus

occupied, religion has been no less atten-
tive to the fame important objcl:. It in-
forms us in the Text, of a pavilion which
God erecqs to flelter his servants in the
time of t"cvble, of afecret place in his taber-
nacle into which he brings them, of a
rock on which he sets them up; and else-
where he tells us, of ajhield and a buckler
which he spreads before them, to cover
them from the terrour by night, and the ar-
row that Jieth by day. Now, of what
nature are those instruments of defence,
which God is representing as providing
with such solicitous care for those who
fear him? Has he reared up any bul-
warks, impregnable by misfortune, in
order to separate the pious and virtuous
from. the reft of mankind, and to screen
them from the common disasters of life ?
No: To those disasters we behold them
liable no less than others. The defence
which religion provides, is altogether of

an

SERM. an internal kind. It is the heart, not the

11.
1-1a~ outward slate, which it professes to guard.

When the time of trouble comes, as come
it must to all, it places good men under
the pavilion of the Almighty, by afford-
ing them that security and peace which
arise from the belief of divine protecion.
It brings them into thefecret of his taber-
nacle, by opening to them sources of con-
folation which are hidden from others.
By that strength of mind with which it
endows them, it fcts them up upon a rock,
against which the tempest may violently
beat, but which it cannot shake.

How far the comforts proceeding from

religion merit those high titles under
which they are here figuratively defcrib-
ed, I shall in this discourse endeavour to
show. I lhall for this end compare toge-
ther the situation of bad men and that of
the good, when both are suffering the
misfortunes of life; and then make such
improvement as the fubjeat will naturally
suggest.

I. RELIGION

I. RELIGION prepares the mind for en- SER M.

countering, with fortitude, the mofl severe .-
shocks of adversity; whereas vice, by its
natural influence on the temper, tends to
produce dejecion under the slightest trials.
While worldly men enlarge their posses-
sions, and extend their connecions, they
imagine that they are itrengthcning them-
selves against all the possible vicissitudes of
life. They fay in their hearts, .My mloun-
tainJlandsJflronfg, and IJfhall never be mov-
ed. But so fatal is their delusion, that, in-
flead of strengthening, they are weaken-
ing that which only can support them
when those vicissitudes come. It is their
mind which must then support them;
and their mind, by their sensual attach-
ments, is corrupted and enfeebled. Ad-
dided with intemperate fondness to the
pleasures of the world, they incur two
great and certain evils; they both ex-
clude themselves from every resource ex-
cept the world, and they increase their
sensibility to every blow which comes upon
them from that quarter.

They

SERM. They have neither principles nor tem-

"__j per which can stand the assault of trouble.

They have no principles which lead them
to look beyond the ordinary rotation of
events; and therefore, when misfortunes
involve them, the profpeqt must be com-
fortlefs on every fide. Their crimes have
disqualified them for looking up to the
assistance of any higher power than their
own ability, or for relying on any better
guide than their own wisdom. And as
from principle they can derive no sup-
port, so in a temper corrupted by pro-
fperity they find no relief. They have
loft that moderation of mind which en-
ables a wife man to accommodate himself
to his situation. Long fed with false
hopes, they are exasperated and flung by
every disappointment. Luxurious and
effeminate, they can bear no uneasiness.
Proud and presumptuous, they can brook
no opposition. By nourishing dispositions
which so little suit this uncertain state,
they, have infused a double portion of bit-
'ternefs into the cup of woe; they have

4 sharpened

sharpened the edge of that sword which is s E R M.
lifted up to smite them. Strangers to all a
the temperate satisfactions of a good and
a pure mind; firangers to every pleaffire
exccpt what was seasoned by vice or vanity,
their adversity is to the last degree difon-
solate. Health and opulence were the two
pillars on which they refted. Shake either
of them; and their whole edifice of hope
and comfort falls. Prostrate and forlorn,
they are left on the ground; obliged to
join with the man of Ephraim in his ab-
jed lamentation, They have taken away
my gods, which I have made, and what
have I more * ?-Such are the causes to
which we muff ascribe the broken spirits,
the peevish temper, and impatient passions,
that To often attend the declining age, or
falling fortunes of vicious men.

But how different is the condition of a

truly good man in those trying situations
of life ! Religion had gradually prepared
his mind for all the events of this incon-
slant state. It had inftruted him in the

* Judges xviii. z4.

nature

SE RM. nature of true happiness. It had early

-- weaned him from the undue love of the

world, by discovering to him its vanity,
and by setting higher prospeCts in his
view. AffliCtions do not attack him by
surprise, and therefore do not overwhelm
him. He was equipped for the storm, as
well as the calm, in this dubious naviga-
tion of life. Under those conditions he
knew himself to be brought hither, that
he was not to retain always the enjoy-
ment of what he loved: And therefore he
is not overcome by disappointment, when
that. which is mortal, dies; when that
which is mutable, begins to change; and
when that which he knew to be transient,
passes away.

All the principles which religion teaches,

and all the habits which it forms, are fa-
vourable to strength of mind. It will be
found, that whatever purifies, fortifies
also the heart. In the course of living
righteously, Soberly, and godly, a good man
acquires a lteady and well-governed fpi-
rit. Trained, by Divine grace, to enjoy

with

with moderation the advantages of the SE IR M
world, neither lifted up by success, nor
enervated with sensuality, he meets the
changes in his lot without unmanly de-
jedion. He is inured to temperance and
refiraint. He has learned firmness and
felf-command. He is accuflomed to
look up to that Supreme Providence,
which disposes of human affairs, not
with reverence only, but with trust and
hope.

The time of prosperity was to him not

merely a season of barren joy, but pro'
duOtive of much useful improvement,.
He had cultivated his mind. He had
flored it with useful knowledge, with
good principles, and virtuous difpofi-
tions. These resources remain entire,
when the days of trouble come. They
remain with him in sickness, as in
health; in poverty, as in the midst of
riches; in his dark and solitary hours,
no less than when surrounded with
friends and gay society. From the glare
of prosperity, he can, without dejection,

D withdraw

S E R M. withdraw into the shade. Excluded from

several advantages of the world, he may
be obliged to retreat into a narrower
circle; but within that circle he will find
many comforts left. His chief pleasures
were always of the calm, innocent, and
temperate kind; and over these, the
changes of the world have the least power.
His mind is a kingdom to him; and he
can still enjoy it. The world did not
bestow upon him all his enjoyments; and
therefore it is not in the power of the
world, by its most cruel attacks, to carry
them all away.

II. THE distresses of life are alleviated

to good men, by refletions on their past
conduct; while, by such reflections, they
are highly aggravated to the bad. During
the gay and adive periods of life, finners
elude, in some measure, the force of con-
science. Carried round in the whirl of
affairs and pleasures; intent on contriv-
ance, oi eager in pursuit; amused by hope,
or elated by enjoyment; they are sheltered

by
3

by that crowd of trifles which surrounds S R M.

iI.

them, from serious thought. But con- --
science is too great a power to remain
always suppressed. There is in every
man's life, a period when he {hall be
made to stand forth as a real object to
his own view: And when that period
comes, Wo to him who is galled by the
fight! In the dark and solitary hour of
distress, with a mind hurt and fore from
some recent wound of fortune, how shall
he bear to have his charader for the first
time disclosed to him, in that humiliating
light under which guilt will necefearily
present it ? Then, the recolledion of the
pafl becomes dreadful. It exhibits to him
a life thrown away on vanities and follies,
or consumed in flagitiousness and fin; no
station properly supported; no material
duties fulfilled. Crimes which once had
been easily palliated, rife before him in
their native deformity. The sense of guilt
mixes itself with all' that has befallen him.
aie beholds, or thinks that he beholds,
the hand of the God whom he hath of-

D 2 fended,

S E R M. fended, openly itretched out againlt hind'
i-I-. -At a season when a man stands most in

need of support, how intolerable is the
weight of this additional load, aggravat-
ing the deprelfion of disease, disappoint-
ment, or old age! How miserable his
state, who is condemned to endure at once
the pangs of guilt, and the vexations of
calamity ! The spirit of a man may fitfain
his infirmities; but a wounded spirit, who
can bear ?

Whereas, he who is blessed with a clear

conscience, enjoys, in the worst conjunc-
tures of human life, a peace, a dignity,
an elevation of mind peculiar to virtue.
The testimony of a good conscience is
indeed to be always diltinguifhed from
that presumptuous boast of innocence,
which every good Christian totally dif-
claims. The better he is, be will be the
more humble, and sensible of his failings.
But though he acknowledge that he can
claim 'nothing from God upon the foot-
ing of desert, yet be can trust in his mer-
ciful acceptance through Jesus Christ, ac-

I cording

.cording to the terms of the gospel. He S E R
can hope that his prayers and his alms -y-i
have come up in memorial bejore God. The
piety and virtue of his former life were
as feeds sown in his prosperous state, of
which he reaps the fruits in the season of
adversity. The riches, the pleasures, and
the friends of the world, may have made
wings to themselves, and lJowi away. But
the improvement which he made of those
advantages while they lasted, the tempe-
rate spirit with which he enjoyed them,
the beneficent actions which he perform-
ed, and the good example which he set to
others remain behind. By the memory
of these, he enjoys his prosperity a fe-
cond time in reflection; and perhaps this
second and refleced enjoyment is not in-
feriour to the first. It arrives at a more
critical and needfil time. It affords him
the high fatisfation of having extracted
lasting pleasure from that which is flhort;
and of having fixed that which by its
nature was changing.-"' If my race be
" now about to end, I have this com-

D 3 "fort

S EIR M. , fort, that it has not been run in vain.

Ihavefought the good fght; 1 have kept
the faith. My mind has no load. Fu-

" turity has no terrours. I have endea-
" voured to do my duty, and to make
" my peace with God. I leave the reft
" to Heaven." These are the refletions
which to the upright make light ariJe in
darkness ; refletions which cheer the
lonely house of virtuous poverty, and at-
tend the conscientious sufferer into prison
or exile; which sooth the complaints of
grief, lighten the pressure of old age, and
furnifl to the bed of sickness, a cordial
of more grateful relish, and more fove-
reign virtue, than any which the world
can afford.

Look abroad into life, and you will

find the general sense of mankind bearing
witness to this important truth, that mind
is fuperiour to fortune; that what one
feels within, is of much greater importance
than all that befals him without. Let a
man be brought into tome such severe
and trying situation, as fixes the attention

of
I.

of the public on his behaviour. The first s E R M·
quefiion which we put concerning him, -
is not, What does he furcrr? but, How
does he bear it ? Has he a quiet mind ?
or, Does he appear to be unhappy within ?
If we judge him to be composed and
firm, resigned to Providence, and sup-
ported by conscious integrity, his charac-
ter rifes, and his misery lessens in our
view. We esteem and admire, rather than
pity him. Recolled what holy men have
endured for the fake of conscience, and
with what cheerfulness they have suffered.
On the other hand, when conscience has
concurred with outward misfortunes in di-
fireffing the guilty, think of the dreadful
consequences which have ensued. How
often, upon a reverse of fortune, after
abused prosperity, have they madly hur-
ried themselves over that precipice fiom
which there is no return; and, in what
nature moi abhors, the voluntary extinc-
tion of life, have fought relief from that
torment of reflection, which was become
top great for them to bear ?

D 4 Never

S E R M. Never then allow yourselves to imagine,

II.

' that misfortunes alone form the chief

misery of man. None but the guilty are
completely miserable. The misgiving and
difiruft, the accusations and reproaches of
their minds, the sense of having drawn
down upon their heads the evils which
they iuffer, and the terrifying expectation
of more and worse evils to come; these
are the essential ingredients of human
misery. They not' only whet the edge,
but they envenom the darts of affliclion,
and add poison to the wound. Whereas,
when misfortunes aflail a good man, they
carry no such fatal auxiliaries in their
train. They may ruffle the surface of
his foul; but there is a strength within,
which refifis their farther imprefion. The
conflitution of his mind is found. The
world can inflict upon it no wounds, but
what admit of cure.

III. ILL men, in the time of trouble,

can look up to no protecor; while good
men commit themfeives, with trust and

hope,

hope, to the care of Heaven. The hu- SER M.
man mind, naturally feeble, is made to ~.--~
feel all its weakness by the prcflfre of
adversity. Dejeced with evils vhich
overpower its flrength, it relies no longer
on itself. It casts every where around, a
wishing, exploring eye, for some flelter to
screen, some power to uphold it; and if,
when abandoned by the world, it can
find nothing to which it may fly in the
room of the world, its state is truly for-
lorn. Now, whither should the ungodly,
in this situation, turn for aid ? After hav-
ing contended with the storms of advcrfe
fortune till their spirits are exhaufled,
gladly would they retreat at last to the
fanduary of religion. But that thanauary
is shut againfl them; nay, it is environed
with terrours. They behold there, not a
Protecor to whom they can fly, but a
Judge whom they dread; and in thole
moments when they need his friendship
the mot, they are reduced to deprecate
his wrath. If he once called bwhen thec
1efitfed, and firetched out his hands w he n

they

SE R M. they would not regard, how much reason

11.
t- _ have they to fear that he will leave them

now to eat the fruit of their own ways,
and to be filled with their own devices;
that he will laugh at their calamity, and
mock when their fear cometh ?

But of all the thoughts which can enter

into the mind, in the season of distress,
the belief of an interest in his favour
who rules the world is the mot soothing.
Every form of religion has afforded to
virtuous men some degree of this confo-
lation. But it was reserved for the Chri-
ftian revelation, to carry it to its highest
point. For it is the dirca scope of that
revelation, to accommodate itself to the
circumstances of man, under two main
views; as guilty in the fight of God,
and as struggling with the evils of the
world. Under the former, it discovers
to him a Mediator and an atonement;
under the latter, it promises him the
Spirit of grace and consolation. It is a
system of complete relief, extending from
por fpititual to our temporal distresses.

The

The fame hand which holds out forgive- S E R M.
ness to the penitent, and affifance to the -
frail, dispenses comfort and hope to the
afflited.

It deserves your particular notice, in

this view, that there is no charaCter
which God more frequently assumes to
himself in the sacred writings, than that
of the Patron of the distressed. 'Compaf-
sion is that attribute of his nature which
he has chosen to place in the greatest va-
riety of lights, on purpose that he might
accommodate his majesty to our weak-
ness, and provide a cordial for human
griefs. He is the hearer of all prayers;
but with particular attention he is repre-
sented as listening to the cry of the poor,
and regarding the prayer of the defiitute.
All his creatures he governs with justice
and wisdom; but he takes to himself, in
a special manner, the charge of executing
judgment for the opprej/ed, of protec7ing the
firanger, of delivering himi who hath no
helper from the hand of thefpoiler. For the
oppre/ion of the pour, and for the fighi1 of

the

SE R M. the needy, 'will I ajrif, s/ith the Lord, to

II.
-v.J fJit him in fjfety from him that plffeth at

him. He is the Fa ther of theJthcerlefs, and
the Judge of the wcidow, in hl holy habi-
tation. He raifeth up them that are bowed
down. lie dwclleth with the contrite. He
healeth the broken in heart. For he know-
eth our frame; he remeembeetth that we
are dufJ *.-If the wisdom of his provi-
dence saw it necessary to place so many
of his creatures in an afflicted state, that
slate, however, he commiserates. He
disdains not to point out himself as the
refuge of the virtuous and pious; and to
invite them, amidst all their troubles, to
pour out their hearts before him. Those
circumstances which estrange others from
them, interest him the more in their. situ-
ation. The neglect or scorn of the world
exposes them not to any contempt in his
fight. No obscurity conceals them from
his notice; and though they should be
forgotten by every friend on earth, they

* Pfal. ix. 8.-cii. 17.-cxlvi. 7,--xviii. 5.-cxlvii. 3.
-ciii. 14,-y.

are

are remembered by the God of heaven. s Fr.Al
That sigh, heaved from the affliaed bo- ,_
fom, which is heard by no human ear, is
listened to by him; and that tear is re-
marked, which falls unnoticed or dcfpifcd
by the world.

Such views of the Supreme Being im-

part the most sensible consolation to evcry
pious heart. They present his admini-
firation under an aspect so nild and be-
nign, as in a great measure to difperf:
the gloom which hangs over human life.
A good man aes with a vigour, and sus-
sers with a patience more than human,
when he believes himself countenanced
by the Almighty. Injured or oppressed
by the world, he looks up to a Judge
who will vindicate his cause; he appeals
to a Witness who knows his integrity;
he commits himself to a Friend who will
never forsake him. When tired with the
vexations of life, devotion opens to him
its quiet retreat, where the tumults of the
world are hushed, and its cares are loft in
happy oblivion; where the 'wicked cease

. ·fio il

SE R M. from troubling, and the weary are at rft.
L e-v- There his mind regains its serenity; the a

agitation of passion is calmed; and a i
softening balm is infused into the wounds a
of the spirit. Disclosing to an invisible .X
Friend those secret griefs which he has !
no encouragement to make known to the t
world, his heart is lightened.. He does ;
not feel himself solitary or forsaken. He f
believes God to be present with him, and i
the Holy Ghost to be the inspirer of his l
consolations. From that secret place of l
the divine tabernacle, into which the Text
represents him as admitted, he hears this
voice issue, Call upon me in the day of
trouble, and I will answer thee. Fear not; j
for I am with thee. Be not dfimayed; for I
I am thy God. And as he hears a voice
which speaks to none but the pure in
heart, so he beholds a hand which finners
cannot fee. He beholds the hand of
Providence conducting all the hidden
springs and movements of the universe;
and with a secret, but unerring operation,
direcing every event towards the happi-

ness

ness of the righteous. Those afflicions SER M.
which appear to others the messengers of
the wrath of Heaven, appear to him the
ministers of fandification and wisdom.
Where they discern nothing but the hor-
rours of the tempest which surrounds
them, his more enlightened eye beholds
the Angel who rides in the whirlwind,
and direcs the storm. Hence a peace
keeping the mind and heart, which is no
where to be found but under the pavilion
of the Almighty.

IV. GOOD men are comforted under

their troubles by the hope of Heaven;
while bad men are not only deprived of
this hope, but distressed with fears arising
from a future state. The foul of man
can never divest itself wholly of anxiety
about its fate hereafter. There are hours
when even to the prosperous, in the midst
of their pleasures, eternity is an awful
thought. But much more when those
pleasures, one after another, begin to
ithdraw; when life alters its form, and

becomes

s ER M. becomes dark and cheerless; when its '
--. changes warn the most inconsiderate, that ?'

what is so mutable will soon pass entirely H
away; then with pungent earnestness
comes home that question to the heart,
Into what world are we next to go ?--
How miserable the man, who, under the
diftraaions of calamity, hangs doubtful
about an event which so nearly concerns
him; who, in the midst of doubts and
anxieties, approaching to that awful
boundary which separates this world from
the next, shudders at the dark profpea
before him; wishing to exist after death,
and yet afraid of that existence; catching
at every feeble hope which superstition
can afford him, and trembling, in the
fame moment, from reflection upon his
crimes !

But blessed be God who hath brought

life and immortality to light; who hath not
only brought them to light, but secured
themn to good men; and by the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, hath begotten
them unto the lively hope of an inheritance

incorruptible,

;rcilruptible, i

undf and that fadcth not SE r i.

away. Jufily is this hope flyled in scrip- --
ture, the anchor of the Jftl, both fire and
fledJaft. For what an anchor is to a flip
in a dark night, on an unknown coafti
and amidif a boifierous ocean, that is
this hope to the foul when diftraated by
the confusions of the world. In danger,
it gives security; amidst general fluCtua-
tion, it affords one fixed point of ref. It
is indeed the most eminent of all (he
advantages which religion now confers.
For, confider the mighty power of hope
over the human mind. It is the univer-
fal comforter; It is the spring of all hu-
niap activity. Upon futurity, men are
conflantly suspended. Animated by the
profpea of some diflant good, they toil
and susser through the whole course of
life; and, it is not so much what they are
at present; as what they hope to be in
some after time, that enlivens their mo-
tions; fixes attention, and fiimulates iri-
dullry. Now, if in the common affairs
bs life such is the energy of hope, even

E vwhen

tE RM. when its objet is neither very confider*
"y' able, nor very certain; what effects may

it not be expeced to produce, when it
refis upon an object so splendid as a life
of immortal felicity ? Were this hope en-
tertained with that full persuasion which
Christian faith demands, it would, in
truth, not merely alleviate, but totally
annihilate, all human miseries. It would
banish discontent, extinguish grief, and
suspend the very feeling of pain.

But allowing for the mixture of hu-

man frailty;' admitting those abatements
which our imperfetion makes upon the
teffect of every religious principle, still
you will find, that in proportion to the
degree in which the hope of Heaven
operates upon good men, they will be
tranquil under sufferings; nay, they will
be happy, in comparison of those who
enjoy no such relief. What indeed, in
the course of human affairs, is sufficient
to difrefs, far less to overwhelm, the
mind of that man who can look down
on all human things from an elevation so

3 -muh

much above them I He is only a paffqnger S E R M.
through this world. He is travelling to a '-.--
happier country. How disagreeable soever
the occurrences of his journey may be, yet,
at every stage of that journey, he receives
the assurance that he is drawing nearer
and nearer to the period of reft and fe-
licity.-Endure, and thou shalt overcome.
Persevere, and thou shalt be successful.
The time of trial haflens to a close. Thy
mansion is prepared abovei thy reft re-
maineth among the people of God. The
disorders which vice has introduced into
the works of God, are about to terminate:;
and all tears are soon to be wiped away
from' the eyes of the jult.-The firm as-
furaice of this happy conclusion to the
vexations and the vanities of life, works a
greater effec on the sincere illiterate Chri-
ftian, than all the refinements of philofo-
phy can work on the most learned Infidel.
These may gratify the mind that is at-
ease; may sooth the heart when slightly'
discomposed; but when it is fore and
deeply torn, wheri bereaved of its best

E2 and

S ERM. and most beloved comforts, the only con-
'-,-- rfolations that can then find access, arise

from the hope of a better world; where
those comforts ihall be' again reflored;
and all the virtuous shall be assembled,
in. the pretence of him who made them.
Suchi.hopes banish that despair which over-
whelms, and leave only that tender me-
lancholy which softens the heart, and often
renders the whole character more gentle
and amiable.

OF this nature are the resources which

religion provides for good men. . By its
previous discipline, it trains them to for-
titude; by the reflecions of a good con-
science it sooths, by the sense of Divine
favour it supports them; and when every
comfort fails them on earth, it cheers
them with the hope of Heaven. Diflin-
guifhing his servants with such advantages,
God is justly said to erea his pavilion over
ther in the evil time. He not onlyfpreads
a tent for them in the wilderness, but. he
transforms in some measure the state of

nature
6

nature around them. To use the beautiful s F R M.
language of ancient prophecy; tI the dc- -
fart, the thi'fly land, where no cwater is,
he openeth Jirings. I/lead of the thorn,
he maketh the fir-tree to come up ; inltcad
of the briar, the myrtle to spring. In mtidj
of the habitation of dragons, he maketh
green p(Alurcs rife, and sJill waters Jlow
around his people.

THE improvement to be made of these

truths, is as obvious as it is important.
Let us study so to conduc our lives, that
we may be qualified for deriving such con-
folations from religion. To their reality,
and their importance, all mankind hear
witness. For no sooner are they overtaken
by distress, than to religion they fly.
This, throughout every age, has been the

lniverfal shelter which the young and the
old, the high and the low, the giddy and
the serious, have fought to gain, as soon
as they found that reft could be no where
else procured for the weary head, or the
aching heart. But amidst those multitudes

E 3 that

SERM. that crowd to religion for relief, how few
~._L are entitled to approach that sacred source

of comfort ? On what feeble props do
their hopes and pretensions reft ? How
much superstition mingles with that reli-
gion to which men are driven by distress
and fear ?-You muff first apply to it as
the guide of life, before you can have re-,
course to it as the refuge of sorrow. You
must submit to its legislative authority,
and experience its renewing influence, be-
fore you can look for its consolatory effect.
You must secure the testimony of a good
conscience, and peace with God through
Jefis Christ; otherwise, when the flood$
hall come, and the rains descend, and the
winds blow, the house which you had pro-
posed for your retreat, thall prove the house
foendcd o. the sand, not on the rock.

There are two plans, and there are but

two, on which any man can propose to
conduct himself through the dangers and
difrefies of human life, The one is the
plan of worldly wifdoxm; the other, that
of determined adherence to conscience.

He

He who acts upon the former, lays prin- S E M.
ciple aside, and trusts his defence to hie -v
art and ability. He avails himself of
every advantage which his knowledge of
the world fuggefis. He attends to nothing
but what he confiders as his interest;
and, unconfined by conscience, pursues it
by every course which promises him fuc-
cess. This plan, though too often adopt-
ed, will be found, on trial, ineffecual and
deceitful. For human ability is an un-
equal match for the violent and unfore-
seen vicissitudes of the world. When
these torrents rife in their might, they.
sweep away in a moment the banks which
worldly wisdom had reared for defence,
and overwhelm alike the crafty and the
artless. In the mean time, parsons of this
character condemn themselves to live a
most unquiet life. They pass their days
in perpetual anxiety, listening to every
motion; flartled by every alarm; chang-
ing their measures on every new occur-
rence; and when distress breaks in over
all their defences, they are left under it,
hopeless and disconsolate.

E 4 The

S E R The plan which, in opposition to this,
A_*v-- religion recommends, as both more ho-

nourable in itself, and more effectual for i
security, is, at all hazards, to do your
duty, and to leave the consequences to
God. Let him who would ad upon this
plan, adopt for the rule of his conduQ,
that maxim of the Psalmist's, Truif in the
Lord, and do good*. To firm integrity,
let him join a humble reliance on God.
Let his adherence to duty encourage his
religious trust. Let his religious trust
inspire him with fortitude in 'the perfor-
mance of his duty. Let him know no
path but the itraight and direct one. In
the' moltcritical moments of action, let
him ask no further queltions, than What
is the right, the fit, the worthy part!
How as 'a man, and as a Christian, it be-
comes him to aac ? Having received the
decision of conscience, let him commit his
way unto the Lord. Let him, without
trepidation or wavering, proceed in dif-
Charging his duty; resolved, that though

t* ral. xxxvi, a.

thq
,* .v

the world may make him unfortunate, it s E R M.
shall never make him base; and confiding,
that in what God and his conscience re-
quire him to aft or susser, God and a good
conscience will support him.- Such prin-
ciples as these, are the belt preparation for
the vicissitudes of the human lot. They
are the Ihield of inward peace. He who
thinks and ats thus, shall be exposed to
no wounds but what religion can cure.
He may feel the blows of adversity; but
he shall not know the wounds of the
heart.

SE R-

# SERMON III. On the Influence of RELIGION upon PROSPERITY. PSALM i. 3. He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not ...

[ s8 ],

S E R M O N III.
On the Influence of RELIGCION upon

PROSPERITY.

PSALM i. 3.
Afe Jhall be like a tree planted by the rivers

of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in
his season ; his leaf also Jhall not wither,
and whatsoever he doth Jhallprofper.

SERM. ^TH E happy influence of religion
G_ P_ 1 upon human life, in the time of

adversity, has been confidered in the pre-
ceding discourse. Concerning this the fen-
timents of men are more generally agreed,
than with refped to some other preroga-
tives which religion claims. They very
readily.affign to it the office of a Comfor-
ter. But as long as their state is profpe-
Xou%8 they are apt to account it an unnecef-

fary

fary guest, perhaps an unwelcome intruder. S ES M.
Let us not be thus unjust to religion, nor c---j
confine its importance to one period only
in the life of man. It was never intended
to be merely the nurse of sickness, and the
gaff of old age. I purpose now to flow
you, That it is no less essential to the en-
joyment of prosperity, than to the comfort
of adversity: That prosperity is prosperous,
if we may be allowed the expression, to a
good man only; and that to every other
person, it will prove, notwithstanding its
fair appearance, a barren and joyless state.

The Psalmist, in the Text, by an image

taken from one of the noft beautiful ob-
jeas in nature, describes a man who flou-
rifhes in full prosperity. But to whom is
the description limited? To him, as the
preceding verses inform us, that walketh
not in the counsel of the ungodly, norfland-
eth in the way of finners, norJitteth in the
feat of the fcornfil, but bath his delight in
the law of God. He only is like the tree
planted by the rivers of water; whilst the
ungodly, as he adds, are not so; but how

profperois

'SE RM. prosperous soever they may appear to the

'*11.
t-.y* world, are in truth but like the chaf which

the wuind driveth away In confirmation
of this doctrine, I shall lay before you,
some of those circumfiances which diftin-
guifh the prosperity of the good man be-
yond that of the finner; and ihall conclude,
with pointing out the dangers and miseries,
into which the latter is apt to be betrayed,
by his favourable situation in the world.

I. PIETY, and gratitude to God, con-

tribute in a high degree to enliven pro-
fperity. Gratitude is a pleating emotion.
The sense of being distinguished by the
kindness of another, gladdens the heart,
warms it with reciprocal affection, and
gives to any possession which is agreeable
in itself, a double relish, from its being
the gift of a friend. Favours conferred
by men, I acknowledge, may prove bur-
denfome. For human virtue is never per-
feac; and Sometimes unreasonable expeca-
tions on the one fide, Sometimes a morti-
fying sense of dependence on the other,

corrode

corrode in secret the pleasure of benefits, SER M.
and convert the obligations of friendship -v
into grounds of jealousy. But nothing of
this kind can assea the intercourse of gra-
titudewith Heaven. Its favours are wholly
disinterested; and with a gratitude the
moR cordial and unfufpicious, a good man
looks up to that Almighty Benefactor, who
aims at no end but the happiness of those
whom he blesses, and who desires no re-
turn from them but a devout and thankful
heart. While others can trace their pro-
fperity to no higher source than a concur-
rence of worldly causes, and, often, of
mean or trifling incidents, which occafi-
onally favoured their designs; with what
fuperiour fatisfadion does the servant of
God remark the hand of that gracious
Power, which hath raised him up; which
hath happily conducted him through the
various steps of life, and crowned him
with the most favourable diltintion beyond
his equals ?

Let us farther confider, that not only
gratitude for the part, but a cheering sense

of

SE R M. of God's favour at the present, enters into
A,_^ the pious emotion. They are only the

virtuous, who in their prosperous days
hear this voice addrefled to them, Go thy
way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy
u'vine with a merry heart ; for God now
accepteth thy works.*. He who is the
Author of their prosperity, gives them a
title to enjoy, with complacency, his own
gift. While bad men snatch. the pleafureas
of the world as by flealth, without counte-
nance from God the; proprietor of the'
world'; the righteous fit openly down to
the feast of life, under the smile of ap.
proving Heaven. No guilty fears damp
their joys. The blessing of God refts upon
all that they possess; his protection fur-
rounds them; and hence, in the' habita,
tions of the righteous, is found the voice' of
rejoicing andfalvation. A lustre unknown
to others; invests, in tleir fight, the whole
face of nature. Their piety reflects a fun-
Ihine from heaven upon the prosperity of
the world; unites in one point of view,

Eccles. ix. 7.

the

the smiling asped, both of the powers SERM.
above, and of the objecs below. Not
only have they as full a relith as others, of
the innocent pleasures of life, but, more-
over, in there they hold communion with
God. In all that is good or fair, they trace
his hand. From the beauties of nature,
from the improvements of art, from the
enjoyments of social life, they raise their
affection to the source of all the happiness
which surrounds them; and thus widen
the sphere of their pleasures, by adding in-
telledual, and spiritual, to earthly joys.

For illustration of what I have said on

this head, remark that cheerful enjoyment
of a prosperous slate which King David
had, when he wrote the twenty-third
Psalm; and compare the highest pleasures
of the riotous finner, with the happy and
satisfied spirit which breathes throughout
that Pfalm.-7In the midst of the splendour
of royalty, with what amiable simplicity
of gratitude does he look up to the Lord as
his Shepherd; happier in ascribing all his
Zuccefs to divine favour, than to the policy

,of

SE R M. of his counsels, or to the force of his
--.-.. arms! How many infiances of divine

goodness arose before him in pleating re-
membrance, when with such relish he
speaks of the green pajqures and flill waters
betide which God had led him; of his cup
·which. he hath made to overflow; and of
the table which he hath prepared for him
in presence of his enemies ! With what per-
sect tranquillity does he look forward to
the time of his passing through the valley
of the J7jadow of death; unappalled by
that Speare, whose most diflant appear-
ance blasts the prosperity of finners ! He
fears no evil, .as long as 'the rod andi the
fiJff of his Divine Shepherd are with him
and, through all the unknown periods of
this and of a future existence, commits
himself to his guidance with fecuie and
triumphant hope. Surely goodness ani
mercy Jhall follow me all the days of my
life; and I will dwell in the hozfe of the
Lord so; ever.-What a purified, senti-
mental enjoyment of prosperity is here
exhibited! How different from. that gross

reliCs

relish of worldly pleasures, which belongs ER M.
to those who behold only the terrestrial ,--
fide of things; who raise their views to
no higher objects than the succession of
human contingencies, and the weak efforts
of human ability; who have no protector
or patron in the heavens, to enliven their
prosperity, or to warm their hearts with
gratitude and trust!

II. RELIGION affords to good men pe-

culiar security in the enjoyment of their
prosperity. One of the firRf reflections
which mull firike every thinking man, as-
ter his situation in the world has become
agreeable, is, That the continuance of such
a situation is most uncertain. From a va-
riety of causes, he lies open to change.
On many fides he fees that he may be
pierced; and the wider his comforts ex-
tend, the broader is the mark which he
spreads to the arrows of misfortune. Hence
many a secret alarm to the reflecting mind;
and to those who reject all such alarms,
the real danger increases, in proportion to
their improvident security.

F By

S E R M. By worldly assistance it is vain to think

of providing any effectual defence, feeing
the world's mutability is the very cause of
our terrour. It is from a higher principle,
from a power fuperiour to the world, that
relief must be fought, amidst such difquie-
tudes of the heart. He who in his pro-
fperity can look up to One who is witness
to his moderation, humanity, and charity;
he who can appeal to Heaven, that he has
not been elated by pride, nor overcome
by pleasure, but has studied to employ its
gifts to the honour of the giver; this
man, if there be any truth in religion, if
there be any benignity or goodness in the
administration of the universe, has just
cause for encouragement and hope. Not
that an interest in the Divine grace will
perpetuate to a good man, more than to
others, a life of unruffled prosperity.
Change and alteration form the very es-
fence of the world. But let the world
change around him at pleasure, he has
ground to hope that it shall not be able to
make him unhappy. Whatever may vary,

God's

God's providence is till the fame; and E R M.
his love to the righteous remains unaltered, ---.-j
If it shall be the Divine will to remove
one comfort, he trusts that some other
shall be given. Whatever is given, what-
ever is taken away, he confides, that in
the last result allJf1all workfor his good.

Hence he is not disturbed, like bad

men, by the infiability of the world.
Dangers, which overcome others, ihake
not his more steady mind. He enjoys the
pleasures of life pure and unallayed, be-
cause he enjoys them, as long as they last,
without anxious terrours. They are not
his all, his only good. He welcomes
them when they arrive; and when they
pass away, he can eye them, as they de-
part, without agony or dcfpair. His pro-
fperity firikes a deeper and firmer root
than that of the ungodly. And for this
reason he is compared, in the Text, to a
tree planted by the rivers of water; a tree,
whose branches the tempest may indeed
bend, but whose roots it cannot touch;
a tree, which may occasionally be stripped

F2 of

SE R M. of its leaves and blossoms, but which still
L--e-J - maintains its place, and in due season flou-

rifes a-new. Whereas the finner in his
prosperity, according to the allusion in the
book of Job, resembles the rn/h that grow-
eth'up in the mire *; a slender reed, that
may flouriih green for a while by the fide
of the brook, as long as it is cherished by
the fun, and fanned by the breeze; till the
first bitter blast breaks its feeble item,
roots it out from its bed, and lays it im
the dust. Lo! such is the prosperity of
them that forget God; and thus their hope
Jhallperlh.

III.: RELIGION forms good men to the

most proper temper for the enjoyment of
prosperity. A little refletion may satisfy
us, that mere poffefllion, even granting it
to be secure, does not constitute enjoyment.
Give a man all that is in the power of the
world to bestow; surround him with riches;
crown. him with honours; invest him, if
you will, with absolute dominion; but

* Job viii. i.

leave

leave him at the fame time under some fe- s F R M.
cret oppression or heaviness of heart; you - -
bellow indeed the materials of enjoyment,
but you deprive him of ability to extract
it. You set a feast before him, but he
wants the power of tailing it. Hence pro-
fperity is so often an equivocal word, de-
noting merely affluence of possession, but
unjustly applied to the miserable possessor.

We all know the effeas which any

indisposition of the body, even though
flight, produces on external prosperity.
Visit the gayest and most fortunate man.
on earth, only with sleepless nights; dif-
order any single organ of his senses; cor-
rode but one of his finalleft nerves; and
you shall presently fee all his gaiety va-
nifh; and you Ihall hear him complain, that
he is a miserable creature, and express his
envy of the psafant and the cottager,-
And can you believe, that a disease in the
foul is less fatal to enjoyment, than a dif-
ease in the animal frame; or that a found
mind is not as essential as a found body,
to the prosperity of man ?-Let us rate

F 3 sensual

s E R M. sensual gratifications as high as we please,

- . we shall be made to feel that the feat of en-

joyment is in the foul. The corrupted temr- , -
per, and the guilty passions of the bad, fruf- I,
trate the effea of every advantage which
the world confers on them. The world may !
call them men of pleasure; but of all men
they are the greatest foes to pleasure. From
their eagerness to grasp, they firangle and
destroy it. None but the temperate, the
regular, and the virtuous, know how to
enjoy prosperity. They bring to its com-
forts the manly relish of a found uncorrupt-
ed mind. They flop at the proper point,
before enjoyment degenerates into disgust,
and pleasure is converted into pain. They
are firangers to those complaints which flow
from spleen, caprice, and all the fantastical
difIreffes of a vitiated mind. While rio-
tous indulgence enervates both the body
and the mind, purity and virtue heighten
all the powers of human fruition. Mode-
rate and simple pleasures relish high with
the temperate; in the midst of hisftudied
refinements, the voluptuary languishes.

Wherever

Wherever guilt mingles with prosperity, s E R M.

a certain gloom and heaviness enter along
with it. Vitious intrigues never fail to
entangle and embarrass those who engage in
them. But innocence confers cafe and
freedom on the mind; leaves it open to
every pleasing sensation; gives a lightness
to the spirits, similar to the native gaiety
of youth and health; ill imitated, and ill
supplied, by that forced levity of the viti-
ous, which arises not from the health, but
from the drunkenness of the mind.

Feeble are all pleasures in which the

heart has no part. The selfish gratifica-
tions of the bad, are both narrow in their
circle, and short in their duration. But
prosperity is redoubled to a good man, by
his generous use of it. It is refleced back
upon him from every one whom he makes
happy. In the intercourse of domeflick
affetion, in the attachment of friends,
the gratitude of dependents, the esteem
and good will of all who know him, he
fees blessings multiplied round him on
every fide. When the ear heard me, then

F 4 i

S I R M. it blefed me; and when the eye saw me, i
A_- - ggave witness to me: Becatfe I delivered the

poor that cried, the fatherless, and him that
had none to help him. The blefing of hit
that was ready to perljJh came upon me, and
Icacfed the widow's heart tofing with joy.
I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to
the lame: I was a father to the poor; and
the cause which I knew not, Ifearched out *.
-Thus, while the righteousflourijheth like
a tree planted by the rivers of water, he
bringeth forth also his fruit in hisfeaJfon:
And that fruit, to pursue the allusion of
the Text, he brings forth not for himself
alone. He flourishes, not like a tree in
some solitary defart, which scatters its blof-
foms to the wind, and communicates nei-
ther fruit nor shade to any living thing:
But like a tree in the midit of an inhabited
country, which to some affords friendly
ihelter, to others, fruit; which is not only
admired by all for its beauty, but blessed
by the traveller for the shade, and by the
hungry for the fuflenance it hath given,

Job xxix. I i.-17.

IV,

IV. RELIGION heightens the profpe- SERM.

rity of good men, by the profpedt which -_-
it affords them of greater happiness to
come in another world. I fliowed, in the
foregoing discourse, the mighty effe& of
the hope of Heaven, in relieving the mind
under the troubles of life. And sure, if
this hope be able to support the falling, it
cannot but improve the flourifling state
of man; if it can dispel the thickest gloom
of adversity, it muff needs enliven profpe-
rity, by the additional lustre which it
throws upon it. What is present, is never
sufficient to give us full fatisfaaion. To
the present we muff always join some
agreeable anticipations of futurity, in or-
der to complete our pleasure. What an
accession then mufft the prosperity of the
righteous man receive, when, born with a
finooth and gentle gale along the current
of life, and looking round on. all the
blessings of his state, he can confider these
as no more than an introducion to higher
scenes which are hereafter to open; he
can view his present life, as only the

porch

SE R M. porch through which he is to pass into the

lit. ,v-..J palace of bliss; and his present joys, as

but a feeble stream, dispensed for his occa-
fional refreshment, until he arrive at that
river of life, which flows at God's right
hand --Such profpe&s purify the mind,
at the fame time that they gladden it.
They prevent the good man from setting
too high a value on his present possessions;
and thereby assist him in maintaining,
amidst the temptations of worldly plea-
sure, that command of himself which is
so essential to the wife and temperate en.
joyment of prosperity.

It is the fate of all human pleasures, by

continuance, to fade; of most of them,
to. cloy. Hence, in the most prosperous
fiate, there are frequent intervals of lan-.
guor, and even of dejection. There are
vacuities in the happiest life, which it is
not in the power of the world to fill up.
What relief so adapted to those vacant or
dejected periods, as the pleating hopes
which arise from immortality ? How bar-
ren and imperfect that prosperity, which

can

can have recourse to no such subsidiary s E R M
comfort, in order to animate the ftagna- .-a
tion of vulgar life, and to supply the infuf.
ficiency of worldly pleasures !

Worldly prosperity declines with de-

clining life. In youth its relish was
brisk and poignant. It becomes more
fober as life advances; and flattens as
life descends. He who lately overflowed
with cheerful spirits and high hopes, be-
gins to look back with heaviness on the
days of former years. He thinks of his
old companions who are gone; and re-
views past scenes, more agreeable than any
which are likely to return. The activity
of pursuit is weakened. The gaiety of
amusement is fled. The gratifications
of sense languish. When his accustomed
pleasures, one after another, thus steal
treacherously away, what can he, who is
an utter stranger to religion, and to the
hope of heaven, substitute in their place ?
-But even in that drooping period, the
promises and hopes of religion support
the spirits of a good man till the latest

hour,

S E R M. hour. His leaf, it is said in the Text,

. Jhall not wither. It shall not be in the

power of time to blast his prosperity:
But old age shall receive him into a quiet
retreat, where, if lively sensations fail,
gentle pleasures remain to tooth him.
That hope of immortality, which formerly
improved his other enjoyments, now in a
great measure supplies their absence. Its
importance rifes, in proportion as its ob-
jeet draws near. He is not forsaken by
the world, but retires from it with digni-
ty; reviewing with a calm mind the part
which he has aaed, and trusting to the
promise of God for an approaching re.
ward. Such sentiments and expecations
ihed a pleasing tranquillity over the old
age of the righteous man. They make
the evening of his days go down uncloud-
ed; and allow the stream of life, though
fallen low, to run clear to the last drop.

THUS I.have shown, I hope, with full

evidence, what material ingredients reli-
gion and a good conscience are in the pro,

fperity

fperity of life. Separated from them, s ER .
prosperity, how fair soever it may seem I
to the world, is insipid, nay frequently
noxious to the possessor: United with
them, it rifes into a real blessing beflowed
by God upon man. God giveth to a man
that isgood in hisfight, wi/do2m, and know-
ledge, and joy ; but to the finner he giveth
fore travel, to gather, and to heap up, that
he may give to him that is good before God '.

ALLOW me now to conclude the sub-

je&, with representing to the prosperous
men of the world, those crimes and mise-
ries into which the abuse of their condi-
tion is likely to betray them, and calling
upon them to beware of the dangers with
which they are threatened.

It is unfortunate for mankind, that

those situations which favour pleasure, are
too generally adverse to virtue. Virtue re-
quires internal government and discipline;
prosperity relaxes the mind, and inflames
the passions. Virtue is supported by a

* lcclef. ii. 26.

regard

sE R M4 regard to what is future; prosperity ate
^-.D taches us wholly to what is prefenti The

charaderifticks of virtue, are modefly and
humility; the mofl common attendants of
prosperity, are pride and prefuinption,
One should think, that prosperity would
prove the strongest incitement to remember
and to honour that God who bestows it.
Yet such is the perverseness of human na.
ture, that it proves much oftener the mo-
tive to impiety. The changes of the
world call the attention of men to an Invi-
fible Power. But a train of events pro-
ceeding according to their wish, leads
them to nothing beyond what they fee,
The Supreme Giver is concealed from view
by his own gifts. This instance of fuccefa
they ascribe to a fortunate concurrence of
worldly causes; that acquisition, to their
own skill and indufiry; unmindful of
him, who from the beginning arranged
that series of causes, and who placed them
in circumRfances where their industry could
operate with success. From forgetting
God, they too often proceed to despise him.

All

All that is light or giddy in their minds s E R M,
is set in motion by the gale of prosperity. --
Arrogance and felf-fufficiency are lifted
up; and their state is confidered, as fe-
cured by their own strength. Hence that
pride of countenance, through which the
wicked, in their prosperity, as David ob-
serves, refJfe tofeek after God. They are
described as speaking loftily, and setting
their mouth agaifl the Heavens. They
take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at.
the found of the organ; and they fay unto
God, Departfrorm us, for we dceire not the
knowledge of thy ways. What is the Al-
mighty that 'we Jhould serve him ? Or,
what profit Jhould we have, if wie pray
unto him ?

They fay unto God, Depart from us.-

What an impious voice! Could we have
believed it poflible, that worldly plea-
fures should so far intoxicate any human
heart? Wretched and infatuated men
Have you ever examined on what your
confidence refts ?-You have said in your
hearts, You Jhall never be rmoved; you

5 fancy

SE M. fancy yourselves placed on a mzountii i
s-re4. whichJlandethJbrong. Awake from those

flattering dreams, and behold how every j'
thing totters around you ! You stand on
the edge of a precipice; and the ground
is sliding away below your feet. In your
health, life, poffeflions, conneaions, plea-
fures, principles of deftrudion work. The
mine advances in secret, which saps the
foundations, while you revel on the fur-
face. No mighty effort, no long prepara-
tion of events, is needed to overturn your
prosperity. By flow degrees it rose. Long
time, much labour, and the concurrence
of many assisting causes, were necessary
to rear it up; but one flight incident can
entirely overthrow it. Suspicions are in-
fused into the patron or the prince on
whom you depend; and your disgrace
ensues. Exercise, or amusement, kindles
a fever in the veins of those whom you
loved; and you are robbed of your com-
forts and hopes. A few grains of sand
lodge themselves within you; and the
reft of your life is disease and misery.

Ten

Ten thousand contingencies ever float on SE RM.
the current of life, the smallest of which, A
if it meet your frail bark in the passing,
is sufficient to dash it in pieces.-Is this
a place, is this a time, to swell with fan-
cied security, to riot in unlawful pleasure,
and, by your disregard of moral and re-
ligious duties, to brave the government
of the Almighty ? He hath fiamped every
possession of man with this inscription,
Rejoice with trembling. Throughout every
age, he hath pointed his peculiar difplea-
sure against the confidence of prefump-
tion, and the arrogance of prosperity. He
hath pronounced, that whosoever exalteth
hinlf fjljall be abased. And shall neither
the admonitions which you receive from
the visible inconstancy of the world, nor
the declarations of the Divine displeasure,
be sufficient to check your thoughtlcfs ca-
reer? Know, that by your impiety, you
multiply the dangers which already threa-
ten you on every fide; you accelerate the
speed with which the changes of the world
advance to your deftrution. The Al-

G mighty

SE R M. mighty touches with his rod that edifice

III. -L,,-i of duff, on which you fland, and boast of

.your strength; and, at that instant, it
crumbles to nothing.

As men, then, bethink yourselves of

human instability. As Chriltians, reve-
rence the awful government of God. In-
sure your prosperity, by consecrating it to
religion and virtue. Be humble in your
elevation; be moderate in your views;
be submissive to him who hath raised and
distinguished you. Forget not, that on
his providence you are as dependent, and
to the obedience of his laws as much
bou;nd, as the meanest of your fellow-
creatures. Disgrace not your station, by
that grossness of sensuality, that levity
of dissipation, or that insolence of rank,
which bespeak a little mind. Let the as-
fability of your behaviour flow that you
remember the natural equality of men.
Let your moderation in pleasure, your
command of passion, and your fleady re-
gard to the great duties of life, Ihow that
you possess a rmind worthy of your fortune.

Efablifll

Eltablifli your characer on the basis of cf- s E R M.
teem; not on the flattery of dependents, --
or the praise of sycophants, but on the
refped of the wife and the good. Let in-
nocence preside over your enjoyments.
Let usefulness and beneficence, not often-
tation and vanity, direc the train of your
pursuits. Let your anlns, together whith
your prayers, come up ill memorial lefore
God. So shall your prosperity, undcr the
blessing of Heaven, be as the Jining light,
which Jjineth more and more unto the per-
fedt day. So ihall it resemble those celef-
tial fires which glow above, with benefi-
cent, with regular, and permanent lustre;
and not prove that mirth offools, which by
Solomon is compared to the crackling of
thorns under a pot, a glittering and fervent
blaze, but speedily extinct.

On the whole, let this be our conclu-

sion, that both in prosperity and in ad-
verfity, religion is the safest guide of hu-
man life. Conduaed by its light, we
reap the pleasures, and at the fame time
escape the dangers, of a prosperous slate.

G e Sheltered

S E R M. Sheltered under its protetion, we fland
.---. the shock of adversity with most intrepi-

dity, and susser least from the violence of
the storm. He that defireth life, and loveth
nmany days that he may fie good, let himn keep
his tongue from evil, and his lipsfrom guile.
Let him depart fronm evil, and do goQd. Let
him seek peace with God, and purfie it.
Then, in his adversity, GodJhall hide him
in his pavilion. In his prosperity, heJhall
flourjiri like a tree planted by the rivers of
water. The ungodly are not so; but are
like the chaff, light and vile, which the
wind driveth away.

SE R-

# SERMON IV. On our Imperfect KNOWLEDGE of a FUTURE STATE. I COR. xiii. 12. For now we see through a glass, darkly. 

[ 85 ]

SE R M ON IV.
On our Imperfel KNOWLEDGE of a

FUTURE STATE.

I COR. Xiii. I2.

For now we fee through a glass, darkly.-

rT HE Apostle here describes the im- SE RI.
T perfedion of our knowledge with i_
relation to spiritual and eternal objeds.
He employs two metaphors, to represent
more strongly the disadvantages under
which we lie: One, that we fee those ob-
je&s through a glafi, that is, through the
intervention of a medium which obscures
their glory; the other, that we fee them
in a riddle or enigma, which our tranfla-
tors have rendered by feeing them darkly;
that is, the truth in part discovered, in

G 3 part

SE R M. part concealed, and placed beyond our

comprehension.

This description, however just and true,

cannot fail to occasion some perplexity
to an enquiring mind. For it may seem i|
strange, that so much darkness fliould be
left upon those celestial objects, towards
which we are at the fame time commanded
to aspire. We are firangers in the uni-
verse of God, Confined to that spot on
which we dwell, we are permitted to
know nothing of what is tranfading in
the regions above us and around us. By
much labour, we acquire a superficial
acquaintance with a few sensible objecls
-which we find in our present habitation;
but we enter, and we depart, under a to-
'tal ignorance of the nature and laws of
the spiritual world. One subjec in par-
ticular, when our thoughts proceed in this
train, must often recur upon the mind
with peculiar anxiety; that is, the im-
mortality of the foul, and the future slate
of man. Exposed as we are at present to
such variety of afflLions, and fubjedctd

to

to so much disappointment in all our pur- S R ,.
suits of happiness, Why, it may be laid, v
has our gracious Creator denied us the
consolation of a fill discovery of our fu-
ture exifence, if indeed such an exifterice
be prepared for us ?-Reason, it is true,
fuggefis many arguments in behalf of
immortality: Revelation gives full anu-
rance of it. Yet even that Gospel which
is said to have brought life and immortality
to light, allows us to fee only through a
glafi darkly. It doth not yet appear what
we Jfhall be. Our knowledge of a future
world, is very imperfect; our ideas of it
are faint and confused. It is not displayed
in flch a manner, as to make an impref-
sion suited to the importance of the object.
The faith even of the befl men, is much
inferiour, both in clearness and in force,
to the evidence of feirfe; and proves on
many occasions insufficient to counterba-
lance the temptations of the present world.
Happy moments indeed there sometimes
are in the lives of pious men, when fe-
quefiered from worldly cares, and born up

4 on

S E R M, on the wings of divine, contemplation, they

- -.I rife to a near and transporting view of

immortal glory. But such efforts of the
mind are rare, and cannot be long sup-
ported. When the spirit of meditation
subsides, this lively sense of a future slate
decays; and though the general belief of
it remain, yet even good men, when they
return to the ordinary business and cares of
life, seem to rejoin the multitude, .and to
re-affume the fame hopes, and fears, and
interests, which influence the reft of the
world.

From such reflecions, a considerable

difficulty refpeaing this important sub-
jeCt, either arises, or seems to arise. Was
such an obscure and imperfect discovery of
another life worthy to proceed from God?
Does it not afford some ground, either to
tax -his goodness, or to fufpet the evi-
dence of its coming from him ?-This is
the point which we are now to confider;
and let us confider it with that close atten-
tion which the subjed merits. Let us en-
quire, whether we have any reason, ei-

ther

ther to complain of Providence, or to ob- s E R M.
jed: to the evidence of a future state, be- I
cause that evidence is not of a 'more fenfi-
ble and :rikinag nature.. lIet us attempt
humbly to trace the reasons, why, 'though
permitted to know and to fee somew'hat of
the eternal world, we are never.thdefs per-
mitted only to know in part, and to fie
through a glass, darkly.

IT plainly appears to be the plan of the

Deity, in all his dispensations, to mix
light with darkness, evidence with uncer-
tainty. Whatever the reasons of this pro-
cedure be, the faa is undeniable. I-e is
described in the Old Teflament, as a God
that hideth hinfelfy. Clouds and darklncjs
are said tofuirround him. His way is in the
sea, and his path in the great waters; his
footJfeps are not known. Both the works
and the ways of God are full of myflery.
In the ordinary course of his government,
innumerable events occur which perplex
us to the utmost. There is a certain limit

I* . xv. l. 15.

to

SE R M. to all our enquiries in religion, beyond

_L. which if we attempt to proceed, we are

loft in a maze of inextricable difficulties.
Even that revelation which affords such
material inftrudion to man, concerning
.his duty and his happiness, leaves many
doubts unresolved. Why it was not given
sooner; why not to all men; why there
ihould be so many things in it' hard to be
underflood, are difficulties not inconsiderable,
in the midst of that inconteftible evidence
by which it is supported. If, then, the
future slate of man be not placed in so full
and clear a light as we desire, this is no
more than what the analogy of all reli-
gion, both natural and revealed, gave us
reason to expet.

But such a solution of the difficulty will

be thought imperfect. It may, perhaps,
not give much fatisfaaion, to show that
all religion abounds with difficulties of a
like nature. Our situation, it will be said,
is so much the more to be lamented, that
not on one fide only we are confined in our
enquiries, but on all hands environed with

mysterious
8

myflerious obfcurity.-Let us then, if so S E M.

1V.

much dissatisfied with our condition, give
scope for once to Fancy, and confider how
the plan of Providence might be recified
to our wifhl, Let us call upon the Scep-
tick, and desire him to fay, what measure
of information would afford him entire fa-
tisfacion.

This, he will tell us, requires not any

long or deep deliberation. He desires only
to have his view enlarged beyond the li-
mits of this corporeal state. Inflead of
relting upon evidence which requires dif-
cufion, which must be supported by muchl
reasoning, and which, after all, he alleges
yields very imperfect information, he de-
mands the everlasting mansions to be so
displayed, if in truth such mansions there
be, as to place faith on a level with the
evidence of sense. What noble and happy
effects, he exclaims, would infantly fol-
low, if man thus beheld his prcfcnt and
his future exifence at once before him !
HIe would then become worthy of his rank
in the creation. Instead of being the sport,

as

S E R M. a now, of degrading pailions and childish

IV.
'---' .attachments, he would ad solely on the

principles of immortality. His purfait of
virtue would be Ready; his life would be
und'ifizbed and happy. Superiour to the
attacks of distress, and to the solicitations
of pleasure, he would advance, by a regu-
lar progress, towards those divine rewards
and honours which were continually pre-
sent to his view.-Thus Fancy, with
as much ease and confidence as if it were
a perfed judge of creation, erects a new
world to itself, and exults with admira-
tion of its own work. But let us pause,
and suspend this admiration, till we coolly
examine the consequences that would fol-
low from this supposed reformation of the
universe.

CONSIDER the nature and circumftancos

of man. Introduced into the world in
an indigent condition, he is supported at
firit by the care of others; and, as soon
as he begins to ac: for himself, finds la-
bour and industry to be necessary for sus-

taining

taining his life, and supplying his wants. SERNM.

IV.

Mutual defence and interest give rife to i
society; and society, when formed, re-
quires diftintions of property, diversity
of conditions, subordination of ranks,
and a multiplicity of occupations, in or-
der to advance the general good. The
services of the poor, and the protecion
of the rich, become reciprocally necessary.
The governours, and the governed, mufft
co-operate for general safety. Various
arts muff be studied; some refpeding the
cultivation of the mind, others, the care
of the body; some to ward off the evils,
and some to provide the conveniencies of
life. In a word, by the destination of
his Creator, and the necessities of' his
nature, man commences, at once, an
ative, not merely a contemplative being.
Religion affilmes him as such. It sup-
poses him employed in this world, as on
a busy stage. It regulates, but does not
abolish, the enterprizes and cares of or-
dinary life. It addresses itself to the va-
rious ranks in society; to the rich and

5 the

SE M. the poor, to the magistrate and the fulb-

1V.
< jeC. It rebukes the slothful; directs the

diligent how to labour; and requires every
man to do his own btknefs.

Suppose, now, that veil to be with-

drawn which conceals another world from
our view. Let all obscurity vanish; Let
us no longerfee darkly, as through a glas ;
but let every man enjoy that intuitive
perception of divine and eternal objects,
which the Sceptick was supposed to desire.
The immediate effect of such a discovery
would be, to annihilate in our eye all
human objecs, and to produce a total
flagnation in the affairs of the world.
Were the celestial glory exposed to our
admiring view; did the angelic har-
mony found in our enraptured ears; what
earthly concerns could have the power
of engaging our attention for a tingle mo-
ment ? All the studies and pursuits, the
arts and labours, which now employ the
activity of man, which support the or-
der, or promote the happiness of society,
would lie neglected and abandoned. Those

desires

desires and fears, those hopes and interests S E R M-'

IV.

by which we are at present stimulated, -_-
would cease to operate. Human life
would present no objeds sufficient to
route the mind; to kindle the spirit of
enterprize, or to urge the hand of in-
duftry. If the mere sense of duty en-
gaged a good man to take some part in
the business of the world, the talk, when
submitted to, would prove distasteful.
Even the preservation of life would be
flighted, if he were not bound to it by
the authority of God. Impatient of his
confinement within this tabernacle of
dutl, languishing for the happy day of
his translation to those glorious regions
which were displayed to his fight, he
would sojourn on earth as a melancholy
exile. Whatever Providence has prepared
for the entertainment of man, would be
viewed with contempt. Whatever is now
attrative in society, would appear insipid.
In a word, he would be no longer a fit
inhabitant of this world, nor be qualified
for those exertions which are allotted to

him

S E R M. him in his present sphere of being. But,
,-.-. all his faculties being sublimated above

the measure of humanity, he would be
in the condition of a being of fuperiour
order, who, obliged to reside among men,
would regard their pursuits with scorn, as
dreams, trifles, and puerile amusements of
a day.

But to this reasoning it may perhaps

be replied, That such consequences as I
have now stated, supposing them to fol-
low, deserve not much regard.-IFor what
though the present arrangement of human
affairs were entirely changed, by a clearer
view, and a stronger impression of our fu-
ture state ? Would not such a change prove
the highest blessing to man ? Is not his
attachment to worldly objeas the great
source both of his misery and his guilt ?
Employed in perpetual contemplation of
heavenly objects, and in preparation for
the enjoyment of them, would he not be-
come more virtuous, and of course more
happy, than the nature of his present em-
ployments and attachments permits him

to

io be -Allowing, for a moment, the s F R M
:onfequence to be such, this much is
yielded, that upon the lfppofition which
was made, man would not be the crea-
ture which he now is, nor human life the
fRate which we now behold. How far
the change would contribute to his welfarei
comes to be confidered.

If there be any principle fully afcer-

tained by religion, it is, That this life was
intended for a slate of trial and improve-
ment to man. His preparation for a bet-
ter world required a gradual purification,
carried on by steps of progressive difci-
pline. The situation, therefore, here as-
signed him, was such as to answer this
design, by calling forth all his active
powers, by giving full scope to his moral
dispositions, and bringing to light his
whole characer. Hence it became pro-
per, that difficulty and temptation flould
arise in the course of his duty. Ample re-
wards were promised to virtue; but these
rewards were left, as yet, in obscurity
and distant profpec, The imprefflons of

H sense

SE R M. sense were so balanced against the difeo-

IV. _-y_ veries of immortality, as to allow a con-

slid between faith and sense, between
conscience and desire, between' present
pleasure and future good. In this con-
slid, the fouls of good men are tried,
improved, and strengthened. In this
field, their honours are reaped. Here are
formed the capital virtues of fortitude,
temperance, and felf-denial; moderation
in prosperity, patience in adversity, sub-
mifllion to the will of God, and charity
and forgiveness to men, amidst the various
competitions of worldly interest.

Such is the plan of Divine wisdom for

man's improvement. But put the cafe,
that the plan devised by human wisdom
were to takelace, and that the rewards
of the jult were to be now fully displayed
to view; the exercise of all those graces
which I have mentioned, would be en-
tirely superseded. Their very names would
be unknown. Every temptation being
withdrawn, every worldly attachment
being subdued by the overpowering dif-

coveries

coveries of eternity, no trial of sincerity, S E RM.
no discrimination of characters, would re- -v
main; no opportunity would be afforded
for those active exertions, which are the
means of purifying and perfeting the
good. On the competition between time
and eternity, depends the chief exercise
of human virtue. The obscurity which
at present hangs over eternal objects, pre-
serves the competition. Remove that ob-
fcurity, and you remove human virtue from
its place. You overthrow that whole sys-
tem of discipline, by which imperfect crea-
tures are, in this life, gradually trained-
,up for a more perfect fate.

This, then, is the conclusion to which

at last we arrive, That the full display
which was demanded, of the heavenly
glory, would be so far from improving
the human fQul, that it would abolish
those virtues and duties which are the
great instruments of its improvement. It
would be unsuitable to the character of
man in every view, either as an active
being, or a' moral agent. It would dif-

H 2 qualify
e

S E R M. qualify him for taking part in the affairs

' of the world ; for reliihing the pleasures,

or for discharging the duties of life: In
a word, it would entirely defeat the pur-
pose of his being placed on this earth.
And the quedion, Why the Almighty has
been pleated to leave a spiritual world,
and the future existence of man, under so
much obscurity, resolves in the end into
this, Why there should be such a crea-
ture as man in the universe of God ?-
Such is the issue of the improvements
proposed to be made on the plans of Pro-
vidence. They add to the discoveries of
the fuperiour wisdom of God, and of the
presumption and folly of man.

FROM what has been said, it now ap-

pears, That no reasonable objetion to the
belief of a future Itate arises, from the
imperfec discoveries of it which we en-
joy; from the diffculties that are mingled
with its evidence; from our feeing as
through a glaf darkly, and being left to
'walk by faith and not by fight. It cannot

be

be otherwise, it ought not to be other- S E R M.

1V.

wife, in our present Rate. The evidence
which is afforded, is sufficient for the
convicion of a candid mind, sufficient
for a rational ground of conduct; though
not so firiking as to withdraw our atten-
tion from the present world, or altoge-
ther to overcome the impression of fenfi-
ble objects. In such evidence it becomes
us to acquiesce, without indulging either
doubts or complaints, on account of our
not receiving all the fatisfation which
we fondly desire, but which our present
immaturity of being excludes. For upon
the supposition of immortality, this life is
no other than the childhood of existence;
and the measures of our knowledge must
be proportioned to such a state. To the
successive stages of human life, from in-
fancy to old age, belong certain peculiar
attachments, certain cares, desires, and
interests; which open not abruptly, but
by gradual advances on the mind, as it
becomes fit to receive them, and is pre-
pared for ating the part to which, in

H 3 their

SEIRM. their order, they pertain. Hence, in tho

IV.
-t.' education of a child, no one thinks of in-

spiring him all at once with the know-
ledge, the sentiments, and views of a
man, and with contempt for the exer-
cifes and amusements of childhood. On
the contrary, employments suited to his
age are allowed to occupy him. By these
his powers are gradually unfolded; and
advantage is taken of his youthful pur-
suits, to improve and firengthen his mind;
till, flep by ftep, he is led on to higher
profpe&ts, and prepared for a larger and
more important scene of action.

this analogy, which so happily illus-

trates the present condua of the Deity
towards man, deserves attention the more,
as it is the very illustration used by the
Apostle, when treating of this subjet in
the context. Now, fays he, we know in
part-but when that which is perfet is
come, that which is in part Jhall be done
away. When I was a child, I spake as a
child, I understood as a child, I thought as
q child; but when I became a man, I put

away

way childijrl thilgs. For now we fee S ER I.
through a glass, darkly; but then, face to
face: Now I know in part; but then, I
/Jall know even as I am known. Under
the care of the Almighty, our education
is now going on, from a mortal to an
immortal state. As much light is let in
upon us, as we can bear without injury.
When the objecs become too splendid
and dazzling for our fight, the curtain
is drawn. Exercised in such a field of
acaion, as suits the strength of our un-
ripened powers, we are, at the fame time,
by proper profpeds and hopes, prompted
to aspire towards the manhood of our
nature, the time wuhen childi/h things Jhall
be put away. But fill, betwixt those
future profpeas, and the impression of
present objecs, such an accurate propor-
tion is eltablifhed, as on the one hand
shall not produce a total contempt of
earthly things, while we aspire to those
that are heavenly; and on the other,
shall not encourage such a degree of at-
tachment to our present state, as would

H 4 render

SERM. render us unworthy of future advance-.

IV.
v--- ment. In a word, the whole course of

things is so ordered, that we may neither
by an irregular and precipitate education,
become men too soon; nor by a fond and
trifling indulgence, be suffered to continue
children for tver.

LET there reflections not only remove

the doubts which may arise from our
obscure knowledge of immortality, but
likewise produce the highest admiration
of the wisdom of our Creator. The itruc-
ture of the natural world affords innume-
rable instances of profound design, which
no attentive fpetator can survey without
wonder. In the moral world, where the
workmanship is of much finer and more
delicate contexture, fubjeas of fill greater
admiration open to view. But admi-
ration mufl rife to its highest point,
when those parts of the moral conftitu-
tion, which at first were reputed ble-
mifhes, which carried the appearance of
gbjeCtios, either to the wisdom or the

goodnefa

goodness of Providence, are discovered, Sr R M.
on more accurate infpeaion, to be ad- -
jufied with the most exquisite propriety.
We have now seen, that the darkness of
man's condition is no less essential to his
well-being, than the light which he en-
joys. His internal powers, and his ex-
ternal situation, appear to be exaaly fitted
to each other. Those complaints which
we are apt to make, of our limited capa-
city and narrow views, of our inability to
penetrate farther into the future deflination
of man, are found, from the forcgoing
observations, to be just as unreasonable, as
the childish complaints of our not being
formed with a microscopic eye, nor fur-
nifhed with an eagle's wing; that is, of
not being endowed with powers which
would subvert the nature, and counteract
the laws, of our present slate.

In order to do justice to the fubje&, I

muff observe, That the fame reasoning
which has been now employed with refped
to our knowledge of immortality, is
equally applicable to many other branches

of

SE R M. of intellectual knowledge. Thus, why

-. we are permitted to know so little of the

nature of that Eternal Being who rules the
universe; why the manner in which he
operates on the natural and moral world,
is wholly concealed; why we are kept in
such ignorance, with refped to the extent
of his works, to the nature and agency of
fpiritual.beings, and even with refpedc to
the union between our own foul and body:
To all these, and several other enquiries
of the fame kind, which often employ the
solicitous researches of speculative men, the
answer is the fame that was given to the
interesting question which makes the sub-
jet of our discourse. The degree of know-
ledge desired, would prove incompatible
with the design, and with the proper bufi-
ness of this life. It would raise us to a
sphere too exalted; would reveal objeats
too great and flriking for our present facul-
ties; would excite feelings too strong ,for
us to bear; in a word, would unfit us for
thinking or acting like human creatures.
It is therefore reserved for a more ad-

vanced

vanced period of our nature; and the hand s E R M.

IV.

of Infinite wisdom hath in mercy drawn a
veil over scenes which would overpower
the fight of mortals.

One instance, in particular, of Divine

wisdom, is so illustrious, and corresponds
so remarkably with our present subjet,
that I cannot pass it over without notice;
that is, the concealment under which Pro-
vidence has placed the future events of
our life on earth. The desire of penetrat-
ing into this unknown region, has ever
been one of the most anxious passions of
men. It has often seized the wife as well
as the credulous, and given rife to many
vain and impious filperftitions throughout
the whole earth. Burning with curiosity
at the approach of some critical event, and
impatient under the perplexity of conjec-
ture and doubt, How cruel is Providence,
we are apt to exclaim, in denying to man
the power of fore-sight, and in limiting
him to the knowledge of the present mo-
ment ? Were he permitted to look forward
into the course of destiny, how much more

suitably

S E R M. suitably would he be prepared for the vari-

IV.
by-y-r ous turns and changes in his life ? With

what moderation would he enjoy his pro-
fperity under the fore-knowledge of an
approaching reverse ? And with what ea-
gernefs be prompted to improve the flying
hours, by feeing the inevitable term draw
nigh which was to finish his course ?

But while Fancy indulges such vain de-

fires and criminal complaints, this coveted
fore-knowledge must clearly appear to the
eye of reason, to be the most fatal gift
which the Almighty could bellow. If in
this present mixed state, all the successive
scenes of distress through which we are
to pass, were laid before us in one view,
perpetual sadness would overcatl our life.
Hardly would any transient gleams of in-
tervening joy be able to force their way
through the cloud. Faint would be the
relish of pleasures, of which we foresaw
the close: Insupportable the burden of as-
flitions; under which we were oppressed
by a load, not only of present, but of an-
ticipated sorrows. Friends would begin

their

their union, with lamenting the day which s E R M.
was' to dissolve it; and, with weeping eye,
the parent would every moment behold
the child whom he knew that he was to
lose. In short, as soon as that mysterious
veil, which now covers futurity, was
lifted up, all the gaiety of life would dif-
appear; its flattering hopes, its pleasing
illusions, would vanish; and nothing but
its vanity and sadness remain. The fore-
fight of the hour of death would conti-
nually interrupt the course of human as-
fairs; and the overwhelming profpea of
the future, infiead of exciting men to pro-
per acivity, would render them immove-
able with consternation and dismay.-
How much more friendly to man is that
mixture of knowledge and ignorance
which is allotted him in this state ! Igno-
rant of the events which are to befall us,
and of the precise term which is to con-
clude our life, by this ignorance our en-
joyment of present objects is favoured;
and knowing that death is certain, and
that human affairs are full of change, by

this

S E R M. this knowledge our attachment to those ob

iv.

jeLts is moderated. Precisely in the fame
manner, as, by the mixture of evidence
and obscurity which remains on the pro- I
fpeEt of a future slate, a proper balance is
preserved betwixt our love of this life, :
and our desire of a better.

The longer that our thoughts dwell on

this subject, the more we must be con- ;
vinced, that in nothing the Divine wifdomr
is more admirable, than in proportioning
knowledge to the necessities of man. In-
stead of lamenting our condition, that we
are permitted only to fee as through a glass
darkly, we have reason to bless our Creator,
no less for what he hath concealed, than
for what he hath allowed us to know. He
is wonderful in coulfel, as he is excellent
in working. He is wife in heart, and his
thoughts are deep. How unsearchable are
the riches of the wfddom of the knowledge
of God

FROM the whole view which we have
taken of the fubjeet, this important in-

ftrution

Itrufion arises, That the great design of s E R M.
all the knowledge, and in particular of the --
religious knowledge which God hath as-
forded us, is, to fit us for discharging the
duties of life. No useless discoveries are
made to us in religion: No discoveries
even of useful truths, beyond the precise
degree of information, which is subser-
vient to right conduc. To this great end
all our information points. In this center
all the lines of knowledge meet. Life and
immortality are brought to light in the gof-
pel; yet not so displayed as to gratify the
curiosity of the world with an alfonifhing
fpetacle; but only so far made known,
as to affill and support us in the pratice
of our duty. If the discovery were more
imperfect, it would excite no desire of im-
mortality; if it were more full and firik-
ing, it would render us careless of life.
On the first supposition, no sufficient mo-
tive to virtue would appear; on the second,
no proper trial of it would remain. In the
one cafe, we should think and act like men
who have their portion only in this world;

4 in

S E R M. in the other cafe, like men who have no

Iv. J

concern with this world at all. Whereas
now, by the wife constitution of Heaven, j
we are placed in the most favourable fitua-
tion for acting, with propriety, our allotted
part here; and for rising, in due course, to
higher honour and happiness hereafter.

Let us then second the kind intentions

of Providence, and act upon the plan
which it hath pointed out. Checking
our inquisitive solicitude about what the
Almighty hath concealed, let us dilil
gently improve what he hath made known.
Inhabitants of the earth, we are at the
fame time candidates for heaven. Look-
ing upon these as only different views of
one consistent characer, let us carry on
our preparation for heaven, not by ab.
firafting ourselves from the concerns of
this world, but by fulfilling the duties and
offices of every flation in life. Living so-
berly, righteoifly, and godly in the present
world, let us look for that blefed hope, and
the glorious appearing of the great God, and
our Saviour YefJis ChriI.

Before

Before I conclude, it may be proper to S E R M.

tbferve, That the reasonings in this dif-
course give no ground to apprehend any
danger of our being too much influenced
by the belief of a future slate. I have
fliown the hurtful effects which would
follow from too bright and full a discovery
of the glory of that tfate; and in showing
this, I have juflified the decree of Provi-
dence, which permits no such discovery.
But as our nature is at present conflituted,
attached by so many firong connections to
the world of sense, and enjoying a com-
munication so feeble and distant with the
world of spirits, we need fear no danger
from cultivating intercourse with the latter
as much as possible. On the contrary,
from that intercourse the chief security of
our virtue is to be fought. The biass of
our nature leans so much towards sense,
that from this fide the peril is to be dread-
ed, and on this fide the defence is to be
provided.

Let us then walk by faith. Let us
strengthen this principle of action to the

I utmost

S E R M utmost of our power. Let us implore the

IV.
'-v-,-' Divine grace, to flrengthen it within us

more and more: That we may thence de-
rive an antidote againfi that subtile poison,
which incessant commerce with the objets
of sense diffuses through our fouls; that
we may hence acquire purity and dignity
of manners, suited to our divine hopes;
and, undefiled by the pleasures of the
world, unshaken by its terrours, may pre-
serve to the end one conflant tenour of in-
tegrity. Till at last, having, under the
conduct of Christian faith, happily finished
the period of discipline, we enter on that
fiate, where a far nobler scene shall open;
where eternal objects shall Ihine in their
native splendour; where, this twilight of
moral life being pals, the Sun ofrighteotf-
nlets shall rife; and that which is perfeti
being come, that which is in part Jhall be
done away.

S E R

# SERMON V. On the DEATH of CHRIST. Preached at the celebration of the SACRAMENT of the LORD'S SUPPER. JOHN xvii. I. Jesus lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father! The hour is come; 

[ is 3]

E RMON V.

On the DEATH of CHRIST,
Preached at the celebration of the SACRAMENT

of the LORD'S SUPPER.

J'OHN xvii. I.
yefus lift up his eyes to hcaven, din( .fat'd

Father! The hour is come ;-
T IHESE were the words of our sERM.

blessed Lord on a memorable occa- V.

sion. The feast of the passover drew nigh,
at which he knew that he was to susser.
The night was arrived wherein he was
to be delivered into the hands of his ene-
mies. He had spent the evening in con-
ference with his disciples; like a dying
father in the midst of his family, min-
gling consolations with his last inftruc-

I 2 tions.

SERM. tions. When he had ended his discourse

V.
.-r- to them, he lifted up his eyes to heaven,

and, with the words which I have now
read, began that solemn prayer of inter-
cession for the Church, which closed his
ministry. Immediately after, he went
forth with his disciples into the garden of
Gethsemane, and surrendered himself to
those who came to apprehend him.

Such was the situation of our Lord at

the time of his pronouncing thcfe words.
He saw his million on the point of being
accomplished. He had the profped full
before him, of all that he was about to
fuffer.-Father ! The hour is come.-What
hour? An hour the most critical, the
most pregnant with great events, since
hours had begun to be numbered, since
time had begun to run. It was the hour
in which the Son of God was. to termi-
nate the labours of his important life, by
a death ltill more important and illuftri-
ous; the hour of atoning, by. his susser-
ings, for the guilt of mankind; the hour
of accomplishing prophecies, types, and

symbols,

symbols, which had been carried on S E R M.

V.

through a series of ages; the hour of con-
cluding the old, and of introducing to the
world the new dispensation of religion;
the hour of his triumphing over the
world, and death, and hell; the hour of
his erefing that spiritual kingdom which
is to last for ever. Such is the hour, such
are the events, which you are to comme-
morate in the Sacrament of our Lord's
Supper. I shall attempt to set them be-
fore you as proper fubjets, at this time,
of your devout meditation. To display
them in their genuine majesty, is beyond
the ability of man.

I. THIS was the hour in which Christ

was glorified by his sufferings. The
whole of his life had discovered much
real greatness, under a mean appearance.
Through the cloud of his humiliation,
his native lustre often broke forth; but
never did it shine so bright, as in this last,
this trying hour. It was indeed the hour
of difrefs, and of blood. He knew it to

3 be

S E R M. be such; and when he uttered the words
v__-y of the Text, he had before his eyes, the

executioner and the cross, the scourge, the
nails and the spear. But by profpeats of
this nature his foul was not to be over-
come. It is distress which ennobles every
great character; and distress was to glo-
rify the Son of God. He was now to
teach all mankind, by his example, how
to susser and to die. He was to tand
forti before his enemies, as the faithful
witness of the truth; jufiifying by his
behaviour the character which he assumed,
and fealing with his blood the doctrine
which he taught.

What magnanimity in all his words.

and acions on this great occasion! The
court of Herod, the judgment-hall of
Pilate, the hill of Calvary, were' o many
theatres prepared for his displaying all the
virtues of a conflant and patient mind.
When led forth to susser, the first voice
which we Hiear from him, is a generous
lamentation over the fate of his unfortu-
nate, though guilty, country; and, to the

last

last moment of his life, we behold him in s E R M.
possession of the fame gentle and benevo-
lent spirit. No upbraiding, no complain-
ing expression escaped from his lips, dur-
ing the long and painful approaches of a
cruel death. He betrayed no symptom of
a weak or a vulgar, of a discomposed or
impatient mind. With the utmolt atten-
tion of filial tendernels, he committed his
aged mother to the care of his beloved
disciple *. With all the dignity of a So-
vereign, he conferred pardon on a peni-
tent fellow-fufferer. With a greatness of
mind beyond example, he spent his last
moments in apologies and prayers, for
those who were shedding his blood.

By wonders in heaven, and wonders on

earth, was this hour diflinguifhed. All
nature seemed to feel it; and the dead and
the living bore witness to its importance.
The veil of the temple was rent in twain.
The earth shook. There was darkness
over all the land. The graves were open-
ed, and many whoflept aroJe and went into

* Sec John xix. 26, 27.

4 the

s E R M. the Holy City. Nor were these the only

V.
I..- prodigies of this awful hour. The most

hardened hearts were subdued and chang-
ed. The judge, who in order to gratify
the multitude passed sentence against him,
publickly attefied his innocence. The
Roman centurion, who presided at the exe-
cution, glorified God, and acknowledged
the sufferer to be more than man. After
he Jaw the things which had passed, he
said, Certainly this was a righteous per-
Jon; truly, this was the Son of God. The
Jewifhl malefator who was crucified with
him, addressed him as a King, and im-
plored his favour. Even the crowd of in-
sensible fpeaators, who had come forth as
to a common fpecacle, and who began
with clamours and insults, returned home,
smiting their breafls.-Look back on the
heroes, the philosophers, the legislators of
old. View them in their last moments.
Recall every circumfiance which diftin-
guifhed their departure from the world.
Where can you find such an aflemblage of
high virtues, and of great events, as con-

curred

curred at the death of Christ ? Where, o S E R M,

V.

many testimonies given to the dignity of
the dying person, by earth, and by hea-
ven?

II. This was the hour in which Christ

atoned for the fins of mankind, and ac-
complifhed our eternal redemption. It
was the hour when that great sacrifice was
offered up, the efficacy of which reaches
back to the firtP transgression of man, and
extends forward to the end of time; the
hour when, from the cross, as fiom an
high altar, the blood was flowing, which
washed away the guilt of the nations.

This awful dispensation of the Al-

mighty contains mysteries which are be-
yond the discovery of man. It is one of
those things into which the angels desire to
look. What has been revealed to us, is,
That the death of Christ was the interpo-
fition of Heaven for preventing the ruin
of human kind. We know, that under
the government of God, misery is the na-
tural consequence of guilt. After rational

creatures

6 E R M. creatures had, by their criminal conduct,
,-V-. introduced disorder into the Divine king-

dom, there was no ground to believe, that
by their penitence and prayers alone,
they could prevent the deftrution which
threatened them. The prevalence of pro-
pitiatory sacrifices throughout the earth,
proclaims it to be the general sense of
mankind, that mere repentance was not
of sufficient avail to expiate fin, or to
flop its penal effecs. By the constant
allusions which are carried on in the
New Teflament to the sacrifices under
the Law, as pre-signifying a great atone-
ment made by Christ; and by the strong
expressions which are used in describing
the effets of his death, the sacred writers
show, as plainly as language allows, that
there was an efficacy in his sufferings, far
beyond that of mere example and in-
ftruaion. The nature and extent of that
efficacy we are unable, as yet, fully to
trace. Part we are capable of behold-
ing; and the wisdom of what we behold,
we have reason to adore. We discern in

this

this plan of redemption, the evil of fin SE RM.

V.

strongly exhibited; and the justice of the .v,
Divine government awfully exemplified, in
,Christ suffering for finners. But let us
not imagine, that our present discoveries
unfold the whole influence of the death of
Christ. It is connected with causes into
which we cannot penetrate. It produces
consequences too extensive for us to ex-
plore. God's thoughts are not as our
thoughts. In all things, we fee only in part;
and here, if any where, we fee- also as
through a glass darkly.

This, however, is fully manifefl, that

redemption is one of the most glorious
works of the Almighty. If the hour of
the creation of the world was great. and
illustrious; that hour, when, from the
dark and formless mass, this fair fyfiem
of nature arose at the Divine command;
when the morning flars fang together, and
all the fans of GodJflouted for joy; no less
illustrious is the hour of the restoration
of the world; the hour when, from con-
demnation and misery, it emerged into

happinefi

E R'M. happiness and peace. With less external
V.l majefly it was attended, but is, on that

account, the more wonderful, that under
an appearance so simple, such great events
were covered,

III. IN this hour the long series of

prophesies, visions, types, and figures,
was accompliihed. This was the center
in which they all met: This the point,
towards which they had tended and verg-
ed, throughout the course of so many
generations. You behold the Law and
the Prophets flanding, if we may speak
so, at the foot of the cross, and doing
homage. You behold Moses and Aaron
bearing the ark of the covenant; David
and'Elijah presenting the oracle of tefti-
mony. You behold all the prietfs and
sacrifices, all the rites and ordinances,
all the types and symbols, assembled
together to receive their consummation,
Without tte death of Chrifi, the worship
and ceremonies of the law would have
remained a pompous, but unmeaning in-

y flitution.

fiitution. In the hour when he was cru- s E R M.

V.

cified, the book with the seven fJals was <_
opened. Every rite assumed its fignifi-
cancy; every prediction met its event;
every symbol displayed its correspond-
ence.

The dark, and seemingly ambiguous

method of conveying important difcove-
ties under figures and emblems, was not
peculiar to the sacred books. The Spirit
of God, in pre-signifying the death of
Christ, adopted that plan, according to
which the whole knowledge of those
early ages was propagated through the
world. Under the veil of mysterious al-
lusion, all wisdom was then concealed.
From the sensible world, images were
every where borrowed, to describe things
unseen. More was understood to be
meant, than was openly expressed. By
enigmatical rites, the Priest communi-
cated his doctrines; by parables and al-
legories, the Philosopher inftruted his
disciples; even the Legifator, by figu-
rative sayings, commanded the reverence

of

s E R M. of the people. Agreeably to this prevaii:

V.
» , ing mode of inftruftion, the whole dif-

penfation of the Old Testament was so
conducted, as to be the shadow and the
figure of a spiritual system. Every re-
markable event, every distinguished pere
fonage, under the Law, is interpreted in
the New Testament, as bearing some re-
ference to the hour of which we treat.
If Isaac was laid upon the altar as an in-
nocent vitim; if David was driven from
his throne by the wicked, and restored
by the hand of God; if the brazen ser-
pent was lifted up, .to heal the people; if
the rock was smitten by Moses, to furnish
drink in the wilderness; all were types of
Christ, and alluded to his death.

In prediding the fame event, the lan-

guage of ancient prophecy was magnifi-
cent, but seemingly contradicory: For it
foretold a Messiah, who was to be at once
a sufferer and a conqueror. The Star was
to come out of Jacob, and the Branch to
Jpritngfrom thefiem of Yefe. The Angel of
the Covenant, the Desire of all Nations, was

6 to

to come suddenly to his temple; and to hLm s E R M.

V.

was to be the gathering of the people. Yet
at the fame time, he was to be dejifed and
rejeited of men; he was to be taken from
prison and from judgment, and to be led as
a lamb to the laughter. Though he was a
man of sorrows and acquainted with grief,
yet the Gentiles were to come to his light,
and Kings to the brightness of his rifng. In
the hour when Christ died, those prophe-
tical riddles were solved; those teeming
contradicions were reconciled. The ob-
fcurity of oracles, and the ambiguity of
types vanished. The Sun of righteolnflief
rose; and, together with the dawn of re-
ligion, those shadows passed away.

IV. THIS was the hour of the abolition

of the Law, and the introduction of the
Gospel; the hour of terminating the old,
and of beginning the new dispensation of
religious knowledge and worship, through-
out the earth. Viewed in this light, it
forms the most august ara which is to be
found in the history of mankind. When

Christ

SERM. Christ was suffering on the cross, we are

V.

informed by one of the Evangelilts, that he
said, I thirfi; and that they filled a fpunge
with vinegar, and put it to his mouth.
After he had tafled the vinegar, knowing
that all things were now acconplijhed, and
the scripture fulfilled, he said, it is finih-
ed *; that is, This offered draught of vi-
negar was the last circumstance prediced
by an ancient Prophett , that remained to
be fulfilled. The vision and the prophecy
are now feared: The Mosaic dispensation
is closed. And he bowed his head, and
gave up the ghoJl.

It is fnifhed.-When he uttered these

words, he changed the state of the uni-
verse. At that moment, the Law ceased,
and the Gospel commenced. This was the
ever-memorable point of time, which fe-
parated the old and the new world from
each other. On one fide of the point of
reparation,, you behold the Law, with its
priests, its sacrifices. and its rites, retiring
from fight. On the other fide, you be-

· John xix. 28, 29, 30. t PCfal. xix. 21.

hold

hold the Gospel, with its simple and ve- E R M.

V.

nerable inffitutions, coming forward into Lv
view. Significantly was the veil of the
temple rent in this hour; for the glory
then departed from between the cherubims.
The legal High Priest delivered up his
Urim and Thummim, his breast-plate,
his robes, and his incenfel And CHRIST
flood forth as the Great High Priest of all
succeeding generations. By that one fa-
crifice which he now offered, he abolished
sacrifices for ever. Altars on which the
fire had blazed for ages, were now to smoke
no more. Viaims were no more to bleed.
Not with the blood of bulls and goats, but
·with his own blood, he now entered into the
Holy Place, there to appear in the prefince
of Godfor us.

This was the hour of association and

union to all the worshippers of God.
When Christ said, It is finslJed, he threw
down the wall of partition which had so
long divided the Gentile from the Jew.
He gathered into one, all the faithful, out
of every kindred and people. He pro-

K claimed

SER M. claimed the hour to be come, when the

V. e_-_j knowledge of the true God should be no

longer confined to one nation, nor his wor-
ship to one temple; but over all the earth,
the worshippers of the Father fhouldferve
him in spirit and in truth. From that
hour, they who dwelt in the uttermoiJ ends
of the earth, firangers to the covenant of
promlfe, began to be brought nigh. In
that hour, the light of the Gospel dawned
from afar on the British islands.

During a long course of ages, Provi-

dence seemed to be occupied in preparing
the world for this revolution. The whole
Jewish oeconomy was intended to usher it
in. 4ihe knowledge of God was preserved
unextinguifhed in one corner of the world,
that thence, in due time, might issue forth
the light which was to overspread the
earth. Successive revelations gradually
enlarged the views of men beyond the nar-
row bounds of Judaea, to a more extensive
kingdom of God. Signs and miracles
awakened their expecation, and directed
their eyes towards this great event. Whe-

ther

ther God descended on the flaming mouti- S E r L

V.

tain, or spoke by the Prophet's voice; _-,
whether he scattered his chosen people into
captivity, or re-assembled them in their
own land; he was still carrying on a pro-
grefive plan, which was accomplifled at
the death of Christ.

Not only in the territories of Israel, but

over all the earth, the great dispensations
of Providence refpeated the approach of
this important hour. If empires rose or
fell; if war divided, or peace united the
nations; if learning civilized their man-
ners, or philosophy enlarged their views;
all was, by the secret decree of Heaven,
made to ripen the world for that fuinefs
of time, when Christ was to publish the
whole counsel of God. The Persian, the
Macedonian, the Roman Conqueror, en-
tered upon the flage, each at his predicted
period; and, though et meant iot so, nei-
ther did his heart think so, ministered to
this hour. The revolutions of power, and
the succession of monarchies, were so ar-
ranged by Providence, as to facilitate the

K progrcfs

s E R tM. progress of the Gospel through the habit*

--' able world, after the day had arrived,

when the flone which was cutt out of the
mountain without hands, Jfould become a
great mountain, and fill the earth *. This
was the day, which AbrahamJfaw afar of,
and lwas glad. This was the day, which
many Prophets and Kings, and righteous
men desired to fee, but could not; the day
for which the earnest expetation of the crea-
ture, long oppressed with ignorance, and
bewildered in fuperfttion, might be justly
said to wait.

V. THIS was the hour of Christ's

triumph over all the powers of darkness;
the hour in which he overthrew dominions
and thrones, led captivity captive, and
gave gfits unto men. The contest which
the kingdom of darkness had long main-
tained against the kingdom of light, was
now brought to its crisis. The period was
come, when the feed of the woman Jhould
brujie the head of the serpent. For many

· Dan. ii. 34, 3S

ages,

ages, the mofl gross fuperfiition had filled S E R M.
the earth. The glory of the uncorrutptible V-
God was every where, except in the land
of Judea, changed into images made like
to corruptible man, and to birds, and beaqis,
and creeping things. The world, which
the Almighty created for himself, seemed
to have become a temple of idols. Even
to vices and passions, altars were raised;
and what was entitled Religion, was in
effec a discipline of impurity. In the
midst of this universal darkness, Satan had
ereced his throne; and the learned and
polished, as well as the ravage nations,
bowed down before him. But at the hour
when Christ appeared on the crols, the
signal of his defeat was given. His king-
dom suddenly departed from him; the
reign of Idolatry passed away: He was be-
held to fall like lightning from heaven. In
that hour, the foundation of every Pagan
temple shook. The flatue of every false
God tottered on its base. The Priest fled
from his falling shrine; and the Heathen
oracles became dumb for ever.

K3 As

S E R M. As on the cross Christ triumphed over
... Satan, so he overcame his auxiliary, the

world. Long had it aflailed him with its
temptations and discouragements. In this
hour of revere trial, he surmounted them
all. Formerly he had despised the plea-
fures of the world. He now baffled its
terrours. Hence he is jufily said to have
crucified the world. By his sufferings,
he ennobled ditrefs; and he darkened
the lustre of the pomp and vanities of life.
He discovered to his followers the path
which leads, through affliction, to glory
and to victory; and he imparted to them
the fame spirit which enabled him to over-
come. My kingdom is not of this world.
In this world yeflJall have tribulation: But
be of good cheer; I have overcome the
world *.

Death also, the lafi foe of man, was

the vitim of this hour. The formidable
appearance of the speCtre remained; but
his dart was taken away. For, in the
tour when Christ expiated guilt, he dif-

* John xvi. 33.

armed

armed death, by securing the refurrecion s ER M.

V.

of the just. When he said to his peni-
tent fellow-fufferer, To-day thou J7fllt be
with me in paradise, he announced to all
his followers the certainty of heavenly
bliss. He declared the cherubims to be
dismissed, and the flaming sword to be
sheathed, which had been appointed at
the fall, to keep from man the way of the
Tree of life *. Faint, before this period,
had been the hope, indiflinf the pro-
fpet, which even good men enjoyed of the
heavenly kingdom. Life and immortality
were now brought to light. From the hill
of Calvary, the firit clear and certain
view was given to the world of the ever-
lasting mansions. Since that hour, they
have been the perpetual consolation of
believers in Christ. Under trouble, they
tooth their minds; amidfl temptation,
they support their virtue; and, in their
dying moments, enable them to fay, 0
Death! where is thy fling ? 0 Grave
where is thy viatoty ?

* Gen. iii. 24.

1 4 . VI,

SE R M. VI. THIS was the hour when our Lord

V. t--- erected that spiritual kingdom which is

never to end. How vain are the counsels
and designs of men ! How shallow is the
policy of the .icked! Iow fihort their
triumphing ! The enemies of Christ ima-
gined, that in this hour they had success-
fully accomplished their plan for his de-
firuction. They believed, that they had
entirely scattered the small party of his
followers, and had extinguified his name
and his honour for ever. In derision,
they addressed him as a King. They
clothed him with purple robes; they
crowned him with a crown of thorns;
they put a reed into his hand; and, with
insulting mockery, bowed the knee before
him. Blind and impious men! How
little did they know, that the Almighty
was at that moment setting him as a King
on the hill f Sion; giving him the Heathen
for his inheritance, and the uttermioJ parts
of the ear'th for his poeffon ! How little
did they know, that their badges of
mock royalty were at that moment con-

x. ' .verted

verted into the signals of absolute domi- S E R M

V.

nion, and the instruments of irresistible L-v
power! The reed which they put into
his hands, became a rod of iron, with
which he was to break in pieces his ene-
mies; a sceptre, with which he was to
rule the universe in righteousness. The
cross, which they thought was to stigma-
tize him with infamy, became the ensign
of his renown. Instead of being the re-
proach of his followers, it was to be their
boast and their glory. The cross was to
shine on palaces and churches, through-
out the earth. It was to be assumed as
the distinction of the molf powerful mo-
narchs, and to wave in the banner of
victorious armies, when the memory of
Herod and Pilate should be accursed;
when Jerusalem Ihould be reduced to
ashes, and the Jews be vagabonds over
all the world.

These were the triumphs which com-

menced at this hour. Our Lord saw
them already in their birth; he aw of
the travail of his foul, and-was satisfied.

He

S ER M. He beheld the word of God going forth,

V.
-_vr - conquering, and to conquer; subduing to

the obedience of his laws, the subduers
of the world; carrying light into the re-
gions of darkness, and mildness into the
habitations of cruelty. He beheld the
Gentiles waiting below the cross, to re-
ceive the Gospel. He beheld Ethiopia
and the Ijles Jiretching out their hands to
God; the desert beginning to rejoice, and to
blossom as the rose; and the knowledge of
the Lordfilling the earthy as the waters co-
ver the sea. Well pleased, he said, It is
fini/hed. As a conqueror, he retired from
the field, reviewing his triumphs: He
bowed his head, and gave up the ghofl.---
From that hour, Christ was no longer a
mortal man, but Head over all things to the
Church; the glorious King of men and
angels, of whose dominion there {hall be
no end. His triumphs shall perpetually
increase. His name Jhall endure for ever;
itJhall lait as long as the fuin; men hall be
blefied in him, and all nations Jhall call him
blefed.

SucH

SUCH were the tranfadions, such the es- s E R lI.

sets of this ever-memorable hour. With ---
all those great events was the mind of our
Lord filled, when he lifted up his eyes to
heaven, and said, Father ! the hour is come.

From this view which we have taken

of this subjed,- permit me to fuggeiR,
what ground it affords to confide in the
mercy of God, for the pardon of fin; to
trust to his faithfulness, for the accom-
plifhment of all his promises; and to ap-
proach to him, with gratitude and devo-
tion, in acs of worship.

IN the first place, The death of Chrifl

affords us ground to confide in the Divine
mercy, for the pardon of fin. All the fleps
of that high difpenlation of Providence,
which we have confidered, lead diredly
to this conclusion, He that spared not his
own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
howJhall he not with him aljb freely give
us all things *? This is the final result
of the discoveries of the gofpcl, On this

p0oM. viii. 32.

refis

SER M. refis that great fyflem of consolation,

.-.J which it hath reared up for men. We

are not left to dubious and intricate rea-
fonings, concerning the conduCt which
God may be expected to hold towards
his offending creatures. But we are led
to the view of important and illustrious
faCts, which firike the mind with evidence
irresistible. For, is it possible to believe,
that such great operations as I have en-
deavoured to describe, were carried on by
the Almighty in vain ? Did he excite, in
the hearts of his creatures, such encou-
raging hopes, without any intention to
fulfill them ? After so long a preparation
of goodness, could he mean to deny for-
givenefs to the penitent and the humble ?
When, overcome by the sense of guilt,
man looks up with an afionifhed eye to
the justice of his Creator, let him recolleC
that hour of which the Text speaks, and
be comforted. The signals of Divine
mercy, ereced in his view, are too con-
fpicuous to be either diitrufted or mistaken.

IN the next place, The discoveries of SER M.

this hour afford the highest reason to trufl *---
in the Divine faithfulness, for the accom-
pliihment of every promise which remains
yet unfulfilled. For this was the hour of
the completion of God's ancient covenant.
It was the performance of the mercy pro-
nmied to the fathers. We behold the con-
summation of a great plan, which, through-
out a course of ages, had been uniformly
pursued; and which, againlt every hu-
man appearance, was, at the appointed
moment, exacly fulfilled. Nro word that
is gone out of the mouth of the Lord, Jfall
fail. No length of time alters his pur-
pose. No obstacles can retard it. To-
wards the ends accomplished in this hour,
the most repugnant instruments were
made to operate. We discern God bend-
ing to his purpose, the jarring passions,
the opposite interests, and even the vices
of men; uniting teeming contrarieties in
his scheme ; making the wrath of man to
praise him; obliging the ambition of
Princes, the prejudices of the Jews, the

malice

S E R M. malice of Satan, all to concur, either in

V. L,_ bringing forward this hour, or in com-

pleting its deflined effets. With what
entire confidence ought we to wait for the
fulfillment of all his other promises in their
due time; even when events are most em-
broiled, and the profpea is most difcou-
raging ? Although thou fayefJ, TJhot cans
not fee him; yet judgment is before him;
therefore trf'i thou in him. Be attentive
only to perform thy duty; leave the event
to God; and be assured, that under the
diredion of his Providence, all things fJall
work together for a happy issue.

LASTLY, The consideration of this

whole subjea tends to excite gratitude and
devotion, when we approach to God in
ads of worship. The hour of which I
have discoursed, presents him to us in the
amiable light of the Deliverer of mankind,
the Restorer of our forfeited hopes. We
behold the greatness of the Almighty,
softened by the mild radiance of conde-
fcenfion and mercy. We behold him di-

minilhing

minifhing the awful distance at which we s E R M.

V.

stand from his presence, by appointing for .----,
us a Mediator and Intercessor, through
whom the humble may, without dismay,
approach to Him who made them. By
such views of the Divine nature, Chriflian
faith lays the foundation for a worfnip
which {hall be at once rational and assec-
tionate; a worship, in which the light of
the understanding shall concur with the
devotion of the heart, and the moit pro-
found reverence be united with the most
cordial love. Christian faith is not a sys-
ter of speculative truths. It is not a les-
son of moral inftrudion only. By a train
of high discoveries which it reveals, by a
succession of intererting objecs which it
places in our view, it is calculated to ele-
vate the mind, to purify the affections,
and, by the assistance of devotion, to con-
firm and encourage virtue. Such, in par-
ticular, is the scope of that divine inAi-
tution, the Sacrament of our Lord's Sup-
per. To this happy purpose let it con-
duce, by concentering, in one ftrikin,

point

S E R M; point of light, all that the Gospel has dif-

V. _11- played of what is most important to 'man.

Touched with just contrition for past of-
fences, and filled with a grateful sense of
Divine goodness, let us come to the altar
of God; and with a humble faith in his
infinite mercies devote ourselves to his
service for ever.

SER-

# SERMON VI. On GENTLENESS. JAMES iii. 17. The wisdom that is from above, is  gentle 

t 145 3
SERMO N VI.

On GENTLENESS.

JAM E S iii. I7.
The wivdorm that is from above, is-gentle-

O be wife in our own eyes, to be s r. R M.
wife in the opinion of the world, _

and to be wife in the fight of God, are
three things so very different, as rarely to
coincide. One may often be wife in his
own eyes, who is far from being so in
the judgment of the world; and to be re-
puted a prudent man by the world, is no
security for being accounted wife by God.
As there is a worldly happiness, which
God perceives to be no other than dif-
guised misery; as there are worldly ho-
nours, which in his estimation are re-

L proach;

SEVRM. proach; so there is a worldly wisdom,

which, in his fight, isfooly/inefs. Of this
worldly wisdom the characers are given
in the context, and placed in contralt with
those of the wifdome which is from above.
The one is the wisdom of the crafty;
the other, that of the upright. The one
terminates in felfifhnefs; the other, in
charity. The one is full of Jlrife and bit-
ter envyings; the other, of mercy and of
good fruits.' One of the chief charaaers
by which the wisdom from above is dif-
tinguifhed, is gentlenefi, of which 1 am
now to discourse, Of this there is the
greater occasion to discourse, because it is
too seldom viewed in a religious light;
and is more readily confidered by the.
bulk of men, as a mere felicity of nature,
or an exterior accomplishment of man-
ners, than as a Christian virtue which
they are bound to cultivate. I ihall firit
explain the nature of this virtue; and
shall then offer some arguments to recom-
mend, and some direcions to facilitate, the
pracice of it.

I BEGIN

I BEGIN with distinguishing true gen- S nRM.

tlenefs from passive tameness of spirit, --
and from unlimited compliance with the
manners of others. That passive tame-
ness which submits, without fIruggle, to
every encroachment of the violent and as-
fuming, forms no part of Christian duty;
but, on the contrary, is deftruaive of
general happiness and order. That unli-
mited complaisance, which, on every oc-
cafion, falls in with the opinions and
manners of others, is so far from being a
virtue, that it is itself a vice, and the pa-
rent of many vices. It overthrows all
steadiness of principle; and produces that
sinful conformity with the world, which
taints the whole character. In the pre-
sent corrupted slate of human manners,
-always to assent and to comply, is the
very worst maxim we can adopt, It is
impossible to support the purity and dig-
nity of Christian morals, without oppof-
ing the world on various occasions, even
though we should stand alone. That
gentleness therefore which belongs to vir-

L 2 tue,

SEVR M. tue, is to be carefully diftinguiffed from

Vt.

the mean spirit of cowards, and the fawn-
ing assent of sycophants. It renounces
no just right from fear. It gives up no
important truth from flattery. It is in-
deed not only consistent with a firm mind,
but it necessarily requires a manly spirit,
and a fixed principle, in order to give it
any real value. Upon this solid ground
only, the polish of gentleness can with
advantage be fuperinduced.

It stands opposed, not to the most de-

termined regard for virtue and truth, but
to harshness and severity, to pride and
arrogance, to violence and opprefion.
It is, properly, that part of the great
virtue of charity, which makes us un-
willing to give pain to any of our bre-
thren. Companion prompts us to relieve
their wants. Forbearance prevents us
from retaliating their injuries. Meekness
refrains our angry pafions; candour, our
revere judgments. Gentleness corrects
whatever is offensive in our manners;
and, by a constant train of humane at-

tentions,

tentions, fludies to alleviate the burden SEsR M.

V1.

of common misery. Its office, therefore, i--i
is extensive. It is not, like some other
virtues, called forth only on peculiar
emergencies; but it is continually in ac-
tion, when we are engaged in intercourse
with men. It ought to form our address,
to regulate our speech, and to diffuse itself
over our whole behaviour.

I must warn you, however, not to

confound this gentle wiflom which is from
above, with that artificial courtesy, that
fludied smoothness of manners, which is
learned in the school of the world. Such
accomplishments, the most frivolous and
empty may possess. Too often they are
employed by the artful, as a snare; too
often affeced by the hard and unfeel-
ing, as a cover to the baseness of their
minds. We cannot, at the fame time,
avoid observing the homage, which,
even in such instances, the world is con-
strained to pay to virtue. In order to
render society agreeable, it is found ne-
ceffary to assume somewhat, that may at

L 3 lcaft

SE RM. Ieaft carry its appearance. Virtue is the

V1.
'Ayj universal charm. Even its shadow is

courted, when the substance is wanting,
The imitation of its form has been re-
duced into an art; and, in the commerce
of life, the first ltudy of all who would
either gain the esteem, or win the hearts
of others, is to learn the speech, and to
adopt the manners, of candour, gentle-
ness, and humanity. But that gentleness
which is the charafteriftick of a good
man, has, like every other virtue, its
feat in the heart: And, let me add, no.
thing except what flows from the heart,
can render even external manners truly
pleasing. For no assumed behaviour can
at all times hide the real charater. In
that unaffeced civility which springs
from a gentle mind, there is a charm in-
finitely more powerful, than in all the
Rudied manners of the most finished
courtier.

True gentleness is founded on a sense

of what we owe to him who made us,
and to the common nature of which we

all

all fliare. It arises from reflecion on our s E R M.

VI

own failings and wants; and fiom jufR -
views of the condition, and the duty of
man. It is native feeling, heightened and
improved by principle. It is the heart
which easily relents; which feels for every
thing that is human; and is backward
and flow to inflict the leant wound. It is
affable in its address, and mild in its de-
meanour; ever ready to oblige, and will-
ing to be obliged by others; breathing
habitual kindness towards friends, cour-
tefy to strangers, long-fuffering to ene-
mies. It exercises authority with mode-
ration; administers reproof with tender-
ness; confers favours with ease and mo-
defly. It is unassuming in opinion, and
temperate in zeal. It contends not ea-
gerly about trifles; flow to contradic, and
till flower to blame; but prompt to
allay dissention, and to restore peace. It
neither intermeddles unnecessarily with
the affairs, nor pries inquisitively into the
secrets of others. It delights above all
things to alleviate distress, and, if it can-

L 4 not

S ERM. not dry up the falling tear, to sooth at

leat the grieving heart. Where it has
not the power of being useful, it is never
burdensome. It seeks to please, rather
than to ihine and dazzle; and conceals
with care that superiority, either of ta-
lents, or of rank, which is oppressive to
those who are beneath it. In a word, it
is that spirit, and that tenour of manners,
which the gospel of Christ enjoins, when
it commands us to bear one another's bur-
dens; to rejoice with those who rejoice,
and to weep with those who weep; to pleaft
every one his neighbour for his good,; to be
kind and tender-hearted; to be pitiul and
courteous; to support the weak, and to be
patient towards all men.

Having now sufficiently explained the

nature of this amiable virtue, I proceed
to recommend it to your practice. Let
me, for this end, desire you to confider
the duty which you owe to God; to con-
fider the relation which you bear to one
another; to confider your own interest.

I, CONSIDER

I. CONSIDER the duty which you owe SERM.

to God. When you survey his works, no-
thing is so conspicuous, as his greatness and
inajefty. When you consult his word, no-
thing is more remarkable, than his attention
to soften that greatness, and to place it in
the mildest and least oppressive light. He
not only characerizes himself as the God of
conolation, but, with condescending gentle-
ness, he particularly accommodates himself
to the situation of the unfortunate. He
dwelleth rwith the humble and contrite. He
hideth not his face when the afficled cry. He
healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up
their wounds.-When his Son came to be
the Saviour of the world, he was eminent
for the fame attribute of mild and gentle
goodness. Long before his birth, it was
prophesied of him, that he should not
Jfrive, nor cry, nor cauf his voice to be
heard in the Jlreets; that the bruiscd reed
he fJould not break, nor quench the finok-
i!g flax *: And after his death, this

* Matthl xii. 19, zo.

diftin.

S E R M. diftinguiihing feature in his character was

VI.
_y_ iso universally remembered, that the Apostle

Paul, on occasion of a request which he
makes to the Corinthians, uses those re-
markable expreffiions *, I beseech you by the
,neeknefs and gentleness of Chris. During
all his intercourse with men, no harshness,
or pride, or flately distance, appeared in
his demeanour. In his access, he was easy;
in his manners, simple; in his answers,
mild; in his whole behaviour, humble and
obliging. Learn of me, said he, for Iam
meek and lowly in heart.-As tlie Son of
God' is the pattern, so the Holy Ghost is
the inspirer of gentleness. His name is
the Consorter, the Spirit of grace and peace.
His fruits, or operations on the human
mind, are love, mecknefs,gentlenefs, and lbng-
fiieringt.-Thus, by every discovery of
the Godhead, honour is conferred upon
gentleness. It is held up to our view, as
peculiarly cpnneced with Celestial Nature.
And suitable to such discoveries, is the whole
firain of the Gospel. It were unnecessary to

2 Cor. x. . f Gal.v. zz.

appeal

appeal to any tingle precept. You need s E R M.
only open the New Teflament, to find this v]
virtue perpetually inculcated. Charity, or
love, is the capital figure ever presented
to our view; and gentleness, forbearance,
and forgiveness, are the founds ever re-
curring on our ear.

So predominant, indeed, is this spirit

throughout the Christian dispensation,
that even the vices and corruptions of
men have not been able altogether to
defeat its tendency. Though that dif-
penfation is far from having hitherto
produced its full effeet upon the world,
yet we can clearly trace its influence, in
humanizing the manners of men. Re-
markable in this refpet, is the victory
which it has gained over those powers of
violence and c'uelty, which belong to the
infernal kingdom. Wherever Chriftia-
nity prevails, it has discouraged, and, in
some degree, abolished slavery. It has
rescued human nature from that ignomi-
nious yoke, under which, in former ages,
the one half of mankind groaned. It has

introduced

S E R M. introduced more equality between the two
(V sexes, and rendered the conjugal union

more rational and happy. It has abated
the ferociousness of war. It has miti-
gated the rigour of despotism, mitigated
the cruelty of punishment; in a word,
has reduced mankind, from their ancient
barbarity, into a more humane and gentle
slate.- Do we pretend refpea and zeal
for this religion, and at the fame time
allow ourselves in that harshness and feve-
rity, which are so contradictory to its ge-
nius ? Too plainly we ihow, that it has no
power over our hearts. We may retain
the Christian name; but we have abandoned
the Christian spirit.

II. CONSIDER the relation which you

bear to one another. Man, as a solitary
individual, is a very wretched being.
As long as he Btands detached from his
kind, he is poffefled, neither of happiness,
nor of stren'gth. We are formed by na-
ture to unite; we are impelled towards
each other, by the compassionate inftinds

in

in our franme; we are linked by a thou- s E R M.

VI.

sand connetions, founded on common e,-..
wants. Gentleness therefore, or, as it is
very properly termed, humanity, is what
man, as such, in every ftatiun, owes to
man. To be inaccessible, contemptuous,
and hard of heart, is to revolt against
our own nature; is, in the language of
scripture, to hide ourselves fir;ll our owlt
jfleh. Accordingly, as all feel the claim
which they have to mildness and huma-
nity, so all are sensibly hurt by the want
of it in others. On no fide are we more
vulnerable. No complaint is more feel-
ingly made, than that of the harsh and
rugged manners of persons with whom we
have intercourse. But how seldom do we
transfer the cafe to ourselves, or examine
how far we are guilty of inflicting on
others, whose sensibility is the fame with
ours, those very wounds of which we so
loudly complain ?

But perhaps, it will be pleaded by

some, That this gentleness, on which we
now insist, regards only those finaller

offices

S E R M. offices of life, which in their eye are

A- not essential to religion and goodness.

Negligent, they confers, on flight occa-
sions, of the government of their temper,
or the regulation of their behaviour, they
are attentive, as they - pretend, to the
great duties of beneficence; and ready,
whenever the opportunity presents, to
perform important services to their fel-
low-creatures. But let such persons re-
flec that the occasions of performing
those important good deeds, very rarely
occur. Perhaps their situation in life, or
the nature of their connecions, may in
a great measure exclude them from such
opportunities. Great events give scope
for great virtues; but the main tenour of
human life is composed of finall occur-
rences. Within the round of these, lie
the materials of the happiness of most
men; the fubjeds of their duty, and
the trials of their virtue. Virtue must
be formed and supported, not by unfre-
quent acs, but by daily and repeated
exertions. In order to its becoming either

vigorous

vigorous or useful, it must be habitually S E M.
active; not breaking forth occasionally with -_
a transient lufire, like the blaze of the
comet; but regular in its returns, like the
light of day: Not like the aromatic gale,
which Sometimes feasts the sense; but like
the ordinary breeze, which purifies the air,
and renders it healthful.

Years may pass over our heads, with-

out affording any opportunity for ats
of high beneficence, or extensive utility.
Whereas not a day passes, but in the
common transaCtions of life, and efpe-
cially in the intercourse of domestic
society, gentleness finds place for pro-
moting the happiness of others, and for
strengthening in ourselves the habit of
virtue. Nay, by seasonable discoveries
of a humane spirit, we sometimes contri-
bute more materially to the advancement
of happiness, than by actions which are
seemingly more important. There are
situations, not a few, in human life,
where the encouraging reception, the
condescending behaviour, and .the look

5 of

S RM. of sympathy, bring greater relief to the

iV1. heart than the most bountiful gift. Whiles

on the other fide, when the hand of libe-
rality is extended to bestow, the want of
gentleness is sufficient to frustrate the in-
tention of the benefit. We four those
whom we meant to oblige; and, by con-
ferring favours with ostentation and harsh-
ness, we convert them into injuries. Can
any disposition then be held to possess a
low place in the scale of virtue, whose
influence is so considerable on the happiness
of the world ?

Gentleness is, in truth, the great ave-

nue to mutual enjoyment. Amidst the
strife of interfering interests, it tempers
the violence of contention, and keeps
alive the feeds of harmony. It softens
animofities; renews endearments; and
renders the countenance of man, a re-
frefhment to man. Banish gentleness
from the earth; suppose the world to be
filled with none but harlh and contentious
spirits; and what fort of society would
remain? The solitude of the defart were

preferable

preferable to it. The conflict of jarring s . R M.

VI.

elements in chaos; the cave, wherc sub- -v
terraneous winds contend and roar; the
den, where serpents hiss, and beaits of the
forest howl; would be the only proper
representations of fuch'afifemblies of men.
-O that I had wings like a dove! for then
I wouldfly away, and be at roes. Lo! then
I would soander far of, and remain in the
?wilderness; I would haJfen my escape from
the windy florm and tempef : For I have
sien violence and ltrif in the city. lMf
chief and sorrow are in the midf of it: De-
ceit and guile depart not front the Jreet *.
-'Strange I that where men have all one
common interest; they ihould so often,
absurdly, concur in defeating it! Has not
Nature already provided a sufficient quan-
tity of unavoidable evils for the tate of
man ? As if we did not susser eriough from
the storm which beats upon us without,
must we conspire also, in those societies
where we afemble, in order to find a re-
treat from that storm, to harass one ano.

Pfal. Iv. 6, 7, 8.

M ther

S E R M. ther ?-But if the sense of duty, and of
A_- common happiness, be insufficient to re-

commend the virtue of which we treat,
then let me desire you,

III. To confider your own interest.

Whatever ends a good man can be sup-
posed to pursue, gentleness will be found
to favour them. It prepossesses and wins
every heart. It persuades, when every
other argument fails; often disarms the
fierce, and melts the stubborn. Whereas
harshness confirms the opposition it would
subdue; and, of an indifferent person,
creates an enemy. He who could over-
look an injury committed in the collision
of interests, will long and severely resent
the flights of a contemptuous behaviour.-
To the man of gentleness, the world is ge-
nerally disposed to ascribe every other good
quality. The higher endowments of the
mind we admire at a ditfance; and when
any impropriety of behaviour accompanies
them,e we admire without love. They are
like some of the distant flars, whose bene-

ficial

ficial influence reaches not to us. Where- S E R M.

VI.

as, of the influence of gentleness, all in '
some degree partake, and therefore all love
it. The man of this character rites in
the world without firuggle, and flouriihes
without envy. His misfortunes are uni-
verfally lamented; and his failings are
easily forgiven.

But whatever may be the effec of this

virtue on our external condition, its in-
fluence on our internal enjoyment is cer-
tain and powerful. That inward tran-
quillity which it promotes, is the firl:
requisite to every pleasurable feeling. It
is the calm and clear atmosphere, the fe-
renity and sun-shine of the mind. When
benignity and gentleness. reign within,
we are always leaf in hazard of being
ruffled from without; every person, and
every occurrence, are beheld in the most
favourable light. But let some- clouds
of disgust and ill-humour gather on the
mind; and immediately the scene changes:
Nature seems transformed; and the ap-
pearance of all things is blackened to our

M a view.

S E R . view. The gentle mind is like the smooth

fiream, which reflets every objeac in its
just proportion, and in its fairest colours.
The violent spirit, like troubled waters,
renders back the images of things distorted
and broken; and communicates to them
all that disordered motion which arises
solely from its own agitation.

Offences inzit come. As soon may the

waves of the sea cease to roll, as provo-
cations to arise from human corruption
and frailty. Attacked by great injuries,
the man of mild and gentle spirit will
feel what human nature feels; and will
defend and resent, as his duty allows him.
But to those flight provocations, and fri-
volous offences, which are the most fre-
quent causes of disquiet, he is happily
fuperiour. Hence his days flow in a far
more placid tenour than those of others;
exempted from' the numberless difcom-
pofures which agitate vulgar minds. In-
spired witfi higher sentiments; taught to
regard, with indulgent eye, the frailties of
men, the omissions of the careless, the

6 follies

follies of the imprudent, and the levity of S F R M.

VI.

the fickle, he retreats into the calmness of v
his spirit, as into an undisturbed fanduary;
and quietly allows the usual current of life
to hold its course.

This virtue has another, and frill more

important connection with our interest,
by means of that relation which our pre-
sent behaviour bears to our eternal fate.
Heaven is the region of gentleness and
friendfhiip; Hell, of fierceness and animo-
fity. If then, as the scripture infiruds us,
according to what we now sow, we muf11
hereafter reap; it follows, that the culti-
vation of a gentle temper is necessary to
prepare us for heavenly felicity; and that
the indulgence of harlh dispositions, is
the introducion to future misery. Men, I
am afraid, too often separate those articles
of their belief which relate to eternity,
from the ordinary affairs of the world.
They conned them with the seasons of
seriousness andgravity. They leave them
with much respect, as in a high region,
to which, only on great occasions, they

M 3 resort

SE R M. resort; and, when they descend into

V.
h-.-.a common life, confider themselves as at

liberty to give free scope to their humours
and passions. Whereas, in fad, it is their
behaviour in the daily train of social in-
tercourfe, which, more than any other
cause, fixes and determines their spiritual
character; gradually inflilling those dif-
positions, and forming those habits, which
affect their everlasting condition. With
regard to trifles, perhaps, their malig-
nant dispositions may chiefly be indulged.
But let them remember well, that those
trifles, by increasing the growth of pee-
vifhnefs and passion, become pregnant
with the most serious mischiefs; and
may fit them, before they are aware, for
being the future companions of none but
infernal spirits.

I mean not to fay, that in order to our

preparation for Heaven, it is enough to
be mild and gentle; or that this virtue
alone, will cover all our fins. Through
the felicity of natural constitution, a cer-
tain degree of this benignity may be pof-

sesscd

sessed by some, whose hearts are in other s ER M.
refpets corrupt, and their lives irregular.
But what I mean to assert, is, That where
no attention is given to the government
of temper, meetnefs for Heaven is not
yet acquired, and the regenerating power
of religion is as yet unknown. One of
the first works of the spirit of God, is,
to infuse into every heart which it inha-
bits, that gentle wifdonm which is from
above. They who are ChriJi's, have cruci-
sied the fiefI, with its affeions and lhmts;
but let it not be forgotten, that among
the works of the fleJh, hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, Jlrife, and envyings, are
as expressly enumerated, as uncleanness,
murders, drunkenness, and revelling *.
They who continue either in the one or
the other, JJhall not inherit, indeed cannot
inherit, the kingdom of God.

Having thus shown the importance of

gentleness, both as a moral virtue, and as
a Chriltian grace, I shall conclude the
subjea, with briefly suggesting some con-

* Gal. v. 19, zc, 21,

M 4 fiderations

S E R M. fiderations which may be of use to facili-

VI.
Ayi tate the practice of it.

FOR this end, let me advise you to view

your character with an impartial eye;
and to learn, from your own failings, to
give that indulgence which in your turn
you claim. It is pride which fills the
world with so much harshness and feve-
rity. In the fulness of flf-eftimation, we
forget what we are. We claim attentions,
to which we are not entitled. We are ri-
gorous to offences, as if we had never of-
fended; unfeeling to distress, as if we
knew not what it was to susser. From
those airy regions of pride and folly, let
us descend to: our proper level. Let us
survey the natural equality on which Pro-
vidence ha' placed man with man, and
reflec on the infirmities common to all.
If the reflection on natural equality and
mutual offences 'be insufficient 'to prompt
humanity, let us at least remember what
we are in the fight of God,;' Have we
none of that forbearance to give to one

.... ' ·another,

another, which we all so earnestly intreat S E R M.

VI.

from Heaven? Can we look for clemency -r
or gentleness from our Judge, when we
are so backward to flow it to our own
brethren ?

Accustom yourselves, also, to reflect on

the small moment of those things which
are the usual incentives to violence and
contention. In the ruffled and angry
hour, we view every appearance through
a false medium. The most inconsiderable
point of interest, or honour, swells into a
momentous object; and the slightest at-
tack seems to threaten immediate ruin.
But after passion or pride has'fubfided, we
look round in vain for the mighty mif-
chiefs we dreaded. The fabric, which
our disturbed imagination had reared,
totally disappears. But though the cause
of contention has dwindled away, its
consequences remain. We have alienated
a friend; we have embittered an enemy;
we have sown the feeds of future fufpi-
cion, malevolence, or difguft.-Sufpend
your violence, I beseech you, for a mo-

ment,

S E R M. ment, when causes of discord occur. An-

VI.
. -~ri ticipate that period of coqlnefs, which, of

itself, will soon arrive. Allow yourselves
to think, how little you have any profpe:
of gaining by fierce contention; but how
much of the true happiness of life you
are certain of throwing away. Easily.,
and from the smallest chink, the bitter
waters of strife are let forth; but their
course cannot be foreseen; and he seldom
fails of suffering molt from their poisonous
effea, who first allowed them to flow.

.But gentleness will, most of all, be pro-

mnoted by frequent views of those great
objeats which our holy religion presents,
Let the profpeCs of immortality fill your
minds. Look upqn this world as a sPate
of passage. Confider yourselves as en-
gaged in the pursuit of higher interests;
as ating now, under the eye of God, an
introductory part to a more important
scene. Elevqted by such fentimenas, your
mind,s will become calm and sedate. You
will look down, as from a superior fla-
tion, on the petty disturbances of the

*8 ~2 ~ world.

world. They are the selfish, the sensual, S E RM.

V1.

and the vain, who are most subjed to the ---
impotence of passion. They are linked
so closely to the world; by so many fides
they touch every objet, and every per-
son around them, that they are perpetu-
ally hurt, and perpetually hurting others.
But the spirit of true religion removes
us to a proper distance from the grating
objects of worldly contention. It leaves
us sufficiently connected with the world,
for acting our part in it with propriety;
but disengages us from it so far, as
to weaken its power of disturbing our
tranquillity. It inspires magnanimity;
and magnanimity always breathes gentle-
ness. It leads us to view the follies of
men with pity, not with rancour; and to
treat, with the mildness of a superior na-
ture, what in little minds would call forth
all the bitterness of passion.

Aided by such considerations, let us

cultivate that gentle wisdom which is, in
so many respeCts, important both to our
duty and our happines,. Let us assume

it

s E R M. it as the ornament of every age, and of

y.
,-.¥_ every fRation. Let it temper the petu-

lance of youth, and soften the morose-
ness of old age. Let it mitigate authority
in those who rule, and promote deference
among those who obey. I conclude with
repeating the caution, not to mistake for
true gentleness, that flimzy imitation of
it, called polished manners, which often,
among the men of the world, under a
smooth appearance, conceals much afpe-
rity. Let yours be native gentleness of
heart, flowing from the love of God, and
the love of man. Unite this amiable spirit,
with a proper zeal for all that is right,
and just, and true. Let piety be com-
bined in your character with humanity.
Let determined integrity dwell in a mild
and gentle breast. A characer thus sup-
ported will command more real refpet,
than can be procured by the most shining
accomplishments, when separated from
yirtue.

S E R-

# SERMON VII. On the DISORDERS of the PASSIONS. ESTHER v. 13. Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the King's gate.

[ 173 ]

SERMON VII1
On the DISORDERS of the PASSIONS.

ESTHER V. 13.

"et all this availeth me nothing, go long
as I fee Mordecai the Jew fitting at the
King's gate.
T H E S E are the words of one, who, s E R M.

though high in station and power, ,v.

confessed himself to be miserable. They
relate to a memorable occurrence in the
Persian history, under the reign of Aha-
fuerus, who is supposed to be the Prince
known among the Greek hiflorians by the
name of Artaxerxes. Ahasuerus had ad-
vanced to the chief dignity in his king-
dom Haman an Amalekite, who inhe-
rited all the ancient enmity of his race to

the

S E R M the Jewifll nation. He appears, from

_' j what is recorded of him, to have been a

very wicked minifier. Raised to greatness
without merit, he employed his power
solely for the gratificati6o' of his passions.
As the honours which he pofeffed were
next to royal, his pride was every day fed
with that servile homage which is pecu-
liar to Asiatic courts; and all the ser-
vants of the King profirated themselves
before him. In the midst of this general
adulation, one person only slooped not to
Haman. This was Mordecai the Jew;
who, knowing this Amalekite to be an
enemy to the people of God, and, with
virtuous indignation, despising that in-
folence of prosperity with which he saw
him lifted up, bowed not, nor did him re-
voe'nce. On this appearance of difre-
fpea from Mordecai, Haman was fill of
ewath: But he thought scorn to lay hands
on Mordecai alone. Personal revenge was
not sufficient to satisfy him. So violent
and black were his passions, that he re-
solved to exterminate the whole nation to

which

which Mordecai belonged. Abusing, for SER W.
this cruel purpose, the favour of his cre- --
dulous Sovereign, he obtained a decree to
be sent forth, that, against a certain day,
all the Jews throughout the Persian do-
minions should be put to the sword.
Mean while, confident of success, and
blind to approaching ruin, he continued
exulting in his prosperity. Invited by
Ahasuerus to a royal banquet, which
Esther the Queen had prepared, he went
forth that day joyful, and with a glad heart.
But behold how flight an incident was
sufficient to poison his joy! As he went
forth, he saw Mordecai in the King's
gate; and observed, that still he refused
to do him homage: He flood not up, nor
was moved for him; although he well
knew the formidable designs which Ha-
man was preparing to execute. One pri-
vate man, who despised his greatriefs,
and disdained submission, while a whole
kingdom trembled before him; one spirit,
which the utmost firetch of his power
could neither subdue nor humble, blafR-

ed

S E RM. ed his triumphs. His whole foul *as

- - fshaken with a storm of passion. Wrath,

pride, and desire of revenge, rose into
fury. With difficulty he refrained him-
self in public; but as soon as he came
to his own house; he was forced to dif-
close the agony of his mind. He gather-
ed together his friends and family, with
Zerifh his wife; He told them of the glory
of his riches, and the multitude of his chil-
dren, and all the things wherein the King
had promoted him, and how he had ad.
vanced him above the princes and servants
of the King. Hefaid, moreover, Tea, EJfher
the tueen did let ni man come in with the
King, unto the banquet that'Jhe had pre-
pared, but myself; and to-morrow also am I
invited unto her with the King. After all
this preamble, what is the conclusion ?-
Tet all this availeth me nothing, so long
as I fee Mordecai the Jyew fitting at the
;King's gate.

The sequel of Haman's history I hlall

not now pursue. It might afford matter
for much initrution, by the confpicu-

ous

buti justice of God in his fall and punish- s R M.
ment. But, contemplating only the fin-
gular situation in which the Text presents
him, and the violent agitation of his
mind which it displays, the following
refletions naturally arise, which, toge-
ther with some practical improvements,
shall make the subjed of this dilcourfe.
I How miserable is vice, when one guilty
passion creates so much torment! II. How
unavailing is prosperity, when, in the
height of it, a single disappointment can
destroy the relish of all its pleasures! III.
How weak is human nature, which, in
the absence of real, is thus prone to form
to itself imaginary woes !

I. How miserable is vice, when one

guilty paflion is capable of creating so
much torment! When we discourse to
you of the internal misery of finners;
when we represent the pangs which they
susser, from violent passions, and a cor-
rupted heart; we are sometimes fufpeced
of chufing a theme for declamation, and

N of

s ER M. of heightening the picture which we
,-v--' draw, by colours borrowed from fancy.

They whose minds are, by nature, hap-
pily tranquil, or whose situation in life
removes them from the disturbance and
tumult of passion, can hardly conceive,
that as long as the body is at ease, and
the external condition prosperous, any
thing which passes within the mind
Should cause such exquisite woe. But,
for the truth of our assertions, we appeal
to the history of mankind. We might
reason from the conifitution of the ra-
tional frame; where the understanding is
appointed to be supreme, and the passions
to be subordinate; and where, if this due
arrangement of its parts be overthrown,
misery as necessarily ensues, as pain is
consequent in the animal frame, upon
the distortion of its members. But lay-
ing speculations of this kind aside, it is
sufficient to lead you to the view of facts,
the import of which can neither be con-
troverted, nor mistaken. This is, indeed,
the great advantage of history, that it is

,~: ,,~ . aa mir-

a miri-our which holds up mankind to S R R\;.
their own view. For, in all ages, human Gu..
nature has been the fame. In the circle of
worldly affairs, the fame characers and
situations are perpetually returning; and
in the follies and passionss the vices and
crimes, of the generations that are past,
we read those of the present.

Attend, then, to the instance now be-

fore us; and conceive, if you can, a per-
son more thoroughly wretched, than one
reduced to make this humiliating consef-
sion, that though surrounded with power,
opulence and pleasure, he was loft to all
happiness, through the fierceness of his
resentment; and was at that moment
flung by disappointment, and torn by
rage, beyond what he could bear. All
this availeth me nothing, so long as I ee
Mordecai the Jew fitting at the King's gate.
Had this been a soliloquy of Haman's
within himself, it would have been a fuffi-
cient discovery of his misery. But when
we confider it as a confeffon which he
makes to others, it is a proof that his

N 2 misery

s E R M. misery was become insupportable. For

such agitations of the mind every man
firives to conceal, because he knows they
dilhonour him. Other griefs and for-
rows, he can, with freedom, pour out to
a confident. What he suffers from the
injutfice or malice of the world, he is not
ashamed to acknowledge. But when his
suffering arises from the bad dispositions
of his own heart; when, in the height
of prosperity, he is rendered miserable,
solely by disappointed pride, every ordi-
nary motive for communication ceases.
Nothing but the violence of anguish, can
drive him to confess a passion which ren-
ders him odious, and a weakness which
renders him despicable. To what ex-
tremity, in particular, muff he be re-
duced, before he can disclose to his own
family the infamous secret of his misery ?
In the eye of his family every man wiflies
to appear refpetable, and to cover from
their knowledge whatever may vilify or
degrade him. Attacked or reproached
abroad, he consoles himself with his im-

portance

portance at home; and in domestic at- SF.RM.
tachment and refpet, seeks for some com- - '
penfation for the injustice of the world.
Judge, then, of the degree of torment
which Haman endured, by its breaking
through all these refiraints, and forcing
him to 'publilh his shame before those,
from whom all men seek most to hide it.
How severe mufft have been the conflict
which he underwent within himself, be-
fore he called together his wife and all
his friends for this purpose ! How dread-
ful the agony he suffered at the moment
of his confession, when, to the aflonifled
company, he laid open the cause of his
distress !

Assemble all the evils which poverty,

disease, or violence can infiEt, and their
flings will be found by far less pungent,
than those which such guilty paflions dart
into the heart. Amidst the ordinary cala-
mities of the world, the mind canr exert
its powers, and suggest relief: And the
mind is properly the man; the sufferer,
and his sufferings, can be diftinguilhed.

N3 But

S RMM. But those disorders of passion, by feiz.

ing direaly on the mind, attack hu-
man nature in its firong hold, and cut
off its last resource. They penetrate to
the very feat of sensation; and convert all
the powers of thought into infiruments of
torture.

Let us remark, in the event that is now

before us, the awful hand of God; and
admire his justice, in thus making the
finner's ozvn wvickednefs to reprove hinm, and
his backJlidings to correS him. Scepticks
reason in vain against the reality of di-
vine government. It is not a subjea of
dispute. It is a faa which carries the
evidence of sense, and displays itself be-
fore our eyes. We fee the Almighty ma-
nifeftly purfJiing thejinner with evil. We
fee him conneting with every single de-
viation from duty, those wounds of the
spirit which occasion the moit exquisite
torment. He hath not merely promul-
gated his laws now, and delayed the dif-
tribution of rewards and punishments
pntil a future period of being. But- the

fanions

fanaions of his laws already take place; s E R M
their effects appear; and with such infi-
nite wisdom are they contrived, as to
require' no other executioners of justice
against the finner, than his own guilty
passions. God needs not come forth from
his secret place, in order to bring him to
punishment. He needs not call thunder
down from the heavens, nor raise any
minister of wrath from the abyss below.
He needs only fay, Ephraitm is joined to his
idols; let him alone: Atnd, at that inflant,
the finner becomes his own tormentor.
The infernal fire begins, of itself, to kin-
die within him. The worm that never
dies, seizes on his heart.

Let us remark also, from this example,

how imperfeitly we can judge from ex-
ternal appearances, concerning real hap-
piness or misery. All Pcrfia, it is pro-
bable, envied H-aman as the happiest
person in the empire; while yet, at the
moment of which we now treat, there
was not within its bounds, one more
thoroughly wretched. We are fcduccd,

N 4 and

SE RM. and deceived by that false glare which
.-v. prosperity sometimes throws around bad

men. We are tempted to imitate their
crimes, in order to partake of their ima-
gined felicity. But remember Haman,
and beware of the snare. Think not,
when you behold a pageant of grandeur
displayed to public view, that you dif-
cern the ensign of certain happiness. In
order to form any just: conclusion, you
must follow the great man into the re-
tired apartment, where he lays aside his
difguile. You must not only be able to
penetrate into the interiour of families,
but you must have a faculty by which
you can look into the inside of hearts.
Were you endowed with such a power,
you would most commonly behold good
men, in proportion to their goodness,
satisfied and easy; you would behold
atrocious finners, always restless and un-
happy.

Unjust are our complaints, of the

promiscuous difiribution made by Provi-
dence, of its favours among men. From

superficial

superficial view such complaints arise, SE RM.
The dirtribution of the goods of fortune, b,.
indeed, may often be promiscuous; that
is, disproportioned to the moral charac-
ters of men; but the allotment of real
happiness is never so. For to the wicked
there is no peace. They are like the trolibled
sea when it cannot reft. They travel with
pain all their days. Trouble and angnuh
prevail agair/l them. Terrours make them
afraid oni every fide. ' A dreadful found is
in their ears; and they are in great fear
where no fear is.- -Hitherto we have
confidered Haman under the characer of
a very wicked man, tormented by crimi-
nal passions. Let us now confider him,
merely as a child of fortune, a profpe-
rous man of the world; and proceed to
observe,

II. How unavailing worldly prosperity

is, since, in the midst of it, a tingle dif-
appointment is sufficient to embitter all
its pleasures. We might at first imagine,
that the natural effet of prosperity would

be,

S R M. be, to diffuse over the mind' a prevailing

vII. Av_,~ satisfaction, which the lesser evils of life

could not ruffle or disturb. We might
expect, that as one in the full glow of
health, despises the inclemency of wea-
ther; so one in poffefion of all the ad-
vantages of high power and station,
should disregard flight injuries; and, at
perfect ease within himself, ihould view,
in the mot favourable light, the behavi-
our of others around him. Such effects
would indeed follow, if worldly prosperity
contained in itself the true principles of
human felicity. But as it possesses them
not, the very reverse of those confequen-
ces generally obtains. Prosperity debili-
tates, instead of strengthening the mind.
Its most common effect is, to create an
extreme sensibility to the flightefi wound.
It foments impatient desires; and raises
expectations which no success can satisfy.
It fofters.a false delicacy, which sickens
in the midst of indulgence. By repeat-
ed gratification, it blunts the feelings of
men to what is pleating; and leaves them

unhappily

unhappily acute to whatever is uneasy. S rR M.
Hence, the gale which another would ; -
scarcely feel, is, to the prosperous, a rude
tempest. Hence, the rofe-leaf doubled be-
low them on the couch, as it is told of the
effeminate Sybarite, breaks their reft.
Hence, the'difrefpea flhown by Mordecai,
preyed with such violence on the heart of
Haman. Upon no principle of reason can
we assign a sufficient cause for all the
distress which this incident occasioned to
him. The cause lay not in the external
incident. It lay within himself; it arose
from a mind distempered by prosperity.

Let this example correct that blind

eagerness, with which we rush to the
chace of worldly greatness and honours.
I fay not, that it ihould altogether divert
us from pursuing them; since, when en-
joyed with temperance and wisdom, they
may doubtless both enlarge our utility,
and contribute to our comfort. But let it
teach us, not to over-rate them. Let it
convince us, that uniefs we add to them
the necessary corredives of piety and vir-

tue,

S ER M. tue, they are, by themselves, more likely

VII.
L-v-j to render us wretched, than to make us

happy.

Let the memorable fate of Haman

suggest to us also, how often, besides cor-
rupting the mind, and engendering inter-
nal misery, they lead us among precipices,
and betray us into ruin. At the moment
when fortune seemed to smile upon him,
with the most serene and fettled aspea
The was digging in secret the pit for his
fall. Prosperity was weaving around his
head the web of deftrudion. Success in-
flamed his pride; pride increased his thirll
of revenge; the revenge which, for the
fake of one man, he fought to execute on
a whole nation, incensed the Queen; and
he is doomed to fuffer'the fame death
which he had prepared for Mordecai.-
Had Haman remained in a private fta-
tion, he might have arrived at a peaceable
old age. He might have been, I ihall not
fay, a good or a happy man, yet pro-
bably far less guilty, and less wretch-
ed, than when placed at the head of the

greateRt

greatest empire in the Eat. WTho knoweth s E R M.

VII.

what is good for man int this life, all the v
days of his vain life, which he fpendeth as
aflhadow?

An extensive contemplation of human

affairs, will lead us to this conclusion,
That among the different conditions and
ranks of men, the balance of happiness
is preserved in a great measure equal;
and that the high and the low, the rich
and the poor, approach, in point of real
enjoyment, much nearer to each other,
than is commonly imagined. In the lot
of man, mutual compensations, both of
pleasure and of pain, universally take
place. Providence never intended, that
any state here should be either completely.
happy, or entirely miserable. If the feel-
ings of pleasure are more numerous, and
more lively, in the higher departments
of life, such also are those of pain. If
greatness flatters our vanity, it multiplies
our dangers. If opulence increases our
gratifications, it increases, in the fame
proportion, our desires and demands. If

the

s R M. the poor are confined to a more narrov

vII. -. circle, yet within that circle lie most of

those natural fatisfaftions, which, after
all the refinements of art, are found to
be the most genuine and true.-In a
state, therefore, where there is neither so
much to be coveted on the one hand, nor
to be dreaded on the other, as at firit
appears, Eow submissive ought we to be
to the disposal of Providence! How tem-
perate in our desires and pursuits! How
much more attentive to preserve our vir-
tue, and to improve our minds, than to
gain the doubtful and equivocal advan-
tages of worldly profperity!-But now,
laying aside the consideration of Haman's
great crimes; laying aside his high pro.
fperity; viewing him simply as a man,
let us observe, from his history,

III. H o w weak human nature is,

which, in the absence of real, is thus
prone. to create to itself imaginary woes.
All this availeth me nothing, so long as Ifee
Mordecai the Jew fitting at the Kiing's gate.

-What

- What was it, 0 Haman ! to thee, s E R M.
though Mordecai had continued to fit ,
there, and neglected to do thee homage ?
Would the banquet have been on that
account the less magnificent, thy palace
lets splendid, or thy retinue less nume-
rous ? Could the difiefped of an obscure
itranger dishonour the favourite of a
mighty King? In the midit of a thou-
sand submissive courtiers, was one fullen
countenance an on!jcl worthy of drawing
thy notice, or of troubling thy repose ?-
Alas! in Haman we behold too just a
picture of what often passes within our-
selves. We never know what it is to be
long at ease. Let the world cease from
changing around us. Let external things
keep that situation in which we most
wish them to remain; yet somewhat
from within shall soon arise, to disturb
our happiness. A Mordecai appears, or
seems to appear,fittilng at the gate. Some
vexation, which our fancy has either
entirely created, or at least has unreason-
Bbly aggravated, corrodes us in secret;

and

SERM. and until that be removed, all that we

VII. -..J enjoy availeth us nothing. Thus, while

we are incessantly complaining of the
vanity and the evils of human life, we
make that vanity, and we increase those
evils. Unskilled in the art of extraaing
happiness from the objecs around us, our
ingenuity solely appears in converting
them into misery.

Let it not be thought, that troubles of

this kind are incident only to the great
and the mighty. Though they, perhaps,
from the intemperance of their paflions,
are peculiarly exposed to them; yet the
disease itself belongs to human nature,
and spreads through all ranks. In the
humble, and seemingly quiet shade of
private life, discontent broods over its
imaginary sorrows; preys upon'the citi-
zen, no less than upon the courtier; and
often nourishes passions, equally malig-
nant in the cottage and in the palace.
Having once seized the mind, it spreads
its own gloom over every surrounding
object; it every where searches out ma-

terials
8

terials for itself; and in no diretion more S ER tM.
frequently employs its unhappy aaivi-
ty, than in creating divisions amongst
mankind, and in magnifying flight pro-
vocations into mortal injuries. Those
felf-created miseries, imaginary in the
cause, but real in the suffering, will be
found to form a proportion of human
evils, notinferiour, either in severity or
in number, to all that we endure from
the unavoidable calamities of life. In
situations where much comfort might be
enjoyed, this man's superiority, and that
man's neglect, our jealousy of a friend,
our hatred of a rival, an imagined as-
fiont, or a miflaken point of honour,
allow us no repose. Hence, discords in
families, animofities among friends, and
wars among nations. Hence, Haman
miserable in the midst of all that great-
ness could beflow. Hence, multitudes
in the mofl obscure flations, for whom
Providence seemed to have prepared a
quiet life, no less eager in their petty
broils, nor less tormented by their pas-

0 lions,

S E R M. sions, than if princely honours were the

VII.
» ,_ prize for which they contended.

FROM this train of observation, which

the Text has suggested, can he avoid re-
fledting upon the disorder in which hu-
man nature plainly appears at present to,
lie? We have beheld, in Haman, the
pidure of that misery. which arises from
evil passions; of that unhappiness, which
is incident to the highest prosperity; of
that discontent, which is common to
every state. Whether we confider him
as a bad man, a prosperous man, or fim-
ply as a man, in every light we behold
reason too weak for passion. This is the
source of the reigning evil; this is the
root of the universal disease. The flory
of Haman only shows us, what human
nature has too generally appeared to
be in every age. Hence, when we read
the history of nations, what do we read
but the 'history of the follies and crimes
of men ? We may dignify those recorded
tranfahtions, by calling them the intrigues

of

of ftatefinen, and the exploits ns S'oEcMlr

e- SE M.

ours; but they arc, in truth, no other than -
the effb:ts of dif;:ontent to escape from
its misery, and the struggles of contending
passions among unhappy men, The history
of mankind has ever been a continued
tragedy; the world, a great theatre exhi-
biting the fame repeated scene, of the follies
of men shooting forth into guilt, and of
their passions fermenting, by a quick pro-
cess, into misery.

But can we believe, that the nature of

mnan came forth in this state from the
hands of its gracious Creator? Did he
frame this world, and flore it with inha-
bitants, solely that it might be replenished
with crimes and misfortunes ?-In the
moral, as well as in the natural world,
we may plainly discern the signs of some
violent convulsion, which has shattered the
original workmanship of the Almighty.
Amidst this wreck of human natures
traces frill remain which indicate its Au-
thor. Those high powers of conscience
and reason, that capacity for happiness,

0 2 that

s ER M. that ardour of enterprize, that glow of

VII. _Lv- affection, which often break through the

gloom of human vanity and guilt, are
like the scattered columns, the broken
arches, and defaced sculptures of some
fallen temple, whose ancient splendour
appears amidit its ruins. So conspicuous
in human nature are those characers,
both of a high origin, and of a degrad-
ed slate, that, by many religious seas
throughout the earth, they have been
seen and confessed. A tradition seems to
have pervaded almost all nations, that
the human race had either through some
offence forfeited, or through some mif-
fortune loft, that flation of primeval
honour which they once possessed. But
while, from this dotrine, ill understood,
and involved in many fabulous tales, the
nations wandering in Pagan darkness
could draw no consequences that were
just; while, totally ignorant of the na-
ture of the disease, they fought in vain
for the remedy; the fame divine revela-
tion, which has informed us in what

manner

manner our apoftacy arose, from the abuse s R R M.
of our rational powers, has inftruded us
also how we may be restored to virtue and
to happiness.

LET us, therefore, study to improve

the assistance which this revelation affords,
for the restoration of our nature, and the
recovery of our felicity. With humble
and grateful minds, let us apply to those
medicinal springs which it hath opened,
for curing the disorders of our heart and
passions. In this view, let us, with reve-
rence, look up to that Divine Personage,
who descended into this world, on pur-
pose to be the light and the life of men:
who came, in the fulness of grace and
truth, to repair the deolations of many ge-
nerations, to restore order among the
works of God, and to raise up a new earth
and new heavens, wherein righteonfnefs
Jhould dwellfor ever. Under his tuition
let us put ourselves; and, amidst the
storms of passion to which we are here
exposed, and the slippery paths which we

0 3 are

SE RM. are left to tread, never trust prefumptu-
Ay^. oufly to our own understanding. Thank.

ful that a Heavenly Condudor vouchsafes
his aid, let us earnestly pray, that from
him may descend divine light to guide
our steps, and divine strength to fortify
our minds. Let us pray, that his grace
nay keep us from all intemperate pas-
flons, and mistaken pursuits of pleasure;
that whether it ihall be his will to give or
to deny us earthly prosperity, he may bless
us with a calm, a found, and well-regu-
lated mind; may give us moderation in
success, and fortitude under disappoint-
ment; and may enable us so to take warn-
ing from the crimes and miseries of others,
as to escape the snares of guilt.

WHILE we thus maintain a due de-

pendence on God, let us also exert our-
selves with care in aCting our own part.
From the.whole of what has been said,
this important infirution arises, That the
happiness of every man depends more
pp.n the fiate of his own mind, than

upon

upon any one external circumstance; nay, s F R M.

V¥I.

more than upon all external things put
together. We have seen, that inordinate
paflions are the great disturbers of life;
and that, unless we possess a good confci-
ence, and a well-governed mind, difcon-
tent will blast every enjoyment, and the
highest prosperity will prove only difguif-
ed misery. Fix then this conclusion in
your minds, that the deftrudion of your
virtue, is the deftruftion of your peace.
Keep thy heart with alldiligence.; govern it
with the greatest care; for out of it are the
ifies of life. In no fiation, in no period,
think yourselves secure from the dangers
which spring from your paflions. Every
age, and every fation, they beset; from
youth to grey hairs, and from the peasant
to the prince.

At your first setting out in life, efpe-

cially, when yet unacquainted with the
world and its snares, when every plea-
sure enchants with its smile, and every
objea shines with the gloss of novelty;
beware of the seducing appearances which

0 4 surround

SEVRM. surround you, and recollec what others

Vil.
~. y *have suffered from the power of head-

itrong desire. If you allow any passion,
even though it be esteemed innocent,
to acquire an absolute ascendant, your
inward peace will be impaired. But if
any, which has the taint of guilt, take
early pofeffion of your mind, you may
date from that moment the ruin of your
tranquillity. Nor with the season of
youth does the peril end. To the im-
petuofity of youthful desire, succeed
the more fober, but no less dangerous,
attachments of advancing years; when
the passions which are conneced with
interest and ambition begin their reign,
and too frequently extend their malig-
nant influence, even over those periods
of life which ought to be most tranquil.
From the first to the last of man's abode
on earth, the discipline must never be
relaxed, of guarding the heart from the
dominion of passion. Eager paflions, and
violent desires, were not made for man.
They exceed his sphere. They find no

adequate

adequate objets on earth; and of course s E R M.
can be produtive of nothing but misery.
The certain consequence of indulging them
is, that there shall come an evil day, when
the anguish of disappointment shall drive
us to acknowledge, that all which we en-
joy availeth us nothing.

You are not to imagine, that the warn-

ings which I have given in this discourse,
are applicable only to the cafe of such
signal offenders as he was, of whom the
Text treats. Think not, as I am afraid
too many do, that, because your passions
have not hurried you into atrocious deeds,
they have therefore wrought no mischief,
and have left no fling behind them. By a
continued series of loose, though appa-
rently trivial, gratifications, the heart is
often as thoroughly corrupted, as by the
commission of any one of those enormous
crimes which spring from great ambition,
or great revenge. Habit gives the pafions
firength, while the absence of glaring
guilt seemingly justifies them; and, un-
awakened by remorse, the finner proceeds

2 in

S E R M. in his cotnrfe, till he wax bold in guilt, and

become ripe for ruin. For, by gradual
and latent steps, the deftrudion of our
virtue advances. Did the evil unveil itself
at the beginning; did the storm which is
to overthrow our peace, discover, as it
rose, all its horrours, precautions would
more frequently be taken against it. But
we are imperceptibly betrayed; and from
one licentious attachment, one criminal
passion, are, by a train of consequences,
drawn on to another, till the government
of our minds is irrecoverably loft. The
enticing and the odious passions are, in this
refpedt, similar in their process; and,
though by different roads, condut at last
to the fame issue. David, when he first
beheld Bathsheba, did not plan the death
of Uriah. Haman was not delivered up
all at once to the madness of revenge. His
passions rose with the rising tide of pro.
fperity; 'and pride completed what profpe-
rity began. What was originally no more
than displeasure at Mordecai's difrefpea,
increased with every invitation he received

ta

to the banquet of the Queen; till it im- s E R I.
pelled him to devise the slaughter of a -
whole nation, and ended in a degree of
rage which confounded his reason, and
hurried him to ruin. In this manner,
every criminal passion, in its progrcfs,
swells and blackens; and what was at first
a small cloud, such as the Prophet's ser-
vant saw, no bigger than a man's hand,
r/ingfroin thefea *, is soon found to carry
the tempest in its womb.

* I .ngs xviii, 44,

SER-

# SERMON VIII. On our IGNORANCE of GOOD and EVIL in this Life. ECCLES. vi. 12. Who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the days of his vain life, which he spendeth as a shadow.

[ 204 ]

SE R M O N VIII.
On our IGNORANCE of GOOD and

EVIL in this Life.

ECCLES. vi. 12.
Who knoweth what is goodfor man in this

life, all the days of his vain life, which
hefpendeth as aJhadow.

s E R M. T HE measure according to which
FJ-v `
. knowledge is dispensed to man, as-

fords conspicuous proofs of divine wis-
dom. In many instances we clearly per-
ceive, that either more or less would have
proved detrimental to his slate; that en-
tire ignorance would have deprived him
of proper motives to action; and that
complete discovery would have raised
him to a sphere too high for his pre-

sent

sent powers. He is, therefore, permitted S ER M.
to know only in part; · and to fee through v
a glass darkly. He is left in that state
of conjecture, and partial information,
which, though it may occasionally fubje&
him to distress, yet, on the whole, con-
duces most to his improvement; which as-
fords him knowledge sufficient for the pur-
poses of virtue, and of acive life, without
disturbing the operations of his mind, by
a light too bright and dazzling. This
evidently holds, with refpec to that de-
gree of obscurity which now covers the
great laws of Nature, the decrees of the
Supreme Being, the state of the invisible
world, the future events of our own life,
and the thoughts and designs which pass
within the breasts of others *.

But there is an ignorance of another

kind, with refpeat to which the applica-
tion of this remark may appear more du-
bious; the ignorance under which men
labour concerning their happiness in the
present life, and the means of attaining it.

' Vide Serm. IV.

If

SERM. If there be foundation for Solomonks
_h,~J complaint in the Text, .who knoweth what

is good for man in this life? this confe-
quence may be thought inevitably to fol-
low, That the days of his life must be vain
in every sense; not only because they are
fleeting, but because they are empty too,
like the Jhadow. For, to what purpose
are all his labours in the pursuit of an
object, which it is not in his power to
discover or ascertain ?-Let us then feri-
oufy enquire, what account can be given
of our present ignorance, refpeaing what
is good for us in this life; whether no-
thing be left, but only to wander in
uncertainty amidst this darkness, and to
lament it as the fad consequence of our
fallen fiate; or whether such infruc-
tions may not be derived from it, as give
ground for acknowledging, that by this,
as by all its other appointments, the wis-
dom of Providence brings real good out
of feemink evil. I flall, in order to de-
termine this point, first, endeavour to il-
lustrate the doctrine of the Text, That we

4 know

know not, or at most know imperfectly, s E.RM.
what is good for us in this life: I shall '--
next explain the causes to which this de-
fest in our knowledge is owing: And
then flall show the purposes which it
was intended to serve, and the effects
which it ought to produce on our con-
duct.

THE whole history of mankind seems
a comment on the dotrine of the Text.
When we review the course of human
affairs, one of the first objeCts which every
where attracts our notice, is, the mif-
taken judgment of men concerning their
own interest. That fore evil, which So-
lomon long ago remarked with refpea to
riches, of their being kept by the owners
thereof to their hurt, takes place equally
with refpet to dominion and power, and
all the splendid objects and high stations
of life. We every day behold men climb-
ing, by painful steps, to that dangerous
height, which, in the end, renders their
fall more severe, and their ruin more con-

fpicuous.

s ER M. fpicuous. But it is not to high flations

_-v that the doCrine of the Text is limited.

In the crimes by which too often these
are gained, and in the misfortunes which
they afterwards bring forth, the greater
part of every audience may think them-
selves little concerned. Leaving such
themes, therefore, to the poet and the his-
torian, let us come nearer to ourselves,
and survey the ordinary walk of life.

Around us, we every where behold a

busy multitude. Restless and uneasy in
their present situation, they are incessantly
employed in accomplishing a change of
it; and, as soon as their wish is fulfill-
ed, we discern, by their behaviour, that
they are as ditfatisfied as they were be-
fore. Where they expected to have found
a paradise, they find a desert. The man
of business pines for leisure. The leisure
for which he had longed, proves an irk-
some gloom; and, through want of em-
ployment, he languishes, sickens, and dies.
The man: of retirement fancies no state to
be so happy, as that of aaive life. But

he

he has not engaged long in the tumults SERM.
and contests of the world, until he finds ,
cause to look back with regret on the calm
hours of his former privacy and retreat.
Beauty, wit, eloquence, and fame, are
eagerly desired by persons in every rank
of life. They are the parent's fondest
with for his child; the ambition of the
young, and the admiration of the old.
And yet, in what numberless instances
have they proved, to those who pofleffed
them, no other than shining snares; fe-
duclions to vice, infligatiohs to folly,
and, in the end, sources of misery ? Com-
fortably might their days have patsed,
had they been less conspicuous. But the
diftindions which brought them forth
to notice, conferred splendour, and with-
drew happiness. Long life is, of all
others, the most generals and seemingly
the most innocent; object of desire. With
respeCt to this too, we so frequently err,
that it would have been a blessing to
many to have had their with denied.
There was a period, when they might

P have

S E RM. have quitted the stage with honour, and

in peace. But by living too long, they
outlived their reputation; outlived their
family, their friends, and comforts; and
reaped nothing from the continuance of
days, except to feel the pressure of age, to
taste the dregs of life, and to behold a wider
compass of human misery.

Man walketh in a vain Jljow. His fears

are often as vain as his wishes. As what
flattered him in expecation, frequently
wounds him in possession; so the event
to which he looked forward with an
anxious and fearful eye, has often, when
it arrived, laid its terrours aside; nay,
has brought in its train unexpeted bless-
ings. Both good and evil are beheld at a
distance, through a perfpetive which
deceives. The colours of objects when
nigh, are entirely different from what
they appeared, when they were viewed in
futurity.

THE fat. then being undoubtedly cer-
tain, that it is common for men to be

deceived

deceived in their profpeds of happiness, s E R I.
let us next enquire into the causes of that
deception. Let us attend to those peculiar
circumstances in our Rate, which render
us such incompetent judges of future good
or evil in this life.

Firfl, We are not sufficiently acquaint-

ed with ourselves, to foresee our future
feelings. We judge by the sensations of
the present moment; and, in the fervour
of desire, pronounce confidently concern-
ing the desired objet. But we refle&
not, that our minds, like our bodies, un-
dergo great alteration from the situations
into which they are thrown, and the pro-
greffive Rages of life.through which they
pass. Hence, concerning any condition
which is yet untried, we conjecture with
much uncertainty. In imagination, we
carry our present wants, inclinations, and
sentiments, into the Rate of life to which
we aspire. But no sooner have We en-
tered on it, than our sentiments and incli-
nations change. New wants and desires
arie ; new qbje&s are required to gratify

P a them;

S E R M. them; and by consequence our old dif-
»_-v- fatisfadion returns, and the void, which

was to have been filled, remains as great
as it was before.

But, next, supposing our knowledge of

ourselves sufficient to direc us in the
choice of happiness, yet frill we are liable
to err, from our ignorance of the con-
netions which subsist between our own
condition and that of others. No indi-
vidual can be happy, unless the circum-
stances of those around him be so ad-
justed as to conspire with his interest. For,
in human society, no happiness or mi-
fery stands unconneced and independent.
Our fortunes are interwoven by threads
innumerable. We touch one another on
all fides. One- man's misfortune or fuc-
cess, his wisdom or his folly, often, by
its consequences, reaches through multi-
tudes. Such a system is far too compli-
cated for our arrangement. It requires
adjustments beyond our skill and power.
It is a chaos of events, into which our
eye cannot pierce; and is capable of re-

gulation,

gulation, only by him who perceives at s R M.

VIII,
one glance the relation of each to all.

Farther, As we are ignorant of the

events which will arise from the combi-
nation of our circumfiances with those of
others, so we are equally ignorant of the
influence which the present tranfaations of
our life may have upon those which are
future. The important question is not,
What is good for a man one day; but
What is goodfor him all the days of his
life? Not, what will yield him a few
scattered pleasures; but what will render
his life happy on the whole amount ?
And is he able to answer that question,
who knoweth not what one day may bring
forth; who cannot tell, whether the e-
vents of it may not branch out into con-
sequences, which will assume a direction
quite opposite to that in which they set
forth, and spread themselves over all his
life to come ? There is not any present
moment that is unconnected with some
future one. The life of every man is a
continued',chain of incidents, each link

P 3 of

S E M. of which hangs upon the former. The

VIIi.
-. « transition from cause to effea, from event

to event, is often carried on by secret
fieps, which our foresight cahnot divine,
and our sagacity is unable to trace. Evil
may, at some future period, bring forth
good; and good may bring forth evil,
both equally unexpeted. Had the Pa-
triarch, Joseph, continued to loiter under
his father's fond indulgence, he might
have lived an obscure and insignificant
life. From the pit and the prison, arose
the incidents which made him the ruler
of Egypt, and the saviour of his father's
house.

Lastly, Supposing every other incapa-

city to be removed, our ignorance of the
dangers to which our spiritual ifate is
exposed, would disqualify us for judging
soundly concerning our true happiness.
Higher interests than those of the present
world, are now depending. All that is
done or suffered by us here, ultimately
refers to that immortal world, for which
good men are trained up, undep the care

9s

of an Almighty Parent. We are as in- SE R I.

VIII.

competent judges of the measures necef- L-
fary to be pursued for this end, as children
are, of the proper conduct to be held in
their education. We foresee the dangers
of our spiritual, still less than we do those
of our natural tate; because we are less
attentive to trace them. We are fill more
exposed to vice than to misery; because
the confidence which we place in our vir-
tue, is yet worse founded than that which
we place in our wisdom. Can you efleem
him prosperous, who is raised to a fitua-
tion which flatters his paflions, but which
corrupts his principles, disorders his tem-
per, and, finally, oversets his virtue ? In
the ardour of pursuit, how little are these
effecs foreseen ? And yet, how often are
they accomplished, by a change of condi-
tion ? Latent corruptions are called forth;
feeds of guilt are quickened into life; a
growth of crimes arises, which, had it not
been for the fatal culture of prosperity,
would never have seen the light. How
often is man, boafiful as he is of reason,

P 4 merely

s R R M. merely the creature of his fortune; form-

VIII.
ago_ _ ed, and moulded, by the incidents of his

life !-Hazael, when yet a private man,
detested the thoughts of cruelty. Thou
Jhalt flay the yoeing men with the sword,
said the PrQphet: ThouJ7aalt dash the chil-
dren, and rip, up the women with child. Is
thy servant a dog, replied Hazael, that he
Jflould do these things ? But no sooner was
he clothed with the coveted purple, than
it seemed to taint his nature. He com-
mitted the crimes of which, at a distance,
he believed himfelf.incapable; and became
the bloody tyrant, whose charater his foul
once abhorred *.

SucH then at present is man; thus

incapable of pronouncing with certainty
concerning his own good or evil. Of
futurity he discerns little; and even that
little he'fees through a cloud. Ignorant
of the akeration which his sentiments
and desires will undergo from new fitua-
tions in life; ignorant of the confequen-

* Kings viii. 12, 13.

CCS

pes which will follow from the combina- s ER M?

VIII.

tion of his circumstances with those of L,,
others around him; ignorant of the i.n-
fluence which the present may have on the
future events of his life; ignorant of the
effec which a change of condition may
produce, on his moral character, and his
eternal interests; How can he know what
is good for him all the days of his vain
life, which hefpendeth as aJhadow ?

Instead of only lamenting this ignorance,

let us, in the last place, confider how it
ought to be improved; what duties it
suggests, and what wife ends it was intend-
ed by Providence to promote.

I. L'ET this docrine teach us to pro-

ceed with caution and circumfpedion,
through a world where evil so frequent-
ly lurks under the form of good.. To be
humble and modest in opinion, to be vigi-
lant and attentive in conduct, to distrust
fair appearances, and to restrain ra(h de-
fires, are inftruaions which the darkness
of our present state should ttrongly in-

culcate.

S E R M. culcate. God hath appointed our fitua.

tion to be so ambiguous, in order both
to call forth the exertion of those intelli-
gent powers which he hath given us, and
to enforce our dependence on his gracious
aid. It is not in man that walketh, to direbi
his Jleps. Surrounded with so many be-
wildering paths, among which the wisest
are ready to stray, how earnestly Ihould
we implore, and how thankfully should
we. receive, that divine illumination which
is promised in scripture to the pious and
the humble ! Thefecret of the Lord is with
them that fear hinm. He will guide them
with his council. He will teach them the
Mway that they JJlould chiufe. But what
murf be the fate of him, who, amidst all
the dangers attending human conduc&,
neither looks up to Heaven for direction,
nor properly exerts that reason which
.od hath. given him? If to the most
diligent enquirer, it proves so difficult a
task to distinguish true good, from those
fallacious appearances with which it is
ever blended, how should he discover it,

who

who brings neither patience nor attention s RiM.
to the search; who applies to no other --
counsellor than present pleasure, and, with
a rash and credulous mind, delivers hitmfclf
up to every suggestion of desire ?

This admonition I particularly dired

to those, who are in a period of life too
often characterized by forward prefump-
tion, and headlong pursuit. The self-
conceit of the young, is the great source
of those dangers to which they are ex-
posed; and it is peculiarly unfortunate,
that the age which stands most in need of
the counsel of the wife, should be the
most prone to contemn it. Confident in
the opinfons which they adopt, and in
the measures which they purlfe, they
seem as if they understood Solomon to
fay, not, Who knoweth, but, Who is ig-
norant of what is good for man all the days
of his life? The bliss to be aimed at, is,:
in their opinion, fully apparent. It is
not the danger of mistake, but the failure
of success, which they dread. Acivity
to seize, not sagacity to difccrn, is the

only

S E R M. only requisite which they value.--.-ow
1i.-_ long shall it be, ere the fate of your prc-

deceffors in the fame course, teach you
wisdom ? How long ihall the experience
of all ages, continue to lift its voice to
you in vain ? Beholding the ocean on
which you are embarked, covered with
wrecks, are not those fatal signals fuffi-
cient to admonifl you of the hidden
rock? If, in Paradise itself, there was a
tree which bare fruit fair to the eye, but
mortal in its effects, how much more, in
this fallen state, may such deceiving ap-
pearances be expeted to abound! The
whole state of Nature is now become a
scene of delusion to the fenftl mind.
Hardly any thing is what it appears to
be: And what flatters most, is always
farthest from reality. There are voices
which sing around you; but whose firains
allure to ruin. There is a banquet spread,
where poison is in every dish. There is
a couch which invites you to repose; but
to slumber upon it, is death. In such a
situation, be not high-nindaed, buctfear. Let

sobriety

sobriety temper your unwary ardour. Let s E R Ml.

VI1II

modefly check your rash presumption. --
Let wisdom be the offspring of reflection
now, rather than the fruit of bitter expe-
rience hereafter.

II. LET our ignorance of what is good

or evil, correct anxiety about worldly fuc-
cess. As rashness is the vice of youth,
the opposite extreme of immoderate care
is the vice of advancing years. The doc-
trine which I have illustrated, is equally
adapted for checking both. Since we are
so often betrayed into evil, by the mif-
taken pursuit of good, care and attention
are requisite, both in forming our choice,
and in conducing our pursuit; but since
our attention and care are liable to be so
often frustrated, they should never be al-
lowed to deprive us of tranquillity.

The ignorance in which we are left con-

cerning good and evil, is not such as to
supersede prudence in conduct: For wis,.
dom is frill found to excel folly, as far as
light excelleth darkness. But it is that de-

6 gree

SE R M; gree of uncertainty, which ought to ren-
.-vj
. der us temperate in pursuit; which ought

to calm the perturbation of hope and
fear, and to cure the pain of anxiety.
Anxiety is the poison of human life. It
is the parent of many fins, and of more
miseries. In a world where every thing
is so doubtful; where you may succeed
in your with, and be miserable; where
you may be disappointed, and be blest in
the disappointment; what means this
restless fir and commotion of mind ? Can
your solicitude alter the course, or un-
ravel the intricacy of human events ? Can
your curiosity pierce through the cloud
wthich the Supreme Being hath made im-
penetrable to mortal eye ?-To provide
against every apparent danger, by the em-
ployment of the most promising means,
is the office of wisdom. But, at this point
wisdom flops. It commands you to re-
tire, after you have done all that was
incumbent on you, and to possess your
mind in peace. By going beyond this
point; by giving yourselves up to immo-

I derate

derate concern about unknown events, E R M.
you can do nothing to advance your fuc- '
cels, and you do much to ruin your
peace. You plant within your breast the
thorn which is long to gall you. To the
vanity of life, you add a vexation of
spirit, which is wholly of your own cre-
ation, not of Divine appointment. For
the dubious goods of this world were
never designed by God to raise such eager
attachment. They were given to man for
his occasional refreshment, not for his
chief felicity. By setting an exceflive
value upon objeas which were intended
only for your secondary regard, you change
their nature. Seeking more fatisfation
from them than they are able to afford,
you receive less than they might give.
From a miltaken care to secure your hap-
piness, you bring upon yourselves certain
misery.

1I. LET our ignorance of good and

evil, determine us to follow Providence,
and to resign ourselves to God. One of

the

SERM. the most important leflons which can be

VIII.
-y- given to man, is resignation to his Maker;

and nothing inculcates it more, than the
experience of his own inability to guide
himfelf.-You know not what is good for
you, in the future periods of life. But
God perfetly knows it; and if you faith-
fully serve him, you have reason to be-
lieve that he will always consult it. Be-
fore him lies the whole succession of
events, which are to fill up your existence.
It is in his power to arrange and model
them at his pleasure; and so to adapt one
thing to another, as to fulfil his promise
of making them all work together for good
to those who love him. Here then, amidst
the agitations of desire, and the perplexi-
ties of doubt, is one fixed point of refl.
By this let us abide; and dismiss our
anxiety about things uncertain and un-
known. Acquaint yourselves with God, and
be at peace. Secure the one thing needfill
Study to acquire an interest in the Divine
favour: And you may safely surrender
yourselves to the Divine administration.

When

When tempted to repine at your condi- s E R M.

tion, reflect how uncertain it is, whether I-.
you should have been happier in any
other. Remembering the vanity of many
of your former wilhes, and the fallacy
which you have so often experienced in
your schemes of happiness, be thankful
that you are placed under a wiser direc-
tion than your own. Be not too parti-
cular in-your petitions to Heaven, con-
cerning your temporal interest. Suffer
God to govern the world according to
his own plan; and only pray, that he
would bellow what his unerring wifdoin
fees to be best for you on the whole. In
a word, Conmmit your way unto the Lord.
Trsio in him, and do good. Follow where-
ever his Providence leads; comply with
whatever his will requires; and leave all
the reft to him.

IV. LET our ignorance of what is goods

for us in this life, prevent our taking any
unlawful ftep, in order to compals our
most favourite designs. Were the finner

Q bribed

6E R M. bribed with any certain and unqueftion-

VIII.
L-v-,i able advantage; could the means which

he employs ensure his success, and could
that fiuccefs ensure his comfort; he might
have some apology to offer for deviating
from the path of virtue. But the doc-
trine which I have illustrated, deprives
him of all excuse, and places his folly in
the most striking light. He climbs the
steep rock, and treads on the edge of a
precipice, in order to catch a shadow.
He has cause to dread, not only the un-
certainty of the event which he withes to
accomplish, but the nature also of that
event when accomplilhed. He is not only
liable to that disappointment of success,
which so often frustrates all the designs of
men; but liable to a disappointment still
more cruel, that of being successful and
miserable at once. Riches and pleasures
are the chief temptations to criminal
deeds. Yet those riches, when obtained,
may very possibly overwhelm him with
unforeseen miseries. Those pleasures may
cut Ihort his health and life. And is it

for

for such doubtful and fallacious rewards, S R M.
that the deceiver fills his mouth with lies, _
the friend betrays his benefactor, the apof-
tate renounces his faith, and the assassin
covers himself with blood ?

Whoever commits a crime, incurs a

certain evil, for a most uncertain good.
What will turn to his advantage in the
course of this life, he cannot with any as-
furance know. But this he may know,
with full certainty, that by breaking the
Divine commandments, he will draw
upon his head that displeasure of the Al-
mighty, which shall crush him for ever.
The advantages of this world, even when
innocently gained, are uncertain blef-
sings; when obtained by criminal means,
they carry a curse in their bosom. To
the virtuous, they are often no more than
chaff. To the guilty, they are always
poison.

V. LET our imperfet knowledge of

what is good or evil, attach us the more
to those few things, concerning which

Q,2 there

S E RM. there can be no doubt of their being

VIII.
.-v.- truly good. Of temporal things which

belong to this class, the catalogue, it must
be confessed, is small. Perhaps the chief
worldly good we ihould wish to enjoy, is
a found mind in a found body. Health
and peace, a moderate fortune, and a few
friends, fum up all the undoubted articles
of temporal felicity. Wife was the man
who addressed this prayer to God; Re-
move far from mte vanity and lies. Give me
neither poverty nor riches. Feed me with
food convenient for me. Left I be full and
deny thee, and fay, who is the Lord? or left
I be poor andJteal, and take the name of my
God in vain *. He whose wishes, refpe6t-
ing the possessions of this world, are the
most reasonable and bounded, is likely
to lead the safest, and, for that reason,
the most desirable life. By aspiring too
high, we frequently miss the happiness,
which, by a less ambitious aim, we might
have gained. High happiness on earth, is
rather a picture which the imagination

Prov.x. xxx. 8, 9.

forms,

forms, than a reality which man is allowed S E R
to possess. L-. --

But with regard to spiritual felicity, we

are not confined to such humble views.
Clear and determinate objects are pro-
posed to our pursuit; and full scope is
given to the most ardent desire. The for-
givenefs of our fins, and the assistance of
God's holy grace to guide our life; the
improvement of our minds, in knowledge
and wisdom, in piety and virtue; the
protecion and favour of the great Father
of all, of the blessed Redeemer of man-
kind, and of the Spirit of sanctification
and comfort; these are objecs, in the
pursuit of which there is no room for
hesitation and distrust, nor any ground for
the question in my Text, Who knozweth
what is good for man ? Had Providence
spread an equal obscurity over happiness
of every kind, we might have had rome
reason to complain of the vanity of our
condition. But we are not left to so
hard a fate. The Son of God hath de-
scended from heaven, to be the Light of

Q,3 the

SER M. the world. He hath removed that veil
VIlJ. ,-..J which covered true bliss from the search of

wandering mortals, and hath taught them
the way which leads to life. Worldly en-
joyments are shown to be hollow and de-
ceitful, with an express intention to direc
their affections towards those which are
spiritual. The fame discoveries which di-
minifh the value of the one, serve to increase
that of the other. Finally,

VI. LET our ignorance of what is good

or evil .here below, lead our thoughts and
desires to a better world. I have endea-
voured to vindicate the wisdom of Provi-
dence, by showing the many useful pur-
poses which this ignorance at present pro-
motes. It serves to check presumption
and rashness, and to enforce a diligent
exertion of our rational powers, joined
with a humble dependence on Divine aid.
It moderates eager passions refpeaing
worldly success. It inculcates refigna-
tion to the disposal of a Providence which
is much wiser than man. It refirains us

8 from

from employing unlawful means, in order S R R I.
to compass our moes favourite dcfigns. -v
It tends to attach us more closely to those
things which are unquestionably good. It
is therefore such a degree of ignorance
as suits the present circumstances of man
better than more complete information con-
cerning good and evil.

At the fame time, the causes which

render this obscurity neceflary, too plainly
indicate a broken and corrupted state of
human nature. They show this life to be
a fate of trial. They fiuggeft the ideas of
a land of pilgrimage, not of the house of
reft. Low minded and base is lie, who
aspires to no higher portion; who could
be satisfied to spend his whole existence,
in chafing those treacherous appearances
of good, which so often mock his pursuit.
What fladow can be more vain than the
life of the greatest part of mankind ? Of
all that eager and bustling crowd which
we behold on the earth, how few discover
the path of true happiness ? How few can
we find, whose activity has not been mif-

Q.4 employed,

SERM. employed, and whose course terminates

-. not in confessions of disappointments? Is

this the tfate, are these the habitations,
to which a rational spirit, with all its
high hopes, and great capacities, is to
be limited for ever?-Let us bless that
God who hath set nobler profpeas be-
fore us; who, by the death and refurrec-
tion of his son Jesus Christ, hath begotten
us to the lively hope of an inheritance in-
corruptible, undeJiled, and that fadeth not
away, reserved in the heavens. Let us
show ourselves worthy of such a hope, by
setting our affetions upon the things above,
not upon things on the earth. Let us walk
by faith, and not by fight; and, amidlt
the obscurity of this faint and dubious
twilight, console ourselves with the ex-
pectation of a brighter day which is soon
to open. This earth is the land of fha-
dows. But we hope to pass into the
world of realities; where the proper ob-
jets of human desire flall be displayed;
where the substance of that bliss shall be
fourd, whose image only we now pursue;

where

where no fallacious hopes shall any longer S E R M.

VIII.

allure, no smiling appearances shall be- '-v-
tray, no insidious joys shall fling; but
where truth shall be inseparably united
with pleasure, and, the mists which haug
over this preliminary slate being diffi-
pated, the perfect knowledge of good
shall lead to the full enjoyrient of it for
ever,

S E R-

# SERMON IX. On RELIGIOUS RETIREMENT. PSALM iv. 4. Commune with your own heart, upon your bed, and be still.

[ 234 1

SERMON IX.
On RELIGIOUS RETIREMENT,

PSALM iv. 4.
Commnune with your own heart, upon jour

bed, and be fill.
SERM. / UC H communing with themselves

IX. MVL there has always been among man-

kind; though frequently, God knows, to
no purpose, or to a purpose worse than
none. Could we discover the employ-
ments of men, in retirement, how often
lhould we find their thoughts occupied
with fubjeas, which they would be
ashamed to own ? What a large share
have ambition and avarice, at some times
the grossest passions, and at other times the
meanest trifles, in their solitary musings?

They

They carry the world, with all its vices, SE R M.
into their retreat; and may be said to dwell ,_
in the midst of the world, even when they
seem to be alone.

This, surely, is not that fort of com-

muning which the Psalmist recommends.
For this is not properly communing with
our heart, but rather holding secret in-
tercourfe with the world. What the
Psalmist means to recommend, is religi-
ous recollection; that exercise of thought
which is connected with the precept given
in the preceding words, to JIand in awe,
andfin not. It is to commune with our-
selves, under the character of spiritual
and immortal beings; and to ponder thoJf
paths of ourfeet, which are leading us to
eternity. I flall, in the first place, show
the advantages of such serious retirement
and meditation; and shall, in the second
place, point out some of the principal
fubjeets which ought to employ us in our
retreat.

The advantages of retiring from the
world, to commune with oul} heart, will be

found

S E R M, found to be great, whether we regard our

happiness in this world, or our preparation
for the world to come.

LET us confider them, first, with re-

spec to our happiness in this world. It
will readily occur to you, that an entire
retreat from worldly affairs, is not what
religion requires; nor does it even enjoin
a great retreat from them. Some fiations
of life would not permit this; and there
are few fiations which render it neceflary,
The chief field, both of the duty and of
the improvement of man, lies in acive
life. By the graces and virtues which he
exercises amidst his fellow-creatures, he
is trained up for heaven. A total retreat
from the world,, is so far from being, as
the Roman Catholic Church holds, the
perfection of religion, that, some particu-
lar cafes excepted, it is no other than the
abuse of it.

But, though entire retreat would lay

us aside from the part for which Provi-
dence chiefly intended us, it is certain,

that,

that, without occasional retreat, we muff SER M.

Ix.

adC that part very ill. There will be -V-
neither confifRency in the condua, nor
dignity in the character, of one who sets
apart no share of his time for meditation
and reflection. In the heat and bufile of
life, while passion is every moment throw-
ing false colours on the objects around us,
nothing can be viewed in a just light. If
you wiflh that Reason should exert her
native power, you must ftep aside from
the crowd, into the cool and silent shade.
It is there that, with fober and steady eye,
she examines what is good or ill, what is
wife or foolish, in human conduct; she
looks back on the past, she looks forward
to the future; and forms plans, not for
the present moment only, but for the
whole of life. How should that man dif-
charge any part of his duty aright, who
never suffers his passions to cool ? And
how should his passions cool, who is en-
gaged without interruption, in the tu-
mult of the world? This incessant fiir
may be called, the perpetual drunken-

ness

S E R M. ness of life. It raises that eager ferment-
L-Y.-. ation of spirit, which will be ever fend.

ing forth the dangerous fumes of rashness
and folly. Whereas he who mingles reli-
gious retreat with worldly affairs, remains
calm, and mailer of himself. He is not
whirled round, and rendered giddy, by
the agitation of the world; but, from that
sacred retirement, in which he has been
conversant among higher objects, comes
forth into the world with manly tran-
quillity, fortified by the principles which
he has formed, and prepared for whatever
may befal,

As he who is unacquainted with re-

treat, cannot sustain any charater with
propriety, so neither can he enjoy the
world with any advantage. Of the two
classes of men who are most apt to be
negligent of this duty, the men of pleasure,
and the men of business, it is hard to fay
'which, susser most, in point of enjoy-
ment, from that neglect. To the former,
every moment. appears to be loft, which
partakes not of the vivacity of amusement.

To

To conner one plan of gaiety with ano- S E R M.

Ix.

ther, is their sole study; till, in a very
short time, nothing remain but to tread
the fame beaten round; to enjoy what
they have already enjoyed, and to fee
what they have often seen. Pleasures
thus drawn to the dregs, become vapid
and tasteless. What might have pleated
long, if enjoyed with temperance, and
mingled with retirement, being devoured
with such eager haste, speedily surfeits
and disgusts. Hence, these are the per-
sons, who, after having run through a
rapid course of pleasure, after having
glittered for a few years in the foremost
line of public amusements, are the most
apt to fly at last to a melancholy retreat;
not led by religion or reason, but driven by
disappointed hopes, and exhausted spirits,
to the pensive conclusion, that all is
vanity.

If uninterrupted intercourse with the

world wears out the man of pleasure, it
no less oppresses the man of business and
ambition. The firongef spirits must at

length

SER M. length fink under it. The happiest tenl-

per mull be toured by incessant returns
of the opposition, the inconstancy, and
treachery of men. For he who lives al-
ways in the bustle of the world, lives' in
a perpetual warfare. Here an enemy en-
counters; there, a rival supplants him.
The ingratitude of a friend flings him
this hour; and the pride of a fuperiour
wounds him the next. In vain he flies
for relief to trifling amusements. These
may afford a temporary opiate to care; but
they communicate no strength to the mind,
On the contrary, they leave it more soft
and defenceless, when moleflations and
injuries renew their attack.

Let himi who wishes for an effeaual

cure to all the wounds which the world
can inflit, retire from intercourse with
men, to intercourse with God. When
he enters into his closet, and shuts the
door, let him shut out, at the fame time,,
all intrusion of worldly care; and dwell
among objecs divine and immortal.-
Those fair profpeas of order and peace,

fliall

shall' there open to his view, which form S E R M,

IX.

the molt perfect contrafl t.. the confusion I
and misery of this earth. 'The celestial
inhabitants quarrel not; among them
'there is neither ingratitude, nor envy,
nor tumult. Men may harass one ano-
ther; but in the kingdom of God, con-
cord and tranquillity reign for ever.-
From such objects, there beams upon the
mind of the pious man, a pure and en-
livening light; there is diffused over .his
heart, a holy calm. His agitated spirit
re-affumes its firmness, and regains its
peace. The world finks in its import-
ance; and the load of mortality and
misery loses almost all its weight. The
green paflures open, and the jlill waters
flow around him, beside which the Shep-
herd of Israel guides his flock. The difG
turbances and alarms, so formidable to
those who are engaged in the tumults of
the world, seem to him only like thunder
rolling afar off; like the noise of diflant
waters, whose found he hears, whose
course he traces, but whose waves touch

.. R him

s E R M. him rn6t.-As religious retirement is thus

-~J evidently conducive to our happiness in

this life, so,

IN the second place, it is alfolutel'y

necessary in order 'to prepare 'us for t'he
life 'to come. He who lives always 'in
public, cannot .live 'to his ohw foil.
The 'world lieth in wickedness; and 'with
good reason the Chrihian is exhorted, not
to be conformed to it, biut tranisormed by the
renewing of his 'indl. Our converfatioa
and intercourse with the world, is, in
several refpets, an education for vice.
From our earlief 'youth, we are accustomed
to hear riches and honours 'extolled as
the chief possessions of man; and 'pro-
posed to us, as the principal aiii of oiir
future pursuits. We are trained 'up, to
look with admiration on the flattering
marks of diftinaion which they bellow.
In qiefl of those fancied bleflings, we fee
the multitude around us eager' and 'ser-
vent. Principles of duty 'We may, per-
haps, hear sometimes inculcated; but

we

iv.e seldom behold them brought into S E R M,

lx.

competition with worldly profit. The -v-
soft names, and plausible colours, under
which deceit, sensuality, and revenge,
are presented to us in common discourse,
weaken, by degrees, our natural sense of
tlie distinction between good and evil.
We often meet with crimes authorized
by high examples, and rewarded with
the caresses and smiles of the world. We
discover, perhaps, at last, that those
whom we are taught to reverence, and
to regard as our patterns of conduct,
aa upon principles no purer than those
of others.-Thus breathing habitually a
contagious airi how certain is our ruin,
unless we sometimes retreat from this
pestilential region, and seek for proper
correctives of the disorders which are
contracted there ? Religious retirement
both abates the difeafei and furnilhes the
remedy. It lessens the corrupting influ-
ence of the world; and it gives oppor-
tunity for better principles to exert their
power. He who is accustomed to turn

R 2 aside,

SERM. aside, and commune with himself, will,

IX.
.. ,._ frometimes at least, hear of truths which

the multitude do not tell him. A miore
found instructor will lift his voice, and
awaken within the heart those latent fug-
geltions, which the world had overpowered
and fippreffed.

The adls of prayer and devotion, the

exercises of faith and repentance, all the
great and peculiar duties of the religion
of Christ, necessarily suppose retirement
from the world. This was one chief end
of their intfitution, that they might be
the means of occasionally sequestering us
from that great scene of vice and folly,
the continued presence of which is so
hurtful. Solitude is the hallowed ground
which religion hath, in every age, chosen
for her own. There her inspiration is
felt, and her secret mylleries elevate the
foul. There, falls the tear of contrition;
there, rifes towards heaven the sigh of the
heart; there, melts the foul with all the
tenderness of devotion, and pours itself
forth, before him who made, and him

who

who redeemed it. How can any one, s E R M.

1X.

who is unacquainted with such employ- '-.-'
ments of mind, be fit for heaven ? If
heaven be the habitation of pure affedions,
and of intellectual joy, can such a state be
relished by him who is always imnerfed
among sensible objects, and has never ac-
quired any tafe for the pleasures of the
understanding, and the heart ?

The great and the worthy, the pious

and the virtuous, have. ever been addict-
ed to serious retirement. It is the cha-
raaeriftic of little and frivolous minds,
to be wholly occupied with the vulgar
objects of life. These fill up their de-
fires, and supply all the entertainment
which their coarse apprehensions can re-
lifh. But a more refined and enlarged
mind leaves the world behind it, feels a
call for higher pleasures, and seeks them
in retreat. The man of public spirit
has recourse to it, in order to form plans
for general good; the man of genius, in
order to dwell on his favourite themes;
the philosopher, to pursue his discoveries;

R 3 the

s E M. the faint, to improve himself in grace.

ix. t.---j- Ianac went out to meditate in the fields, at

the evening tide. David, amidst all the
splendour of royalty, often bears witness
both to the pleasure which he received,
and to the benefit which he reaped, from
devout meditation. I communed with my
own heart, and my spirit made diligent
search.. I thought on my ways, and turned
my feet unto God's teflimonies. In the
mIultitude of thoughts within me, his com-
forts delight ?y so ul. Our blessed Sa-
viour himself, though of all who ever
lived on earth he needed least the assist-
ance of religious retreat, yet, by his fre-
quent pracice, has done it signal honour.
Often were the garden, the mountain,
and the. silence of the night, fought by
him, for intercourse with heaven. When
he hadJont the multitude awiay, he went up
into a mountain, apart, to pray.

The advantages of religious retirement

will fill more clearly appear, by confider-
ing, as was proposed, in the next place,
Fpme of those great objects which fliould

there

there employ our thoughts. I Ihall mention s i R MI
only three, which are of the most plain and ---
acknowledged importance; God, the world,
and our own charater.

I. WHIN you retire from the world,

colmmlune with your hearts concerning God.
Impressions of Deity, besides their being
the principle of what is ftridly termed
religion, are the great support of all moral
sentiment, and virtuous conduc, among
men. But with what difficulty are they
preserved in any due degree of force,
.amidfl the affairs and avocations of the
world ? While the crowd of surrounding
objecs is ever rulhing on the imagina-
tion, and occupying the senses and the
heart, what is not only absent from view,
but, by its nature, invisible, is apt to
vaniih like a ihadow. Hence it is given
as the character of wicked men, in scrip-
ture, that they are without God in the
'world. They deny not, perhaps, that he
does exist; but it is the fame to them as
though he did not: For having loft him

R 4 from

S ER M. from their view, his existence has no efl

,-,-_ fed on their conduCt. If, at any time,

the idea of God rife in their mind, it
rifes like a terrifying phantom which they
haften to expel; and which they gladly
fancy to be unreal, because they fee it
make so little impression on others around
them.

Let him who retires to serious medita-

tion, begin with impressing deeply on his
mind this important truth, That there is
undoubtedly a Supreme Governour, who
presides over the universe. But let him
not imagine, that to commune with his
heart concerning God, is to search into
the mysteries of the Divine Nature, or to
attempt a discovery of the whole plan of
Providence. Long enough he may be-
wilder himself in this maze, without
making any proficiency in the practical
knowledge of God. Shall he who knows
so little of his own nature, or of the na-
ture of the objects with which he is fur-
rounded, expec to comprehend the Being
who made him ? To commune with our-

selves,

felvcs, to any useful purpose, on this sub- s E R M.
jed, is to bring home to our fouls the in-
ternal, authoritative sense of God, as of a
Sovereign and a Father. It is not to fpecu-
late about what is mysterious in his essence,
but to contemplate what is displayed of his
perfecions. It is to realize the presence
of the Supreme Being, so as to produce the
most profound veneration; and to awaken
the earnest desire of as near an approach as
our nature will permit, to that great Foun-
tain of happiness and life.

After this manner was that holy man

affeced, who uttered this ardent wiflh *,
0 that I knew where I might find him, that
I might come even to his feat!-If with
such a frame of mind you seek after God,
be assured that he is not far from you;
and that, though you are not permitted
as yet to come to his feat, you may, at
lead, reach the footstool of his throne, and
touch the robe that covers him. In the
midst of your solitary musings lift your
eyes, and behold all nature full of God.

Job xiii, 3,

Look

SE RM. Look up to the firmament, and admire

Ix. '.--,' his glory. Look round on the earth, and

observe his pretence every where display-
ed. If the gay landscape, or the fruitful
field, present themselves to your eye, be-
hold him smiling upon his works. If the
mountain raise its lofty head, or the ex-
panfe of waters roll its tide before you,
contemplate, in those great and solemn
objecs, his power and majefly. Nature,
in all its diversities, is a varied manifefta-
tion of the Deity. If you were to take the
nhivgs of the morning, and dwell in the ut-
termnof parts of the sea, even there you
would find him. For in him you live and
liove. He fills and animates all space. In
the barren wilderness, as in the peopled
region, you can trace his footsteps; and
in the deepest solitude, you may hear a
voice which testifies of him.

Him, indeed, you are never to con-

found with the workmanihip of his
hands. Nature, in its molt awful or most
pleating. scenes, exhibits no more than
different forms of inanimate matter. But

on

on these dead forms is imprcfed the glory SE R M,

IX.

of a living Spirit. The beauty, or the
greatness, which appears in them, flows
from the Fountain of all greatners and
beauty; in him it centers; of his perfec-
tion it reflects an image; and towards
him should lead your view.-In converf-
ing with a fellow-creature on earth, it is
not with his body we converse, though it
is his body only which we fee. From his
words and actions we conceive his mind;
with his mind, though invisible, we hold
correspondence, and direct towards this
Spiritual Essence, our affetion and regard.
In like manner, though here we behold
no more of God than what his works dif-
play, yet, in those displays, we are capable
of perceiving the universal Spirit, and of
holding correspondence with this unseen
Being, in veneration, gratitude, and love.

It is thus that a pious man, in his re-

tired meditations, viewing natural objets
with a spiritual eye, commnunes with his
heart concerning God. He walks among
the various scenes of nature, as within

the

SE RM. the precinas of a great temple, in the
>-_, habitual exercise of devotion. To those

discoveries of the Supreme Being in his
works, let him apply the comment of
his word. From the world of Nature, let
him follow God into the world of Grace.
When conducted from the outer courts,
into this inmost fanEtuary of the temple,
he shall feel himself brought still more
nigh to the Sacred Presence. In the great
plan of divine Wisdom, for extirpating
the evils produced by fin, he shall receive
the interpretation of many of the hidden
mysteries of Nature. He shall discover in
Christ, the Deity made, in rome degree,
visible to sense. In the beneficent works
which he performed, and the gracious
undertaking which he accomplished, he
{hall behold the brightness of the Father's
glory, and shall discern it to be full of
grace and truth.-From the sacred retreat,
wherein his thoughts have been thus
employed, he returns to the world like a
fuperiour being. He carries into active
life, those pure and elevating sentiments,

to

to which the giddy crowd are firangers. S E R I.

Ix.

A certain odour of fandcity remains upon o-.r,
his mind, which, for a while at least, will
repel the contagion of the world.

II. COMMUNE with your heart, in

the season of retirement, concerning the
world. The world is the great deceiver,
whose fallacious arts it highly imports us
to detect. But in the midst of its pleasures
and pursuits, the deteEtion is impossible.
We tread, as within an enchanted circle,
where nothing appears as it truly is. It
is only in retreat, that the charm can be
broken. Did men employ that retreat,
not in carrying on the delusion which the
world has begun, not in forming plans
of imaginary bliss, but in fubjeding the
happiness which the world affords to a
ftrit discussion, the spell would dissolve;
and in the room of the unreal profpeas,
which had long amused them, the naked,
ness of the world would appear.

Prepare yourselves, then, to encounter
the light of truth. Resolve rather to bear

the

s E M. the disappointment of some flattering
t-.i_ hopes, than to wander for ever in the

paradise of fools. While others meditate
in secret on the means of attaining world-
ly success, let it be your employment to
scrutinize that success itself. Calculate
fairly to what it amounts; and whether
you are not losers on the wholes by your
apparent gain. Look back for this pur-
pose, on your past life. Trace it from
your earliest youth; and put the question
to yourselves, what have been its hap-
pieif periods? Were they those of quiet
and innocence, or those of ambition and
intrigue? Has your real enjoyment uni-
formly kept pace with what the world
calls prosperity ? As you advanced in
wealth or station, did you proportionally
advance in happiness ? Has success, al-
most in any one instance, fulfilled your
expectation ? Where you reckoned upon
mol enjoyment, have you not often found
leafl? Wherever guilt entered into your
pleasures, did not its fting long remain,
after the gratification was pall ?-Such

6 questions

queftRiors as tlhefe candidly answered, S E R :.

Ix.

would in a great meafire unmafl the L-
world. They would expose the vanity of
its pretensions; and convince you, that
there are other springs than those which
the world iffords, to which you must apply
for happiiefs.

While you commune with your heart

concerning what the world now is, con-
fider also what it will one day appear to
be. Anticipate the awful moment of your
bidding it an eternal farewell. Think,
what reflections shall motl probably arise,
when you are quitting the field, and look-
ing back on the scene of adcion. In what
light' will your closing eyes contemplate
those vanities which now fline so bright,
and those interests which now swell into
such high importance ? What part will
you then wish to have aaed? What shall
then appear momentous, what trifling
in human conduct ?-Let the fober senti-
ments which such anticipations filggeft,
temper now your misplaced ardour. Let
the last conclufions-which you shall form,

enter

S ER M. enter into the present estimate which you

'- make of the world, and of life.

Moreover, in communing with your-

selves concerning the world, contemplate
it as subjea to the Divine dominion. The
greater part of men behold nothing more
than the .rotation of human affairs. They
fee a great crowd ever in motion; the
fortunes of men alternately rising and
falling; virtue often distressed, and pro"
fperity appearing to be the purchase of
worldly wisdom. But this is only the
outside of things. Behind the curtain,
there is a far greater scene, which is be-
held by none but the retired, religious
fpefator. Lift up that curtain, when
you are alone with God. View the world
with the eye of a Christian; and you
shall fee, that while man's heart devifeth
his way, it is the Lord who direaeth his
Jieps. You shall fee, that however men
appear to. move and adt after their own
pleasure, they are, nevertheless, retained
in secret bonds by the Almighty, and all
their operations rendered subservient to

4 the

the ends of his moral government. You S E R M.
ihall behold him obliging the wrath of k.
man to praifn him; punishing the finner
by means of his own iniquities; from
the trials of the righteous, bringing forth
their reward; and to a state of seeming
universal confusion, preparing the wisest
and most equitable issue. While the
faJhioin f this world is passed fast away,
you flfall difecrn the glory of another
rising to succeed it. You lhall behold all
human ev'efits, oui grieft and our joys,
our love and our hatred) our chara&ter
and memoiry, absorbed in the ocean of
eternity; and no trace of bur present ex-
iftence left, except its beiig for ever iwell
with the righteous, anid ill with the wictked.
-SiiSch a view of the world) frequenut
ly presented to bur miids, could not
fail to enforce those solemn conclusions,
There is no wisdom, inoz 'onsel, agaiift the
Lord. Fear God, and keep his cornmand-
mecnts; for ths is thei whbol of tan. Wihat
is a *dian prbifedf he Jhallgamin t'he ihofe
wigd, Jmid iof his oinJfoui ?

S III. CoM-

SERM. III. COMMUNE with your heart, con-

' , cerning yourselves, and your real charac-

ter. To acquire a thorough knowledge
of ourselves, is an attainment, no less dif-
ficult than important. For men are ge-
nerally unwilling to fee their own imper-
sections; and when they are willing to
enquire into them, their felf-love imposes
on their judgment. Their intercourse
with one another assists the delusion to
which, of themselves, they are prone.
For the ordinary commerce of the world
is a commerce of flattery and falsehood;
where reciprocally they deceive, and are
deceived, where every one appears under
an assumed form, professes esteem which
he does not feel, and bestows praise in
order to receive it. It is only in retreat,
where those false semblances disappear, and
those flattering voices are silent, that a man
can learn to think soberly of himself, and as
he ought tothink.

It has been said, that there are three

charaters which every man fuflains;
and there often extremely different from

one

one another: One, which he pofefles in s E R M.
his own opinion; another, which he car-
ries in the estimation of the world; and
a third, which he bears in the judgment
of God. It is only the last which afcer-
tains what he really is.-- Whether the
characer which the world forms of you,
be above or below the truth, it imports
you not much to know. But it is of eter-
nal consequence, that the character which
you possess in your own eyes, be formed
upon that which you bear in the fight
of God. In order to try it by this great
standard, you must lay aside, as much as
possible, all partiality to yourselves; and
in the season of retirement, explore your
heart with such accurate scrutiny, as may
bring your hidden defects to light.

Enquire, for this purpose, whether you

be not conscious, that the fair opinion
which the world entertains of you, is
founded on their partial knowledge, both
of your abilities and your virtues ? Would
you be willing that all your actions should
be publickly canvassed? Could you bear

S 2 to

S E RM. to have your thoughts laid open? Are
,_-_ there no parts of your life which you

would be uneasy if an enemy could dif-
cover? In what light, then, must these
appear to God? When you have kept
free of vice, has your innocence proceed-
ed from purity of principle, or from
worldly motives ? Rifes there no envy or
malignity within you, when you compare
your own condition with that of others ?
Have you been as solicitous to regulate
your heart, as to preserve your manners
from reproach? Professing yourselves to
be Christians, has the Spirit of Christ ap-
peared in your conduct? Declaring that
you hope for immortality, has that hope
surmounted undue attachments to the pre-
sent life ?

Such investigation as this, seriously pur-

sue-d, might produce to every man many
discoveries of himself; discoveries, not
pleating, perhaps, to vanity, but salutary
and useful. For he can be only a flat-
terer, but no true friend to himself, who
aims noX at knowing his own defects, as

. 2 --well

well as virtues. By imposing on the SERM.
world, he may carry on some plan of fan- '-
cied profit; but by imposing on his heart,
what can he propose to gain ? He feedeth
of aJhes: A deceived he.rt hath turned him
aside, that he cannot deliver his foul, nor
fay, Is there not a lie in my right hand ?

THUS I have set before you, some of

those great objects, which ought to em-
ploy your meditation in religious retire-
ment. I have endeavoured to introduce
you into a proper intercourse with your
heart, concerning God, the world, and
your own character. Let this intercourse
terminate in fixing the principles of your
future conduct. Let it serve to introduce
consistency into your life. Nothing can
be more wavering and disjointed, than
the behaviour of those who are wholly
men of the world, and have never been
inure'd to commune with themselves.
Dissipation is a more frequent cause of
their ruin, than determined impiety. It

Ifa. xliv. 20.
S 3 is

s E R M; is not so much because they have adopted

-v,-_j bad principles, as because they have never

attended to principles of any kind, that their
lives are so full of incoherence and difor-
der.-You hover on the borders of fin and
duty. One day, you read the scriptures,
you hear religious discourses, and form
good resolutions. Next day, you plunge
into the world, and forget the serious im-
pression as if it had been never made.
The impression is again renewed, and again
effaced; and in this circle your life revolves.
Is such condua worthy of creatures en-
dowed with intelligent powers ? Shall the
close of life overtake you, before you have
determined how to live ? Shall the day ne-
ver come, that is to find you steady in your
views, decided in your plans, and engaged
in a course of ation which your mind ap-
proves ?-If you with that day ever to ar-
rive, retirement and meditation must first
bring yod home to yourselves, from the
dissipation in which you are now scattered;
must teach you to fix such aims, and to lay
down such rules of condut, as are fuitablc

to

to rational and immortal beings. Then S E R M.

IX.

will your charader become uniform and t--v
refpeatable. Then you may hope, that your
life will proceed in such a train as shall
prepare you, when it is finished, for join-
ing the society of more exalted spirits.

,S 4 S ER-

# SERMON X. On DEVOTION. ACTS x. 2. Cornelius  A devout man 

I 264 ]
S E R M N X.

On DEVOT IO N.

ACTS X. 2.

Cornelius-A devout man-
s E RM. r HAT religion is essential to the wel-

1j l fare of man, can be proved by the

most convincing arguments. But these,
how demonstrative soever, are insufficient
to support its authority over human con-
dut. For arguments may convince the
understanding, when they cannot con-
quer the passions. Irresistible they seem
in the calm hours of retreat; but, in the
season of adion, they often vanish into
smoke. There are other and more power-
ful springs, which influence the great

movements

movements of the human frame. In or- s E R M.
der to operate with success on the active ._
powers, the heart must be gained. Sen-
timent and affection muff be brought to
the aid of reason. It is not enough that
men believe religion to be a wife and ra-
tional rule of conduc, unless they relish
it as agreeable, and find it to carry its
own reward. Happy is the man. who,
in the conflit of desire between God and
the world, can oppose, not only argu-
ment to argument, but pleasure to plea-
sure; who, to the external allurements of
sense, can oppose the internal joys of de-
votion; and to the uncertain promises of
a flattering world, the certain experience
of that peace of God which pagesth under-
Jfanding, keeping his mind and heart.--Such
is the temper and spirit of a devout man.
Such was the character of Cornelius, that
good centurion, whose prayers and alms
are said to have come up in memorial before
God. Of this character 1 intend, through
Divine affifance to discourse; and Mhall
endeavour, I. To explain the nature of

devotion;

s E R M. devotion; II. To justify, and recommend

Xa._ it; and, III. To recify obme mistakes con-

cerning it.

I. DEVOTION is the lively exercise of

those affections, which we owe to the
Supreme Being. It comprehends several
emotions of the heart, which all termi-
nate on the fame great objec. The chief
of them are, veneration, gratitude, desire,
and resignation.

It implies, first, profound veneration

of God. By veneration, I understand an
affecion compounded of awe and love;
the affection which, of all others, it bell
becomes creatures to bear towards their
infinitely perfect Creator. Awe is the
first sentiment that rifes in the foul, at
the view of his greatness. But, in the
heart of a devout man, it is a solemn and
elevating, not a dejeting, emotion; for
he glows; rather than trembles, in the
Divine pretence. It is not the fuperiti-
tious dread of unknown power, but the
homage yielded by the heart to him who

is,

is, at once, the greatest and the beR of Be- s F R M.

X.

ings. Omnipotence, viewed alone, would -
be a formidable objec. But, confidered
in conjunEtion with the moral perfections
of the Divine Nature, it serves to heighten
devotion. Goodness affects the heart with
double energy, when residing in One so
exalted. The goodness which we adore
in him, is not like that which is common
among men, a weak, mutable, undif-
cerning fondness, ill qualified to be the
ground of assured trust. It is the good-
ness of a perfect Governour, acting upon
a regular extensive plan; a feady prin-
ciple of benevolence, conduted by wis-
dom; which, subjea to no variableness or
fJiadow of turning, free from all partiality
and caprice, incapable of being either
soothed by flattery, or ruffled by resent-
ment, resembles, in its calm and equal
lustre, the eternal serenity of the higllelt
heavens. Thy melrcy, 0 Lord! is in the hea-
vens, and thy faitlfitzefs reacheth nuito the
clouls. Thy rigghteozufiefs is like thegreat inonii-
tains, and thy judgments are a great depth.

Such

SE RM. Such are the conceptions of the great

X.
-J. God, which fill with veneration the heart

of a devout man. His veneration is not
confined to ads of immediate worship.
It is the habitual temper of his foul.
Not only when engaged in prayer or
praise, but in the silence of retirement,
and even amidst the occupations of the
world, the Divine Being dwells upon his
thoughts. No place, and no object, ap-
pear to him void of God. On the works
of Nature, he views the impression of his
hand; and in the actions of men, he
traces the operation of his Providence.
Whatever he beholds on earth, that is
beautiful or fair, that is great or good,
he refers to God, as to the supreme ori-
gin of all the excellence which is scattered
throughout his works. From those effecs,
he rifes to the first cause. From those
streams, he ascends to the fountain whence
they flow. .By those rays, he is led to
that eternal source of light in which they
centre.

DEVOTION

DEVOTION implies, secondly, sincere SERM.

X.

devotion to God, for all his benefits. Li.
This is a warmer emotion than simple
veneration. Veneration looks up to the
Deity, as he is in himself; Gratitude re-
gards what he is towards us. When a
devout man surveys this vast universe,
where beauty and goodness are every
where predominant; when he reflects on
those numberless multitudes of creatures,
who, in their different stations, enjoy the
blessings of exiltence; and when at the
fame time he looks up to an Universal
Father, who hath thus filled creation with
life and happiness, his heart glows within
him. He adores that disinterested good-
ness, which prompted the Almighty to
raise up so many orders of intelligent be-
ings, not that he might receive, but that
he might give and impart; that he might
pour forth himself, and communicate to
the spirits which he formed, some ema-
nations of his felicity.

The goodness of this Supreme Benefac-
tor he gratefully contemplates, as display-

ed

S ER M. ed in his own tlate. He reviews the
,_. events of his life; and, in every com-

fort which has sweetened it, he discerns
the Divine hand. Does he remember
with affetion the parents under whose
care he grew up, and the companions
with whom he passed his youthful life?
Is he now happy, in his family rising
around him; in the spouse who loves
him, or in the children who give him
comfort and joy? Into every tender re-
membrance of the past, and every pleas-
ing enjoyment of the present, devotion
enters; for in all those beloved objeds,
it recognizes God. The communication
of love from heart to heart, is an effusion
of his goodness. From his inspiration,
descends all the friendship which ever
glowed on earth; and therefore, to him
it jufily returns in gratitude, and termi-
nates on him.

But this life, with all its interefis, is

but a small part of human exiitence. A
devout man looks forward to immorta-
lity, and discovers still higher fubjets of

gratitude.

gratitude. He views himself as a guilty s E R M.

X.

creature, whom Divine benignity has re-
ceived into grace; whose forfeited hopes
it has restored; and to whom it has open-
ed the most glorious profpeds of future
felicity. Such generosity shown to the
fallen and miserable, is yet more affedt-
ing to the heart, than favours conferred
on the innocent. He contemplates, with
astonishment, the labours of the Son
of God, in accomplishing redemption
for men; and his foul overflows with
thankfulness to him, who loved us, and
washed usfrom our Jins in his own blood.-
What Jhall I render to the Lord for all his
benefts ? Bless the Lord, 0 my foul! and all
that is within me, bless his holy name; who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, and healeth
all thy diseases; who redeemeth thy lifefrom
deJirucion, and crowOneth thee with loving
kindness, and with tender mercies.

DEVOTION implies, thirdly, the de-

fire of the foul after the favour of the Su-
preme Being, as its chief good, and final

reft.

s E R M. reft. To inferiour enjoyments, the devout
k- -v-. man allots inferiour and secondary attach-

ment. He disclaims not every earthly
affection. He pretends not to renounce
all pleasure in the comforts of his pre-
sent slate. Such an unnatural renuncia-
tion humanity forbids, and religion can-
not require. But from these he expeas
not his supreme bliss. He discerns the
vanity which belongs to them all; and
beyond the circle of mutable objets
which surround him, he aspires after
some principles of more perfect felicity,
which fiall not be subjea to change or
decay. But where is this complete and
permanent good to be found? Ambition
pursues it in courts ahd palaces; and re.
turns from the pursuit, loaded with for-
rows. Pleafare seeks it among sensual
joys; and retires with the confetion of
disappointment. The deepfaith, it is not in
me; and theSea faith, it is not with me. It
cannot begottenfor gold; neither JhallJilver
be tveighedfor the price thereof. Its place
is n^t in the land of the living. True hap-

piness

piness dwells with God; and from the S E R M.
light of his countenance, it beams upon the -
devout man. His voice is, Wshom have I
in heaven but thee ? and there is none upon
earth that I desire betide thee. After ex-
ploring heaven and earth for happiness,
they seem to him a mighty void, a wil-
dernefs of shadows, where all would be
empty and unsubstantial without God.
But in his favour and love, he finds what
supplies every defe& of temporal objects;
and assures tranquillity to his heart, amidst
all the changes of his existence. Thotr
fiJalt guide mfe 'uith thy coulnfel; and thou
flhalt receive me to thy glory. MyflyeJ and
my heart failet; but God is thefi-rength of
my heart, and my portion for ever.

FROM these sentiments and affetions,

Devotion advances, fourthly, to an entire
resignation of the foul to God. It is the
consummation of trust and hope. It ba-
nifhes anxious cares, and murmuring
thoughts. It reconciles us to every ap-
pointment of Divine Providence; and re-

T solves

s E R M. solves every wi(h into the desire of pleas-

x.
'-.--, ' ing him, whom our hearts adore. Its

genuine breathings are to this effet:
"Conduct me, 0 God! in what path

soever feemeth good to thee. In no-

"thing ihall I ever arraign thy sacred
' will. Dost thou require me to part
" with any worldly advantages, for the
" fake of virtue and a good conscience?
:' 1 give them up. Dost thou command
' me to relinquish my friends, or my
( country ? At thy call I cheerfully leave
"t them. Dolt thou summon me away
:' from this world ? Lo! I am ready to

depart. Thou haft made, thou haft
' redeemed me, and I am thine. My-
" self, and all that belongs to me, I fur-
"' render to thy disposal. Let the men of
"the world have their portion in this life,
" Be it mine, to behold thy face in righ-
"teoujiefS; and when I awake, to befatyi-
' fed pith thy likenefi."

This, surely, is one of the noblest ats

of which the human mind is capable,
when thus, if we may be allowed the ex-

preflion,

pression, it unites itself with God. Nor S E R M.
can any devotion be genuine, which in- t--
spires not sentiments of this nature. For
devotion is not to be confidered as a tran-
fient glow of affecion, occasioned by some
casual impressions of Divine goodness,
which are suffered to remain unconnected
with the conduetof life. It is a power-
ful principle, which penetrates the foul;
which purifies the affedcions from debaf-
ing attachments; and by affixed and
fleady regard to God, subdues every sinful
paflion, and forms the inclinations to piety
and virtue,

StuiC in generai are the dispositions

that constitute devotion. It is the union
of veneration, gratitude, desire, and re-
fignation. It expressess not so much the
performance of any particular duty, as
the spirit which muff animate all religi-
ous duties. It flands opposed, not mere-
ly to downright vice; but to a heart
which is cold, and insensible to sacred
things; which, from compulsion perhaps,

T 2 and

s ER M. and a sense of interest, preserves some leC

X.

' gard to the divine commands, but obeys

them without ardour, love, or joy. I
proceed,

II. To recommend this devout spirit

to your imitation. I begin with obferv-
ing, That it is of the utioft consequence
to guard against extremes of every kind
in religion. We must beware, left, by
seeking to avoid one rock, we split upon
another. It has been long the subjec of
remark, that superstition and enthufiafni
are two capital sources of delusion; fu-
perftition, on the one hand, attaching
men, with immoderate zeal, to the ritual
and external part of religion;. and enthu-
fiafm, on the other, direcing their whole
attention to internal emotions, and'myf-
tical communications with the spiritual
world; while neither the one, nor the
other, has paid sufficient regard to the
great moral duties of the Christian life.
But, running with intemperate eagerness
from there two great abuses of religion,

* 5 men

men have neglected to obfervc, that there s E R M.l

X.

are extremes opposite to each of them,
into which they are in hazard of precipi-
tating themselves. Thus the horrour of
fuperlition has sometimes reached so far,
as to produce contempt for all external
institutions; as if it were poflible for
religion to subsist in the world, without
forms of worflfip, or public acknow-
ledgment of God. It has also happened,
that some who in the main are well as-
sected to the cause of goodness, observing
that persons of a devout turn have at
times been carried, by warm affetions,
into unjustifiable excesses, have thence
hastily concluded, that all devotion was
akin to enthusiasm; and separating reli-
gion totally from the heart and affections,
have reduced it to a frigid observance of
what they call the rules of virtue. This
is the extreme which I purpose at present
to combat, by Ihowing you, first, That
true devotion is rational, and well found-
ed; next, That it is of the highest im-
portance to every other part of religion

T3 and

SEXRM. and virtue; and, lastly, That it is moa

X. ak__ conducive to our happiness.

IN the first place, True devotion is ra-.

tional, and well founded. It takes its rife
from affecions, which are essential to the
human frame. We are formed by Na-
ture, to admire what is great, and to love
what is amiable. Even inanimate objecs
have power to excite those emotions.
The magnificent profpeds of the natural
world, fill the mind with reverential awe.
Its beautiful scenes create delight. When
we survey the actions and behaviour of
our fellow-creatures, the affetions glow
with greater ardour; and, if to be un-
moved, in the former cafe, argues a defet
ps sensibility in our powers, it discovers,
in the latter, an odious hardness and de-
pravity in the heart. The tenderness of
an affectionate parent, the generosity of
a forgiving enemy, the public spirit of a
patriot or a hero, often fill the eyes with
tears, and swell the breafi with emotions
loo big for utterapce. The objed of those

! § affeaions

affections is frequently raised above us, in s ER M.

X.

condition and rank. Let us suppose him a
raised also above us, in nature. Let us
imagine, that an Angel, or any being of
fiperiour order, had condescended to be
our friend, our guide and patron; no
person, sure, would hold the exaltation of
his benefator's chara:er, to be an argu-
ment why he should love and revere him
lefs.-Strange! that the attachment and
veneration, the warmth and overflowing
of heart, which excellence and goodness
on every other occasion command, should
begin to be accounted irrational, as soon
as the Supreme Being becomes their objcQ.
For what reason must human sensibility be
extina towards him alone ? Are all benefits
entitled to gratitude, except the highest
and the best ? Shall goodness cease to be
amiable, only because it is perfect ?

It will, perhaps, be said, that an un-

known and invisible being, is not quali-
sied to raise affection in the human heart.
Wrapt up in the mysterious obscurity of
his nature, he escapes our search, and as-

T 4 fords

S ERM. fords no determinate object to our love

o r desire. WAe go forward, but he is not
there ; and backward, but ire cannot per-
ceive hiim; on the left hand, where he
worketh, but we cannot behold him: He
hideth hinfelf on the right hand, that we
cannot fee hin *.- Notwithflanding this
bbfcurity, is there any being in the uni-
verse more real and certain, than the Cre-
ator of the world, and the Supporter of
all existence ? Is he, in whomi we live and
move, too distant from us to excite de-
votion ? His form and essence, indeed,
we cannot fee; but to be unseen, and
imperfealy known, in many other ins
stances, precludes neither gratitude nor
love. It is not the fight, so much as the
strong conception, or deep impression, of
an object, which asse&s the passions. We
glow with admiration of personages, who
have lived in a diflant age. Whole na-
tions have been transported with zeal and
affeaion, for the generous hero, or pub-
lic deliverer, whom they knew only by

* Job xxxiii. 8, 9.

fame.

fame. Nay, properly speaking, the direc S E R M,

X.

object of our love, is, in every cafe, in-
visible. For that on which affection is
placed, is the mind, the foul, the internal
chara&er of our fellow-creatures; which,
surely, is no less concealed, than the Di-
vine Nature itself is, from the view of
sense. From aCtions, we can only infer
the dispositions of men; from what we
fee of their behaviour, we colleCt what is
invisible; but the conjecture which we
form, is, at belt, imperfect; and when
their actions excite our love, much of
their heart remain still unknown. I ask
then, in what refpe:t God is less qualified
than any other being, to be an object of
affection? Convinced that he exists; be-
holding his goodness spread abroad in his
works, exerted in the government of the
world, displayed in some measure to sense,
in the actions of his Son Jetus Christ; are
we not furnished. with every essential re-
quifite which the heart demands, in order
to indulge the most warm, and at the fame
time the most rational emotions ?

If

SE RM. If these considerations justify the rea-

X.
L, ~ fonablenefs of devotion, as expressed in

veneration, love, and gratitude, the fame
train of thought will equally justify it,
when appearing in the forms of desire,
delight, or resignation. The latter are,
indeed, the consequence of the former.
For we cannot but desire some communi-
cation with what we love; and will na-
turally resign ourselves to one, on whom
we have placed the full confidence of
affeation. The aspirations of a devout
man after the favour of God, are the
effecs of that earnest wish for happiness,
which glows in every breast. All men
have somewhat that may be called the
bbjet of their devotion; reputation,
pleasure, learning, riches, or whatever
apparent good has strongly attached their
heart. This becomes the centre of at-
traction, which draws them towards it;
which quickens and regulates all their
;notions. While the men of the world
are thus influenced by the objets which
they feyerally worship, ihall he only who

direts

directs his devotion towards the Supreme SE, RM,

X.

Being, be excluded from a place in the
system of rational condu ? or be cen-
fured for having passions, whose fenfibi-
lity corresponds to the great cause which
moves them ?-Having vindicated the
reasonableness of devotion, I come,

IN the second place, to show its im-

portance, and the high place which it
pofleffes in the system of religion. I ad-
dress myself now to those, who, though
they reject not devotion as irrational, yet
confider it as an unnecessary refinement;
an attainment which may be safely left to
recluse and sequestered persons, who aim
at uncommon fantity. The solid and
material duties of a good life, they hold
to be in a great measure independent of
devout affeEtion; and think them fuffi-
ciently supported, by their necessary con-
nection with our interest, both in this
and in a future world. They insist much
upon religion being a calm, a fober, and
Titional principle of conduCt.--- admit

that

S E R M. that it is very laudable to have a rational

X.

religion. But I must admonish you, that
it is both reproachful and criminal, to
have an insensible heart. If we reduce re-
ligion into so cool a slate, as not to admit
love, affection, and desire, we shall leave
it in possession of small influence over
human life. Look abroad into the world,
and observe how few ad upon deliberate
and rational views of their true interest.
The bulk of mankind are impelled by
their feelings. They are attraded by ap-
pearances of good. Taste and inclination
rule their condut. To direct their incli-
nation and taste towards the highet ob-
jets; to form a relish within them, for
virtuous and 'spiritual enjoyment; to in-
troduce religion into the heart, is the pro-
vince of devotion; and hence arises its im-
portance to the interests of goodness.

Agreeably to this doctrine, the great

Author of our religion, who well knew
what was in man, laid the foundation of
his whole system in the regeneration of
the heart. The change which was to be

accomplished

accomplifled on his followers, he did not S BER M.

X.

purpose to effec, merely by regulating kv
their external conduc; but by forming
within them a new nature; by taking
away the heart of flone, and giving them
a heart offieJ7, that is, a heart relenting
and tender, yielding to the Divine im-
pulse and readily susceptible of devout
impressions. Thou Jnhalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and mind, andfoul,
and strength: This is the fifl and great
commandment. AMyfon, give me thy heart,
is the call of God. to each of us: And,
indeed, if the heart be with-held, it is
not easy to conceive what other offering
we can present, that will be acceptable to
him.

Of what nature must that man's reli-

gion be, who professes to worship God,
and to believe in Christ; and yet raises
his thoughts towards God, and his Savi-
our, without any warmth of gratitude or
love ? I speak not of those occasional de-
cays of pious affection, to which the bel
are subjet, but of a total insensibility to

this

SE RM, this part of religion. Surely let the outs

_- j ward behaviour be ever so irreproachable,

there muff be some essential defeC in a
heart, which remains always unmoved at
the view of infinite goodness. The as-
fetions cannot, in this cafe, be deemed
to flow in their natural channel. Some
concealed malignity mufft have tainted
the inward frame. This is not the man
whom you would chufe for your bosom-
friend; or whose heart you could expet
to answer, with reciprocal warmth, to
yours. His virtue, if it deserves that
name, is not of the most amiable fort;
and may, with reason, receive the appel-
lation (often injudiciously bestowed) of
cold and dry morality. Such a person
muff, as yet, be far from the kingdom of
HIeaven.

As devotion is thus essential to religion

in its principle, so it enters into the pro-
per discharge of all its duties. It diffuses
an auspicious influence over the whole
of virtue. The prevailing temper of the
mind is formed by its most frequent em-

ployments,

ployments. Intercourse with Supreme sE RM.

X.

perfeCtion cannot, therefore, but ennoble .-a
and improve it. The pure love of God,
naturally conneas itself with the love of
man. Hence, devotion has been often
found a powerful instrument, in huma-
nizing the manners of men, and taming
their unruly passions. It fiooths what
is rough, and softens what is fierce, in
our nature. It is the great purifier of the
affections. It inspires contempt of the
low gratifications belonging to animal
life. It promotes a humble and cheerful
contentment with our lot; and subdues
that eager desire of riches and of power,
which has filled this unhappy world with
crimes and misery. Finally, it bellows
that enlargement of heart in the service
of God, which is the great principle,
both of perseverance, and of progress in
virtue. He who, unacquainted with de-
vout affecions, sets himself to keep the
Divine commandments, will advance in
obedience with a flow and languid pace;
like one who, carrying a heavy burden,

toils

SE R M. toils to mount the hill. But he whose

X.

' heart devotion has warmed, will proceed

on his way, cheerful and rejoicing. The
one performs his duty, only because it is
commanded; the other, because he loves
it. The one is inclined to do no more
than necessity requires; the other seeks
to excell. The one looks for his reward
in somewhat besides religion; the other
finds it in religion itself; It is his meat
and drink to do the will of that heavenly
Father, whom he loves and adores. Which
of these two are likely to make the great-
eft improvement in goodness, is easily dif-
cerned. Let us now confider,

IN the third place, the influence of de-

votion on the happiness of life. Whatever
promotes and strengthens virtue, what-
ever calms and regulates the temper, is a
source of happiness. Devotion, as I have
just now shown, produces those effets in
a remarkable degree. It inspires compo-
sure of spirit, mildness, and benignity;
weakens the painful, and cherishes the

pleating

pleating emotions; and, by these means, S E R M.

X.

carries on the life of a pious man in a
smooth and placid tenour.

Betides exerting this habitual influence

on the mind, devotion opens a field of
enjoyments, to which the vicious are en-
tire firangers; enjoyments the more valu-
able, as they peculiarly belong to retire-
ment when the world leaves us, and to
adversity when it becomes our foe. These
are the two seasons, for which every wife
man would molt wish to provide some
hidden store of comfort. For let him be
placed in the most favourable situation
which the human state admits, the world
can neither always amuse him, nor al-
ways shield him from difirefs. There
will be many hours of vacuity, and
many of dejeaion, in his life. If he be
a stranger to God, and to devotion, how
dreary will the gloom of solitude often
prove? With what oppressive weight will
sickness, disappointment, or old age, fall
upon his spirits ? But, for those pensive
periods, the pious man has a relief pre-

U pared.

SER M. pared. From the tiresome repetition of

X.
. ---. the common vanities of life, or from the

painful corrosion of its cares and sorrows,
devotion transports him into a new re-
gion; and surrounds him there with such
objeds, as are the most fitted to cheer the
dejecion, to calm the tumults, and to
heal the wounds of his heart. If the
world has been empty and delusive, it
gladdens him with the profped of a
higher and better order of things, about
to arise. If men have been ungrateful
and base, it displays before him the
faithfulness of that Supreme Being, who,
though every other friend fail, will never
forsake him. Consult your experience,
and you will find, that the two greatest
sources of inward joy, are, the exercise of
love direted towards a deserving objed,
and the exercise of hope terminating on
some high and assured happiness. Both
these are fipplied by devotion; and
therefore we have no reason to be fur-
prifed, if, on some occasions, it fill the
hearts of good men with a fatisfadtion
not to be expressed.

The

The refined pleasures of a pious mind s ER R.

X.

are, in many refpeas, fuperiour to the
coarse gratifications of sense. They are
pleasures which belong to the highest
powers, and best affetions of the foul;
whereas the gratifications of sense reside
in the lowelf region of our nature. To
the one, the foul stoops below its native
dignity. The other, raise it above itself.
The one, leave always a comfortless, often
a mortifying, remembrance behind them.
The other, are reviewed with applause
and delight. The pleasures of sense re-
femble a foaming torrent, which, after a
disorderly course, speedily runs out, and
leaves an empty and offensive channel.
But the pleasures of devotion resemble
the equable current of a pure river,
Which enlivens the fields through which
it passes, and diffuses verdure and ferti-
lity along its banks. To thee, 0 Devo-
tion ! we owe the highest improvement of
our nature, and much of the enjoyment
of our life. Thou art the support of our
virtue, and the reft of our fouls, in this

U 2 turbulent

SER M. turbulent world. Thou compofefl the
'_L^ thoughts. Thou calmell the passions(

Thou exaltef: the heart. Thy commu-
nications, and thine only, are imparted
to the low, no less than to the high; to
the poor, as well as to the rich. In thy
presence, worldly diftinaions cease; and
under thy influence, worldly sorrows are
forgotten. Thou art the balm of the
wounded mind. Thy fanduary is ever
open to the miserable; inaccessible only
to the unrighteous and impure. Thou
beginneft on earth, the temper of heaven.
In thee, the hosts of angels and blessed
spirits eternally rejoice. It now remains,
that,

1II. I ENbEAVOUR to corire faint

errors, into which men are apt to fall
concerning devotion. For it is but too
obvious, that errors are often committed
in this part of religion. These frequently
disfigure its appearance before the world,
and subjed it to unjnft reproach. Let us
therefore attend deliberately to its nature,

so

so as to difRinguifh pure and rational de- sE P M,.

X.

votion, of which I have hitherto treated, '-;--
from that which is, in any degree, fpuri-
ous and adulterated.

In the first place, It is an error to

place devotion in the mere performance
of any external aa of worship. Prayer
and praise, together with the ordinances
peculiar to the Christian religion, are the
appointed means of raising the heart to-
wards the Supreme Being. They are the
inflituted signs of devotion; the language
in which it naturally expresses itself. But
let us remember, that they are signs and
expressions only; and we all know, that,
in various cafes, these may not correspond
to the thing signified. It is in the difpo-
fition of the heart, not in the motion of
the lips, or in the posture of the body,
that devotion consists. The heart may
pray or praise, when no words are utter-
ed. But if the heart be unconcerned or
ill affeaed, all the words we can utter,
how properly framed soever, are no other
than empty and unacceptable founds in
the ear of the Almighty.

U 3 IN

S L R M. IN the second place, It is an error to

X.
'-&-.i conceive the pleasures and advantages of

devotion, to be ,indiscriminately open to
all. Devotion, like many parts of reli-
gion, may in ome, lights be confidered
as a privilege, and-in others as a duty.
It is the duty of all, to love God, and to
resign themselves to his will. But it is
the privilege of good men only, to re-
joice in God:, and to 'confide in his
friendship. Hence a certain preparation
is requisite, for the enjoyment of devotion
in its whole extent. Not only must the
life be reformed from gross enormities,
but the heart muff have undergone that
change which the Gospel demands. A
competent knowledge of God must be
acquired. A proper foundation must be
laid in faith and repentance, for inter-
course with Heaven.

They who would rush all at once from

the arms of the world, into the sacred
retreat of devotion; they who imagine
that retreat to fland always ready for the
reception of such as betake themselves to

it, for no reason, but because every other s E R M.

X.

refuge excludes them, betray gross igno-
rance of this part of religion. They bring
to it, faculties unqualified to taste its plea-
fures; and they grasp at hopes, to which
they are not entitled. By incorporating
with devotion the unnatural mixture of
their unfanCtified passions, they defile and
corrupt it. Hence that gloom which has
often spread over it. Hence those fupcr-
tfitious mortifications and aufterities, by
which the falsely devout hope to purchase
favour from God; haunted by the ter-
rours of a guilty conscience, and vainly
firuggling to substitute a servile and
cringing homage, in the room of the pure
affections of a renewed heart. On such
altars, the hallowed fire of true devotion
cannot burn; nor can any incense ascend
from them, that flhall be grateful to Hea-
ven. Bring no more vain oblations. JVaf/J
ye, make you clean, put away the evil of
your doings Jfoni before mine eyes, faith the
Lord. Cease to do evil; learn to do well.
Then draw nigh to God, and he will draw

U 4 nighl

s E R M. Iigh to you..--But though devotion rec

X.

quires a pure heart, and a virtuous life,
and neceflarily supposes the exercise of
frequent retirement, I must observe,

I N the third place, That it is an error

to conceive it as requiring an entire re-
treat from the world. Devotion, like
every other branch of religion, was in-
tended to fit us for discharging the duties
of life. We serve God, by being useful
to one another. It is evident from the
frame of our nature, and from our com-
mon necessities and wants, that we were
designed by Providence for an active part
on this earth. The Gospel of Christ, ac-
cordingly, confiders us as engaged in the
concerns of the world; and direcs its
exhortations to men, in all the various re-
lations, characters, and employments of
civil life. Abftraftion from society, there-
fore, and total dedication of our time to
devout exercises, cannot be the most pro-
per method of acquiring the favour of
God.

I mean

I mean not, however, to throw any SERM.

blame on those, who having loft all relifln v--i
for the ordinary pursuits of life, in con-
sequence of severe wounds which they
have received from afflition; who, be-
ing left to stand alone, and discerning
their connections with the world to be
in some measure broken off, choose to
seek tranquillity in a religious retirement,
and to consecrate their days entirely to
God. Situations sometimes occur, which
both justify a great degree of retreat from
the world, and entitle it to refpecd. But,
with regard to the bulk of mankind,
Christian devotion neither requires nor
implies any such sequestration from the
affairs of men. Nay, for the most part,
it will be cultivated with greater success
by those who mingle it with the active
employments of life. For the mind,
when entirely occupied by any one ob-
je., is in hazard of viewing it at last
through a false medium. Objecs, efpe-
cially, so great and sublime as those of
devotion, when we attempt to fix upon

7 them

SE R M. them (unremitting attention, overflretch
»-c« and disorder our feeble powers. The

mind, by being relaxed, returns to them
with more advantage. As none of our
organs can bear intense sensations without
injury; as the 'eye, when dazzled with
overpowering light, beholds imaginary co-
lours, and loses the real distinction of ob-
jects; so the mind, when overheated by
perpetual contemplation of celestial things,
has been sometimes found to mistake the
firong impressions of fancy, for fupernatu-
ral communications from above. To the
employments of devotion, as to all other
things, there are due limits. There is a
certain temperate sphere, within which it
preserves longest its proper exertion, and
most successfully promotes the purposes for
which it was designed.

I N the fourth place, It is an error to

imagine, . that devotion enjoins a total
contempt of all the pleasures and amuse-
ments of human society. It checks, in-
deed, that spirit of dissipation which is

too

too prevalent. It not only prohibits plea, s E t M.
fures which are unlawful, but likewise ,-..
that unlawful degree of attachment to
pleasures in themselves innocent, which
withdraws the attention of man from
what is serious and important. But it
brings amusement under due limitation,
without extirpating it. It forbids it as
the business, but permits it as the re-
laxation, of life. For there is nothing in
the spirit of true religion, which is hostile
to a cheerful enjoyment of our situation
in the world.

They who look with a revere and in-

dignant eye upon all the recreations by
which the cares of men are. relieved, and
the union of society is cemented, are, in
two refpeas, injurious to religion. Firit,
they exhibit it to others under a forbid-
ding form, by clothing it with the garb
os.so much unnecessary austerity. And.
next, they deprive the world of the be-
nefit which their example might afford,
in drawing the line between innocent and
dangerous pleasures. By a temperate

, partici-

S ER M. participation of those which are innocent,
I-Y ..they might successfully exert that autho-

rity, which a virtuous and respeCtable cha-
racter always possesses, in refraining un-
due excess. They would show the young
and unwary, at what point they ought
to flop. They would have it in their
power, to regulate, in some degree, the
public manners; to check extravagance,
to humble presumption, and put vice to
the blush. But, through injudicious fe-
verity, they fall (hort of the good they
might perform. By an indiscriminate
censure of all amusement, they detract
from the weight of their reproof, when
amusement becomes undoubtedly sinful.
By totally withdrawing themselves from
the circle of cheerful life, they deliver up
the entertainments of society, into the
hands of the loose, and the corrupted;
and permit the blind power of fashion,
uncontrouled, to eflablifh its own stand,
ards, and to exercise its dangerous sway
over the world.

IN the fifth place, It is an error to be- s E R M.

X.

tieve, that devotion nourishes a spirit of -
severity, in judging of the manners and
characters of others. Under this re-
proach, indeed, it has so long suffered in
the world; that, with too many, the ap-
pellation of devout, suggests no other
characer, but that of a four and recluse
bigot, who delights in censure. But the
reproach is unjust; for such a spirit is
entirely opposite to the nature of true de-
votion. The very first traces which it
imprints on the mind, are candour and
humility. Its principles are liberal. Its
genius is unassuming and mild. Severe
only to itself, it makes every allowance
for others which humanity can suggest.
It claims no privilege of looking into
their hearts, or of deciding with refped
to their eternal ftate.-If your supposed
devotion produce contrary effets; if it
infuse harshness into your sentiments,
and acrimony into your speech; you may
conclude, that under a serious appear-
ance, carnal passions lurk. And, if ever

it

S E RM. it shall so far lift you up with felf-con.
L-,-.J ceit as to make you eflablifh your own

opinions as an infallible standard for the
whole Christian world, and lead you to
consign to perdition, all who differ from
you, either in some doctrinal tenets, or
in the mode of expressing them; you may
reft assured, that to much pride you have
joined much ignorance, both of the na-
ture of devotion, and of the Gospel of
Christ. Finally,

I N the sixth place, It is an error to

think, that perpetual rapture and fpiri-
tual joy belong to devotion. Devout
feelings admit very different degrees of
warmth and exaltation. Some persons,
by the frame of their minds, are much
inore susceptible than others, of the ten-
der emotions. They more readily relent
at the view of Divine goodness, glow with
a warmer. ardour of love, and, by confe-
quence, rife to a higher elevation of joy
and hope. But, in the midf of still and
talm affections, devotion often dwells;

I and,

and, though it produce no transports in SE PT.
the mind, diffuses over it a tfeady fe-
renity. Devout sensations not only vary in
their degree according to the frame of
different tempers; but, even among the
best disposed, susser much interruption
and decay. It were too much to expeEt,
that in the present state of human frailty,
those happy feelings should be uniform
and constant. Oppression of worldly
cares, languor of spirits, and infirmities
of health, frequently indispose us for the
enjoyment of devout affecions. Pious
men, on these occasions, are in hazard of
passing judgment on their own fate with
too much severity; as if, for some great
iniquity, they were condemned by God
to final hardness of heart. Hence arises
that melancholy, which has been seen to
overcloud them; and which has given
occasion to many contemptuous scoffs of
ungodly men. But it is a melancholy
which deserves to be treated with tender-
ness, not with contempt. It is the excess
of virtuous and pious fenfibiJity. It is

the

S E R M. the overflowing of a heart affeced, in ari

extreme degree, with the humble sense
of its own failings, arid with ardent
concern to attain the favour of God. A
weakness, however, we admit it to be
though not a crime; and hold it to be
perfectly separable from the essence. of
devotion. For contrition, though it may
melt, ought not to fink or overpower the
heart of a Christian. The tear of repent-
ance brings its own relief. Religion is
a spring of consolation, not of terrour, to
every well-informed mind, which, in a
proper manner, refts its hope on the in-
finite goodness of God, and the all-fuffi-
ejent merit of Christ.

To conclude, Let us remove from de-

votion, all those miltakes, to which the
corruptions of men, or their ignorance
and prejudices, have given rife. With
us let it be the worship of God, in spirit
and in truth; the elevation of the foul
towards him, in simplicity and love. Let
us pursue it as the principle of virtuous

condut,

Conduc, and of inward peace. By fre- S E R M.

X.

*quent and serious meditation on the great
objects of religion, let us lay ourselves
open to its influence. By means of the
inflitutions of the Gospel, let us cherish
its imprefilons. And, above all, let us
pray to God, that he may establish its
power in our heart. For here if any
where his affiflance is requisite. The
spirit of devotion is his gift. From his
inspiration it proceeds. Towards him it
tends; and in his pretence hereafter, it
ihall attain its full perfection.

X . SER-

# SERMON XI. On the DUTIES of the YOUNG. TITUS ii. 6. Young men likewise exhort, to be sober-minded.

[ 306 ]

SERMON XI.
On the DUTIES of the YOUNG.

.,~-.1 .----^--^-iiR .J-

TITUS ii. 6.

Young men likewise exhort, to befober- minded.
S FR . OBRIETY of mind, is one of those

- virtues which the present condition
of human life strongly inculcates. The
uncertainty of its enjoyments, checks
presumption; the multiplicity of its dan-
gers, demands perpetual caution. Mo-
deration, vigilance, and felf-government,
are duties incumbent on all; but efpeci-
ally on such as are beginning the journey
of life.. To them, therefore, the admo-
fition in the Text is, with great propriety,
directed; though there is reason to fear,
that by them it is in hazard of being

least

least regarded. Experience enforces the S E RM.
admonition on the molt giddy, after they XI
have advanced in years. But the whole
tfate of youthful views and paflions, is
adverse to sobriety of mind. The scenes
which present themselves, at our entering
upon the world, are commonly flattering.
Whatever they be in themselves, the lively
spirits of the young gild every opening
profpea. The field of hope appears to
firetch wide before them. Pleasure seems
to put forth its blossoms on every fide.
Impelled by desire, forward they rush
with inconsiderate ardour: Prompt to
decide, and to choose; averse to helitate,
or to enquire; credulous, because un-
taught by experience; rash, because un-
acquainted with danger; headstrong,
because unfubdued by disappointment.
lHence arise the perils, of which it is my
design at present to warn them. I shall
take sobriety of mind, in its molt compre-
henfive sense, as including the whole of
that discipline which religion and virtue
prescribe to youth. Though the words

X2 of

S E R M. of the Text are diretly addressed to yo7uig

XL.

_- men, yet, as the fame admonition is given

in a preceding verse to the other sex, the
infirudions which arise from the Text are
to be confidered as common to both. I
intend, first, to show them the importance
of beginning early to give serious attention
to their conduct; and, next, to point out
those virtues which they ought chiefly to
cultivate.

As soon as you ate capable of reflec-

tion, you muff perceive that there is a
right and a wrong, in human actions.
You fee, that those who are born with
the fame advantages of fortune, are not
all equally prosperous in the course of life.
While some of them, by wife and steady
conduct, attain diftindion in the world,
and pass their days with comfort and ho-
nour; others of the fame rank, by mean
and vicious behaviour, forfeit the advan-
tages of their birth, involve themselves in
much misery, and end in being a dif-
grace to their friends, and a burden on

society.

society. Early, then, you may learn, that s TER jM.

xi.

it is not on the external condition in LC---
which you find yourselves placed, but on
the part which you are to aft, that your
welfare or unhappincls, your honour or
infamy, depend. Now, when beginning
to aa that part, what can be of greater
moment, than to regulate your plan of
conduct with the most serious attention,
before you have yet committed any fatal
or irretrievable errors ? If, inflead of
exerting reflection for this valuable pur-
pose, you deliver yourselves up, at so cri-
tical a time, to sloth and pleasure; if you
refute to liften to any counsellor but hu-
mour, or to attend to any pursuit except
that of amusement; if you allow your-
selves to float loose and careless on the
tide of life, ready to receive any direc-
tion which the current of fashion may
chance to give you what can you expect
to follow from such beginnings? While
so many around you are undergoing the
fad consequences of a like indiscretion,
for what reason shall not those confe-

X 3 quences

s EXRM. quences extend to you? Shall you only
-v----' attain success without that preparation,

and escape dangers without that precau-
tion, which is required of others ? Shall
happiness grow up to you, of its own ac-
cord, and solicit your acceptance, when,
to the reft of mankind, it is the fruit of
long cultivation, and the acquisition of
labour and care ?- Deceive not your-
selves with such arrogant hopes. What-
ever be your rank, Providence will not,
for your fake, reverse its established or-
der. The Author of your being hath en-
joined you to take heed to your ways; to
ponder the paths of your feet; to remember
your Creator in the lays of your youth. He
hath decreed, that they only who seek as-
ter wisdom, flJall find it; that fools Jhall
be affigted, becanfe of their tranfgre/ions;
and that vhofo refifeth inftruSlion, /hall
dejfroy his own ftoul. By listening to these
admonitions, and tempering the vivacity
of youth with a proper mixture of serious
thought, you may ensure cheerfulness for
the reft of life; but by delivering your-

selves

selves up at present to giddiness and S ERM.

XI.

levity, you lay the foundation of lafling --
henvinefs of heart.

When you look forward to tlofe plans

of life, which either your circumstances
have luggefted, or your friends have pro-
posed, you will not hesitate to acknow-
ledge, that in order to pursue them with
advantage, some previous discipline is re-
quifite. Be assured, that whatever is to
be your profeflion, no education is more
necessary to your success, than the ac-
quirement of virtuous dispositions and
habits. This is the univertal preparation
for every cbaraater, and every fiation in
life; Bad as the world is, rcfpeat is al-
ways paid to virtue. In the usual course
of human affairs, it will be found, that
a plain understanding joined with ac-
knowledged worth, contributes more to
prosperity, than the brightest parts with-
out probity or honour. Whether science,
or business, or public life, be your aim,
virtue fill enters, for a principal Ihare,
into all those great departments of society.

X 4 It

SEXM. It is connected with eminence, in every

XL
-,,.., liberal art; with reputation, in every

branch of fair and useful business; with
distinCtion, in every public fiation. The
vigour which it gives the mind, and the
weight which it adds to character; the
generous sentiments which it breathes, the
undaunted spirit which it inspires, the
ardour of diligence which it quickens, the
freedom which it procures from pernicious
and dishonourable avocations, are the foun-
dations of all that is high in fame, or great
in success, among men.

Whatever ornamental or engaging en-

dowments you now possess, virtue is a
necessary requisite, in order to their shin-
ing with proper luitre. Feeble are the
attractions of the fairest form, if it be
fufpe&ed that 'nothing within corre-
fponds to the pleating appearance without.
Short are the triumphs of wit, when it is
supposed to 'be the vehicle of malice. By
whatever arts you may at first attraCt the
attention, you can hold the esteem, and
secure the hearts of others, only by ami-

able

able dispositions, and the accompliflments s E R M,
of the mind. These are the qualities
whose influence will last, when the lustre
of all that once sparkled and dazzled has
passed away.

Let not then the season of youth be

barren of improvements, so eflential to
your future felicity and honour. Now is
the seed-time of life; and according to
.what y3oujow, you fiall reap. Your cha-
rader is now, under Divine afliffEnce, of
your own forming; your fate is, in some
measure, put into your own hands. Your
nature is as yet pliant and soft. Habits
have not established their dominion. Pre-
judices have not pre-occupied your un-
derflanding. The world has not had time
to contract and debase your affetions.
All your powers are more vigorous, dif-
embaraffid, and free, than they will be
at any future period. Whatever impulse
you now give to your desires and paflions,
the direction is likely to continue. It
will form the channel in which your life
is to run ; nay, it may determine its evcr-

lafling

ERM. lading issue. Confider then the employ-
XL.
v_-i ment of this important period, as the

highest trust which ihall ever be com-
mitted to you; as, in a great measure,
decisive of your happiness, in time, and
in eternity. As in the succession of the
seasons, each, by the invariable laws of
Nature, affeds the produeions of what is
next in course; so, in human life, every
period of our age, according as it is well
or ill spent, influences the happiness of
that which is to follow. Virtuous youth
gradually brings forward accomplished
and flourishing manhood; and such man-
hood passes of itself, without uneasiness,
into refpedtable and tranquil old age.
But when Nature is turned out of its re-
gular course, disorder takes place in the
moral, just as in the vegetable world. If
the Spring put forth no blossoms, in
Summer there will be no beauty, and
in Autumn, no fruit. So, if youth be
trifled away without improvement, man-
hood will be contemptible, and old age
miserable. If the beginnings of life have

been

been vality, its latter end can be no other s E R M.
than vexation of spirit.

Having thus ihown the importance of

beginning early to give serious attention
to condud, I come, next, to point out the
virtues which are most neccfTary to be cul-
tivated in youth. What I flhall,

I. RECOMMEND, is piety to God. With

this I begin, both as the foundation of
good morals, and as a disposition parti-
cularly graceful and becoming in youth.
To be void of it, argues a cold heart, delti-
tute of some of the bell affedions which
belong to that age. Youth is the season
of warm and generous emotions. The
heart should then, spontaneously, rife
into the admiration of what is great,
glow with the love of what is fair and
excellent, and melt at the discovery of
tenderness and goodness. Where can
any obje&t be found, so proper to kindle
those affedions, as the Father of the uni-
verse, and the Author of all felicity ?
Unmoved by veneration, can you con-

template

SER M. template that grandeur and majefy,
.-, -.. which his works every where display ?

Untouched by gratitude, can you view
that profusion of good, which, in this
pleasing season of life, his beneficent hand
pours around you? Happy in the love
and affetion of those with whom you
are connected, look up to the Supreme
Being, as the inspirer of all the friend-
ship which has ever been liown you by
others; himself, your best and your first
friend; formerly, the supporter of your
infancy, and the guide of your child-
hood; now, the guardian of your youth,
and the hope of your coming years,
View religious homage, as a natural ex-
pression of gratitude to him for all his
goodness. Confider it as the service of
the God of your fathers; of him, to whom
your parents devoted you; of him, whom
in former ages your ancestors honoured;
and by whom they are now rewarded,
and blessed in heaven. Connected with
so many tender sensibilities of foul, let
religion be with you, not the cold and

barren

barren offspring of speculation, but the SE M.

XL
warm and vigorous dictate of the heart. --

But though piety chicfly belong to the

heart, yet the aid of the understanding is
requisite, to give a proper diredion to the
devout affecdions. You must endeavour,
therefore, to acquire just views, both of
the great principles of natural religion,
and of the peculiar docrines of the gospel.
For this end fludy the sacred scrip-
tures. Consult the word of God, more
than the systems of men, if you would
know the truth in its native purity.
When, upon rational and fober enquiry,
you have established your principles, sus-
ser them not to be flhaken, by the scoffs
of the licentious, or the cavils of the fcep-
tical. Remember, that in the examination
of every great and comprehensive plan,
such as that of Chriflianity, difficulties may
be expeted to occur; and that reasonable
evidence is not to be rejeded, because
the nature of our present slate allows us
only to know in part, and to fee throzugh a
glass, darkly.

Impress

S E R M. Impress your minds with reverence foi

Xl.
A _.-, all that is sacred. Let no wantonness of

youthful spirits, no compliance with the
intemperate mirth of others, ever betray
you into prophane sallies. Betides the
guilt which is thereby incurred, nothing
gives a more odious appearance of petu-
lance and presumption to youth, than the
affectation of treating religion with levi-
ty. Instead of being an evidence of fupe-
riour understanding, it discovers a pert
and shallow mind; which, vain of the
first smatterings of knowledge, presumes to
make light of what the reft of mankind
revere.

At the fame time, you are not to ima-

gine, that when exhorted to be religious,
you are called upon, to become more for-
mal and solemn in your manners than
others of the fame years, or to erec your-
selves into supercilious reprovers of those
around you.. The spirit of true religion
breathes gentleness and affability. It
gives a native, unaffected ease to the be-
haviour. It is social, kind, and cheer-

4 ful;

ful: far removed from that gloomy and s E R M.

XI.

illiberal superstition which clouds the
.brow, iharpens the temper, dejeds the
spirit, and teaches men to fit themselves
for another world, by neglecing the con-
cerns of this. Let your religion, on the
contrary, conned preparation for heaven,
with an honourable discharge of the du-
ties of adive life. Let it be aflbciated in
your imagination, with all that is manly
and useful; with whatsoever things are
true, are jiif, are pure, are lovely, are of
good report, wherever there is any virtue,
and wherever there is any praise. Of such
religion discover, on every proper occasion,
that you are not ashamed; but avoid mak-
ing any unnecessary oflentation of it before
the world.

II. To piety, join modefry and docili-

ty, reverence of your parents, and sub-
miflion to those who are your fuperiours
in knowledge, in flation, and in years.
Dependence and obedience belong to
youth. Modefly is one of its chief orna-

ments;

S E R M. ments; and has ever been esteemed a pre.

XL.
'-v-- sage of rising merit. When entering on

the career of life, it is your part, not to
assume the reins as yet into your hands;
but to commit yourselves to the guidance
of the more experienced, and to become
wife by the wisdom of those who have gone
before you.

Of all the follies incident to youth,

there are none which either deform its
present appearance, or blast the prospect
of its future prosperity, more than self-
conceit, presumption, and obstinacy. By
checking its natural progress in improve-
ment, they fix it in long immaturity;
and frequently produce mischiefs, which
can never be repaired. Yet these are vices
too commonly found among the young,
Big with enterprise, and elated by hope,
they resolve to trust for success to none
but themselves. Full of their own abili-
ties, they. deride the admonitions which
are given them by their friends, as the
timorous suggestions of age. Too wife
to learn, too impatient to deliberate, too

5 forward

forward to be refirained, they plunge, S ER .

Xi.

with precipitant indiscretion, into the '--I
midst of all the dangers with which life
abounds. Seefi thou a young man wife in
his own conceit ? There is more hope of a
fool, than of him.-Pofitive as you now are
in your opinions, and confident in your
assertions, be assured, that the time ap-
proaches when both men and things will
appear to you in a different light. Many
characters which you now admire, will,
by and by, fink in your esteem; and
many opinions, of which you are at pre-
sent most tenacious, will alter as you ad-
vance in years. Distrust, therefore, that
glare of youthful presumption, which
dazzles your eyes. Abound not in your
own sense. Put not yourselves forward
with too much eagerness; nor imagine,
that by the impetuosity of juvenile ar-
dour, you can overturn systems which
have been long established, and change
the face of the world. Learn not to think
more highly of yourselves than you ought to
think, but to thinkfoberly. By patient and

Y gradual

SE R M. gradual progression in improvement, you
a__j may, in due time, command lasting ereem..

But by assuming at present, a tone of
superiority, to which you have no title,
you will disgust those whose approbation
it is most important to gain. Forward vi-
vacity may fit you to be the companions of
an idle hour. More solid qualities muff re-
commend you to the wife, and mark you
out for importance and consideration in
subsequent life.

III. IT is necessary to recommend to

you, sincerity and truth. This is the
basis of every virtue.. That darkness of
charater, where we can fee no heart;
those foldings of art, through which no
native affection is allowed: to penetrate
present an object, unamiable in every
season of life, but particularly odious in
youth. If, at an age when the heart is
warm, when the emotions are ftrongt
and when nature is expeded to show it-
self free and open, you can already smile
and deceive, what are we to look for,

when

when you fl:l! be longer hackneyed in the s E R M.
ways of men; when inte:eft shall have corn- -v-
pleted the obduration oJ: y- ur heart, and
experience fliall have improved you in all
the arts of guile ? Diflimulation in youth,
is the fore-runner of perfidy in old age. Its
first appearance, is the fatal omen of grow-
ing depravity, and future fhaime. It de-
grades parts and learning; obscures the
lustre of every accomplishment; and finks
you into contempt with God and man.

As you value, therefore, the appro-

bation of lieaven, or the esteem of the
World, cultivate the love of truth. In all
your proceedings, be dire&l and confidtent.
Ingenuity and candour possess the most
powerful charm; they bespeak universal
favour, and carry an apology for almost
every failing. The lip of truth, Jhall be
eJtabli/hed for ever; but a ying tongue, is
but for a moment. * The path of truth, is a
plain and a safe path; that of falsehood,
is a perplexing maze. After the first de-
parture from sincerity, it is not in yout

* Prov. xii. 19.

Y.2 power

SERM. power to flop. One artifice unavoidably

XI.
ai_ I leads on to another; till, as the intricacy

of the labyrinth increases, you are left
entangled in your own snare. Deceit dif-
covers a little mind, which flops at tem-
porary expedients, without rising to com-
prehenfive views of conduct. It betrays,
at the fame time, a daflardly spirit. It is
the resource of one who wants courage
to avow his designs, or to reft upon him-
self. Whereas, openness of charater dif-
plays that generous boldness, which ought
to distinguish youth. To set out in the
world with no other principle than a
crafty attention to interest, betokens one
who is defined for creeping through the
inferiour walks of life. But to give
an early preference to honour above gain,
when they sand in competition; to despise
every advantage, which cannot be attained
without dilhoneft arts; to brook no mean-
ness, and to ltoop to no dissimulation; are
the indications of a great mind, the pre-
fages of future eminence'and diflindion in
life.

At

At the fame time, this virtuous sincerity s E R A.

is perfectly consistent with the most pru- _
dent vigilance and caution. It is opposed
to cunning, not to true wisdom. It is not
the simplicity of a weak and improvident,
but the candour of an enlarged and noble
mind; of one, who scorns deceit, because
he accounts it both base and unprofitable;
and who seeks no disguise, because he needs
none to hide him. Lord! wbhojjaill abide
in thy tabernacle? WhoJhall ascend into thy
holy hill? He that walketh uprightly, and
"worketh righteotuiefis, and fpeaketh the
truth in his heart.

IV. YOUTH is the proper season of

cultivating the benevolent and humane
affetions. As a great part of your hap-
piness is to depend on the connections
which you form with others, it is of high
importance that you acquire, betimes, the
temper and the manners which will ren-
der such connections comfortable. Let a
sense of justice be the foundation of all
your social qualities. In your most early

Y 3 intercourse

SERM. intercoutfe with the world, and even in

XI.

your youthful amusements, let no unfair-
ness be found. Engrave on your mind
that sacred rule, of doing all things to.
others, according as you 'wi/fJ that they
Jhould do unto you. For this end, impress
yourselves with a deep sense of the origi-
nal, and natural equality of men. What-
ever advantages of birth or fortune you
poffels, never display them with an often-
tatious superiority. Leave the fubordi-
nations of rank, to regulate the intercourse
of more advanced years. At present, it
becomes you to act among your compa-
nions, as man with man. Remember how
unknown to you are the vicissitudes .of the
world; and how often they, on whom ig-
norant and contemptuous young men once
looked down with scorn, have risen to be
their fuperiours in future years.

Compassion is an emotion, of which

you ought never to be ashamed. Grace-
ful in youth is the tear of sympathy, and
the heart that melts at the tale of woe.
Let not ease and indulgence contract your

affetions,

affections, and wrap you up in felfiflh en- s r p1 M.

XI.

joyment. But go sometimes to the houftc -.. .J
of mourning, as well as to the houfr offeafi-
ing. Accustom yourselves to tlhink of the
difireffes of human life; of the solitary
cottage, the dying parent, and the weep-
ing orphan. Thou flJalt not harden thy
heart, nor Jhut thy hand from thy poor bro-
ther; but thou lfJalt firely give unto him in
the day of his need: And Ihine heartyJhall
not be grieved uwhenl thou giveJt unto hin;
because thatfor this thing, the Lord thy God
Jfall bless thee in all thy wcorks . Never
sport with pain and distress, in any of
your amusements; nor treat even the
meanest inset with wanton cruelty.

In young minds, there is commonly a

strong propensity to particular intimacies
and friendships. Youth, indeed, is the
season when friendships are sometimes
formed, which not only continue through
succeeding life, but which glow to the
lat, with a tenderness unknown to the
connections begun in cooler years. The
propensity therefore is not to be difcou-

* Deut. xv. 7.10.

Y 4 raged;

S ER M. raged; though at the fame time it muRf
.-v_- be regulated with much circumfpedion

and care. Too many of the pretended
friendships of youth, are mere combina-
tions in pleasure. They are often found-
ed on capricious likings; suddenly con-
trated, and as suddenly dissolved. Some-
times they are the effect of interested com-
plaifance and flattery on the one fide, and
of credulous fondness on the other. Be-
ware of such rash and dangerous connec-
tions, which may afterwards load you
with difionour. Remember, that by the
character of those whom you choose for
your friends, your own is likely to be
formed, and will certainly be judged of
by the world. Be flow, therefore, and
cautious in contracting intimacy; but
when a virtuous friendship is once efta-
blifhed, confider it as a sacred engagement.
Expose not yourselves to the reproach of
lightness and inconstancy, which always
bespeak, either a trifling, or a base mind.
Reveal none of the secrets of your friend.
Be faithful to his interests: Forsake him

not

not in danger. Abhor the thought of ac- s E R M.

XI.

quiring any advantage by his prejudice I
or hurt. There is a friend that loveth at
all times, and a brother that is born for ad-
verfity. Thine own friend, and thy father's
friend, forsake not .

Finally, on this head; in order to ren-

der yourselves amiable in society, correct
every appearance of harlhnefs in beha-
viour. Let that courtesy distinguish your
demeanour, which springs, not so much
from fludied politeness, as from a mild
and gentle heart. Follow the cufloms of
the world in matters indifferent; but flop
when they become sinful. Let your man-
ners be simple and natural; and of course
they will be engaging. Affecation is cer-
tain deformity. By forming themselves
on fantastic models, and vying with one
another in every reigning folly, the young
begin with being ridiculous, and end in
being vicious and immoral.

V. LET me particularly exhort youth
to temperance in pleasure: Let me ad-

Prov. xvii. 17.--xxv. ic.

aS mlonifl

SE R M. monifi them, to beware of that rock on

- which .thouSands, from race to race, con-

tinue to split. The love of pleasur.e, ,na-
tural to man in every period of his life,
glow6 at this age with .exceslive ardour.
Novelty adds.frefh charms, as yet, to.eve-
ry gratification. The world appears to
Spread a continual feast; and health, vi-
gour, and high spirits, invite them to
partake of it without restraint. In vain
we warn :them of latent dangers. Reli-
gion is accused of insufferable severity,
in prohibiting enjoyment: and the old,
when they offer their admonitions, are
upbraided with having forgot that they
once were young.-And yet, my friends,
to what do the restraints of religion, and
the counsels of age, with refpe& to plea-
sure amount ? They may all be com-
prized in few words, not to hurt your'
selves, and not to hurt others, by your
pursuit of pleasure. Within these bounds,
pleasure is lawful; beyond them, it be-
comes criminal, because it is ruinous.
Are ;these reitraints any other, than what

a wife

a wife man would choose to impose on him- S E R M.

XI.

self? We call you not to renounce plea-
sure, but to enjoy it in safety. Instead of
abridging it, we exhort you to pursue it on
an extensive plan. We propose measures
for securing its possession, and for prolong-
ing its duration.

Consult your whole nature. Confider

yourselves not only as sensitive, but as ra-
tional beings; not onlyas rational, but flcial.;
notoonly as social, but.immortal. Whatever
violates your nature in any of there re-
fpecds, cannot afford true pleasure; any
more than that which undermines an effen-
tial part of the vital system can promote
health. For the truth of this conclusion,
we appeal, not merely to the authority of
religion, nor to the testimony of the aged,
but to yourselves and your own experience.
We ask, Whether you have not found, that
in a course of criminal excess, your plea-
sure was more than compensated by luc-
ceeding pain ? Whether, if not from every
particular inltance, yet from every habit,

at

s E R M. at least, of unlawful gratification, there did
A._> not spring some thorn to wound you, there

did not arise some consequence to make you
repent of it in the issue ? How long then,
yeJimple ones ! will ye love simplicity ? How
long repeat the fame round of pernicious
folly, and tamely expose yourselves to be
caught in the fame snare ? If you have any
consideration, or any firmness left, avoid
temptations, for which you have found
yourselves unequal, with as much care, as
you would shun pestilential infetion. Break
off all connetions with the loose and pro-
fligate. When finners entice thee, consent
thou not. Look not on the wine when it is
red, when it giveth its colour in the cup;
for at the lat, it biteth like a serpent, and
jlingeth like an adder. Remove thy way
from theJirange woman, and come not near
the door of her house. Let not thine heart
*decline to her ways; for her house is the
way to hell. Thou goeJI after her as a bird
hafleth to the snare, and knoweth not that
it isfor his life.

By

By these unhappy excesses of irregular s ER M.

pleasure in youth, how many amiable dif- -,-
positions are corrupted or destroyed ! How
many rising capacities and powers are sup-
pressed! How many flattering hopes of pa-
rents and friends, are totally extinguished !
Who but must drop a tear over human
nature, when he beholds that morning
which arose so bright, overcast with such
untimely darkness; that good humour
which once captivated all hearts, that vi-
vacity which sparkled in every company,
those abilities which were fitted for adorn-
ing the highest flation, all sacrificed at the
flrine of low sensuality; and one who was
formed for running the fair career of life
in the midst of public efleem, cut off by
his vices at the beginning of his course,
or funk, for the whole of it, into infignifi-
cancy and contempt!-Thefe, O sinful
Pleasure! are thy trophies. It is thus
that, co-operating with the foe of God
and man, thou degradet human honour,
and blafteft the opening profpets of hu-
man felicity.

VI.

SERM. Vi. DILIGENCE, industry, and proper
v_-_ improvement of time, are material duties

of the young. To no purpose are they
endowed with the best abilities if they
want actiity for exerting them. Un-
availing, in this cafe, will be every direc-
tion that can be given them, either for
their temporal or spiritual welfare. In
youth, the labits of industry ate most
easily acquired. In youth, the incen-
tives to it are firongeft, from ambition
and from duty, from emulation and hope,
from all the profpets which the begin-
ning of life affords. If dead to these
calls, you already larguifh in slothful
inaction, what will be able to quicken
the more fluggilh current of advancing
years ?

Induflry is not only the lnflrumeht

of improvement, but the foundation of
pleasure. Nothing is so opposite to the
true enjoyment of life, as the relaxed
and feeble state of an indolent mind.
He who is a firanger to industry, may
poflefs, but he cannot enjoy. For it is

labour

labour only which gives the rclifl to s E R M.
pleafurc. It is the appointed vehicle of
every good to man. It is the indifpen-
fable condition of our pofltefing a found
mind, in a found body. Sloth i3 so in-
consistent with both, that it is hard to
determine whether it be a greater foe to
virtue, or to health and happiness. In-
acive as it is in itself, its effcEs are
fatally powerful. Though it appear a
Ilowly flowing stream, yet it undermines
all that is stable and flourishing. it not
only saps the foundation of every virtue,
but pours upon you a deluge of crimes
and evils. It is like water which first pu-
trifies by flagnation; aud then fends up
noxious vapours, and fills the atmosphere
with death.

Fly, therefore, from idleness, as the

certain parent both of guilt and of ruin.
And under idleness I include, not mere
inaCtion only, but all that circle of trio
fling occupations, in which too many
saunter away their youth; perpetually
engaged in frivolous society, or public

4 amuse-

SERM. amusements, in the labours of dress, or

XL ,-.-.. the ostentation of their perfons.-Is this

the foundation which you lay for future
usefulness and elteem? By such accom-
plifhments, do you hope to recommend
yourselves to the thinking part of the
world, and to answer the expetations
of your friends, and your country ?-
Amusements, youth requires. It were
vain, it were cruel to prohibit them.
But though allowable as the relaxation,
they are molt culpable as the business,
of the young. For they then become
the gulf of time, and the poison of the
mind. They foment bad passions. They
weaken the manly powers. They fink
the native vigour of youth, into con-
temptible effeminacy.

Redeeming your time from such dan-

gerous waite, seek to fill it with employ-
ments which you may review with satis-
faaion. The acquisition of knowledge
is one of'the molt honourable occupa-
tions of youth. The desire of it disco-
vers a liberal mind, and is conneted with

many

many accompliihments, and many virtues. E RM.

XI.

But though your train of life flould not
lead you to study, the course of education
always furnilhes proper employments to a
well-difpofed mind. Whatever you pur-
sue, be emulous to excel. Generous am-
bition, and sensibility to praise, are, efpe-
cially at your age, among the marks of
virtue. Think not, that any affluence of
fortune, or any elevation of rank, exempts
you from the duties of application and
industry. Industry is the law of our
being; it is the demand of Nature, of
Reason, and of God. Remember always,
that the years which now pars over your
heads, leave permanent memorials behind
them. From your thoughtless minds they
may escape; but they remain in the re-
membrance of God. They form an im-
portant part of the register of your life.
They will hereafter bear testimony, either
for or against you, at that day, when, for
all your acions, but particularly for the
employments of youth, you must give an
account to God.

Z THUS

SE RM. THUS I have set before you, some of

XI.
x_-J- the chief qualifications which belong to

thatfiber mind, that virtuous and religi-
ous characer, which the Apostle in my
Text recommends to youth; piety, mo-
defly, truth, benevolence, temperance,
and industry. Whether your future course
is destined to be long or short, after this
manner it should commence; and, if it
continue to be thus conducted, its con-
clufion, at what time soever it arrives,
will not be inglorious or unhappy. For
honourable age is not that which standeth
'in length of time, or that which is mea-
fired by number of years. But wjfdom is
the gray hair to man, and an uifpotied lie
is old age.

LET me finish the fubje:, with recall-

ing your attention to that dependence on
the blessing of Heaven, which amidst all
your endeavours after improvement, you
ought continually to preserve. It is too
common with the young, even when they
resolve to tread the path of virtue and ho-

nour,

nour, to set out with presumptuous con- S kM.
fidence in themselves. Trusting to their
own abilities for carrying them success-
fully through life, they are careless 'of
applying to God, or of deriving any as-
fiflance from what they are apt to reckon
the gloomy discipline of religion. Alas !
how little do they know the dangers which
await them ? Neither human wisdom, nor
human virtue, unsupported by religion,
are equal for the trying situations which
often occur in life. By the lhock of tempt-
ation, how frequently have the most vir-
tuous intentions been overthrown? Un-
der the pressure of disaster, how often has
the greatest constancy funk ? Eve}r1 good,
anidevery perfet gift, is from above. Wis-
dom and virtue, as well as riches and ho-
loWlr, comlefrom God. Destitute of his fa-
vour, you are in no better situation, with
all your boasted abilities, than orphans
left to wander in a trackless desert, with-
out any guide to conduct them, or any
shelter to cover them from the gathering
storm. Corret, then, this ill-founded ar-

Z 2 rogance.

S E R M. rogance. Expet not, that your happiness

Xl.

' can be independent of him who made

your.. By faith and repentance, apply to
the Redeemer of the world. By piety and
prayer, seek the protection of the God
of heaven. I conclude with the solemn
words, in which a great Prince delivered
his dying charge to his son; words, which
every young person ought to confider as
addressed to himself, and to engrave deep-
ly on his heart. Thou Solomon, my son,
know thou the God of thy fathers; and
serve him with a perseet heart, and with
a willing mind. For the Lord fearcheth
all hearts, and underfiandeth all the ima-
ginations of the thoughts. IJ thoufeek him,
he will befound of thee; but if thouforfake
him, he will cajf thee of for ever*.

* Chron, xxviii. 9:

5E R-

# SERMON XII. On the DUTIES and CONSOLATIONS of the AGED. PROV. xvi. 31. The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.

[ 341 3

S E R M O N XII.
On the DUTIES and CONSOLATIONS

of the AG ED.

PR V. xvi. 3r.
The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it

befound in the way of righteoufiiefs.

O fear God, and to keep his command- s E R M.

T ments, is the rule of our duty, in Xli.
every period of life. But, as the light
which guides our fleps, varies with the
progress of the day, so the rule of reli-
gious conduct is diverifiied in its appli-
cation, by the different fiages of our pre-
sent exigence. To every age, there be-
longs a diftin& propriety of behaviour.
There arises from it, a series of duties
peculiar to itself.

2 3 Of

S E R M. Of those which are incumbent on

XlI.
av youth, I have treated in the preceding

discourse. As we advance from 'youth to
middle age, a new field of aation opens,
and a different charater is required. The
flow of gay and impetuous spirits be-
gins to subside. Life gradually assumes a
graver call; the mind, a more sedate and
thoughtful turn. The attention is now
transferred from pleasure to interest; that
is, to pleasure diffused over a wider extent,
and meafurtd by a larger scale. Former-
ly, the enjoyment of the present moment
occupied the whole attention. Flow, no
aaion terminates ultimately in itself, but
refers to some more ditfant aim. Wealth
and power, the instruments of lasting
gratification, are now coveted more than
any single pleasure. Prudence and fore-
fight lay their plans. InduRfry carries on
its patient efforts. Adivity pushes for-
ward; address winds around. Here, an
enemy is to be overcome; there a rival
to be displaced. Competitions warm; and
the itrife of the world thickens on every

8 fide,

fide. To guide men through this busy S ERM.
period, without loTs of integrity ; to guard - --
them againlt the temptations which arise
from mistaken, or interfering, interests;
to call them from worldly pursuits, to
serious thoughts of their spiritual concerns,
is the great office of religion.

But as this includes, in a great mea-

sure, the whole compass of moral duty;
as the general firain of religious exhorta-
tion is addresscd to those who are in this
season of life; a delineation of the vir-
tues, properly belonging to middle age,
may appear unneceflary, and would lead
us into too wide a field. Let us therefore
turn our view to a bounded profped;
and contemplate a period of life, the du-
ties of which are circumscribed within
narrower limits. Old age is a tfage of
the human course, which every one hopes
to reach; and therefore the consideration
of it interests us all. It is a period jutly
entitled to general refpeat. Even its fail-
ings ought to be touched with a gentle
hand; and though the petulant, and the

Z 4 vain1

SE R M. vain, may despise the hoary head, yet the

v ifeft of men has affcrted in the Text,
that when found in the way oJ ri; httoUf-
ness, it is a crown of glory. I shall tirft,
offer so!ne counlels, conceining the errors
which are mofi incident to the aged. Se-
condly, I Ihall fuggell the peculiar duties
they ought to prattife; and thirdly, point
put the conlolations they may enjoy.

I. As the follies and vices of youth,

are chiefly derived from inexperience and
presumption; so, almost all the errors of
age, may be traced up to the feebleners
and distress peculiar to that time of life.
Though, in every part of life, vexa'ions
occur, yet, in former years, either bufi-
ness, or pleasure, served to obliterate their
impression, by supplying occupation to
the mind. Old age begins its advances,
with disqualifying men for relishing the
one, and for taking an aaive part in the
other. Wlile it withdraws their accuflbm-
ed supports, it imposes, at the fame
tiAme the additional burden of growing

infirmities.

infirmities. In the former fRages of their s ER M

XII.

journey, hope continued to flatter them L
with many a fair and enticing profpeCa.
But in proportion as old age increases,
thole pleasing illusions vanith. Life is
contracted within a narrow and barren
circle. Year after year tteals somewhat
away from their store of comfort, de-
prives them of fomne of their ancient
friends, blunts some of their powers of
sensation, or incapacitates them for some
funtion of life.

Though, in the plan of Providence, it

is wifely ordered, that before we are
called a ay from the world, our attach-
ment to it should be gradually loosened;
though it be fit in itself, that as in the
day of human life, there is a morning
and a noon, so there should be an even-
ing also, when the lengthening shadows
lhall admonilh us of approaching night;
yet we have no reason to be surprised,
if they who are arrived at this dejecing
season, feel and lament the change which
they susser. The complaints, therefore,

4 of

S E R M. of the aged, should meet with tenderness,

XII.
i-_- rather than censure. The burden under

which they labour, ought to be viewed
with sympathy, by those who muff bear
it in their turn, and who perhaps, here-
after, may complain of it as bitterly. At
the fame time, the old should confider,
that all the seasons of life have their fe-
deral trials allotted to them; and that to
bear the infirmities of age with becoming
patience, is as much their duty, as it is
that of the young to resist the temptations
of youthful pleasure. By calmly endur-
ing, for the short time that remains, what
Providence is pleased to inflict, they both
express a resignation most acceptable to
God, and recommend theml'elves to the
esteem and assistance of all who are around
them.

But though the querulous temper im-

puted to old age, is to be confidered as a
natural infirmity, rather than as a vice;
the fame apology cannot be made for that
peevish disgust at the manners, and that
malignant censure of the enjoyments, of

the

the young, which is sometimes found to SERM.
accompany declining years. Nothing can a_
be more unjut, than to take offence at
others, on account of their partaking of
pleafires, which it is pall your time to
enjoy.. By indulging this fretful temper,
you both aggravate the uneasiness of age,
and you alienate those on whose affeaion
much of your comfort depends. In order
to make the two extremes of life unite
in amicable society, it is greatly to be
wished, that the young would look for-
ward, and confider that they flall one
day be old; and that the old would look
back, and remembering that they once
were young, make proper allowances for
the temper and the manners of youth.

But instead of this, it is too common

to find the aged at declared enmity with
the whole system of present customs and
manners; perpetually complaining of the
growing depravity of the world, and of
the aftonilhing vices and follies of the
rising generation. All things, according
to them, are rushing fall into ruin. De-

cency

SERM. cency and good order have become ex-

X1.
,__.. tin~t, ever since that happy discipline,

under which they spent their youth, has
pafled away.- Part, at least, of this
displeasure, you may fairly impute to the
infirmtity of age, which throws its own
gloom on every surrounding objec. Si-
milar lamentations were, in the days of
your youth, poured forth by your fathers;
and they who are now young, flall, when
it comes to their turn, inveigh, in the
like strain, against those who succeed
them. Great has been the corruption of
the world in every age. Sufficient ground
there is for the complaints made by feri-
ous observers, at all times, of abounding
iniquity and folly. But though particu-
lar modes of vice prevail in one age, more
than in others, it does not follow, that
on that age all iniquity is accumulated.
It is the form, perhaps, more than the
quantity of corruption, which makes the
diftindion. In the worst of times, God
has aflured us, that there shall be always
a feed who Jhall serve him *, Say not thou,

* Ffal xxii. 30.

What

What is the caruf that the former days were s E R M.
better than thef ? for thou doff not enquire ,-
·uwiely concerning this. Be not righteous
over-lmuch; neither make th.filf e'oer-wfif*.
Former follies pals away, and are forgot-
ten. Those which are present, strike ob-
servation, and sharpen censure. Had the
depravation of the world continued to in-
crease in proportion to those gloomy cal-
culations, which, for so many centuries past,
have estimated each race as worse than the
preceding; by this time, not one ray of
good sense, nor one spark of piety and vir-
tue, muff have remained unextinguifhed
among mankind.

One of the vices of old age, which ap-

pears the most unaccountable, is that cove-
tous attachment to worldly interest, with
which it is often charged. But this too,
can naturally be deduced from the sense of
its feebleness and decay. In proportion as
the vigour both of body and mind declines,
timidity may be expeated to increase. With
anxious and fearful eye, the aged look for-

* Eccles. vii . i 6.

ward.

SERM. ward to the evils which threaten theml

XII.

,-' and to the changes which may befal.

Hence, they are sometimes apt to over-
value riches, as the instrument of their
defence against these dangers, and as the
most certain means of securing them a-
gainft solitude and difrefpe&. But though
their apprehensions may jufRify a cautious
frugality, they can by no means excuse
a fordid avarice. It is no less absurd,
than it is culpable, in the old, from the
dread of uncertain futurity, to deny
themselves the enjoyment of the present;
and to increase in anxiety about their
journey, in proportion as it draws nearer
to its close. There are more effeaual
methods of commanding refpedt from the
world, than the mere possession of wealth.
Let them be charitable, and do good.
Let them mix beneficence to their friends,
with a cheerful enjoyment of the com-
forts which befit their slate. They will
then receive the returns of real refpe&
and love. Whereas, by their riches,
they procure no more than pretended

demon-

demonstrations of regard; while their ill- s E R M.

XIl.

judged parsimony occasions many secret -
willes for their death.

As increasing years debilitate the body,

so they weaken the force, and dimi-
nifh the warmth of the affections. Chill-
ed by the hand of time, the heart loses
that tender sensibility, with which it once
entered into the concerns and sorrows of
others. It is, in truth, a merciful ap-
pointment of Providence, that as they
who fee many days, must behold many
a fad scene, the impressions of grief upon
their heart should be blunted by being
often repeated; and that, in proportion
as their power of advancing the pro-
fperity of others decrease, their parti-
cipation of the misfortunes of others
should also lessen. However, as, in eve-
ry period of life, humanity and friend-
Ihip contribute to happiness, it is both
the duty and the interest of the aged, to
cherish the remains of the kind assec-
tions; and, from the days of former
years, to recal such impressions as may

tend

S F M. tend to soften their hearts. Let them

XII.
Lv_- not, from having suffered much in the

course of their long pilgrimage, become
callous to the sufferings of others. But,
remembering that they Rill are men, let
them fludy to keep their heart open to
the sense of human woe. Pradifed in
the ways of men, they are apt to be
suspicious of design and fraud; for the
knowledge, and the difiruft of mankind,
too often go together. Let not, how.
ever, that wary caution, which is the
fruit of their experience, degenerate into
craft. Experience ought also to have
taught them, that amidlt all the falsehood
of men, integrity is the belt defence; and
that he who continueth to the end to walk
uprightly, shall continue to walk Jirely.
Having thus offered some admonitions con-
cerning the errors most incident to age, I
proceed,

II. To point out the duties which pecu-
liarly belong to it.

The

The first which I ihall mcntion, is, a S P RM.

timely retreat from the world. In every
part of life, we are in hazard of being too
deeply immersed in its cares. But, during
its vigorous periods, the impulse of adive
spirit, the necessary busiess of our flation,
and the allowable endeavours to advance
our fortune by fair industry, render it dif-
ficult to observe due moderation. In old
age, all the motives of eager pursuit dimi-
nith. The voice of Nature then calls you
to leave to others the bustle and contest of
the world; and gradually to disengage
yourselves from a burdens which begins to
exceed your strength. Having born your
{hare of the heat and labour of the day, let
the evening of life be passed in the cool and
quiet shade. 'It is only in the shade, that
the virtues of old age can flourish. There,
its duties are discharged with most success;
and there, its comforts are enjoyed with
greatest fatisfadion.

By the retreat of old age, however, I
do not mean a total cessation from every

A a worldly

S,ER M. worldly employment. There is an error
x!.[. _ . in this, as well as in the opposite extreme.

Persons who have been long harassed with
business and care, sometimes imagine, that
when life declines, they cannot make their
retirement from the world too complete;
But where they expected a delicious enjoy-
ment of leisure and ease, they have often
found a melancholy, solitude. Few are able,
in any period of their days, to bear a total
blftraaion from the world. There remains
a vacancy, which they cannot fill up.
Incapable of being always employed in
the exercises of religion, and often little
qualified for the entertainments of the
uriderftanding, they are in. hazard! of be-
coming a burden to themselves, and to
all! with whom. they are cohneced. It
is, therefore, the duty of the aged, not so
much to withdraw entirely. from worldly
business, as to-contraa its circle; not so
much to break off, as to loosen their
communication with active life. Conti-
nuing that train of occupation to which

32 they

they have been most accustomed, let s E R n.
them pursue it with less intenseness; re- L--'
laxing their efforts, as their powers de-
cline; retiring more and more, from
publick observation, to domestic scenes,
and serious thoughts; till, as the decays
of life advance, the world ihall of itself
withdraw to a greater distance from their
view; its objects shall gradually yield
their place to others of more importance;
and its tumults shall found in their ears,
only like a nioife which is heard fiom
afar.

If it be the duty of the old, to retreat

betimes from the fatigue of worldly care,
it is still more incumbent on them, tor
quit the pursuit of such pleasures as are
unsuitable to their years. Cheerfulness,
in old age, is graceful. It is the natural
concomitant of virtue. But the cheerful-
ness of age is widely different from the
levity of youth. Many things are allow-
able in that early period, which, in ma-
turer years, would deserve censure; but
which, in old age, become both ridiculous

Aa 2 and

E R M. and criminal. By awkwardly affe&ing
---v- to imitate the manners, and to mingle in

the vanities of the young, as the aged
depart from the dignity, so they forfeit
the privileges of gray hairs. But if, by
follies of this kind, they are degraded,
they are exposed to much deeper blame,
by descending to vicious pleasure, and
continuing to hover round those sinful
gratifications to which they were once
addited. Amusement and relaxation the
aged require, and may enjoy. But let
them confider well, that by every intem-
perate indulgence, they accelerate decay;
inflead of enlivening, they oppress, and
precipitate their declining state. Ease,
safety, and refpea, are the proper enjoy-
ments of age. Within these bounds let it
remain, and not vainly attempt to break
through that barrier, by which nature
has separated the pleasures of youth, from
the comforts left to the concluding years
of life.

A material part of the duty of the
aged, consists, in studying to be useful

4 to

to the race who are to succeed them. SER M.

XII.

Here opens to them an extensive field --
in which they may so employ themselves,
as considerably to advance the interest of
religion, and the happiness of mankind.
To them it belongs, to impart to the
young the fruit of their long experience;
to inltrua them in the proper condut,
and to warn them of the various dangers,
of life; by wife counsel, to temper their
precipitate ardour; and, both by precept
and example, to form them to piety and
virtue.

It is not by rigorous discipline, and

unrelaxing austerity, that they can main-
tain an ascendant over youthful minds.
The constraint which their pretence will
impose, and the aversion which their
manners will create, if the one be con-
ftantly awful, and the other severe, tend
to frustrate the effect of all their wisdom.
They must assume the spirit of the com-
panion, and the friend; and mix with
the authority of age, a proper degree of
indulgence to the manners of the young.

A a 3 Inflead

S ER M. InRead of lessening the refpet due to
J-X- their years by such condescension, they

take the furef method to increase it. Old
age never appears with greater dignity
than, when tempered by mildness, and
enlivened with good humour, it afls as
the guide and the patron of youth. Reli-
gion displayed in such a ch.araaer, ftikes
the beholders, as. at once amiable and
venerable. They revere its power, when
they fee it adding so much grace to the
decays of nature, and sledding so. pleasing
a lufRre over the evening of life. The
young wilh to tread in the fame fieps,
and to arrive at the, close. of their days
with equal bonpour. They li.egn with at-
tentlon to counsels, which are mingled
with tenderness, and rendered respectable
by gray hairs. For, notwit.hsanding all
its pr.es~umption, youth, naturally bends
before fuperiour knowledge and years.
Aged wisdom, when joined with acknow-
ledged virtue, exerts an. authority oyer
the human mind, greater even than that
which arises from. pow.er and station. It

can

can check the most forward, abafl the molt s . R M.

XII.

profligate, and strike with awe the most Am---
giddy and unthinking.

In the midst of their endeavours to be

useful to others, let not the aged forget
those religious employments, which their
own slate particularly requires. The first
of these, is, reflecion on their past beha-
viour, with a view to discover the errors
which they have committed; and, as far
as remaining life allows,. to apply them-
selves to repentance and amendment.:---
Long has the world bewildered you' in its
maze, and imposed upon you by its arts.
The time is now come,\ when tihis great
seducer should mislead you no more.
From the calm station at which you are
arrived,: sequestered from the crowd of
the deceiving and the deceived,, review
your conduCt, with the eye of Christians
and immortal beings. After all the tu-
mult of life is over, what now remains to
afford you solid fatisfadtion? Have you
served God with fidelity, and discharged
your part to your fellow.creatures with

A a 4 integrity

E R . integrity and a good conscience ? Can

you look forward, without terrour, to
that day which is to diflulve your con-
neation with this world, and to bring
you into the pretence of him who made
you, in order to give account of your
ations ?-The retrofpet of life is seldom
wholly unattended by uneasiness and
shame. Though, to the good and the
bad, it presents a very different scene;
yet, to all men, it recalls much guilt
incurred, and much time mif-fpent. It
too much resembles the review, which a
traveller takes from some eminence, of a
barren country, through which he has
passed, where the heath and the defart
form the chief profpea; diversified only
by a few scattered spots of imperfect cul-
tivation.

Turn then your thoughts to the.proper

methods of making your peace with God
through Jesus Christ; and implore, from
Divine grace, that new heart, and right
spirit, which will fit you for a better
wvrld. Let devotion fill up many of

tk9r,¢

those hours, which are now vacant from S r R M.

Xi[.

worldly business and care. Let your as- ,-
fedions dwell among divine and immor-
tal objects.. In silent and thoughtful me-
ditation, walk as on the shore of that vast
ocean, upon which you are soon to em-
bark. Summon up all the conidera-
tions, which should reconcile you to your
departure from life; and which may
prepare you for going through its alt:
scene, with firmness and decency. Often
let your thanksgivings ascend to God,
for that watchful care with which he
hath hitherto conducted you, through
the long journey of life. Often let your
prayers be heard, that, in what remains
of your pilgrimage, he may not forsake
you; and, that when you enter into the
valley of theJJiadow of death, he may there
support you with hisJaff, and defend you
with his rod.-Amidfl such thoughts and
cares, let old age find you employed; be-
taking yourselves to a prudent and timely
retreat; disengaged, both from the op-
preffive load of business, and from the

unfeafon-

SE R M. unseasonable pursuit of pleasure; apply-
L_»- ing yourselves to form the succeeding

race, by your counsels to virtue and wis-
dom; reviewing seriously your pals life;
by repentance and devotion, preparing
yourselves for a better; and, with hum-
ble and manly composure, expeting that
hour, which Nature cannot now long de-
lay. It remains,

Ill. To suggest the consolations which

belong to old age, when thus found in the
way of righteousness.

I muff introduce them with observing,

That nothing is more reasonable in itself,
than to submit patiently to those infirmi-
ties of Nature, which are brought on by
the increase of years.: You knew before-
hand what you had, to) expt;,. when you
numbered: the successive Summers and
Winters which were pasing over your
heads. Old age did not attack you by
surprise, nor was it forced upon you
against your choice. Often, and earnestly,
did you wilh to fee. long life, and many

days,

days. When arrived at the desired period, s R M.
have you any just cause to complain, on _
account of enduring what the constitution
of our being imposes on all? Did you ex-
pe&, that, for your fake, Providence was
to alter its established order? Throughout
the whole vegetable, sensible, and rational
world, whatever makes progress towards
maturity, as soon as it has passed that
point, begins to verge towards decay. It
is as natural for old age to be frail, as for
the corn to bend under the ripened ear,
or for the autumnal leaf to change its
hue. To this law, all who went before
you, have submitted; and all who shall
come after you, must yield. After they
have flourished for a season, they shall
fade, like you, when the period of decline
arrives, and bow under the pressure of
years.

During the whole.progrefs of the hu-

man course, the principal materials of
our comfort, or uneasiness, lie within our-
selves. Every age will prove burdensome,
to those who have no fund of happiness

in

S E R M. in their own breast. Preserve them, if you

xLi[ could, from all infirmity of frame; bestow

upon them, if it were possible, perpetual
youth; fill they would be restless and
miserable, through the influence of ill-
governed passions. It is not surprising, that
such persons are peevish, and querulous,
when old. Unjustly they impute to their
time of life, that misery with which their
vices and follies embitter every age.
Whereas, to good men, no period of life
is unsupportable, because they draw their
chief happiness from sources which are in-
dependent of age or time. Wisdom, piety,
and virtue, grow not old with our bodies.
They susser no decay from length of 'days.
To them only belongs unalterable and un-
fading youth. Those that be planted in the
hoiie of the Lord, Jhall fiourifh in the
courts of our God. They Jhall fJill bring
forth fruit in old age; they Jhall be fat and
flour jfling *.

You can now, it is true, no longer re-
lifh many of those pleasures which once

* Pfal, xcii. 13, 14.

amused

amused you. Your sensations are less s ER M.
quick than formerly; your days more --^--
languiffling. But if you have quitted the
region of pleasure, in return, you possess
that of tranquillity and repose. If you are
strangers to the vivacity of enjoyment,
you are free, at the fame time, from the
pain of violent and often disappointed
desire. Much fatigue, much vexation, as
well as vanity, attend that turbulence of
life, in which the younger part of man-
kind are engaged. Amidf those keen pur-
suits, and teeming pleasures, for which
you envy them, often they feel their own
misery, and look forward with a wishful
eye to the season of calmness and retreat.
For, on all fides of human life, the ba-
lance of happiness is adjusted with more
equality than at firfte appears; and if old
age throws some new distresses into the
scale, it lightens also the weight of others.
Many passions, which formerly disturb-
ed your tranquillity, have now subsided.
Many competitions, which long filled
your days with disquiet and flrife, are now

at

s E R M. at an end. Many afflistions, which once

XII.
a__L rent your hearts with violent anguish, are

now softened into a tender emotion, on
the remembrance of past woe. In the be-
ginnings of life, there was room for much
apprehension concerning what might be-
fall in its progress. Your security was
never untroubled. Your hopes were inter-
rupted by many anxieties and fears. Hav-
ing finished the career of labour and danger,
your anxiety ought of course to lessen.
Ready to enter into the harbour, you can
look back, as from a secure flation, upon
the perils you have escaped, upon the
tempest by which you was toffed, and upon
the multitudes who are still engaged in con-
fliaing with the fiorm.

If you have acted your part with in-

tegrity and honour, you are justly entitled
to refpea, and you will generally receive
it. For rarely, or never, is old age con-
temnned, unless when, by vice or folly,
it renders itself contenptible. Though
length of time may have worn off super-
ficial ornaments, yet what old age lores

in

in grace, it often gains in dignity. The S E R M.

XII.

veneration, as was before observed, which
gray hairs command, puts it in the power
of the aged, to maintain a very important
place in human society. They are so far
from being insignificant in the world, that
families long held together by their autho-
rity, and Societies accuflomed to be guided
by their counsels, have frequently had cause
to regret their loss, more than that of the
most vigorous and young. To success of
every kind, the head which directs, is no
less effential.than the hand which executes.
Vain, nay, often dangerous, were youthful
enterprise, if not conducted by aged pru-
dence. I said, Days Jfjould speak, and
multititde of years Jslould teach wvidorn *.
Therefore, thou J73alt rife up before the
hoary head, and honour the face of the old
mnan, andfear thy Godt.

Though, in old age, the circle of your

pleasures is more contraced than it has
formerly been; yet, within its limits,
many of those enjoyments remain, which

Job xxiii. 7. [ Lev. xix. 32.

are

SE R M. are mos grateful to human natire.

XI'.
'-_ Temperate mirth, is not extinguished by

advanced years. The mild pleasures of
domestic life, still cheer the heart. The
entertainments of conversation, and social
intercourse, continue unimpaired. The
desire of knowledge, is not abated by
the frailty of the body; and the leisure
of old age, affords many opportunities
for gratifying that desire. The sphere
of your observation and reflection, is so
much enlarged by long acquaintance with
the world, as to supply, within itself, a
wide range of improving thought. To
recall the various revolutions which have
occurred since you began to aft your part in
life; to compare the characers of pat and
present times; to trace the hand of Provi-
dence, in all the incidents of your own lot;
to contemplate, with thoughtful eye, the
fucceflive new appearances which the world
has assumed around you, in government
education, opinions, customs, and modes of
living; these are employments, no less en-
tertaining, than instruCtive to the mind.

While

While you are engaged in such em- SE R .

ployments, you are perhaps surrounded .--
with your families, who treat you with
attention and refpea; you are honoured
by your friends; your character is efta-
blifhed; you are placed beyond the reach
of clamour, and the frife of tongues; and,
free from diftrading cares, you can at-
tend calmly to your eternal interests. For
such comforts as these, have you not
cause most thankfully to acknowledge
the goodness of Heaven? Do they not
afford you ground to pass the remainder
of your days in refignatioa and peace;
disposing yourselves to rife in due time,
like satisfied guests, from the banquet
that has been set before you; and to
praise and bless, when you depart, the
great Master of the feast ? To a man that
is good in his fight, whether he be young
or old, God giveth wi/dwim, and knowledge,
and joy. For every season of life, the be-
nignity of his providence hath prepared
its own fatisfaations, while his wisdom
hath appointed its peculiar trials. No

B b age

S E RM. age is doomed to total infelicity; pro-

XM. _.-_-' vided that we attempt not to do violence

to Nature, by seeking to extort from one
age, the pleasures of another; and to ga-
ther, in the winter of life, those flowers
which were defined to blossom, only in
its Summer, or its Spring.

BUT perhaps it will be said, That I

have confidered old age, only in its first
stages, and in its most favourable point
of light; before the faculties are as yet
much impaired, and when disease or as-
flidion has laid no additional load on
the burden of years. Let us then view
it, with all its aggravations of distress.
Let us suppose it arrived at its utmost
verge, worn out with infirmities, and
bowed down by sickness and sorrow.
Still there remains this consolation, that
it is not long ere the wealr Jhall be at
reft. Having passed through lb many of
the toils of life, you may now, surely,
when your pilgrimage touches on its
close, bear, without extreme impatience,

4 the

the hard:hips of its concluding ltage. S ERM.
From the i:;eflimalle proinifes of the
Gospel, and fromn the gracious presence
of God, the afflitions of old age cannot
seclude you. Though you,' heart J1ould
be in to faint, and your jle/Jl to fail, there
is One, who can be the fZrength of your
heart and your portion for ever. Evcn to
your old axe, filth the Lord, I am I-'; and
even to hoary hairs, will I c.arry you. I
have made, and I will bear; even I will
carry, and will deliver yu '. Leave thy
fiatherlefs children; I will preljrve them
alive; and let thy widows trzH in me t.

There is undoubtedly a period, when

there ought to be a satiety of life, as
there is of all other things; and when
death should be viewed, as your merci-
ful dismission from a long warfare. To
come to the grave in a full age, like as a
Jhock of corn cometh in, in its fea/on $, is
the natural termination of the human
course. Amidit multiplying infirmities,
to prolong life beyond its usual bounds,

* Ia,.xlvi. 4. t Jer xlix. I i $ Job v. 26,

B b 2 and

SERM. and to draw out your existence here to

XI'.
A--,_- the last and foulest dregs, ought not to

be the wish of any wife man. Is it de-
firable, to continue lingering on the bor-
ders of the grave, after every tie which
conneds you with life is broken; and to
be left a solitary individual, in the midst
of a new generation, whose faces you
hardly know? The shades of your de-
parted friends rife up before you, and
warn you, that it is time to depart.
Nature and providence summon you, to
be gathered to your fathers. Reason ad-
monilhes you, that as your predecessors
made way for you, it is just that you
ihould yield your place to those, who
have arisen to succeed you on this busy
stage; who, for a while, shall fill it
with their ations and their sufferings,
their virtues and their crimes; and then
ihall, in their turn, withdraw, and be
joined' to the forgotten multitudes of for-
mer ages.

Could death indeed be confidered in
no other view, than as the close of life,

it

it would afford only a melancholy re- SER Al.
treat. The total extinction of being, is -
a thought, which human nature, in its
most distressed circumstances, cannot bear
without dejection. But, blessed be God!
far other profpeas revive the spirits of
the aged, who have spent their life in
piety and virtue. To them, death is
not the extinction, but the renovation of
the living principle; its removal from
the earthly house of this tabernacle, to the
hobfe not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens. Having fought the good fight;
having finiJhed their course, and kept the
faith; there is laid up for them the crown
of righteofniefs. The Saviour of the
world hath not only brought immortality
to light, but placed it within the reach
of their hope and truit. By making
atonement for their guilt, he hath pre-
pared their way within the veil; and
secured to them, the possession of an in-
heritance, incorruptible and undefiled, re-
served in the heavens.-Such are the
hopes and profpets, which cheer the

B b 3 sorrows

SERM; sorrows of old age, and surmount tho
L-y- fear of death. Faith and piety are the

only adequate lupports of human na-
ture, in all its great emergencies. After
they have guided us through the vari-
ous trials of life, they uphold us, at last,
amidst the ruins of this tfallng frame;
and when the jilver cord is jld ready
to be loojed, and the golden bowl to be
broken; when the pitcher is broken at the
fountain, and the wheel broken at the ci-
jfern; they'enable us to fay 0 Death!
where is thy fling? 0 Grave! where iZ
thy vi&iory ?

# SERMON XIII. On the POWER of CONSCIENCE. GENESIS xlii. 21, 22. And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us; ...

[ 375 1

S E R M ON XIII.
On the POWER of CONSCIENCE,

GENESIS xlii. 21, 22.
And they said one to another, TWe are verily

guilty concerning our brother, in that we
Jaw the angui/7 of his foul, whqen he
besought us; and we would not hear:
Therefore is this dihlrefs come upon us.
And Reuben answered them, faying,
Spake I not unto you, fiying, Do not fin
agaill the child; and ye would not
hear? Therefore, behold alJo his blood
is required.

HIS book of Genesis displays a more S E R M.
singular and interefling scene, than

was ever presented to the world, by any
other historical record. It carries us back

Bb 4 tQ

S ERM. to the beginning of time; and exhibits

xl1.
\i-_ mankind in their infant and rising Rate.

It shows us human manners in their pri-
mitive simplicity, before the arts of re-
finement had polished the behaviour, or
disguised the characters of men; when
they gave vent to their passions without
dissimulation, and spoke their sentiments
without reserve. Few great societies were,
as yet, formed on the earth. Men lived
in scattered tribes. The tranfadions of
families made the chief materials of his-
tory; and they are related in this book,
with that beautiful simplicity, which, in
the highest degree, both delights the ima.
gination, and affeas the heart.

Of all the patriarchal histories, that of

Joseph and his brethren is the most re-
markable, for the characers of the actors,
the inftrucive nature of the events, and
the surprising revolutions of worldly for-
tune. As far as relates to the Text, and
is necessary for explaining it, the story is
to the following purpose.- Joseph, the
youngest, except one, of the sons of

a2 Jacob,

Jacob, was diffinguifhed by his father s ER M.

XIII.

with such marks of peculiar affetion, as ,--
excited the envy of his brethren. Having
related to them, in the openness of his
heart, certain dreams which portended
his future advancement above them, their
jealousy iofe to such a height, that they
unnaturally conspired his deftrution.
Seizing the opportunity of his being at
a diflance from home, they first threw
him into a pit, and afterwards fold him
for a slave; imposing on their father, by
a false relation of his death. When they
had thus gratified their resentment, they
loft all remembrance of their crime. The
family of Jacob was rich and powerful;
and several years passed away, during
which they lived in prosperity; without
being touched, as far as appears, with the
least remorse for the cruel deed which
they had committed.

Mean-while, Joseph was safely con-

duated, by the hand of Providence,
through a variety of dangers, until,
from the lowest condition, he rose at

last

SE R M. last to be chief favourite of the King of
A.yL.J Egypt, the molt powerful monarch at

that time in the world. While he pof-
fened this high dignity, a general famine
distressed all the neighbouring countries.
·In Egypt alone, by means .of his fore-
fight, and prudent adminiRtration, plenty
fiill reigned. Compelled to have recourse
to that kingdom for supply of food, the
brethren of Joleph, upon this occasion,
,appeared in his pretence, and made their
humble application to him, for liberty to
purchase corn; little fufpeating the Go-
vernour of the land, before whom they
bowed down theirfices to the earth, to be
him, whom, long ago, they had fold as a
slave to the Ishmaelites. But Joseph no
sooner saw, than he knew his brethren;
and, at this unexpected meeting, his
heart. melted within him, Fraternal ten-
dernefs arose, in all its warmth; and
totally effaced from his generous breast,
the impression of their ancient cruelty.
Though, from that moment, he began to
prepare for them a furprize of joy; yet

he so far constrained himself, as to assume s ER PM,
an appearance of great severity. By this _-
he intended, both to oblige them to bring
into Egypt his youngest and moil beloved
brother, whose presence he instantly re-
quired; and also, to awaken within them,
a due fenle of the crime which they had
formerly pe petrated. Accordingly, his
behaviour produced the designed effect.
For, while they were in this situation,
firangers in a foreign land, where they
had fallen, as they conceived, into ex-
treme distress; where they were thrown
into prison by the Governour, and treated
with rigour, for which they could aflign
no cause; the reflection mentioned in
the Text arose in their minds. Con-
science brought to remembrance, their
former fins It recalled, in particular,
their long forgotten cruelty to Joseph;
and, without hesitation, they interpreted
their present diRtrefs, to be a judgment,
for this crime, inflicted by Heaven. They
said, one to another, We are veril) guilty
fonccrning our brother, in that we saw the

angrui/

s E R M. angui7/ of hisfoul when he besought us,

XIII.
ta_- and we would not hear: Therefore is this

difrefs come upon uts.-Behold alo his blood
is required.

From this instruCtive passage of hiflo-

ry, the following observations naturally
arise. I. That a sense of right and wrong
in condua, or of moral good and evil,
belong to human nature. II. That it
produces an apprehension of merited pu-
nilhment, when we have committed evil.
III. That although this inward sentiment
be stifled during the season of prosperity,
yet, in adversity, it will revive. And,
IV. That when it revives, it determines
us to confider every distress which we sus-
ser, from what cause soever it has arisen,
as an aftual infliction of punishment by
Heaven. The consideration of there par-
ticulars; will lead us to a very serious
view of the nature of man, and of the
government of God.

I. THERE belongs to human nature, a
sense 'of moral good and evil, ..or a fa-

culty

culty which distinguishes right from S ERM.
wrong, in acion and conduct. Theyfaid A
one to another, We are verily guilty.-In
an age, when the law was not yet given,
when no external revelation of the Divine
will fubfifed, except what had been
handed down among the Patriarchs, from
one generation to another; the brethren
of Joseph reasoned concerning their con-
dut, upon the fame moral principles,
and were affeced by the fame feelings,
of which we are conscious at this day.
Such sentiments are coeval with human
nature; for they are the remains of a
law, which was originally written in our
heart. In the darkest regions of the
earth, and among the rudest tribes of
men, a diftindion has ever been made,
between just and unjust, between a duty
and a crime. Throughout all the inter-
course of human beings, there diflinctions
are supposed. They are the foundation
of the mutual trust, which the tranfac-
tions of life require; nay, the very cnter-
tainments of society conflantly app'al to

them.

S ER M. them. The Historian, who fudies to
a__^i magnify his hero, by representing him as

just and generous; the Poet, who seeks
to interest the world in his ficions, by
engaging the heart in behalf of difireffed
virtue; are sufficient to confute the Sceptic,
who denies any natural perception of a
diftindion in acions.

But though a sense of moral good and

evil be deeply impressed on the heart of
man, yet it is not of sufficient power to
regulate his life. In his present corrupted
state, it is both too general to afford
him full direction in conduc, and too
feeble to withstand the opposition of con-
trary principles in his nature. It is often
perverted, by ignorance and fuperflition;
it is too easily overcome, by passion and de-
fire. Hence, the importance of that Divine
revelation, which communicates both light
and strength; which, by the infirudive dif-
coveries it makes, and by the powerful
assistance it supplies, it raises man to a fta-
tion, infinitely fuperiour to that which he
possesses under the mere light of Nature.

It

It is of conFcquence, however, to re- s ERM.

mark, That this revelation necessarily L-
supposes an antecedent sense of right and
wrong to take place in the human mind.
It addresses itself to men, as poiefed of
such a faculty; and, when it commands
them, in general terms, to purfuc what-
foevcr things are true, vwhatfoever things
are honeJt, whatsoever things are jilg, purte,
lovely, or of good report, if there be any vir-
tue, and if there be any prafie, it plainly
appeals to the native dilates of their
heart. Nay, unless men were endowed
by Nature, with some sense of duty, or
of moral obligation, they could reap no
benefit from revelation; they would re-
main incapable of all religion whatever.
For, in vain were a system of duty pre-
feribed to them by the word of God;
allegiance were in vain required towards
their Creator, or love and gratitude en-
joined towards their. Redeemer; if, pre-
vioufly, there was no principle in their
nature, which made them feel the obli-
gations of duty, of allegiance, and of

gratitude.

sER M. gratitude. They could have no ideas cor-

XIII.
-.v--o responding to such terms; nor any con-

vidion, that, independently of fear or
interest, they were bound to regard, either
him who made, or him who redeemed
them.-This, therefore, is to be held as a
principle fundamental to all religion, That
there is in human nature, an approving or
condemning sense of conduEt; by means of
which, they 'who have not the law, are a
law unto thenielves *. They who, from
a mistaken zeal for the honour of Divine
revelation, either deny the exifience, or
vilify the authority of natural religion,
are not aware, that, by disallowing the
sense of obligation, they undermine the
foundation, on which revelation builds its
power of commanding the heart.

The Text leads us to observe, That one

of the cafes in which the natural sense of
good and evil operates most forcibly, is,
when men have been guilty of injustice
or inhumanity. We saw the angui/J of
our brother's foul when he besought us, anld

* Rom. ii. 14.

we(

we wvould not hear. An inward principle S ER M.
prompts us to do good to others; but
with much greater authority, it checks
and condemns us, when we have done
them injuries. This part of the human
constitution deserves to be remarked, as a
signal proof of the wisdom of its Author,
and of the gracious provifon which he
has made for the welfare of mankind.
We are all committed, in some measure,
to the care and assistance of one another.
But our mutual influence reaches much
farther with refpea to the evils, than
with refpeCd to the enjoyments, of those
around us. To advance their prosperity,
is often beyond our ability; but to in-
flii injuries, is almost always within our
power: And, at the fame time, felf-inte-
reft very frequently tempts us to commit
them. With the utmost propriety, there-
fore, we are so framed, that the influence
of the moral principle should be most
authoritative, in cafes where its aid is
most needed; that to promote the happi-
ness of others, should appear to us as

C c praise-

s E R M. praise-worthy, indeed, and generous,
-r--. but that, to abstain from injuring them,

mhould be felt as matter of the strictest
duty.-Amidft the distress which the Pa-
triarchs suffered in Egypt, had only this
suggestion occurred, " We saw our bro-

ther beginning to prosper, and we con-

" tributed not to his advancement," their
minds would have been more easily quiet-
ed. But, when their reflecion was, We
saw his anguih wvhen he besought us, and
we would not hear, then compuntion
turned upon them its flarpeft edge. I pro-
ceed to observe,

II. THAT our natural sense of right

and wrong, produces an apprehension of
merited punishment when we have com-
mitted a crime. When it is, employed in
surveying the behaviour of others, it dif-
tinguilhes some aaions, as laudable and
excellent; and disapproves of others, as
evil and base. But when it is direted
upon our own conduct, it assumes a
higher office, and exercises the authority

of
s

of a judge. It is then properly termed, SERM.

XlII.

Conscience; and the sentiments which ....
it awakens, upon the perpetration of a
crime, are filed, Remorse. Therefore, said
the brethren of Joseph, is this diJlrefs come
upon us; behold alo his blood is required.
They acknowledged, not only that they
had committed a wrong, but a wrong
for which they were justly doomed to
susser.

Did not conscience suggest this natural

relation between guilt and punishment,
the mere principle of approbation, or dif-
approbation, with refpeat to moral con-
dua, would prove of small efficacy. For
disapprobation attends, in rome degree,
every conviaion of impropriety or folly.
When one has aded unsuitably to his in-
terest, or has trespassed against the rules
of prudence or decorum, he reflecs upon
his condua with pain, and acknowledges
that he deserves blame. But the diffe-
rence between the sense of misconduct,
and the sense of guilt, consists in this,
That the latter penetrates much deeper

Cc into

s E R M. into the heart. It makes the criminal feel,
'\-~ that he is not only blameable, but ju!tly

punishable, for the part which he has
aced. With reference to this oflice of
confcicnce, the inspired writers frequent-
ly speak of it, in terms borrowed from
the awful folemnities of judicial proce-
dure; as, hbearing wvitnefs f for or gaijtl
Its; accIfing o, r rxctfing, judging and con-
demni;g. it will be found, that in the
language of most nations, terms of the
fame import are applied to the operations
of conscience; exprefling the sense, which
all mankind have, of its paifing sentence
upon them, and pronouncing rewards or
punishments to be due to their actions.

The sense of punishment merited, you

are further to observe, can never be fepa-
rated from the dread, that, at some time
or other, punishment shall be adually in-
flicted. This dread is not confined to the
vengeance of man. For, let the finner's
evil deeds be ever so thoroughly conceal-
ed from the knowledge of the world, his
inward alarms are not quieted by that

consideration.

consideration. Now, punishment is the S E R Ml.
fandion of a law. Every law luppofcs .---
a rightful flperiour: And thcrefore,
when conscience threatens punifinmcnt to
secret crimes, it manifcftly recognizes a
supreme Governour, from whom nothing
is hidden. The belief of our being ac-
countable to him, is what the molt hard-
ened vickednefs has never been able to
eradicate. It is a belief which arises, not
merely from reasoning, but from internal
sentiment. Conscience is felt to a0: as
the delegate of an invilible Ruler; both
anticipating his sentence, and foreboding
its execution.

Hence. arise the terrours, which so of-

ten haunt guilt, and rife in proportion to
its atrocity. In the history of all na-
tions, the Tyrant and the Oppressor, the
bloody and the flagitious, have been ever
pointed out, as fearful, unquiet, and reft-
less; subjea to alarms and apprehensions
of an unaccountable kind. And surely,
to live under such disquietude, from the
dread of merited punishment, is already

Cc 3 to

s E R M. to undergo one of the most severe punish-

J ments which human nature can susser.

When the world threatens us with any
of its evils, we know the extent, and dif-
cern the limits of the danger. We fee the
quarter, on which we are exposed to its
attack. We measure our own strength
with that of our adversary; and can take
precautions, either for making refintance,
or for contriving escape. But when an
awakened conscience places before the fin-
ner, the just vengeance of the Almighty,
the profpea is confounding, because the
danger is boundless. It is a dark unknown
which threatens him. The arm that is
firetched over him, he can neither fee nor
resist. On every fide, he dreads it; and
on every object which surrounds him, he
looks with terrour, because he is confci-
ous that every objec can be employed
against him as an instrument of wrath.
No wonder that the lonesome solitude,
or the midnight hour, flould strike him
with horrour. His troubled mind be-
holds forms,, which other men fee not;

and

and hears voices, which found only in the s E R M.
ear of guilt. A hand appears to come
forth, and to write upon the wall over
against him; as it did of old, in the fight
of an impious monarch. He JaJll find
no ease, nor reft. For the Lord fJall give
him a trembling heart, and failing of eyes,
and sorrow of mind: .And his life J7all hang
in doubt before him; and he flall fear (lay
and night, and have none afjirance of his
life. In the morning hefalallfay, Would to
God it were even; and at even he fhallfzy,
Would to God it were morning, for the fear
of his heart wherewith he J7all fear, and
for the fight which his eyes fJallfee. His
life fJall. be grievous unto hiim .- Adver-
fity! how blunt are all the arrows of
thy quiver, in comparison with those of
guilt !-But if such be the power of con-
science, whence, it may be asked, comes it
to pass, that its influence is not more gene-
ral, either in refiraining men from the com-
mission of fin, or in leading them to a timely
repentance ? This brings me to observe,

* Peut. xxviii. 65, 66, 67. Ifa. xv. 4.

C c4 . III. THAT,

S ER M. III. THAT, during a course of profpe.
sc-r rity, the operations of conscience are of-

ten suspended; and that adversity is the
season which restores them to their pro-
per force. At the time when crimes are
committed, the mind is too much heated
by passion, and engrossed by the objec of
its pursuit, to be capable of proper reflec-
tion. After this tumult of spirits has
subsided, if a train of new passions be at
hand to employ its activity, or a fuccef-
sion of pleasurable objects occur to en-
gage its attention, it may for a while re-
main, though not entirely free from in-
ward misgivings, yet unconscious of the
degree of its guilt. Dissipated among the
amusements of life, the finner escapes, in
some measure, from his own view. If he
reflects upon himself at all, the continu-
ance of prosperity seems to him a firong
justification of his condua. For it will
be found, that in the hearts of all men,
there is a natural propensity, to judge of
the favour of the Supreme Being, from
the course of external events. When they

are

are born with a smooth gale along the sE R M.

XIlI.

fiream. of life, and behold every thing A
proceeding according to their wish, hard-
ly can they be brought to believe, that
Providence is their enemy. Balking in
the fun-Ihine of prosperity, they suppose
themselves to enjoy the finile of indulgent
Heaven; and fondly conclude, that they
are on terms of friendflip, with all above,
and with all below. Easy they find it,
then, to.fpread over the grossest crimes,
a covering, thin, indeed, and flight, yet
sufficient to conceal them from a super-
ficial view.

Of this we have a very remarkable in-

fiance, in those brethren of Joseph, whose
history we now confider. Not only from
the silence of the inspired writer, we have
ground to believe that their remorse was
tifled, while 'their prosperity remained;
but we are able to trace some of the pre-
tences, by which, during that period, they
quieted their minds. For when they
were contriving the deftrution of Joseph,
we find Judah faying to his brethren,

What

E R M. What profit is it, if we Jlay our brother
1-b.--' and conceal his blood? Let us fell him to the

-IJhmaelites; and let not our hand be upon

him; for he is our brother, and our fleh :
And his brethren wtere content*. Here
you behold them justifying their crime,
by a fort of pretended humanity; and
making light of felling their brother for
a slave, because they did hot take away
his life. How strangely are the opinions
of men altered, by a change in their con-
dition ! How different is this sentiment of
the Patriarchs, from that which they after-
wards entertained of the fame ation, when,
as you fee in the Text, the remembrance of
it wrung their hearts with anguih ?

But men, in truth, differ as much from

themselves, in prosperity, and in adver-
fity, as if they were different creatures.
In prosperity, every thing tends to flatter
and deceive. In adversity, the illusions of
life vanish. Its avocations, arid its plea-
fures, no longer afford the finner that
thelter. he was wont to find from confci-

* Gin. xxxvii. z6, 27.

ence,

ence. Formerly, he made a part of the s ER ^f.
crowd. He now feels himself a solitary
individual, left alone with God, and with
his own mind. His spirits are not sup-
ported, as before, by fallacious views of
the favour of Heaven. The candle of the
Lord ihines not on his head; his pride is
humbled; and his affetions are softened
for receiving every serious imprefflon. In
this situation, a man's iniquity is sure to
find him out. Whatever has been notori-
ouly criminal in his former conduct,
rifes as a fpeetre, and places itself before
him. The increased sensibility of his
mind, renders him alive to feelings which
lately were faint; and wounds which
had been ill healed, bleed afresh. When
men take the timbrel and the harp, and re-
joice at the found of the organ, they Jay,
What is the Almighty that wejIJouldferve
hit ? But when they are holden in the cords
of afiftion, then he Jheweth them their
·work, and their rranfgreffon, that they
have exceeded. He openeth aso their ears
to discipline; and commandeth, that they
return from iniquity.

Hence,

S E R M. Hence, we may perceive the great use-

XI11.
v fulness, and propriety, of that inter-

change of conditions, which takes place
in human life. By prosperity, God gives
scope to our passions, and makes trial of
our dispositions. By adversity, he revives
the serious principle within. Neither the
one, nor the other, could be born entire
and unmixed. Man, always prosperous,
would be giddy and insolent; always as-
flited, would be fullen and despondent.
Hopes and fears, joy and sorrow, are,
therefore, so blended in his life, as both
to give room for worldly pursuits, and
to recall, from time to time, the admoni-
tions of conscience. Of the proportion
in which they should be mixed for this
purpose, we are very incompetent judges,
From our ignorance of the degree of dif-
cipline, which the spiritual state of others
requires, we often censure Providence
unjustly, for its severity towards them:
And, from the vanity and rashness of
our wishes, we complain, without rea-
son, of its rigour to ourselves. While

we

we consult nothing but our ease, God s , R M.

Xlll.

attends to our spiritual improvement. --
When we seek what is pleasing, he fends
what is useful. When, by drinking too
deep of worldly prosperity, we draw in a
secret poison, he mercifully infuses a me-
dicine, at the time that he troubles and
embitters the waters. It remains now to
observe,

IV. THAT when conscience is tho-

roughly awakened, it determines the
finner, to confider every calamity which
he suffers, as a positive inflicion of pu-
nifhment by Heaven. As it had before
alarmed him with threatenings of Di-
vine displeasure, it tells him, when he
falls under distress, that the threatened
day of account is come. Afflitions, on
some occasions, rife direaly out of our
fins. Thus diseases are brought on by
intemperance; poverty springs from
idleness; and disgrace, from prefump-
tion. In such cafes, the punishment is
so closely connected with the crime, that

I it

SER M. it is impossible to avoid discerning the

XIII.
L-~. relation which the one bears to the

other. But the appointment of Provi-
dence, which we now confider, reaches
farther than. this. God has framed us
so, that diftreifes, which have no per-
ceivable connection with our former
crimes, are, nevertheless, interpreted by
conscience, to be inflicted on their account.
They force themselves upon our apprehen-
sion, under this view. They are made to
carry, not only that degree of pain which
properly belongs to. themselves, but that
additional torment also, which arises from
the belief of their being the vengeance of
the Almighty.

Let. a, man: fall unexpecedly into some

deep calamity. Let that calamity be
brought upon him, either by means
which) the- world calls fortuitous; or by
a, train of incidents;: in which his own
miffondut:, or. guilt, has apparently had
no, part; yet one of the firfi questions,
which, in such a situation, he puts to
himself, is, What have I done to de-

serve

serve this? His refletion is, almost in- SE RM.

XIII.

ftintively, drawn back upon his former a
life; and if, in the course of that re-
trofpea, any flagrant guilty deed occur
to smite his conscience, on this he can-
not avoid reffing with anxiety and ter-
rour, and connecting it in his imagina..
tion with what he now suffers. He fees,
or thinks that he fees, a. Divine arm lifted
up; and what, in other circumstances,
he would have called a reverse of for-
tune, he now views as a judgment' of
Heaven.

When the brethren of Joseph, confined

in the Egyptian prison, were bewailing
the distress into which they had fallen,
there was no circumflance which pointed
out any relation between their present
misfortune, and their former cruelty to
their brother. A long course of years had
intervened, during which they flourilh-
ed in wealth and ease. They were now
far from the scene of their crime; in a
foreign land, where they believed them-
selves utterly unknown, and where they

had

s R M. had done nothing to offend. But con-

XIII.
i ,--J science formed a connection between

events, which, according to the ordi-
nary apprehension of men, were entire-
ly independent of each other. It made
them recollec, that they, who once had
been deaf to the supplications of a bro-
ther, were now left friendless and for-
lorn, imploring pity in vain from an un-
relenting Governour; and that they who
had first conspired to kill their brother,
and afterwards fold him for a slave,
were themselves deprived of liberty, and
threatened with an ignominious death.
How undefervedly soever these evils be-
fell them on the part of men, they con-
sessed them to be just on the part of
Providence. They concluded the hour of
retribution to be arrived; and, in the
person of the Governour of Egypt, they
beheld the ruler of the world calling
them to account for guilt. Therefore is
this dilirefs come upon us. Behold also his
blood is required.

Similar

Similar fentimnents on like occasions, SER M.

will be found not uncommon among
mankind. Pious men, there is no doubt,
are at all times disposed to look up to
God, and to acknowledge his hand in
every event of life. But what I now
observe, is, That where no habitual ac-
knowledgment of God tales place; nay,
where a daring coitempt of his autho-
rity has prevailed, confcicnce, neverthe-
less, conflrains men, in the day of their
distress, to recognize God, under the most
awful of all characters, The avenger of
past guilt.

Herein the wisdom of God appears

in such' a light, as justly to claim our
highest admiration. The ordinary course
of his Providence, is carried on by hu-
man means. He has fettled a train of
events, which proceed in a regular fuc.
cession of causes and effets, without his
appearing to interpose, or to aa. But
these, on proper occasions, are made to
assea the human mind, in the fame
manner as if he were beheld descend-

D d ing

S F R M. ing from his throne, to punish the fin-
XI:I. -v~-- ner with his own hand. Were God to

suspend the laws of Nature, on occasion
of every great crime that was committed
on earth, and to govern the world by
frequent interpositions of a miraculous
kind, the whole order of human affairs
would be unhinged; no plans of acion
could be formed; and no scope would
be given for the probation and trial of
men. On the other hand, were the ope-
ration of second causes allowed to con-
ceal a Divine hand totally from view, alj
sense of fuperiour government would be
loft; the world would seem to be void
of God; the finner would perceive no-
thing but chance and fortune, in the
distresses which he suffered. Whereas,
by its being so ordered, that several in-
cidents of life ihall carry the fame force,
and strike the mind with the fame im-
pression, as if they were supernatural
interpositions, the fear of God is kept
alive among men, and the order of hu-
man affairs is, at the fame time, pre-

served

served unbroken. The finner fees his s E R M.
difrefs to be the immediate effet of ---.
human violence or opprefion; and is
obliged, at the fame moment, to confi-
der it as a Divine judgment; His con-
kcience gives to an ordinary misfortune,
all the edge and the fling of a visitation
from Heaven.

FROM the train of thought which the

Text has suggested, several inferences na-
turally follow. But I (hall confine myself
to two, which claim your particular atten-
tion.

The sirs is, the clear evidence which

the preceding observations afford, of a
Divine government now exercised over
mankind. This most important and aw-
ful of all truths, cannot be too often prc-
sented to our view, or too firongly im-
pressed on our mind. To the imperfect
conviction of it, which obtains in the
world, must be ascribed, in a great mea-
sure, the prevalence of fin. Did men
firmly believe, that the Almighty Being,

D d who

SERM. who formed them, is carrying on a sys-

tern of administration which will not
leave guilt unpunished, it is impossible
that they could remain so inattentive, as
we often behold them, to their moral
conduct. But the bulk of mankind are
giddy and thoughtless. Struck by the
superficial appearances of pleasure, which
accompany licentiousness, they inquire
no farther; and deliver themselves up to
their senses and their passions. Where-
as, were they to refled, but for a mo-
ment, upon that view which has now
been given of human nature, they might
soon be satisfied, that the moral govern-
ment of God is no matter of doubtful
difcuflion. It is a fad, no less obvious
and incontestable, than the government
exercised by those earthly rulers, whom
we behold with the ensigns of their office
before our eyes.

To govern,. is to require a certain

course of action, or, to prescribe a law;
and to enforce that law by a suitable.
difiribution of rewards and punishments.

Now,

Now, God has not only invested con- S rp, Ri.

XII.

fceence, as we have seen, with authority ,- .
to promulgate, but endowed it also with
power to enforce, his law. By placing
inward approbation and peace on the fide
of virtue, he gave it the faneion of re-
ward. But this was not enough. Pain
is a more powerful principle, than plea-
sure, To escape misery, is a stronger
motive for acion, than to obtain good.
God, therefore, so framed human nature,
that the painful sense of ill-defert should
attend the commission of crimes; that
this sense of ill-defert should necessarily
produce the dread of punishment; and
that this dread should so operate on the
mind, in the time of distress, as to make
the finner conceive Providence to be en-
gaged against him, and to be concerned
in infliaing the punishment which he
suffers. All these impressions he hath
ltamped upon the heart with his own
hand. He hath made them constituent
parts of our frame; on purpose, that by
the union of so many strong and pungent

D d 3 senti-

SE RM. sentiments, he might enforce repentance
,I-- and reformation, and publish to the hu-

man race his detestation of fin. Were he
to speak to us from the clouds, his voice
could not be more decisive. What we
discern to be interwoven with the con-
texture of human nature, and to pervade
the whole course of human affairs, carries
an evidence not to be refitled. We might,
with as much reason, doubt whether the
fun was intended to enlighten the earth,
or the rain, to fertilize it; as whether he
who thus framed the human mind, in-
tended to announce righteousness to man-
kind, as his law.

THE second inference which I make

from the foregoing discourse, refpeds the
intimate connection, which those opera-
tions of conscience have, with the pecu-
liar and distinguishing docrines of the
Gospel of Christ. They will be found to
accord with them so remarkably, as to
furnish an answer to some of those ob-
jecions, which superficial reasoners are

apt
6

apt to raise against the Chritfian revela- ER M.

XII.

tion. In particular, they coincide with
that awful view which the Gospel gives
us, of the future consequences of guilt.
If the finner is now constrained by con-
science, to view the Almighty as pur-
suing him with evil for long-forgotten
crimes, how naturally muff he conclude,
that, in a subsequent period of existence,
the Divine administration will proceed
upon the fame plan, and complete what
has been left imperfea here ? If, during
this life, which is only the time of trial,
the displeasure of Providence at fin is
displayed by tokens so manifest, what
may be apprehended to follow, when
justice, which at present only begins to'
be executed, flall be carried to its con-
summation ? What conscience forebodes,
revelation verifies; assuring us, that a
day is appointed, when God will render
to every man according to his works; to
them, who by patient continuance in well-
doing, feck forglory, honour, and immorta-
lity; eternal life: But unto them that are

D d 4 contentiousq

E R M. contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey
x l ni unriglhteoflnefs ; indignationl and wrath,

tribulation and angujfj, upon every foul of
man that doth evil, of the Jew firfl, and
also of the Gentile. For there is no refped
of persons with God. For as many as have
finned without the law, Jiall aso perjih
'without the law; and as many as have
finned in the law, JfJall be judged by the
law A.

While the threatenings of conscience

thus firengthen the evidence of the scrip-
ture do&rine concerning future punish-
ments, they likewise pave the way for
the belief of what is revealed concerning
the method of our deliverance by ChritR.
They suggest to the finner, some deep
and dark malignity contained in guilt,
which has drawn upon his head such
high displeasure from Heaven. They
call forth his most anxious efforts, to
avert the effeCts of that displeasure, and
to propitiate his offended judge. Some
atonement, he is conscious, must be
made; and the voice of Nature has, in

* Rom ii. 7,--13.

every

every age, loudly demanded fuiffering, as SER M.
the proper atonement for guilt. Hence
mankind have constantly fled for refuge
to such substitutions, as they could de-
vise to place in the room of the offender;
and, as by general content, vidims have
every where been slain, and expiatory fa-
crifices have been offered up on innume-
rable altars. WTJerewith Jflall I come be-
fore the Lord, and bow my/elf before the 1moj
high God'? Shall I come bebfre him with
burnt-offerings, and calves of a year old?
Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of
rams, or wvith ten thousand of rivers of oil?
Or, Jfall I give nyJiirJ-born for ,my tranf-
greffon; the fruit of ay body, for theJin of
my foul*? These perplexities and agita-
tions of a guilty conscience, may be
termed preludes, in some measure, to the
Gospel of Christ. They are the pointings
of unenlightened Nature, towards that
method of relief, which the grace of
God has provided. Nature felt its inabi-

* Micah vi. 6, 7,

lity

E x RM. lity to extricate itself from the confe-

-L quences of guilt: The Gospel reveals the

plan of Divine interposition and aid.
Nature confessed some atonement to be
necessary: The Gospel discovers, that the
neceflary atonement is made. The re-
medy is no sooner presented, than its
suitableness to the disease appears; and
the great mystery of redemption, though
it reaches, in its full extent, beyond our
comprehension, yet, as far as it is re-
vealed, holds a visible congruity with
the sentiments of Conscience, and of Na-
ture.

Natural and revealed religion proceed

from the fame Author; and, of course,
are analogous and consistent. They are
parts of the fame plan of Providence.
They are connected measures of the fame
system of government. The serious be-
lief of the one, is the befl preparation
for the reception of the other. Both
concur in impressing our mind with a
deep sense of one moll important truth,

whicl

which is the result of this whole dif- S ERM
course, That as we sow now, we mIflt -v-
reap; that under the government of
God, no one shall be permitted, with
impunity, to gratify his criminal pas-
sions, and to make light of the great
Duties of life.

;S ER-

# SERMON XIV. On the Mixture of JOY and FEAR in RELIGION. PSALM ii. II. Rejoice with trembling.

[ 412 ]

S E R M O N XIV.
On the Mixture of Jo Y and F E A R in

RELIGION.

PsALM ii. II.

Rejoice with trembling.

XIV.
serV. OY and Fear, are two great springs
>--. Ji of human action. The mixed con-

dition of this world, gives scope for
both; and, according as the one or the
other predominates, it influences the ge-
neral tenour of our conduct. Each of
them pofleffes a proper place in religion.
To Serve the Lord with gladness, is the
exhortation of the Psalmist David *. To
serve hin witlh reverence and godly fear,
is the admonition of the Apostle Paul t.
But, under the present imperfection of

' Pfal. . , t Heb. xii. 23.

human

human nature, each of there principles S ERM.
may be carried to a dangerous extreme. -v
When the whole of religion is placed in
joy, it is in hazard of riing into unwar-
rantable rapture. When it refts altoge-
ther on fear, it degenerates into fuperfli-
tious servility. The Text enjoins a due
mixture of both; and inculcates this im-
portant maxim, That joy, tempered with
fear, is the proper disposition of a good
man. In discoursing of this subjea, I
shall endeavour to show, first, That joy
is essential to religion; and next, That,
for various reasons, this joy ought to be
mixed with fear; whence we shall be
able to ascertain the nature of that fleady
and composed spirit, which is most suit-
able to our present condition, and most
acceptable to God.

I. JoY is essential to religion, in two

respects; as religion infpiires joy, and as
it requires it. In other words; To rejoice,
is both the privilege, and the duty, of
good men.

5 IN

E R M. IN the first place, Religion inspires joy.
XIV.

It affords just ground of gladness, to all
who firmly believe its doctrines, and fin-
cerely study to obey its laws: For it con-
sers on them, the two most material re-
quifites of joy; a favourable situation of
things without, and a proper disposition
of mind within, to reliff that favourable
situation.

When they examine their situation

without, they behold themselves placed
in a world, which is full of the influ-
ence of a gracious Providence; where
beauty and good are every where predo-
minant; where various comforts are be-
flowed; and where, if any be with-held,
they have reason to believe, that they are
with-held by parental wisdom. Among
the crowd that encompass them, they
may be at a loss to discern, who are
their friends, and who their enemies.
But it is sufficient to know, that they
are under the protection of an invisible
Guardian,. whose power can keep them
from every evil. All the steps of his

conduct,
/

conduc, they may be unable to trace. S F R M.

XLV.

Events may befall them, of which they -
can give no account. But as long as
they are satisfied, that the system of Di-
vine government is founded on mercy,
no present occurrences are able to defiroy
their peace. For he who spared not his
*own Son, but delivered bhi up for them,
bow Jhall he not iwith himb freely give
them all things ? If their nature is frail,
Divine affiflance is promised to strengthen
it. If their virtue is imperfect, a difpen-
fation is opened, which gives them the
hope of pardon. If their external cir-
cumftances be in any refpeE unfavour-
able, it is because a higher interest is
consulted. All things, they are allured,
JfJall work together for their good. On
their prosperity refis, the blessing; on
their adversity, the fandifying Spirit, of
the Almighty. Old age may advance,
and life decay; but beyond those boun-
daries of Nature, faith opens the pro-
fpea of their lasting felicity. Without
anxiety, they pass through the different

periods

s ER M. periods of'their present existence, because
L-vCJ they know it to be no more than an intro-

dudion to immortality.

As such a situation of things without,

lays a solid foundation for joy; so the
disposition which religion forms within,
promotes the reliflh of it. It is indeed
from within, that the chief sources of
enjoyment or trouble rife. The minds
of bad men are always disorderly; and
hence their lives are so generally uneasy.
In vain they take the timbrel and the harp,
and endeavour to rejoice at the found of the
organ. Spleen and disgust pursue them,
through all the haunts of amusement.
Pride and ill humour torment them,
Oppressed with discontent, their spirits
flag; and their worn-out pleasures afford
them entertainment no more. But reli-
gion subdues those malignant paflions,
which are the troublers of human repose
which either' overcast the mind with the
gloom of peevi(hnefs, or disquiet it by
the violence of agitation. It infuses, in
their room, those mild and gentle difpo-

fitions,

fitions, whose natural effec is to fiooth S E R''i.

XIV.

the tenour of the foul. Benevolence and - -
candour, moderation and temperance,
wherever they reign, produce cheerful-
ness and serenity. The consciousness of
integrity, gives cafe and freedom to the
mind. It enables good men to extraa
from every object, the whole fatisfacion
which it is capable of yielding; and adds
the flavour of innocence, to all their ex-
ternal pleasures.

I N the second place, As religion natu-

rally inspires joy; so, what' it inspires, it
commands us to cherish. As a necessary
proof of our sincerity, it requires cheer-
fulness in the performance of our duty;
because, if this be wanting, our religion
discovers itself, not to be genuine in prin-
ciple, land in pracice it cannot be stable.

Religious obedience, destitute of joy, is

not genuine in its principle. For, did
either faith or hope, the love of God, or
the love of goodness, rule the heart;
they could not fail to produce satisfaction

Ee in

s ERM. in piety and virtue. All those causes of

joy which I have mentioned, would then
operate; and their native effet on the
mind, would follow. The profpeas
which religion opens, would gladden,
and the affections which it inspires,
would sooth the heart. We serve, with
pleasure, the benefaCor whom we love.
We rejoice in every fludy and pursuit,
to which we are sincerely attached. If
we serve not God with pleasure, it is
because we know him not, or love him
not. If we rejoice not in virtue, it is
because our affetion is alienated from it,
and out inclinations are depraved. We
give too evident proof, that either we
believe not the principles of religion, or
{hat we feel not their power. Exclude
joy from religion; and you leave no
other motives to it, except compulsion
and interest.. But are these 'suitable
grounds, on which to reft the whole of
our obedience to the Supreme Being?
My Jfn, give nie thy heart, is the call of
Odd. Surely if there be no pleasure in

i-* 2 fulfilling

fulfilling his commands, the heart is not SERM.

xIv.

given him; and, in that cafe, the multi-
tude of facrfices and burnt offerings, is
brought to his altar in vain.

As religion, destitute of joy, is imperfe&

in its principle; so, in pracice, it must be
unstable. In vain you endeavour to fix any
man to the regular performance of that, in
which he finds no pleasure. Bind him ever
so fat by interest or fear, he will contrive
some method of eluding the obligation.
Ingenuity is never so fertile of evasions, as
where pleasure is all on the one fide, and
mere precept on the other. He may study
to save appearances. He may dissemble
and constrain himself. But his heart re-
volts in secret; and the weight of incli-
nation will, in the end, draw the pratice
after it. If perseverance is not to be ex-
peced, fill less can zeal be looked for,
from him,. who, in his religious duties,
trembles without rejoicing. Every at-
tempt towards virtue which he forms, will
be feeble and awkward. He applies to it
as a task; he dreads the tafk-rmater; but

Ee e he

s ER M. he will labour no more than necessity
XIV.

'- ' enjoins. To escape from punishment, is

his sole aim. He bargains for immunity,
by every duty which he performs; and
all beyond, he esteems superfluous toil.
-Such religion as this, can neither pu-
rify the heart, nor prepare for heavenly
bliss. It is the refuge of an abjet mind.
It may form the ritual of the monk, or
prescribe the penance of the idolater;
but has no concern with the homage of
him, who worjlips the Father in spirit and
in truth. His charater is, that the joy of
the Lord is his Jfrength ". It attaches his
heart to religion. It inspires his zeal. It
fiapports his contfancy; and accelerates
his progress.

There is no man, but has some object

to which he cleaves for enjoyment; some-
what that flatters him with distant hope,
or affords him present pleasure. Joy is
the end towards which all rational beings
tend. For the fake of it, they live; it
resembles the air they breath, which is

* Neh. viii. io.

necessary
4

necessary for the motion of the heart, s PiR MI
and all the vital fundions. But as the ~--.
breathing of infeated air proves fatal to
life; in the fame manner, joy drawn
from a corrupted source, is deftrudive,
both of virtue, and of true happiness.
When you have no pleasure in good-
ness, you may with certainty conclude
the reason to be, that your pleasure is
all derived from an opposite quarter.
You have exhausted your affetion upon
the world. You have drunk too much
of its poisoned waters, to have any relilh
for a pure spring.

Estimate, therefore, the genuineness of

your religious principles; eflimate the de-
gree of your fiability, in religious prac-
tice, by the degree of your fatisfadion in
piety and virtue. Be assured, that where
your treasure is, there will your delight
be also. The worldly man rejoices in his
pofleflions; the voluptuous, in his plea-
fures; the social, in his friends and corn-
panions. The truly good man rejoices
in doing jitfly, loving mercy, and walking

E e 3 humbly

s E R M. humbly with the Lord his God. He is hap-
»--*» py, when employed in the regular dif-

charge of the great duties of life. Spon-
taneous they flow from the affections of a
pure heart. Not only from the keeping
of the divine commandments he expects,
but in the keeping of them, he enjoys, a
great reward.-Accordingly, in the senti-
ments of holy men recorded in scripture,
we find this spirit every-where prevalent.
Their language was; Thy Jtatutes have I
taken as mine heritage for ever; for they are
the rejoicing of my heart. They are ny songs
in the hotfe of my pilgrimage. They are
sweeter than honey, and the honey-comb.
Whom have I in heaven but thee ? And there
is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.
They did not receive the spirit of bondage,
but the spirit of adoption. They were filled
with peace and joy in believing. They re-
joiced in hope of the, glory of God. As fobn
as the .Ethiopian eunuch received from
Philip the light of the Gospel, that light
revived and cheered his heart. A new fun
feerned to arise; a new glory, to shine

around

around him. Every object brightened; S E M.
and he went on his way rejoicing i. After
the fame manner should every good man
proceed in his journey through life, with
a serene and cheerful spirit. Conflerna-
tion and dejecion let him leave to the
slaves of guilt; who have every thing to
dread, both from this world and the
next. If he appear before others with a
dispirited afpeat, he dishonours religion;
and affords ground for suspicion, that he
is either ignorant of its nature, or a itran-
ger to its power.

Thus I have flown joy to be essential

to religion. It is the spirit which it in-
spires, and which it requires, in good
men. But in our present state, the best
principles may be carried to a dangerous
excess; and joy, like other things, has
its due limits. To serve God with un-
mixed delight, belongs to more advanced
spirits in a happier world. In this region
of imperfection, some infusions from a
different cup, must of necessity tincture
our joy. Let us then,

* Aas viii. 39.

E e 4 II. TURN

S '

R M I'. TURN to the other fide of the argue
Ai-~ ment, and confider the reasons which ren-

der it proper, that when we rejoice, we
should rejoice with trembling.

In the first place, because all the ob-

jecs of religion, which afford ground for
joy, tend to inspire, at the fame time, re-
verence and fear. We serve a Benefador,
it is true, in whom we have reason to de-
light; whose purposes are gracious; whose
law is the plan of our happiness. But this
Benefator, is the King eternal, immortal,
and invisible; at whose presence, the moun-.
tains shake, and Nature trembles. Every
good, and every perfet gift, come cown from
him. But the hand which confers them,
we cannot fee. Mysterious obscurity refts
upon his essence. He dwelleth in thefecret
place of thunder; and clouds and darkness
surround him. He is the Hearer ofprayer;
but we lift our voice to him from afar.
Into his immediate pretence no access is
permitted. Our warmest devotion admits
no familiarity with him. God is in heaven,
and thou upon earth; therefore, let thy.

words

words be few. If his omniscience admi- s E R M.

XIV.

nifers comfort in our secret distress, it A
likewise fills with awe the heart that is
conscious of guilt. For, if he knowts our
friame, and renembers we are dzft; our ini-
quities, also, are ever before him; our fcrcet
ilns, in the light of his countenance.

Throughout all his dispensations, great-

ners, in conjunction with goodness, strikes
our view; and, wherever we behold the
Parent, we behold the Legislator also. The
death of Christ, in behalf of a guilty
world, is the chief ground of religious
hope and joy. But it is no lets the ground
of reverence; when, in this high tranf-
ation, we contemplate God, as at once
firid in justice, and great in mercy. I
the Lord keep mercy for tholufands of them
thatfear me. Iforgive their iniquity, traif-
gre/fon, and fin; but I will by no means
clear the guilty. When we open the book
of the Law, we find promises and threaten-
ings mingledg in the fame page. On the
one fide, we fee Heaven displayed in
all its glory: On the other, Hell opening

its

s E R M. its terrours. In ihort, in whatever light

XIV.
h-r- we view religion, it appears solemn and

venerable. It is a temple full of majefly,
to which the worshippers may approach
with comfort, in the hope of obtaining
grace, and finding mercy; but where they
cannot enter, without being impressed
with awe. If we may be permitted to
compare spiritual with natural things,
religion resembles not those scenes of
natural beauty, where every objea smiles.
It cannot be likened to the gay landscape,
or the flowery field. It resembles more
the august and sublime appearances of
Nature; the lofty mountain, the expanded
ocean, and the starry firmament; at the
fight of which, the mind is at once over-
awed and delighted; and, from the union
of grandeur with beauty, derives a pleas-
ing, but a serious, emotion.

IN the second place, As joy, tempered

by fear, suits the nature of religion, so
it is requisite for the proper regulation of
the conpuet of man. Let his joy flow

from

from the bell and purest source; yet, if it s E R M..

. V.

remain long unmixed, it is apt to become
dangerous to virtue. As waters which
are never stirred, nor troubled, gather a
sediment, which putrifies them; so the
undisturbed continuance of placid sensa-
tions engenders disorders in the human
foul. It is wifely ordered in our present
state, that joy and fear, hope and grief,
ihould aa alternately, as checks and ba-
lances upon each other, in order to pre-
vent an excess in any of them, which
our nature could not bear. If we were
subjed to no alarms of danger, the
wisest would soon become improvident;
and the most humble, presumptuous.
Man is a pilgrim on earth. Were his
path to be always finooth and flowery,
he would be tempted to relinquish his
guide, and to forget the purpose of his
journey. Caution and fear are the
Ihields of happiness. Unguarded joy
begets indolence; indolence produces fe-
curity; security leads to rashness; and
rashness ends in ruin. In order to re-

joice

SEX R M joice long, it is necessary that we rejoice

-v with ' trembling. Had our first parents

observed this rule, man might have been
fill in paradise. He who faith in his
heart, My mountain Jlands Jfrong; IfJhall
never be moved; may be assured, that his
slate already begins to totter. Religion,
therefore, performs a kind office, in giv-
ing us the admonition of the Text. It
inspires cheerfulness in the service of
God. It proposes joy, as our chief spring
of aaion. But it supports joy, by guard-
ing it with fear; not suppressing, but re-
gulating its indulgence; requiring us to
rejoice, like persons who have obtained
a treasure, which, through want of vigi-
lance, they are exposed to lose. De-
pendent beings are formed for fubmif-
sion; and to submit, is to fland in awe.
Becaife the Lord reigneth, let the earth be
glad. We are the fubjedts of God; and
therefore may justly rejoice. But still we
are fubjeats; and, therefore, trembling
muff mix itself with our joy.

IN

IN the third place, The unflable condi- s ER M.

tion of all human things, naturally in-
spires fear in the midif of joy. The
spirit to which religion forms us, must
undoubtedly correspond to the state in
which we are placed, and to the part
which is assigned us to act. Now, the
first view under which our present itate
appears, is that of fallen creatures, who
are undergoing, in this world, probation
and trial for their recovery; and are
commanded to work out their fialvation
with fear aud trembling. This view of
our condition infers not. habitual dejetion
of mind. It requires not melancholy
abstraCtion from the affairs, or total con-
tempt of the amusements of life. But it
inspires humility. It enforces dependance
on Divine aid; and calls forth the voice
of supplication to Heaven. In a situation
so critical, and where interelfs so important
are at flake, every reasonable person mufl
confess, that seriousness ought to temper
rejoicing.

Were

SE RM. Were there in human life any fixed
XIV.

point of flability and reft, attainable by
man; could we, at any one moment, as-
sure ourselves, that there remained no
latent source of danger, either to our tem-
poral, or our spiritual fiate; then I ad-
mit, we might lay trembling aside, and
rejoice in full security. But, alas! no
such safe flation, no such moment of
confidence, is allowed to man during his
warfare on earth. Viciflitudes of good
and evil, of trials and consolations, fill
up 'his life. The belt intentioned are
sometimes betrayed into crimes; the moll
prudent, overwhelmed with misfortunes.
The world is like a wheel incessantly re-
volving, on which human things alter-
nately rife and fall. What is pall of our
life, has been a chequered scene. On its
remaining periods, uncertainty and dark-
neis ell. Futurity is an unknown re-
gion, into W.hioh no man can look for-
ward without awe, because he cannot tell
what forms of danger or trial may meet
him there. This we know well, that in

every

every period of our life, the path of hap. s E R M.

XIV.

piness shall be found steep and arduous; -
but swift and easy, the descent to ruin.
What, with much exertion of care and
vigilance, we had built up, one unwary
aaion may, in an evil hour, overthrow.
The props of human confidence are, in
general, insecure. The sphere of human
pleasures is narrow. While we form
schemes for firengthening the one, and
for enlarging the other, death, mean-
while, advances. Life, with a fwifr,
though insensible course, glides away;
and, like a river which undermines its
banks, gradually impairs our state. Year
after year fleals something from us; till
the decaying fabric totter of itself, and
crumble at length into duff. So that,
whether we confider life or death, time
or eternity, all things appear to concur in
giving to man the admonition of the
Text, Rejoice with trembling.

I HAVE now shown, in what refpeds
religion.both promotes joy, and inspires

seriousness.

SE R M. erioufnefs. It places us in'the mos fa-
xIV.

vourable situation, which human life as-
fords, for joy; and it gives us every assist-
ance, for relishing that joy. It renders
it our duty, to cultivate the fatisfaCion
which it yields. It demands a cheerful
spirit, in order to ascertain the sincerity
of our principles, and to confirm us in
good praaice. At the fame time, the
joy which it inspires, is tempered with
fear, by the genius of religion itself;
by the danger to which unguarded joy
would expose us; and by the impropriety
of indulging it, in a situation so mixed as
the present. The trembling which is here
enjoined, is not to be understood' as fig-
nifying a pusillanimous dejedion. It im-
ports no more than that caution and so-
briety, which prudence dictates, as be-
longing to our state. By connecting such
trembling with our joy, religion means
to recommend to us, a cheerful, but a
composed, spirit, equally remote from
the humiliating depression of fear, and
the exulting levity of joy. Always to re-

joice,

joice is to be a fool. Always to tremble, S E RI '
is to be a slave. It is a modest cheerful- _
ness, a chastened joy, a manly seriousness,
which becomes the servant of God,

BUT is this, it may perhaps be said,

the whole amount of that boasted satis-
fadion which religion bellows ? Is this
all the compensation which it makes, for
those sacrifices it exats ? Are not the
terms which vice holds out, far more
enticing, when it permits us to gratify
every desire; and, in return for our fur-
mounting the timorous scruples of con-
science, promises us a life of gaiety, fef.
tivity, .and unrestrained joy ?--Such
promises, vice may indeed make; but,
how far it fulfils them, we may safely
refer to the determination of the greatest
sensualist, when he has finished his ca-
reer, and looks back on what he has en-
joyed. Ask him, Whether he would re-
commend to his children, and his friendsi
to hold the fame course; and whether,
with his dying breath, he dare assure

F f them,

SER M. them, that the gratifications of licenti-
XIV.

_^j oufnefs afford the greatest enjoyment of

life ? Whatever hopes vice may at the
beginning inspire, yet, after the trial is
made, it has been always found, that
criminal pleasures are the bane of happi-
ness; the poison, not the cordial, of our
present state. They are pleasures, com-
penfated by an infinite overbalance of
pain; moments of delight, succeeded by
years of regret; purchased at the expence
of injured reputation, broken health, and
ruined peace. Even abftrafing from
their pernicious consequences, they are,
for most part, in themselves treacherous
pleasures; unsound and disturbed in the
moments of enjoyment. In the midJf offitch
laughter, the heart isforrowfil. Often is
the smile of gaiety assumed, while the heart
akes within: And though folly may laugh,
guilt will fting. Correcing this pernicious
phrenzy of pleasure, and reducing it to a
more fober and regulated state, religion is,
in truth, no other than wisdom, introducing
,peace and order into the life of man.

While

While religion condemns such plea- S R M.

XIV.

fures as are immoral, it is chargeable
with no improper austerity, in refped of
those which are of an innocent kind.
Think not, that by the cautious difci-
pline which it prescribes, it excludes you
from all gay enjoyment of life. With-
in the compass of that sedate spirit, to
which it forms you, all that is innocently
pleasing will be found to lie. It is a
Iniftake to imagine, that, in constant es-
fusions of giddy mirth, or in that flutter
of spirits which is excited by a round
of diversions, the chief enjoyment of our
slate consists. Were this the cafe, the
vain and the frivolous would be on bet-
ter terms 'for happiness, than the wife,
the great, and the good. To arrange
the plans of amusement, or to preside in
the haunts of jollity, would be more de-
firable, than to exert the highest effort of
mental powers for the benefit of na-
tions. A consequence so absurd, is fuffi-
cient to explode the principle from which
it flows. To the amusements and lesser

F f joys

S E.R M. joys of the world, religion assigns their

XIV.
Avv pproper place. It admits of them, as re-

laxations from care, as instruments of
promoting the union of men, and of en-
livening their social intercourse. But
though, as long as they are kept within
due bounds, it does not censure nor con-
demn them; neither does it propose them,
as rewards to the virtuous, or as the prin-
cipal objets of their pursuit. To such,
it points out nobler ends of action. Their
felicity it engages them to seek, in the
discharge of an useful, an upright, and
honourable part in life; and, as the ha-
bitual tenor of their mind, it promotes
cheerfulness, and discourages levity.

Between these two there is a wide dif-

tinction; and the mind which is most
open to levity, is frequently a stranger to
cheerfulness. It has been remarked, that
transports of intemperate mirth, are of-
ten no more than flaflies from the dark
cloud; and that, in proportion to the
violence of the effulgence, is the succeed-
ing gloom. Levity may be the forced

production

production of folly or vice; cheelrul- SE R MI.

XIV,

ness is the natural offspring of wisdom --vA
and virtue only. The one is an oc-
cafional agitation; the other, a perma-
nent habit. The one degrades the cha-
rader; the other is perfectly confident
with the dignity of reason, and the
fleady and manly spirit of religion. To
aim at a constant succession of high and
vivid sensations of pleafilre, is an idea of
happiness altogether chimerical. Calm
and temperate enjoyment, is the utmost
that is allotted to man. Beyond this, we
struggle in vain to raise our hate; and, in
fadt, depress our joys, by endeavouring
to heighten them. Instead of those falla-
cious hopes of perpetual feflivity, with
which the world would allure us, religion
confers upon us a cheerful tranquillity.
Instead of dazzling us with meteors of
joy, which sparkle and expire, it sheds
around us a calm and steady light. By
mixing trembling with our joy, it renders
that joy more solid, more equal, and more
lasting.

Fs3 Ia

SE, RM. In this spirit, then, let us serve God,

XIV.

and hold our course through life. Let us
approach to the Divine Being, as to a
sovereign of whom we fland in awe, and
to a father in whom we trust. In our
conduc, let us be cautious and humble,
as those who have ground to fear; well
pleased and cheerful, as those who have
cause to rejoice. Let us show the world,
that a religious temper, is a temper, sedate,
not fad; that a religious behaviour, is a
behaviour, regulated, not fliff and formal.
Thus we shall ife the wesld, as not ab fitg
it; we shall pass through its various
changes, with the leaf discomposure; and
we ihall vindicate religion, from the re-
proaches of those who would attribute to
it, either enthusiastic joys, or slavish ter-
rours. We shall show, that it is a rational
rule of life, worthy of the perfecion of
God, and suited to the nature and slate
fp man,

SE R-

# SERMON XV. On the Motives to CONSTANCY in VIRTUE. GALAT. vi. 9. And let us not be weary in well-doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

[ 439 ]

S E R M N XV.
On the Motives to CONSTANCY in

VIRTUE.

GALAT. vi. 9.
And let us not be weary inl well-doing;

for in due season we Jhall reap, if we
faint not.
D ISCONTENT is the most general S ERM.

of all the evils which trouble the ,---_

life of man. It is a disease, which every-
where finds materials to feed itself; for,
if real distresses be wanting, it fubftitutas
such as are imaginary in their place. It
converts even the good things of the
world, when they have been long enjoy-
ed, into occasions of disgust. In the
midst of prosperity, it disposes us to
complain; and renders tranquillity tire-

F f 4 some,

t

S ER M. some, only because it is uniform. There

xv. I,1 is no wonder that this spirit of reltleff-

ness and diffatisfation, which corrupts
every terrefirial enjoyment, should have
Sometimes penetrated into the region of
virtue. Good men are not without their
frailties; and the perverseness incident to
human nature, too readily leads us, who
become weary of all other things, to be
weary, also, in uwell-doing.

Let me put a cafe, which, perhaps,

will be found not unfrequent in ordinary
life. Suppose a person, after much com-
merce with the world, to be convinced
of its vanity. He has seen its most'
flattering hopes to be fallacious. He has
felt its most boasted pleasures to be un-
fatisfatory. He resolves, therefore, to
place his happiness in virtue; and, dif-
regarding all temptations from interest,
to adhere to what is right and honour-
able in conduC., He cultivates acquaint-
ance with religion. He performs, with
seriousness, the offices of devotion. He
lays down to himself, a rational and use-

fil
o1t

ful plan of life; and, with fatisfadion, SER M.
holds on for a while in this reformed -,.
course. But, by degrees, discourage-
ments arise. The peace which he hoped
to enjoy, is interrupted, either by his
own frailties, or by the vices of others.
Pafions, which had not been thorough-
ly subdued, struggle for their accustom-
ed gratification. The pleasure which he
expected to find in devotion, sometimes
fails him; and the injuflice of the world
often fours and frets him. Friends prove
ungrateful; enemies misrepresent, rivals
supplant him: And part, at least, of the
mortifications which he suffers, he be-
gins to ascribe to Virtue.- Is this all
the reward of my serving God, and re-
nouncing the pleasures of fin ? erily, in
vain I have cleansed mny heart, and waJlJed
?my hands in innocency. Behold, the ungodly
prosper in the world, and have more than
heart can wivi/J; while, all the day long, I
am plagued and chastened every mornilng.-
To such persons as these, and to all who
are in hazard of being infeaed with their

spirit,

;..,

!-

SEIR M. spirit, I now address myself. In reply to
.--y- their complaints, I purpose to show, That

in no slate they can chufe on earth, by
no plan of conduct they can form, it is
poflible for them to escape uneasiness and
disappointment; that in a life of virtue,
they will susser less uneasiness, and fewer
disappointments, than in a course of vice;
they will possess much higher resources
and advantages; and they will be assured
of complete reward at the end. From
there considerations, I hope to make it
appear, that there is no sufficient reason
for our being weary in well-doing; and
that, taking human life upon the whole,
Virtue is far the most eligible portion of
man.

I. UNE A SINE S and disappointment

are inseparable, in some degree, from every
slate on earth. Were it in the power of
the world, to render those who attach
themselves to it, satisfied and happy, you
might then, I admit, have some title to
complain, if you found yourselves placed

upon
*1

upon worse terms in the service of God. SERM.
But this is so far from being the cafe, A--
that among the multitudes who devote
themselves to earthly pleasure, you will
not find a single person who has com-
pletely attained his aim. Enquire into
the condition of the high and the low,
of the gay and the serious, of the men of
business and the men of pleasure, and
you shall behold them all occupied, in
supplying some want, or in removing
some distress. No man is pleated with
being precisely what he is. Every-where
there is a void; generally, even in the
mot prosperous life, there is some corner
possessed by sorrow. He who is engaged
in business, pines for leisure. He who
enjoys leisure, languishes for want of
employment. In a single state, we envy
the comforts of a family. In conjugal
life, we are chagrined with dometfic
cares. In a safe ltation, we regret the
want of objects for enterprise. In an
enterprising life, we lament the want of
safety. It is the doom of man, that his

sky

S ER M. sky should never be free from all clouds.

xv.
_,_- He is, at present, in an exiled and fallen

fiate. The objecs which surround him,
are beneath his native dignity. God has
tinged them all with vanity, on purpose
to make him feel, that this is not his
reft; that here he is not in his proper
place, nor arrived at his true home.

If, therefore, you aim at a condition

which shall be exempted from every dif-
quiet, you pursue a phantom; you in-
crease the vanity and vexation of life, by
engaging in a chace so fruitless. If you
complain of virtue, because there is in-
cident to it a portion of that uneasiness
which is found in every other fate, your
complaint is most unreasonable. You
claim an immunity from evil, which be-
longs not to the lot of man. Recon-
cile yourselves, then, to your condition;
and, inltead of looking for perfect hap-
piness any where on earth, gladly em-
brace that state which contains the fewest
sorrows.

II, THOUGI

II. THOUGH no condition of human SER M.

XV.

life is free from uneasiness, I contend, --
That the uneasiness belonging to a sinful
course, is far greater, than what attends
a course of well-doing. If you be weary
of the labours of virtue, be assured, that
the world, whenever you try the ex-
change, will lay upon you a much heavier
load. It is the outside, only, of a licentious
life, which is gay and smiling. Within,
it conceals toil, and trouble, and deadly
sorrow. For vice poisons human happiness
in the spring, by introducing disorder into
the heart. Those passions which it seems
to indulge, it only feeds with imperfect
gratifications; and thereby firengthens
them from preying, in the end, on their
unhappy vicims.

It-is a great mistake to imagine, that

the pain of felf-denial is confined to virtue.
He who follows the world, as much
as he who follows Christ, mufl take up
his croft; and to him, assuredly, it will
prove a more oppressive burden. Vice
allows all our paflions to range uncon-

8 trouled;

.SERM. trouled; and where each claims to be

XV
.. .,m fuperiour, it is impossible to gratify all.

The predominant desire, can only be in-
dulged at the expence of its rival. No
mortifications which virtue exacts, are
more revere than those, which ambition
imposes upon the love of ease, pride upon
interest, and covetousness upon vanity.
Self-denial, therefore, belongs, in com-
mon, to vice and virtue; but with this
remarkable difference, that the passions
which virtue requires us to mortify, it
tends to weaken; whereas, those which
vice obliges us to deny, it, at the fame
time, strengthens. The one diminishes
the pain of felf-denial, by moderating
the demand of passion; the other in-
creates it, by rendering those demands
imperious and violent.-What diflrefles,
that occur in the calm life of virtue, can
be compared to those tortures, which re-
morse of conscience inflicts on the wicked;
to those revere humiliations, arising from
guilt combined with misfortunes, which
,fink them to the dull; to those violent

agitations

agitations of shame and disappointment, s r R M.

XV.

which sometimes drive them to the most
fatal extremities, and make them abhor
their existence? How often, in the midst
of those difaltrous situations, into which
their crimes have brought them, have
they cursed the fedudions of vice; and,
with bitter regret, looked back to the day
on which they first forsook the path of
innocence!

But, perhaps, you imagine, that to

such miseries as these, great criminals
only are exposed; and that, by a wary
and cautious management, it is possible
to avoid them. Take vice and virtue,
then, in the most general point of view,
Compare God and the world as two maf-
ters, the one or other of whom you must
obey; and confider fairly, in whose ser-
vice there will be reason for your being
weary soonest, and repenting most fre-
quently. The world is both a hard, and
a capricious matter. To submit to a long
servitude, in the view of a recompense
from which they are excluded in the end,

7 is

S R M. is known to be often the fate of those,

xv.
i-ó J who are devoted to the world. They

sacrifice their present ease, to their future
profpeas. They court the great, and
flatter the multitude. They prostitute
their conscience, and dishonour their cha-
raaer: And, after all their efforts, how
uncertain is their success! Competitors
justle, and outstrip them. The more art-
ful deceive, the more violent overthrow
them. Fair profpeas once smiled; but
clouds soon gather; the sky is darkened;
the scene changes; and that fickle world,
which, a moment before, had flattered,
the next moment, forgets them.

God is never mistaken in the character

of his servants; for he feeth their hearts,
and judgeth according to the truth. But
the world is often deceived in those who
court its favour; and, of course, is un-
just in the distribution of its rewards.
Flattery gains. the ear of power. Fraud
supplants innocence; and the pretending,
and assuming, occupy the place of the
worthy and the modest. In vain you

claim

claim any merit with the world, on ac- S rVR I.

XV.

count of your good intentions. The -\,--
world knows them not; regards them
not. It judges of you, solely by your
acions; and, what is worse, by the fuc-
cess of your adions, which often depends
not on yourselves. But, in the fight of
the Supreme Being, good intentions sup-
ply the place of good deeds, which you
had not the opportunity of performing.
The well-meant endeavours of the poor,
find the fame acceptance with him, as
the generous aaions of the rich. The
widow's mite is, in his eye, a costly of-
fering; and even he who giveth to a ds-
ciplc a cup of cold water, when he. can
give him no more, goeth not without his
reward.

As the world is unjust in its judgments,

so it is ungrateful in its requitals. Time
speedily effaces the memory of the great-
eft services; and when we can repeat
them no' more, we are negleced, and
thrown aside. It was the fiying of a
noted great man of the world, on the

Gg fall

S E R M. fall of his fortunes, " Had I served God

¥v.
Ax <' as faithfully as I have done my King,

" he would not have cast me 'off in my
"old age." Unfaithfulness, and ingra-
titude, are unknown to God. With him
no new favourites arise, to usurp the
place, or to bear off the rewards, of his
ancient servants. Even to your old age, I
am He; and even to hoary hairs, I will
carry you. I have made, and I will bear;
even I will carry, and will deliver you,
faith the Lord AlmigJhty*.-Since, then, in
our several departments, we muff labour,
What comparison is there, between la-
bouring for God, and for the world?
How unjust are they, who become weary
so much sooner in the service of God, than
they do in that of the most severe and im-
perious of all masters !

III. THE resources of virtue are much

greater than those of the world; the com-
penfations which it makes for our distresses,
far more valuable. Perpetual success be-
longs neither to the one, nor the other.

Ifa. xlvi. 4.

But

But under disappointments, when they s ER .
occur, virtue bears us up; the world al- __-
lows us to fink. When the mind of a
good man is hurt by misfortunes, reli-
gion administers the cordial, and infuses
the balm. Whereas the world inflits
wounds, and then leaves them to feflet.
It brings sorrows, but it provides no con-
folation. Consolation is entirely the pro-
vince of religion. Supposing religion to
be inferiour to vice in external advan-
tages, it must be allowed to possess inter-
nal peace, in a much higher degree. This
is so certain, that almost all men, at some
period or other of their life, look forward
to it, as to a desirable retreat. When the
ends of their present pursuit shall be
accomplished, they propose to themselves
much fatisfaation, in an honourable dif-
charge of the duties of their fiation,
amidst those moderate passions, and tem-
perate pleasures, which innocence allows.
That which all men agree in holding to
be second in importance to the pursuit
which they follow, may be safely esteem-

Gg 2 ed

SERM. ed to be the first in real worth; and it

xv.
1- may be concluded, that if they were not

blinded by some prevailing passion, they
would discern and adopt it as such. -

It is the peculiar effec of virtue, to

make a man's chief happiness arise from
himself and his own conduct. A bad
man is wholly the creature of the world.
He hangs upon its favour, lives by its
smiles, and is happy or miserable, in pro-
portion to his success. But to a virtuous
man, success in worldly undertakings is
but a secondary objeac. To discharge his
own part with integrity and honour, is
his chief aim. If he has done properly
what was incumbent on him to do, his
mind is at reft; to Providence he leaves
the event. His witness is in heaven, and
his record is on high. Satisfied with the
approbation of God, and the teflimony
of a good conscience, he enjoys himself
and despises the triumphs of guilt. In
proportion as such manly principles rule
your heart, you will become independent
of the world; and will forbear complain-

ing

ing of its discouragements. It is the irn- s E R i.
perfedion of your virtue, which occasion$s v
you to be weary in well-doillg. It is be-
cause your hearts remain divided between
God and the world, that you are so often
discontented; partly wifling to discharge
your duty, and partly seeking your happi-
ness from somewhat that is repugnant to
your duty. Study to be more confifent in
principle, and more uniform in practice,
and your peace will be more u'nbroken.

Though virtue may appear at first fight

to contrad: the bounds of enjoyment, you
will find, upon reflection, that, in truth,
it enlarges them. If it refrains the excess
of fonme pleasures, it favours and increases
others. It precludes you from none, but
such as are either fantastic and ima-.
ginary, or pernicious and deftruQive.
Whatever is truly valuable in human en-
joyment, it allows to a good man, no less
than to others. It not only allows him
such pleasures, but heightens them, by
that grateful relish which a good con-
science gives to every pleasure. It not

G g 3 only

SE RM. only heightens them, but adds to them,

XV. I-_> - also, the peculiar fatisfadions which flow

from virtuous sentiments, from devout
affecions, and religious hopes. On how
much worse terms is the finner placed, in
the midst of his boafled gratifications?
His portion is confined to this world.
His good things are all of one fort only;
he has neither knowledge, nor relish, of
any thing beyond them. His enjoyment,
therefore, refts on a much narrower basis,
than that of the servants of God. En-
large, as much as you please, the circle of
worldly gratifications; yet, if nothing of
the mind and the heart, nothing of a re-
fined and moral nature, enter into that
circle, and vary the enjoyment, languor
and weariness soon succeed. Among
whom do you hear more peevish expref-
sions of discontent, or more frequent com-
plaints of low spirits, than among the pro.
sessed votaries of worldly pleasure ?

Vice and virtue, in their progress, as

in every other refpe&, hold an opposite
course. The beginnings of vice are en-

ticing.

ticing. The firfl fleps of worldly ad- S R M.
vancement, are flattering and pleating. .--.i
But the continuance of success blunts
enjoyment, and flattens desire. Whereas
the beginnings of virtue are laborious.
But, by perseverance, its labours dimi-
nifh, and its pleasures increase. As it
ripens into confirmed habit, it becomes
both smoother in practice, and more com-
plete in its reward. In a worldly life,
the termination of our hopes always
meets our view. We fee a boundary be-
fore us, beyond which we cannot reach.
But the profpeas of virtue are growing,
and endless. The righteous /hall hold onl
in his'way; and he that hath clean hands,
Jhall wax Jironger and jironger. The path
of the jtii is as the flJining light, that
Jhineth more and more unto the perfeD7 day.
This brings me to confider,

IV, THE assured hope, which good

men enjoy, of a full reward at last. I
have endeavoured, by several confidera-
tions, to correc your impatience under

G g 4 the

S E R :. the present diicouragements of virtue.

XV, '
u---, I have ihown many high advantages,

which it already pollffes. But now, lay-
ing all these aside; fippofing virtue to
have brought you no advantage, but to
have only engaged you in perpetual
struggles with an evil world; the Text
fuggelts what is sufficient to answer eve-
ry objetion, and to silence every com-
plaint; Itn due season you Jfiall reap, if
you faint not. It is not a loose encourage-
ment, or a dubious hope,. which is held
forth to us. A direc and explicit decla-
ration is made by the Spirit of God, that
piety and virtue, how discouraged soever,
or oppressed, they may be for a while,.
shall not be fruifrated of their reward;
'but that in due feafoni when the period
which is fixed'.. by thel Divine decree shall
come, all who have not beenr weary in
'well-doing, though they may have fiwn ill
tears, Jhall reap'in joy. As this great prin-
ciple of faith is so essential to our present
argument, and is indeed the foundation
of al :'religion, it will be proper that we

now

now take a view of the grounds on which S E R M.

XV.

it relts. By fixing our attention, both on
the proofs which reason suggests, and on
the discoveries which revelation has made,
of a state of future retribution, we shall
take an effetual method of confirming our
adherence to religion, and of baffling those
temptations which might lead us to' be
weary in well-doing.

T H E first and most obvious prefimp-

.tion, which reason affords in behalf of
future rewards to the righteous, arises
from the imperfedt distribution of good
and evil in our present state. Notwith-
flanding what I have advanced concern-
ing the pleasures and advantages of vir-
tue, it cannot be denidd, that the lappi-
ness of good men is often left incomplete.
The vicious possess advantages, to which
they have no' right; while the confcien-
tious susser fdr the fake of virtue, and
groan under diftlieffes Which they have
not merited frobl the world. Indeed,
were the diributidri f gofod ad' evil, in

thin

S EX RM. this life, altogether promiscuous; could
'-v-J it be said, with truth, that the moral

condition of men had no influence what-
ever upon their happiness or misery; I
admit, that from such a state of things,
no presumption would arise, of any fu-
ture retribution being intended. They
who delight to aggravate the miseries of
life, and the distresses of virtue, do no
service to the argument in behalf of Pro-
vidence. For, if total disorder be found
to prevail now, suspicions may, too just-
ly, arise, of its prevailing for ever. If
he who rules the universe, entirely ne-
glets virtue here, the probability must
be small, of his rewarding it hereafter.
But this, is far from being the true slate
of the fad. What human life presents to
the view of an impartial observer, is by
no means a scene of entire confusion;
but a state of order, begun, and carried
on a certain length. Virtue is so far
from being negleaed by the Governour
of the world, that from many evident
marks it appears to be a chief objec of

his

his care. In the constitution of human SERM.

XV.

nature, a foundation is laid, for comfort ._
to the righteous, and for internal punish-
ment to the wicked. Throughout the
course of Divine government, tenden-
cies towards the happiness of the one,
and the misery of the other, constantly
appear. They are so conspicuous, as not
to have escaped the notice of the rudest
nations. Over the whole earth, they
have diffused the belief, that Providence
is propitious to virtue, and adverse to
guilt. Yet these tendencies are, some-
times, disappointed of their effec; and
that which Providence visibly favours, is
left, at present, without an adequate re-
ward.

From such an imperfeCt ditribution of

happiness, what are we to conclude, but
that this system is the beginning, not the
whole of things; the opening only of a
more extensive plan, whose confumma-
tion reaches into a future world ? If God
has already set his thronefor judgment; if
he has visibly begun to reward and to

punilh,

S E R M. punish, in some degree on earth, he can-

xv.
.i,, not mean to leave the exercise of govern-

ment incomplete. Having laid the foun-
dation of a great and noble ftruaure, he
will in due time rear it up to perfection.
The unfinished parts of the fabric evi-
dently ihow, that a future building is
intended. All his other works are con-
ftruCted according to- the most full and
exa : proportion. In the natural world,
nothing is deficient, nothing redundant.
It is in the moral world, only, that we
difeover irregularity and defee. It falls
short of that order and perfe&ion, which
appear in the reft of the creation. It ex-
hibits not, in its present slate, the fame
features of complete wisdom, justice, or
goodness. But can we believe, that, under
the: government of the Supreme Being,
those: apparent difoeders lhall riot be redi-
fled at the last ? Or, that from his conduct
towards his ratibnal creatures, the chief of
his works, the fold objection against his
perfection shall be allowed to: rife, and
.ball continue unremoved for ever.

8 ~ On

On the supposition of future rewards SER I.

xv.

and punishments, a satisfying account a-
can be given, of all the disorders which
at present take place on earth. Chriftia-
nity explains their origin, and traces
them to their issue. Man, fallen from
his primaval felicity, is now undergoing
probation and discipline for his final
state. Divine justice remains, for a sea-
son, concealed; and allows men to aC
their parts with freedom on this theatre,
that their characters may be formed and
ascertained. Amidst discouragements and
afflidions, the righteous give proof of
their fidelity, and acquire the habits of
virtue. But, if you suppose the events
of this life to have no reference to an-
other, the whole state of man becomes,
not only inexplicable, but contradictory,
and inconsistent. The powers of the in-
feriour animals are perfeclly suited to
their station. They know nothing higher
than their present condition. In gratify-
ing their appetites, they fulfil their defti-
ny, and pass away. Man, alone, comes

forth

SE R M. forth to aa a part, which carries no

meaning, and tends to no end. Endowed
with capacities, which extend far beyond
his present sphere; fitted by his rational
nature, for running the race of immor-
tality, he is flopped short in the veryen-
trance of his course. He squanders his
activity on pursuits, which he discerns to
be vain. He languishes for knowledge,
which is placed beyond his reach. He
thirsts after a happiness, which he is'
doomed never to enjoy. He fees, and
laments, the difaaters of his ltate; and
yet, upon this supposition, can find no-
thing to remedy them.-Has the eternal
God any pleasure in sporting himself
with such a scene of misery and folly, as
this life, if it had no connection with an-
other, mufft exhibit to his eye? Did he
call into existence this magnificent uni-
verse, adorn it with so much beauty and
splendour, and' surround it with those
glorious luminaries which we behold in
the heavens, only that some generations
of mortal men might arise to behold there

wonders,

wonders, and then disappear for ever ? s E R M.

xv.

How unsuitable, in this cafe, were the
habitation to the wretched inhabitant!
How inconsistent the commencement of
his being, and the mighty preparation of
his powers and faculties, with his defpi-
cable end! How contradictory, in fine,
were every thing which concerns the tlate
of man, to the wisdom and perfection of
his Maker!

Throughout all ages, and among all

nations, the persuasion of a future life
has prevailed. It sprung not from the
refinements of science, or the speculations
of philosophy; but from a deeper and
fronger root, the natural sentiments of
the human heart. Hence it is common
to the philosopher and the savage; and
is found in the most barbarous, as well
as in the modt civilized regions. Even
the belief of the being of a God, is not
more general on the earth, than the be-
lief of immortality. Dark, indeed, and
confused, were the notions which men
entertained concerning a future state.

5- Yet

SER M. Yet still, in that fate, they looked for
----' retribution, both to the good, and the

bad; and in the perfection of such plea-
iures, as they knew best, and valued most
highly, they placed the rewards of the vir-
tuous. So universal a content seems plain-
ly to indicate, an original determination
given to the foul by its Creator. It shows
this great truth, to be native and congenial
to man.

When we look into our own breasts,

we find various anticipations and pre-
fages of future exifience. Moll of our
great and high passions, extend beyond
the limits of this life. The ambitious
and the felf-denied, the great, the good,
and the wicked, all take interest, in what
is to happen after they shall have left the
earth. That passion for fame, which in-
spires so much of the activity of man-
kind, plainly is animated by the perfua-
sion, that consciousness is to survive the
dissolution of the body. The virtuous
are supported by the hope, the guilty
tormented with the dread, of what is to

take

take place after death. As death approaches, S E R M.

x.V.

the hopes of the one, and the fears of the
other, are found to redouble. The foul,
when issuing hence, seems more clearly to
discern its future abode. All the operations
of conscience, proceed upon the belief of
immortality. The whole moral conduct of
men refers to it. All legislators have sup-
posed it. All religions are built upon it.
It is so essential to the order of society, that
were it erased, human laws would prove
ineffectual restraints from evil, and a de-
luge of crimes and miseries would overflow
the earth. To suppose this universal and
powerful belief to be without foundation
in truth, is to suppose, that a principle of
delusion was interwoven with the nature of
man; is to suppose, that his Creator was
reduced to the necessity of imprefling his
heart with a falsehood, in order to make
him answer the purposes of his being.

BUT though these arguments be firong,

yet all arguments are liable to objection.
Perhaps this general belief, of which I have

H h spoken,

SE R M. spoken, has been owing to inclination and

xv.
L _-y- desire, more than to evidence. Perhaps, in

our reasonings on this fubjeca from the Di-
vine perfections, we flatter ourselves with
being of more consequence, than we truly
are, in the system of the universe. Hence
the great importance of a difcovcry proceed-
ing from God himself, which gives full
authority to all that reason had suggested,
and places this capital truth beyond the
reach of suspicion or distrust.

The method which Christianity has ta-

ken, to convey to us the evidence of a future
state, highly deserves our attention. Had
the Gospel been addressed, like a system of
philosophy, solely to the understanding of
men; had it aimed only at enlightening the
fludious and reflecting, it would have con-
fined itself to abftraa truth; it would
have simply informed us, that the righteous
are hereafter to be rewarded, and finners to
be punilhed. Such a declaration as that
contained in the Text, would have been
sufficient: Be not weary nl well-doing; for

in

in drlJefafoin ')ouJfhalll reap, if you faint not. S E R M.

XV.

But the Gospel has not flopped, at barely -
announcing life and immortality to man-
kind. It was calculated for popular edifi-
cation. It was intended to be the religion
not merely of the few, whose underflanding
was to be informed; but of the many, also,
whose imagination was to be impresscd, and
whose passions were to be awakened, in
order to give the truth its due influence
over them. Upon this account it not only
reveals the certainty of a future slate, but,
in the person of the great Founder of our
religion, exhibits a series of fads relating
to it; by means of which, our senses, our
imagination, and paflions, all become inte-
refted in this great objed.

The refurredion of Chrifl from the grave,

was designed to be a sensible evidence, that
death infers not a final extintion of the
living principle. He rose, in order to show,
that, in our name, he had conquered death,
and was beconie the first-fruits of them that
Jleep. Nor did he only rife from the grave,
but, by ascending to heaven in a visible

H h 2 form,

SE R M. form, before many witnefes, gave an ocu-
Xv

lar specimen of the transition from this
world into the region of the blessed. The
employments which now occupy him there,
are fully declared. As our fore-runner, he
hath entered within the veil. He appears
in the presence of God for us. He maketh
perpetual interceffoon for his people. I go,
faith he, to my Father and your Father, to
my God and your God. In my Father's house
are many malnions. I go to prepare a place
for you. I will come again, and receive you
to myself, that where I am, there ye may be
also. The circumstances of his coming
again, are diftindly foretold. The found-
ing of the last trumpet, the refurretion of
the dead, the appearance of the Judge, and
the solemnity with which he shall difcrimi-
nate the good from the bad, are all described.
The very words in which he ihall pro-
nounce the final sentence, are recited in our
hearing: Come, ye blefed of my Father!
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from
the obundation of the world. Then llall
the holy and the just be caught up in the

~~~~~~2 ~~clouds,

louds, to meet the Lord in the air. They s E R M.
flall enter with him into the city of the liv- Iys_
ing God. They ihall possess the new earth
and new heavens, wherein dwelleth right-
eoufiiefs. God J7hnll wipe away all tears
from their eyes. They fJiall behold his face
in righteousness, and be satisfied with his
likenefsfor ever.-By recording such a train
of striking circumstances and fads, the Gof-
pel familiarizes us in rome measure with a
future state. By accommodating this great
discovery, in so useful a manner, to the
conceptions of men, it furnishes a strong
intrinsic evidence of its divine origin.

THUS, upon, the whole, whether you

consult your reason, or liften to the disco-
veries of revelation, you behold our argu-
ment confirmed; you behold a life of piety
and virtue issuing in immortal felicity.
Of what worldly pursuit can it be pro-
nounced, that its reward is certain ? Look
svery where around you, and you shall fee,
that the race is far from being always to
the swift, or the battle to the /rong. The

most

SE R I. moRt diligent, the moa wife, the molt ac-

xv.
v complifhed, may, after all their labours, be

disappointed in the end; and be left to sus-
ser the regret, of havingfpent their frength
for nought. But, for the righteous, is laid
up the crown of life. Their final happiness
is prepared in the eternal plan of Povi-
dence, and secured by the labours and sus-
ferings of the Saviour of the world.

Cease, then, from your unjust complaints

against virtue and religion. Leave difcon-
tent, and peevishness, to worldly men. In
no period of distress, in no moment of dif-
appointment, allow yourselves to fufpet,
that piety and integrity are fruitless. In
every state of being, they lead to happiness.
If you enjoy not at present their full rewards,
it is because the season of recompence is not
yet come. For, in due season yonhall reap.
There is a time which is proper for reward;
and there is a period which belongs to trial.
How long the one should last, and when
the other {hould arrive, belongs not to you
to determine. It is fixed by the wife,
though unknown, decree of the Almighty.

But,

But. be aiTured, that He that comcth, shall s Et RM.

xv.

come, and will not tarry. He flall come in l
due feaJbn, to restore perfect order among
his works; to bring reft to the weary, com-
fort ta the afflicted, and just retribution to
all jen. Behold, faith the faithful and
trie W/itness, I come quickly, and my reward
is with me. To hin that overcometh, will
I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in
the mi(di oJ' the paradfe of God. I will
give him the morning Jlar. I will make himi
a pillar in my temple. HeJ fall be cloathed
in white raiment; and Jhall fit down with
me, on my throne *

' Rev. xxii. 12.-ii. 7. 28.-iii. 12, 5, z21

F I N I S.
