ON TIIE
DUTIES OF THE YOU'NG.

..>..K)«-<..<
BY DR. BLAIR.

,,.)¢.¢O<.<..
PRINTED BY G. NICIIOLSON AND CO.

Palace-street, Manchester.

Sold by T. KNOTT, No. 47, Lombard-sticet;
and CHIAMPANTE & WHITROW, Jcwry-strcet, London.

1793.

ON THE DUTIES OF THE YOUNG.

he uncertainty of the enjoyments of human life
icks presumption; the multiplicity of its dangers
cimads perpetual caution. Moderation, vigilance,
d self-government, are duties incumbent on all; but
pecially on such as are beginning the journey of life.
he scenes which present themselves, at our cnering
on the world, are commonly flattering. What-
ver they he in themselves, the lively spirits of the
ounggild every opening prospect. The field of
ope appears to stretch wide before them. Pleasure
cems to put forth its blossoms on every side. Im-
illed by desire, forward they rush with inconsider-
te ardour: Prompt to decide, and to chuse ; averse
o hesitate, or to inquire; cred!ulous; because untaught
v experience; rash, because unacquainted with dan-
er; headstrong, because unsubdued by disappoint-
ent. As soon as you are capable of relection,
ou must perceive that there is a right and a wrong
n human actions. You see, that those who ale born
vith the same advantages of fortune, are not all equally
rosperous in the course of life. While some of them,
y ;ise and steady conduct, attain distinction in the
orld, and pass their days with comfortand honour;
thers of the same rank, by mean and vicious behav-
our, forfeit the advantages of their birth, involve
themsclves in much misery, and end in being a dis-

,grace to their flictnds, and a hbu den on society. Eatil;
thlen you may learn, that it is not on the external co.
dition in wiich you find yourselves placed, but :'
the part which you are to act, that your welfarec:
unhappiness, your honour or infamy), depend. No;i
when beginning toact that part, whatcan be of grcatr
moment, tlan to regulate your plan of conduct wil'
the most serious attention. before you lhave vet cor-
miitted any fatal or irretrieveable errors? If, instead1 i
cxerting reflectionforthis aloable purposec youdeli
er youI selves up at so critical a time, to sloth and ple
sure; if you refuse to listen to any counsellot but h
mour, or to attend to any)pursuit except thatof aus
ment; if youallow vourselves to floatloose and carele
on the tide of life, ready to receive any directio
which the current of fashion may chance to give ye0
what can you expect to follow from such beginnings
While so many around you are undergoing the si
consequences of a like indiscretion, for what reas:
shall not those consequences extend to you ? Sh
you attain success without that preparation, and e
cape dangers without that precaution, which is r
quired of others ? Shall happiness grow up t6 yo!
of its own accord, and solicit your acceptance, whI
to the rest of mankind, it is the fruit of long cultiv
tion, and the acquisition of labour and care?--
ccive not yourselves with suchl arogant hopes. Wh:a
ever be your rank. Providence will not, for your sak
reverse its established order. The Author of yourb-
ing hatlh enioined you to take heed to your wa)'s;
ponderr the paths of) ourfeet; to renmemb:r)yoar Creater
the dars of o'ir 'outh. He. hath decreed, that th
only who scek after wisdom shallfnd it; that fools sa
be a/licttd because of their tranrsg;re ,sions; and that , hi
so reitiseth insit action .hall destroy Iss oatn oa/l. Bylis
eningto these admonitions, and tempering tlevivaci
of youth with a propermixtureof serious thought,o
ulay ensure cheerfulness for the rest of life; but by d

...... ...
livcillg yourtselves up at present to giddiness and Icy-

'it. ou lay

tCle foundation of lasting heaviness of

hart. When you look forward to those plans

of lif, which cither your circumstances have suggest-
4l, or) our tricnds have proposed, you will not hesi-
tc to acknowledge that, ilorder to pursue tllrenwitlh
vantage, some previous discipline is requisite. Be
suecd, that whatever is to be your profession, no cdu-
tion is more necessary to your success. than the
q(lireient of virtuous dispositions and habits. This
the universal preparation for every character, and
cry station in life. Bad as the world is, respect is
.ays paid to virtue. In the usual course of hunman
ai:s, it will be found, that a plain understanding
ined withacknowledged worth, contributes more to
rosperity, than the brightest par4s without probity
rhonour. Whetherscience, or business, or public life
c your aim, virtue still enters, for a principal share,
to all those great departments of society. It is con-
ccted vith eminence in every liberal art; with repu-
tion,in every branch of fair and useful business; with
istinction, in every public station. The vigour which
tgises the mind,and the weightwhichitaddstochar-
cter; the generous sentiments which it breathes, the
ndaunted spirit which it inspires, the ardour of dili-
ence which it quickens, the freedom which it procures
rom pernicious and dishonourable avocations, are the
oundations of all that is high in fame, or great in suc-
css among men. Whatever ornamental or en-
agingendowmentsyou now possess,virtue is a neces-
aryrequisite, in order to their shinini with proper
stre. Feeble are the attractions of the fairest form, if
be suspected that nothing within corresponds to the
lcasingappearancewithout. Short are the triumph, of
nt,when it is supposed to be the vehicle of malice. By

'hatever arts you mayat firstattractthe attention, you
an hold the esteem, and secure the hearts of others,
nly byamiable dipositions, and the accomplishmcnts

of the mind. These are the qualities whose influnc
will lsl, when the lustre ofall that once sparkled ar:
dazzled has passed away. Let not then tlhe seas:
of youth be barren of iiprovemncltssocssential to yo'.
future felicity and honour. Now is the secd-timncc
life; and according to a'lit )ol u sou, y'ou .shll C/iren. Y):
character is now, under Divine assistalnce, ofyour o'r
forming; your fa:e is, in some ncasure, put into you
own Iands. Your nature is as yet pliant and soft
Habits have not established their dominion. Preju.
dices have not pre-occupied your understanding. Th'
world has not had time to contract and debase your
affections. All your powers are more vigorous, di,.
embarrassed, and free, than they will be at any fuiulr
period. Whateverimplse c you now give to your deJ
sires and passions, the direction is likely to continue.
It will form the channel in which your life is to run;
nay, it may determine its everlastingissue. Conside
then the employment of this important period, as thl
highest trust which shall ever be committed to you;
as, in a great measure, decisive of your happiness, it
time, and in eternitsy. As in the succession of the SC2.
sons, each, by the invariable laws of Nature, affect
the productions of whatis next incourse; so, in humo
life, every period of our age, according as it is wdl
or ill spent, influences the happiness of that which ii
to follow. Virtuous youth gradually brings forward
accomplished and flourishing manhood; and sud
manhood passes of itself, without uneasiness, into
respectable and tranquil old age. But when Natuiei!
turned out of itsregular course, disorder takes placeit
the moral, just as in the vegetable world. If the Spring
put forth no blossoms, in Summer there will be no
beauty, and in Autumn no fruit. So, if youth bt
trifled away without improvement, manhood will be
contemptible, and old age miserable. If the begin.
nings of life have been iznity, its later end can be no
other than vexation of spirit.

,' ..},.}~..<..

Pint' to God is the foundation of good morals, and
i a disposition particularly graceful and becoming in

iout. To be void of it, argues a cold heart, desti-

"uc of some of the best affections which belong to that

I. Youth is the season of warm and generous emo-
ons. The lheart should then, spontaneously, rise in-
o the admiration of what is great, glow with the love
hs what is fair and excellent, and melt at the discov-
ry of tenderness and goodness. Where can any ob-
ct be found, so proper to kindle those affections, as
he Father of the universe, and the Author of all fe-
icity? Unmoved by veneration, can you contemplate
hat grandeur and majesty, which his works every
ihere diplay ? Untouched by gratitude, can you view
hat profusion of good, which, in this pleasing season
f life. is beneficent hand pours around you ? Happy
the love and affection of those with whom you are
onnected, look up to the Supreme Being, as the in-
pirer of all the friendship which has ever been she wn
ou by others; himself, your b'st and your first
riend; formerly, the supporter of your infancy, and
he guide of your childhood; now, the guardian of
our youth, and the hope of your coming years. View
eligions homage, as a natural expression ofgratitude
o him for all his goodness. Connected with so many
ender sensibilities of soul, let religion be with you,
ot the cold and barren offspring of speculation, but
he waim and vigorous dictate of the heart. But
hough piety chiefly belong to the heart, yet the aid
f the understanding is requisite, to give a proper di-
ction to the devout affections. You mustendcavour,
herefore, to acquire just views, both of the great prin-
iples of natural religion, and of the peculiar doc-
trines of the Gospel. For this end study the sacred.
scriptures. Cousult the word of God, more than the
systems of men, if you would know the truth in its
native purity. When,upon rational and sober inquiry,

..,..,..... i

you have established your principles, suffer them nc:
to be shaken by the scoffs of the licentious, or the cavili
of the sceptical. Remember, that in the examinatio:
of every great and comprehensive plan, such as that o
Christianity, difficulties may be expected to occur
and that reasonable evidence is not to be rejected. be.
cause the nature of our present state allows us onlylt
know in part, and to see throeegh aglass darkl). Im.
press your minds with r-verence for all that is sacred
Let no wantonness of youthful spirits, no compliant
with the intemperate mirth of others, ever betray ye'
into prophane sallies. Besides the guilt which is thert.
by incurred, nothing gives a more odious appearanc
of petulance and presumption to youth, than the afcc.
tation of treating religion with levity. Instead of be.
ing an evidence ofsuperiorunderstanding, it d iscoven
a pert and shallow mind; which,vain of the first smat.
terings of knowledge, presumes to make light of whi
the rest of mankind revere. At the same time
you are not to imagine, that when exhorted to be ri.
ligious, you are called upon to become more forms
and solemn in your manners than others of the same
years, or to erect yourselves into supercilious repros
ers of those around you. The spirit of true rehgion
breathes gentleness and affability. It gives a native
unaffected ease to the behaviour. It is social, kind
and cheerful; far removed from that gloomy and i.
liberal superstition which clouds the brow, sharpen
the temper, dejects the spirits, and teaches men to si
themselves for another world, by neglecting the con
cerns of this. I.et your religion, on the contrary, con.
nect preparation for heaven, with an honourable dis-
charge of the duties of active life. Let it be associated
in your imagination, with all that is manly and useful;
with whatsoever things are true, are jyst, are pure, ate
lore y, are of good report, wherever there is any virtua,
and wherever there is any praise. Of such religion

iscover, on every proper occasion, that you are not
chancd; but avoid making any unnecessary ostenta-
'in of it before the world.
5s To piety, join modestl and docility, reverence of
ur parents, and submission to those who are your
peiors in knowledge, in station, and in years. De-
ndence and obedience belong to youth. Modesty
one of its chief ornaments; and has ever been es-
emcd a presage of'rising merit. Whent entering on

ecareer of life, it is your part, not to assume the
insasect into your hands; buttoco.nmitlyourselves
the guidance of the more experienced, and to be-
cme wise by the wisdom of those who have gone be-
reyou. Of all the follies incident to youth,

are
a none whicheither deform its present appear-

cc,orhlas: the prospectof itsfuture prlsperity, more
an self-conceit, presumption, and obstinacy. By
hecking its natural progress in improvement, they fix
tin long immaturity; and frequently produce mis-
iefs,which can never be repaired. Yet these are vices
commonly found among the young. Big with en-
rprise, and elated by hope, they resolve to trust for
ccessto none but themselves. Full of their own abi-
ties, they deride the admonitions which are given
mn by their friends, as the timorous suggestions of
ge. Too wise to learn, too impatient to deliberate,
oi forw.ard to be restrained. theyplunge, wil h preci-
itant indiscretion, into the midst of all the dangers
Withlwhicl life abounds. S&est thoiu a eyongnsma r':.se in
is Or conci! ? There is ?nore hope of a so,/. tha llni. in.
Positive as you now are in your opinions, and con-
dnit in your assertions, be assured, that the time ap.
roaches when both men and things will appear to you
a different light. Many characters which you now
dmire, will, by and by. sink in your esteemn; and
san) opinions, of which you are at present most tena-
ioas. will alter as you advance in years. Distrust,
herefore, that glare of youthful presumption, which

..,..><,,..<

dazzles your eyes. Abound not in your own sens
Put not yourselves forward with too much eagernea
nor imagine, that by the impetuosity of juvenile S
dour, you can overturn systems which have been lon
established, and change the face of the world. Lea
not to think more highly of yourselves than you ought, 1:
to thin i soberly. By patient and gradual progrecssioni
improvement,you may, in due time,command last
esteem. But by assuming, at present, a tone of sup
riority, to which Sou have no title, you will disgur
those whose approbation it is most important to gai
Forward vivacity may fit you to be the companionsi
an idle hour. More solid qualities must recommen;
you to the wise, and mark you out for-importanc
and consideration in subsequent life.

It is necessary to recommend to you, sincerity an

truth. This is the basis of every virtue. That dark.
ness of character, where we can see no heart; tlis
foldings of art, through which no native affectioni
allowed to penetrate, present an object, unamiablei:
every season of life, but particularly odious in youtl
If, at an age when the heart is warm, when the em
tions are strong, and when nature is expected tc
shew itself free and open. you can already smile ari
deceive, what are we to look for when you shallb:
longer hackneyed in the ways of men; when intern'
shall havecompleted the obduration of your heart, ans
experience shall have improved you in all the artso
guile ? Dissimulation in youth, is the fore-runners
perfidy in old age. Its first appearance is the fatala
men of growing depravity, and future shame. Itds
grades parts and learning; obscures the lustre ofevrr
accomplishment; and sinks you into contempt v/il
God and man. As you value, therefore, the a]
probation of Heaven, or the esteem of the world, cu!
tivate the love of truth. In all your proceedings, be hi.
rect and consistent. Ingenuity and candour posses
the most powerful charm; they bespeak universal fl

-tur, and carry an apology for almost every failing.

c till offitaih, shall be establislsed for ever; but a lyinv
iadlt'. is but /or a moment. The path of truth, is a
plain ad asate path; that of falsehood. isa perplexing
iiaze. After the first departure from sincerity, it is not
tyour power to stop. One artifice unavoidably lea'!s
nto another; till, as the intricacy of the labyrinth
iceascs. you are left entangled in your own snare.
ceit discovers a little mind, which stops at tempo-
ryexpedients,without risingtocomprehensive views
conduct. It betrays, at the same time, a dastardly
irit. It is the resource of one who wants courage to
ow his designs, or to rest upon himself. Whereas,
aness of character displays that generous boldness
ich ought to distinguish youth. To set out in the
orid with no other principle than a crafty attention
inteist, betokens one who is destined for creeping
rough the inferior walks of life. But to give an early
·efranc to honour above gain, when they stand in
tmpetition; to depise every advantage, which can-
t be attained without dishonest arts; to brook no
ranncss, and to stoop to no dissimulation; are the
dications ofa great mind,the presages of future em-
·nce and distinction in life. At the same time,
is virtuous sincerity is perfectly consistent with the
?st prudent vigilance and caution. It is opposed to
aning, not to true wisdom. It is not the simplicity
a Wveak and improvident, but the candour of an
lsrgcd and noble mind; of one who scorns deceit,
eause he accounts it both base and unprofitable;

d who seeks no disguise, because he needs none to

ide him.
Youth is the proper season of cultivating the be-
evolent and humane affections. As a great part of

r happiness is to depencon the connections which
tu form with others, it is of high importance that
ouacquire, betimes, the temper and the manners
'ich will render such connections comfortable. Let
,i

a sense of justice be the foundation of all your so
qualities. In your most early intercourse with
world, and even in your youthful amusements, le
unfairness be found. Engrave on your mind that
cred rule, of doing all things to others, according a
zoish that they should do unto you. For this end, im
yourselves with a deep sense of the original and
ural equality of men. Whatever advantages of b
or fortune you possess, never display them with a
tentatious superiority. Leave the subordination
rank, to regulate the intercourse of more advan
years. At present it becomes you to act among
conpanions, as man with man. Remember how
known to you are the vicissitudes of the world;
how often they, on whom ignorant and contemptu
young men once looked down with scorn, have ri
to be theirsuperiours in future years. Compass
is an emotion of which you ought never to bh
shamed. Graceful in youth is the tear of sympat
and the heart that melts at the tale of woe. Let
ease and indulgence contractyouraffections, and w
you up in selfish enjoyments. But go sometimes to
house of mournilng, as well as to the house of feast
Accustom yourselves to think of the distresses of
man life; of the solitary cottage, the dying part
and the weeping orphan. Never sport with pain
distress, in any of your amusements; nor treat
the meanest insect with wanton cruelty.
,young minds there is commonly a strong proper
to particular intimacies and friendships. Youth
deed, is the season when friendships are someti
· formed, which not only continue through succed
-life, but which glow to the last, with a tender
unknown to the connections begun in cooler ye

,'The propensity therefore is not to be discoura

though at the same time it must be regulated l
much circumspection and care. Too many of
pretended friendships of youth, are mere combi

ins in pleasure. They are often founded on capri-
ous likings; suddenly contracted, and as suddenly
issolved. Sometimes they are the efiect of interested
mplaisance and ilattery on the one side, and of cred-
lous fondness on the other. Beware of such rash and
angerous connections, which may afterwards load
o with dishonour. Remember, that by the char ac-
r of those whom you choose for your friends, )our
an is likely to be formed, and will certaih'l be
dged of by the world. Be slow, therefore. and cau-
ousin contracting intimacy; but when a virtuous
cndship is once established, consider it as a sacred
geraement. Expose not yourselves to the reproach of
iiltnessand inconstancy,whilclalwaysbesDeak.cithecr
trising, or a base mind. Reveal none of the secrets
; your friend. Be faithful to his interests. Forsake
in not in danger. Abhor the thought of acquirinmg

advantage by his prejudice or hurt. In
rder to render yourselves amiable in society, correct
cry appearance of harshness in behaviour. Let
at courtesy distinguish your demeanour, which
rings, not so much from studied politeness, as froni
mild and gentle heart. Follow the customs of the
orld in matters indifferent; but stop when they be-
me sinful. Let your manners be simple and natural;
ld of course they will be engaging. Affectation is
rtaindeformity. Byforming themselves on fantastic
edels, and vying with one another in every reignintr
ly, the young begin with being ridiculous, and end
being vicious and immoral.
The love of pleasure, natural to man in every period
Ihis life, glows at this age with excessive ardour;
velty adds fresh charms, as yet, to every grati-
ation. The world appears to spread a continual '
3st; and health, vigour, and high spirits, invite
en to partake of it without restraint. In vain rwe
rm them of latentdangers. Religion is accused of
iullrable severity, in prohibiting enjoyment: and

B

the old, when they offer their admonitions, are u:
braided with having forgot that theyonce were your,
- And yet, my friends, to what do the restraints
religion, and the counsels of age, with respect to pit
sure, amount ? They may all be comprized in fc
words, not to hurt yourselves, and not to hurt other
by your pursuit of pleasure. Within these bonn
pleasure is lawful; beyond tem,n,it becomescrimin
because it is ruinous. Are these restraints any otht
than what a wise man would choose to impose
himself ? We call you not to renounce pleasure,
to enjoy it in safety. Insaead of abridging it, wee
hort you to pursue it on anextensive plan. We p
pose measures for securing its possession, and forpr
longing its duration. Consult your whole natu
Consider yourselves not only as sensitive, but
rational beings; not only as rational, but socia
not only as social, but immortal. Whatever violac
your nature in any-of these respects, cannot alo
true pleasure; any more than that which undermir
an essential part of the vital system can proms
health. For the truth of this conclusion, we
peal, not merely to- the authority of religion,
to the testimony of the aged, but to yourselves
your ownexperience. We ask, Whether you haver
found, that in a course of criminal excess, your pl
sure was more than compensated by succeedingpai
Whether, if not from every particular instance,
from every habit, at least, of unlawful gratificati
there did not spring some thorn to wound you, th
did not arise some consequence to make you repent
it in the issue ? If you have any consideration, or
firmness left, avoid temptations, for which you h
found yourselves unequal, with as much care, as
would shun pestilential infection. Break off all
nections with the loose and profligate. Vlhen sin
entice thee, consent thou not. Look not on the woine aeie
is red, whes itgivetih its colour in the ciup ; for at the Il

,iltt/l like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder. Re.
.;e thy way fron the strange woman, and conme not near
door of her louse. Let not thine heart decline to her
Ws; fir her hone is the way to hell. Thou goest after
r as a bird hastclh to the snare; and knoweth not that
is for hs life. By these unhappy excesses of ir-
ular pleasure in youth, how many amiable dispo-
ions are corrupted or destroyed! How many rising
acities and powers are suppressed! How many
tering hopes of parents and friends are totally ex-
ngished ! Who but must drop a tear over human
oaure, when he beholds that morning which arose so
riht, overcast with such untimely darkness; that
col humour which once captivated all hearts, that
iacity which sparkled in every company, those abil-
iCs which were fitted for adorning the highest sta-
on, all sacrificed at the shrine of low sensuality; and
ne who was formed for running the fair career of
ie in the midst of public esteem, cut off by his vices
the beginning of his course, or sunk, for the whole
it, into insignificancy and contempt!-Thcse, O
ful Pleasure! are thy trophies. It is thus that, co-
pciating with the foe of God and man, thou de-
radst human honour, and blastest the opening pros-
cts of human felicity.
Diligence, industry, and proper improvement of
DC, are material duties of the young. To no purpose
I they endowed with the best abilities, if they want
tirity for exerting them. Unavailing, in this case,
ll be every direction that can be given them, either
r their temporal or spiritual welfare. In youth the
bits of industry are most easily acquired. In
uth, the incentives to it are strongest, from ambi-
on and from duty, from emulation and hope, from
the prospects which the beginning of life affords.
fdead to these calls, you alreadylauguish in sloth-
I inaction, what will be able to quicken the more
aggish current of advancing years ? Industry

is .not only the instrument of improvement, but ti,
foundation of pleasure. Nothing is so opposite t
the true enjoyment of life, as the relaxed and fceb
state of an indolent mind. He who is a stranger
industry, may possess, but he cannot enjoy. Sori
is labour only which gives the relish to pleasure. 1
is the appointed vehicle of every good to man. It i
the indispensable condition of our possessing a soun
mind in a sound body. Sloth is so inconsistent wit
both, that it is hard to determine whether it be
greater foe to virtue, or to health and happiness. In
active as it is in itself, its effects are fatally powe
ful. Though it appear a slowly flowing stream, yeti
undermines all that is stable and flourishing. It no
only saps the foundation of every virtue, but pour
upon you a deluge of crimes and evils. It is like w
ter which first putrifies by stagnation, and then send
up noxious vapours, and fills the atmosphere wit
death. Fly, therefore, from idleness, as til
certain parent both of guilt and of ruin. And unde
idleness I include, not mere inaction only, but all th
circle of trifling occupations, in which too man
saunter away their youth; perpetually engaged i
frivolous society, or public amusements, in the l
bours of dress, or the ostentation of their persons.
Is this the foundation which you lay for future usetu
ness and esteem ? By such accomplishments, do yo
hope to recommend yourselves to the thinking pa
of the world, and to answer the expectations of yo
friends and your country ?-Amusements, youth i
quires. It were vain, it were cruel to prohibit then
But though allowable as the relaxation, they are mo
culpable as the business, of the young. For they th
become the gulf of time, and the poison of the in
They foment bad passions. They weaken the ma
ly powers. They sink the native vigour of yout
into contemptible effeminacy. Redeeming y
time from such dangerous waste, seek to fill it wi

nlployments which you may review with satisfac.
ion. The acquisition of knowledge is one of the
most honourable occupations of youth. The desire
fit discovers a liberal mind, and is connected with
anyaccomplishmcnts,andmanyvirtucs. But though
our train of life should not lead you to study, the
ourse of education always furnishes proper employ-
cnts to a well-disposed mIind. Whateveryou pursue,
remluous to excel. Generous ambition,and sensibili-
'to praise.areespeciall), at your agc,among the marks
feirtue. Thni!e notthat any amfflrnce offor:llnc,oranly
vation of rank, exempts you from tie duties of ap-
lication and industry. Industry is the law of our be-
; it is the demand of Nature,ofReason and of God.
emember always, that the years which now pass over
ar heads, leave permanent memorials behind them.
om your thoughtless minds they may escape; but
Icy remain in the remembrance of God. They
rnn an important part of the register of your life.
acy will hereafter bear testimony, either for or a.
innst you, at that day, when, for all your actions, but
ticularly for the employments of youth, you must
ne an account to God. Thus I have set before
a some of the chief qualifications which belong
na virtuous and leligious character; piety, modes-

truth, benevolence, temperance, and industry.

i'netheryour future course is destined to be longor
rt, afterthismanner itshouldcommence; and, ifit
ntinue to be thus conducted, its conclusion, at what
ae soever it arrives, will not be inglorious or un-
Ippy.
Let your attention be recalled to that dependance
the blessing of Heaven, which, amidst all your
deavours after improvement, you ought continu.
to preserve. It is too common with the young,
In when they resolve to tread the path of virtue and
our, to set out with presumptuous confidence in
niselves. Trusting to their own abilities for carry.

.~..><.<..

ing them successfully through life, they are carelessaf
applying to God, or of deriving any assistance froa
what they are apt to reckon the gloomy discipline a!
religion. Alas ! how little do they know the danger
which awaitthem ? Neither human wis'!om, nor hu.
manvirtue, unsupported by religion, are equal to th
.trying situations which often occur in life. By th:
shock of temptation, how frequently have the meo:
virtuous intentions beenoverthrown ? Under the pre.
sure of disaster, how often has the greatest constanci
sunk ? Every good and ever), perfect gift, is from abcv.
-Wisdom and virtue, as well as riches and honour, cc:::
from God. Destitute of his favour, you are in no bite
situation, with all your boasted abilities, than orpbhnr
left to wander in a trackless desert, without any guide
to conduct them,or anyshelter to coverthem from tl:
gatheringstorm. Correct, then, this ill-founded arr.
gance.. Expect not, that your happiness can be indr.
pendentof him who made you. By faith and repen!
ance, apply to the Redeemer of the world. By piec
and prayer, seek the protection of the God of heave,
In fine, remember the solemn words, in which a gre:
Prince delivered his dying charge to his son; wvord
which every young person ought to consider as ad.
. dressed to himself, and to engrave deeply on his hear;:
Thour, Solomon, my son, know thou the God of thv flhor;
and serve him with a perfect heart, and zith a oilliq
mind. For the Lord searcheth all hearts, and undert ,3
eth all the imaginations of the thoughts. If thou seek li.m
he will befrund of thee; but i thou forsake him, he ai.
cast thee offur ever.

END OF
3LAIR ON THE DPIaS-DOF THE YOUNG.

, n*'..
( 1

1T-»ty
