1 '1

SERMONS,

B Y

HUGH BLAIR, D.D. F.R.S. ED.
One of the MItNITERI of the HIGH CHuaRC,

AMD
PROFEsso» of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTIES

in the UNIVEISITY, of EDINDBRGH.

VOLUME THE THIRD.

LONDON:
Printed for A. STIAHAN; and T. CADELL in the Strand;

and W. ClrEEH, Edinburgh.

M DCC XC.

' 0 ..' k' 1 i C'

l\ SE\
BRITA \
t~Ij l,'ix

# THE CONTENTS.

THE
CONTENTS.

SERMON I.

On the True Honour of Man.

PROVERBS, iv. 8. Exalt her, and fie

Jball promote thee; Je JaUll bring thee
to honour.- Page i

SERMON II.

On Sensibility.
ROMANS, xii. 15. Rejoice with them

that do rejoice, and weep with them
that weep. 22

SERMON III.

On the Improvement of Time.
GENESIS, xlvii. 8. And Pharaoh said

unto Jacob, How old art thou? 44

A2

SERMON IV.
On the Duties belonging to Middle

Age.

I CORINTH. xiii. 11. -When I be-

came a man, I put away childi/h
things. Page 65

SERMON V.

On Death.
ECCLESIASTES, xii. 5. - Man goetb

to his long bome, and the mourners go
about the jireetr. 88

SERMON VI.
On the Progress of Vice.
I CORINTH. xv. 33. Be not deceived:

Evil communications corrupt good man-
ners. 108

SERMON VII.

On Fortitude.
PSALM xxvii. 3. Though an hbot Jhould

encamp againf me, my heart /ball not
fear. 129

SERMON VIII.

On Envy.

I CORINTH. Xii 4. Charity envieth
not. Page iSo

SERMON IX.

On Idleness.
MATTHEW, xx. 6. - Wby Jand y

here all the day idle 172

SERMON X.

On the Sense of the Divine Presence.
PSALM lxxiii. 23. - Iam continual.

ly with thee.- 196

SERMON XI.

On Patience.

LUKE, xi. 19. In your Patiencepo
ye your fouls. 29

219
SERMON XII

On Moderation.
PHILIPPIANS, iv. S. Let yor Moacra.

tion be known unto all Men .. 242

a4a

S E R M 0 N XIII.
On the Joy, and the Bitterness of the

Heart.
PROVERBS, xiv. to. Tbe heart knowetb

bis own bitterneft, and a firanger dotb
not intermeddle with his joy. Page 263

SERMON XIV.

On Characters of Imperfeft Goodness.
MARK, X. 21. Then YJeus, beholding

him, loved him.-- 86

SERMON XV.
On the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,

as a Preparation for Death.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Suppcr.
MATTHEW, xxvi. 29. But Ifay unto

you, I will not drink henceforth of this
fruit of the vine, until that day when I
drink it new with you in my Father's
kingdom. 305

SERMON XVI.

On the Use and Abuse of the World.

I CORINTH. vii .

3. Theythatufe
thbi world, as not abusing it.- Page 329

SERMON XVII.
On Extremes in Religious and Moral

Conduct
PROVERBS, iv. 27. 7urn not to the rigbt

hand, nor to the left. 351

S E R M ON XVIII.

On Scoffing at Religion.
2 PETER, iii. 3. - bTere Jhall come

in the lai days J offers. 371

SERMON XIX.

On the Creation of the World.
GENESIS, i. i. In the beginning God

created the heaven, and the earth. 391

1~~~~~~~~~3

SERMON XX.

On the Diffiolution of the World.
2 PETER, iii. 1t. But the day of the

Lord will come as a thief in the night;
in the which the heaven hall pass away
with a great noifi, and the ekmentsJhall
melt with fervent heat; the earth alo,
and the works that are therein, Jhall be
burnt up. - Page 413

# SERMON I. On the TRUE HONOUR of MAN. PROVERBS, iv. 8. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee; she shall bring thee to honour. —

SERMON I.
On the TRUE HONOUR of MAN.

PROVERBS, iv. 8.
Exalt her, and Jh e Jall promote thee; /he

fJall bring thee to bonour.-
T IHE love of honour is one of the SERM.

strongest passions in the human .
heart. It ihows itself in our earliest

years; and is coeval with the first exer-
tions of reason. It accompanies us through
all the itages of subsequent life; and in
private stations discovers itself no less than
in the higher ranks of society. In their
ideas of what conflitutes honour, men

Vo.. III. B greatly
.(

SEn M. greatly vary, and often grossly err. But

I. of somewhat which they conceive to form

pre-eminence and diltinclion, all are deli-
rous. All with, by tome means or other,
to acquire refipcl fiom those among whom
they live; and to contempt andl liigracc,
none are inlenfible.

Among the advantages which attend re-

ligion and virtue, the honour which they
confer on man is frequently mentioned in
scripture as one of the moit considerable.
71'fitom is the principal thing, lays Solomon
in the passage where the text lies, therefore
get wildom; and wibt all thy getting, get
under/landing. Exalt her, and Jhc ball pro-
mote thee; jhe JIall bring thee to honour, when
thou dofl embrace her. Sheb Jallgive to tl ne
head an ornament of grace; a crown o5 glory
Jhall/he deliver to thee. It is evident that
throughout all the sacred writings, and par-
ticularly in this book of Proverbs, by w/f-
don is to be underflood a principle of re-
ligion producing virtuous conduct. The
fear of the Lord is said to be the beginning
of wiridom: And by this fear of the Lord

men

men are aiid to dc/r! fr::' evil; to walk S E R '.f.
i/ ihe iwa r' good imen, and It L ',p the path
'of/h ribticoIs *. Man is th,'n regulated by
tlCh wIf.i/!: ic/'i/uJ is frcmi al'.ve, when hl e is
formed bh picty to the duties of virtue and
morality; and of the wild!om which pro-
duces this elFect, it is afelrted in the text,
that it brinrcrth us to bor.::r.

On this recommendation of religion it

is the more neceflarv to fix our attention,
because it is often refuft l to it by men of
the world. Their notions of honour are
apt to run in a very different channel.
Wherever religion is mentioned, they con-
n.'t with it ideas of melancholy and de-
jedion, or of mean and feeble spirits. They
perhaps admit that it may be ufefull to the
multitude, as a principle of reitraint from
disorders and crimes; and that to persons
of a peculiar turn of mind, it may afford
consolation under the diltrecles of life. But
from the acive scenes of the world, and
from those vigorous exertions which dif-
play to advantage the human abilities, they

Prov. ii. 20.
B 2 incline

*

SERM. incline totally to exclude it. It may tooth

a_, the timid, or the fad: But they confider it

as having no connection with what is pro.
per to raise men to honour and diftintion.
I flall now endeavour to remove this re-
proach from religion; and to fiow that in
every situation of human life, even in the
highest stations, it forms the honour, as
well as the happiness of man.

But first, let us be careful to ascertain

what true religion is. I admit that there
is a certain species of religion (if we can
give it that name) which has no claim to
such high diftinicion; when it is placed
wholly in speculation and belief, in the re-
gularity of external homage, or in fiery
zeal about contested opinions. From a fu-
perftition inherent in the human mind, the
religion of the multitude has always been
tinctured with too much of this spirit.
They serve God as they would serve a
proud master, who may be flattered by
their prostrations, appeased by their gifts,
and gained by loud protestations of attach-
ment to his interests, and of enmity to all

whom

whom they suppose to be his foes. But SERM.
this is not that wisdom to which Solomon '
ascribes, in the text, such high preroga-
tives. It is not the religion which we
preach, nor the religion of Chrit. That
religion consists in the love of God and
the love of man, grounded on faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ, the great Redeemer of
the world, the Intercessor for the penitent,
and the Patron of the virtuous; through
whom we enjoy comfortable access to the
Sovereign of the universe in the ads of
worship and devotion. It consists in ju-
ftice, hutnanity, and mercy; in a fair and
candid mild, a generous and affeCionate
heart; accompanied with temperance, self-
government, and a perpetual regard in all
our actions to conscience, and to the law
of God. A religious, and a thoroughly
virtuous characer, thercfore, I confider as
the fame.

BY the true honour of man is to be un-

derftood, not what merely commands ex-
ternal refped, but what commands the re-

B 3 fpea

SE R M. fpeca of the heart; what raises one to ac-

_ knowledged eminence above others of the

%ltme fpecics; what always creates esteem,
and in its highest degree, produces vene-
ration. The queltion now before us is,
from what caute this eminence arises ? By
what means is it to be attained ?

I SAY, firfi, from riches it does not arise.

These, we all know, may belong to the
vilelt of mankind. Providence has fcattcr-
cd them among the crowd with an undif-
tinguilhing hand, as of purpote to show of
what finall account they are in the fight
of God. Experience every day proves that
the possession of them is confiflent with
the most general contempt. On this point
therefore I conceive it not necessary to in-
lilt any longer.

NEITHER does the honour of man arise

from mere dignity of rank or office. Were
uich dittincions alwa)s, or even generally,
obtained in confc(luence of uncommon me-
rit, they would indeed confer honour on
tle characler. But, in the lpreient slate of

ibciety,

On the True HoIlour of Mal. 7

society, it is too well known that this is SER M.
not the ciall. They arc often the confe- ...
quence of birth alone. They are tome-
times the fruit of mere dependence and
afliduity. They may be the rccumpence
of flattery, veriatility, and intrigue ; and
so be conjoined with meanness and bafi-
ness of character. To pcrfons graced with
noble birth, or placed in high itations,
much external honour is due. This is
what the subordination of society neceila-
rily requires; and what every good mem-
ber of it will chearfully yield. But how
often has it happened that such persons,
when externally respected, are, neverthe-
less, despised by men in their hearts; nay,
sometimes execrated by the public ? Their
elevation, if they have been unworthy of
it, is so far from procuring them true ho-
nour, that it only renders their infignifi-
cance, perhaps their infamy, more confpi-
cuous. By drawing attention to their con-
duct, it discovers in the most glaring light
how little they deserved the itation which
they poffcfs.

B4 I

SERM. I MUST next observe, that the proper ho-
,_._ nour of man arises not from some of those

lplendid actions and abilities which excite
high admiration. Courage and prowess,
military renown, frgnal vicories and con-
quefis, may render the name of a man fa-
mous, without rendering his character tru-
ly honourable. To many brave men, to
many heroes renowned in dtory, we look
up with wonder. Their exploits are re-
corded. Their praises are fiung. They fland
as on an eminence above the reft of man-
kind. Their emirnence, nevertheless, may
not be of that fort before which we bow
with inward esteem and. refpeA. Some-
thing more is wanted for that purpose, than
the conquering arm, ahnd the intrepid mind.
The laurels of the warrior must at all times
be dyed in blood, and bedewed' with the
tears of the widow and the orphan. But
if they have been stained by rapine and in-
humanity; if fordid avarice has marked his
charater; or low and gross sensuality has
degraded his life; the great hero finks into
a little man. What at a distance, or on a

superficial

superficial view, we admired, becomes mean, E R M.
perhaps odious, when we examine it more L
closely. It is like the Colossal statue, Whose;
immense size struck the fpetator afar off
with astonishment; but when nearly view-
ed, it appears disproportioned, unihapely,
and rude.

Observations of the fame kind may be

applied to all the reputation derived from
civil accomplishments; from the refined
politics of the statesman; or the literary
efforts of genius and erudition. These be-
stow, and, within certain bounds, ought
to bestow, eminence and diftin&ion on
men: They discover talents which in them.
selves are flining; and which become high-
ly valuable, when employed in advancing
the good of mankind. Hence, they fre-
quently give rife to fame. But a diftinc-
tion is to be made between fame and true
honour. The former.is a loud' and noisy
applatfe: The latter, a more silent and in-
ternal homage. Fame floats on tie' breath
of the multitude: Honour refts on the
judgement of the thinking. Fame may

give

SE RM. give praise while it with-holds esteei:

True honour implies eftecm mingled with
refped. The one regards particular diftin-
guifhed talents: the other looks up to the
whole character. Hence the statesman, the
orator, or the poet, may be famous; w!ile
yet the man himself is far from being ho-
noured. We envy his abilities. We with
to rival them. But we would not chute to
be clalfed with him who poifefled them.
Instances of this fort arc too often found in
every record of ancient or modern history.

FROM all this it follows, that in order to

discern where man's true honour lies, we
must look, not to any adventitious circum-
stance of fortune; not to any single sparkling
quality; but to the whole of what forms
a man; what intitles him, as such, to rank
high among that class of beings to which
he belongs; in a word, we must look to
the mind and the foul.- A mind fuiperior
to fear, to selfish interest and corruption;
a mind governed by the principles of uni-
form reCtitude and integrity; the fame in

prosperity

prosperity and adversity; which no bribe SE R M.

I.

can seduce, nor terror overawe; neither by
pleasure melted into effeminacy, nor by
distress funk into dejection; such is the
mind which forms the diflincion and emi-
nence of man. One, who in no fitua-
tion of life is either ashamed or afraid of
dilcharging his duty, and acting his proper
part with firmnels and constancy; true to
the God whom he worships, and true to
the faith in which he professes to believe;
full of affcction to his brethren of man-
kind; faithful to his friends, generous to
his enemies, warm with compassion to the
unfortunate; fclf-denying to little private
interests and pleasures, but zealous for pub-
lic interest and happiness; magnanimous,
without being proud; humble, without be-
ing mean; jult, without being harsh; fim-
pie in his manners, but manly in his feel-
ings; on whose word you can entirely re-
ly; whose countenance never deceives you;
whose profeifions of kindness are the effu-
sions of his heart: one, in fine, whom in-
dependent of any views of advantage, you

would

*

ERM . Would chufe for a superior, could trust in

as a friend, and could love as a brother:
- This is the man, whoil in your heart,
above all others, you do, you must, ho-
flour.

SucH a character, imperfc&ly as it has

now been drawn, all must acknowledge to
be formed solely by the influence of steady
religion and virtue. It is the effect of prin-
ciples which, operating on conscience, de-
termine it uniformly to pursue wbatfoever
things are true, wbatfoever things are bonfi,
wbatfoever things are juJt, wbatfoever things
are pure, whbafoever things are lovely, wbat-
soever things are of good report, if there be
any virtue, and if there be any praise *. By
there means, wi/hom, as the text aflerts,
bringetb us to bonour.

IN confirmation of this doctrine it is to

be observed, that the honour which man
acquires by religion and virtue is more in-
dependent, and more complete, than what

* Philip. iv. 8.

can

Gan be acquired by any other means. It is sERM.
independent of any thing foreign or exter- ._
na. It is not partial, but entire refpet,
which it procures. Wherever fortune is
concerned, it is the station or rank which
commands our deference. Where some fhi-
ning quality attracts admiration, it is only
to a part of the character that we pay ho-
mage. But when a person is diftinguiihed
for eminent worth and goodness, it.is the
man, the whole man, whom we refpe&
The honour which he pofeffes is intrinsic.
Place him in any situation of life, even an
obscure one; let room only be given for
his virtues to come forth and lhow them-
selves, and you will revere him; as a pri-
vate citizen; or as the father of a family.
If in higher life he appear more illustrious,
this is not owing merely to the refped crea-
ted by rank. It is, because there a nobler
sphere of action is opened to him; because
his virtues are brought forth into more ex-
tended exertion; and placed in such con-
fpicuous view, that he appears to grace
and adorn the station which he fills. Even

in

SERM. in the silence of retirement, or in the re-

treat of old age, filch a man finks not in-
to forgotten obscurity. His remembered
virtues continue to be honoured, when their
active exertions arc over; and to the laif
stage of life he is followed by public esteem
,and respect. Whereas, if genuine worth
be wanting, the applause which may have
attended a man for a while, by degrees dies
away. Though, for a part of his life, he
had dazzled the world, this was owing to
his deficiency in the essential qualities ha-
ving not been suspected. As soon as the
imposture is discovered, the falling flar
finks in darknefs.-There is therefore a
flandard of independent, intrinsic worth,
to which we must bring in the end what-
ever claims to be honourable among men.
By this we muff measure it; and it will al-
ways be found, that nothing but what is
essential to man has power to command the
refpet of man's heart.

IT is to be farther observed, that the
universal content of mankind in honouring

real

real virtue, is sufficient to show what the SERmu
genuine sense of human nature is on this
iubjed. All other claims of honour are
ambulatory and changeable. The degrees
of respect paid to external stations vary with
forms of government, and faihions of the
times. Qualities which in one country are
highly honoured, in another are lightly
esteemed. Nay, what in some regions of
the earth distinguishes a man above others,
might elsewhere expose him to contempt or
ridicule. But where was ever the nation
on the face of the globe, who did not ho-
nour unblemished worth, unaffeced piety,
stedfast, humane, and regular virtue? To
whom were altars ere&ed in the Heathen
world but to those who by their merits and
heroic labours, by their invention of uffful
arts, or by some signal ads of beneficence
to their country, or to mankind, were
found worthy, in their opinion, to be tranf-
ferred from among men, and added to the
number of the gods ? Even the coun-
terfeited appearances of virtue, which are
so often found in the world, are teflimo.

nies

AERM. nies to its praise. The hypocrite knows

.L that, without aftuning the garb of virtue,

every other advantage he can possess is in-
sufficient to procure him esteem. Interfe-
rence of intercft, or perversity of difpofi.
tion, may occasionally lead individuals to
oppose, even to hate, the upright and the
good. But however the charadters of such
persons may be mistaken, or misrepresent-
ed, yet, as far as they are acknowledged to
be virtuous, the profligate dare not traduce
them. Genuine virtue has a language that
speaks to every heart throughout the world.
It is a language which is underltod by all.
In every region, every clime, the homage
paid to it is the fame. In no one senti-
ment were ever mankind more generally a-
greed.

FINALLY, the honour acquired by reli-

gion and virtue is honour divine and im-
mortal. It is honour, not in the eftima-
tion of men only, but in the fight of God;
whose judgement is the standard of truth
and right; whose approbation confers a

Erowstn

frown of glory that fadeth not away. All SE RM.
the honour we can gain among men is li- _
mited and confined. Its circle is narrow.
Its duration is short and transitory. But
the honour which is founded on true good-
ness, accompanies us through the whole
progress of our existence. It enters with
man into a future state; and continues to
brighten throughout eternal ages. What
procured him refped on earth, ilall ren-
der him estimable among the great affcm-
bly of angels, and firits of just men made
perfect; where, we are assured, they who
have been eminent in righteousness fllall

ine e

as the brightnef of the firmament, and

at the Jfars for ever and ever '.-Earthly
honours are both shortlived in their con-
tinuance, and, while they last, tarnished
with spots and Rfains. On some quarter
or other, their brightness is obscured; their
exaltation is humbled. But the honour
which proceeds from God, and virtue, is
unmixed and pure. It is a lustre which is

* Daniel xii. 3.
VOL. III. C derived

SERM. derived from heaven; and is likened, in
L.-~ scripture, to the light of the morning, whbc

tbe un rifitb; even a morning without clouds;
to the light which Jhineth more and more unto
the perfect day *. Whereas the honours
which the world confers resemble the feeble
and twinkling flame of a taper; which is
often clouded by the smoke it fends forth;
is always wafting; and soon dies totally
away.

LET him, therefore, who retains any sense

of human dignity; who feels within him
that desire of honour which is congenial to
man, aspire to the gratification of this pas-
sion by methods which are worthy of his
nature. Let him not reft on any of those
external diftin&ions which vanity has con-
trived to introduce. These can procure
him no more than the semblance of re-
fpedt. Let him not be flattered by the ap-
plause which some occasional display of a-
bilitics may have gained him. That ap-

* 2 Sam. xxii. 4.; Prov. iv. 18.

plause

plause may be mingled with contempt. SERM.
Let him look to what will dignify his
characer as a man. Let him cultivate
those moral qualities which all men in
their hearts refpe& Wisdom rhall then give
to his bead an ornament of grace; a crown
of glory. fall Je deliver to him. This is an
honour to which all may aspire. It is a
prize, for which every one, whether of
high or low rank, may contend. It is al-
ways in his power so to diftinguiih him.
self by worthy and virtuous condut, as to
command the refpet of those around him;
and, what is highest of all, to obtain praise
and honour from God.

LET no one imagine that in the reli.

gious part of this character there is any
thing which carts over it a gloomy ihade,
or derogates from that esteem which men
are generally disposed to yield to exemplary
virtues. False ideas may be entertained of
religion; as false and imperfe& conceptions
of virtue have often prevailed in the world.
But to true religion there belongs no ful-

C 2 len

BE RM. len gloom; no melancholy austerity, tend.
-,_ - ing to withdraw men from human society,

or to diminith the exertions of active vir-
tue. On the contrary, the religious prin-
ciple, rightly understood, not only unites
with all such virtues, but supports, forti-
fies, and confirms them. It is so far from
obscuring the lustre of a character, that it
heightens and ennobles it. It adds to all
the moral virtues a venerable and autho-
ritative dignity. It renders the virtuous
characer more august. To the decorations
of a palace, it joins the majesty of a tem-
ple.

He who divides religion from virtue,

understands neither the one, nor the other.
It is the union of the two which confum-
mates the human character and state. It
is their union which has distinguished those
great and illustrious men, who have lhone
with so much honour in former ages; and
whose memory lives in the remembrance
of succeeding generations. It is their u-
nion which forms that wisdom which is
from above; that wisdom to which the text

ascribes

ascribes such high effects; and to which SERM.
belongs the sublime encomium given of it _
by an author of one of the apocryphal
books of Scripture; with whose beautiful
and emphatical expreflions I conclude this
discourse. bThe memorial of virtue is immor-
tal. It is known with God, and with men.
lbhen it is prefint, men take example at it;
and when it ir gone, they desire it. It wear-
etb a crown, and triumpheth for ever; ha-
ving gotten the victory; /friving for undefied
rewards. lifdom is the breath of the power
of God; and a pure influence flowing from the
glory of the Almighty. Therefore can no de-
filed thing fall into her. She is the brigbt-
neff of the everlafiing light; the unspotted
mirror of the power of God; and the image
of bis goodnesS. Remaining in berfelf, ]he
maketb all things new; and in all ages, en-
tering into holy fouis, be maketh themfriendt
of God, and prophets: For God lovetb none
but him that dwelleth with wisdom. She is
more beautiful than the un ; and above all the
order of theb ars. Being compared with libt,
JAe is found before it *,

f ifdom of Solomon, iv. 2. 3.-vii. 25. 26. 17. 28. 29.

C 3 SER.

# SERMON II. On SENSIBILITY. ROMANS, xii. 15. Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

[ 22 ]
SERMON II.

On SENSIBILITY.

ROMANS, xii 15.
Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep

with them that weep.

SE RM. T HE amiable spirit of our holy reli-
.-E--,
s
. gion appears in nothing more than in

the care it hath taken to enforce on men
the social duties of life. This is one of the
clearef charateriftics of its being a reli.
gion whose origin is divine: For every doc-
trine which proceeds from the Father of
mercies will undoubtedly breathe benevo-
lence and humanity. This is the scope of
the two exhortations in the text, to rejoice
with them that rejoice, and to weep with them

that

that weep; the one calculated to promote SER .
the happiness, the other, to alleviate the _
sorrows of our fellow-creatures; both con-
curring to form that temper which interests
us in the concerns of our brethren; which
disposes us to feel along with them, to take
part in their joys, and in their sorrows.
This temper is known by the name of Sen-
fibility; a word, which in modern times
we hear in the mouth of every one; a qua-
lity, which every one affects to poflefs; in
itself, a most amiable and worthy difpofi-
tion of mind; but often mistaken and ab-
used; employed as a cover, sometimes, to
capricious humour; sometimes, to selfish
passions. I {hall endeavour to explain the
nature of true sensibility. I shall confider
its effects: and after tiowing its advanta-
ges, liall point out the abuses, and mifta-
ken forms of this virtue.

THE original constitution of our nature

with respect to the mixture of selfish and
social affeiions, discovers in this, as in eve-
ry other part of our frame, profound and

C 4 admirable

SER M. admirable wisdom. Each individual is, by
ip__, his Creator, committed particularly to him.

self, and his own care. He has it more in
his power to promote his own welfare, than
any other person can possibly have to pro-
lnote it. It was therefore fit, it was necef-
fary, that in each individual felf-love lhould
be the strongest and most active inftint.
This felf-love, if he had been a being who
flood solitary and alone, might have pro-
ved sufficient for the purpose both of his
preservation, and his welfare. But such is
not the situation of man. He is mixed a-
mong multitudes of the fame nature. In
these multitudes, the felf-love of one man,
or attention to his particular interest, en-
countering the felf-love and the interests of
another, could not but produce frequent
opposition, and innumerable mischiefs. It
was necessary, therefore, to provide a coun-
terbalance to this part of his nature; which
is accordingly done, by implanting in him
those social and benevolent inftinds which
lead him in some measure out of himself, to
follow the interest of others. The strength

of

of these social inflincs is, in general, pro- SERM.
portioned to their importance in human
life. Hence that degree of sensibility which
prompts us to weep with them that weep, is
stronger than that which prompts us to re-
joice with them that rejoice; for this reason,
that the unhappy stand more in need of
our fellow-feeling and affiltance than the
prosperous. Still however it was requisite;
that in each individual the quantity of self.
love ihould remain in a large proportion,
on account of its importance to the prefer-
vation of his life and well-being. But as the
quantity requisite for this purpose is apt both
to ingrofs his attention, and to carry him
into criminal excesses, the perfection of his
nature is measured by the due counterpoise
of those social principles which, tempering
the force of the selfish affection, render
man equally useful to himself, and to those
with whom he is joined in society. Hence
the use and the value of that sensibility of
which we now treat

THAT it constitutes an eflential part of a

religious

BERM. religious character, there can be no doubt.

Not only are the words of the text express
to this purpose, but the whole New Testa-
ment abounds with passages which enjoin
the cultivation of this disposition. Being
all one body, and members one of another, we
are commanded to love our neighbour as our-
self; to look every marn not on his own things
only, but on those of others also; to be pitiful,
to be courteou#, to be tender-hearted; to bear
ne another's burdens, and so to fkjil the law
of Cbr/i *. The dispositions opposite to
sensibility are, cruelty, hardness of heart,
contrated attachment to worldly interests;
which every one will admit to be directly
opposite to the Christian charater. Accor-
ding to the different degrees of conftitutio-
nal warmth in men's affecions, sensibility
may, even among the virtuous, prevail in
different proportions. For all derive not
from nature the fame happy delicacy, and
tenderness of feeling. With some, the heart

* Lukr, x. 27.; Philip. ii. 4.; 1 Peter, iii. 8.; Ephef.
iiv. 3. Galat. vi. ,.

melts,

melts, and relents, in kind emotions, much SE R M
more easily than with others. But with ,_
every one who aspires to the charater of a
good man, it is neceflary that the humane
and compaflionate dispositions ihould be
found. There must be that within him
which shall form him to feel in some degree
with the heart of a brother; and when he
beholds others enjoying happiness, or fees
them funk in sorrow, shall bring his as-
fecions to accord, and, if we -may speak
so, to found a note unison to theirs. This
is to rejoice with them that rejoice, and
to weep with them that weep. How much
this temper belongs to the perfection of
our nature, we learn from one who exhi-
bited that perfection in its highest degree.
When our Lord Jesus, on a certain occa-
sion, came to the grave of a beloved friend,
and saw his relations mourning around it,
he presently caught the impreflion of their
sorrow; be groaned in ]firit, and was trou-
bled. He knew that he was about to re-
move the cause of their distress, by re-
calling Lazarus to life: Yet, in the mo-

ment

E£RM. ment of grief, his heart sympathised with
I__ theirs; and, together with the weeping

friends, Yefus wept *.

LET us next proceed to confider the es-

fed of this virtuous sensibility on our cha-
rater, and our state. I shall confider it in
two views; its influence on our moral con-
duat, and its influence on our happiness.

FIRST, it powerfully influences the proper

discharge of all the relative and social du-
ties of life. Without some discharge of
those duties there could be no comfort or
security in human society. Men would
become hordes of savages, perpetually ha-
raffing one another. In one way or other,
therefore, the great duties of social life must
he performed. There muff be among man-
kind some reciprocal co-operation and aid.
In this, all consent. But let us observe,
that these duties may be performed from
different principles, and in different ways.
Sometimes they are performed merely from

* John, ii. 3.

decency

decency and regard to charadter; some- SERM.
times from fear, and even from felfifhnefs, ,__
which obliges men to ihow kindness, in or-
der that they may receive returns of it. In
such cafcs, the exterior of fair behaviour
may be preserved. But all will admit, that
when from constraint only, the offices of
seeming kindness are performed, little de-
pendance can be placed on them, and little
value allowed to them.

By others, these offices are discharged

solely from a principle of duty. They are
men of cold affections, and perhaps of an
interested characer. But, overawed by a
sense of religion, and convinced that they
are bound to be beneficent, they fulfil the
course of relative duties with regular tenor.
Such men act from conscience and prin-
ciple. So far they do well, and are wor-
thy of praise. They assist their friends;
they give to the poor; they do justice to
all. But what a different complexion is
given to the fame aftions, how much high-
er flavour do they acquire, when they floW
from the sensibility of a feeling heart ? If

one

S.ERM. one be not moved by affection, even sup.
-_. posing him influenced by principle, he

will go no farther than ftrid principle
appears to require. He will advance flow-
ly, and reluctantly. As it is justice, not
generosity, which impells him, he will of-
ten feel as a talk what he is required by
conscience to perform. Whereas, to him
who is prompted by virtuous sensibility,
every office of beneficence and humanity
is a pleasure. He gives, assists, and relieves,
not merely because he is bound to do so,
but because it would be painful for him
to refrain. Hence, the smallest benefit he
confers rifes in its value, on account of its
carrying the affection of the giver impress-
ed upon the gift. It speaks his heart; and
the discovery of the heart is very frequent-
ly of greater consequence than all that li-
berality can beitow. How often will the
affectionate smile of approbation gladden
the humble, and raise the dejeted? How
often will the look of tender sympathy, or
the tear that involuntarily falls, impart con-
folaton to the unhappy ? By means of this

correspondence

correspondence of hearts, all the great du- SER L
ties which we owe to one another are both _
performed to more advantage, and endear-
ed in the performance. From true fenfibi-
lity flow a thousand good offices, apparent-
ly small in themselves, but of high impor.
tance to the felicity of others; offices which
altogether escape the observation of the cold
and unfeeling, who, by the hardness of
their manner, render themselves unamiable,
even when they mean to do good.-How
happy then would it be for mankind, if this
affeAionate disposition prevailed more go-,
nerally in the world! How much would
the fum of public virtue and public felicity
be increased, if men were always inclined
to rejoice with them that rejoice, and to weep
witb them that weep !

BUT, besides the effeCt of such a temper

on general virtue and happiness, let us con-
fider its effect on the happiness of him who
poffefles it, and the various pleasures to
which it gives him access. If he be ma-
ftcr of riches or influence, it affords him

the

SERM. the means of increasing his own enjoy-
,__,^ ment, by relieving the wants, or increa-

sing the comforts of others. If he com-
mand not these advantages, yet all the
comforts which he fees in the plofeiffion of
the deserving become in some fort his, by
his rejoicing in the good which they enjoy.
Even the face of nature yields a fatisfac-
tion to him which the insensible can never
know. The profusion of goodness which
he beholds poured forth on the universe,
dilates his heart with the thought that in-
numerable multitudes around him are blest
and happy. When he fees the labours of
men appearing to prosper, and views a
country flourilhing in wealth and indus-
try ; when he beholds the spring coming
forth in its beauty, and reviving the de-
cayed face of nature; or in autumn be-
holds the fields loaded with plenty, and
the year crowned with all its fruits; he lifts
his affections with gratitude to the great
Father of all, and rejoices in the general
felicity and joy.

It may indeed be objected, that the fame

sensibility

sensibility lays open the heart to be pier- SERM.
ced with many wounds from the distresses ,_
which abound in the world; exposes us to
frequent fufering from the participation
which it conmmunicates of the sorrows, as
well as of the joys of friendihip. But let
it be confidered, that the tender melancho-
ly of sympathy is accompanied with a fen-
fation, which they who feel it would not
exchange for the gratifications of the fel-
filhb When the heart is strongly moved
by any of the kind affetions, even when
it pours itself forth in virtuous sorrow, a
secret attractive charm mingles with the
painful emotion; there is a joy in the
midst of grief. Let it be farther confider-
ed, that the griefs which sensibility intro.
duces are counterbalanced by pleasures
which flow from the fame source. Senfibi-
lity heightens in general the human pow-
ers, and is conneced with acuteness in all
our feelings. If it make us more alive to
tome painful sensations, in return, it ren-
ders the pleaing ones more vivid and a-
nimated. The selfish man hanguiihes in

VOL, III. D his

SERM. his narrow circle of pleasures. They are
v__^ confined to what affects his own interet.

He is obliged to repeat the fame gratifica-
tions, till they become insipid. But the
man of virtuous sensibility moves in a wi-
der sphere of felicity. His powers arc much
more frequently called forth into occupa-
tions of plcafing aCtivity. Numberlcfs oc-
cafions open to him of indulging his fa-
vourite taltc, by conveying fatisfation to
others. Often it is in his power, in one way
or other, to sooth the afflicted heart; to
carry some consolation into the house of
woe. In the scenes of ordinary life, in the
domestic and social intercourses of men,
the cordiality of his affections chears and
gladdens him. Every appearance, every
description of innocent happiness, is enjoy-
ed by him. Every native expression of
kindness and affection among others is felt
by him, even though he be not the object
of it. Among a circle of friends, enjoying
one another, he is as happy as the happiest.
In a word, he lives in a different fort of
world from what the selfish man inhabits.

He

He posseses a new sense, which enables SER M.
him to behold objecs which the felfifih
cannot fee. At the fame time, his enjoy-
ments are not of that kind which remain
merely on the surface of the mind. They
penetrate the heart. They enlarge and e-
levate, they refine and ennoble it. To all
the pleasing emotions of affection, they add
the dignified consciousness of virtue.-
Children of men ! Men formed by nature
to live and to feel as brethren ! How long
will ye continue to estrange yourselves from
one another by competitions and jealou-
fies, when in cordial union ye might be so
much more blest ? How long will ye seek
your happiness in felfith gratifications a-
lone, negleding those purer and better
sources of joy, which flow from the assec-
tions and the heart ?

HAVING now explained the nature, and

shown the value and high advantages of
true sensibility, I proceed to point out some
of the mistaken forms, and abuses of this
virtue.-- In modern times, the chief im-

D 2 provement

SE R M. provement of which we have to boast, is a
s.__. _sense of humanity. This, notwithltanding

the felfithnels that still prevails, is the fa-
vourite and distinguishing virtue of the age.
On general manners, and on several depart-
ments of flciety, it has had considerable
influence. It has abated the spirit of per-
fecution: It has even tempered the horrors
of war; and man is now more ashamed than
he was in some former ages, of acting as a
savage to man. Hence, sensibility is be-
come so reputable a quality, that the ap-
pearance of it is frequently assumed when
the reality is wanting. Softness of man-
ners must not be mistaken for true fenfi-
bility. Sensibility indeed tends to produce
gentlcnefs in behaviour; and when such
behaviour flows from native affetion, it is
valuable and amiable. Bur'the exterior
manner alone may be learned in the school
of the world; and often, too often, is found
to cover much unfeeling hardncfs of heart.
Professions of sensibility on every trifling
occasion, joined with the appearance of ex-
ceffive softness, and a profusion of senti-

mental

mental language, afford always much E R M.
ground for distrust They create the sus- _ _
picion of a studied charader. Frequently,
under a negligent and seemingly rough
manner, there lies a tender and feeling
heart. Manlinefi and sensibility are so far
from being incompatible, that the truly
brave are, for the most part, generous and
humane; while the soft and effeminate are
hardly capable of any vigorous exertion of
afferion.

As sensibility supposes delicacy of feel-

ing with refped to others, they who as-
fe& the highest fen4ibility are apt to carry
this delicacy to excess. They are, perhaps,
not incapable of the warmth of disinterest-
ed friendihip; but they are become so re-
fined in all, their sensations; they enter-
tain such high notions of what ought to
correspond in the feelings of others to their
own; they are so mightily hurt by every
thing which comes not up to their ideal
standard of reciprocal affe&ion, as to pro-
duce disquiet and uneasiness to all with

D 3 whom

S E R M. whom they are connected. Hence, unjust

l suspicions of their friends; hence, ground-

less upbraidings, and complaints of un-
kindness; hence, a proneness to take vio-
lent oftence at trifles. In consequence of
examining their friends with a microfco-
pic eye, what to an ordinary observer
would not be unpleafing, to them is gra-
ting and disgusting. At the bottom of the
charader of such pcrfons there always lie
much pride, and attention to themselves.
This is indeed a false species of sensibility.
It is the fubltitution of a capricious and
irritable delicacy, in the room of that plain
and native tenderness of heart, which
prompts men to view others with indul-
gent eye, and to make great allowances for
the imperfections which are sometimes ad-
herent to the most amiable qualities.

THERE are others who affect not fenfi-

bility to this extreme, but who found
high claims to themselves upon the degree
of intercft which they take in the concerns
of others. Although their sensibility can

produce

produce no benefit to the person who is SERM.
its object, they always conceive that it in- i.
titles themselves to some profitable returns.
These, often, are persons of refined and art-
ful characer; who partly deceive them-
selves, and partly employ their icnfibility
as a cover to interest. He who acs from
genuine affection, when he is feeling along
with others in their joys or sorrows, thinks
not of any recompence to which this gives
him a title. He follows the impulse of his
heart. He obeys the dictate of his nature;
just as the vine by its nature produces
fruit, and the fountain pours forth its
freams. Wherever views of interest, and
profpeAs of return, mingle with the feel-
ings of affection, sensibility ads an imper-
sect part, and intitles us to small fliare of
praise.

BUT supposing it to be both complete

and pure, I must caution you against reft-
ing the whole merit of your character on
sensibility alone. It is indeed a happy con-
ifitution of mind. It fits men for the pro-

D 4 per

SERM. per discharge of many duties, and gives

, them access to many virtuous pleasures.

It is requisite for our acceptance either
with God or man. At the fame time, if
it remain an inftinivc feeling alone, it
will form no more than an imperfec cha-
rader. Complete virtue is of a more ex-
alted and dignified nature. It supposes
sensibility, good temper, and benevolent
affedions; it includes them as essential
parts; but it reaches farther: It supposes
them to be strengthened and confirmed by
principle; it requires them to be support-
ed by justice, temperance, fortitude, and
all those other virtues which enable us to
ad with propriety, in the trying situations
of life.

It is very pofflble for a man to poflefs

the kind affedions in a high degree, while,
at the fame time, he is carried away by
paflion and pleasure into many criminal
deeds. Almost every man values himself
on possessing virtue in one or other of its
forms. He wishes to lay claim to some
quality which will render him estimable

in

in his own eye, as well as in that of the SERb!

IL

public. Hence, it is common for many, ,
especially for those in the higher classes of
life, to take much praise to themselves on
account of their sensibility, though it be, in
truth, a fcnfibility of very defective kind.
They relent at the view of misery when it is
strongly set before them. Often too, affe&ed
chiefly by the powers of description, it is at
feigned and pictured distress, more than at
real mifery,that they relent. The tears which
they ihed upon these occasions they confider
as undoubted proofs of virtue. They applaud
themselves for the goodness of their hearts;
and conclude, that with such feelings they
cannot fail to be agreeable to Heaven. At
the fame time, these transient relentings
make flight impreflion on conduct They
give rife to few, if any, good deeds; and
soon after such persons have wept at some
tragical tale, they are ready to stretch forth
the hand of oppression, to grasp at the gain
of injustice, or to plunge into the torrent
of criminal pleasures. This fort of fenfi-
bility affords no more than a fallacious

claim

BERM. claim to virtue, and gives men no ground

to think highly of themselves. We must
inquire not merely how they feel, but how
their feelings prompt them to a&, in order
to ascertain their real character.

I SHALL conclude with observing, that

sensibility, when genuine and pure, has a
itrong connection with piety. That warmth
of affection, and tendcrnefs of heart, which
lead men to feel for their brethren, and to
enter into their joys and sorrows, should
naturally dispose them to melt at the re-
membrance of the divine goodness; to
glow with admiration of the divine ma-
jefty; to fend up the voice of praise and
adoration to that Supreme Being who
makes his creatures happy. He who pre-
tends to great sensibility towards men, and
yet has no feeling for the high objecs of
religion, no heart to admire and adore the
great Father of the universe, has reason to
diitruft the truth and delicacy of his fenfi-
bility. He has reason to fufpet, that in
some corner of his heart there lodges a fe-

cret

cret depravity, an unnatural hardness and SERM.
callousness, which vitiates his character. _
- Let us study to join all the parts of
virtue in proper union; to be consistently
and uniformly good; just and upright, as
well as pitiful and courteous; pious, as
well as sympathising. Let us pray to him
who made the heart, that he would fill it
with all proper dispositions; rectify all its
errors; and render it the happy abode of
personal integrity and social tenderness, of
purity, benevolence, and devotion.

SE R-

# SERMON III. On the IMPROVEMENT of TIME. GENESIS, xlvii. 8. And Pharoob said unto Jacob, How old art thou?

44

S E R M ON III.
On the IMPROVEMENT of TIME.

GENESIS, xlvii. 8.
.nd Pharob said unto Jaob, How old art

tbou P

S ER M.'IME is of so great importance to man-
_L _ I. kind, that it cannot too often employ

religious meditation. There is nothing in
the management of which wisdom is more
requisite, or where mankind display their
inconsistency more. In its particular par-
cels, they appear entirely careless of it; and
throw it away with thoughtless profusion.
But, when colleted into some of its great
portions, and viewed as the measure of
their continuance in life, they become fen-

fible

sibe of its value, and begin to regard it SERM.
with a serious eye. While day after day is I
wafted in a course of idleness or vicious
pleasures, if some incident shall occur
which leads the moit inconsiderate man to
think of his age, or time of life; how
much of it is gone; at what period of it he
is now arrived; and to what proportion of
it he can with any probability look for-
ward, as yet to come; he can hardly avoid
feeling some secret compunction, and re-
flieing seriously upon his state. Happy,
if that virtuous imprefllon were not of mo-
menary continuance, but retained its in-
fluence amidst the succeeding cares and
pleasures of the world To the good old
Patriarch mentioned in the text, we have
reason to believe that such impreflions
were habitual. The question put to him
by the Egyptian monarch produced, in his
answer, such refletions as were naturally
suited to his time of life. And Vacob said
unto Pharaoh, tbe days of the years of my pil-
Xrimage are an hundred and thirty years:
few and evil have the dayo of the years of my

Ife

SE R M. life been, and have not attained unto the days
a__, of the years of the life of my fathers, in the

days of their pilgrimage. But the peculiar
circumstances of the Patriarch, or the num-
ber of his years, are not to be the subjec
of our present consideration. My purpose
is, to show how we should be affected in
every period of human life, by reflection
upon our age, whether we be young, or
advanced in years; in order that the que-
stion, How old art thou ? may never be put
to any of us without some good effe&.
There are three different portions of our
life which such a quetion naturally calls to
view; that part of it which is pall; that
which is now present; and that to which
we fondly look forward, as future. Let
us confider in what manner we ought to
be affected by attending to each of theft.

1. LET us review that part of our time

which is past. According to the progress
which we have made in the journey of life,
the, field which past years present to our re-
view will be more or less extensive. But

to

to every one they will be found to afford S R hi
sufficient matter of humiliation and regret.
For where is the perbon, who having ated
for any time in the world, remembers not
many errors, and many follies, in his pas
behaviour ? Who dares to fay, that he has
improved, as he might have done, the va-
rious advantages which were afforded him;
and that he recalls nothing for which he
has reason either to grieve, or to bluih ?
When we recolled the several stages of life
through which we have passed; the fuccef-
live occupations in which we have been
engaged, the designs we have formed, and
the hopes and fears which alternately have
filled our breast; how barren for most
part is the remembrance; and how few
traces of any thing valuable or important
remain? Like characters drawn on the
sand, which the next wave washes totally
away, so one trivial fuccefflon of events has
effaced the memory of the preceding; and
though we have seemed all along to be bu-
fy, yet for much of what we have ated,
we are neither wiser nor better than if such

actions

ER M. actions had never been. Hence, let the re-
_it. trofpect of what is past produce, as its first

effea, humiliation in our own eyes, and
abasement before God. Much do human
pride and felf-complacency require some
correcion; and that correction is never
more effecually administered, than by an
impartial and serious review of former life.

But though past time be gone, we are

not to confider it as irredeemably loft To
a very profitable purpose it may yet be ap-
plied, if we lay hold of it while it remains in
remembrance, and oblige it to contribute to
future improvement. If you have gained
nothing more by the years that are past,
you have at least gained experience; and
experience is the mother of wisdom. You
have seen the weak parts of your character;
and may have discovered the chief sources of
your mifcondud. To these let your atten-
tion be directed; on these, let the proper
guards be set. If you have trifled long,
resolve to trifle no more. If your paslions
have often betrayed and degraded you,
study how they may be kept, in future,

under

under better discipline. Learn, at the fame sE R
time, never to truit presumptuously in your ,
own wisdom. Humbly apply to the Au-
thor of your being, and beseech his grace
to guide you safely through those slippery
and dangerous paths, in which experience
has shown that you are so ready to err, and
to fall.

In reviewing past life, it cannot but oc-

cur, that many things now appear of in-
considerable importance, which once occu-
pied and attached uss in the highest de-
gree. Where ate those keen competitions,
those mortifying disappointments, those
violent enmities, those eager purfiits, which
we once thought were to last for ever, and
on which we confideted our whole happi-
nefa or misery as ffpended ? We look
back upon them now, as upon a dream
which has pafied away. None of those
mighty consequences have followed which
we had predited. The airy fabric has va-
nilhed, and left no trace behind it. We
fmine at our former violence; and wonder
how such- things could have ever appeared

VOL. III. E so

SER M. o significant and great. We may reft ali
a_. fured, that what hath been, shall again be.

When Time fiall once have laid his lenient
hand on the paflions and pursuits of the
present moment, they too shall lore that i-
maginary value which heated fancy now
bestows upon them. Hence, let them al-
ready begin to subside to their proper level
Let wisdom infuse a tinture of moderation
into the eagerness of contest, by anticipa-
ting that period of coolness, which the lapse
of time will, of itself, certainly bring.-
When we look back on years that are past,
how swiftly do they appear to have fleeted
away ? How insensibly has one period of
life stolen upon us after another, like the
successive incidents in a tale that is told ?
Before we were aware, childhood had grown
up into youth; youth had pafred into man-
hood; and manhood now, perhaps, begins
to assume the gray hair, and to decline in-
to old age. When we are carrying our
views forward, months and years to come
seem to stretch through a long and exten-
five space. But when the time flall arrive

of

of our looking back, they fliall appear con- s E R
traded within narrow bounds. Time, when _,
yet before us, seems to advance with flow
and tardy steps; no sooner is it past, than
we discern its wings.

It is a remarkable peculiarity in the re-

trofped of former life, that it is commonly
attended with some measure of heaviness of
heart. Even to the most prosperous, the
memory of joys that are past is accompa-
nied with secret sorrow. In the days of
former years, many objeds arise to view,
which make the most unthinking, grave;
and render the serious, fad. The pleafu-
rable scenes of youth, the objects on which
our affetions had been early placed, the
companions and friends with whom we had
spent many happy days, even the places
and the occupations to which we had been
long accustomed, but to which we have
now bid farewell, can hardly ever be re-
called, without softening, nor sometimes,
without piercing, the heart. Such sensa-
tions, to which few, if any, of my hearers,
are wholly strangers, I now mention, as

E 2 affording

SERM. affording a strong proof of that vanity of

III.
__- -. the human slate, which is so often repre-

sented in the sacred writings: And vain
indeed mhft that state be, where shades of
grief tinge the recollection of its brightest
scenes. But, at the fame time, though it
be very proper that such meditations should
sometimes enter the mind, yet on them I
advise not the gentle and tender heart to
dwell too long. They are apt to produce a
fruitless melancholy; to deje&c, without
bringing much improvement; to thicken
the gloom which already hangs over hu-
man life, without furnishing proportionable
affifance to virtue.

Let me advise you, rather to recall to vitw

such parts of former condud, if any such
there be, as afford in the remembrance a
rational fatisfadion. And what parts of
conduc are these ? Are they the purfiits
of sensual pleasure, the riots of jollity, or
the displays of show and vanity ? No; I
appeal to your hearts, my friends, if what
you recolled with most pleasure be not the
innocent, the virtuous, the honourable pars

of

of your past life; when you were employ- SE R f.
ed in cultivating your minds, and impro- .j
ving them with useful knowledge; when,
by regular application and persevering la-
bour, you were laying the foundation of
future reputation and advancement; when
you were occupied in discharging with si-
delity the duties of your station, and ac-
quiring the'efteem of the worthy and the
good; when in some trying situation you
were enabled to ad your part with firm-
ness and honour; or had seized the happy
opportunity of assisting the deserving, of
relieving the distressed, and bringing down
upon your heads the blefngs of tbo that
were ready to perijh.-Thefe, these are the
parts of former life which are recalled with
most fatisfacdion On them alone, no heavi-
ness of heart attends. You enjoy them as a
treasure which is now stored up, and put
beyond all danger of being loft. These
chear the hours of sadness, lighten the bur-
den of old age, and, through the mortify-
ing remembrance of much of the past, dart
a ray of light and joy.-From the review

E3 of

SE R M. of thele, and the comparison of them with
_I_ the deceitful pleasures of fin, let us learn

how to form our estimate of happiness. Let
us learn what is true, what is false, in hu-
man pleasures; and from experience of the
past, judge of the quarter to which we
mufl in future turn, if we would lay a
foundation for permanent fatisfaaion. As-
ter having thus reviewed the former years
of our life, let us confider,

II. WHAT attention is due to that period

of age in which we are at present placed.
Here lies the immediate and principal ob-
jet of our concern. For the recollection
of the pals is only as far of moment, as it
ats upon the present. The pald, to us
now, is little; the future, as yet, is no-
thing. Between there two great gulphs of
time subsists the present, as an isthmus or
bridge, along which we are all palsing.
With hasty and inconsiderate steps let us
not pass along it; but remember well, how
much depends upon our holding a steady,
and properly conducted course. Whbato-

cver

ever thine hand findeth to do, do it pow with SE R M.

II.

all thy miight; for now is the accepted time;
now is the day of falvatien. Many direc-
tions might be given for the wife and reli-
gious improvement of the present; a few
of which only I shall hint.

Let us begin with excluding those super-

fluous avocations which unprofitably con-
fume it. Life is fiort; much that is of
real importance remains to be done. If we
susser the present time to be wafted either
in absolute idleness, or in frivolous em-
ployments, it will hereafter call for ven-
geance againif us. Removing therefore
what is merely fupcrfluous, let us bethink
ourselves of what is most material to be at-
tended to at present: As, first and chief,
the great work of our salvation; the dif-
charge of the religious duties which we
owe to God our Creator, and to Christ our
Redeemer. God waitetb as yet to be gra-
cious; whether he will wait longer, none of
us can tell. Now, therefore, feck the Lord
while he may be found, call upon him while
be is near. Our spiritual interests will be

E 4 belt

BERM. best promoted by regular performance of
,__, all the duties of ordinary lfe. Let there,

therefore, occupy a great share of the pre-
sent hour. Whatever our age, our charac-
ter, our profeflion, or station in the world,
requires us to do, in that let each revolving
day find us busy. Never delay till to-mor-
row what reason and conscience tell you
ought to be performed to-day. To-mor-
row is not yours; and though you should
live to enjoy it, you must not overload it
with a burden not its own. Suficient for
the day will prove the duty thereof.

The observance of order and method, is

of high consequence for the improvement
of present time. He who performs every
employment in its due place and season,
suffers no part of time to escape without
profit. He multiplies his days; for he
lives much in little space. Whereas he who
neglefts order in the arrangement of his
occupations, is always losing the present in
returning upon the palt, and trying, in
vain, to recover it when gone.-Let me
advise you frequently to make the present

employment

employment of time an object of thought. SE RM.
Ask yourselves, about what are you now
busied? What is the ultimate scope of
your present pursuits and cares ?' Can you
justify them to yourselves ? Are they like-
ly to produce any thing that will survive
the moment, and bring forth some fruit
for futurity? He who can give no sati-s
factory answer to such questions as these,
has reason to fufpec that his employment
of the present is not tending either to hit
advantage, or his honour.- Finally let
me admonish you, that while you study to
improve, you should endeavour also to en-
joy, the present hour. Let it not be dif-
turbed with groundless discontents, or poi-
boned with foolifli anxieties about what is
to come: But look up to Heaven, and ac-
knowledge, with a grateful heart, the actual
blessings you enjoy. If you muff admit,
that you are now in health, peace, and
safety; without any particular or uncom-
mon evils to afflict your condition; what
more can you reasonably look for in this
vain and uncertain world ? How little can

the

SER M. the greatest prosperity add to such a Rfate?

Will any future situation ever make you
happy, if now, with so few causes of grief,
you imagine yourselves miserable? The
evil lies in the (tate of your mind, not in
your condition of fortune; and by no al-
teration of circumstances is likely to be re-
medied. Let us now,

III. CONSIDER with what dispositions

we ought to look forward to those years of
our life that may yet be to come. Merely
to look forward to them, is what requires
no admonition. Futurity is the great ob-
jet on which the imaginations of men are
employed; for the fake of which the past
is forgotten, and the present too often ne-
gleded. All time is in a manner swallow-
ed up by it. On futurity, men build their
designs; on futurity, they reft their hopes;
and though not happy at the present, they
always reckon on becoming so, at some
subsequent period of their lives. This pro-
penfity to look forward, was for wife pur-
pofcs implanted in the human breast. It

serves

serves to give proper occupation to the active SE RM.
powers of the mind, and to quicken all its itl
exertions. But it is too often immoderate-
ly indulged, and grossly abused. The cu-
riofity which sometimes prompts persons to
inquire, by unlawful methods, into what
is to come, is equally foolifi and sinful.
Let us restrain all desire of penetrating far-
ther than is allowed us, into that dark and
unknown region. Futurity belongs to God:
and happy for us is that mysterious veil
with which h:s wisdom has covered it.
Were it in our power to lift up the veil,
and to behold what it conceals, many and
many a thorn we would plant in our
breasts. The proper and rational conduc
of men with regard to futurity, is regulated
by two considerations: First, that much
of what it contains, must remain to us
absolutely unknown; next, that there are
also some events in it which may be cer-
tainly known and foreseen.

First, much of futurity is, and mutt be,
entirely unknown to us. When we fpecu-

late

S ER M. late about the continuance of our life, and
_._.~ the events which are to fill it, we behold a

river which is always flowing; but which
soon escapes out of our fight, and is cover-
ed with mists and darkness. Some of its
windings we may endeavour to trace; but
it is only for a very short way that we are
able to pursue them. In endless conjec-
tures we quickly find ourselves bewil-
dered; and, often, the next event that
happens baffles all the reasonings we had
formed concerning the succession of events
The consequence which follows from this
is, that all the anxiety about futurity,
which passes the bounds of reasonable pre-
caution, is unprofitable and vain. Certain
measures are indeed necessary to be taken
for our safety. We are not to rulh for-
ward inconsiderate and headlong. We must
make, as far as we are able, provision for
future welfare; and guard against dangers
which apparently threaten. But having
done this, we must stop; and leave the reft
to Him who difpofeth of futurity at his
will. He who fittetb in the heavens lalgbs

at

at the wifiom and the plans of worldly SER l
men. Wherefore, boafi not tbyfif of to-mor- Id--
row; for thobu kowe nrot what a day may
kring forth. For the fame reason, despair
not of to-morrow; for it may bring forth
good as well as evil Vex not yourselves
with imaginary fears. The impending
black cloud, to which you look up with
so much dread, may pass by harmless; or
though it should discharge the storm, yet,
before it breaks, you may be lodged in
that lowly mansion which no storms ever
touch.

In the next place, there are in futurity

some events which may be certainly fore-
seen by us, through all its darkness. Sirs,
it may be confidently predited, that no
situation into which it will bring us, mall
ever answer fully to our hopes, or confer
perfet happiness. This is as certain as if
we already saw it, that life, in its future
periods, will continue to be what it has
heretofore been; that it will be a mixed
and varied state; a checquered scene of
pleafuros and pains, of fugitive joys and

transient

SERM. transient griefs, succeeding in a round to

L one another. Whether we look forward

to the years of youth, or to those of man.
hood and advanced life, it is all the fame.
The world will be to us, what it has been
to generations pall. Set out, therefore, on
what remains of your journey under this
persuasion. According to this measure,
eftitnate your future pleasures; and calcu-
late your future gains. Carry always along
with you a modest and a temperate mind.
Let not your expectations from the years
that are to come rife too high; and your
disappointments will be fewer, and more
easily supported.

Farther; this may be reckoned upon as

certain, that in every future situation of life,
a good conscience, a well ordered mind, and
a humble trust in the favour of Heaven,
will prove the essential ingredients of your
happiness. In reflecting upon the past,
you have found this to hold. Assure your-
selves that in future, the cafe will be the
fame. The principal correfives of human
vanity and distress, must be fought for in

religion

religion and virtue. Entering on paths SS R M.
which to you are new and unknown, place _
yourselves under the conduct of a divine
guide. Follow the great Shepherd of lirael,
who, amidst the turmoil of this world,
leads his flock into green pafltures, and by the
Jlill waters. As you advance in life, study
to improve both in good principles, and
in good practice. You will be enabled to
look to futurity without fear, if, whatever
it brings, it flall find you regularly em-
ployed in doing jflly, loving mercy, and
walking humbly with the Lord youzr God.

Lastly, Whatever other things may be

dubious in futurity, two great events are
undoubtedly certain, death and judgement.
These, we all know, are to terminate the
whole course of time; and we know them
to be not only certain, but to be approach-
ing nearer to us, in consequence of every
day that passes over our heads. To these,
therefore, let us look foward, not with the
dread of children, but with that manly fe-
rioufnefs which belongs to men and Chri-
tians. Let us not avert our view from

them,

SERM. them, as if we could place them at some
_n_ greater distance by excluding them from

our thoughts. This indeed is the refuge of
too many; but it is the refuge of fools,
';ho aggravate thereby the terrors they
mnut encounter. For be that cometb, J/all
come, and will not tarry. To his coming, let
us look with a steady eye; and as life ad-
vances through its progressive stages, pre-
pare for its close, and for appearing before
him who made us.

THUS I have endeavoured to point out

the reflections proper to be made, when the
question is put to any of us, How old art
thou? I have shown with what eye we should
review the past years of our life; in what
light we {hould confider the present; and
with what dispositions look forward to the
future: In order that such a question may
always leave some serious impression behind
it; and may dispose usfo to number the years
of our life, that we tay apply our hearts inta
witfdom.

S E R-

# SERMON IV. On the DUTIES belonging to MIDD… AGE. I CORINTHIANS, xiii. 11. — When I became a man, I put away childish things.

[ 65 )

S E R M ON IV.
On the DUTIES belonging to MIDD-"

AGE.

I CORINTHIANS, Xiii 11.
-- When I became a man, Iput away child-

/b things.
T O0 every thing, fays the wife man, there SERM.

is a season; and a time to every purpose _

under heaven *. As there are duties which
belong to particular situations of fortnme,
so there are duties also which result from
particular periods of human life. In every
period of it, indeed, that comprehensive
rule takes place, Fear God, and keep his com-

Eccles. iii. 1.
VOL. III. F mandments;

S E R M. tnandmcnts;fhr ibis is the whole duty rcf man .

IV.
a__rJ Piety to God, and charity to men, are in-

cumbent upon persons of every age, as
soon as they can think and ad. Yet these
virtues, in different stages of life, assume
different forms; and when they appear in
that form which is most suited to our age,
they appear with peculiar gracefulpefs;
they give propriety to conduct, and add
dignity to character. In former discourses
I have treated of the virtues which adorn
youth, and of the duties which specially
belong to old age t. The circle of those
duties which refpec middle age is indeed
much larger. As that is the busy period
in the life of man, it includes in effect the
whole compass of religion, and therefore
cannot have its peculiar characer so de-
finitely marked and ascertained. At the
fame time, during those years wherein one
is sensible that he has advanced beyond
the confines of youth, but has not yet pass-
ed into the region of old age, there are fe-
* Ecclcf. li. xi. t See vol. I. Sermons I . and 12.

veral

veral things which reflection on that por- SERM.
tion of human life suggests, or at least _
ought to suggest, to the mind. Inconfi-
derate must he be, who, in his gradual
progress throughout middle age, pauses not,
at times, to think, how far he is now re-
ceding from youth; how near he draws to
the borders of declining age; what part it
is now incumbent on him to act; what
duties both God and the world have a title
to expect from him. To these, I am at
present to call your attention; as what
materially concern the greatest part of those
who are now my hearers.

1. I BEGIN with observing, that the sirs

duty of those who are become men is, as
the text expresses it, to put away cbildi/b
tbingr. The season of youthful levities,
follies, and pamilons, is now over. These
have had their reign; a reign perhaps too
long; and to which a termination is cer-
tainly proper at last Much indulgence is
due to youth. Many things admit of ex-
cufe then, which afterwards become un-

F 2 pardonable.

SE R M. pardonable. Some things may even be
,V. graceful in youth, which, if not criminal,

are at Icaft ridiculous, in persons of matu-
rer years. It is a great trial of wisdom, to
make our retreat from youth with pro-
priety; to assume the character of man-
hood, without cxpofing ourselves to re-
proach, by an unflafonablc remainder of
juvenility, on the one hand, or by precise
and difgufling formality, on the other.
Nature has placed certain boundaries, by
which she discriminates the pleasures, ac-
tions, and employments, that are suited to
the different stages of human life. It be-
comes us, neither to overleap those boun-
daries by a transition too hafly and vio-
lent; nor to hover too long on one fide of
the limit, when nature calls us to pass o-
ver to the other.

There are particularly two things in

which middle age ihould preserve its dif-
tinction and efparation from youth; these
are, levities of behaviour, and intemperate
indulgence of pleasure. The gay spirits of
the young often prompt an inconsiderate

degree

degree of levity, Sometimes amusing, some- sE R M.
times offensive; but for which, though be- ,IV
traying them occasionally into serious dan-
gers, their want of experience may plead
excuse. A more composed, and manly be-
haviour is expected in riper years. The
affecation of youthful vanities, degrades
the dignity of manhood; even renders its
manners less agreeable; and by aukward
attempts to please, produces contempt.
Chearfulnefs is becoming in every age.
But the proper chearfulnefs of a man is as
different from the levity of the boy, as the
flight of the eagle is from the fluttering of
a sparrow in the air.

As all unseasonable returns to the levity

of youth ought to be laid afide,-an admo-
nition whith equally belongs to both the
fexes,-itill more are we to guard against
those intemperate indulgences of pleasure,
to which the young are unhappily prone.
From these we cannot too soon retreat.
They open the path to ruin, in every pe-
riod of our days. As long, however, as
these excesses are confined to the first stage

F 3 of

SE R M. of life, hope is left, that when this fever of

IV. the spirits shall abate, sobriety may gain the

ascendant, and wiser counsels have power
to influence conduct. But after the sea-
son of youth is palt, if its intemperate fpi-
rit remain; if, inflead of listening to the
calls of honour, and bending attention to
the cares, and the business of men, the
fame course of idleness and sensuality con-
tinue to be pursued, the cafe becomes
more desperate. A fad presumption a-
rifes, that long immaturity is to prevail;
and that the pleasures and passions of the
youth are to fink and overwhelm the man.
Difficult, I confess, it may prove to over-
come the attachments which youthful habits
had for a long while been forming. Hard,
at the beginning, is the talk, to impose on
our conduct restraints which are altogether
unaccufRomed and new. But this is a trial
which every one mull undergo, in enter-
ing on new fcencs of ation, and new pe-
riods of life. Let those who are in this
situation bethink themfelvcs, that all is now
at flake. Their character and honour, their

future

future fortune and success in the world, SERM.
depend in a great measure on the fleps they Iv.
take, when first they appear on the stage
of adcive life. The world then looks to
them with observing eye. It studies their
behaviour; and interprets all their motions,
as presages of the line of future conduc
which they mean to hold. Now, there-
fore, put away cbildib Ibings; dismiss your
former trifling anufements, and youthful
pleasures; blast not the hopes which your
friends are willing to conceive of you.
Higher occupations, more serious cares, a-
wait you. Turn your mind to the steady
and vigorous discharge of the part you are
called to a&. This leads me,

II. To point out the particular duties

which open on those who are in the middle
period of life. They are now come for-
ward to that field of ation where they are
to mix in all the stir and bustle of the
world; where all the human powers are
brought forth into full exercise; where all
all that is conceived to be important in hu-

F 4 man

SE R M. man affairs is incessantly going on around
,.__ them. The time of youth was the prepa-

tion for future ation. In old age our ac-
tive part is supposed to be finiihed, and reft
is permitted. Middle age is the season when
we are expected to display the fruits which
education had prepared and ripened. In
this world, all of us were formed to be as-
filtants to one another. The wants of so-
ciety call for every man's labour, and re-
quire various departments to be filled up.
They require that some be appointed to
rule, and others to obey; some, to defend
the society from danger, others to main-
tain its internal order and peace; some, to
provide the conveniencies of life, others to
promote the improvement of the mind;
many, to work; others to contrive and di-
reA. In short, within the sphere of society
there is employment for every one; and in
the course of these employments, many a
moral duty is to be performed; many a
religious grace to be exercised. No one is
permitted to be a mere blank in the world.
No rank, nor station, no dignity of birth,

nor

nor extent of possessions, exempt any man SERM.
from contributing his mharc to public uti- _.
lity and good. This is the precept of God.
This is the voice of nature. This is the
just demand of the human race upon one
another.

One of the first questions, therefore,

which every man who is in the vigour of
his age should put to himself is, " What
"am I doing in this world ? What have
"I yet done, whereby I may glorify God,
" and be useful to my fellows ? Do I pro-
" perly fill up the place which belongs to
' my rank and station ? Will any memo-
' rial remain of my having existed on the
" earth ? or are my days pafling fruitless
"away, now when I might be of some im-
"portance in the system of human affairs ?"
-Let not any man imagine that he is of
no importance, and has, upon that ac-
count, a privilege to trifle with his days
at pleasure. Talents have been give to all;
to some, ten; to others, five; to others,
two. Occupy with tbefe * till I come, is the

Luke, xix. 13.

command

SE R MI. command of the great Master to all. Where
.L , fiuperior abilities are poffeflfd, or diftin-

guiflhed advantages of fortune are enjoyed,
a wider range is afforded for useful exer-
tion, and the world is intitled to expec it.
But among those who fill up the inferior
departments of society, though the sphere
of usefulness be more contraced, no one is
left entirely insignificant. Let us remem-
ber, that in all stations and conditions, the
important relations take place, of mafiers
or fcrvants, husbands and wives, parents
and children, brothers and friends, citizens
and fubjeAs. The discharge of the duties
ariiing from those various relations, forms
a great portion of the work assigned to
the middle age of man. Though the part
we have to aa may be confined within a
humble line, yet if it be honourably a&-
ed, it will be always found to carry its
own reward.

In fine, industry, in all its virtuous

forms, ought to inspirit and invigorate
manhood. This will add to it both satis-

faction

facion and dignity; will make the current s ER M.
of our years, as they roll, flow along in a
clear and equable fiream, without the pu-
trid stagnation of sloth and idleness. Idle-
ness is the great corrupter of youth; and
the bane and dishonour of middle age. He
who, in the prime of life, finds time to
hang heavy on his hands, may with much
reason suspect, that he has not consulted
the duties which the consideration of his
age imposed upon him; assuredly he has
not consulted his own halpinefs. But a-
midst all the bustle of the world, let us not
forget,

III. To guard with vigilance againrt the

peculiar dangers which attend the period of
middle life. It is much to be regretted,
that in the present state of things there is
no period of man's age in which his virtue
is not exposed to perils. Pleasure lays its
snares for youth: and after the season of
youthful follies is past, other temptations,
no less formidable to virtue, presently arise.

The

SE R M. The love of pleasure is succeeded by the
,_. palion for interest. In this passion the

whole mind is too often absorbed; and the
change thereby induced on the character is
of no amiable kind. Amidst the excesses
of youth, virtuous affections often remain.
The attachments of friendihip, the love of
honour, and the warmth of sensibility, give
a degree of lustre to the character, and co-
ver many a failing. But interest, when it is
become the ruling principle, both debases
the mind, and hardens the heart. It dead-
ens the feeling of every thing that is sub-
lime or refined. It contracts the affections
within a narrow circle; and extinguishes
all those sparks of generosity and tender-
ness which once glowed in the breast.

In proportion as worldly pursuits multi-

ply, and competitions rife, ambition, jealou-
fy, and envy, combine with interest to ex-
cite bad passions, and to increase the corrup-
tion of the heart. At first, perhaps, it was
a man's intention to advance himself in the
world by none but fair and laudable me-

thods.

thods. He retained for some time an aver- SE R M.
sion to whatever appeared dithonourable. ,V.
But here, he is encountered by the violence
of an enemy. There, he is supplanted by
the address of a rival. The pride of a fu-
perior insults him. The ingratitude of a
friend provokes him. Animofities ruffle
his temper. Suspicions poison his mind.
He finds, or imagines that he finds, the
artful and designing surrounding him on
every hand. He views corruption and
iniquity prevailing; the modest neglected;
the forward and the crafty rising to diftinc-
tion. Too easily, from the example of
others, he learns that mystery of vice, call-
ed the way of the world. What he has
learned he fancies necessary to pracfife for
his own defence; and of course assumes
that fipple and versatile charader, which
he observes to be frequent, and which of-
ten has appeared to him successful.

To ihefe, and many more dangers of the

fame kind, is the man exposed who is deep-
ly engaged in ative life. No finall degree

of

SERM. of firmness in religious principle, and of

,__ constancy in virtue, is requisite, in order to

prevent his being aflimilated to the spirit of
the world, and carried away by the multi.
tude of evil doers. Let him therefore call
to mind those principles which ought to
fortify him against such temptations to vice.
Let him often recollec that, whatever his
station in life may be, he is a man; he is
a Christian. These are the chief characters
which he has to support; characters fupe-
rior far, if they be supported with dignity,
to any of the titles with which courts can
decorate him; superior to all that can be
acquired in the strife of a busy world. Let
him think, that though it may be desire-
able to increase his opulence, or to advance
his rank, yet what he ought to hold much
more sacred is, to maintain his integrity and
honour. If these be forfeited, wealth or
station will have few charms left. They
will not be able to protect him long from
finking into contempt in the eye of an ob-
serving world. Even to his own eye he

will

will at last appear base and wretched.- S E R M
Let not the affairs of the world entirely in- 1V.
gross his time and thoughts. From that
contagious air which he breaths in the
midit of it, let him sometimes retreat into
the salutary shade consecrated to devotion
and to wisdom. There, converting serious-
ly with his own foul, and looking up to
the Father of spirits, let him study to calm
those unquiet passions, and to redify those
internal disorders, which intercourse with
the world had excited and increaied. In
order to render this medicine of the
mind more effectual, it will be highly pro-
per,

IV. THAT as we advance in the course

of years, we often attend to the lapse of
time and life, and to the revolutions which
these are ever effecting. In this medita-
tion, one of the first reflections which
Ihould occur is, how much we owe to that
God who hath hitherto helped us; who
hath brought us on so far in life; hath

guided

BERM. guided us through the slippery paths of

1V. youth, and now enables us to flourifi in

the strength of manhood. Look back, my
friends, to those who started along with
yourselves in the race of life. Think how
many of them have fallen around you.
Observe how many blank spaces you can
number in the catalogue of those who were
once your companions. If, in the midst
of so much devastation, you have been
preserved and blessed; confider seriously
what returns you owe to the goodness of
Heaven. Inquire whether your condua
has corresponded to these obligations; whe-
ther, in public and in private, you have
honoured, as became you, the God of your
fathers; and whether, amidfl the unknown
occurrences that are yet before you, you
have ground to hopl for the continued
protection of the Almighty.

Bring to mind the various revolutions

which you have beheld in human affairs,
since you became acors on this busy the-
atre. Refle& on the changes which have
taken place in men and manners, in.opi-

nions

nions and customs, in private fortunes, and SE RM

iv.

in public conduct. By the observations _
you have made on these, and the experi-
ence you have gained, have you impro-
ved proportionably in wisdom ? Have the
changes of the world which you have wit-
neffed, loosened all unreasonable attachment
to it? Have they taught you this great
lesson, that, while the fahion of the world is
ever pasing away, only in God and in vir-
tue, stability is to be found ? Of great use,
amidst the whirl of the world, are such
pauses as these in life; such refting places
of thought and reflection; whence we can
calmly and deliberately look back on the
past, and anticipate the future.

To the future, we are often casting an

eager eye, and fondly storing it, in our i-
magination, with nany a pleasing scene.
But if we would look to it, like wife men,
let it be under the persuasion that it is
nearly to resemble the past, in bringing
forward a mixture of alternate hopes and
fears, of griefs and joys. In order to be
Prepared for whatever it may bring, let us

VOL. III. G cultivate

GE RM. cultivate that manly fortitude of mind,
,_2^ which, supported by a pious trust in God,

will enable us to encounter properly the
vicissitudes of our tlate. No quality is
more necessary than this, to them who are
pasing through that stormy season of life
of which we now treat. Softness and es-
feminacy, let them leave to the young and
unexperienced, who are amusing themselves
with florid profpeas of bli's. But to those
who are now engaged in the middle of
their course, who are supposed to be well
acquainted with the world, and to know
that they have to struggle in it with va.
rious hardIhips, firmness, vigour, and re-
solution, are dispositions more fuitabie.
They must buckle on well this armour of
the mind, if they would issue forth into
the contest with any profpe&t of success.-
While we thus study to correC the er-
rors, and to provide againit the dangers,
which are peculiar to this stage of life,
let us also,

V, LAY foundation for comfort in old

age.

age. That is a period which all expect and SERM.
hope to fee; and to which, amidil the toils I_
of the world, men sometimes look for-
ward, not without satisfaction, as to the
period of retreat and reft. But let them
not deceive themselves. A joyless and
dreary season it will prove, if they arrive
at it with an unimproved, or corrupted
mind. For old age, as for every other
thing, a certain preparation is requisite;
and that preparation conifts chiefly in three
particulars; in the acquisition of know-
ledge, of friends, of virtue. There is an
acquisition of another kind, of which it is
altogether needless for me to give any re-
commendation, that of riches. But though
this, by many, will be esteemed a more mate-
rial acquisition than all the three I have na-
med, it m.y be confidently pronounced,
that, without these other requisites, all the
wealth we can lay up in store will prove
insufficient for making our latter days pais
smoothly away.

First, He who wishes to render his old
age comfortable, should iudy betimes to

G 2 enlarge

*

SER M. enlarge and improve his mind; and by
»-y« thought and inquiry, by reading and re-

flecing, to acquire a taste for useful know-
ledge. This will provide for him a great
and noble entertainment, when other en-
tertainments leave him. If he bring into
the solitary retreat of age a vacant, unin-
formed mind, where no knowledge dawns,
where no ideas rile, which has nothing to
feed upon within itself, many a heavy and
comfortless day he must necessarily pass.-
Next, When a man declines into the vale
of years, he depends more on the aid of
his friends, than in any other period of his
life. Then is the time, when he would
especially with to find himself surrounded
by some who love and respect him; who
will bear with his infirmities, relieve him
of his labours, and chear him with their
society. Let him, therefore, now, in the
'Tummer of his days, while :yet active and
fouriihing, by aCs of feafofable kindness
and beneficence cnfure that love, and by
-upright and honourable conduc lay foun-
tlation for that reflecd, which in old age

he
4

he would wiih to enjoy.-In the last place, SERM.
Let him confider a good conscience, peace ,__
with God, and the hope of heaven, as the
molt effectual consolations he can possess,
when the eil days thall come, wherein,
otherwise, he is likely to find little plea-
sure. It is not merely by transient ats
of devotion that such consolations are
to be provided. The regular tenor of a
virtuous and pious life, spent in the faith-
ful discharge of all the duties of our fta-
tion, will prove the best preparation for
old age, for death, and for immortality.

AMONG the measures thus taken for the

latter scenes of lifei let me admonish every
one not to forget to put his worldly affairs
in order, in due time. This is a duty
which he owes to his characer, to his fa-
mily, or to those, whoever they be, that
are to succeed him; but a duty too often
unwisely delayed, from a childilh aversion
to entertain any thoughts of quitting the
world. Let him not trufi much to what
he will do in his old age. Sufficient for

(c 3 that

E R M. that day, if he shall live to fee it, will be
_,_, the burden thereof. It has been remark-

ed, that as men advance in years, they
care less to think of death. Perhaps it oc-
curs oftener to the thoughts of the young,
than of the old. Feebleness of' spirit ren-
ders melancholy ideas more oppreflive;
and after having been so long accustomed
and inured to the world, men bear worse
with any thing which reminds them that
they must soon part with it.-However,
as to part with it is the doom of all, let
us take measures betimes for going off the
flage, when it mhall be our turn to with-
draw, with decency and propriety; leaving
nothing unfulfilled which it is expedient
to have done before we die. To live long,
ought not to be our favourite wish, so
much as to live well. By continuing too
long on earth, we might only live to wit-
ness a greater number of melancholy scenes,
and to expose ourfclves to a wider compass
of human woe. He who has served his
generation faithfully in the world, has du-
ly honoured God, and been beneficent and

useful

useful to mankind; he who in his life has SE R M.
been refpeted and beloved; whose death _
is accompanied with the sincere regret of
all who knew him, and whose memory is
honoured; that man has sufficiently fulfil-
led his course, whether it was appointed by
Providence to be long or short. For ho-
nourable age is not that which flandetb in
length of time, nor that which is measured by
number of years; but wJfdom is the gray hair
to man; and an unspotted life is old age *.

* Widom, iv. 8. 9.

i 4 S E R-

# SERMON V. On DEATH. ECCLESIASTES, xii. 5. — Man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets.

SERMON V.

On DEATH.

ECCLESTASTES, Xii. 5.
- Man goetb to bis long home, and the

mourners go about the Jrceets.
SEVRM. HIS is a fight which incessantly pre-

I l ents itself. Our eyes are so much
accustomed to it, that it hardly makes any
impression. Throughout every season of
the year, and during the course of almost
every day, the funerals which pals along
the streets show us man going to bis long
bone. Were death a rare and uncommon
objeCt; were it only once in the course of
a man's life, that he beheld one of his fel-
low-creatures carried to the grave, a solemn

awe

awe would fill him; he would flop flort in SERM
the midst of luis plcafures; he would even aV
be chilled with fecrct horror. Such impref.
sions, however, would prove unsuitable to
the nature of our preient flare. When they
became so strong as to render men unfit for
the ordinary business of life, they would in
a great measure defeat the intention of our
being placed in this world. It is better or-
dered by thc wisdom of Providence, that
they lhould be weakened by the frequency
of their recurrence; and so tempered by
the mixture of other passions, as to allow
us to go on freely in acting our parts on
earth.

Yet, familiar as death is now become, it

is undoubtedly fit, that by an event of so
important a nature, some imprelion should
be made upon our minds. It ought not to
pass over, as one of those common incidents
which are beheld without concern, and a.
waken no reflecion. There are many things
which the funerals of our fellow-creatures
are calculated to teach; and happy it were
for the gay and dissipated, if they would

liften

rE RM. liften mote frequently to the inftrudions

of so awful a monitor. In the context, the
wife man had described, under a variety of
images suited to the eastern style, the grow-
ing infirmities of old age, until they arrive
it that period which concludes them all;
when, as he beautifully expresses it, the fil-
ver cord being loosened, and the golden bowl
broken, the pitcher being broken at the foun-
tain, and the wheel at the cistern, man goeth
to bis long home, and the mourners go about
tbeJreett. In discoursing from these words,
it is not my purpose to treat, at present, of
the infiruaiona to be drawn from the pro-
sped of our own death. I am to confine
myself to the death of others; to confider
death as one of the molt frequent and con-
fiderable events that happen in the course
of human: affairs; and to show in what
manner.we ought to be affected, first, by
the death of firangers, or indifferent per-
sons; secondly, by the death of friends;
and thirdly, by the death of enemies.

I. BY the death of indifferent persons;

if

if any can be called indifferent, to whom SE RM.
we are so nearly allied as brethren by na-
ture, and brethren in mortality. When
we observe the funerals that pars along the
streets, or when we walk among the mo-
numents of death, the first thing that na-
turally strikes us is the undiftinguifhing
blow, with which that common enemy le-
vels all. We behold a great promiscuous
multitude all carried to the fame abode;
all lodged in the fame dark and silent man-
sions. There, mingle persons of every age
and character, of every rank and condition
in life; the young and the old, the poor
and the rich, the gay and the grave, the
renowned and the ignoble. A few weeks
ago, most of those whom we have seen car-
ried to the grave, walked about as we do
now on the earth; enjoyed their friends,
beheld the light of the fun, and were form-
ing designs for future days. Perhaps, it is
not long since they were engaged in scenes
of high festivity. For them, perhaps, the
cheerful company assembled; and in the
midst of the circle they shone with gay and

pleasing

s E RM. pleasing vivacity. But now-to them, all is

' finally closed. To them, no more flall the

seasons return, or the fun arise. No more ihall
thcy hear the voice of mirth, or behold the
face of man. They are swept from the
univcrfe, as though they had never been.
They are carried away as with a flood: The
wind has paged over them, and they are gone.

When we contemplate this desolation of

the human race; this final termination of
fb many hopes; this silence that now reigns
among those who, a little while ago, were
to busy, or so gay; who can avoid being
xouched with sensations at once awful and
tender i What heart but then warms with
the glow of humanity ? In whose eye does
not the tear gather, on revolving the fate of
passing and ihortlived man ? Such sensa-
tions are so congenial to human nature, that
they are attended with a certain kind of
sorrowful pleasure. Even voluptuaries them-
selves, sometimes indulge a taste for fune-
real melancholy. After the festive assembly
is difmifTld, they chufe to walk retired in
the shady grove, and to contemplate the ve-
nerable fcpulchrcs of their ancestors. This

melancholy

melancholy pleasure arises from two differ- SERM.
ent sentiments meeting at the fame time in ^J
the breast; a sympathetic sense of the short-
ness and vanity of life, and a persuasion
that something exists after death; senti-
ments, which unite at the view of the honfe
appointed for all living. A tomb, it has
been justly said, is a monument situated on
the confines of both worlds. It, at once,
presents to us the termination of the inquie-
tudes of life, and sets before us the image
of eternal reft h bere, in the elegant ex-
pressions of Job, the wicked ce.fe from trou-
bling; and there the weary be at ref. There
the prisoners ref together; they hear not the
voice ofthe opprefor. Thefmall and the great
are there; and the servant is free from his
mafler. It is very remarkable, that in all
languages, and among all nations, death
has been described in a style of this kind;
expressed by figures of speech, which con-
vey every where the fame idea of reft, or
sleep, or retreat from the evils of life. Such
a style perfestly agrees with the general be-
lief of the foul's inSmortality; but assuredly

. conveys

SERM. conveys no high idea of the boasted plea-

V. fures of the world. It. hows how much

all mankind have felt this life to be a fccne
of trouble and care; and have agreed in
opinion, that perfect reft is to be expected
only in the grave.

There, fays Job, are the finall and the

great. There, the poor man lays down at
lat the burden of hiswearifome life. No
more shall he groan under the load of po-
verty and toil. No more fall he hear the
insolent calls of the master, from whom he
received his scanty wages. No more shall
he be raised from needful number on his
bed of straw, nor be hurried away from
his homely meal, to undergo the repeated
labours of the day. While his humble grave
is preparing, and a few poor and decayed
neighbours are carrying him thither, it is
good for us to think, that this man too was
our brother; that for him the aged and de-
ftitute wife, and the needy children now
weep; that, neglected as he was by the
world, he possessed perhaps both a found
understanding, and a worthy heart; and is

now

now carried by angels to reft in Abraham's SE R M.
bofom.-At no great distance from him, the . W
grave is opened to receive the rich and proud
man. For, as it is said with emphasis in
the parable, the rich man al/o died, and war
buried*. He a/o died. His riches prevent-
ed not his sharing the fame fate with the
poor man; perhaps, through luxury, they
accelerated his doom. Then, indeed, the
mourners go about the Jreets; and while, in
all the pomp and magnificence of woe, his
funeral is prepared, his heirs, in the mean
time, impatient to examine his will, are
looking on one another with jealous eyes,
and already beginning to quarrel about the
division of his fubftance.-One day, we
fee carried along the coffin of the frniling
infant; the flower just nipped as it began to
blossom in the parents view: and the next
day, we behold the young man, or young
woman, of blooming form and promising
hopes, laid in an untimely grave. While
the funeral is attended by a numerous, un-

*Luke, xv. 2:.

concerned

SERM. concerned company, who are discoursing

V. to one another about the news of the day,

or the ordinary affairs of life, let our
thoughts rather follow to the house of
mourning, and represent to themselves what
is going on there. There, we would fee a
disconsolate family, fitting in silent grief,
thinking of the fad breach that is made in
their little society; and, with tears in their
eyes, looking to the chamber that is now
left vacant, and to every memorial that
presents itself of their departed friend. By
such attention to the woes of others, the
selfish hardness of our hearts will be gra-
dually softened, and melted down into hu-
manity.

Another day, we follow to the grave one

who, in old age, and after a long career
of life, has in full maturity funk at last
into reft. As we are going along to the
mansion of the dead, it is natural for us to
think, and to discourse, of all the changes
which such a person has seen during the
course of his life. He has pafled, it is
likely, through varieties of fortune. He

has

has experienced prosperity, and adversity. SE R M.
He has seen families and kindreds rife and
fall. He has seen peace and war succeed-
ing in their turns; the face of his country
undergoing many alterations; and the ve-
ry city in which he dwelt riling, in a man-
ner, new around him. After all he has
beheld, his eyes are now closed for ever.
He was becoming a stranger in the midst
of a new fucceflion of men. A race who
knew him not, had arisen to fill the earth.
Thus passes the world away. Throughout
all ranks and conditions, one generation pass-
eth, and another generation cometh; and this
great inn is by turns evacuated, and re-
plenished, by troops of succeeding pilgrims.
--0 vain and inconflant world! 0 fleet-
ing and transient life ! When will die sons
of men learn to think of thee, as they
ought? When will they learn humanity
from the aflictions of their brethren; or
moderation and wisdom, from the sense of
their own fugitive state ?-But, now to
come nearer to ourselves, let us,

VOL. III. H II. CON-

SERM. II. CONSIDER the death of our friends.

V. Want of reflection, or the long habits, ei-

ther of a very busy, or a very dissipated life,
may have rendered men insensible to all
such objects as I have now described. The
firanger, and the unknown, fall utterly
unnoticed at their fide. Life proceeds with
them in its usual train, without being as-
fe&ed by events in which they take no
personal concern. But the dissolution of
those ties which had long bound men toge-
ther, in intimate and familiar union, gives
a painful thock to every heart. When a
family, who, for years, had been living in
comfort and peace, are suddenly flattered
by some of their most beloved or refpe&ed
members being torn from them; when
the hutband or the spouse are separated for
ever from the companion who, amidst eve-
ry viciflitude of fortune, solaced their life;
v:ho had ihared all their joys, and partici-
pated in all their lorrows; when the weep-
ing parent is folding in his arms the dying
!:lid whom he tenderly loved; when he
is giving his laht blessing, receiving the

last

lat fond adieu, looking for the last time SE M.

V.

on that countenance, now wafting and fa- .-
ded, which he had once beheld with much
delight; then is the time, when the heart
is made to drink all the bitterness of hu-
man woe.-But I seek not to wound your
feelings by dwelling on there fad defcrip.
rions. Let us rather turn our thoughts to
the manner in which such events ought
to be received and improved, since happen
they mult in the life of man.

Then, indeed, is the time to weep. Let

not a false idea of fortitude, or mistaken
conceptions of religious duty, be employed
to restrain the bursting emotion. Let the
heart seek its relief, in the free effusion of
just and natural sorrow. It is becoming in
every one to show, on such occasions, that
he feels, as a man ought to feel. At the
fame time, let moderation temper the grief
of a good man and a Christian. He mull
not sorrow like tbofe who have no bhpe. As
high elation of spirits befits not the joys,
so continued and overwhelming dejection
suits not the griefs of this tranitory world.

H 2 Grief,

E RM. Grief, when it goes beyond certain bounds,
V., becomes unmanly; when it lasts beyond a

certain time, becomes unseasonable. Let
him not reject the alleviation which time
brings to all the wounds of the heart, but
susser excessive grief to subside, by degrees,
into a tender and affectionate remem-
brance. Let him confider, that it is in the
power of Providence to raise him up other
comforts in the place of those he has loft.
Or, if his mind, at present, rejed the
thoughts of fuicY consolation, let it turn
for relief to the profpet of a future meet-
ing in a happier world. This is indeed
the chief soother of affliction; the most
powerful balm of the bleeding heart. It
affilts us to view death, as no more than
a temporary separation of friends. They
whom we have loved still live, though not
present to us. They are only removed in-
to a different mansion in the house of the
common Father. The toils of their pil-
grimage are finished; and they are gone
to the land of reft and peace. They are
gone from this dark and troubled world,

to

to join the great aflcmbly of the just; and SERM.
to dwell in the midst of everlasting light. _,
In due time we hope to be associated with
them in these blissful habitations. Until
this season of re-union arrive, no principle
of religion discourages our holding corre-
1pondence of affecion with them by means
of faith and hope.

Meanwhile, let us refpec the virtues,

and cherifl the memory, of the deceased.
Let their little failings be now forgotten.
Let us dwell on what waiamiable in their
charater, imitate their worth, and trace
their steps. By this means, the remem-
brance of those whom we loved shall be-
come useful and improving to us, as well
as sacred and dear; if we accustom our-
selves to confider them as Rill speaking,
and exhorting us to all that is good; if,
in situations where our virtue is tried, we
call up their refpe'ted idea to view, and,
as placed in their presence, think of the
part which we could ac before them with-
out a blush.

Moreover, let the remembrance of the

H 3 friends

SE R M. friends whom we have loft, strengthen our

V. affection to those that remain. The nar-

rower the circle becomes of those we love,
let us draw the closer together. Let the
heart that has been softened by sorrow,
mellow into gentleness and kindness; make
liberal allowance for the weaknesses of
others; and divest itself of the little pre-
judices that may have formerly prepossess-
ed it against them. The greater havock
that death has made among our friends
on earth, let us cultivate connecion more
with God, and heaven, and virtue. Let
those noble views which man's immortal
charaCter affords, fill and exalt our minds.
Passengers only through this sublunary re-
gion, let our thoughts often ascend to that
divine country, which we are taught to
confider as the native feat of the foul.
Thcre, we form conneCtions that are ne-
ver broken. There, we meet with friends
who never die. Among celestial things
there is firm and lasting constancy, while
all that is on earth changes and passes a-
way.- Such are some of the fruits we

should

{hould reap from the tender feelings ex- SE R M.

V.

cited by the death of friends. But they v_
are not only our friends who die. Our
enemies also must go to their long home.
Let us, therefore,

III. CONSIDER how we ought to be as-

fe&ed, when they from whom fulpicions
have alienated, or rivalry has divided us;
they with whom we have long contended,
or by whom we imagine ourselves to have
suffered wrong, are laid, or about to be
laid, in the grave. How inconsiderable
then appear those broils in which we had
been long involved, those contefis and
feuds which we thought were to last for
ever ? The awful moment that now ter-
minates them, makes us feel their vanity.
If there be a spark of humanity left in the
breast, the remembrance of our common
fate then awakens it. Is there a man, who,
if he were admitted to stand by the death-
bed of his bitterest enemy, and beheld him
enduring that conflic which human na-
ture muf fuiffer at the last, would not be

H 4 inclini '

SE R M. inclined to stretch forth the hand of friend.

V.s, ship, to utter the voice of forgiveness, and

to wish for perfet reconciliation with him
before he left the world? Who is there
that, when he beholds the remains of his
adversary deposited in the dutl, feels not,
in that moment, some relentings at the re-
membrance of those par animofities which
mutually embittered their life ?-" There
" lies the man with whom I contended so
" long, silent and mute for ever. He is
" fallen; and I am about to follow him.
" How poor is the advantage which I now
"enjoy ? Where are the fruits of all our
" contels ? In a short time we shall be
"laid together; and no remembrance re-

main of either of us, under the fun.
How many mistakes may there have
" been between us ? Had not he his vir-

tues and good qualities, as well as I ?

"When we fliall both appear before the
" judgement-feat of God, flall I be found
"innocent, and free of blame, for all the
"enmnity I have borne to him ?"- My
friends, let the anticipation of fich senti-

ments,

ments, serve now to correc the inveteracy SE RM.
of prejudice, to cool the heat of anger, to V.
allay the fierceness of resentment. How
unnatural is it for animofities so lasting to
possess the hearts of mortal men, that no-
thing can extinguish them, but the cold
hand of death ? Is there not a sufficient
proportion of evils in the flort span of
human life, that we seek to increase their
number, by ruffling into unneccffary con-
tefls with one another ? When a few funs
more have rolled over our heads, friends
and foes shall have retreated together; and
their love and their hatred be equally bu-
ried. Let our few days, then, be spent in
peace. While we are all journeying on-
wards to death, let us rather bear one an-
other's burdens, than harass one another by
the way. Let us smooth and chear the
road as much as we can, rather than fill
the valley of our pilgrimage with the
hateful monuments of our contention and
strife.

Tnus I have set before you some of

those

SE RM. those meditations which are naturally fug-
_V._ gested by the prevalence of death around

us; by the death of firangers, of friends,
and of enemies. Because topics of this na-
ture are obvious, let it not be thought that
they are without use. They require to be
recalled, repeated, and enforced. Moral
and religious inftrusion derives its efficacy,
not so much from what men are taught to
know, as from what they are brought to
feel. It is not the dormant knowledge of
any truths,. but the vivid impreflion of
them, which has influence on practice.
Neither let it be thought, that such medita-
tions are unseasonable intrusions upon those
who are living in health, in affluence, and
ease. There is no hazard of their making
too deep or painful an impression. The
gloom which they occasion is transient; and
will soon, too soon, it is probable, be dif-
pelled by the succeeding affairs and plea-
furcs of the world. To wisdom it certain-
ly belongs, that men ihould be impresscd
with just views of their nature, and their
state: and the pleasures of life will always

be

be enjoyed to most advantage when they SERM.
are tempered with serious thought. There V.
is a time to mourn, as well as a time to rejoice.
There is a virtuous firrow, which is better
than laughter. There is a fdnff of the coun-
tenance, by which the heart is made better.

S E R.

# SERMON VI. On the PROGRESS of VICE. 1 CORINTHIANS, xv. 33. Be not deceived: Evil communications corrupt good manners.

[ Io8 1

S E R M ON VI.
On the PROGRESS of VICE.

I CORINTHIANS, Xv. 33.
Be not deceived: Evil communications corrupt

good manners.

SERFR. T HOUGH human nature be now fallen
lT"_ .
1 from its original honour, several good

principles still remain in the hearts of men.
There are few, if any, on whose minds the
reverence for a Supreme Being continues
not, in some degree, impressed. In every
breast, some benevolent affetions are found;
and confciencc still retains a sense of the
liftindion between moral good and evil.
These principles of virtue are always sus-
ceptible of improvement; and, in favour-

able

able situations, might have a happy in- S R M.
fluence on praceice. But filch is the frail- __
ty of our nature, and so numerous are the
temptations to evil, that they are in perpe-
tual hazard of being either totally effaced,
or so far weakened as to produce no effect
on conducd. They are good feeds original-
ly sown in the heart; but which require
culture, in order to make them rife to any
maturity. If left without afliftance, they
are likely to be stifled by that profusion of
noxious weeds which the foil fends forth
around them.

Among the numerous causes which in-

troduce corruption into the heart, and ac-
celerate its growth, none is more unhappily
powerful than that which is pointed out in
the text, under the description of evil com-
munications; that is, the contagion which is
diffused by bad examples, and heightened
by particular connections with persons of
loose principles, or dissolute morals. This,
in a licentious slate of society, is the most
common source of those vices and disorders
which so much abound in great cities;

and

aE R M. and often proves, in particular manner, fa-

_ tal to the young; even to them whose be-

ginnings were once auspicious and promi-
sing. It may therefore be an useful em-
ployment of attention, to trace the progreif
of this principle of corruption; to examine
the means by which evil communications gra-
dually undermine, and at last destroy good
manners, or (which here is the proper fig-
nification of the original word) goad morals.
It is indeed disagreeable to contemplate hu-
man nature, in this downward course of its
progress. But it is always profitable to
know our own infirmities and dangers.
The consideration of them will lead me to
suggest some of the means proper to be u-
fed, for preventing the mischiefs arising
from evil communications.

AGREEABLY to what I observed of cer-

tain virtuous principles being inherent in
human nature, there are few but who set
out at first on the world with good difpofi-
tions. The warmth which belongs to youth
naturally exerts itself in generous feelings,

and

and sentiments of honour; in firong at- SERM.

VI.

tachment to friends, and the other emo- k-_,
tions of a kind and tender heart. Almost
all the plans with which persons who have
been liberally educated begin the world, are
connected with honourable views. At that
period, they repudiate whatever is mean
or base. It is pleasing to them to think, of
commanding the esteem of those among
whom they live, and of acquiring a name
among men. But alas! how soon does this
flattering prafp begin to be overcast!
Desires of pleafire usher in temptation, and
forward the growth of disorderly paflions.
Nlinifters of vice are seldom wanting to en-
courage, and flatter, the palfions of the
young. Inferiors study to creep into fa-
vour, by servile obfequioufnefi to all their
desires and humours. Glad to find any
apology for the indulgences of which they
are fond, the young too readily liften to the
voice of those who suggest to them, that
ftricl notions of religion, order, and vir-
tue, are old faihioned and illiberal; that
the restraints which they impose are only

fit

SE R M. fit to be prescribed to those who are in the
v_,J first stage of pupillage; or to be preached

to the vulgar, who ought to be kept within
the closest bounds of regularity and subjec-
tion. But the goodness of their hearts, it
is insinuated to them, and the liberality of
their views, will fully justify their emanci-
pating themselves, in some degree, from
the rigid discipline of parents and teachers.

Soothing as such infmuations are to the

youthful, and inconsiderate, their first steps,
however, in vice, are cautious and timid,
and occasionally checked by remorse. As
they begin to mingle more in the world,
and emerge into the circles of gaiety and
pleasure, finding these loose ideas counte-
nanced by too general pratice, they gra-
dually become bolder in the liberties they
take. If they have been bred to business,
they begin to tire of industry, and look
with contempt on the plodding race of citi-
zens. If they be of superior rank, they
think it becomes them to resemble their e-
quals; to assume that freedom of beha-
viour, that air of forwardness, that tone of

dissipation,

dissipation, that easy negligence of those SERM.
with whom they converse, which appear ,1.
faihionable in high life. If affluence of
fortune unhappily concur to favour their
inclinations, amusements and diversions
succeed in a perpetual round; night and
day are confounded; gaming fills up their
vacant intervals; they live wholly in public
places; they run into many degrees of ex-
cess, disagreeable even to themselves, mere-
ly from weak complaisance, and the fear of
being ridiculed by their loose associates.
Among these associates, the most hardened
and determined always take the lead. The
reft follow them with implicit submission;
and make proficiency in this school of ini-
quity, in exa& proportion to the weakness
of their understandings, and the strength
of their passions.

How many pais away, after this manner,

some of the most valuable years of their
life, toft in a whirlpool of what cannot be
called pleasure, so much as mere giddinefi
and folly ? In the habits of perpetual con-
nection with idle or licentious company,

VOL. III. I all

SE R M. all reflection is loft; while, circulated fromt
Vl.

t one empty head, and one thoughtlefit heart,

to another, folly shoots up into all its molt
ridiculous forms; prompts the extravagant,
unmeaning frolic in private; or sallies forth
in public into mad riot; impelled some-
times by intoxication, sometimes by mere
levity of spirits..

All the while, amidst this whole course

of juvenile infatuation, I readily admit, that
much good nature may fill remain. Ge-
nerofity and attachments may be found;
nay, some awe of religion may lill subsist,
and fime remains of those good imprefflons
which were made upon the mind in early
days. It might yet be very poflible to rc-
claim such persons, and to form them for
useful and refpecable flations in the world,
if virtuous and improving focicty lhould
happily 'ucceed to the place of that idle
crew with whom they now associate; if
important bufmefs ihould occur, to bring
them into a different sphere of acion; or,
if some fealbnable stroke of afflition ihould
in mercy be sent, to recall them to them-

felvcs,

celves, and to awaken fcrioui annl manly seReM.
thought. But, if youth and vigour, and V__.
flowing fortune continue; if a similar sic-
ceflion of companions go on to ainmfe them,
to ingrofs their time, and to Flir up their
passions; the day of ruin,-lct them take
heed, and beware !-the day of irrecover-
able ruin, begins to draw nigh. Fortune
is squandered; health is broken; friends
are offended, affronted, ellranged; aged
parents, perhaps, sent afflicted and mourn-
ing, to the dust.

There are certain degrees of vice which

arc chiefly stamped with the characer of
the ridiculous, and the contemptible: and
there are also certain limits, beyond which
if it pass, it becomes odious and execra-
ble. If, to other corruptions which the
heart has already received, be added the
infusion of sceptical principles, that worst
of all the evil communicationm of finners, the
whole of morals is then on the point of
being overthrown. For, every crime can
then be palliated to conscience; every'check
and restraint which had hitherto remained,

1 2 is

SERM. is taken away. He who, in the beginning

_1 _ of his courte, soothed himself with the

thought, that while he indulged his de-
fires, he did hurt to no man; now, pressed
by the neceflity of supplying those wants
into which his expensive pleasures have
brought him, goes on without remorse to
defraud, and to oppress. The lover of plea-
sure, now becomes hardened and cruel;
violates his trust, or betrays his friend; be-
comes a man of treachery, or a man of
blood; satisfying, or at least endeavouring
all the while to satisfy himfeif, that circum-
stances form his excuse; that by necessity
he is impelled; and that, in gratifying the
passions which nature had implanted within
him, he does no more than follow nature.

Miserable and deluded man! to wi.:t

art thou come at the last? Dost thou
pretend to follow nature, when thou art
contemning the laws of the God of nature?
when thou art Itifling his voice within
thee, which remonltrates against thy crimes?
when thou art violating the belt part of
thy nature, by counteracing the dicates

of

of justice and humanity? Dost thou fol- SERM.
low nature, when thou rendereft thyself an _1
useless animal on the earth; and not use-
less only, but noxious to the society to
which thou belongeft, and to which thou
art a disgrace; noxious, by the bad ex-
ample thou haft set; noxious, by the crimes
thou haft committed; sacrificing innocence
to thy guilty pleasures, and introducing
flame and ruin into the habitations of
peace; defrauding of their due the unfuf-
picious who have trusted thee; involving
in the ruins of thy fortune many a worthy
family; reducing the industrious and the
aged to misery and want; by all which, if
thou haft escaped the deserved sword ofju-
ftice, thou halt at least brought on thylelf
the resentment, and the reproach of all the
respectable and the worthy.-Tremble then
at the view of the gulph which is opening
before thee. Look with horror at the pre-
cipice, on the brink of which thou stand-
eft: and if yet a moment be left for rc-
treat, think how thou mayst escape, and
be saved.

I 3 Tils

SERM. Tins brings me to what I proposed
VI.

- as the next head of discourse; to suggest

some means that may be used for stopping
in time the progress of such mischiefs; to
point out some remedies against the fatal
infection of evil communications.

THE first and most obvious is, to with-

draw from all associations with bad men,
with persons either of licentious principles,
or of disorderly condut. I have shown to
what ifue such dangerous connections are
apt to bring men at lat. Nothing, there-
fore, is of more importance for the young,
to whom I now chiefly address myself, than
to be careful in the choice of their friends
and companions. This choice is too fre-
quently made without much thought, or
is determined by some casual connection;
and yet, very often, the whole fate of their
future life depends upon it. The circum-
stances which chiefly attract the liking and
the friendship of youth, are vivacity, good
humour, engaging manners, and a cheer-
ful or easy temper; qualities, I confess, a-

riabible

miable in themselves, and useful and va- SER M.

VI.

luable in their place. But I intreat you to ,
remember, that there are not all the quali-
ties requisite to form an intimate compa-
nion or friend. Something more is still to
he looked for; a found understanding, a
steady mind, a firm attachment to prin-
ciple, to virtue, and honour. As only so-
lid bodies polish well, it is only on the sub-
ftantial ground of these manly endowments,
that the other amiable qualities can receive
their proper lustre. Destitute of these es-
fential requisites, they ihine with no more
than a tinsel brilliancy. It may sparkle for
a little, amidst a few circles of the frivolous,
and superficial; but it imposes not on the
discernment of the public. The world in
general seldom, after a short trial, judges
amiss of the characers of men. You may
be assured, that its charater of you will be
formed by the company you frequent; and
how agreeable soever they may ieem to be,
if nothing is to be found among them but
hollow qualities, and external accomplifm-
ments, they soon fall down into the class,

I 4 at

SERM. at best, of the insignificant, perhaps of the
V .' worthless; and you fink of course, in the

opinion of the public, into the fame defpi-
cable rank.

Allow me to warn you, that the most

gay and pleasing, are sometimes the most
insidious and dangerous companions; an
admonition which refpeds both the sexes.
Often they attach themselves to you from
interested motives; and if any taint or fufpi-
cion lie on their characer, under the cover
of your rank, your fortune, or your good
reputation, they seek protection for them-
selves. Look round you, then, with atten-
tive eye, and weigh characters well before
you conned yourselves too closely with any
who court your society. He that walketb
with wife men a/ll be wis ; but a companion
of fools Jball be deflrored. Wherefore, enter
not thou into the counsel of the scorner. Walk
not in the way with evil men; avoid it; pafi
not by it, turn from it, and pass away *.

*Prov. xiii. 20.; Prov . . 14.

IN

IN order to prevent the influence of evil SERM.

communications, it is farther needful, that aj_
you fix to yourselves certain principles of
conduct, and be resolvcd and determined
on no occasion to swerve from them. Set-
ting the consideration of religion and vir-
tue aside, and attending merely to interest
and reputation, it will be found, that he
who enters on active life without having
ascertained some regular plan, according to
which he is to guide himself, will be un-
prosperous in the whole of his subsequent
progress. But when conduct is viewed in
a moral and religious light, the effeft of
having fixed no principles of action; of
having formed no laudable standard of
character, becomes more obviously fatal'
For hence it is, that the young and thought-
less imbibe so readily the poison of evil
communications, and fall a prey to every fe-
ducer. They have no internal guide whom
they are accustomed to follow and obey; no-
thing within themselves, that can give firm-
ness to their condu.c They are of course
the vicims of momentary inclination or

caprice;

R .M. caprice ; religious and good by flarts,

., when, during the absence of temptation

and tempters, the virtuous principle stirs
within them ; but never long the fame;
changing and fluctuating according to the
passion that chances to rife, or the inftiga-
tion of thole with whom they have con-
nected themfclves. They are failing on a
dangerous sea, which abounds with rocks;
without compass, by which to direct their
course, or helm, by which to guide the vef-
fel. Whereas, if they acted on a system,
if their behaviour made it appear that they
were determined to conduct themselves by
certain rules and principles, not only would
they escape innumerable dangers, but they
would command reljied from the licenti-
ous themfelvcs. Evil doers would cease to
lay their fiares for one whom they saw
moving above them, in a higher iphere,
and with a more steady course.

As a farther corrective of evil communi-

cations, and as a foundation to those prin-
ciples which you lay down for conduct,

let

let me advise you sometimes to think fe- SERM.

Vi.

rioufly, of what contlitutes real enjoyment _
and happiness. Your days cannot be en-
tirely spent in company and pleasure.
How closely soever you are surrounded and
besieged by evil companions, there must
be some intervals, in which you are left by
yourselves; when, after all the turbulence
of amusement is over, your mind will na-
turally assume a graver and more pensive
cast These are precious intervals to you,
if you knew their value. Seize that fober
hour of retirement and silence. Indulge
the meditations which then begin to rife.
Cast your eye backwards on what is past
of your life; look forward to what is pro-
bably to come. Think of the part you
are now acting; and of what remains to
be ated, perhaps to be suffered, before you
die. Then is the time to form your plans
of happiness, not merely for the next day,
but for the general course of your life.
Remember, that what is pleasing to you at
twenty, will not be equally so at forty or
fifty years of age; and that what continues

longef

SE R M. longest pleasing, is always most valuable.
V.a Recolled your own feelings in different

fcenep of life. Inquire on what occasions
you have felt the truest fatisfalion; whe-
ther days of sobriety, and rational employ-
ment, have not left behind them a more a-
greeable remembrance, than nights of li-
centioueiefs and riot. Look round you on
the world; reflec on the different focie-
ties which have fallen under your obfer-
vation; and think who among them ap-
pear to enjoy life to most advantage; whe-
ther they who, encircled by gay compa-
nions, are constantly fatiguing themselves
in quest of pleasure; or they to whom plea-
sure comes unsought, in the course of an
ative, virtuous, and manly life. Compare
together these two claffcs of mankind, and
aik your own hearts, to which of them
you would chufe to belong. If, in a hap-
py moment, the light of truth begin to
break in upon you, refuse not admittance
to the ray. If your hearts lecretly re-
proach you for the wrong choice you have
made, bethink yourselves that the evil is

not

not irreparable Srill llerc is time for re- SE R M.
pentance and retreat; and a return to wis- -
dom, is always honourable.

Were such meditations often indulged,

the evil comalnications of finners would die
away before the i; the force of their poi-
son would evaporate; the world would be-
gin to assume in your eyes a new form
and shape. Disdain not, in these solitary
hours, to recolled what the wisest have
lsid, and have written, concerning human
happincfs, and humarn vanity. Treat not
theit opinions, as effusions merely of pee-
viihnefs or disappointment: but believe
theni to be, What they truly are, the result
of long experience, and thorough acquaint-
mace with the world. Confider that the
leafon of youth is passing fait away. It
is time for you to be taking measures for
an establishment in life; nay, it were wife
to be looking forward to a placid enjoy-
ment of old age. That is a period you
wish to fee; but how miserable when it
arrives, if it yield you nothing but the
dregs of life; and present no retrdfped,

except

SERM. except that of a thoughtless, and difio-
VL__ noured youth!

LET me once more advise you, to look

forward sometimes beyond old age; to
look to a future world. Amidst evil commu-
nications, let your belief, and your character
as Christians, arise to your view. Think
of the sacred name in which you were
baptized. Think of the God whom your
fathers honoured and worihipped; of the
religion in which they trained you up; of
the venerable rites in which they brought
you to partake. Their paternal cares have
now ceased. They have finished their
earthly course: and the time is coming
when you must follow them. You know
that you are not to live always here; and
you surely do not believe that your exist-
ence is to end with this life. Into what
world then are you next to go ? Whom
will you meet with there ? Before whose
tribunal are you to appear ? What account
will you be able to give of your present
trifling and irregular conduCt to him who

made

made you ?-Such thoughts may be treat- s E R M.
ed as unseasonable intrusions. But intrude Vi.
they sometimes will, whether you make
them welcome or not. Better then, to al-
low them free reception when they come,
and to confider fairly to what they lead.
You have seen persons die; at least, you
have heard of your friends dying near you.
Did it never enter into your minds, to
think what their last reflections probably
were in their concluding moments; or
what your own, in such a situation, would
be ? What would be then your hopes and
fears; what part you would then wish to
have acted; in what light your closing
eyes would then view this life, and this
world ?

These are thoughts, my friends, too im-

portant to be always excluded. These are
things too solemn and awful to be trifled
with. They are superior to all the ridicule
of fools. They come home to every man's
bosom; and are intitled to every man's
highest attention. Let us regard them as
becomes reasonable and mortal creatures;

and

SE RM. and they will prove effectual antidotes to
V"_^ the evil communications of petulant scoffers.

When vice or folly arise to tempt us un-
der flattering forms, let the serious charac-
ter which we bear as men come also for-
ward to view; and let the solemn admo-
nitions, with which I conclude, found full
in our ears: My Jon, if inners entice thee,
consent tbou not. Come out from amongj)
them, and be separate. Remember thy Crea-
tor in the days of tby youth. Fear the Lord,
and depart from evil. The way of lif is
bove to the wife; and be that keepetb the
commandment, Reepeth his own foul *.

' Prov. i. 1o.; z Corinth. vi. 17.; Eccles. xii. l.
Prov. xy. 24.

S E R-

# SERMON VII. On FORTITUDE. PSALM xxvii. 3. Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear. —

[ 129 ]
S E R M 0 N VII.

On FORTITUDE.

PSALM xxvii. 3.
Though an hojl Jould encamp again? me, my

heart Jhall not scar.-

HIS world is a region of danger, in SERM.
which perfedt safety is poffefled by VI.

no man. Though we live in times of e-
ftablithed tranquillity, when there is no
ground to apprehend that an brfl ihall, in
the literal sense, encamp againJt us; yet eve-
ry man, from one quarter or other, has
somewhat to dread. Riches often make to
them/elves wings, and flee away. The firm-
eft health may in a moment be ihaken.
The inoft flourishing family may unexp-'-

VOL. III. K edly

SERM. edly be Icattered. The appearances of our

VII.
a _ liecurity are frequently deceitful. When

our sky seems most fettled and serene, in
iome unobserved quarter gathers the little
black cloud, in which the tempest ferments,
and prepares to discharge itself on our head.
Such is the real situation of man in this
world; and he who flatters himself with an
opposite view of his slate, only lives in the
paradise of fools.

In this situation, no quality is more re-

quifite than constancy, or fortitude of
mind; a quality which the Psalmist ap-
pears, from the sentiment in the text, to
have pofirfcfe in an eminent degree. For-
titude was justly classed by the ancient
philosophers, among the cardinal virtues.
It is indeed essential to the support of them
all; and is molt necessary to be acquired
by every one who wifles to discharge with
fidelity the duties of his tation. It is the
armour of the mind, which will fit hin
for encountering the trials, and surmount-
ing the dangers, that are likely to occur in
the course of his life. It may be thought,

perhaps,

perlhap, to be a quality, ill fine meallre, SS RM.
conlilitutiolal; ; dependent on lirmnefs of t_
nerves, and itrcngtl of flirits. Though,
partly, it is io, vet experience ihows that
it may also be acquired by principle, and
be fortified by realbn ; and it is only when
thuls acquired, and thus fortitied, th:at it
can be accounted to carry the characer of
virtue. Fortitude is opposcd, as all know,
to timidity, ilrcliolution, a feeble and a
wavering spirit. It is placed, like other
virtues, in the middle between two cx-
trcmes ; tanding at an equal diltance from
rallnelc on the one hand, and from puiil-
lanimity on the other. In difiourfing on
this fuljeict, I purlpolc, firl, to flow the
importance of fortitude or conflancv; next,
to afccrtain the grounds on which it mult
reft; and, latl!y, to fuiggif ioime confidera -
tions for affiffing the exercile of it.

I. THIE high importance of fortitude will

cafily appear, if we coniider it as refpet-
ing either the happinels of human life, or
the proper :!ifch:rge of its dutics.

K 2 Without

SE R M. Without some degree of fortitude there

,VL. can be no happincs;e; bccanfe, amridft the

thousand uncertainties of life, there can be
no enjoyment of tranquillity. The man
of feeble and timorous spirit, lives under
perpetual alarms. He foresees every distant
danger, and trembles. He explores the re-
gions of pofTibility, to discover the dangers
that may arilc. Often lie creates imaginary
ones; always magnifies those that are real.
Hence, like a person haunted by speares,
he loies the free enjoyment even of a fife
and 1rofpcrous tate. On the firflt hock of
adversity, he dcifonds. Inltead of exerting
himself to lay hold on the resources that
remain, he gives up all for loft; and re-
signs himfclf to abject and broken spirits.
-On the other hand, firmness of mind is
the parent of tranquillity. It enables one
to enjoy the prelent without dilturbance;
and to look calmly on dangers that ap-
proach, or evils that threaten in future. It
fuggeits good hopes. It supplies resources.
It allows a man to retain the full poffefiion
of himself, in every situation of fortune.
Look into the heart of this man, and you

will

will find compofiure, cheerfulness, and mag- SS. RM.
nanimity. Look into the heart of the other, VI.
and you will fee nothing but confusion,
anxiety, and trepidation. The one is the
cattle built on a rock, which defies the at-
tacks of surrounding waters. The other
is a hut placed on the shore, which every
wind lhakes, and every wave overflows.

IF fortitude be thus essential to the enjoy-

ment of life, it is equally so, to the proper
diTcharge of all its most important duties.
He who is of a cowardly mind is, and
must be, a slave to the world. He fashions
his whole conduc according to its hopes
and fears. He smiles, and fawns, and be-
trays, from abjec considerations of personal
safety. He is incapable of either concei-
ving, or executing, any great design. He
can neither fland the clamour of the mul-
titude, nor the frowns of the mighty. The
wind of popular favour, or the threats of
power, are sufficient to {hake his molt
determined purpose. The world always
knows where to find him. He may pretend

K 3 to

E R M. to have prinlciplcs; blit on every trying oc-
L^^_ claionl, it will he lCeen, that his pretended

principles Iendl to convenience and fafcty.
-hTc man of virtuous fortitude, again,
follows the dictatcs of his heart, uncmbar-
rafled by those restraints which lie upon
the timorous. I laving once detcrmined
what is fit for him to do, no threatenings
can flake, nor dangcrs appall him. He
rclts upon himself, fipported by a con-
Icioulcfis of inward dignity. I (do not fay
that this difofition alone, will fccure hltn
againflt cvery vice. IHc may he lifted up
witl pride. lle may le seduccd by plea-
firc. He may ie hurried away by palion.
But at Icaft on one quarter, he will be fa T;
by no abljjc fears milled into evil.

Without this temper of mind, no man

can be a thorough Christian. For his pro-
!felion, as lich, requires him to be fupc-
lior to that feIr f ,nan which blringell.) a
fi;irc,; enjoin, himi, tor the fake of a good
(.(!:l.; CIe, to encounter evcry danger; and
to bc lp:'parcd, if called, even to lay down
his lili mn the cault of religion and truth.

All

All who have been distinguished as ser- SE RM.

VII.

vants of God, or benefactors of men; all _
who, in perilous situations, have aced their
part with such honour as to render their
names illustrious through succeeding ages,
have been eminent for fortitude of mind.
Of this we have one conspicuous example in
the Apostle Paul, whom it will be inftruc-
tive for us to view in a remarkable occur-
rence of his life. After having long aaed
as the apostle of the Gentiles, his miflion
called him to go to Jerusalem, where he
knew that he was to encounter the utmost
violence of his enemies. Just before he set
fail, he called together the elders of his
favourite church at Ephesus, and in a pa-
thetic speech, which does great honour to
his characer, gave them his last farewel.
Deeply affceted by their knowledge of the
certain dangers to which lie was exposing
himifilf, all the aflcmbly were filled with
diitlefs, and melted into tears. The cir-
rtumilances were such, as might have con-
\eyd (dgection even into a reiolute mind;
;!md would have totally overwhelmed the

K 4 feeble.

S E R M. feeble. 7hey all uwpt fire, andfell on Paul's

.,_ neck, and kisscd him ; firrowing mofl of all

for the words which he spake, that theyJhould
fee bis face no mrre. What were then the
sentiments, what was the language, of this
great and good man ? Hear the words
which spoke his firm and undaunted
mind. Behold, I go bound in the spirit, un-
to Jerrfalem, not knowing the things that
fJall befall me there; five that the Holy
GhoJf witnefeth in every city, faying, that
bonds and afflicions abide me. But none of
these things move me; neither count I my life
dear unto inytlf, si that I might fnbfl my
course with joy, and the minJilry which I
have received of the Lird Jesus, to teflif) the
gofpil of the grace of God *. There was ut-
tered the voice, there breathed the spirit, of
a brave, and a virtuous man. Such a man
knows not what it is to flrink from dan-
ger, when confcicncec oints out his path.
In that path he is determined to walk; let
the confequenccs be what they will. Till

* A s xx. 2. 23. 24.; 37. 38.

I die,

I/di, I will not remove my inegrit frJom me. SE R M.
My rightcbielfifns li'i ol fj, and il nol ,lt let
it go. My heart Jhfll not rproaclr mc so long
as Ilive *. " For mc, there is a part ap-
" pointed to ad. I go to perform it. My

duty I shall do to-day. Ict to-morrow

"take tbought for the things of itfJlf"--
Having thus shown the importance, I pro-
ceed,

II. To show the proper foundations of

constancy and fortitude of mind. They
are principally two; a good conscience,
;and trult in God.

A corrupted and guilty man, can poflefs

no true firmness of heart. He who by
crooked paths, purfucs dishonourable ends,
has many things to dismay him. He not
only dreads the difappointlrent of his de-
signs, by some of those accidents to which
all are exposed; but lie has alol to dread
the treachery of his confederates, the dif-
covery and reproach of the world, and the

' Job xxvii. 5. 6.

just

SERM. just difpleafire of Heaven. His fears he

is obliged to conceal; but while he assumes
the appearance of intrepidity before the
world, he trembles within himnfelf; and
the bold and steady eye of integrity, fre-
quently darts terror into his heart. There
is, it is true, a fort of conltitutional cou-
rage, which sometimes has rendered men
daring in the molt flagitious attempts.
But this fool-hardiness of the ralh, this
bol(lnefs of the ruffian, is altogether differ-
ent from real fortitude. It arises merely
from warmth of blood, from want of
thought, and blindness to danger. As it
forms no character of value, so it appears
only in occasional sallies; and never can be
nniformily maintained. It requires adven-
titious props to lipport it; and in some
hour of trial, always fails. There can be
no true courage, no regular persevering
conltancy, but what is connected with
principle, and founded on a consciousness
of rectitude of intention. This, and this
only, erects that brazen wall which we can
oppose to every hostile attack. It cloaths

us

us with an armour, on which fortune will SE R M.
,pend its shafts in vain. All is found VIi.
within. There is no weak place, where we
particularly dread a blow. There is no
occalion for false colours to be hung out.
No disguise is needed to cover us. We
would be satisfied if all mankind could
look into our hearts. What has he to
fear, who not only ats on a plan which
his conscience approves, but who knows
that every good man, nay, the whole un-
bialfed world, if they could trace his in-
tentions, would justify and approve his
condut ?

1H knows, at the fame time, that he is ad-
ing under the immediate eye and protec-
tion of the Almighty. Behold my witness is
in ceaven ; and my record is on high *. Here
opens a new source of fortitude to every
virtuous man. The consciousness of such
an illutrious fpedator, invigorates and ali-
mates him. He trults, that the eternal lo-

Job xvi. 19.

ver

S E R M. ver of righteousness not only beholds and

VII.
a__ approves, but will strengthen and assist;

will not susser him to be unjustly oppressed,
and will reward his constancy in the end,
with glory, honour, and immortality. A
good conscience, thus supported, bestows
on the heart a much greater degree of intre-
pidity, than it could otherwise inspire. One
who reils on an Almighty, though invisible,
Protector, exerts his powers with double
force; ads with vigour not his own. Ac-
cordingly, it was from this principle of
trust in God, that the Psalmist derived that
courage and boldness, which he expresses
in the text. He had said immediately be-
fore, The Lord is my light and my salvation;
the Lord it the Jretigth of my life. The con-
sequence which diredly follows is, of whom
jhall I be afraid ? Though an hoJt Jhould en-
camp againt me, my heart Jhall not frar. It
remains,

III. THAT I fuggedt a few considerations
which may prove auxiliary to the exercise

of

of virtuous fortitude, in the midst of dan- SE R M

VII.
gers. v

From what was just now said, it appears,

first, that it is of high importance to every
one who wifles to aa his part with f.
coming resolution, to cultivate a religious
principle, and to be inspired with trust in
God. The imperfections of the best are
indeed so numerous, as to give them no
title to claim, on their own account, the
protection of Heaven. But we are taught
to believe, that the merciful God, who made
us, and who knows our frame, favours the
sincere and upright; that the supreme ad-
ministration of the universe is always on
the fide of truth and virtue; and, that,
therefore, every worthy character, and eve-
ry just and good cause, though for a while
it mhould be depressed, is likely to receive
countenance and proteCtion in the end.
The more firmly this belief is rooted in
the heart, its influence will be more power-
ful, in surmounting the fears which arise
from a sense of our own weakness or dan-
ger. The records of all nations afford a

thousand

SE R M. thousand remarkable initances of the es-

. fed of this principle, both on individuals,

and on bodies of men. Animated by the
strong belief of a just cause, and a pro-
tcding God, the feeble have waxed Jlrong,
and have despised dangers, sufferings,
and death. Handfuls of men have defied
bojis that were encamped agaitql them ; and
have gone forth, conquering and to con-
quer. The fuword of the Lord, and of Gi-
deon, have called forth a valour which a-
fionifhed the world; and which could have
been exerted by none, but those who fought
under a divine banner.

IN the next place, let him who would

preserve fortitude in difficult situations, fill
his mind with a sense, of what constitutes
the true honour of man. It consists not in
the multitude of riches, or the elevation of
rank; for experience Ihows, that these may
be possessed by the worthless, as well as by
the deserving. It consists, in being deterred
by no danger when duty calls us forth; in
fulfilling our allotted part, whatever it may

be,

be, with faithfulness, bravery, and con- SERM.
ftancy of mind. These qualities never fail V_.
to stamp diftilnction on the character. They
confer on him who discovers them, an ho-
nourable fuperlority, which all, even ene-
mies, feel and revere. Let every man,
therefore, when the hour of danger comes,
bethink himself, that now is arrived the
hour of trial; the hour which must deter-
mine whether he is to rife, or to fink for
ever, in the eftcem of all around him. If,
when put to the test, he discover no firm-
ness to maintain his ground, no fortitude
to stand a flock, he has forfeited every
pretension to a manly mind. He mull
reckon on being exposed to general con-
tempt; and what is worse, he will feel that
he deserves it. In his own eves he will be
contemptible; than which, lurely, no mi-
fery can be more severe.

BUT in order to acquire habits of forti-

tude, what is of the highest consequence
is, to have formed a just estimate of the
goods and evils of life, and of the value of

life

BERM. life itself. For here lies the chief Iburce of
»^_^ our weakness and pusillanimity. We over-

value the advantages of fortune; rank and
riches, cafe and iifety. Deluded by vain
opinions, we look to theye as our ultimate
goods. We hang upon them with fond at-
tachment; and to forfeit any hope of ad-
.ancement, to incur the least discredit with
the world, or to be brought down but one
ftep from the fiation we possess, is regard-
ed with consternation and dismay. Hence,
a thousand weights hang upon the mind,
which depress its courage, and bend it to
mean and diflionourable compliances. What
fortitude can he poffels, what worthy or
generous purpose can he form, who con-
ceives diminution of rank, or loss of for-
tune, to be the chief evils which man can
susser? Put these into the balance with
true honour, with conscious integrity, with
the esteem of the virtuous and the wife,
with the favour of Almighty God, with
peace of mind, and hope of heaven; and
then think, whether those dreaded evils are
sufficient to intimidate you from doing

your

your duty. Look beyond external appear- E R M.

VII.

ances to the inside of things. Suffer not _
yourselves to be impoied o,l by that glitter-
ing varnish, with which the surface of the
world dazzles the vulgar. Confider how
many are contented and happy without
those advantages of fortune, on which you
put so extravagant a value. Confider whe-
ther it is poifible for you to be happy with
them, if, for their fake, you forfeit all that
is effimabe in man. The favour of the
great, perhaps, you think, is at flake; or
that popularity with the multitude, on
which you build plans of advancement.
Alas! how precarious are the means which
you employ in order to attain the end you
have in view; and the end itself, how little
is it worthy of your ambition ? That fa~
your which you pursue, of dubious advan-
tage when gained, is frequently loft by
servile compliance. The timid and abjeA
are deteted, and despised even by those
whom they court; while the firm and re-
solute rife in the end to those honours%
which the other pursued in vain.

VOL. 11. L Pui'

SERM. PUT the cafe at the wori. Suppose not

_.~.2. your fortune only, but your safety, to be

in hazard; your life itself to be endanger-
ed, by adhering to conscience and vir-
tue. Think, what a creeping and igno-
minious state you would render life, if,
when your duty calls, you would expose it
to no danger; if by a dastardly behaviour,
you would, at any expence, preserve it.
That life, which you are so anxious to pre-
serve, can at any rate be prolonged only
for a few years more; and those years may
be full of woe. He who will not rilk death
when conscience requires him to face it,
ought to be aihamed to live.- Confider,
as a man and a Christian, for what purpose
life was given thee by Heaven. Was it,
that thou mighteft pass a few years in low
pleasures, and ignoble sloth; flying into
every corner to hide thyself, when the least
danger rifes to view ? No: Life was given,
that thou mighteft come forth to ad some
useful and honourable part, on that theatre
where thou haft been placed by Provi-
dence; mighteft glorify him that made

thee;

thee; and by steady perseverance in virtue, SERM.
rife in the end to an immortal state. ,_

Son of man! Remember thine original

honours. Aflert the dignity of thy nature.
Shake off this pusillanimous dread of death;
and seek to fulfil the ends for which thou
wert sent forth by thy Creator.--The
sentiment of a noble mind is, Icount not
my life dear unto miyef, Jo that I may fini#
my courfi with joy. To the fini/bing of bi
course, let every one direc his eye; and let
him now appretiate life according to the
value it will be found to have, when fum-
med up at the close. That is the period
which brings every thing to the tet. Illu-
sions may formerly have imposed on the
world; may have imposed on the man him-
self. But all illusion then vanishes. The
real characer comes forth. The estimate
of happiness is fairly formed. Hence it
has been justly said, that no man can be
pronounced either great or happy, until his
last hour come. To that last hour, what
will bring such fatisfadion, or add so much
dignity, as the refletion, on having fur-

L 2 mounted

SE R M mounted with firmness all the discourage-
VII.

ments of the world, and having persevered
to the end in one uniform course of fidelity
and honour? We remarked before, the
magnanimous behaviour of the Apostle
Paul, when he had persecution and distress
full in view. Hear now the sentiments of
the fame great man, when the time of his
last suffering approached; and remark the
majesty, and the ease, with which he look-
ed on death. I am now ready to be oered,
and the time o' my departure is at hand. I
have fougbt the good jfgt. I have finihed
my courie. I have kept the faith. Hence-
fortb tbher is laid up for me a crown of righ-
tovfitJf *. How many years of life does
such a dying moment overbalance ? Who
would not chute, in this manner, to go off
the stage, with such a song of triumph in
his mouth, rather than prolong his exist-
ence through a wretched old age, stained
with fin and hame ?

* Timothy, iv. 6. 7.

ANIMATED

ANIMATED by these considerations, let SEP:.

us nourish that fortitude of mind, which is v;
so essential to a man, and a Christian. Let
no discouragement, nor danger, deter us
from doing what is right. Through ho-
nour and dijonour, through good report and
bad report, let us preserve fidelity to our
God and our Saviour. hbough an hofiboutid
encamp againfi us, let us not fear to dif-
charge our duty. God assists us in the vir-
tuous conflid; and will crown the conque-
ror with eternal rewards. Be thou faithful
unto death, and I will give thee a crown of
life. To kim that overcometb, faith our bless.
ed Lord, I will grant to fit with me on my
throne; even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father on his throne *.

Rev. ii. o.-lii. 1.

L3 S E
3-

# SERMON VIII. On ENVY. 1 CORINTHIANS, xiii. 4. Charity envieth not. —

[ 150 ]
SERItMON VIII.

On ENVY.

I CORINTHIANS, xiu. 4,

Charity enviet not.-

BERM. NVY is a sensation of uneasiness
v. Jj and disquiet, arising from the ad-

vantages which others are supposed to
possess above us, accompanied with ma-
lignity towards those who possess them.
This is universally admitted to be one of
the blackest paflions in the human heart.
In this world, we depend much on on2
another; and were therefore formed by
Cod to be mutually iufeful and afifting.
The inftinds of kindness and compafion
which belong to our frame, Ihow how

much

much it was the intention of our Creator, SE RM.
that we should be united in friendfliip. If vilI.
any infringe this great law of nature, by
ads of causeless hostility, resentment may
justly arise. No one is to be condemned
for defending his rights, and ihowing dif-
pleasure against a malicious enemy. But
to conceive ill-will at one who has attacked
none of our rights, nor done us any inju-
ry, solely because he is more prosperous
than we are, is a disposition altogether un-
natural; it suits not the human conftitu-
tion, and partakes more of the rancour of
an evil spirit. Hence, the charader of an
envious man is universally odious. All dif-
claim it; and they who feel themselves un-
der the influence of this paflion, carefully
conceal it.

But it is proper to confider, that among

all our paflions, both good and bad, there
are many different gradations. Sometimes
they swim on the surface of the mind,
without producing any internal agitation.
They proceed no farther than the begin-
nings of passion. Allayed by our confti-

L 4 tution,

E R M. tution, or tempered by the mixture of other
VII. dispositions, they exert no considerable in-

fluence on the temper. Though the cha-
rater in which envy forms the ruling pas-
sion, and reigns in all its force, be one too
odious, I hope, to be common; yet some
shade, some tincture, of this evil difpofi-
tion, mixes with molf characters in the
world. It is, perhaps, one of the mot pre-
vailing infirmities to which we are subjeCt.
There are few but who, at one time or
other, have found somewhat of this nature
stirring within them; some lurking unea-
finest in their mind, when they looked up
to others, who enjoyed a greater share than
had fallen to their lot, of some advantages
which they wilhed, and thought themselves
intitled, to possess. Though this ihould
not embitter their disposition; though it
should create the uncafinefs only, without
the malignity, of envy; yet still it is a dif-
turbcd Itate of mind; and always borders
upon, if it actually include not, some vi-
cious affections. In order, as far as pof-
fible, to remedy this evil, I hall now con.

fider

fider what are the most general grounds of SERM

VIIL

the envy which men are apt to bear to
others; and shall examine what foundation
they afford, for any degree of this trouble-
some and dangerous paffion.-The chief
grounds of envy may be reduced to three:
Accomplihmnents of mind; advantages of
birth, rank, and fortune; superior fuccefi
in worldly pursuits.

I. ACCOMPLISHMENTS, or endowments

of the mind. The chief endowment for
which man deserves to be valued, is virtue.
This, unquestionably, forms the most effi-
mable distinction among mankind. Yet
this, which may appear surprising, never
forms any ground of envy. No man is
envied for being more just, more generous,
more patient, or forgiving, than others.
This may, in part, be owing to virtue pro-
ducing in every one who beholds it, that
high degree of refped and love, which ex-
tingnifhes envy. But probably, it is more
owing to the good opinion which every
one entertains of his own moral qualities.

Some

SE tM. Some virtues, or, at least, the feeds of them,

he finds within his breait. Others, he vain-
ly attributes to himself. Those in which
he is plainly deficient, he undervalues; as
either not real virtues, or virtues of very
inferior rank; and relts satisfied, that, on
the whole, he is as worthy and refpedtable
as his neighbour.

The cafe is different, with regard to those

mental abilities and powers which are a-
fcribed to others. As long as these are ex-
erted in a sphere of action remote from
ours, and not brought into competition
with talents of the fame kind, to which we
have pretensions, they create no jealousy.
They are viewed as distant objects, in
which we have not any concern. It is not
until they touch our own line, and appear
to rival us in what we wish to excel, that
they awaken envy. Even then, envy is,
properly speaking, not grounded on the
talents of others. For here, too, our self-
complacency brings us relief; from the
persuasion, that were we thoroughly known,
and full justice done to us, our abilities

would

would be found not inferior to those of SERM.
our rivals. What properly occasions envy, vI.
is the fruit of the accomplishments of
others; the pre-eminence which the opi-
nion of the world bestows, or which we
dread it will bestow, on their talents above
ours. Hence, distinguished superiority in
genius, learning, eloquence, or any other
of those various arts that attract the no-
tice of the world, often become painful
grounds of envy; not indeed to all indif-
ferently, but to those who follow the fame
line of pursuit. Mere rivality, inspired by
emulation, would carry no reproach; were
not that rivality joined with obliquity, and
a malignant spirit; did it not lead to fe-
cret detraction, and unfair methods of di-
minifhing the reputation of others. Too
frequently has such a spirit tarnished the
charater of those who fought to shine in
the elegant arts; and who, otherwise, had a
just title to fame.-Let such as are ad-
dided to this infirmity confider, how much
they degrade themselves. Superior merit,
of any kind, always refts on itself. Con-

fcious

sERM. fciou of what it deserves, it disdains low
,L__, competitions and jealousies. They who

are itung with envy, especially when they
allow its malignity to appear, confess a sense
of their own inferiority; and, in effec, pay
homage to that merit from which they en-
deavour to detract

But in order to eradicate the pafion,

and to cure the disquiet which it creates,
let such persons farther confider, how in-
considerable the advantage is which their
rivals have gained, by any superiority over
them. They whom you envy, are them-
selves inferior to others who. follow the
fame pursuits. For how few, how very
few, have reached the summit of excel-
lence, in the art or study which they cul-
tivate? Even that degree of excellence
which they have attained, how eldom is
it allowed to them by the world, till after
they die ? Public applause is the mot fluc-
tuating, and uncertain, of all rewards. Ad-
mired, as they may be, by a circle of their
friends, they have to look up to others,
who (land above them in public opinion;

and

and undergo the fame mortifications which s ER M.
you susser in looking up to them. Con- .
fider what labour it has cost them to arrive
at that degree of eminence they have gain-
ed; and after all their labour, how imp
perfect their recompence is at lait. With-
in what narrow bounds is their fame con-
fined? With what a number of humilia-
tions is it mixed ? To how many are they
absolutely unknown? Among those who
know them, how many cenfire and decry
them ?- Attending fairly to these confi.
derations, the envious might come in the
end to discern, that the fame acquired by
anv accompliihment of the mind, by all
that {kill can contrive, or genius can exe-
cute, amounts to no more than a small ele-
vation; raises the polfeffor to such an in-
considerable height above the crowd, that
others may, without disquiet, fit down con-
tented with their own mediocrity.

II. ADVANTAGES of fortune, superiority

in birth; rank and riches, even qualifica-
ions of body and form, become grounds

of

SERM. of envy. Among external advantages,

-vm. those which relate to the body ought cer-

tainly, in the comparative estimation of
ourselves and others, to hold the lowest
place; as in the acquisition of them we
can claim no merit, but must ascribe them
entirely to the gift of nature. Yet envy
has often Ihowed itself here in full malig-
nity; though a small measure of reflection
might have discovered, that there was little
or no ground for this paflion to arise. It
would have proved a blessing to multi-
tudes, to have wanted those advantages for
which they are envied. How frequently,
for instance, has Beauty betrayed the pof-
feffors of it into many a snare, and brought
upon them many a disaster ? Beheld with
spiteful eyes by those who are their rivals,
they, in the mean time, glow with no less
envy against others by whom they are fur-
passed; while, in the midst of their com-
petitions, jealousies, and concealed enmi-
ties, the fading flower is easily blasted;
Ihortlived at the best; and trifling, at any

rate,

rate, in comparison with the higher, and SE RL
more lasting beauties of the mind. VIn.

But of all the grounds of envy among

men, superiority in rank and fortune is
the most general. Hence, the malignity
which the poor commonly bear to the
rich, as ingroffing to themselves all the
comforts of life. Hence, the evil eye with
which pcrfons of inferior station scrutinise
those who are above them in rank; and if
they approach to that rank, their envy is ge-
nerally strongest against such as are just one
ftep higher than themfelves.-Alas ! my
friends, all this envious disquietude, which
agitates the world, arises from a deceitful
figure which imposes on the public view.
False colours are hung out: the real state
of men is not, what it seems to be. The
order of society requires a diftintion of
ranks to take place; but in point of hap-
piness, all men come much nearer to equa-
lity than is commonly imagined; and the
circumstances, which form any material
difference of happiness among them, are not
of that nature which renders them grounds

of

BERM. of envy. The poor man polfetles not, it

L is true, some of the conveniencies and

pleasures of the rich; but, in return, he
is free of many embarrassments to which
they are fubjeft. By the simplicity and
uniformity of his life, he is delivered from
that variety of cares, which perplex those
who have great affairs to manage, intricate
plans to pursue, many enemies, perhaps, to
encounter in the pursuit. In the tranquil-
lity of his small habitation, and private
family, he enjoys a peace which is often
unknown at courts. The gratifications of
nature, which are always the most satis-
fafory, are possessed by him to their full
extent; and if he be a firanger to the re-
fined pleasures of the wealthy, he is un-
acquainted also with the desire of them,
and by consequence, feels no want. His
plain meal satisfies his appetite, with a re-
lifh, probably, higher than that of the rich
man, who fits down to his luxurious ban-
quet. His sleep is more found; his health
more firm; he knows not what spleen,
languor, or liitleffnefs are, His accustom-

ed

ed employments or labours are not more SERM.
oppressive to him, than the labour of at- __
tendance on courts and the great, the la-
bours of dress, the fatigue of amusements,
the very weight of idleness, frequently are
to the rich. In the mean time, all the
beauty of the face of nature, all the enjoy-
ments of domestic society, all the gaiety
and chearfulnefs of an easy mind, are as
open to him as to those of the highest
rank. The splendour of retinue, the found
of titles, the appearances of high refpeA,
are indeed soothing, for a short time, to
the great. But become familiar, they are
soon forgotten. Custom effaces their im-
preflion. They fink into the rank of those
ordinary things, which daily recur, without
raising any sensation of joy.-Ceafe, there-
fore, from looking up with discontent and
envy to those whom birth or fortune have
placed above you. Adjust the balance of
happiness fairly. When you think of tie
enjoyments you want, think also of the
troubles from which you are free. Allow
their just value to the comforts you pof-

VOL. III. M fess;

BERM. fess; and you will find reason to reft fa-
vtL,. tisfied, with a very moderate, though not

an opulent and splendid, condition of for-
ttne. ,,Often, did you know the whole,
you would be inclined to pity the fiate of
those whom you now envy.

III. SUPERIOR success in the course of

worldly pursuits, is a frequent ground of
envy. Among all ranks of men, compe-
titions arise. Wherever any favourite ob-
jed is pursued in common, jealousies fel-
dom fail to take place among those who
are equally desirous of attaining it; as in
that ancient instance of envy recorded of
Jgfeph's brethren, who bated their brather,
because tbeir father loved him more than all
te ref *. . " I could easily bear," fays one,
" that some others should be more repu-
" table or famous, should be richer or
" greater, than I. It is but just, that this
" man Ihould enjoy the distinction to
"which his splendid abilities have railed

* n. uxiii. 4.

"him.

" him. It is natural for that man, to SER b
" command the refpeC to which he is in- VI_.
" titled by his birth or his rank. But
" when I, and another, have flarted in the
" race of life, upon equal terms, and in
"the fame rank; that he, without any

pretension to uncommon merit, should
" have suddenly so far outfiripped me;

Ihould have ingroffed all that public fa-

· vour to which I am no less intitled than
" he; this is, what I cannot bear; my
" blood boils, my spirit swells with indig-
"nation, at this undeserved treatment I
" have suffered from the world." Com-
plaints of this nature are often made, by
them who seek to juffify the envy which
they bear to their more prosperous neigh-
bours. But if such persons with not to be
thought unjust, let me desire them to in-
quire, whether they have been altogether
fair in the comparison they have made of
their own merit with that of their rivals;
and whether they have not themselves to
blame, more than the world, for being left
behind in the career of fortune. The world

M2 is

SE RM. is not always blind or unjust, in conferring
V1_.
' its favours. InRances indeed, sometimes,

occur, of deserving persons prevented, by a
fuccellion of crois incidents, from rising
into public acceptance. But, in the ordi-
nary course of things, merit, sooner or later,
receives a reward; while the greater part
of men's misfortunes and disappointments
can, generally, be traced to some mifcondua
of their own. Wldlom bringeth to honour:
The band of the diligent makctb rich; and, it
has been said, not altogether without rca-
son, that, of his own fortune in life, every
man is the chief artificer. If Joseph was
preferred by the father to all his brethren,
his subsequent condut ihowed how well
he merited the preference.

Supposing, however, the world to have.

been unjust, in an uncommon degree, with
regard to you, this will not vindicate ma-
lignity and envy towards a more prof-
perous competitor. You may accuse the
world; but what reason have you to bear
ill-will to him, who has only improved the
favour which the world lhowed him ? If,

by

by means that are unfair, he has risen; SERM.
and, to advance himself, has ated inju- _n.
rioufly by you, resentment is justifiable;
but if you cannot accuse him of any fucl
improper conduct, his success alone gives
no fandion to your envy. You, perhaps,
preferred the enjoyment of your cafe, to the
stir of a busy, or to the cares of a thought-
ful life. Retired from the world, and fol-
lowing your favourite inclinations, you were
not always attentive to seize the opportu-
nities which offered, for doing justice to
your character, and improving your fitua-
tion. Ought you then to complain, if the
more active and laborious have acquired
what you were negligent to gain ? Confi-
der, that if you have obtained less prefer-
ment, you have possessed more indulgence
and ease. Confider, moreover, that the ri-
val to whom you look up with repining
eyes, though more fortunate in the world,
may perhaps, on the whole, not be more
happy than you. He has all the viciffi.
tudes of the world before him. He may
have much to encounter, much to susser,

M 3 fiuil

E RM. from which you are protected by the great-
,v_. er obscurity of your station. Every fitua-

tion in life, has both a bright and a dark
fide. Let not your attention dwell only
on what is bright on the fide of those you
envy, and dark on your own. But bring-
ing into view both fides of your refpeftive
conditions, estimate fairly the fum of fe-
licity.

THUS I have suggested several confider-

ations, for evincing the unreasonableness of
that disquietude which envy raises in our
breasts; considerations, which tend at least
to mitigate and allay the workings of this
malignant passion, and which, in a fober
mind, ought totally to extinguish it. The
scope of the whole has been, to promote,
in every one, contentment with his own
irate. Many arguments of a different na-
ture may be employed against envy; some
taken from its sinful and criminal nature;
some, from the mischiefs to which it gives
rife in the world; others, from the misery
which it produces to him who nouri/hes

this

this viper in his bosom. But, undoubted- SERM.

VII1.

ly, the most efficacious arguments, are such .v
as .how, that the circumstances of others,
compared with our own, afford no ground
for envy. The mistaken ideas which are
entertained, of the high importance of cer-
tain worldly advantages and diffindtions,
form the principal cause of our repining
at our own lot, and envying that of others.
To things light in themselves, our imagi-
nation has added undue weight. Did we
1llow reflection and wisdom to correct the
prejudices which we have imbibed, and to
disperse those phantoms of our own creating,
the gloom which overcasts us would gra-
dually vanish. Together with returning
contentment, the Iky would clear up, and
every objec brighten around us. It is in

ehp fullen and dark fiade of discontent,

that noxious passions, like venomous ani-
mals, breed, and prey upon the heart.

ENVY is a paflion of so odious a nature,

that not only it is concealed as much as
possible from the world, but every man is

M 4 glad

SE R M. glad to dissemble the appearances of it to

VIII.
v__- his own heart. Hence, it is apt to grow

upon him unperceived. Let him who is
desirous to keep his heart chaste and pure
from its influence, examine himself ttriCtly
on those dispositions which he bears to-
wards his prosperous neighbours. Does he
ever view, with secret uneasiness, the merit
of others rising into notice and diftintion?
Does he hear their praises with unwilling
ear ? Does he feel an inclination to depre-
ciate, what he dares not openly blame ?
When obliged to commend, does his cold
and aukward approbation, insinuate his be-
lief of some unknown defects in the ap-
plauded character? From such symptoms
as these, he may infer that the disease of
envy is forming; that the poison is be-
ginning to spread its infection over his
heart.

THE causes that nourish envy are prin-

cipally two; and two which, very frequent-
ly, operate in conjunction; these are, pride
and indolence. The connecion of pride

with

with envy, is obvious and direct. The high SERM.

VIII.

value which the proud set on their own ,_
merit, the unreaibnable claims which they
form on the world, and the injustice which
they suppose to be done to them by any prese-
rence given to others, are perpetual sources,
; it of discontent, and next of envy. When
indolence is joined to pride, the disease of
¥ _e mind becomes more inveterate and in-

curable. Pride leads men to claim more
than they deserve. Indolence prevents them
from obtaining what they might justly
claim. Disappointments follow; and spleen,
malignity, and envy, rage within them.
The proud and indolent, are always envi-
ous. Wrapt up in their own importance,
they fit ffill, and repine, because others are
more prosperous than they; while, with
all their high opinion of themselves, they
have done nothing either to deserve, or to
acquire, prosperity. As, therefore, we va-
lue our virtue, or our peace, let us guard
against these two evil dispositions of mind.
Let us be modest in our own esteem, and,
by diligence and indufiry, tfudy to acquire

the

s,E R m. the esteem of others. So shall we shut up
v__. the avenues that lead to many a bad pas-

sion; and {hall learn, in whbateverflate we
are, bterewitb to be content.

FINALLY, in order to subdue envy, !c:

us bring often into view those relig1ol,
considerations which regard us particularly
as Christians. Let us remember how ul;
worthy we all are in the fight of God; and
how much the bleflings which each of us
enjoy, are beyond what we deserve. Let us
nourifli reverence and submission to that
Divine government, which has appointed
to every one such a condition in the world
as is fittest for him to poflfs. Let us re-
colled how opposite the Christian spirit is
to envy; and what sacred obligations it
lays upon us, to walk in love and charity
towards one another. Indeed, when we
reflect on the many miseries which abound
in human life; on the scanty proportion of
happiness which any man is here allowed
to enjoy; on the small difference which the
diversity of fortune makes on that scanty

proportion;

proportion; it is surprising, that envy should s E R M.
ever have been a prevalent passion among v^ii.
men, much more that it should have pre-
vailed among Christians. Where so much
is suffered in common, little room is left
for envy. There is more occasion for pity
and sympathy, and inclination to aflift each
other. To our own good endeavours for
rectifying our dispositions, let us not forget
toadd serious prayers to the Author of our
being, that he who made the heart of man,
and knows all its infirmities, would tho-
roughly purify our hearts from a pailion so
base, and so criminal, as envy. Create in me,
0 God, a clean beart; and renew a right pi-
rit within me. Search me, and know m
heart. Try me, and ow my thoughts. See
if there be any ticked way in me, and lead
me in the way everlaflig *.

P. Ii. I.; cxuiz. 23. 24.

S E R-

# SERMON IX. On IDLENESS. MATTHEW, xx. 6. — Why stand ye here all the day idle?

[ 72 3
SERMON IX.

On IDLENESS.

MATTHEW, X. 6.

- Why IJand ye here all the day idle ?

SERM. IT is an observation which naturally oc-
IX
. curs, and has been often made, that all

the representations of the Chriflian life in
scripture are taken from active scenes;
from carrying on a warfare, running a
race, striving to enter in at a strait gate,
and, as in this context, labouring in a vine-
yard. Hence the conclusion plainly fol-
lows, that various active duties are requi-
red of the Christian; and that sloth and
indolence are inconsistent with his hope of
heaven.

But

But it has been sometimes supposed, that SE R M

industry, as far as it is matter of duty, re- iL
gards our spiritual concerns and employ-
ments only; and that one might be very
busy as a Christian, who was very idle as a
man. Hence, among some denominations of
Christians, an opinion has prevailed, that the
perfection of religion was to be found in
those monastic retreats, where every active
function of civil life was totally excluded,
and the whole time of men filled up with
exercises of devotion. They who hold such
opinions proceed on the supposition, that
religion has little or no concern with the
ordinary affairs of the world; that its du-
ties stand apart by themselves; and mingle
not in the intcrcourfe which men have with
one another. The perfet Christian was
imagined to live a fort of angelic life, fe-
questered from the business or pleasures
of this contemptible state. The gospel, on
the contrary, represents the religion of
Christ as intended for the benefit of human
society. It assumes men as engaged in the
business of a&ive life; and direcs its ex-

hortations,

SERM. hortations, accordingly, to all ranks ind
,_,_, stations; to the magistrate and the subjet,

to the mafler and the servant; to the rich
and the poor, to them that buy and them
that fell, them that uif and them that abut
the world. Some duties, indeed, require
privacy and retreat. But the moR import-
ant must be performed in the midst of the
world, where we are commanded to Jbhit
at lights, and by our good works to glorif
our Father which is in heaven. This world,
as the context represents it, is God's vine-
yard, where each of us has a talk assigned
him to perform. In every fRation, and at
every period of life, labour is required. At
the rhrdl the firrh. or the Pleventh hour
we are <:c;31ln;3Lded :o work, if we would
tnot incur. rnm the oreat Lord of' the vine-

the fame time admoniih you, that no man s E RM.
can be idle without being sinful. This I t
{hall endeavour to mhow in the sequel of the
discourse; wherein I purpose to reprove a
vice which is too common among all ranks
of men. Superiors admonifl their infe-
riors, and parents tell their children, that
idleness is the mother of every fin; while,
in their own practice, they often set the
example of what they reprobate severely in
others. I flall study to show, that the idle
man is, in every view, both foolish, and
criminal; that he neither lives to God;
nor lives to the world; nor lives to him-
fef.

w , HCF lies cpt tio God. n7;o g inr aiy.
wivi Creanto: certainly does nothing in vain.

# SERMON IX. On IDLENESS. MATTHEW, xx. 6. — Why stand ye here all the day idle?

[ 372 3
SERMON IX.

On IDLENESS.

MATTHEW, xx. 6.

- Why J/land ye bere all tbe day idle ?

SERM. IT is an observation which naturally oc-
I. 1 curs, and has been often made, that all

the representations of the Christian life in
scripture are taken from aaive scenes;
from carrying on a warfare, running a
race, striving to enter in at a strait gate,
and, as in this context, labouring in a vine-
yard. Hence the conclusion plainly fol-
lows, that various acive duties are requi-
red of the Christian; and that sloth and
indolence are inconfiltent with his hope of
heaven.

But

But it has been sometimes supposed, that SE RM.

industry, as far as it is matter of duty, re-
gards our spiritual concerns and employ-
ments only; and that one might be very
busy as a Christian, who was very idle as a
man. Hence, among some denominations of
Christians, an opinion has prevailed, that the
perfection of religion was to be found in
those mohaftic retreats, where every active
function of civil life was totally excluded,
and the whole time of men filled up with
exercises of devotion. They who hold such
opinions proceed on the supposition, that
religion has little or no concern with the
ordinary affairs of the world; that its du-
ties stand apart by themselves; and mingle
not in the intcrcourfe which men have with
one another. The perfec 'Christian was
imagined to live a fort of angelic life, fe-
questered from the business or pleasures
of this contemptible state. The gospel, on
the contrary, represents the religion of
Christ as intended for the benefit of human
society. It assumes men as engaged in the
business of a.tive life; and directs its ex-

hortations,

BERM. hortations, accordingly, to all ranks id
_,l. fiations; to the magistrate and the fubje&,

to the matter and the servant, to the rich
and the poor, to them that buy and them
that fell, them that use and them that abuse
the world. Some duties, indeed, require
privacy and retreat. But the mot import-
ant must be performed in the midst of the
world, where we are commanded to jbih
as lights, and by our good works to glorif
our Father which is in heaven. This world,
as the context represents it, is God's vine-
yard, where each of us has a talk assigned
him to perform. In every tfation, and at
every period of life, labour is required. At
the third, the sixth, or the eleventh hour,
we are commanded to work, if we would
not incur, from the great Lord of the vine-
yard, this reproof, Why .Jand ye here all the
day idle --We may, I confess, be 'busy
about many things, and yet be found ne-
gligent of the One thing needful. We may
be very active, and, withal, very ill employ-
ed. But though a person may be indu-
ftrious without being religious, I must at

the

the fame time admonish you, that no man SE RM.
can be idle without being sinful. This I I"
Shall endeavour to show in the sequel of the
discourse; wherein I purpose to reprove a
vice which is too common among all ranks
of men. Superiors admonilh their infe-
riors, and parents tell their children, that
idleness is the mother of every fin; while,
in their own pracice, they often set the
example of what they reprobate severely in
others. I shall study to ihow, that the idle
man is, in every view, both foolish, and
criminal; that he neither lives to God;
nor lives to the world; nor lives to him-
.elf.

1. HE lives not to God. The great and

wife Creator certainly does nothing in vain.
A finall measure of refledtion might con-
vince every one, that for some useful pur-
pose he was sent into the world. The na-
ture of man bears no mark of infignifican-
cy, or negle& He is placed at the head
of all things here below. He is furniihed
with a great preparation of faculties and

powers.

ZERM. powers. He is enlightened by reason with

_ many important difloveries; even taught

by revelation to confider himself as ranfo-
med, by the death of Christ, from misery;
and intended to rife, by gradual advances,
to a still higher rank in the universe of
God. In such a situation, thus diffin-
guiihed, thus favoured and assisted by his
Creator, can he hope to be forgiven, if he
aim at no improvement, if he pursue no
useful design, live for no other purpose but
to indulge in sloth, to consume the fruits
of the earth, and to spend his days in a
dream of vanity? Existence is a sacred
trult; and he who thus misemploys, and
squanders it away, is treacherous to its Au-
thor.- Look around you, and you will
behold the whole universe full of active
powers. Action is, to speak so, the genius
of nature. By motion and exertion, the fy-
ftem of being is preserved in vigour. By
its different parts always acting in fubordi-
nation one to another, the perfection of the
whole is carried on. The heavenly bodies
perpetually revolve. Day and night incef-

iintly

fantly repeat their appointed course. Con- s £ R M.
tinual operations are going on in the earth, ,_
and in the waters. Nothing stands still.
All is alive, and stirring, throughout the
univerfe.-In the midst of this animated
and busy scene, is man alone to remain
idle in his place ? Belongs it to him, to be
the sole inactive and slothful being in the
creation, when he has so much allotted
him to do; when in so many various ways
he might improve his own nature; might
advance the glory of the God who made
him; and contribute his part to the genes
ral good ?

Hardly is there any feeling of the hu-

man heart more natural, or more univer-
fal, than that of our being accountable to
God. It is, what the most profligate car
never totally erase. Almost all nations have
agreed in the belief, that there is to come
some period, when the Almighty will at
as the judge of his creatures. Prefenti-
ments of this, work in every breat. Con-
science has already erected a tribunal, on
which it anticipates the sentence which at

VOL. III. N that

Sr M. that period shall be palsed. Before this tri-
_,j bunal let us sometimes place ourselves in

serious thought, and confider what account
we are prepared to give of our conduc to
Him who made us. " I placed you," the
great Judge may then be supposed to fay,
" in a station where you had many occa-
' sions for acion, and many opportunities
" of improvement. You were taught, and
" you knew, your duty. Throughout a
" course of years I continued your life. I

surrounded you with friends, to whom
you might be useful. I gave you health,

" ease, leisure, and various advantages of
" situation.- Where are the fruits of
" those talents which you possessed ? What
' good have you done with them to your-
" selves? what good, to others? How
" have you filled up your place, or answer-
" ed your deitination, in the world ? Pro-

duce some evidence, of your not having

"existed altogether in vain ?"- Let such
as are now mere blanks in the world, and
a burden to the earth, think what answer
they will give to those awful questions.

II. Tli

II. THE idle live not to the world, and SET M.

their fellow-creatures around them, any _
more than they do to God. Had any man
a title to stand alone, and to be independ-
.ent of his fellows, he might then confider
himself as at liberty to indulge in solitary
ease and sloth, without being responsible
to others for the manner in which he
chore to live. But, on the face of the
earth, there is no such person, from the
King on his throne, to the beggar in his
cottage. We are all conneced with one
another, by various relations; which create
a chain of mutual dependence, reaching
from the highest, to the lowest flation in
society. The order and happiness of the
world cannot be maintained, without a per-
petual circulation of ative duties and of-
sices, which all are called upon to perform
in their turn. Superiors are no more inde-
pendent of their inferiors, than these infe-
riors are of them. Each have demands
and claims upon the other; and he, who
in any situation of life, refuses to ad his
part, and to contribute his flare to the ge-

N 2 neral

S E R . neral flock of felicity, deserves to be pro-
ar-__ Icribed from society, as an unworthy mem-

ber. Ifany man will not work, fays the A-
poftle Paul, neither Jhould he eat *. If he
will do nothing to advance the purposes of
focicty, he has no title to enjoy the advan-
tages of it.

It is sometimes supposed, that industry

and diligence are duties required of the
poor alone, and that riches confer the pri-
vilege of being idle. This is so far from
being justified by reason, how often soever
it may obtain in fad, that the higher one
is raised in the world, his obligation to be
useful is proportionably increased. The
claims upon him, from various quarters,
multiply. The sphere of his acive duties
widens on every hand. Even fuppofmg
him exempted from exerting himself in be-
half of his inferiors, supposing the relation
between fuiperiors and inferiors abolished,
the relation among equals must still subsist.
If there be no man, however high in rank,
who stands not frequently in need of the

* 2 Th.ef iii. Ic.

good

good offices of his friends, does he think SERM.

IX.

that le owes nothing to them in return ? __
Can he fold his arms in fdlfilh indolence,
and expet to be servcd by others, if he
will not exert himself, in doing service to
any ?- Were there no other call to indu-
ftry, but the relation in which every one
stands to his own family, the remembrance
of this alone, mhould make the man of idle-
ness blush. Pretends he to love those with
whom he is connected by the dearest ties,
and yet will he not bestir himself for their
guidance, their support, or their advance-
ment in the world? How immoral, and
cruel, is the part he acs, who slumbers in
sensual ease, while the wants and demands
of a helpless family cry aloud, but cry in
vain, for his vigorous exertions ? Is this a
husband, is 'this a father, that deserves to
be honoured with those sacred names ?
How many voices will be lifted up against
him, at the last day ? Let such pcrfons re-
member the awful words of scripture, and
tremble. It is written in the FIirif Epistle
to Timothy, the fifth chapter, and eighth

N 3 verse,

8 E RM. verse, if any proviae not for his own, and
I. specially for thoSe of his own house, ht bath

denied the faith, and is worfc than an infi-
del.

III. THE idle man lives not to himself,

with any more advantage than he lives to
the world. It is indeed on a supposition
entirely opposite, that persons of this cha-
rafter proceed. They imagine that, how
deficient soever they may be in point of
duty, they at least consult their own satis-
fadion. They leave to others the drudge-
ry of life; and betake themselves, as they
think, to the quarter of enjoyment and
ease. Now, in contradition to this, I as-
fert, and hope to prove, that the idle man,
first, shuts the door against all improve-
ment; next, that he opens it wide to every
deftruCive folly; and, lastly, that he ex-
cludes himself from the true enjoyment of
pleasure.

FIRST, He shuts the door against im-
provement of every kind, whether of mind,

body,

body, or fortune. The law of our nature, s E RM.
the condition under which we were placed ,_
from our birth, is, that nothing good or
great is to be acquired, without toil and in.
duftry. A price is appointed by Provi-
dence to be paid for every thing; and the
price of improvement, is labour. Indu-
ftry may, indeed, be Sometimes disappointed.
The race may not be always to the fwifi,
nor the battle to the flrong. But, at the
fame time, it is certain that, in the ordi-
nary course of things, without strength,
the battle cannot be gained; without swift-
ness, the race cannot be run with success.
In all labour, fays the wife man, there is
prfit; but the foul of the Jluggard defireth,
and bath nothing *. If we consult either
the improvement of the mind, or the health
of the body, it is well known that exercise
is the great instrument of promoting both.
Sloth enfeebles equally the bodily, and the
mental powers. As in the animal system
it engenders disease, so on the faculties of

* Prov. xiv. 3.; xiii. 4.

N 4 the

SERM. the foul it brings a fatal rust, which cor-
Ix.

_ rodes and waftes them; which, in a ihort

time, reduces the brightest genius to the
fame level with the meanest underitanding.
The great differences which take place a-
mong men, are not owing to a diflinftion
that nature has made in their original
powers, so much as to the superior dili-
gence with which some have improved
these powers beyond others. To no pur-
pose do we possess the feeds of many. great
abilities, if they are suffered to lie dormant
within us. It is not the latent possession,
but the active exertion of them, which
gives them merit. Thousands whom in-
dolence has funk into contemptible obfcu-
rity, might have come forward to the high-
ell diftinclion, if idleness had not fruftra-
ted the effect of all their powers.

Instead of going on to improvement, all

things go to decline, with the idle man.
His character falls into contempt. His for-
tune is consumed. Disorder, confusion,
and embarraffmcnt, mark his whole fitua-
tion, Obfcrve in what lively colours the

gtatc

state of his affairs is described by Solomon. sE RMI
I went by the field of the Jlothfil, and by the
vineyard of the man void of nnderJlanding.
And lo ! it was all grown over with thorns;
and nettles bad covered the face thereof; and
the flone wall thereof was broken down.
Then I saw and confidered it well. I looked
upon it, and received irnrtrution *. In the
midst, too, of those distresses which idle-
ness brings on its votaries, they must sub-
mit to innumerable mortifications, which
never fail to attend their mhameful conduct
They must reckon, on feeing themselves
contemned by the virtuous and wife, and
flighted by the thriving part of mankind.
They mutt expeEt to be left behind by eve-
ry competitor for rank or fortune. They
will be obliged to humble themselves be-
fore persons, now far their superiors in the
world, whom, once, they would have dif-
dained to acknowledge as their equals.-
Is it in this manner, that a man lives to
himself? Are these the advantages, which

* Prov. liv. 30. 31. 32.

were

SERM. were expeced to be found in the lap of
uL ease ? The down may at firif have appear-

ed soft: But it will soon be found to cover
thorns innumerable. How long wilt thou
sleep, 0 Juggard ? When wilt tbou arif out
es thyr jeep ? et a little Je+); yet a little
Jlmdber, a little folding of the bands to jlep.
S Jball thy poverty come as one that travel-
btb; ad thy want ai an armed 7man *.
But this is only a small part of the evils
rhich persons of this description bring on
themfelvea: For,

. IN the second place, while in this man-
ner they shut the door against every im-
provement4 they open it wide to the most
deftrutive vices and follies. The hu-
man mind cannot remain always unem-
ployed. Its paflions must have some exer-
cife. If we supply them not with proper
employment, they are sure to run loose
into riot and disorder. While we are un-
occupied by what is good, evil is coninu-

*Prov. xxiv. 33. 34.

ally

ally at hand; and hence it is said in Scrip- S RM.
ture, that as soon as Satan found the bouse IX.
empty, he took pofreffion, and filled it witb
evil. firits *. Every man who recollecs
his conduA, may be satisfied, that his
hours of idleness have always proved the
hours most dangerous to virtue. It was
then, that criminal desires arose; guilty
pursuits were suggested; and deligns were
formed, which, in their iflue, have dif-
quitted and embittercd his whole life. If
seasons of idleness be dangerous, what must
a continued habit of it prove ? Habitual
indolence, by a silent and secret progress,
undermines every virtue in the foul. More
violent passions run their course, and ter-
minate. They are like rapid torrents, which
foam, and swell, and bear down every
thing before them. But after having over-
flowed their banks, their impetuosity sub-
fdes. They return, by degrees, into their
natural channel; and the damage which
they have done, can be repaired. Sloth is

Mtth. xii. 44.

like

SERI. like the flowly-flowing, putrid itream,
%_A, which stagnates in the marsh, breeds veno-

mous animals, and poisonous plants; and
infects with pestilential vapours the whole
country round it. Having once tainted
the foul, it leaves no part of it found; and,
at the fame time, gives not those alarms
to conscience, which the eruptions of bold-
er and fiercer emotions often occasion. The
disease which it brings on, is creeping and
iniidious; and is, on that account, more
certainly mortal.

One constant effeca of idleness, is to nou-

rifh the passions, and, of course, to height-
en our demands for gratification; while it
unhappily withdraws from us the proper
means of gratifying these demands. If the
desires of the industrious man be set upon
opulence or rank, upon the conveniencies,
or the splendour of life, he can accomplifi
his desires, by methods which are fair and
allowable. The idle man has the fame de-
fires with the industrious, but not the fame
resources for compafling his ends by ho-
nourable means. He must therefore turn

himself

himself to seek by fraud, or by violence, SERM.
what he cannot submit to acquire by in- _
dultry. Hence, the origin of those multi-
plied crimes to which idleness is daily gi-
ving birth in the world; and which con-
tribute so much to violate the order, and
to disturb the peace, of society.- In gene-
ral, the children of idleness may be rank-
ed under two denominations or classes of
men; both of whom may, too justly, be
termed, The children of the devil. Either,
incapable of any effort, they are such as fink
into absolute meanness of character, and
contentedly wallow with the drunkard and
debauchee, among the herd of the fcnfual;
until poverty overtake them, or disease cut
them off: Or, they are such as, retaining
some remains of vigour, are impelled, by
their passions, to venture on a desperate at-
tempt for retrieving their ruined fortunes.
In this cafe, they employ the art of the
fraudulent gamester to ensnare the un-
wary. They issue forth with the high-
wayman to plunder on the road; or with
the thief and the robber, they infest the

city

BERM. city by night. From this class, our pri-
f_, sons are peopled; and by them the scaffold

is furnished with those melancholy admo-
nitions, which are so often delivered from it
to the crowd. Such are frequently the tra-
gical, but well known, consequences of the
vice against which I now warn you.

IN the third, and last place, how dan-

gerous soever idleness may be to virtue,
are there not pleasures, it may be said,
which attend it ? Is there not ground to
plead, that it brings a release from the op.
preflive cares of the world; 4nd sooths the
mind with a gentle fatisfa&ion, which is
not to be found amidst the toils of a busy
and active life --This is. an advantage
which, least of all others, we admit it to
possess. In behalf of incessant labour, no
man contends. Occasional release from toil,
and indulgence of ease, is what nature de-
mands, and virtue allows. But what we
assert is, that nothing is so great an enemy
to the lively and spirited enjoyment of life,
as a relaxed and indolent habit of mind.

He

He who knows not what it is to labour, SE RM
knows not what it is to enjoy. The feli- _
city of human life, depends on the regular
prosecution of some laudable purpose or
object, which keeps awake and enlivens all
our powers. Our happiness consists in the
pursuit, much more than in the attainment,
of any temporal good. Reft is agreeable;
but it is only from preceding labours, that
reft acquires its true relish. When the
mind is suffered to remain in continued
inaction, all its powers decay. It soon lan-
guifhes and sickens; and the pleasures
which it proposed to obtain from refit, end
in tediousness and insipidity. To this, let
that mifcrable set' of men bear witness,
who, after spending great part of their life
in active indutfry, have retired to what
they fancied was to be a pleasing enjoy-
ment of thtmfelves, in wealthy inacti-
vity, and profound repose. Where they
expeted to find an elysium, they have
found nothing but a dreary and com-
fortlefs waste. Their days have dragged
on, in uniform languor; with the melan-

choly

E R M. choly remembrance often returning, of the

y chearful hours they passed, when they were

engaged in the honelt business, and labours
of the world.

We appeal to every one who has the least
knowledge or observation of life, whether
the busy, or the idle, have the mos agree-
able enjoyment of themselves ? Compare
them in their families. Compare them
in the societies with which they mingle;
and remark, which of them discover most
chearfulnefs and gaiety; which possess the
most regular flow of spirits; whose temper
is most equal; whose good humour, most
unclouded. While the active and diligent
both enliven, and enjoy, society, the idle
are not only a burden to themselves, but a
burden to those with whom they are con-
neaed; a nuisance to all whom they op-
press with their company. On whom does
time hang so heavy, as on the slothful and
lazy ? To whom are the hours so linger-
ing? Who are so often devoured with
spleen, and obliged to fly to every expedi-
ent which can help them to get rid of

themselves ?

themselves ? Instead of producing tran- SERM.
quillity, indolence produces a fretful reft- _
leffnefs of mind; gives rife to cravings
which are never satisfied; nourilhes a sick-
ly effeminate delicacy, which fours and cor-
rupts every pleasure.

ENOUGH has now been said to convince

every thinking person, of the folly, the
guilt, and the misery, of an idle state. Let
these admonitions stir us up, to exert our-
feyves in our different occupations, with
that virtuous ativity which becomes men
and Christians. Let us arise from the bed
of sloth; distribute our time with attention
and care; and improve to advantage the
opportunities which Providence has bestow-
ed. The material business in which our
several stations engage us, may often prove
not sufficient to occupy the whole of our
time and attention. In the life even of
busy men, there are frequent intervals of
leisure. Let them take care, that into
these, none of the vices of idleness creep.
Let some secondary, some subsidiary em-

VOL. III. O ployment,

SERM. ployment, of fair and laudable kind, be

_ always at hand to fill up those vacant spaces

of life, which too many aflign, either to
corrupting amusements, or to mere inac-
tion. We ought never to forget, that en-
tire idleness always borders, either on mi-
fery, or on guilt

AT the fame time, let the course of our

employments be ordered in such a manner,
that in carrying them on, we may be also
promoting our eternal interest. With the
business of the world, let us properly in-
termix the exercises of devotion. By reli-
gious duties, and virtuous actions, let us flu-
dy to prepare ourselves for a better world.
In the midst of our labours for this life, it is
jnver to be forgotten, that we must first
seek the kingdom of God, and bis rigbteoufnefS;
and give diligence to make our calling and
eleclion sure. Otherwise, how ative soever
we may seem to be, our whole activity will
prove only a laborious idleness: We shall
appear in the end, to have been busy to no
purpose, or to a purpose worse than none.

Then

Then only we fulfil the proper character of s RM.
Christians, when we join that pious zeal
which becomes us as the servants of God,
with that industry which is required of

tn, as good members of society; when, ac-
cording to the exhortation of the Apostle,
we are found not Jlothful in buftnefs, and, at
the fame time, fervent in spirit, fJrving the '
Lord*.

* Rom. xi. It.

0: SER.

# SERMON X. On the SENSE of the DIVINE PRESENCE. PSALM lxxiii. 23. — I am continually with thee —.

[ '96 ]

SERMON X.
On the SENSE of the DIVINE PRESENCI.

PSALM Ixxiii. 23.

_ I am continually with thbe -.
tSRM. W E ive in a world which is full of the

divine presence and power. We be-

hold every where around us the traces of
that supreme goodness, which enlivens and
fipports the univerie. Day utteretb fpeccb
of it to day; and night Jhowetb knowledge of
it to night. Yet, surrounded as we are with
the perfections of God, meeting him where-
ever we go, and called upon by a thousand
objecs, to confess his presence, it is both the
misfortune and the crime of a great part

of

of mankind, that they are strangers to Him s E R
in whose world they dwell. Occipied with X_
nothing but their purfuiits of inteteft and
pleasure, they pass through this world, as
though God were not theie. The virtu-
ous and reflecting, are particularly diftin-
guifhed from the giddy and dissolute, by
that habitual sense of the divine presence
which charaderifes the formner. To them,
nothing appears void of God. They con-
template his perfetions in the works of
nature; and they trace his Providence in
the incidents of life. When retired from
the world, he often employs their medita-
tion. When engaged in ation, he always
influences their conducd Wherever a pious
man is, or whatever he does, in ile style
of the text, he is continually with Cad.

The happy effedt of this sentiment on

the heart, is fully displayed in the context.
We fee it allaying all the disquiet which
the Psalmist, in the preceding verses, de-
scribes himself to have suffered on account
of the prosperity of the wicked. The sirs
reflection *hich leftored tranquillity to his

0 3 mind,

SERK. mind, was the remembrance of the pre-
._r~_ fence of God. Neverthelefi, I am continu-

ally with thee; thou bast bolden me by my
right hand. He became sensible, that what-
ever distresses the righteous might susser
for a time, they could not fail of being
compensated in the end, by that Almighty
Protector, whose propitious presence ever
continued to surround them. Whereupon
follow those memorable expressions of his
trult and joy in God. Thou faltguide me
witb thy counsel; and afterwards receive me
to glory. Whom have I in heaven but thee t
and there is none upon earth I defre chfbdes
thee.

THERE are principally two effects, which

the.fenfe of the divine pretence is fitted to
produce upon men. One is, to restrain
them from vice; the other, to encourage
their virtue. Its operation, as a check up-
on the finner, is obvious. The perpetual
presence of so powerful and venerable a
witness, is one of the most awful confidera-
tio4 which can be addressed to the dif.

solute.

solute. It removes all the security which SE RMm
secrecy can be supposed to give to crimes..,_ ~
It aggravates the guilt of them, from be-
ing committed in face of the Almighty;
and has power to strike terror into the
heart of the greatest criminal, in the midst'
of his misdeeds. While this principle of
religion thus checks and terrifies the fin-l
ner, it produces also another effect, that oft
flengthening and comforting the good
man, in the pratice of his duty. It is the
influence of the divine presence on good
men, which, in consequence of the Psalmist's
sentiment, I purpose to confider. To their
character, it belongs to be continually with
God. I shall endeavour to show the high
benefit and comfort which they derive
from such a habit of mind; and shall, for
this end, first confider their internal moral
state; and next, view them as they are as-
feted by several of the external accidents
and situations of life.

LET us begin with confidering them in
their internal state. The belief of divine

0 4 presence

S ERM. prefnce ads upon them here, firfl, as an

X',, incitement to virtue. The presence of one

whom we highly esteem and revere, of a
sovereign, for initance, a father, or a friends
whose approbation we are solicitous to gain,
is always found to exalt the powers of men+
to refine, and improve their behaviour.
Hence, .it has been given as a rule by an-
cient moralists, that, in order to excel in
virtue, we should propound to ourselves
some person of eminent and diftinguilhed
worth; and should accustom ourselves to
ac, as if he were standing by, and behold-
ing us. To the esteem and approbation
of their fellow creatures, none are insen-
fible. There are few who, in the confpi-
cuous parts of their life, when they know
the eyes of the public to be fixed on them,
&t not their part with propriety and de-
corum. But what is the observation of the
public, what is the presence of the greatest
or wifcft man on earth, to that pretence of
the Divinity which conltantly surrounds
us? The man who realises to his mind
this august presence, feels a constant incen-

tive

tire for acquitting himself with dignity. SER M

X.

He views himself as placed on an illuftri- _'j
ous theatre. To have the Almighty for
the fpeator and witness of his condut,
is more to him than if the whole world
were assembled to observe him. Men judge
often falsely, always imperfectly, of what
ptfics before them. They are imposed on
by specious appearances; and the artful
carry away the praise which is due to the
deserving. Even fuppofmg them to judge
fairly, we may want the opportunity of
doing justice to our charaAer, by any pro-
per display of it in the fight of the world.
Our situation may bury in obscurity, those
talents and virtues which were intitled to

mminand the highest efteemn. But he, in

whose preenrce the good man a&s, is both
an impartial, and an unerring judge of
worth. No fallacious appearances impose
on him. No secret virtue is hidden from
him. He is attentive equally to the mean-
eft and the greatest; and his approbation
confers eternal rewards. The man, there-
fore, who sets the Lord always before him,

is

sS P M. is prompted to excel in virtue by motives,

which are peculiar to himself, and which
engage, on the fide of duty, both honour
and interest. I have kept tby precepts, and
thy teflimonies; for all my ways are before
thee *.

SUPPOSING, however, his virtubus en-

deavours to be faithful, many imperfec-
tions will attend them. A faultless tenor
of unblemished life, is beyond the reach of
man. Paflions will sometimes overcome
him; and ambition or interest, in an un-
guarded hour, will turn him aside into e-
vil. Hence, he will be aihamed of him-
self, and disquieted by a sense of guilt and
folly. In this fRate, to which we are often
reduced by the weakness of human nature,
the belief of God's continual pretence brings
relief to the heart. It aced before as an
animating principle. It now ats as a prin-
ciple of comfort. In the midst of many
imperfections, a virtuous man appeals to
his divine witness, for the sincerity of his

Psalm cxix. i68.

intentions.

intentions. He can appeal to him who SERM.
knows bis frame, that in the general train X'
of his conduct, it is his study to keep the
law of God.

Mere law, among men, is rigid and

inflexible. As no human lawgiver can
look into the hearts of his fubjeets, he
cannot, even though he were ever pre-
sent with them, estimate their character
exactly. He can make no allowance for
particular situations. He mutt prescribe
the fame terms to all whom he rules; and
treat all alike, according to their outward
actions. But every minute diversity of
character, temper, and situation, is known
to God. It is not only from what his ser-
vants do, but from what they seek to do,
that he forms his judgement of them. He
attends to all those circumstances which
render the trial of their virtue, at any time,
peculiarly hard. He hears the whisper of
devotion as it rifes in the foul He beholds
the tear of contrition which falls in secret.
He fees the good intention struggling in
its birth; and pursues it, in its progress,

through

ft t M. thrdugh those various obstacles whtich ta

X_ prevent it from ripehing into adion. Good

mnn, therefore, Ih theit noll humbled and
dejeded state, draw some consolation from
his klowledge of their eattrt Though they
iay sometimes hive erred from the right
path, they can look up to hiih who is ever
with them, and fay, as at apostle, wiho
hli grievously offnded, oie said to his
great Malfet; Lord, tboa itMstvOt all things;
bou Inowefl that I ove thee *.

Appealing thte to therr ofnnifcient wit-

hess, they are naturilly soothed and encou-
raged by the hope of his' clemency. At
the fame time, it is the peculiar advantage
of this fentimnent of the divine presence,
that it prevents such hope from flattering
them too much, or rising into undue pte-
flmtption. For while it encourages, it tends
also fdt humble, a Fious man. If it encou-
rage him, by the refedion on all his good
dispositions being known and attended to
by God, it humbles him, by the remem-

* John, ni. 17.

brance,

brance, that bis seret fins also are ever in SERM.
the light of the divine countenance. So that, by .,
dwelling under the sense of God being con-
tinually with us, we keep alive the proper
temper of a Christian in the foul; humility,
without dejection; fear, mingled with hope.
We are cheared, without being lifted up.
We feel ourselves obnoxious to the all-obfer-
ving eye ofjullice ; but are comforted with
the thoughts qs that mercy which, through
Jesus Christ, the Discerner of all hearts
holds forth to the fncere and penitent.
Such are the blessed effects which this prin-
ciple of religion produces upon the inward
moral itate of a good man. Let us now,

IN the second place, confider his exter-

nal circumstances; and examine the in-
fluence which the fame principle has upon
his happiness, in several different situations
of life.

LET us first view him in what the world

calls prosperity; when his circumstances
are easy or affluent, and his life flows in a

smooth

E R M. smooth untroubled stream. Here, it might
x. be thought, that a sense of the divine pre-

fence could operate upon him only, or
chiefly, for promoting temperance, and re.
ftraixiing the disorders incident to a profpe-
rous fate. Valuable effects, indeed, these
are; and molt conducive to the true enjoy-
ment of all that is agreeable in life. But
though it, doubtless, does exert this falu-
tary influence, yet it (tops not there. It
not only preserves the virtue of a good man
amidit the temptations of pleasure, but it
gives to his prosperity a security, and a pe-
culiar relish, which to others is unknown.
He who is without a sense of God upon
his mind, beholds in human affairs nothing
but a perpetual fluctuation, and viciflitude
of events. He is surrounded with unknown
causes, which may be working his deftruc-
tion in secret. He cannot avoid perceiving,
that there hangs over him the irresistible
arm of that Providence, whose displeasure
he has done nothing to flay or avert. But
he who, in the day of prosperity, dwells
with God, is delivered from those disquiet-

ing

ing alarms. He dwells as with a friend SERM.
and protetor, from whom he conceives his _
blessings to proceed. He can appeal to him
for the thankfulness with which he receives
them; and for his endeavours to employ
them well. He trusts, that the God whom
he serves will not forsake him; that the
goodness which he has already experienced,
will continue to bless him; and though he
believes himself not exempted from the
changes of the world, yet, in the midst of
these, he has ground to hope, that sources
of comfort and happiness ihall always be
left open to him.

Moreover, the pleasures of life, while

they last, are unspeakably heightened by
the presence of that Benefactor who be-
stows them. The pleasing emotion of gra-
titude to the giver, mingles with the enjoy-
ment of the gift. While to the mere world-
ly man, the whole frame of nature is only
a vast irregular fabric; and the course of
human affairs no more than a confused fuc.
cefllon of fortuitous events; all nature is
beautified, and every agreeable incident is

enlivened,

SERM. enlivened, to him who beholds God in all
_x_ things. Hence arise a variety of pleasing

sensations, to fill up those solitary hours, in
which external prosperity supplies him with
no entertainment. In the smiling scenes of
nature, he contemplates the benignity of
its author. In its sublime objecs, he ad-
mires his majesty. In its awful and ter-
rible ones, he adores his power. He dwells
in this world as in a magnificent temple,
which is full of the glory of its founder;
and every where views nature offering up
its incense to him, from a thousand altars.
Such ideas exalt and ennoble the human
mind; and refle an additional lustre on
the brightness of prosperity.

FROM the prosperous, let us next turn to

the afflicted condition of a good man. For,
as prosperity may, afflition certainly will,
at one time or other, be his lot. It enters
into the appointed trial of his virtue; and,
in one degree or other, is the doom of all.
Here we ihall find various situations occur,
in which no relief is equal to what a vir-

tuous

ruous and holy man derives from a fcnfe of SE R M.
the perpetual presence of God. X

Is he, for instance, thrown into an ob-

fcure condition in the world, without friends
to assist him, or any to regard and confider
his itate? He enjoys the fatisfacion of
thinking, that though he may be neglected
by men, he is not forgotten by God. In-
considerable as he is in himself, he knows,
that he will not be overlooked by the Al-
mighty, amidit the infinite variety of be-
ing, or loft in the immensity of his works.
The poor man can, with as much en-
couragement as the rich or great, lift up
his eyes to heaven, and fay, NAvertbeles, 0
Lord, lam continually with thee: Thou bold.
efi me by my right hand. The gracious pre-
fence of that Supreme Being is affected by
no diversity of rank or fortune. It imparts
itself alike to all the virtuous and upright;
like its glorious image, the fun in the fir-
mament, which iheds its rays equally upon
the humble cottage, and upon the palace of
Kings. In the presence of the great Lord
of heaven and earth, all the diftindions

VOL. III. P which

GE RM. which vanity has contrived to make among
X,. ' men, totally disappear. All ranks are on one

level. The rich and the poor here indeed
meet together; without any other diftindtion
than what arises from the heart and the fouL
The sense of this, lifts the poor man above
contempt; supports his spirits when apt to
be dejeced; and beitows dignity on the
part which he ads. How inconsiderable
soever that part may appear in the eftima-
tion of an injudicious world, it is ennobled,
when virtuously performed, by the appro-
bation of his divine witness. He can bear
with indifference the scorn of the proud,
as long as he knows, that there is one
higher than the highest to regard hin.
He can enjoy himself with pleasure in
his mean habitation, because he believes
that God dwells with him there. The
Divine presence chears to him the moit
lonely retreat. It accompanies his steps to
the most distant regions of the earth. If
he should be driven into exile from all his
friends, and obliged to dwell in the utter-
mol? parts of the sea, even there God's band

would

would bold him, and his right band would S ER M

x.

guide him. Though left without compa- _
nion or friend, he never thinks himself de-
solate, as long as he can fay, Iam Jfill with
God.

BUT though raised above obscurity or

poverty, yet, in any situation of fortune, ca-
lumny and reproach may be the lot of the
servant of God. His good intentions may
be mifconftruced; his character unjustly
traduced; and, to the open reviling of ene-
mies, the more bitter unkindness of friends
may Sometimes be joined. In this fitua-
tion, when wounded in spirit, and, per-
haps, unable to make his innocence appear,
to whom ihall he have recourse for defence,
to whom make his last appeal, but to that
God who is ever present with him, and
who knoweth his heart How frequent-
ly, amidst the injustice and oppression of
the world, has diftrefled innocence had no
other relief but this ? " God is my wit-
"ness. God is my avenger. He hath seen
"it; and he will repay." A good con-

P 2 science,

8 ER M. science, it is true, is, of itself, a powerful

x.
,__ support. But God is Lord of the con-

science; and it is only when connected
with a sense of divine pretence and appro-
bation, that a good conscience becomes a
steady principle of fortitude in the mind,
under all discouragements. Hence, a vir-
tuous man possesses a high degree of inde-
pendence, both on the praise, and on the
censure of the world. It is enough to him,
if, when undergoing the fame reproaches
which Job suffered from his mistaken
friends, he can fay with him, Behold my
witntefs is in heaven, and my record is on
bigb *. He affecs not to divulge his good
deeds to the world. He is without con-
cern whether the world be acquainted with
them, or not. He knoweth, that his Father
which is in heaven Jeetb in secret; and that
his prayers and his alms come up in grateful
memorial before him. With me, it is a small
thing to be judged of you, or of man's judge-
ment; be that judgetb me is the Lord t. JIt

* Job ri. 39. t I Cor. iv. I. 4.

Jhall

Jball bring forth my rigbteoufnefs, at last, as SERtM
the light, and my judgement as the noon day. -
In this consciousness of integrity, he looks
down with indifference, as from a superior
station, upon the harsh censures of a giddy
and ignorant world. The sense of being
continually with God diffuses over his foul
a holy calm, which unjust reproach cannot
disturb. In the presence of that august and
venerable witness, all the noise and cla-
mours of men, like the murmurings of a
distant storm, die away.

LASTLY, Supposing the character of a

good man to be untainted by reproach,
supposing also his external situation to be
opulent or diftinguiihed, many, notWith-
standing, and revere, are the diftreefes to
which he may be exposed. Secret griefs
may be preying upon him; and his heart
left to feed in silence on its own bitterness.
He may labour under fore disease, and dif-
cern his earthly frame gradually moulder-
ing into dust. He may be deprived of those
friends and relatives who had been the

P 3 chief

E R M. chief comforts of his tfate; or may be ob-
X.
e* _ liged to prepare himself for taking farewel

of them for ever. In the midst of these
various afflicting scenes of human life, no
consolation can be more powerful than
what arises from the pretence of a divine
protector and guardian, to whom our cafe,
with all its sorrows, is perfectly known.
To him, fays the Pfalnift, I poured out my
complaint. IJb/hwed before him my trouble.
I looked Gn my right band and viewed; but
behold there was no man who caredfor my
foul. I aid unto thee, 0 Lord, thou art my
refuge. When my spirit wal overwhelmed
within me, then thou knewejl my path *.

We all know, that to communicate our

gricf to a faithful friend, often gives ease
and relief to the burdened heart Such com-
munication we are encouraged to make, and
such relief we may expecA to find, in pour-
ing out our heart before that God in whom
compaffons flow. We may have no earthly
friend to whom we can with full confi.

Psalm clii. 2. 3. 4.

dence

dence disclose all our sorrows; or we may SERM.

X.

want words in which to express them. But __
God is the fearchcr of all hearts; and the
hearer of all prayers. To the secret an-
guifh of the foul, he is no inattentive wit-
ness. Every groan which is heaved from the
labouring bosom, though heard by no hn-
man car, reaches his throne. As he knows
our frame, so he remembhers e are duJf; and
thence light arise to the upright in dark-
nefi. For the hope naturally springs, that
this beneficent being will pity them, as a
father pitieth his children; and in the midst
of those diftrefles which the present cir-
cumftances of man reider unavoidable,
willfend them help from his fanfltary. Sur-
rounded with this compassionate pretence
of the Almighty, good men never view
themselves as left in this vale of tears, to
bear, solitary and alone, the whole weight
of human woe. In their dark, as well as
in their brighter hours, God is with them.
Even in that valley of the shadow of death,
where no friiend, no comforter, can go a-
long to aid them, he is with them still. In

P 4 the

8ERM. the last extremity of nature, the rod and

X flaf of the Shepherd of Ifratd support them.

THUS I have ihown, though in an im-

perfec manner, what benefits holy men
derive from a habitual sense of the divine
presence. It animates and strengthens their
virtue. It enlivens and brightens their pro-
fperity. Under various forms of adversity,
it affords them consolation and relief.-
Such considerations, undoubtedly, form a
strong argument in favour of a devout fpi-
rit, and a virtuous life. But they are con-
fiderations which may, probably, be regard-
ed by some, as ideal and visionary; requiring
aid from a heated, or an enthusiastic fancy,
in order to give them force. I readily ad-
mit, that amidst the hurry and turbu-
lence of the world, it may be difficult to
bring these religious sentiments as fully in-
to view, as is necessary for their making a
just impreflion on the foul. This requires
the effort of an intelligent and feeling
mind; and therefore cannot be expected
to be commonly found. To the unreflect-

ing

ing crowd, nothing appears real, but what s pR.
is exposed to sense. What is invisible, is
the fame to them, as if it had no existence.
But by the grossness of their own concep-
tions, they have no title to measure those of
others. While they asseE to treat all con-
fiderations taken from the sense of the di-
vine pretence, as visionary and enthufiaf-
tic, it can, on the contrary, be clearly
ihown, that they are founded on the most
certain and unquestionable principles of
reason. They essentially belong not to re-
vealed only, but to natural, religion. Their
reality can be denied by none, but those
who deny that God exists, or that he go-
verns the world. For, if he exist, he must
undoubtedly pervade and infpet the world
which he governs. He muit know what
is going on throughout his own universe;
and especially must know what passes with-
in the hearts which he has made, and of
which he is to judge. To be every where
present, is the attribute of his nature,
which, of all others, is the mods necessary
to his admiiiftration of the universe. This,

accordingly,

SERM. accordingly, is an attribute which all re-
-~_ ligions have ascribed to him. All nations

have believed in it. All societies appeal to
it, in the folemnities of an oath, by which
they determine controversies. This attri-
bute being once admitted to belong to the
Deity, the consequences which I have de-
duced from it, plainly and naturally fol-
low: And every good man has ground to
fay, 0 Lord, Iam continually with thee.

SE R-

# SERMON XI. ON PATIENCE. LUKE, xxi. 19. In your Patience possess ye your souls.

E 219 3
SERMON XI.

ON PATIENCE.

LUKE, xxi. 19.

In your Patience poefl )c your fouls.
rHE pfffoni of our ulh is a very em- SERM.

phatical expression. It describes that XI.

fate in which a man has both the ful
command, and the undisturbed enjoyment
of himself; in opposition to his undergo-
ing some inward agitation which difcom-
poses his powers. Upon the leat reflec-
tion, it mft appear, how essential such a
slate of mind. is to happiness. He only
who thns pei/c bi foul is capable of pof-
fefling any other thing with advantage;
and in order to attain and preserve this

self-

SERM. felf-pofleffion, the most important requiiwt

is, the habitual exercise of patience.

I know that patience is apt to be ranked

by many, among the more humble and
obscure virtues; belonging chiefly to those
who groan on a sick-bed, or who languish in
a prison. If their situation be, happily, of a
different kind, they imagine that there is
no occasion for the dilcipline of patience
being preached to them. But I hope to
make it appear, that, in every circumstance
of life, no virtue is more important, both
to duty and to happiness; or more requi-
site for forming a manly and worthy cha.
racer. It is not confined to a situation of
continued adversity. It principally, in-
deed, regards the disagreeable circum-
stances which are apt to occur. But, in
our present state, the occurrence of these
is so frequent, that, in every condition of
life, patience is incessantly called forth.
Prosperity cannot be enjoyed, any more
than adversity supported, without it. It
must enter into the temper, and form the
habit of the foul, if we would pafi through

the

the world with tranquillity and honour. SERM.
What I purpose is, to point out some of
the chief occasions on which patience is re-
quired; and to recommend and enforce
the exercise of it, in order to our pojing
eur fouls.

I. PATIENCE under provocations. The

wide circle of human society is diversified
by an endless variety of characters, difpo-
fitions, and paflions. Uniformity is, in no
refpea, the genius of the world. Every
man is marked by some peculiarity which
distinguishes him from another: and no
where can two individuals be found who
are exactly, and in all refpets, alike.
Where so much diversity obtains, it can-
not but happen, that, in the intercourse
which men are obliged to maintain, their
tempers {hall often be ill adjusted to that
intercourse; {hall jar, and interfere with
each other. Hence, in every fation, the
highest as well as the lowest, and in every
condition of life, public, private, and dome-
ftic, occafions-of irritation frequently arise.

We

SE R M. We are provoked, sometimes, by the folly
,Xl. and levity of those with whom we are con-

neted; sometimes, by their indifference or
neglec; by the incivility of a friend, the
haughtiness of a superior, or the insolent
behaviour of one in lower station. Hardly
a day passes, without somewhat or other oc-
curring,whichferves to ruffle the man of im-
patient spirit. Of course, such a man lives
in a continual form. He knows not what
it is to enjoy a train of good humour.
Servants, neighbours, friends, spouse, and
children, all, through the unrestrained vio-
lence of his temper, become sources of di-
fturbance and vexation to him. In vain
is affluence; in vain are health and profpe-
rity. The lealt trifle is sufficient to dif-
compose his mind, ana poitbn his plea-
fures. His very amusements are mixed
with turbulence and passion.

I would beseech this man to confider, of

what small moment the provocations which
he receives, or at least imagines himself to
receive, are really in themselves; but of
what great moment he makes them, by

fullering

faffering them to deprive him of the pof- SERM.
session of himself. I would befcech him, X'I
to confider, how many hours of happineis
he throws away, which a little more pa-
tience would allow him to enjoy; and how
much he puts it in the powcr of the moit
insignificant persons to render lim mise-
rable. " But who can expect," we hear him
exclaim, " that he is to possess the infenfi-
"bility of a itone ? How is it possible for
"human nature to endure so many re-
" peated provocations? or to bear calmly
"with such unreasonable behaviour?"-
My brother ! if you can bear with no in.
stances of unreasonable behaviour, with-
draw yourself from the world. You are
no longer fit to live in it. Leave the in-
tercourfe of men. Retreat to the moun-
tain, and the desert; or fliut yourself up
in a cell. For here, in the midst of so-
ciety, of'nces mtl conic. You might as well
expec, when you beheld a calm atmo-
i)here, and a clear Iky, that no clouds were
ever to rife, and no winds to blow, as that
your life was long to proceed, without re-

ceiving

sr.l M. ceiving provocations from human frailty.
__, The careless and the imprudent, the giddy

and the fickle, the ungrateful and the in-
terested, every where meet us. They are
the briars and the thorns, with which the
paths of human life are beset. He only
who can hold his course among them with
patience and equanimity, he who is pre-
pared to bear what he must expet to hap-
pen, is worthy of the name of a man.

Did you only preserve yourself compo-

fed for a moment, you would perceive the
insignificancy of molt of those provocations
which you magnify so highly. When a few
funs more have rolled over your head, the
storm will have, of itself, subsided; the cause
of your present impatience and diturbance
will be utterly forgotten. Can you not, then,
anticipate this hour of calmness to your-
self; and begin to enjoy the peace which
it will certainly bring ? If others have be-
haved improperly, leave them to their own
folly, without becoming the victim of their
caprice, and punishing yourself on their
account. Patience, in this exercise of it,

cannot

cannot be too much studied by all who SERM.
wish their life to flow in a smooth stream. X.
It is the reason of a man, in opposition to
the passion of a child. It is the enjoyment
of peace, in opposition to uproar and con-
fusion. He that bath no rule over his own
spirit, i like a city that is broken down, and
withost walk *.-The next important ex-
ercife of patience is,

II. PATIENCE under disappointments.

These will often happen to the best and
wisest men; sometimes, to the wisest and
best concerted plans. They may happen,
too, not through any imprudence of thoe
who have devised the plan, not even
through the malice or ill design of others
but merely in cenfequence of some of those
croft incidents of life which could not be
foreseen. On such occations, persons of a
warm and sanguine temper are presently in
a ferment. They had formed their hopes,
as they think, upon the jufteft grounds.

* Prr', lxv. 0t.
Voi.. III. Q They

aERM. They had waited long for success; and

xl. xsL( borne with many delays. But when their

designs are brought to so unexpected an
issue; when, without any fault of their
own, they find their hopes finally blasted,
all patience forsakes them; they no longer
possess their fouls; the molt passionate ex-
clamations break forth. " To whom, ex-
" cept to them, could such a disappoint-
" ment have happened? Since the creation

of the world, was such a combination of

" disastrous incidents ever beheld? Why
i are they doomed to be so unfortunate
" beyond all others ?"- Alas ! how un-
flilfully have you calculated the course of
human events ? How raihly and prefump-
tuoufly had you trusted to success? To
whom was it ever given, to guard against
all the vicissitudes, which the fluctuating
fajbion of the world is incessantly bringing
about ? If one friend, to whom you look-
ed up has died, or another has loft his in-
fluence and power; if the opinion of the
public is changed, and its favour has been
withdrawn; if some mistakes have occur-

red

red to lessen the good will of a patron on s ER M.
whom you depended; if, through the con-
currence of these, or such like circum-
stances, a more fortunate rival has prevail-
ed against you ; what is there in all this,
that differs from the ordinary lot of man ?
Are we not, each in his turn, doomed to
experience the uncertainty of worldly pur-
suits ? Why, then, aggravate our misfor-
tunes by the unreasonable violence of an
impatient spirit ? If our designs have fail-
ed through rashness or mifcondud, let
us blame ourselves. If they have failed
through circumstances which we could not
prevent, let us submit to the fate of man;
and wait, with patience, till a more favour-
able opportunity Ihall occur of regaining
success.

Meanwhile, let us turn to the other fide

oT the profpecd; and calmly confider how
dubious it was, whether the success which
we longed for, would have proved a blef-
sing. Who knoweth what is good for man
in this life ? Perhaps, the accomplishment
of our designs might have been pregnant

Q 2 with

8ERM. with misery. Perhaps, from our present
tJ-_ d(isappointment, future prosperity may rife.

Of such unlooked for iffucs, we all know
there have been many examples. Who can
tell, whether our cafe may not add one to the
number ?-At any rate, let us recollet,
that there is a Supreme Ruler, who disposes
of the affairs of men; under whom, all fe-
cond causes work only as subordinate a-
gents. Looking up to that irresistible arm
which is stretched over our heads, let us
be calm; let us submit and adore. Either
to despair, or to rage, under disappoint-
ments, is sinful. By the former, we injure
outfelves. By the latter, we insult Provi-
dence, and provoke its displeasure to con-
tinue. To posess our foufi in patience is, at
once, our wisdom as men, and our duty
as Chriflians. The benefits of this virtue
are so often reaped in this world, that
good policy alone would recommend it to
every thinking man. Disappointments de-
range, and overcome, vulgar minds. The
patient and the wife, by a proper improve-
ment, frequently make them contribute to

their

their high advantage.-Let me next recom- s E R M,
mend,

III. PATIENCE under relfraints. Nu-

merous are the restraints imposed on us, by
the nature of the human condition. To
the restraints of authority and law, all
must submit. The reitraints of education
and discipline lie on the young. Conli-
derations of health reitrain the indulgence
of pleasure. Attentions to fortune reitrain
expence. Regard to friends, whom we are
bound to please; refped to eftablifled cu-
ltoms, and to the opinions of society, im-
pose restraints on our general behaviour.
There is no man, in any rank of life, who
is always at liberty to aft according as he
would incline. In some quarter or other,
he is limited by circumstances, that either
actually confine, or that ought at least to
confine and restrain him.

These restraints, the impatient are apt to

fcor. They will needs burst the barriers
which reason had ereced, or their fitua-
jion had formed; and without regard to

Q 3 consequences,

SE RM. conlleqlences, give free scope to their pre-
X'i_. ent wish. Hence, many dangerous ex-

cedfes flow; much confusion and misery
are produced in human life. Had men
the patience to submit to their condition,
and to wait till it thould allow them a
freer indulgence of their desires, they
might, in a short time, obtain the power
of gratifying them with lafety. If the
young, for instance, would undergo, with
patience, the labours of education, they
would rife, at a proper period, to honours,
riches, or ease. If the infirm would, with
patience, bear the regulations which their
constitution demands, they might regain
the comforts of health. If persons of firait-
ened fortune had patience to conform them-
selves to their circumstances, and to abridge
their pleasures, they might, by degrees, im-
prove and advance their tlate. Whereas,
by eagerness of temper, and precipitancy
of indulgence, they forfeit all the advan-
tages which patience would have procu-
red ; and incur the opposite evils to their
full extent,

IN

IN the present state of human affairs, SERM.

no leflbn is more necessary to be learned __.
by all, to be inculcated on the young, and
to be practised by the old, than that of
patient fubmiflion to necessity. For under
the law of necessity, we are all inevitably
placed. No man is, or can be, always his
own matter. We are obliged, in a thou-
sand cafes, to submit and obey. The dif-
cipline of patience preserves our minds ea-
fy, by conforming them to our state. By
the impetuosity of an impatient and un-
submitting temper, we fight against an un-
conquerable power; and aggravate the e-
vil we muit endure.-Another important
exerci'e of the virtue concerning which
we discourse, is,

IV. PATIENCE under injuries and

wrongs. To these, amidst the present con-
fusion of the world, all are exposed. No
itation is so high, no power so great, no
charater so unblemiihed, as to exempt
men from being attacked by ralhnefs, ma-
lice, or envy. To behave under such at-

Q 4 tacks

ERM. tacks with due patience and moderation,
X_"_, is, it mutt be confcllcd, one of the molt

trying exercises of virtue.-But, in order
to prevent nlitakes on this fubjecc, it is
necessary to observe, that a tame uibmif-
sion to wrongs is not required by religion.
We are, by no rmeang, to imagine, that re-
ligion tends. to extinguilh the sense of ho-
nour, or to fiuppirc(f the exertion of a man-
ly.f'pirit. It is under a falle apprehension
of this kind, that Christian patience is
sometimes ftigmatilfd in discourse, as no
other than a different name for cowardice.
On the contrary, every man of virtue
6ught to feel what is due to his characer,
and to support properly his own rights.
Resentment of wrong, is an useful principle
in human nature; and for the wileft pur-
poses, was implanted in our frame. It is
the necessary guard of private rights; and
the great restraint on the insolence of the
violent, who, if no resistance were made,
would trample on the gentle and peace-
able.

Resentment, however, if not kept with-

in

in due bounds, is in hazard of rising into SERIB.
fierce and cruel revenge. It is the office of XL
patience, to temper relfntment by reason.
In this view, it is moll properly described in
the text, by a man's pofierJig his Joul; acting
the part which felf-defence, which juffice, or
honour, require him to act, without being
transported out of himself by the vehe-
mence of anger; or insisting on such de-
grees of reparation as bear no proportion
to the wrong that he has suffered. What
proportion, for instance, is there between
the life of a man, and an affront received
by some rash expression in conversation,
which the wife would have flighted; and
which, in the course of a few weeks, would
have been forgotten by every one ? How
fantastic, then, how unjustifiable, are those
supposed laws of modern honour, which
for such an affront, require no less repara-
tion than the death of a fellow-creature;
and which, to obtain this reparation, re-
quire a man to endanger his own life?
Laws, which as they have no foundation
in reason, never received the least fanAion

from

BERM. from any of the wife and polished nations

XjI_ of antiquity; but were deviled in the

darkcft ages of the world, and are derived
to us from the ferocious barbarity of Go-
thic manners.

Nothing is so inconsistent with felf-pof-

session as violent anger. It overpowers
reason; confounds our ideas; distorts the
appearance, and blackens the colour, of
every object. By the storm which it raifcs
within, and by the mischiefs which it oc-
cafions without, it generally brings on the
pallionate and revengeful man, greater mi-
fery than he can bring on his enemy. Pa-
tience allays this deftrufive tempest, by
making room for the return of calm and
fober thought. It suspends the blow which
sudden resentment was ready to inflict. It
disposes us to attend to the alleviating cir-
cumftances, which may be discovered in
the midst of the wrongs we suppose our-
selves to have suffered. Hence, it natural-
ly inclines us to the moderate and gentle
fide; and while it allows all proper mea-
fures to be taken, both for safety, and for

just

just redress, it makes way for returning SERM.

XI.

peace. Without some degree of patience j
exercised under injuries, human life would
be rendered a state of perpetual hofility;
offences and retaliations would succeed to
one another in endless train; and the world
would become a field of blood.-It now
remains to recommend,

V. PATIENCE under adversity and as-

flition. This is the moil common sense
in which this virtue is understood; as it
refpeds difeaie, poverty, old age, loss of
friends, and the other calamities which are
incident to human life. Tbozgh a man live
many years, and rejoice in them all, yet let
him remember the days of darkncfs, for they
shall be many *. The various duties to
which patience, under this view, gives rife,
afford a larger subjeC to discourse than I
am at present to pursue. In general, there
are two chief exercises of patience under
adversity; one refpe&ing God, and another
rcfpeCing men.

* Eccld. xi. 8.

Patience,

ER M. Patience, with refped to God, must, in
X`l in the days of trouble, suppress the risings

of a murmuring and rebellious spirit. It
must appear in that calm resignation to the
will of Heaven, which is expressed in those
pious sentiments of ancient good men: I
was dumb; I opened not my mouth, beerafe
Ibou did]f it. It is the Lord, let him do what
Jfemetb good in his eyes. Shall we receive
good at the band of the Lord, and Jhall we
not receive evil aljo ? This is loyalty to the
great Governor of the universe. This is
that reverence which so well becomes crea-
tures who know they are dependent, and
who must confess themlrlves to be linful.
Such a spirit is fitted to attract the favour
of Heaven; and to bring the revere vifita-
tion sooner to a close. Whereas the stub-
born and impatient, who submit not them-
selves to the decrees of the Most High, re-
quire to be humbled and subdued by a
continuance of chastisement.

Patience in adversity, with refped to

men, mulf appear by the composure and
tranquillity of our behavieor. The -loud

complaint,

complaint, the querulous temper, and fret- SER M
ful spirit, disgrace every character. They i._
[how a mind that is unmanned by misfor-
tunes. We weaken thereby the sympathy
of others; and estrange them from the of-
sices of kindness and comfort. The exer-
tions of pity will be feeble, when it is
mingled with contempt. At the fame time,
by thus weakly yielding to adversity, we
allow its weight to bear us down with
double pressure. Patience, by preserving
composure within, refifis the impression
which trouble makes from without. By
leaving the mind open to every consolation,
it naturally tends to alleviate our burden.
-To maintain a steady and unbroken
mind, amidst all the hlocks of the world,
forms the highest honour of a man. Pa.
tience, on such occations, rifes to magna.
nimity. It ihows a great and noble mind,
which is able to reft on itself, on God, and
a good conscience; which can enjoy itself
amidst all evils; and would rather endure
the greatest hardihips, than submit to what
was diihonourable, in order to obtain re-

lief.

SERM. lief. This gives proof of a strength that

x is derived from Heaven. It is a beam of

the Immortal Light, shining on the heart.
Such patience, is the most complete triumph
of religion and virtue; and accordingly it
has ever charaderifed those whole names
have been tranfinitted with honour to po-
fterity. It has ennobled the hero, the faint,
and the martyr. We arc troubled on tevry
fide, yet not diflrejed; we are perplexed, but
not in despair; persecuted, but not fjrfaken;
cafi down, but not deIlroyed *.

THUS I have traced Patience through

several of its moft,important operations, in
different circumstances of life; under pro-
vocations; under disappointments; under
restraints; under injuries; and under as-
flictions. We now fee, that it is a virtue
of universal use. No man, in any condi-
tion, can pass his days with tolerable com-
fort, who has not learned to practise it.
His prosperity will be continually disturb-

* Cor. iv. 8. 9.

ed;

ed; and his adversity will be clouded with SERM.
double darkness. He will be uneasy and _
troublesome to all with whom he is con-
neted ; and will be more troublesome
to himself than to any other.- Let me
particularly advise those who wiflh to cul-
tivate so necessary a virtue, to begin their
cultivation of it, on occasions when small
offences and provocations arise. It is a
great, but common, error to imagine, that
we are at liberty to give loose reins to tem-
per, among the trivial occurrences of life.
No excuse for irritation and impatience can
be worse, than what is taken from the per-
son being inconsiderable, or the incident
being flight, which threw us off our guard.
With inconsiderable persons we are fur-
rounded. Of flight incidents, the bulk of
human life is composed. In the midst of
there, the ruling temper of the mind is
formed. It is only by moderation and self-
command then acquired, that we can inure
ourselves to patience, when the great con-
junCtures of life shall put it to a feverer
trial. If neglected then, we {hall after-

wards

SERM wards solicit its return in vain. If tbou
_ bhaft run with footmen, and they have wea-

ried tbce, bow cans thbou contend with borsei t
and if in the land of peace, wherein thou
ruftedfq, they wearied thee, then bow wilt
thou do in tbe swellings of ordan * ?

wI order to assist us in the acquisition of

this grace, let us often contemplate that
great model of it, which is displayed in the
whole life of our Saviour Jesus Christ.
Whose temper was ever tried by more fre-
quent provocations, more repeated difap-
pointments, more flagrant injuries, or more
severe distress ? Yet, amidst them all, we
behold him patiently enduring the contra-
dilion offinners; to their rudeness, oppo-
sing a mild and unruffled, though firm,
spirit; and, in the cause of mankind, gene-
roufly bearing with every indignity. Well
might he fay, Learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in heart t. Having such a high
example before our eyes, let us be afiamed

Jer. iii 5. t Matth. xi. 29.

Of

of those sallies of impatience which we so SER M
often susser to break forth, in the midst of _x_
prosperity. By a more manly tranquillity
and felf-command, let us discover to the
world, that, as men, and as Christians, we
have learned in patience to pclefi our fouls.

VOL. III. R S E t.

# SERMON XII. On MODERATION. PHILLIPPIANS, iv. 5. Let your Moderation be known unto all Men. —

[ 24^ ]
SERMON XII.

On MODERATION.

PHILLIPPIANS, iv. j.
Let your Moderation be knuon unto all

Men.
sERM. THE present slate of man is neither

doomed to conltant misery, nor de-

signed for complete happiness. It is, in
general, a mixed state, of comfort and Tor-
row, of profpcrity and adversity; neither
brightened by uninterrupted sunshine, nor
overcatl with perpetual ihade; but subjet
to alternate fucceilions of the one, and the
other. While such a fate forbids despair,
it also checks presumption. It is equally
adverse to depondency of mind, and to

high

high elevation of spirits. The temper which s E RM
best suits it, is expreffe4 ni the text by mao- _X
deration; which, as the habitual tenor of
the foul, the apostle exhorts us to discover
in our whole conduc; let it be known unto
all men. This virtue consists in the equal
balance of the fouL It imports such pro-
per government of our pafions and plea-
fures, as {hall prevent us from running in-
to extremes of any kind; and shall pro-
duce a calm and temperate frame of mind.
It chiefly refpets our conduct in that tate,
which comes under the description of ease,
or prosperity. Patience, of which I treat-
ed in the preceding discourse, direts the
proper regulation of the mind, under the
disagreeable incidents of life. Moderation
determines the bounds within which it
should remain, when circumitances are a.
greeable or promising. What I now pur-
pose is, to point out some of the chief in-
stances in which Moderation ought to take
place, and to how the importance of pre-
serving it.

R 2 I. Mo-

SERM. I. MODERATION in our wimtes. The
XI. active mind of man seldom or never refts

satisfied with its present condition, how
prosperous soever. Originally formed for
a wider range of objects, for a higher sphere
of enjoyments, it finds itself, in every si-
tuation of fortune, straitened and confi-
ned. Sensible of deficiency in its state, it
is ever fending forth the fond desire, the
aspiring wish, after something beyond what
is enjoyed at present. Hence, that restless-
nefa which prevails so generally among
mankind. Hence, that disgust of pleasures
which they have tried; that palfion for
novelty; that ambition of rising to some
degree of eminence or felicity, of which
they have formed to themselves an indif-
tin& idea. All which may be confidered
as indications of a certain native, original
greatness in the human foul, swelling be-
yond the limits of its present condition;
and pointing at the higher objects for
which it was made. Happy, if these latent
remains of our primitive state served to di-
red our wishes towards their proper defti-

nation,

nation, and to lead us into the path of true SE RM.
bliss ! XI.

But in this dark and bewildered state,

the aspiring tendency of our nature unfor-
tunately takes an opposite direction, and
feeds a very misplaced ambition. The
flattering appearances which here present
themselves to sense; the diftintions which
fortune confers; the advantages and plea-
fures which we imagine the world to be
capable of bestowing, fill up the ultimate
with of molt men. These are the objets
which ingrofs their solitary mulings, and
ltimulate their active labours; which warm
the brealts of the young, animate the in-
duftry of the middle aged, and often keep
alive the pallions of the old, until the very
close of life. Assuredly, there is nothing
unlawful in our wilhing to be freed from
whatever is disagreeable, and to obtain a
fuller enjoyment of the comforts of life.
But when there vwithes are not tempered by
reason, they arc in danger of precipitating
us into much extravagance and folly. De-
fires and willies are the first iirings of ac-

R 3 tion.

SER M. tion. When they become exorbitant, the

Xll.
_ whole characer is likely to be tainted. If

we susser our fancy to create to itself, worlds
of ideal happiness; if we feed our imagi-
nation, with plans of opulence and splendor
far beyond our rank; if we fix to our
wishes certain stages of high advancement,
or certain degrees of uncommon reputation
or diftintion, as the sole stations of feli-
city; the assured consequence will be, that
we shall become unhappy in our present
state; unfit for a&ing the part, and dif-
charging the duties that belong to it; we
shall discompose the peace and order of our
minds, and foment many hurtful paflions.
Here, then, let Moderation begin its reign;
by bringing within reasonable bounds the
withes that we form. As soon as they be-
come extravagant, let us check them, by
proper refleftions on the fallacious nature
of those objecs, which the world hangs out
to allure dcfire.

You have strayed, my friends, from the

road which conducs to felicity; you have
diffhontured the native dignity of your

fouls,

founls, in allowing your wishes to terminate s . R M.
on nothing higher than worldly ideas of XIL
grcatnefs or happiness. Your imagination
roves in a land of lhadows. Unreal forms
deceive you. It is no more than a phan-
tom, an illusion of happiness, which at-
trats your fond admiration; nay, an illu-
sion of happiness, which often conceals
much real misery. Do you imagine, that
all are happy, who have attained to thole
summits of distinction, towards which your
wishes aspire ? Alas ! how frequently has
experience shewed, that where rotes were
supposed to bloom, nothing but briars and
thorns grew ? Reputation, beauty, riches,
grandeur, nay, royalty itself, would, many
a time, have been gladly exchanged by the
polfeffors, for that more quiet and humble
station, with which you are now diffatif.
sied. With all that is splendid and ihining
in the world, it is decreed that there should
mix many deep fiades of woe. On the e-
levated situations of fortune, the great ca-
lamities of life chiefly fall. There the Itorm
spends its violence, and there the thunder

R 4 hreaks

6E R M. breaks; while safe and unhurt, the inhabit-
XII.

ant of the vale remains below.- Retreat,
then, from those vain and pernicious excur-
sions of extravagant desire. Satisfy your-
selves with what is rational and attainable.
Train your minds to moderate views of
human life, and human happiness. Re-
member, and admire, the wisdom of Agur's
with. Remove far from me vanity and lies.
Give me neither poverty nor riches. Feed me
with food convenient for me: Left I be full,
and deny thee, and fay, who is the Lord P or
leIf I be poor, and Jfeal, and take the name of
my God in vain *.- Let me recommend,

II. MODERATION in our pursuits.

Wishes and desires reft within. If immo-
derate and improper, though they taint
the heart, yet society may not be affeced
by them. The obscure and harmless in-
dividual may indulge his dreams, without
(lilhllbl)ing the public peace. But when
the active pursuits in which we engage,

' Prov. xxi. 8. 9.

rife

rife beyond moderation, they fill the world E R M.
with great disorders; often with flagrant X-i.
crimes. This admonition chiefly relpects
the ambitious men of the world. I fay not,
that all ambition is to be condemned; or
that high pursuits ought, on every occa-
sion, to be checked. Some men are form-
ed by nature, for rising into conspicuous
stations of life. In following the impulse
of their minds, and properly exerting the
talents with which God has blessed them,
there is room for ambition to ad in a lau-
dable sphere, and to become the inltru-
ment of much public good. But this may
fafcly be pronounced, that the bulk of
men are ready to over-rate their own abi-
lities, and to imagine themselves equal to
higher things than they were ever design-
ed for by nature. Be fober, therefore, in
fixing your aims, and planning your de-
ftined pursuits. Beware of being led a-
fide from the plain path of found and mo-
derate conduct, by those false lights which
felf-flattery is alwa)s ready to hang out.
1By aiming at a mark too high, you may

fall

SERM. fall ihort of what it was within your
X-v- power to have reached. Instead of attain-

ing to eminence, you may expose your-
felvcs to derision; nay, may bring upon
your heads manifold disasters. Ifay to
every man that it among you, not to tbink of
himfeif more highly than be ought to think,
but to think Joberly *.

Whatever your aims be, there is one ex-

ercife of moderation which must be en-
joined to those of the greatest abilities, as
well as to others; that is, never to tranf-
grefs the bounds of moral duty. Amidst
the warmth of pursuit, accustom your-
selves to fuhmit to the retraints, which re-
ligion and virtue, which propriety and de-
cency, which regard to reputation and cha-
rader, impose. Think not, that there are
no barriers which ought to stop your pro-
grefs. It is from a violent and impetuous
spirit that all the evils spring, which are
so often found to accompany ambition.
Hence, in private life, the laws of truth

' Rom. xii. 3.

and

and honour are violated. Hence, in pu- SERM.
blic contests, the peace and welfare of na- .^
tions have been so often sacrificed to the
ambitious projects of the great. The man
of moderation, as he is temperate in his
wilhes, so in his pursuits he is regulated
by virtue. A good conscience is to him
more valuable than any success. He is
not so much bent on the accomplithment
of any design, as to take a dishonourable
flep, in order to compass it. He can have
patience. He can brook disappointments.
He can yield to unsurmountable obstacles;
and, by gentle and gradual progress, is
more likely to succeed in the end, than
others are, by violence and impetuosity. In
his highest enterprise, he wiflies not to
have the appearance of a meteor, which
fires the atmosphere; or, of a comet, which
altonithes the public, by its blazing, ec-
centric course; but rather to resemble those
steady luminaries of heaven, which ad-
vance in their orbits, with a silent and re-
gular motion. He approves himself there-
by to the virtuous, the wife, and discern-

ing i

BERM. ing; and, by a temperate and unexcep-

XII.
.l tionable condut, escapes those dangers

which persons of an opposite deicription
are perpetually ready to incur.

III. BE moderate in your expecations.

When your slate is flourilhing, and the
courfc of events proceeds according to your
wish, susser not your minds to be vainly
lifted up. Flatter not yourselves with high
profpeds of the increasing favours of the
world, and the continuing applause of men.
Say not within your hearts, My mountain
flands fprong, and Jhall never be moved. I
Jhall never fee adversity. To-morrow Jhall
be as this day, and more abundantly.-You
are betraying yourselves; you are laying a
sure foundation of disappointment and mi-
fery, when you allow your fancy to soar
to such lofty pinnacles of confident hope.
By building your house in this airy region,
you are preparing for yourselves a great
and cruel fall. Your truf/ is the Jbider's
twb. You may lean on your bouse; but it
thall notjiand. You may bold it fai ; but it

Jhall

Jball not endure. For, to man on earth it S E R M.

xY!l.

was never granted, to gratify all his hopes; _
or to perfcvcre in one trad of uninterrup-
ted profpcrity. Unpleafing viciflitudes ne-
ver fail to succeed those that were grateful.
The fajhion of the world, how gay or fii-
ling soever, paf'ib, and often pafleth fud-
denly, away.

By want of moderation in our hopes,

we not only increase dejecaion, when dif-
appointment comes, but we accelerate dif-
appointment; we bring forward, with great-
er speed, disagreeable changes in our state.
For the natural consequence of prefump-
tuous expectation, is raihnefs in condut.
He who indulges confident security, of
course neglects due precautions against the
dangers that threaten him; and his fall
will be foreseen, and predited. He not
only exposes himself unguarded to dan-
gers, but he multiplies them against him-
self. By presumption and vanity, he either
provokes enmity, or incurs contempt.

The arrogant mind, and the proud
hope, are equally contrary to religion, and

to

ERM. to prudence. The world cannot bear such
XIL

a spirit; and Providence seldom fails to
check it. The Almighty beholds with dif-
pleasure those who, intoxicated with pro-
fperity, forget their dependence on that Su-
preme Power which raised them up. His
awful government of the world has been
in nothing more conspicuous than in bring-
ing low the lofty looks of man, and seatering
the proud in the imaginations of their minds.
-Is not this the great Babylon which I have
built by the might of my power, and for the
honour of my Majesty * ? Thus exclaimed
the presumptuous monarch, in the pride of
his heart. But, lo! when the word was
yet in his mouth, the visitation from hea-
ven came, and the voice was heard; 0,
Nebuchadnezzar! to thee it is spoken; thy
kingdom is departed from thee.-He that ex-
altetb bimfelf, Jhall be humbled; and be that
humblethb imfef, Jball be exalted t. A tem-
perate spirit, and moderate expectations,
are the best safeguard of the mind in this

Danid, iv. 3. 31. t Luke, xiv. iI.

uncertain

uncertain and changing state. They en- SF.RM.
able us to pals through life with most XII.
comfort. When we rife in the world, they
contribute to our elevation; and if we
must fall, they render our fall the lighter.

IV. MODERATION in our pleasures is an

important exercise of the virtue which we
are now confidering. It is an invariable
law of our present condition, that every
pleasure which is pursued to excels, con-
verts itself into poison. What was intend-
ed for the cordial and refreshment of hu-
man life, through want of moderation, we
turn to its bane. In all the pleasures of
sense, it is apparent, that only when indul-
ged within certain limits, they confer fa-
tisfation. No sooner do we pass the line
which temperance has drawn, than perni-
cious effects come forward, and flow them-
selves. Could I lay open to your view the
monuments of death, they would read a
leture in favour of moderation, much
more powerful than any that the most elo-
quent preacher can gie. You would be-

hold

BERM. hold the graves peopled with the victims
^X, of intemperance. You would behold those

chambers of darkness hung round, on eve-
ry fide, with the trophies of luxury, drunk-
ennefs, and sensuality. So numerous would
you find those martyrs of iniquity, that it
may safely be asserted, where war or pefti-
lence have lain their thousands, intempe-
rate pleasure has slain its ten thousands.

While the want of moderation in plea-

sure brings men to an untimely grave,
at the fame time, until they arrive there,
it pursues and afflicA them with evils
innumerable. To what cause so much
as to this, are owing, faded youth, and
premature old age; an enervated body,
and an enfeebled mind; together with
all that long train of diseases, which the
indulgence of appetite and sense have in-
troduced into the world? Health, chear-
fulness, and vigour, are known to be the
offspring of temperance. The man of
moderation brings to all the natural and
innocent pleasures of life, that found un-
corrupted relili, which gives him a much

fuller

fullzr enjoyment of them, than the pallcd qs .RM.

XI.

and vitiated appetite of the voluptuary al- _,
lows him to know. He culls the flower of
every allowable gratification, without dwell-
*ing upon it until the flavour be loft He
taftes the ifvezt of every pleaflre, without
pursuing it till the bitter dregs rife. Where-
as the man of opposite charaacr dips so
deep, that he never fails to stir an impure
and noxious sediment, which lies at the
bottom of the cup. -In the plcafures,
besides, which are regulated by modera-
tion, there is always that dignity which
goes along with innocence. No man needs
to be alhamed of them. They are confit-
ent with honour; with the favour of God,
and of man. But the sensualist, who dif-
dains all restraint in his pleasures, is odious
in the public eye. His vices become gross;
his charader, contemptible; and he ends
in being a burden both to himself and to
society. Let me exhort you, once more,

V. To moderation in all your passions.
This exercise of the virtue is the more re4

VOL. III. S guifite,

SERM. quifite, because there is no passion in hu-

-Lvj man nature but what has, of itself, a ten-

dency to run into excess. For all passion
implies a violent emotion of mind.. Of
course, it is apt to derange the regular
course of our ideas; and to produce con-
fusion within. Nothing, at the fame time,
is more seducing than paflion. During the
time when it grows and swells, it constant-
ly justifies, to our apprehenlion, the tumult
which it creates, by means of a thousand
false arguments which it forms, and brings
to its aid. Of some passions, such as anger
and resentment, the excess is so obviously
dangerous, as loudly to call for modera-
tion. He who gives himself up to thl im-
petuofty of such passions, without retraint,
is universally condemned by the world;
and hardly accounted a man of found
mnind. But, what is less apt to be attend-
ed to, some even of those passions which
arc reckoned innocent, or whose tendency
to disorder and evil is not apparent, fland,
nevertheless, in need of moderation and re-
fwaint, as well as others. For, such is the

,'w~ .*~~ ~feeblenelf

feebleness of our nature, that every padfion SERM.
which has for its object any worldly good, XIL
is in hazard of attaching us too strongly,
and of transporting us beyond the bounds
of reason. If allowed to acquire the full and
unrestrained dominion of the heart, it is
futdicient, in various situations, to render
us miserable; and almost in every fitua-
tion, by its ingrofling power, to render
us negligent of dutes which, as men or
Chriltians, we are bound to perform.

Of the insidious growth of passion, theie-

fore, we have great reason to beware. We
ought always to have at hand confidera-
tions, which may ailift us in tempering its
warmth, and in regaining poffeflion of our
fouls. Let us be persuaded, that moments
of paflion are always moments of delusion;
that nothing truly is, what it then seems to
be.; that all the opinions which we then
form, are erroneous; and all the judge-
ments which we pass, are extravagant. Let
moderation accustom us to wait until the
fumes of pafflion be spent; until the milt
which it has raised begin to be diipatcd.

S 2 We

SERM. We lhall then be able to fee where truth
XI aand right lie; and reason shall, by degrees,

resume the ascendant. On no occasion let
us imagine, that strength of mind is shown
by violence of paflion. This is not the
strength of men, but the impetuosity of
children. It is the strength of one who is
in the delirium of a fever, or under the
disease of madness. The strength of such a
person is indeed increased. But it is an
unnatural strength; which being under no
proper guidance, is direced towards ob-
jeas that occasion his deftruifon. True
strength of mind is 1hown in governing
and refiffing passion, not in giving it scope;
in restraining the wild beast within; and
a&ing, on the most trying occasions, ac-
cording to the dictates of conscience, and
temperate reason.

THUS I have pointed out, in several in-

stances, how moderation ought to be dif-
played: Moderation in our withes; mo-
deration in our pursuits; moderation in
our hopes; moderation in our pleasures;

moderation

moderation in our passions. It is a prin- SERM.

XYrI

ciple which ihould habitually influence our Lx.
conduct, and form the reigning tempera-
ture of the obul.

TlHE great motive to this virtue is suggest-

ed by the words immediately following the
text; the Lord is at band. The Judge is co-
ming, who is to close this temporary scene of
things, and to introduce a higher slate of
exitence. The day is at hand, which will
place the great concerns of men in a point
of view very different from that in which
they are at present beheld; will itrip the
world of its false glory; will detect the va-
nity of earthltr pursuits; and disclose ob-
jecs which have the proper title to interest
a rational mind. Objeds acquire power
to engage our paflions, only in proportion
as they arc conceived to be great. But
great, or little, are no more than terms of
conlparifon. Those things which appear
great to one who knows nothing greater,
will fink into a diminutive size, when he
becomes acquainted with objects of a high-

S 3 er

E Rk M. er nature. Were it oftener in our thoughts,
11I that the Lord is at hand, none ot thoie

things which now difcorlmofe and agitacc
worldly men, would appear of sufficient
magnitude to raise commotion in our
breasts. Enlarged views of the future de-
ftination of man, and of the place which
he may hope to possess in an eternal
world, naturally give birth to modera-
tion of mind. They tend to cool all mif-
placed ardour about the advantages of this
Rate; and to produce that calm and tem-
perate frame of spirit, which becomes men
and Christians. They give no ground for
entire disregard of earthly concerns. While
we are men, we must feel and aat as such.
But they afford a good reason why they
who believe the Lord to be at band, Should
let their moderation appear, and be known
unto all men.

S E R-

# SERMON XIII. On the JOY, and the BITTERNESS of the HEART. PROVERBS, xiv. 10. The heart knoweth his own bitterness, and a stranger doth not intermeddle with his joy.

[ 263 3

S E R M O N Xi.
On the JoY, and the BITTERNESS of the

HEART.

PROVERBS, xiv. 1o.

rbe heart knowctb his own bitrcn:cfs, and a
Jlranger doth not intermeddle with his joy.

T is well known, that men have always S E R M.
been much inclined to place their hap- _-

piness in the advantages of fortune, and
the diftintions of rank. Hence these have
been pursued by the multitude with such
avidity, that every principle of honour,
probity, and virtue, have been sacrificed
to the attainment of them. At the fame
time, many circumitances might have con-
vinced men, that supposing them to be fuc-

S 4 ccfsful

BERM. celsful in the pursuit, it by no means fol-

lowed, that happinels was to be the re-
ward. For if happiness be, in truth, es-
fentially conneced with splendid fortune,
or exalted rank, how comes it to pass, that
many in the inferior stations of life, visibly
spend their days with more comfort, than
they who occupy the higher departments
of the world ? Why does the beggar ting,
while the King is fad ? A small meature of
refiection on our nature might latist- us,
that there are other principles of happiness
or miftry, too often overlooked by the
world, which immediately affect the heart,
and operate there with greater force and
power, than any circumitances of rank or
fortune. This is the oblervation of the
wile man in the text; and what I now pur-
pose to illulrate. I ilall take a view of
the chief fourccs of that biJttrnefi which the
h/I,'rt l.niwetlh, and of that joy with uhicb
I IJrainger diIilh nlt inlermcdd/l ; and then
lhall point out the proper improvements to
be made of the subject.

IF

IF we inquire carefully into the sources SERM.

of the joy or bitterness of the heart, we ,i.,
Ihall find, that they are chiefly two; that
they arise either from a man's own mind
and temper; or, from the connection in
which he stands with tome of his fellow-
creatures. In other words, the circum-
stances which molt essentially affect every
man's happiness are, his peribnal character,
and his iocial feelings.

I. EVERY man's own mind and temper

is, necessarily, to himself a iource of much
inward joy or bitterness. For every man,
if we may be allowed the exprelfion, is
more connected with himself, than with
any external object. He is constantly a
companion to hitnilf in his own thoughts;
and what he meets with there, must, of all
things, contribute most to his happiness or
his difiluiet. Whatever his condition in
the world be, whether high or low, if he
find no cauie to upbraid himlelf for his
bchaviour; if he be satisfied that his con-
ducl procecds upon a rational plan; if,

amidst

SERM. amidt the failings incident to humanity,
xM. his confiience be, in the main, free from

reproach, and his mind undilturbed by
any dilmal presages of futurity; the foun-
dation is laid for a placid and agreeable te-
nor of life. If to this you add a calm and
chearful temper, not easily fretted or di-
fturbed, not lubjed to envy, nor prone to
violent pallion, much of that joy will be
produced, which it is said in the text, a
flranger intermeddleth not with. For this is
an intrinsic joy, independent of all foreign
causes. The upright man, as it is written,
is fatisid from hbnimlf. Undisturbed by
the vexations of folly, or the remorse of
guilt, his nights will be peaceful, and his
days serene. His mind is a kingdom to it-
self. A good conscience, and good tem-
per, prepare, even in the midlft of poverty,
a contiwnalfeqft.

But how sadly will the scene be reversed,

if the firit thoughts which occur to a man
concerning himself, shall be of a gloomy
and threatening kind; if his tcmptr, in-
fead of calmness and felf-enjoyment, shall

yield

yield him nothing but disquiet and painful SE R M.
agitation ? In any situation of fortune, is _,
it possible for him to be happy, whose
mind is in this troubled state ? The spirit
of a man will fiflain his ifirmities; but a
wounded Jpirit, who can bear ? Vigour of
mind, may enable a man to sustain many
shocks of adversity. In his spirit, as long
as it is found, he can find a resource,
when other auxiliaries fail. But if that
which should sustain him be enfeebled and
broken; if that to which he has recourse
for the cure of other sorrows, become itself
the wounded part; to what quarter can he
turn for relief?

The wounds which the spirit suffers are

owing chiefly to three causes; to folly, to
paflion, or to guilt. They frequently ori-
ginate from folly; that is, from vain, and
improper pursuits, which, though not di-
re&ly criminal, are unsuitable to a man's
age, character, or condition, in the world.
In consequence of these, he beholds him-
self degraded and exposed; and suffers the
pain of many a mortifying refletion, and

many

ERM . many a humbling comparison of himself
XslL. with others. The dittrels occalioncd by a

sense of folly, is aggravated by any violent
pailon being allowed to take policlion of
the heart. Even though it be of the class
of those which are reckoned innocent, yet,
if it have entirely leizcl and overpowered
; man, it deltroys his tranquillity, and
brings his mind into a perturbed state.
But if it be a passion of the black and vi-
cious kind, it is futficient to blast the most
flouriihing condition, and to poison all his
joys. If to thole wounds infliced by fol-
ly, or by passion, you add the wound of
guilt, the remorie and fear produced by
criminal deeds, you fill up the measure of
pain, and bitterness of heart. Often have
the terrors of conscience occasioned inward
paroxyfins, or violent agitations of mind.
A dark a nd threatening cloud teems, to the
conicious linner, to be hanging over his
head. He who believes himself despised,
or hated, by men, and who dreads, at the
fane time, an avenging God, can derive
little pleasure from the external comforts of

life.

life. The bitterness of his heart infufcs it- s E R ,M.
self into every draught which pleaiure of- i
sers to his lips.

The external misfortunes of life, difapi

pointments, poverty, and sickness, are no-
thing in comparison of those inward di-
fireffes of mind, occasioncd by folly, by
pallion, and by guilt. They may indeed
prevail in different degrees, according as
one or other of those principles of bitter-
nets is predominant. But they are seldom
parted far asunder from one another; and
when, as it too often happens, all the three
are complicated, they complete the misery
of man. The disorders of the mind, ha-
ving then arisen to their height, become of
all things the moll dreadful. The ihame
of folly, the violence of passion, and the
remorse of guilt, acting in conjunction,
have too frequently driven men to the last
and abhorred refuge, of seeking relief in
death from a life too embittered to be any
longer endured. I proceed to confider

II. OTHER troubles, and other joys of

the

SER M. the heart, arising from Iburces different
X'. . from those that I have now described;

founded in the relations or connecdions
which we have with others, and springing
from the feelings which there occifion.
Such causes of sorrow or joy are of an
external nature. Religion does not teach,
that all the Iburces of inward pleasure or
pain are derived from our temper, and mo-
ral behaviour. These are indeed the prin-
cipal springs of bitterness or joy. In one
way or other, they asset all the pleasures
and pains of life; but they include not,
within themselves, the whole of them. Our
Creator did not intend, that the happinels
of each individual ihould have no depend-
ence on those who are around him. Ha-
ving connected us in society by many ties,
it is his decree, that there ties should prove,
both during their subsistence, and in their
dissolution, causes of pleasure or pain, im-
mediately, and often deeply, affecting the
human heart. My dotrine, therefore, is
not, that the bitternef wubicb the heart know-
eth as it: own, and the joy with which a

J/ralnger

5franger intermeddkflh *ot, is independent of s. 1 R
every thing external. What I assert is, X .
that this bitternefi, and this jy', depend
much more on other causes, than on riches
or poverty, on high or low itations in the
world; that, equally in the conditions of
elevated fortune, and of private life, the
moOt material circumstances of tronble or
felicity, next to the [Fate of our own mind
and temper, are the ienfations and assec-
tions which arise from the connetions we
have with others.

IN order to make this appear, let us sup.

pose a man, in any rank or condition of
life, happy in his family and his friends;
soothed by the cordial intercourse of kind
affections, which he partakes with them;
enjoying the comfort of doing them good
offices, and receiving in return their since-
reft gratitude; experiencing no jealousy
nor envy, no disquiet or alienation of as-
fction, among those with whom he is con-
nected ;- how many, and how copious
sources of invward joy open to such a man

How

E RM. How finooth is the tenor of a life that pro-
I__I ceeds in such a course! What a smiling

asped does the love of parents and chil-
dren, of brothers and fillers, of friends and
relations, give to every surrounding objet,
and every returning day ! With what a
lutfre does it gild even the small habitation
where such placid intercourse dwells; where
such scenes of heartfelt satisfaction succeed
uninterruptedly to one another!

But let us suppose this joyful intercourse

to be broken off, in an untimely hour, by
the cruel hand of the last foe; let us ima-
gine the family, once so happy among
themselves, to behold the parent, the child,
or the spouse, to whom their hearts were
attached by the tendereft ties, stretched on
the cold bed of death; then, what bitter-
ness does the heart know ! This, in the
ftri'teft sense, is its own bitterness; from
which it is not in the power of any exter-
nal circumstance whatever to afford it re-
lief. Amidst those piercing griefs of the
heart, all ranks of life are levelled; all dif-
tin&tions of fortune are forgotten. Un-

availing

availing arc the trophies of splendid woe, SE R M.
with which riches deck the fatal couch, to _ _'
give the leaf comfort to the mourner. The
prince, and the peasant, then equally feel
their own bitterness. Dwelling on the me-
lancholy remembrance of joys that arc past
and gone, the one forgets his poverty; the
other despises the gilded trappings of his
ltate. Both, in that fad hour, are fully
lenfble, that on the favours of fortune it
depends not to make man happy in this
world.

But it is not only the death of friends,

which, in the midst of a seemingly pro-
fperous state, is able to bring diitrefs home
to the heart. From various failures in their
conduct when living, arises much of the
inward uneasiness we susser. It will, in
general, be found, that the behaviour of
those among whom we live in near connec-
tion, is, next to personal charater and
temper, the chief source, either of the plea-
fures, or of the disquietudes, of every man's
life. As, when their behaviour is cordial
and fatisfacory, it is of all external things

VOL. ll. T the

SER M. the inof soothing to the mind ; so, on the

XIII.
Lry-- other hand, their levity, their inattention,

or occasional harllnefs, even though it pro-
ceed to no deciled breach of fricndflip,
yet ruffles and sirets the temper. Social
life, harassed with those petty vexations,
resembles a road which a man is doomed
daily to travel; but finds it rugged, and
flony, and painful to be trod.

The cafe becomes much worst, if the

base and criminal conduc of perfins whom
we have once loved, dissolve all the bonds
of amity, and flow that our confidence
has been abused. Then are opened, some
of the dccpelt springs of bitterness in the
human heart. - Behold the heart of the
parent, torn by the unworthy behaviour,
and cruel ingratitude of the child, whom
lie had trained up with the fondest hopes;
on whom he had laviflied his whole assec-
tion ; and for whoe fake lie had laboured
and toiled, through the course of a long life.
Behold the endearments of the conjugal
slate changed into black suspicion, and mif-
trust; the affeclionate spouse, or the vir-

tuous

tuous husband, left to mourn, with a bro- SERM.
ken heart, the infidelity of the once-beloved _x.
partner of their life. Behold the unfif-
pecing fiiend betrayed, in the hour of
danger, by the friend in whom he trulted;
or, in the midst of severe misfortune, meet-
ing nothing but cold indifference, perhaps
scorn and contempt, where he had expet-
ed to find the kindest fvmpathy.- Are
these, let me ask, uncommon scenes in the
world ? Are such distresses peculiar to any
rank or station ? Do they chiefly befall
persons in humble life, and have the great
any prerogative which affords them exemp-
tion ? When the heart is sorely wounded
by the ingratitude or faithleffilefs of those
on whom it had leaned with the whole'
weight of affection, where shall it turn for
relief? Will it find comfort in the recol-
lection of honours and titles, or in the con-
templation of surrounding treafurcs ?-.-
Talk not of the honours of a court. Talk
not of the wealth of the east. These, in
the hours of hcart-bitternefs, are spurned,
as contemptible and vile; perhaps cursed,

T 2 as

SERM. as indireA causes of the present difrefi.
Xli. The dart has made its way to the heart.

There, there, it is fixed. The very feat of
feeling is assailed; and in proportion to
the sensibility of the sufferer's heart, and
the tenderness of his affecions, such, un-
fortunately, will be his degree of anguiih.
A good conscience, and hope in God, may
indeed bring him consolation. But un-
der such distresses of the heart, as I have
described, fortune, be it as flourishing as
you will, is no more than an empty pa-
geant. It is a feeble reed, which affords
no support. It is a house of straw, which
is scattered before the wind.

THUS you fee this dodrine meeting us

from many quarters, that the heart knows
a bitterness and a joy of its own, altogether
diffind from tie uneasiness or the pleasure
that is produced by the circumstances of
external fortune; arising either from per-
fonal character, and the state of a. man's
own mind; or from the affecions excited
by the relations in which he stands to others.

This

This joy, and this bitterness, are, each of s E R M.
them, of so much greater consequence than _
any diftintions of fortune, that blessed with
the former, one may be happy, as far as
human happiness goes, in a cottage; and
afflided with the latter, he must be mise-
rable in a palace.- Let us now proceed
to an important part of the subject, the
practical improvement to which this doc-
trine leads.

FIRST, Let it serve to moderate our pas-

sion for riches, and high situations in the
world. It is wel known, that the eager
pursuit of these is the chief incentive to the
crimes that fill the world. Hence, among
the middle and lower ranks of men, all the
fraud, falsehood, and treachery, with which
the competition for gain infeCts society.
Hence, in the higher stations of the world,
all the atrocious crimes flowing fiom am-
bition, and the love of power, by which
the peace of mankind has so often been
broken, and the earth stained with blood.
Had tlhee coveted advantages the power,

T 3 when

SERM. when obtained, of ensuring joy to the
XIII L-s_ heart, and rendering it a stranger to bitter-

ness, some apology might be offered for
the violence to which they have given oc-
cafion. The prize might be supposed wor-
thy of being acquired at a high expence,
when so much depended on the attain-
ment. But I have Ihown, I hope with fa-
tisfaAory evidence, that the contrary is the
truth. I fay not, that the advantages of
fortune deserve no regard from a wife or a
good man. Poverty is always distressing.
Opulence and rank are both attended with
many comforts, and may be rendered sub-
servient to the most valuable purposes. But
what I fay is, that it is a great error to rate
them beyond their just value. Secondary
advantages, inferior afliftances to felicity,
they are; and no more. They rank below
every thing that immediately assets the
heart; and that is a native source of joy or
bitterness there. If a man be either un-
happy in his dispositions, or unhappy in all
his connecions, you heap upon him in
vain, all the treaiures, and all the honours,

which

which kings can bcetow. Divest thef S E ERM.
things, then, of that fallc glare which the i
opinions of the multitude throw around
them. Contemplate them with a more im-
partial eye. Iurlle them with less cager-
nels. Above all, never sacrifice to the pur-
suit any degree of probity or moral worth,
of candour or good affetion; if you would
not lay a foundation for that bitterness of
heart, which none of the goods of fortune
can either compensate or cure.

SECONDLY, Let the observations which

have been made, correct our mistakes, and
check our complaints, concerning a fuppo-
led promiscuous diltribution of happiness
in this world. The charge of injustice,
which lb often, on this account, bath been
brought againit Providence, refts entirely
on this ground, that the happiness and mi-
fery of men may be eflimated by the de-
gree of their external proiperity. This is
the delusion under which the multitude
have always laboured; but which a just
consideration of the invisible springs of hap-

T 4 piness

SER M piness that affcl the heart, is sufficient to
xii. cjrrc. If you would judge whether a

man be really happy, it is not solely to bi1
houses and his lands, to his equipage and
lus retinue, you are to look. Unless you
could fee farther, and discern what joy, or
what bitterness, his heart feels, you can
pronounce nothing concerning him. That
proud and wicked man, whom you behold
lurrounded with Uate and splendour, and
upon whom you think the favours of Hea-
ven so improperly lavilhed, may be a
wretch, pining away in lecret, with a thou-
sand griefs unknown to the world. That
poor man, who appears negleted and over-
looked, may, in his humble station, be
partaking of all the moral, and all the so-
cial joys, that exhilarate the heart; may
be living chearful, contented, and happy.
Cease, then, to murmur against difpenfa-
tions of Providence, which are, to us, tb im-
perfedly known. Envy not the prosperity
of finners. Judge not of the real condition
of men, from what floats. merely on the
surface of their state. Let u& rather,

TIIRDLY,

THIRDLY, Turn our attention to those SER M.

internal sources of happiness or misery, on XII.
which it hath been Ihown that fb much
depends. As far as the bitterness or joy
of the heart arises from the first of thoie
great springs which I assigned to it, our
own conduct and temper, so far our hap-
piness is placed, in some measure, in our
own hands. What is amiss or disordered
within, in consequence of folly, of pailion,
or guilt, may be rectified by due care, un-
der the afliftance of divine grace. He who
thereby attains to a tranquil and composed
state of heart, free from ill humour and
disgust, from violent passions, and from
vexing remorse, is laying a foundation for
enjoyment of himself, much furer and
broader, than if he were amafing thou-
sands to increase his estate.

With regard to the other spring of joy

or bitterness of heart, arising from our con-
nections with others, here indeed, we are
more dependent on things not within our
power. These connections are not al-
ways of our own forming; and even when

they

s E R M. they have been formed by choice, the wisest
JXII. are liable to be disappointed in their expec-

tations. Yet here too it will be found, that
the proper regulation of the heart is of the
utmost importance, both for improving the
joys which our situation affords, and for
mitigating the griefs which our connec-
tions may render unavoidable. As far as
the choice of friends or relatives depends
on ourselves, let their virtue and worth
ever dire& that choice, if we look for
any lasting felicity from it. In all the
habits and attachments of bfcial life, after
they are formed, let it be our study, to ful-
fil properly our own part. Let nothing be
wanting on our fide, to nourith that mutual
harmony and affectionate friendship which,
in every situation of life, as has been Ihown,
is of so great consequence to our peace and
satisfaction. It is not, indeed, in our power
to preserve always alive those friends, in
whom our hearts delight. It is often not
in our power to prevent the ingratitude and
unworthy behaviour of other friends, from
whom we once expected comfort. But

under

under those afflicting incidents of life, s ER M.
much may be done by proper employment xtI.
of the thoughts, and direction of the assec-
tions, for obtaining relief. To a purified
and well-regulated heart, reason and reli-
gion can bring many aids for healing its
wounds, and rctoring its peace; aids which,
to the negligent and vicious, are wholly
unknown. The greater experience we have
of the viciflitudes of human life, with more
weight will that precept of the wife man
always come home to our remembrance;
Keep thy heart with all diligence; for ut of
it are te iues of lfe *.- Hence arises,

IN the fourth and last place, another in-

itruction, that it is of the utmost import-
ance to us all, frequently to look up to
Him who made the human heart; and to
implore his afliftance in the regulation and
government of it. Known to him, are all
the sources of bitterness and joy by which
it is affected. On him it depends, to let

Prov. ;>. 23.

them

SERM. them forth, or to ihut them up; to in-
A>L . crease, or to diminith them, at his plea-

sure. In a study so infinitely important to
happiness, as that of the preservation of in-
ward peace, we cannot be too earnest in
beseeching aid from the great Father of
Spirits, to enable us to keep our hearts free
from distress and trouble.- Besides the
assistance which we may hope to derive
from divine grace, the employments of de-
votion tbemfclves, form one of the most
powerful means of composing, and tran-
quillifing the heart. On various occasions,
when the sources of heart-bitternefs have
been most overflowing, devotion has been
found the only refuge of the sufferer. De-
votion opens a fanduary, to which they,
whose hearts have been most deeply wound-
ed, can always fly. Within that quiet and
sacred retreat, they have often found a
healing balsam prepared. When grieved
by men, they have derived, from the ascent
of the mind towards God and celestial ob-
jecs, much to tooth them at present, and
much to hope for in future. Let us, there-

fore,

fore, neglect no mean with which religion SE RM.

XIII.

can furnith us, for promoting the joys, and
afluaging the bitterness of the heart. A-
midst the frailties of our nature, the incon-
ftancy of men, and the frequent changes
of human life, we shall find every assistance
that can be procured, little enough, for en-
abling us to pass our few days with tole-
rable comfort and peace.

SE R-

# SERMON XIV. On CHARACTERS of IMPERFECT GOODNESS. MARK, x. 21. Then Jesus, beholding him, loved him. —

[ 286 ]

SE R M ON XIV.
On CHARACTERS of IMPERFECT GOOD-

NESS.

MARK, x. 21.

Then Jesu, beholding him, loved him.-

S E R . H E characters of men which the world
L,__ presents to us are infinitely diversificd.

In some, either the good or the bad qualities
are so predominant, as firongly to mark
the character; to discriminate one person
as a virtuous, another as a vicious man.
In others, these qualities are so mixed to-
gether, as to leave the character doubtful.
The light and the shade are so much blend-
ed, the colours of virtue and vice run in
such a manner into one another, that we

can

can hardly distinguish where the one ends, SERM.

XIV.

and the other begins; and we remain in __
fufpence, whether to blame or to praise.
While we admire those who are thorough-
ly good, and detest the grossly wicked, it
is proper also to bestow attention on those
imperfect characters, where there may be
much to praise, and somewhat to blame;
and where regard to the commendable part,
shall not hinder us from remarking what
is defective or faulty. Such attentions will
be found the more useful, as characters of
this mixed fort are, more frequently than
any other, exhibited to us in the commerce
of society.

It was one of this fort, which gave occa-

sion to the incident recorded in the text. The
incident seems to have been confidered as re-
markable, since it is recounted by three of
the evangelical writers; and by them all,
with nearly the fame circumstances. The
person to whom the history relates was a ru-
ler; one of higher rank and station than
those who usually resorted to Jesus. He
was a rich man: He was a young man. His

whole

SERM. whole behaviour was prepoflefling and en.
XlV, gaging. He appears to have conceived a

high opinion of our Lord. He addrefled
him with the utmft refpe;t and the que-
stion which he put to him was proper and im-
portnt. He kneeld to him; andfaid, Good
Ma/or, What Jball I do that I may inherit
eternal lft His conduct in the world had
been regular and decent He could pro-
tft, that he had hitherto kept himfeif free
from any gross vice; and in his dealings
with others, had observed the precepts of
God. Our Lord, beholding him, is said to
have loved him; whence we have reason to
conclude, that he was not hypocritical in
his professions; and that his countenance
carried the expression of good dispositions,
as his speech, and his manners, were altoge-
ther complacent and gentle. Yet this per-
son, amiable as he was, when his virtue
was put to the test, disappointed the hopes
which he had given reason to form. At-
tached, in all probability, to the indulgence
of cafe and pleasure, he wanted fortitude
of mind to part with the advantages of the

world,

world, for the fake of reliion. When our sr. R M.
Lord required him to tultil his good intell-
tions, by riliinquillling his fortule, beco-
inig one of his follovcrs, and preparing
himllff to encounter uilriilngs, the lacri-
lice alpcarcd to Iilm too great. Imprclhous
of virtue, however, llill remained on his
mind. Ile was lenfible of what he ought
to have done; and regretted his want of
courage to do it. He w7s rJlrro.fil: He
war grieved: Yet he wZLnt away.

PERSONS of a character fomcwhat re,

feinbling this, all of us may have met with;
eliecially, among the young; among those
who have been liberally educated, and
polilhed by good society. They abhor
open vice, and crimes that ditlurb the
world. They have a refipec for religion.
They are willing to receive initrucion for
their conduc. They are modelt and un-
assuming; rclipcctthl to their superiors in
age or station; gentle in their address; in-
offenfivc and courteous in their whole be-
haviour. They are fond of obliging every

VOL. III. U one;

E R M. one; unwilling to hurt or dilpleafe any.-

Such persons we cannot but love. We
gladly promise well of them; and are dif-
posed to forward and affilt them. Yet such
is the weakness of our nature, that at the
bottom of this character there may lie, as
we fee exemplified in the inttance before
us, some secret and material defects. That
vigour of mind, that firmness of principle,
may be wanting, which is requisite for en-
abling them to ad with propriety, when
their virtue is put to a decisive trial. The
softness of their nature is unfavourable to a
feady perseverance in the course of inte-
grity. They possess the amiable qualities;
but there is ground to fufped, that in the
estimable ones they are deficient. While,
therefore, we by no means class them among
the bad, we dare not give them the full
praiIe of virtue. When they set out in the
workl, we cannot pronounce with confi-
dence, what confirmed features their cha-
racer will aflume; nor how far they can
be depended upon, in future life. Allow
me now to point out the dangers which

such

iuch persons are mos likely to incur; and 8E RM.
to ihow what is requisite for them farther
to study, in order to their fulfilling the part
of good men and true Christians.

I. PERSONS of this description are not

qualified for discharging aright many du-
ties, to which their Sitnation in life may
call them. In certain circumstances, they
behave with abundance of propriety. When
all is calm and smooth around them; when
nothing occurs to agitate the mind, or to
disturb the tenor of placid life, none of
their defects come forward. They are be-
loved; and they are useful. They promote
the comfort of human society; and, by
gentleness, and courtesy of manners, serve
to cement men together in agreeable union.
But to fail on the tranquil surface of an
unruffled lake, and to steer a safe course
through a troubled and stormy ocean, re-
quire different talents: and alas! human
life oftener refernbles the flormy ocean,
than the unruffled lake. We shall not
have been long embarked, without find-

U 2 ing

SERM. ing the resemblance to hold too clofc-
XIV.

Amidst the bustle of the world, amidst

the open contentions, and secret enmities,
which prevail in every society, mildness
and gentleness alone, are not iufficient to
carry us, with honour, through the duties
of our different stations; as heads of fami-
lies, citizens, fabjets, magistrates, or as
engaged in the pursuits of our several call-
ings. Disturbances and trials arise, which
demand vigorous exertions of all the moral
powers; of patience, vigilance, and self-
denial; of constancy and fortitude, to sup-
port us under danger and reproach; of
temperance, to restrain us from being car-
ried away by pleasure; of firm and deter-
mined principle, to make us dcfpile the
bribes of fin. These manly dispositions of
mind are indifpcnfably necessary to prepare
one, for surmounting the discouragements
of virtue; and for firuggling honourably
through the hardships of life. Unless he
be thus armed and fortified, whatever good
intentions have been in his heart, they are

likely

likely to be frustrated in ac'ion. Nothing s E R M.
that is great, can be undertaken. Nothing *.
that is dificult or hazardous, can be accom-
plilhed. Nor arc we to imagine, that it is
only in times of perlrcution, or war, or ci-
vil commotions, that there is occasion for
thoie ilronger efforts, tholfe malculine vir-
tues of the ioul, to be displayed. The pri-
vate, and seemingly quiet, stations of life,
often call men forth, in the days of peace,
to severe trials of firmness and conflancy.
The life of very few proceeds in so uniform
a train, as not to oblige them to discover,
in tome situation or other, what portion
they possess of the cftimable qualities of
man. Hence it lometimes happens, that
perlons, whole manners were much less
promising and cngaging than thole of
others, have, neverthelels, when brought
to ac a part in critical circumstances, per-
formed that part with more untillhed ho-
nour, and firmer integrity, than they.

II. I'ERSONS of the character I have dc-
cribed are ill fitted, not only for dilchar-
ging the higher duties of life, but allb for

U 3 rcfilting

SE RM. refiting the common temptations to vice.
X1V. With good dispositions in their mind, with

a desire, like the young ruler in the text,
to know what they shall do, in order to in.
berit eternal life; yet, when the terms re-
quired of them interfere with any favou-
rite enjoyment, like him, they are sorrow.
.fl; and go away. The particular trial to
which he was put, may appear to be a hard
one, and to exceed the ordinary rate of
virtue. Our Lord, who discerned his heart,
saw it to be necessary, in his cafe, for
bringing his character to the tell. But in
cafes, where trials of much less difficulty
present themselves, they who partake of a
charaCter funilar to his, are often found to
give way. The good qualities which they
possess, border on certain weaknesses of the
mind; and these weaknesses are apt to be-
tray them insensibly into vices, with which
they are connected.

Good nature, for instance, is in dan-

ger of running into that unlimited com-
plaifance, which assimilates men to the
loose manners of those whom they find
around them. Pliant, and yielding in

their

their temper, they have not force to fiand s E RM.

3;IV.

by the decisions of their own minds, with J
regard to right and wrong. Like the a-
nimal which is said to assume the colour
of every objeft to whlich it is applied, they
lose all proper character of their own; and
are formed by the characters of those with
whom they chance to aflociate.-The mild
are apt to fink into habits of indolence and
sloth. The chearful and gay, whae warm-
ed by pleasure and mirth, lo'e that Iobriety
and felf-denial, which is elcential to the
support of virtue.-Even nodefty and
fubmiiion, qualities so valuable in them-
selves, and so higlly ornamcntal to youth,
sometimes 4egenerate into a vicious timi-
dity; a timidity which refirains men from
doing their duty with firmness; which can-
not stand the frown of tle great, the re-
proach of the multitude, or even the ridi-
cule and fncer of the icorner.

Nothing can be more amiable than a

constant desire to please; and an unwilling-
ness to offend or hurt. Yet in characcrs
where this is a predominant feature, d(-

UT 4 ftcs

SE RM. fecls are often found. Fond always to ob-
xlv lige, and afraid to utter any disagreeable

- truth, fluch persons are lometimes led to

dissemble. Their love of truth is lacrificed
to their love of pleating. Their speech, and
their manners, allune a tfhdied coultefy.
You cannot always depend on their finile;
nor, when they promile, be ;ure of the per-
formance. 'They mean and intend well.
But the good intention is tempolrary. Like
wax, they yield cafily to every inpreffion;
and the transient friendihip contracted with
one person, is efli;ccd by the next. Undif-
tinguilhing dclirc to oblige, often proves, in
the pr' lcnt fate of human things, a dan-
gerous: haliit. T'hey who cannot, on many
occalions, give a lirn and steady denial, or
who cannot break olf a connecion, which
lias i)en hallily and improperly formed,
itand on the brink of many mischiefs.
Thec.y will be ieduced by the corrupting,
cnlill'cd by the artful, betrayed by thole
iii whom tlhey had placed their trult. Un-
I'lfpicious thcrnlfilves, they were flattered

'irh the i)licn
of havilng many friends a-

round

round them. Elated with fmtluine hopes, SERiM.
and chearful fpilits, the, reckoned, that to- -v
morrow wldi be a.s this dai), and mnre abun-
ldant. Injudicious liberality, and thought-
lels profulion, are the coniequence; until,
in the end, the Illaits to which they are re-
duced, bring them into mean or diihonour-
able courses. Through innocent, hut un-
guarded weakness, and fiom want of the
leverer virtues, they are, in proceis of time,
betrayed into downright crimes. Such may
be the conclusion of those, who, like the
young ruler before us, with many amiable
and promising dispositions, had begun their
career in life.

III. Sucn persons are not prepared for

sustaining, with propriety and dignity, the
difireflcs to which our (late is liable. They
were equipped for the ibafon' of tiinflinc
and tl renity ; but whcn the iky is overcall,
.nd the days of darkness come, their feeble
minds are destitute of Ihclter, and ill pro-
vided for defence. Then is the time, when
more hardy qualities are required; when

courage

8ER M. courage must face danger, constancy sup-
_v_ port pain, patience possess itself in the midst

of discouragements, magnanimity dilplay
its contempt of threatenings. If those high
virtues be altogether llrangers to the mind,
the mild and gentle will certainly fink un-
der the torrent of difafters.-The ruler
in the text could plead, that his behaviour
to others, in the course of social life, had
been unexceptionable. So far, the reflec-
tion on his conduct would afford him com-
fort amidst adversity. But no man is with-
out failings. In the dejecting season of
trouble, it will occur to every one, that he
has been guilty of frequent tranfgreflion;
that much of what ought to have been
done, was neglected; and that much of
what has been done, had better have been
omitted. In such situations, when a thou-
sand apprehensions arise to alarm conscience,
nothing is able to quiet its uneasiness, ex-
cept a well-grounded trust in the mercy
and acceptance of Heaven. It is firm reli-
gious principle, acting upon a manly and
enlightened mind, that gives dignity to the

character,

character, and composure to the heart, un- SERM.

XlV.

der all the troubles of the world. This _V'
enables the brave and virtuous man, with
success to buffet the storm. While he, who
had once sparkled in society with all the
charms of gay vivacity, and had been the
delight of every circle in which he was
engaged, remains dispirited, overwhelmed,
and annihilated, in the evil day.

SUCH are the failings incident to persons

of mixed and imperfet goodness: such
the defects of a character formed merely of
the amiable, without the cftimable quali-
ties of man.

It appears from this, that we must not

place too much trust in the fair appear-
ances, which a charater may at first exhi-
bit. In judging of others, let us always
think the best, and employ the spirit of
charity and candour. But in judging of
ourselves, we ought to be more severe. Let
us remember him whom our Lord beheld,
and lkved; and who yet fell short of the
kingdom of heaven. Let us not forget,

that

8.vP m. that loimetllinqg more tlian gentleness and

XIV
,j_ _, modelty, than complacency of temper and

altli'iiity of mantlcr;e, is requisite to form a
worthv man, or a true Chritian. To a
hilgh place in our eftecm, these qualities are
jultly intitled. They enter cifeitiiall into
every good man's characfer. They form
some of its moll favourable diltinctions.
But they constitutc a part of it; not the
whole. Let us not, therefore, rcll on them
entirely, when we conceive an idea of what
manner of persons we ought to be.

LET piety form the basis of firm and

established virtue. If this be wanting, the
character cannot be found and entire. Mo-
ral virtue will always be endangered, often
be overthrown, when it is separated from
its lilrelt filpport. Confidence in God,
lrcnthlened by faith in the great Redeem-
er of mankind, not only, amidst the ieve-
rer trials of virtue, gives conitancy to the
min(l, but, by nourilhing the hope of im-
mortality, adds warmth and elevation to
the aflec'ions. They whose conduct is not

animated

animated by religious principle, are depri- SE R M.
ved of the molt powerful incentive to wor- _.J
thy and honourable deeds.

Let fich difciplinc, next, be studied, as

may form us to the active and manly vir-
tues. To natural good affcctions, we can
never entirely trull our conduct. These,
as has been llown, may Ibmctimes be
warped into what is wrong; and often will
prove insufficient, for carrying us rightly
through all the duties of life. Good assec-
tions are highly valuable; but they mult
he flipportcd bv fixed principles, cultivated
in the underlianding, and rooted in the
heart. lHabits nufi be acquired of tempe-
rance and felf-denial, that we may be able
to refill pleasure, and endure pain, when
either of them interfere with our duty;
that we may be prepared to make a facri-
fice of any worldly interest, when the voice
of God and conscience demand it. Let us
always remember, that without fortitude
of mind, there is no manhood; there can
be no perseverance in virtue. Let a tcred
and inviolable regard for truth reign in

our

SERM. our whole behaviour. Let us be diftin-
xlVJ guilhed for fidelity to every promise we

have made; and for constancy in every
worthy friendihip we have formed. Let
no weak conplailance, no undue regard to
the opinions of men, ever make us betray
the rights of confcicnce. What we have
once, upon due consideration, adopted as
rules of conduct, to these let us adhere un-
lhaken. However the world may change
around us, let it find us the fame in pro-
fperity and adversity; faithful to God and
virtue; faithful to the convidions of our
own heart. What our lot in the world
may be, is not ours to foresee or determine.
But it is ours to resolve, that whatever it
Ihall be, it ihall find us persevering in one
line of uprightness and honour.

BY such discipline, such attentions as

these, we are to guard against those fail.
ings, which are fibmetimes found to stain
the molt engaging characers. Joining in
proper union the amiable and the estimable
qualities, by the one we fliall attract the

good;

good; and by the other, command rcfpec SERM.

XIV.

from the bad. We shall both secure our _
own integrity, and fihall exhibit to others a
proper view of what virtue is, in its native
grace and majesty. In one part of our
character, we lhall resemble the flower that
smiles in spring; in another, the firmly-
rooted tree, that braves the winter storm.
For, remember we mult, that there is a
feablo of winter, as well as of spring and
summer, in human life; and it concerns
us to be equally prepared for both.

A higher and more perfect example of

such a character as I now recommend,
cannot be found, than what is presented to
us in the life of Jesus Christ. In him, we
behold all that is gentle, united with all
that is refpeftable. It is a remarkable ex-
pression, which the Apostle Paul employs
concerning him; I befeecb you by the meek-
nesS and gentlenefi of Chril *. Well might
these qualities be singled out, as those for
which he was known and diftinguiihed.

* Cor, x. r.

We

E RM. We fee him in his whole behaviour affable,
.__, courteous, and ealy or access. He con-

verted familiarly with all who preflnted
themselves; and defpiled not the meanett.
With all the infirmities of his disciples he
calmly bore; and his rebukes were mild,
when their provocations were great. He
wept over the calamities of his country,
which persecuted him; and apologised and
prayed for them who put him to death.
Yet the fame Jesus we behold, awful in the
ftridtnefs of his virtue; inflexible in the
cause of truth; uncomplying with prevail-
ing manners, when he found them cor-
rupt; setting his face boldly against the
hypocritical leaders of the people; over-
awed by none of their threatenings; in
the molt indignant terms, reproving their
vices, and itigmatizing their characters.
We behold him gentle, without being tame;
firm, without being stern; courageous,
without being violent. Let this mind be in
us wbich was alo in JeJus Cbrif; and we
shall attain to honour, both with God and
with man.

SER-

# SERMON XV. On the SACRAMENT of the LORD'S SUPPER, as a PREPARATION for DEATH. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. MATTHEW, xxvi. 29. But I say unto you, I will not drink ...

[ 305 1

S E R M ON XV.
On the SACRAMENT of the LORD'S SUP-

PER, as a PREPARATION for DEATH.
Preched at the Celebration of the Sacrment of the

Lord's Supper.

MATTHEW, xxvi. 29.

But Ifay unto you, I will not drilk hence-

forth of tbi fruit of the vine, until that day

vwen I. drink it new with you in my Fa-
tber's kingdom.
W ITH'thefe words of our blered Lord, s R M.

the Evangelist concludes his account X.

of the institution of the sacrament of the
Supper. It is an institution which, solemn
and venerable in itself, is rendered still more
so, by the circumstances which accompanied

VOL. III. X it,

SE R M. it. Our Lord had now, for about three
iL_-_ years, continued 1' appear in his public

character, in the land of Judea. He had,
all along, been watched with a jealous eye,
by his enemies; and tie time was come,
when they were to prevail against him. A
few friends he had, from lhe, beginning,
flec'led, who, in every vicillitude of his
tdttc, remained faithfully attached to him.
Witl thele friends he was now meeting for
the lail time, on the very evening in which
he was betrayed and seized. He perfetly
knew all that was to befal him. He knew
that this was the last meal in which he was
to join with those, who had been the com-
panions of all his labours, the confidedt of
all his griefs; among whom he had passed
all the quiet and private moments of his life.
He knew, that within a few hours, he was
to be torn from this loved society, by a
band of ruffians; and by to-morrow, was
to be publicly arraigned, as a malefactor
With a heart melting with tenderneif, he
said to the twelve Apostles, as he fat down
with them at table, With defre I have deired

te

Is eat this pafover with ;'9 befire ftier. SERM.

xv.

And then, having gratified himself for the
lall time in their fociery, and having infti-
tuted that commemoration of his death
which was to continue in the Christian
church until the end of ages, he took a so-
lemn and affetionate farewel of his friends,
in the words of the text, Ifay unto you,
tbat I will not drink bencefirtb of this fruit
of the vine, until that day when I drink it
new with you in my Father's kingdom.

As these words were uttered by our

Lord, in the profped of his sufferings';
when preparing himself for death, and
looking forward to a future meeting with
his f'ends in heaven; let us, under this
view; confider the sacrament, which he
then intituted, as a preparation for all the
sufferings of life, and especially, a prepa-
ration for death. It is fit and proper, that
such folernn profpeds should enter into the
service which we are this day to perform.
We have no reason to imagine, that they

* Luik, mii. 15.

X v will

SERM. will render it a gloomy service. A good
_--^_ and wife man is often disposed to look for-

ward to the termination of life. The num-
ber of our days is determined by God; and
certainly it will not tend to Ihorten their
number, that we employ ourselves in pre-
paring for death. On the contrary, while
our days last, it will tend to make us pass
them more comfortably, and more wifely.
Let us now then, as if for the last time we
were to partake of this sacrament, confider
how it may serve to prepare us for the dy-
ing hour.

I. IT is a high exercise of all those difpo-

fitions and affections, in which a good man
would wish to die. He would surely wish
to leave this world, in the spirit of devo-
tion towards God, and of fellowflip and
charity with all his brethren on earth.
Now, these are the very sentiments, which
the sacrament of the Lord's Supper in-
spires into the heart of every pious com-
municant. It includes the higher ats of
devotion of which human nature is ca-

pable.

pable. It imports, a lively fcnfe of the in- SERM.
finite mercies ot Heaven; of the gratitude _ .
we owe to that God, who, by the death of
his Son, hath reltored the forfeited happi-
ness and hopes of the humlan r.ce. It im-
ports, the consecration of the foul to Lod;
the entire rcfignation of ourlilvcs, and all
our concerns, into his hands; as to the God
whom we serve and love; the guardian in
whom we confide. To thee, 0 Lord, do lift
up njmyfol. I willgo to the altar of God, to God
my exceeding joy. I will come into thy booke
in the multitude of thy mercy; and in thy fear,
I will worJhip towards thy hol/ temple *.

These devout affecions towards GCod are,

on this occasion, necetlarily accompanied
with benevolent dilpofitions towards men.
Our communion is not only with God, but
with one another. In this solemn service,
the diitinction of ranks is abolilhcd. We
assemble in common before our great
Lord, professing ourselves to be all mem-
bers of his family, and children of the
fame Father. No feud, nor strife, nor en-

* Psalm xliii. 4.; v. 7.

X 3 mity,

SEaM. rtity, is permitted to approach the sacred
XV table. All within that hallowed space

breathes peace, and concord, and love. If
thou bring thy gif? to the altar, and Btre re-
memberrcf that thy brother bath ought agai#f
thee; leav e there ehy

gift bfore the altar, and

go thy way; firfi be reconciled to tby brother;
and then come and offer thy gift *. What can
be more becoming men and Christians,
than such sentiments of piety to the great
Father of the univcrfe; gratitude to the
merciful Redeemer of mankind; and cha-
rity and forgivcnefs towards all our bre-
thren? Is not this the temper in which a
good man would wish to live? more espe-
cially, is not this the frame of mind which
will give both dignity and peace to his last
moments? How discomposed and embit-
tered will these important moments prove,
if, with a mind toured by the remembrance
of unforgiven injuries, with a breast rankled
by enmity, with a heart alienated from
God, and insensible to devotion, one be
forced away from life?

* Mitthew, v. 23. 24.

Contemplate

Contemplate the manner in which our E R M

blessed Lord died; which the lervice of this xV_
day brings particularly into your view.
You behold him, amidit the extremity of
pain, calm and collected within himself;
poffefiing his spirit with all the fcrenity
which sublime devotion, and exalted bene-
volence inspire. You hear him, first, la-
menting the fate of his unhappy country;
next, when he was fastened to die cross,
addressing words of consolation to his as-
slided parent; and lastly, fending up pray-
ers, mixed with compaifionate apologies,
for those who were Ihedding his blood.
After all those exercises of charity, you be-
hold him in an ad of devout adoration and
trust, resigning his breath; Father, into thy
hands I commend myJpirit.- Can any death
be pronounced unhappy, how distressful so-
ever its circumstances may be, which is
thus supported, and dignified ? What could
we wifl for more in our last moments, than
with this peaceful frame of mind, this calm
of all the afficions, this exaltation of heart

X 4 towards

8E RM. towards God, this diffusion of benevolence

XVY
·^y«, towards men, to bid adieu to the world?

If, in such a spirit as this, we would all

wish to die, let us think, that now is the
time to prepare for it, by seasonably cul-
tivating this spirit while we live; by im-
bibing, in particular, from the holy sacra-
ment, those dispositions and affecions
which we would with to possess at our
latest period. It is altogether vain to ima-
gine, that when the hour of death ap-
proaches, we ihall be able to form our-
selves into the frame of mind which is then
mofl proper and decent. Amidit the ftrug-
gles of nature, and under the load of sick-
ness or pain, it is not time for unaccuftom-
ed exertions to be made, or for new refor-
mations to be begun. Suficient, and more
than sufficient, for that day is the evil there-
of. It will be too late to assume then the
hero, or the faint, if we have been totally
unacquainted with the character before.
The sentiments we would display, and the
language we would utter, will be alien and
firange to us. They will be forced, and so-

reign

reign to the heart. It is only in confe- SERM.

xv.

quence of habits acquired in former and
better days, that a temper of piety and
charity can grow up into such strength, as
to confer peace and magnanimity on the
concluding hours of life. Peculiarly fa-
vourable to the acquisition of such a tem-
per, are the devotions of this day. In this
view, let us perform them; and study to
be at the table of the Lord, what we would
with to be when the summons of death fhal
come.

II. Tin s sacrament becomes a prepara-

tnl. f',. leath, by laying a foundation for
iJ,,ac with God. What is important at the
close of life, is not only the temper in
which we leave tie world, but the fituarion
in which we stand with refpet to that
great Judge, before whom we are about to
appear. This view of our situation is apt
to escape us, during the ordinary course of
life. Occupied with the affairs and con-
cerns of this world; flattered by those illu-
five colours of innocence and virtue, in

which

8ERM. which felf-love dresses up our character,
xv. L apprehenfiQns of guilt create little unearl-

nefi to the multitude of men. But, on the
approach of death, their ideas change. As
the inquisition of the supreme Judge draws
nigh, remembered transgressions crowd up-
on the mind. Guilt becomes strongly rea-
lifed to the imagination; and alarms, be-
fore unknown, begin to arise. Hence that
anxiety, in the profpet of a future invi-
fible world, which is so often seen to attend
the bed of death. Hence those various me-
thods, which fuperltition has devised for
quieting this anxiety; the trembling mind
eagerly grasping every feeble plank on
which it can lay hold; and flying for pro-
tection to the most unavailing aid. The
stoutest spirits have been then known to
bend; the proudest hearts, to be humbled.
They who are now most thoughtless about
their spiritual concerns, may, perhaps, be
in this state before they die.

The dispensation of grace, discovered in

the gospel, affords the only remedy against
those terrors, by the promise of pardon, ex-

tended

tended to the penitent, through the merits SERM.

XV.

of our Lord Jesus Christ It is the very ,_
offence of this sacrament, to exhibit this
promised grace to mankind; My body wbicb
was broken for you; my blood Jbed for many,
for the remijon of fins. Here, iines from
above, the ray of hope. Divine juffice, we
are assured, is not inexorable. Divine mer-
cy is accessible, to all who believe and re-
pent. The participation of this sacrament,
therefore, naturally imparts comfort to the
worthy communicant; as it supposes, on
his part, a cordial compliance with those
terms, on which pardon is offered by the
gospel to mankind.

I mean not to fay, that the participation

of this sacrament, how pious and proper
soever our difpofitons at the time may be,
is, of itself, sufficient to ensure us of com-
fort at death. It were unwarrantable to
flatter Christians, with hopes to this extent.
No single act of the mos fervent devotion
can afford assured hopes of peace with Hea-
ven, until these hopes be confirmed by the
succeeding tenor of a good life. But what

may

8ERM. may safely be asserted is, that communica-

_,
*. ting in a proper manner, makes way for

such hopes. It is an introduction to that
Rate of reconciliation with God, which will
give you peace in death. It is the begin-
ning of a good course, which, if duly pur-
sued, will make your latter end blefied. It
is the entrance of the path of the juJ ; the
morning of that light, which fhinetb more
and more unto the perfeft day. For this holy
sacrament is a professed renunciation of the
vices and corruptions of the world. It is
a professed dereliction of former evil ha-
bits; a solemn return, on our part, to God
and virtue, under the firm trust, that God
will, through Jesus Christ, show mercy to
the frailties of the penitent. If you conti-
nue to support the character which you
this day assume, the invisible world will no
longer present to you a scene of terrors.
You will be comforted with the view of
goodness and compafion, as predominant
in the administration of the universe. As-
ter having finiihed a virtuous course, you
will be able to look up to that God whom

you

you have worshipped, and to fay, I know E RM.
in wbom I have trufied. Though I walk xY
through the valley of the Jhadow of death, I
will fear no evil; for thou art with me. Tay
rod and thy fJiffl all comfort me.

III. THis sacrament prepares us for a

happy death, by strengthening the connec-
tion between Christians, and Christ their
Saviour. This is a connection which, in
various ways, redounds to their benefit;
and will be found particularly consolatory
at the hourfof death. The awful majesty
of Heaven is in danger of overwhelming
the mind, in the feeble moments of depart.
ing life. The reverence it inspires is ming-
led with fenlitions of dread, which might
be too strong for us then to bear. When
we look up to it, through a Mediator and
Intercessor, that Majesty assumes a milder
aspet, and appears to invite our approach.
Whatever, therefore, forms a connection
with this great Mediator, this powerful
friend and patron of the human race, must
be most desirable to every one, especially to

the

BERM. the dying man. Now, this sacrament u-
xv. _-. nites us closely with him. It is the oath of

our allegiance. It is the act of enlisting
ourselves under the banner. of this divine
Leader. Of course, it ftrcngthens our faith
in him, as our guide through life, and our
guardian and protector in death. It gives
us a title to look up to him, under the
confidence of that reciprocal engagement,
which fidelity on the one hand is always
understood to imply, of protection on the
other.

His participation of our nature conveys

a degree of encouragement, which we could
derive from no being altogether celeflial,
how gracious or benign soever. In our ut-
most extremity, we can have recourse to
his sympathizing aid, who had experience
both of the distresses of life, and of the
terrors of death. We behold, in the text,
with what firm tranquillity he looked for-
ward to his approaching sufferings. Sin-
cere attachment to our great Master, may
be expected to infuse into us some degree
of the fame happy composure of mind. It

is

is owing to our losing out of view this per- s E R M.

XY.

ftt model; to our following the crowd, ^
and adopting the common spirit of the
world, that we become mean-fpirited and
base; servilely attached to life, and afraid
to die. Did we, according to our engage-
ments at the Lord's table, keep our eye
fixed on our divine Leader, and itudy to
follow his steps, a portion of his spirit
would descend upon us at the hour of
death. It would be as the mantle of Eli-
jah, falling on a chosen disciple; and would
enable us, as it did Eliiha of old, to finite,
and divide the waters. We believe our
Saviour now to rule in the world of fpirita
The grave, therefore, bars not his follow-
ers from access to him. In the grave, for
our fake, he once lay down, that he might
dispel the gloom which appears to us to
cover that formidable mansion. In a short
time he arose from it, in order to assure us,
that the dark and narrow house was not to
confine his followers for ever. By his
death, he conquered death; and him that
had the power of it; and his voice to us

is,

sE R M. is, Because I live, ye /ball live alo. Hence,

xv.
h--__ as long as we preserve that attachment to

him which we this day profess, we are fur-
nifted with a variety of canfiderations pro-
per for supporting us in the profpec of our
difolution.-This leads me to observe,

IV. THAT the sacrament of which we

are to partake, prepares us for death, by
confirming and enlivening our hope of im-
mortality. In this sacrament, my friends,
you a& for both worlds. As inhabitants
of the earth, you are on this day to look
forward, with care, to your future beha-
viour in it. For you are not, by any means,
disengaging yourselves totally from this life,
and its concerns. On the contrary, you
are forming, and even strengthening, those
connecions, which virtue requires you to
maintain with your friends, and fellow-
creatures around yoL.--At the ifme time,
you are not to confider yourselves as citi-
zens of earth only; but also as citizens of
heaven. You are to recogniLe, on this oc-
cafion, your relation to a higher and better

country,

country, with which you are connected by 8 E R M.
the most sacred ties; and from which you xv
derive those comforts and hopes, that will
both purify your life, and render your
death happy. The sacrament of the supper
is, in this view, an ascent of the mind a-
bove terrestrial things. At the Lord's table,
we associate ourselves, in rome degree, with
spirits of a more exalted order. We de-
clare, that we are tending towards their so-
ciety; and have fixed our final reft within
the veil. This view of the inflitution, so
comfortable to the last period of life, is
plainly given us in the words of the text.
For it is worthy of particular observation,
that, as soon as our Lord had instituted
this sacrament, he straightway leads the
thoughts of his disciples to a state of future
existence. Employing that metaphorical
Rfyle, which the occasion naturally suggest-
ed, he tells them, that though he was not
henceforth to drink of the fruit of the vine
on earth, yet a day was coming, when he
was again to' drink it with them; to drink
it, in bis Father's kiigdom. Two diftint

VOL. III. Y ideas

ERM. ideas are, in these words, presented to us.
xv. One is, the abode into which our Saviour

was to remove; bis Father's kingdom. The
other, the iociety which he was there to en-
joy; with you, in my Father's kingdom. These
correspond to the two views, under which
death is most formidable to men; both of
which he intended to banish, by the infi-
tution of this sacrament: firll, that death
is a transition to a new and unknown
world; and next, that it is a final fepara-
tion from all the friends whom we have
loved on earth.

FIRST; if death terminates our existence

here, the abode to which it translates the
faithful followers of Christ, is the kingdom
of his Father. The inflitution of this fa-
crament dispels all the gloomy ideas of an-
nihilation, of non-exiftcnce, of total dark-
ness, which our imagination is ready to as-
fociate with the grave. We are here affu-
red, that, to good men, death is not the
close of being, but a change of slate; a re-
moval, from a distant and obscure province

of

of the universe, into the city of God, SERM.
the chief feat of their Father's kingdom. _
They have every reason to believe, that
the objects which are to meet them there,
how new and unknown soever, lhall all be
propitious and friendly. For into the king-
dom of his Father, their Lord has decla-
red, that he is entered as their forerunner.
I go to my Father, and your Fabter; to my
God, and your God. In my Father's house are
many mansions. I go to prepare a place for
you. I will come again, and receive you to
myself, that where I am, there ye may be alo.
What reasonings, what speculations, can
have power to impart so much peace to the
dying man, as a promise so direct and ex-
plicit, coming from him who is truth itself,
and cannot lie ? If it were not Jo, I would
have told you *. The profpet becomes still
more chearing and relieving, when we in-
clude,

THE other circumstance mentioned in

John, xiv. 2.

Y: the

SERM. the text; the society to be enjoyed in that
x_ future itate of being. With you, I Jball

drink of the fruit of the vine in my Father's
kinr,,m. Inl how amiable a light does our
Saviour here appear, looking forward to a
future reunion with those beloved friends,
whom he was now leaving, as to a circum-
stance which Ihould increase both his own
felicity and theirs, when they met again in
a happier world ! Thus, in the molt assec-
tionate manner, chearing their drooping
and dejected ipirits; and, by a similar pro-
fpee, providing for the comfort of his fol-
lowers in future generations, when they
ihould be about to leave the world.

The exprelfions in the text plainly suggest

a joyful intercourse among friends, who
had been separated by death: and therefore
seem to give much confirmation, to what
has always been a favourite hope of good
men; that friends stall know and recog-
nife each other, and renew their former
connecions, in a future state of existence.
How many pleating proiiects, does such an
intimation open to tile mind! How much

does

does it tend to compensate the vanity of life, s E R M.

xv.

and to mitigate the sorrows of death ! For _
it is not to be denied, that one of the molt
bitter circumstances attending death, is the
final keparation from beloved friends. This
is apt equally to wring the hearts of the
dying, and the iurviving; and it is an an-
guilh of that fort, which dellcends most
deeply into the virtuous and worthy breadt.
When, surrounded with an affcCtionate fa-
mily, and weeping friends, a good man is
taking his last adieu of all whom he held
molt dear on earth; when, with a feeble
voice, he is giving them his blessing, before
he leaves them for ever; when, for the
last time, he beholds the countenance, he
touches the hand, he hears the voice, of the
person nearefl his heart; who could bear
this bitterness of grief, if no fiipport were
to be minifecred by religious hope ? if there
were no voice to whisper to our spirits, that
hereafter we, and those whom we love,
ihall meet again in a more blissful land?
--What higher view can possibly be gi-
ven, of the benefit redounding from this

Y 3 divine

SE RM. divine intfitution, than its affording us con-
XV_ folation in fich situations of extreme di-

stress, by realising to our fouls the belief
of an immortal irate, in which all the vir-
tuous and worthy ihall be reunited in the
presence of their common Lord ?

Tllus I have set before you many confi-

derations, arising from the sacrament of
our Lord's flupper, which render it a pro-
per preparation, not only for a good life,
but for a comfortable and happy death.
The great improvement to be made of the
subjea is, to bring to the altar of God
such dispositions of heart, as may give us
ground to hope for this blessed effect. Let
us approach to the sacrament with the fame
fcrioufnefs of frame, as if it were the last
time we were ever to partake of it; as if we
were now making provision for a journey
to that land whence none return; as if we
were never to drink, in this manner, of the
fruit of the viln, urltil that day when we drink
it, with thol whom we hIve loved, in our
Father's kiingtdom. -God only knows to

whom

whom this may be truly spoken! God SERM.
knows who, of this assembly, ihall never _X.
have opportunity to approach again to the
sacred table, and to meet with their bre-
thren, on such an occasion, in the courts
of the Lord's house !-\VWhatever our doom
is to be, whether we are appointed for life
or for death, fich is the frame of mind
which now best becomes, and will molt
improve us, in partaking of the holy sacra-
ment.

LET me caution you, before I conclude,

against judging of the propriety of your
disposition in this solemn ad of worihip,
solely by the warmth of your affections,
and the fervour of your devotion. This
slate of heart, how desirable soever it may
be, cannot be at all times poflcffed. It de-
pends, in some measure, on natural fcnfi-
bility. All are not equally endowed with
warm and tender feelings. Even they who
are susceptible of the highest degrees of
pious and virtuous sensibility, cannot, on
every occasion, command that happy tem-

Y 4 perature

SERM. perature of mind. We are not, therefore,
xv. _ to judge unfavourably of ourfilves, if this

be not always the privilege of our devo-
tions. It is chiefly a sedate and compo-
fed frame of spirit, that we mult tludy to
cultivate; arising from grave and fober
thoughts; from serious and penitent recol-
ledtlon of past errors; from good purposes
for the future; and from a deep fcnfe of
the approaching events of death and im-
mortality. Penetrated with filch difpofi-
tions, you have ground to come to the al-
tar of God with humble trust and joy;
under the belief, that you are approaching,
through the great Redeemer, to that mer-
ciful Creator, to whom, in the bigb and boly
place of eternity, the devout aspirations of
his servants on earth, are ever acceptable
and pleating.

S E R-

# SERMON XVI. On the USE and ABUSE of the WORLD. 1 CORINTHIANS, vii. 31. — They that use this world, as not abusing it. —

[ 329 1

S E R MON XVI.
On the UsE and ABUSE of the WORLD.

I CORINTHIANS, vii. 31.

-They that its this wgrld, as

ntr abotfing it.-
THE world is always represented in SERM.

Scripture as the great scene of trial to

a Christian. It sets before him a variety of
duties, which are incumbent on him to per-
form; and, at the fame time, surrounds
him with many dangers, against which he
has to guard. The part which is proper
for him to aCt, may be comprised in these
two expressive words of the text; uJing the
world, and not albnTig it; the significancy
and extent of which, I purpose now to ex-
plain. The subjed is of the higher im-

portance,

SBR.M. portance, as in the world we must live;

and according as we uie, or abuse it, it will
prove either our fi'icnd, or our greatclt
foe.

It is natural to begin with observing,

that the Chrillian is here supposed to ife
the world; by which we must certainly un-
derftand the Apoitle to mean, maintaining
intercourfi .ld connection with the world;
living in it, as one of the members of hu-
man ocicty; assuming that rank which
belongs to his station. No one can be said
to ufc' the world who lives not thus. Hence
it follows, that sequestration from the world
is no part of Chriltian duty; and it ap-
pears ftrangc, that even among those who
approve not of monaftick confinement, fe-
clufion from the pleafurcs of society ihould
have been sometimes confidered, as bclong-
ing to the character of a religious man.
They have been supposed to be the best
fcrvants of God, who, consecrating their
time to the exercifcs of (dvotion, mingle
least in the ordinary commerce of the
world; and cfpccially who abstain most

rigidly

rigidly from all that has the appearance of s E R M.
amusement. But how pious and sincere XV_
soever the intentions of such persons may
be, they certainly take not the propereft
method, either for improving themselves, or
for advancing religion among others. For
this is not using the world, but relinquilh-
ing it. Instead of making the light of a
good example shine with useful splendour
throughout the circle of society, they con-
fine it within a narrow compass. Accord-
ing to the metaphor employed by our Sa-
viour, after the candle is lighted, they put it
under a bujhel. Instead of recommending
religion to the world, they exhibit it un-
der the forbidding aspect of unnecessary au-
fterity. Instead of employing their influ-
ence, to regulate and temper the pleasures
of the world, by a moderate participation
of those that are innocent, they deliver up
all the entertainments of society, into the
hands of the loose and giddy.

The various dangers which the world

presents to one who is desirous of main-
taining his piety and integrity, have given

rife

SERM. rife to this scrupulous caution concerning
xvI. the use of the world; and so far, the prin-

ciple is commendable. But we must re-
member, that the virtue of a Christian is
to be shown, in surmounting dangers which
he is called to encounter. Into the post of
danger we were ordered by Providence,
when we were brought into this world.
We were placed as soldiers, on the field of
battle. It is there, that our fidelity to our
great Commander must appear. The most
signal virtues which adorn and improve the
human character, are displayed in a&ive
life. There, the strength of the mind is
brought forth, and put to the test. There,
all the amiable dispositions of the heart find
their proper exercise: humanity is culti-
vated; patience, fortitude, and felf-denial,
come forward in all their forms; and the
light of good men's works so shines before
others, as to lead them to glorify their Fa-
ther wvhicb is in heaven.

It may be assumed, therefore, as a prin-

ciple justified by the text, and by the whole
strain of Scripture, that to use, and in a cer-

tain

tain degree to enjoy, the world, is altoge- SE R M.
ther confifent with religion. According _XV
to the rank which men possess in society,
according to their age, their employment
and connections, their intercourse with the
world will be more or less extended. In
private life, they use the world with pro-
priety, who are ative and industrious in
their callings; just and upright in their
dealings; fober, contented, and chearful in
their station. When the circumstances of
men allow them a wider command of the
enjoyments of the world, of those enjoy-
ments they may freely partake, within the
bounds of temperance, moderation, and
decency. The highest situations of rank
and opulence, ought to be distinguished by
dignity of charader; by extensive benefi-
cence, usefulness, and public spirit; by
magnificence, without ostentation; and ge-
nerous hospitality, without profuiion.

We shall have a clearer view of the pro-

per use of the world, when we contrast it
with that abuse of the world, which we too
often oblerve. Those abuses manifest them-

selves

8E R M. selves in various forms; but in general may
XV be classed under three great heads.

I. They are abusers of the world, who

intemperately give themselves up to its plea-
fures, and lead a life of licentioufnefi,
riot, and dissipation. Amidlt the wealth
and luxury of the present age, it will be
admitted, that persons of this description
are not unfrequent, who, being opulent in
fortune, and perhaps high in rank, think
themselves intitled to pass their days in a
careless manner, without any other objec
in view, than the gratification of their senses
and paflions. It shall be granted, that they
are not obliged to that exat oeconomy and
attention in their manner of living, which
the state of fortune may require of others.
Gaiety shall be permitted to them; change
of scene, and variety of amusements. But
let them not forget, that as men and mem-
bers of society, not to fay professors of the
Christian faith, they are bound to flop (hort
in their career of pleasure, as soon as it be-
comes disgraceful to themselves, and hurt-

ful

ful to the world. By the train of life which s E R I.
they lead, they defeat every purpose for xv_.
which Providence beflowed on them the
blessings of prolperitv. They fink every
talent which they poilefs, into useless infig-
nificancy. They corrupt the public man-
ners by their example; and diiiule among
others the spirit of extravagance and folly.
They behave in a manner altogether un-
suitable to the condition of the world in
which we live; where we are exposed to so
much change, firrounded with so much
distress, and daily behold ib many asseting
scenes, as ought to awaken serious rellec-
tion, and chailen dirfolute mirth.

With indignant eves, the fober and tllink-

ing part of mankind, view the luxury anl
riot of those abulkrs of the world. To them
are owing the discontents of the poor, their
difaffecion to their fupcriors, their prone-
ness to disturb the peace of the world.
When the poor behold wealth properly
used, they look up with refped to them
who poflefs it. They reft contented in
their llation; and bless the just and the ge-

nerous,

SERM. nerous, from whose munificence they re-
XV. ceive employment and reward. But when

they behold those men of pleasure diffipa-
ting, in vice and folly, the fortune which
their forefathers had honourably earned;
when they behold them opprefling all their
dependents, merely that they may revel in
luxurious extravagance, then their hearts
swell within them; with murmurs of ful-
len grief, they eye their Own mean habita-
tion, and needy family; and become pre-
pared for robbery, tumult, sedition, and
every evil work.

The conduct of such abusers of the

world, is not only pernicious to the wel-
fare of society, and to the interests of vir-
tue; it is equally ruinous to themselves.
I ihall not insist on the loss of reputation,
the waste of fortune, the broken health,
and debilitated frame, which are the well-
known consequences of a life of intempe-
rate pleasure. I shall not recount all the
better and more substantial enjoyments
which they forfeit. Amidit the turbulence
of riot, and the fumes of intoxication, un-

known

known to them are the rational entertain- SE R M.

XVL

ments of regular life; the enjoyment of the _
face of nature; the pieafures of knowledge,
and an improved mind; the pleafilres of
private friendlhip, and domestic society;
the conlcious litisfadion which accompa-
nies honourable labours, and the jully ac-
quired efleem of those who surround diem.
All theie they have thrown away; and in
their room have substituted, what they
think more high and vivid pleasures. But
of what nature are those pleasures ? Even in
liaghter the heart is frrowuyl; and the end of
that mirth is heavinei +.

At the bottom of the hearts of all men,

there lies a secret sense of propriety, virtue,
and honour. This sense may be ob far blunt-
ed, as to lose its influence in guiding men to
what is right, while yet it retains its power
of making them feel that they are. acting
wrong. Hence remorse often gnaws the
heart, which affeas to appear light, and gay,
before the world. Among the crowd of a-

Prov. xiv. 13.
Vol. III. Z mufements,

SE R M. mufements, the voluptuary may endea-
_.s, deavour to ltifle his uncafinels; but through

all his defences it will penetrate. A con-
fcious lense of his own insignificance, when
he fees others diftinguilhed for atilng a
manly and worthy part; reflection on the
time he has wafted, and the contempt he
has incurred; the galling remembrance of
his earlier and better days, when he gave
the fair promise of accomplilhmcnts, which
now are blasted, have frequently been found
to fadden the fcftive hour. The noie' of
merriment may be heard; but hcavincfs
lies at the heart. While the tabret and the
viol play, a melancholy voice founds in his
ears. The wafted estate, the neglected halls,
and ruined mansion of his fathers, rife to
view. The angry countenances of his
friends, seem to flare him in the fice. A
hand appears to come forth on the wall,
and to write his doom.

Retreat then, from your dishonourable

courses, ye who by licentioufnefl, extra-
vagance, and vice, are abusers of the world!
you are degrading, you are ruining your-

fclves.

selves. You are grossly miremploving the SERM.
gifts of God; and the giver will not fail to XVI
punilh. Awake to the pursuits of men of
virtue, and honour. Break loose from that
magic circle, within which you are at pre-
sent held. Reje& the poisoned cup which
the enchantress Pleasure holds up to your
lips. Draw aside the veil which ihe throws
over your eyes. You will then fee other
objets than you now behold. You will
fee a dark abyss opening below your feet.
You will fee virtue and temperance mark-
ing out the road, which conducts to true
felicity. You will be enabled to discern, that
the world is enjoyed to advantage, by none
but such as follow those divine guides; and
who confider pleasure as the seasoning, but
not as the business of life.

II. THE world is abused, not only by an

intemperate pursuit of its pleasures, but by
a fordid attachment to its gains. This re-
speds a set of men of very different de-
scription from the former; more decent in
their carriage, and less flagrant in their

. 2 vices;

BERM. vices; but corrupted by the world in no
xvL less a degree. For the world is often abused

by the men of butinefs, as much as by the
men of pleasure. When worldly success
becomes the sole object of their life; when
the accumulation of fortune so engrolfes
them, as to harden their heart against eve-
ry feeling of moral obligation; when it
renders them insensible to the calls of as-
fecion, and to the impressions ox piety
and religion; they then come under the
class of the covetous, whom, it is said, the
Lord abborretb *.

The world, with its advantages, is a

lawful object of pursuit to a Christian.
He may seek, by fair industry, to ren-
der his circumitances affluent. Without
reproof, he may aim at distinction and
consideration in the world. He may be-
Rtow a considerable portion of his time and
attention, on the successful management of
his worldly interests. All this is within the
limits of that allowable use of the world, to
which religion gives its sanction. But to

Psalm x. 3.

a

a wife and good man, the world is only a SE RM.

XVI.

secondary object. He remembers there is _j
an eternity beyond it. His care is, not
merely to amass and possess, but to use his
poffeiffons well, as one who is accountable
to God. He is not a save, either to the
hopes, or the fears of the world. He would
rather forfeit any present advantage, than
obtain it at the expencc of violating the di-
vine liv, or neglecting his duty. This is
using the world like a good man. This is
living in it, as a subjed of God, and a
member of the great community of man-
kind. To such a man, riches are a blef-
sing. He may enjoy them with magnifi-
cence; but he will use them with liberali-
ty. They open a wide field to the exercif:
of his virtuc, and allow it to shine with
diffilfive lufire.

Very opposite to this, is the character of

the worldly-minded. To them, the mere
attainment of earthly poffefions, is an ulti-
mate aim. They cannot be said to tfe the
world; for to posess,, not to use or enjoy,
is their object. They are emphatically said

Z 3 in

SERM. il Scripture, to /lad t/enflvc.s wilb thick

/ad,.v `'. Some fort of apology imav hb framed
for them who seek to extract from the
world, pleafurc of one kind or other. But
for thole who know no ple:afurc, farther
than adding boise to bore, and field to field,
and calling them their own, it is hardly
possible to frame any apology. Such per-
sons are idolaters of the worst kind; for
they have made the world their God. They
daily worship and bow down before it;
and hold nothing to be mean or base, which
can promote the enlargement of their for-
tune.- He is an abuser of the world, let
his possession of it be ever so ample, who
knows nothing higher than the gains of the
world. He is an abuser of the world, who
sacrifices probity, virtue, or humanity, to
its interests. He is an abuser of the world,
who cannot occasionally retreat from it, to
confider what character he bears in the
fight of God; and to what iftue his con-
duclt will bring him at last. In a word, the

Hlabakkuk, ii. 6.

world

world is then properly used, when it is ge- ;. RM.
ncrouily and beneficently enjoyed; neither
hoarded up by) avarice, nor Ilulandcred( by
ostentation.

111. TmFE world is abuscd, b)v thoc who

employ its advantages to the injury or oj-
preflion of their brcthren. Under this class
are included, the worst and most criminal
abufcrs of the world; who turn a^ainft
their fellow - crcatures, those advantages
with which it has pleased Heaven to diflin-
guilh them. It is a class which compre-
hends, the sovereign who tyrannises over his
people; the great man who oppreffcs his
dependents; the master who is cruel to his
servants; every one, in fine, who renders
his superiority of any kind, whether of
wealth or power, unnecessarily grievous to
those who are his inferiors: Whose super-
cilioufnefs dejeas the modest; whose info-
lence tramples on the poor; whose rigour
makes the widow and the orphan weep.
Pcrfons of this character, while thus abu-

Z 4 ting

E R M. sing the advantages of the world, may, for
,_ . awhile, enjoy their triumph. But let them

not think, their'triumph is always to latl
Their turn Ihall come, to be humbled as
low as those whom they now opprcfs. For
there is a vigilant eye in the heavens, atten-
tive to observe their procedure. There is
an impartial ear, which liletns to everv just
complaint preferred against them. There
is an irrefiltible arm ftrctched over their
heads, whose weight they Ihall one cay
feel. The Sovereign of the univerfc cha-
racerifes 1:imfilf in the sacrcd writings, as
peculiarly an adversary to the insolent and
haughty. I¥,r the opprrfion of the poor, for
the fihing ns the nreed, now will I anriri,fith
hi, Lfr/; I will fit him in fiafety from iim
tb,!t plfrlth at him . .I will cime near to y'oI
i,n 'udgement ; and I i b a will

be a fwf it

,cainJg tihfi tha t r.prefs the hireling in his
WTgcs, the aidr'Uw, and the fatherlrfs, and
ltlt turn afiic il f lfianger from his right -1.
lIk that pjre Jith the poor, rcproacheth his

* Psalm xii. 5. t Malachi, iii. 5.

Malcr.

Maker *. The Lord will plead their cause; S E RM.
andpoil the foul of tbofe that spoiled them .
t j.

After hearing these awful words, is it

not strange, O men, at once infatuated and
cruel! that you cannot use the world, with-
out abusing it, to the distress of your bre-
thren? Even fuppoling no punilhment to
be threatened, no arm to be lifted up a-
gainit you, is there nothing within you,
that relents at the circumitances of thafe
below you in the world? Is it not enough,
that they susser their own hard fate, with-
out its being aggravated, by your ieverity
and opprellion? Why must the aged, the
poor, and the friendless, tremble at your
greatness? Cannot you be happy, unless
you make them eat their fcantv morsel in
bittcrnels of heart? You happy !-profane
not the word-what is such happiness as
yours, compared with that of him who
could fay, Wh'en the car beard me, then it
bi/ed me; and when the ey'e Jw me, it gave
witness to me; becaife I delivered the poor

Prov.xiv. 31. t Prov. xiii. 13.

that

S F R . that cried, and the fatberlefs, and him that
XVIl /lad none to help him. I wa a father to the

poor. The bljiig of him that was ready to
perib, came upon me; and I catrd Ihe widow's
heort to sing .r joy *. How properly did
such a man life the world, and with what
uft honour did he florlrifh in it! Unto me
men gave ear; they elpt silence, and waited
for my, counsel. The princes refraired talking.
The aged arose, and flood up. My root was
spread out by the waters; and the dew lay
upon my branch.- Not only unknown to
you are such pleasures of virtuous profpe-
rity; but, even previous to prepared pu-
nifhment, be assured, that remorse is ap-
proaching to wring your hearts. Of the
world, which you now abuse, in a short
time nothing shall remain, but the horror
arising from remembered crimes. The
wacgs you have detained, the wealth you
have squeezed fiom the needy, fliall lie
heavv on your fouls. The flatcly build-
ings which your pride has ercAcd, by means

* Job, xix. II.--i,.

of

of violence and oppression, shall seem haunt- s E R M.
ed by injured ghosts. The Jlone /hall cry JX
out of the wall; and the beam out of the tim-
ber hall aifwcr it *. When you lie on the
bed of death, the poor, whom you have
oppressed, liall appear to you, as gather-
ed together; firetching forth their hands,
and lifting up their voices againlt you, at
the tribunal of Heaven. I have seen the
wicked great in power, and spreading himself
like a green bay-tree. But be pased away,
and was not. I fught him, but he could not be
fJund. Thcy arc brought down to desolation
in a moment, and utterly consumed with ter-
rors. As a dream when one awaketh, so, 0
].Lrd, when thou awakeJf, thou Jhalt dcfpife
their image t.

Tilus I have flown what it is to ife, and

what to abfi the tworld. When, according
to our different flations, we enjoy the ad-
vantages of the world with propriety and
decency; temperate in our pleasures; mo-

* labak. i;. Ii. , Palm xxxvii. 35.; Ixxiii. 19.

derate

BERM. derate in our purfiits of interest; mindful

I_ . of our duty to God, and, at the fame time,

just, humane, and generous to our bre-
thren ; then, and then only, we rife the
world, as becomes men, and Chriltians.
Within these limits, we may safely enjoy
all the comforts which the world affords,
and our station allows. But if we pass be-
yond these boundaries, into the regions of
disorderly and vicious pleasure, of debasing
covetousness, or of oppressive insolence, the
world will then serve only to corrupt our
minds, and to accelerate our ruin. The
licentious, the avaricious, and the insolent,
form the three great classes of abusers of
the world.

Let not thote who are in wealthy and

flourifling circumstances, complain of the
restraints which religious doctrine attempts
to impose on their enjoyments. For, to
what do there refiraints amount ? To no
more than this, that, by their pleasures,
they would neither injure themselves, nor
injure others. We call not on the young,
to relinquifli their gaiety; nor on the rich,

to

to forego their opulence; nor on the great, SE R K
to lay alide their slate. We only call on L
them, not to convert gaiety into licentious-
ness; not to employ opulence in mere ex-
travagance; nor to abuse greatness for the
oppression of their inferiors: While they
enjoy the world, not to forget that they are
the fubjeds of God, and are loon to pass
into another state. Let the motive by
which the Apostle enforces the exhortation
in the text, present itself to their thought;
Lie this world as not abusing it; for the fa-
Jhion of the world paetbh away. Its pomp
and its pleasures, its riches, magnificence,
and glory, are no more than a transient
show. Every thing that we here enjoy,
changes, decays, and comes to an end. All
floats on the surface of a river, which, with
swift current, is running towards a bound-
less ocean. Beyond this present scene of
things, above these sublunary regions, we
are to look for what is permanent and
stable. The world pafles away; but God,
and heaven, and virtue, continue unchange-
ably the fame. We ate soon to enter into

eternal

SERM. eternal habitations: and into these, oui
_Vl works {hall follow us. The confequcnces

{hall fbr ever remain of the part which we
have aded as good, or bad men; as faith-
ful fubjeAs of God, or as servants of a vain
world.

S E R

# SERMON XVII. On EXTREMES in RELIGIOUS and MORAL CONDUCT. PROVERBS, iv. 27. Turn not to the right hand, nor to the left. —

L 35j 1

SERMON XVII.
On EXTREMES in RELIGIOUS and MORAL

CONDUCT.

PROVERBS, iv. 27.
Turn not to the right band, nor to the left.-

f Will behave mfff'f wisej , said the Pfallnit s E R M.
David, in a perfrc way . Wildom is xv l.

no less necessary in religious, and moral,
than in civil conduct. Unless there be a
proper degree of light in the understand-
ing, it will not be enough, that there are
good dispositions in the heart. Without
regular guidance, they will often err fiom
the right scope. They will be always wa-

* Psalm ci. 2.

vering

SERM. vering and unfleady; nay, on some occa-
xvnl sions, they may betray us into evil. This

is too much verified by that propensity to
run into extremes, which so often appears
in the behaviour of men. How many have
originally set out with good principles, and
intentions, who, through want of difcre-
tion in the application of their principles,
have in the end injured themselves, and
brought discredit on religion ? There is a
certain temperate mean, in the observance
of which, piety and virtue consist. On
each fide there lies a dangerous extreme.
Bewildering paths open; by deviating into
which, men are apt to forfeit all the praise
of their good intentions; and to finifl
with reproach, what they had begun with
honour. This is the ground of the wife
man's exhortation in the text. Iet thine
eyes look right on, and let thine eye-lids look
flraight before thee. .Ponder the path of thy
feet, and let all thy ways be eftablified. Turn
not to the right hand, nor to the left; remove
tbyfootfrom evil. In discoursing from these
words, I purpose to point out some of the

extremes

extremes into which men are apt to run in SE R M
religion and morals; and to suggest dircc- _XVI
tions for guarding against them.

WITH regard to religious principle in

general, it may perhaps be expeced, that
I should warn you of the danger of being,
on one hand, too rigid in adhering to it,
and, on the other hand, too easy in relax-
ing it. But the diftindion between these
supposed extremes, I conceive to have no
foundation. No man can be too ftrid, in
his adherence to a principle of duty. Here,
there is no extreme. All relaxation of prin-
ciple, is criminal. What conscience ditates
is to be ever obeyed. Its commands are
universally sacred. Even though it should
be misled, yet, as long as we conceive it to
utter the voice of God, in disobeying it we
fin. The error, therefore, to be here a-
voided is, not too scrupulous or tender re-
gard to conscience, but too little care to
have conscience properly enlightened, with
refpet to what is matter of duty and of
fin. - Recive not, without examination,

VOL. III. A a whatever

SER M. whatever human tradition has consecrated
XVII.

, as sacred. Recur, on every occasion, to

those great fountains of light and know-
ledge, which are opened to you in the pure
word of God. Diftinguiih, with care, be-
tween the superstitious fancies of men, and
the everlasting commandments of God.
Exhaust not on trifles that zeal, which
ought to be reserved for the weightier mat-
ters of the law. Overload not confcicnce,
with what is frivolous and unnecessary.
But when you have once drawn the line,
with intelligence and precision, between
dnty and fin, that line you ought on no
occasion to transgress.

THOUGH there is no extreme in the reve-

rence due to conscience, there may un-
doubtedly be an extreme, in laying too
much stress, either on mere principle, or
on mere practice. Here we must take par-
ticular care, not to turn to the right band,
nor to the left; but to bold faith and a good
csfrience united, as the Scripture, with great

propriety,

propriety, exhorts ns *. The error of reft- S FR M.

XVII.

ing wholly on faith, or wholly on works, _X i
is one of those fedudions, which most ea-
fily mislead men; under the semblance of
piety on the one hand, and of virtue on
the other. This is not an error peculiar to
our times. It has obtained in every age of
the Christian church. It has run through
all the different modes of false religion. It
forms the chief diftinftion of all the va-
rious fedts which have divided, and which
ltill continue to divide the church; accord-
ing as they have leaned most to the fide of
belief, or to the fide of morality.

Did we liften candidly to the voice of Scrip-

ture,it would guard us against either extreme.
The Apostle Paul every where testifies, that
by no works of our own we can be jufti-
fled; and that vitxhut faith it is impofible
to please God. The Apostle James as clear-
ly shows, that faith, if it be unproductive
of good works, justifies no man. Between
thole sentiments, there is no opposition.

' Tirothy, i. 19.

A a 2 Faith

SERM. Faith without works, is nugatory and in-
xvH_, significant. It is a foundation, without any

fuperftrucdre raised upon it. It is a foun-
tain which fends forth no stream; a tree
which neither bears fruit, nor affords (hade.
Good works, again, without good princi-
ples, are a fair, but airy ftrudure; without
firmness or stability. They resemble the
house built on the sand; the reed which
shakes with every wind. You must join
the two in full union, if you would exhi-
bit the character of a real Christian. He
who sets faith in opposition to morals, or
morals in opposition to faith, is equally an
enemy to the interests of religion. He
holds up to view an imperfect and disfi-
gured form; in the room of what ought to
command refpet from all beholders. By
leaning to one extreme, he is in danger of
falling into vice; by the other, of running
into impiety.

WHATEVER the belief of men be, they

generally pride themselves, in the possession
of obme good moral qualities. The sense

of

of duty is deeply rooted in the human SERM.

XVII.

heart. Without some pretence to virtue, _
there is no felf-efleem; and no man wishes
to appear in his own view, as entirely
worthless. But as there is a constant strife
between the lower and higher parts of our
nature, between inclination and principle,
this produces much contradition and in-
consistency in conduc. Hence arise most
of the extremes, into which men run in
their moral behaviour; refting their whole
worth on that good quality, to which, by
constitution or temper, they are most in-
clined.

ONE of the firfi and most common of

those extremes, is that of placing all virtue,
either in justice, on the one hand; or in
generosity, on the other. The opposition
between these, is most discernible among
two different classes of men in focicty.
They who have earned their fortune by a
laborious and industrious life, are naturally
tenacious of what they have painfully ac-
quired. To justice, they confider them-

A a selves

SE R M. eflves as obliged; but to go beyond it ia
X_ , aCcas of kindness, they confider as super-

fluous and extravagant. They will not
take any advantage of others, which con-
science tells them is iniquitous; but nei-
ther will they make any allowance for their
neccffities and wants. They contend, with
rigorous exadnefs, for what is due to them-
selves. They are satisfied, if no man sus-
ser unjustly by them. That no one is be-
nefited by them, gives them little concern.
- Another set of men place their whole
merit in generosity and mercy; while to
justice and integrity they pay small regard.
These are persons generally of higher rank,
and of easy fortune. To them, juffice ap-
pears a fort of vulgar virtue, requisite chief-
ly in the petty tranfadtions, which those of
inferior fation carry on with one another.
But humanity and liberality, they confider
as more refined virtues, which dignify their
characer, and cover all their failings. They
can relent at reprcfentations of distress; can
bellow with ostentatious generosity; can
even occaionally {hare their wealth with a

companion

companion of whom they are fond; while, SERK
at the fame time, they with-hold from XVII
others what is due to them; are negligent
of their family and their relations; and to
the just demands of their creditors give no
attention.

Both these classes of men run to a faulty

extreme. They aivide moral virtue be-
tween them. Each takes that part of it
only, which suits his temper. Without ju-
ffice, there is no virtue. But without hu-
manity and mercy, no virtuous charaCter
is complete. The one man leans to the ex-
treme of parsimony. The other, to that of
profusion. The temper of the one is un-
feeling. The sensibility of the other is
thoughtless. The one you may in some
degree refpea; but you cannot love. The
other may be loved; but cannot be re-
fpeated: and it is difficult to &y, which
characer is most defetive.-We must un-
doubtedly begin with being jurt, before we
attempt to be generous. At the fame time,
he who goes no farther than bare justice,
flops at the beginning of virtue. We are

A a 4 ; omn

SE R M. commanded to do jutly; but, to love mercy.
XVII.
-~, The one virtue, regulates our actions. The

other, improves our heart and affecions.
Each is equally necessary to the happiness
of the world. Justice is the pillar, that
upholds the whole fabric of human focietv.
Mercy is the genial ray, which chears and
warms the habitations of men. The per-
fedion of our social characterconfifts, in
properly tempering the two with one an-
other; in holding that middle course,
which admits of our being just, without
being rigid; and allows us to be generous,
without being unjust.

WE muff next guard against either too

great severity, or too great facility of man-
ners. These are extremes, of which we
every day behold instances in the world.
He who leans to the fide of severity, is
harfl in his censures, and narrow in his
opinions. He cannot condescend to others
in things indifferent. He has no allowance
to make for human frailty; or for the dif-
ference of age, rank, or temper, among

mankind.

mankind. With him, all gaiety is sinful SERM.

XVII.

levity; and every amusement is a crime. '-;v-
To this extreme, the admonition of Solo-
mon may be understood to belong; Be not
righteous over much; neither make tbyelf over
wis. Why /houldft thou dtflroy thyself *
When this severity of manners is hypocri-
tical, and assumed as a cloak to secret in-
dulgence, it is one of the worst proftitu-
tions of religion. But I now confider it,
not as the effec of design, but of natural
austerity of temper, and of contrated ma-
xims of conduct. Its influence upon the
person himself, is to render him gloomy
and four; upon others, to alienate them
both from his society, and his counsels;
upon religion, to set it forth as a morose
and forbidding principle.-The opposite
extreme to'this is, perhaps, still more dan-
gerous; that of too great facility, and ac-
commodation to the ways of others. The
man of this character, partly from indolent
weakness, and partly from softness of tem-

*Ecccf. vii. 16.

per,

r8El per, is disposed to a tame and universal as.
XV¥I, sent. Averse either to contradic or to

blance, he goes along with the manners that
prevail. He views every character with in-
dulgent eye; and with good dispositions in
his breat, and a natural relutance to pro-
fligacy and vice, he is enticed to the con-
million of evils which he condemns, mere-
ly through want of fortitude to oppose
others.

Nothing, it must be confessed. in moral

conduct, is more difficult, than to avoid
turning here, either to the right band or to
the left. One of the grtateft trials both of
wisdom and virtue is, to preserve a just
medium, between that harshness of aufte-
rity, which disgusts and alienates mankind,
and that weakness of good-nature, which
opens the door to sinful excefi. The one
separates us too much from the world. The
other connects us too cloely with it; and
reduces us to follow the multitude in doing
evil. One who is of the former character,
studies too little to be agreeable, in order to
render himself useful. He who is of the

latter,

latter, by studying too much to be agree- stitU
able, forfeits his innocence. If the one a_
hurt religion, by cloathing it in the garb
of unnecessary ftridnefs; the other, by un-
warrantable compliance, strengthens the
power of corruption in the world. The
one borders on the character of the Phi-
rifee; the other, on that of the Sadducee.
True religion enjoins us to stand at an
equal distance from both; and to pursue
the difficult, but honourable aim, of uni-
ting good nature with fixed religious prin-
ciple; affable manners, with untainted vir-
tue.

FARTHER ; we run to one extreme, when

we contemn altogether the opinions of man.
kind; to another, when we court their
praise too eagerly. The former discovers
a high degree of pride and felf-conceit.
The latter betrays servility of spirit. We
are formed by nature and Providence, to be
connected with one another. No man can
stand entirely alone, and independent of
all his fellow-creaturcs. A reasonable re.

gard,

gE M. gard, therefore, for their esteem and good

-,, opinion, is a commendable principle. It

flows from humanity; and coincides with
the desire of being mutually useful. But,
if that regard be carried too tar, it becomes
the-fource of much corruption. For in the
present slate of mankind, the praise of the
world often interferes with our acting that
steady and conscientious part, which gains
the approbation of God. Hence arises the
difficulty of drawing a proper line, between
the allowable regard for reputation, and
the exceflive dcfire of praise. On the one
fide, and on the other, dangers meet us; and
either extreme will be pernicious to virtue.

H-e who extinguishes all regard to the

frntiments of mankind, suppresses one in-
centive to honourable deeds; nay, he re-
moves one of the lIrongefi checks on vice.
For, where there is no desire of praifc,
there will be also no sense of reproach and
si ame; and when this sense is destroyed,
the way is paved to open profligacy. On
the other hand, he who is acuated solely
by the love of human praise, incroaches on

the

the higher refpe& which he owes to con- SERX

XVIL

science, and to God. Hence, virtue ist X
often counterfeited; and many a fplen-
did appearance has been exhibited to the
world, which had no basis in real prin.
ciple, or inward affection. Hence, reli-
gious truths have been disguised, or un-
fairly represented, in order to be suited
to popular taste. Hence the Scribes and
Pharilees rejeted our blessed Lord, becanfi
they loved the prafi of men more than the
praise of God.-Turn, therefore, neither to
the right hand, nor to the left. Assed not to
despise what the world thinks of your con-
dud and characer; and yet, let not the
sentiments of the world entirely rule you.
Let a desire of esteem be one motive of
your condut; but let it hold a fubordi-
nate place. Measure the regard that is due
to the opinions of men, by the degree in
which these coincide with the law of God.

ALLOW me next to suggest, the danger

of running to the extreme of anxiety about
worldly interests on the one hand, and of

negligence

SERAM. negligence on the other. It is hard to sty
_,_, which of these extremes is fraught with

mot vice, and most misery. Industry and
diligence are unquestionable duties, ftrici
ly enforced on all Chriltians; and he who
fails in making suitable provision for his
household and family, is pronounced to be
rorfe than an infidel. But there are bounds,
within which our concern for worldly fuc-
cess mufl be confined. For anxiety is the
certain poison of human life. It debases
the mind; and iharpens all the paflions.
It involves men in perpetual diftraCfions,
and tormenting cares; and leads them aside
from what ought to be the great scope of
human afion. Anxiety is, in general, the
effeA of a covetous temper. Negligence is
commonly, the offspring of licentiousness,
and always, the parent of universal difor.
der. By anxiety, you render yourselves
miserable. By negligence, you too often
occasion the ruin of others. The anxious
man is the votary of riches; the negligent
man, the votary of pleasure. Each offers
his mistaken worihip, at the llrine of a

false

false deity; and each ihall reap only such SERM.
rewards as an idol can bellow; the one fa.
crificing the enjoyment and improvement
of the present, to vain cares about futuri-
ty; the other so totally taken up in enjoying
the present, as to f(ore the future with cer-
tain miseries. -True virtue holds a tem-
perate course between these extremes; nei-
ther careless of to-morrow, nor taking too
much thought for it; diligent, but not
anxious; prudent, but not covetous; at-
tentive to provide comfortable accommo-
dation on earth, but chiefly concerned to
lay up treafitrec in Heaven.

I {hall only warn you farther against the

extreme, of engaging in a courle ot hte too
busy and hurned, or of devoting your-
selves to one too retired and unemployed.
We are formed for a mixture ot acton,
and retreat. Our connections with society,
and the performance of the duties which we
owe to one another, necessarily engage us
in active life. What we owe to ourselves,
requires occasional retirement For he wlho

lives

GERM. lives always in the buffle of the world can-
xvsl. not, it is to be feared, always prcferve his

virtue pure. Sentiments of piety will be
deprived of that nourilhment and support,
which they would derive from meditation
and devotion. His temper will be often
ruffled and disturbed. His passions will be
kept too much on the stretch. From the
contagious manners which every where a-
bound, he will not be able to avoid con-
tracqing some dangerous infection.- On
the other hand, he who flies to total retreat,
in order either to enjoy ease, or to escape
from the temptations of the world, will of-
ten find disquiet meeting him in solitude,
and the worst temptations arising from
within himself. Unoccupied by acive and
honourable pursuits, unable to devote his
whole time to improving thoughts, many
an evil pafilon will start up, and occupy the
vacant hour. Sullenness and gloom will be
in danger of overwhelming him. Peevish
displeasure, and suspicions of mankind, are
apt to persecute those who withdraw them-
selves altogether from the haunts of men.

-Steer

Steer therefore a middle course, be- SEB .

tween a life oppressed with bufnefs on the XV-L
one hand; and burdened, for the burden
is no less, with idleness on the other. Pro-
vide for yourselves matter of fair and ho-
nest pursuit, to afford a proper obje& to
the aAtive powers of the mind. Temper
business with serious meditation; and en-
liven retreat by returns of action and in-
duftry.

THUS I have pointed out some of those

extremes into which men are apt to run,
by forsaking the line which religion and
wisdom have drawn. Many more, I am
sensible, might be suggested; for the field
is wide, and hardly is there any appearance
of piety, virtue, or good conduct, but what
the folly of men is apt to push into undue
excels, on one or other fide. What I have
mentioned, will be sufficient to ihow the
necessity of prudent circumfpeieon, in or-
der to escape the dangers which beset us in
this state of trial. Let us tudy to attain
a regular, uniform, confitent charater;

VOL. III. B b where

SERM. where nothing that is excessive or difpro-
XVII.
,-_ portioned shall come forward to view;

which shall not plume itself with a fair
show on one fide only, while in other quar-
ters it remains unadorned, and blemished;
but, where the different parts of worth and
goodness shall appear united, and each liall
exert its proper influence on condu&
Thus, turning neither to the right band nor to
the left, we Ihall, as far as our frailty per-
mits, approach to the perfecion of the hu-
man character; and ihall have reason not
to be ajbamed when we have equal refpcct to
all God's commandments.

S E R-

# SERMON XVIII. On SCOFFING at RELIGION. 2 Peter, iii. 3. — There shall come in the last days Scoffers. —

[ 371 ]
S E R M O N XVIII.

On SCOPPING at RELIGION.

2 Peter, iii. 3.

-b'herejball come i the lajI days Soffcrs.--
A S the Christian religion is adverse to the s E R M.

inchnauons and paihons ot the corrupt- xvIII.

ed part ot manund, it has been its tate, m eve-
ry age, to encounter the oppolition of various
foes. Sometimes, it has undergone the storms
of violence and persecution. Sometimes, it
has been attacked by the arms of false
reasoning, and sophistry. When these have
failed of success, it has at other times been
exposed to the scoffs of the petulant. Men
of light and frivolous minds, who had no
comprehtainio of thought for discerning

, B b 2 'hat

EZ K . what is great, and no solidity of judge-
XVIII. ment for deciding on what is true, have

taken upon them to treat religion with con-
tempt, as if it were of no consequence to
the world. They have asseted to represent
the whole of that venerable fabric, which
has so long commanded the refpet of man-
kind; which, for ages, the learned have
supported, and the wife have admired, as
having no better foundation than the
gloomy imagination of fanatics and vifio-
naries. Of this charaer were those fcof-
sers, predicted by the Apostle to arise ix the
lta days a predicion which we have seen
too often fulfilled As the falie colours
which such men throw on religion, are apt
to impose on the wek and unwary, let us
now examine, whether religion affords any
jift grounds for the contempt or ridicule
of the scoffer. They must be either the
dotrines, or the precepts of religion, which
he endeavours to hold forth to contempt.

Tab doctrines of the Chriflian religion
are ratiorn ad pure. All tht it has re-

vealed

wealed concerning the perfetlions of God, s3 It
his moral government and laws, the defti-
nation of man, and the rewards and pu-
nithments of a future state, is perfettly con,
sonant to the most enlightened reason. In
some articles which transcend the limits of
our present faculties, as in what relates to
the eflence of the Godhead, the fallen state
of mankind, and their redemption by Jesus
Christ, its do&trines may appear mysterious
and dark. Against these, the scoffer has of-
ten directed his attacks; as if whatever could
not be explained by us, ought upon that
account to be exploded as absurd.

It is unnecessary to enter,at prefent,on any

particular defence of these ditrines, as there
is one observation which, if duly weighed,
is fuffident to silence the cavils of the rcof-
ser. Is he not compelled to admit, that the
whole system of nature around him is full
of myfery? What reason, then, had he to
suppose, that the do&rines of revelation,
proceeding from the fame author, were to
contain no myfterios obscurity ? All that
is requifie for the condu& of life, both ii

B b 3 nature

SE RM. nature and in religion, divine wisdom has

_XVI_. rendered obvious to all. As nature has as-

forded us fuilicient information concerning
what is necetfary for our tood, our accom-
modation, and our safety; so religion has
plainly inltructcd us in our duty towards
God, and our neighbour. But as lion as
we attempt to rile towards objects that lie
beyond our immediate sphere of aCtion,
our curiolity is checked; and darkness meets
us on every fide. What the essence is of
those material bodies which we fee and
handle; how a feed grows up into a tree;
how man is formed in the womb; or how
the mind ads upon the body, after it is
formed; are mysteries of which we can give
no more account, than of the most obscure
and difficult parts of revelation. We are
obliged to admit the existence of the fad,
though the explanation of it exceeds our fa-
culties.

After the fame manner, in natural reli-

gion, questions arise concerning the crea-
tion of the world from nothing, the origin
of evil under the government of a per, &c

Being,

Being, and the consistency of human liber- SERM.
ty with divine prescience, which are of as xi
intricate nature, and of as difficult solution,
as any queftlons in Christian theology. We
may plainly fee, that we are not admitted
into the secrets of Providence, any more
than into the mysteries of the Godhead. In
all his ways, the Almighty is a God that
bidetb himsef He makctb darkness hit pavi-
lion. He boldeth back thee face of bi throne;
and fpreadeth a thick cloud upon it.-In-
Read of its being any objection to revela-
tion, that some of its dotrines are myfte-
rious, it would be much more ifrange and
unaccountable, if no such dodrines were
found in it. Had every thing in the Chri-
ftian system been perfectly level to our ca-
pacities, this might rather have given ground
to a suspicion, of its not proceeding from
God; since it would have been then so un-
like to what we find, both in the system
of the universe, and in the system of natu-
ral religion. Whereas, according as mat-
ters now stand, the gospel has the fame sea-
tures, the fame general characer, with the

B b 4 other

SERtB. other two, which are acknowledged to be of
~^ divine origin; plain and comprchenfible, in

what relates to pracice; dark and myfte-
rious, in what relates to speculation and be-
lief *. The cavils of the scoffer, therefore,
on this head, are so far from having any
jus foundation, that they only discover
his ignorance, and the narrowness of his
views.

LET us next proceed to what relates to

prafice, or the preceptive part of religion.
-The duties which religion enjoins us to
perform towards God, are those which have
ofteneft furnished matter to the fcoft of
the licentious. They attempt to represent
thef: as so idle and superfluous, that they
could owe their birth to nothing but en.
thufidia.-For, is not the Deity so far ex-
alhd above us, as to receive neither advan-
tage nor pleasure, from our worship ? What
are our prayers,or our praifes,to that infinite

Sec this argument fully pursued, and placed in a

sfg light, by tim mdekry hand of BiRop Butler, in
hi; dots/ f t A
A 4RAw4a R4 0iw.

mind,

mind, who, refting in the full enjoyment SErtM
of his own beatitude, beholds all his crea- xvIt.
tures palling before him, only as the infects
of a day ? What but superstitious terrors,
could have dictated those forms of homage,
and those diftintions of sacred days, in
which vulgar minds delight, but which the
liberal and enlarged look upon with scorn?

Now, in return to such insults of the

scoffer, it might be sufficient to observe,
that the united sentiments of mankind, in
every age and nation, are against him.
Thoughtless as the bulk of men are, and
attached only to objects which they fee a-
round them; this principle has never been
extinguished in their breasts, that to the
great Parent of the human race, the uni-
versal, though invisible, benefactor of the
world, not only internal reverence, but ex-
ternal homage is due. Whether he need
that homage or not, is not the queRfion. It
is what, on our part, we undoubtedly owe;
and the heart is, with reason, held to be
bate, which tfifles the emotions of grati-
tude to a benefaaor, how independent so-

ever

SE tR M ever he may be of any returns. True vir-
XVIII. XVI__ tue, always prompts a public declaration of

the grateful sentiments which it feels; and
glories in exprefling them. Accordingly,
over all the earth, crowds of worshippers
have aflembled to adore, in various forins,
the Ruler of the world. In these adorations,
the philosopher, the savage, and the faints
have equally joined. None but the cold
and unfeeling can look up to that benefi-
cent Being, who is at the head of the uni-
verse, without some inclination to pray, or
to praise. In vain, therefore, would the
scoffer deride, what the loud voice of na-
ture demands andjuftifies. He ere&s him-
self againit the general, and declared sense
of the human race.

But apart from this consideration, I must

call on him to attend to one of a still more
serious and awful nature. By his licentious
ridicule of the duties of piety, and of the
institutions of divine worship, he is weak-
ening the power of conscience over men;
he is undermining the great pillars of so-
cicty; he is giving a mortal blow to public

order,

order, and public happineis. All there reft s E R M
on nothing so much, as on the general be- xvL.
lief of an all-feeing witness, and the gene-
ral veneration of an Almighty Governor,
On this belief, and this veneration, is found.
ed the whole obligation of an oath; with-
out which, government could not be admi-
niftered, nor courts of justice at; contro.
verfies could not be determined, nor private
property be preserved safe. Our only fe-
curity againit innumerable crimes, to
which the refiraints of human laws cannot
reach, is the dread of an invisible avenger,
and of those future punishments which he
hath prepared for the guilty. Remove this
dread from the minds of men; and you
firengthen the hands of the wicked, and
endanger the safety of human society.

But how could impressions so neceflary to

the public welfare be preierved, if there were
no religious assemblies, no sacred inftitu-
tions, no days set apart for divine worihip,
in order to be solemn remembrancers to
men of the existence, and the dominion of
God; and of the future account they have

to

Ste to give of their actions to him ? To all rtnke
xvxIL of men, the fentimente which public reli-

gion tends to awaken, are salutary and be-
neficial. But with refpet to the inferior
classes, it ie well known, that the only prin-
ciples which restrain them from evil, are
acquired in the religious assemblies which
they frequent. Destitute of the advantages
of regular education; ignorant, in great
measure, of public laws; unacquainted
with those refined ideas of honour and pro-
priety, to which other of more knowledge
have been trained; were those sacred tem-
ples deserted to which they now resort,
they would be in danger of degenerating
into a ferocious race, from whom lawlefi
violence was perpetually to be dreaded.

He, therefore, who treats sacred things

with any degree of levity and scorn, is ad-
ing the part, perhaps without his feeing or
Inowing it, of a public enemy to society.
He is preeifely the madma described in the
book of Proverbs, * who caqthb frramnr,

* Pror. uri. if&

artoWJQ,

arrow:, and death; and faith, am I not in SElIt
fpert? We ihall hear him, at times, com- x-vl_
plain loudly of the undutifulness of chil-
dren, of the dishonesty of servants, of the
tumults and insolence of the lower ranks;
while he himself is, in a great measure,
rtfponfible for the disorders of which he
complains. By the example which he sets
of contempt for religion, he becomes ac-
cefiry to the manifold crimes, which tat
contempt occasions among others. By his
feoffing at sacred institutions, he is encou-
raging the rabble to uproar and violence;
he is emboldening the false witness to take
the name of God in vain; he is, in cffet,
putting arms into the hands of the high-
wayman, and letting loose the robber on
the streets by night.

WE came next to confider that great

class of duties, which refpet our conduA
towards our fellow-creaturs. The obfolute
nece~iy of thefc to general welfare is so
apparent, as to have secured them, in a
reat degree, from the attacks of the fcof-

-.: . ser.

SItM. ser. He who mhould attempt to turn ju-

mi fice, truth, or honesty, into ridicule, would

be avoided by every one. To those who
had any remains of principle, he would be
odious. To thoie who attended only to
their interest, he would appear a dangerous
man. But though the fbcial virtues are
treated in general as refpedable and lared,
there are certain forms and degrees of them,
which have not been exempted from the
scorn of the unthinking. That extensive
generosity, and high public spirit, which
prompt a man to iacrifice his own interelt,
in order to promote some great general
good; and that ftrid and scrupulous inte-
grity, which will not allow one, on any
occasion, to depart from the truth; have
often been treated with contempt by those
who are called men of the world. They
wh ,will not sloop to flatter the great; who
diidain to comply with prevailing manners,
when 4heyijudge them t9 be evil; who re-
fuli to take the fiuallll adva.gepf.others,
in order tq.procure the. glreief:benefit.for
ttemuelvea; are repref~ert" ;as.pearn ,of

romantic

romantic characer, and visionary notions, SE RM
unacquainted with the world, and unfit XVIII.
to live in it.

Such persons are so far from being liable

to any just ridicule, that they are intitled
to a degree of refpet, which approaches to
veneration. For they are, in truth, the
great supporters and guardians of public
order. The authority of their characer
overawes the giddy multitude. The weight
of their example retards the progress of cor-
ruption; checks that relaxation of morals,
which is always too apt to gain ground in-
sensibly, and to make incroachments on
every department of society. Accordingly,
it is this high generosity of spirit, this in-
flexible virtue, this regard to principle, fu-
perior to all opinion, which has ever mark-
ed the characters of those who have emi-
nently distinguished themselves in public
life; who have patronised the cause of ju-
slice against powerful oppressors; who, in
critical times, have supported the falling
rights and liberties of men; and have re-
fleded honour on their nation and country.

Such

ER Such persons may have been scoffed at by
_v-. fIome among whom they lived; but pofte-

rity has done them ample justice; and they
are the persons, whose names are recorded
to future ages, and who are thought and
spoken of with admiration.

The mere temporizer, the man of accom-

modating principles, and inferior virtue,
may support a plausible character for a
while among his friends and followers;
but as soon as the hollowness of his prin-
ciples is detected, he finks into contempt.
They who are prone to deride men of in-
flexible integrity, only betray the littlenef
of their minds. They ihow that they un-
derftand not the sublime of virtue; that
thev have no discernment of the true ex-
cellence of man, By asseting to throw
any discouragement on purity and stris-
nels of morals, they not only expose them-
selves to just contempt, but propagate fen-
timents very dangerous to society. For, if
we loosen the regard due to virtue in any
cf its parts, we begin to sap the whole of
it. No man, as it has been often said, be-

comes

comes entirely profligate at once. He deo SERM.
viates, ftep by ftep, from conscience. If i_.
the loose caluiftry of the scoffer were to
prevail, open difhonelty, falsehood, and
treachery, would speedily grow out of thoft
complying principles, those relaxations of
virtue, which he would reprelent to be ne-
ceflary for every man who knows the
world.

THs lift class of virtues I am to men.

tion, are those which are of a personal na-
ture, and which refped the government to
be exercised over our pleasures and passions.
Here, the scoffer has always confidered
himself as having an ample field. Often,
and often, have such virtues as fobriet,
temperance, modesty, and chastity, been
made the subject of ridicule, as monkish
habits, which exclude men from the com-
pany of the faihionable and the gay; ha.
bits, which are the cffcd of low education,
or of mean spirits, or of mere feebleness of
constitUtion; while (coflrs, walking, as it is
too truly said of then by the Apoltle, after

VOL. Ill. C c /I,.;:

SERM their luJft, boast of their own manners as
XVII. liberal and free, as manly and spirited.

They fancy themselves raised thereby much
above the crowd; and hold all those in con-
tempt, who confine themselves within the
vulgar bounds of regular and orderly life.

Infatuated men! who fee not that the

virtues of which they make sport, not
only derive their authority from the laws of
God, but are moreover essentially requisite
both to public, and to private happiness.
By the indulgence of their licentious plea-
fures for a.while, as long as youth and vi-
gour remain, a few pairing gratifications
may be obtained. But what are the confe-
quences ? Suppose any individual to per-
severe unrestrained in this course, it is cer-
tainly to be followed by disrepute in his
charader, and disorder in his affairs; by a
wafted and broken conflitution; and a
speedy and miserable old age. Suppose a
society to be wholly formed of such persons
as the scoffers applaud; suppose it to be
filled with none but those whom they call
the sons of pleasure; that is, with the in-

temperate,

temperate, the riotous, and diflilute, among s E R M.
whom all regard to lobriety, decency, and xvIII.
private virtue, was aboli:hd,; what an odious
fceine would such a iociety exhibit ? How
unluie any civilised or well-ordered state,
in wiich mankind have chosen to dwell
What turbulence and uproar, what contests
and quarrels, would perpetually reign in
it ? What man of common underltanding
would not rather chufe to dwell in a de.
fert, than to be alrociated for life with such
companions ? Shall, then, the scoffer pre-
fume to make light of those virtues, with-
out which there could be neither peace,
nor comfort, nor good order, among man-
kind ?

Let him be desired to think, of his do.

meltic situation and connections. Is he a
father, a husband, or a brother ? Has he
any friend or relation, male or female, in
whose happiness he is intereited ?- Let
us put the question to him, whether he be
willing that intemperance, unchastity, or
dilfipation of any kind, flould mark their
charafter ? Would he recommend to them

C c 2 such

SERM. such excesses ? Would he chufe, in their

tI_ ,presence, openly, and without disguise, to

scoff at the opposite virtues, as of no con-
sequence to their welfare ?- If even the
most licentious lmudders at the thought;
if, in the midst of his loo'e pleafuires, he
be desirous that his own family lhould re-
main untainted; let this teach him the va-
luc of those private virtues, which, in the
hours of dissipation, in the giddiness of his
mind, he is ready to contemn. Baniih so-
briety, temperance, and purity, and you
tear up the foundations of all public order,
and all domestic quiet. You render every
house a divided and miserable abode, re-
founding with terms of ihame, and mutual
reproaches of infamy. You leave nothing
refpecable in the human charader. You
change the man into a brute.

THE conclusion from all the reasonings

which we have now pursued is, that reli-
gion and virtue, in all their forms, either
of doctrine or of precept; of piety towards
God, integrity towards men, or regularity

in

in private conduct; are so far from afford- s ER M
ing any grounds of ridicule to the petulant, .Y
that they are intitled to our highest vene-
ration; they are names, which should ne-
ver be mentioned, but with the utmost ho-
nour. It is said in Scripture, Fools make a
mock at fin *. They had better make a
mock at pestilence, at war, or famine.
With one, who should chufe these public
calamities for the fubjedt of his sport, you
would not be inclined to associate. You
would fly from him, as worse than a fool;
as a man of distempered mind, from whom
you might be in hazard of receiving a fud-
den blow. Yet certain it is, that, to the
great fbciety of mankind, fin is a greater
calamity, than either pestilence, or famine,
or war. These operate, only as occasional
causes of misery. But the fins and vices
of men, are perpetual scourges of the world,
Impiety and injustice, fraud and falsehood,
intemperance and profligacy, are daily pro-
ducing mischief and disorder; bringing

* rov. xiv. 9.

C c ruin

GERM ruin on individuals; tearing families and
XVIII.

communities in pieces; giving rife to a
thousand tragical kcenes on this unhappy
theatre. In proportion as manners are vi-
cious, mankind are unhappy, The per-
fedion of virtue which reigns in the world
above, is the chief source of the perfeca
blessedness which prevails there.

When, therefore, we observe any tenden-

cy to treat religion or morals with difre-
sped and levity, let us hold it to be a sure
indication of a perverted understanding, or
a depraved heart. In the feat of the scorner
let us never fit. Let us account that wit
contaminated, which attempts to sport itself
on sacred fubjces. When the scoffer arifis,
let us rraintain the honour of our God,
and our Redeemer; and resolutely adhere
to the cause of virtue and goodness. The
rlps of the uwif utter knowledge; but the mouth
of the foolfh iJ near to delruilion. Him that
bonoureth God, God will honour. Thefear of
the Lord is the beginning of wisdom : and be
that keepeth the commandment, keepctt his
tWnI foul.

S E R-

# SERMON XIX. On the CREATION of the WORLD. GENESIS, i. 1. In the beginning God created the heaven, and the earth.

[ 391 ]

S E R M ON XIX.
On the CREATION of the WORLD.

GENESIS, i. I.
In the beginning God created the heaven, and

the earth.
SUCH is the commencement of the his- SERM.

tory of mankind; an aera, to which we __

must ever look back with solemn awe and
veneration. Before the fun and the moon
had begun their course; before the found
of the human voice was heard, or the
name of man was known; in the beginning
God created the heaven, and the earth.-
To a beginning of the world, we are led
back by every thing that now exists; by
all history, all records, all monuments of

C c 4 antiquity.

SFR M. antiquity. In tracing the tranfadions of

XLX.
_LLf, pafl ages, we arrive at a period, which clear-

ly indicates the infancy of the human race.
W\e behold the world peopled by degrees.
We ascend to the origin of all those useful
and necefiary arts, without the knowledge
of which, mankind could hardly subsist.
We discern society and civilization arising
from rude beginnings, in every corner of
the earth; and gradually advancing to the
ftatc in which we now find them: All
which afford plain evidence, that there was
a period, when mankind began to inhabit
and cultivate the earth. What is very re-
warkable, the moll authentic chronology
aid hitory of molt nations, coincides with
the account of Scripture; and makes the
period during which the world has been
inhabited by the race of men, not to ex-
;end beyond fix thousand years.

To the ancient philosophers, creation

from nothing appearod aa unintelligible
idea. They maintained the eternal exist-
ence.of matter, which they supposed to be
modelled by the Ibvcreign mind of the uni-

verse,

verse, into the form which the earth now SERM.
exhibits. But there is nothing in this opi- xlx.
nion which gives it any title to be opposed
to the authority of revelation. The doc-
trine of two felf-exiftent, independent prin-
ciples, God and matter, the one active, the
other passive, is a hypothesis which presents
difficulties to human rcafon, at leait as
great as the creation of matter from no-
thing. Adhering then to the testimony of
Scripture, we believe, that in the beginning
God created, or from non-existence brought
into being, she heaven and the earth.

But though there was a period when this

globe, with all that we fee upon it, did not
exist, we have no reason to think, that the
wisdom and power of the Almighty were
then without exercise or employment.
Bouudlels is the extent of his dominion.
Other globes and worlds, enlightened by
other funs, may then have occupied, as
they still appear to occupy, the immense
regions of space. Numberless orders of be-
ings, to us unknown, people the wide ex-
tent of the universe; and afford an endless

variety

6 E R M. variety of objects to the ruling care of the

.lx.v great Father of all. At length, in the

course and progress of his government,
there arrived a period, when this earth was
to be called into existence. When the fig-
nal moment, predestined from all eternity,
was come, the Deity arose in his might;
and with a word created the world. -
What an illustrious moment was that,
when, from non-existence, there sprang at
once into being, this mighty globe, on
which so many millions of creatures now
dwell!-No preparatory measures were re-
quired. No long circuit of means was em-
ployed. He fpak; and it was done: He
commanded; and it fJood faf. The earth
was at first, without form, and void; and
darkntja was on theface of the deep. The Al-
mighty surveyed the dark abyss; and fix-
ed bounds to the several divisions of na-
ture. He siid, Let there be light; and there
was light. Then appeared the sea, and the
dry land. The mountains rose; and the
rivers flowed. The fun and moon began
their course in the ikies. Herbs and plants

cloathed

cloathed the ground. The air, the earth, SERM.
and the waters, were storcd with their re- Xt._
fpecive inhabitants. At last, man was
made after the image of God. He appear-
ed, walking with countenance erea; and
received his Creator's benediction, as the
Lord of this new world. The Almighty
beheld his work when it was finished; and
pronounced it good. Superior beings saw
with wonder this new acceflion to existence.
The morning fars fang together; and all the
sons of God Jhoutedfor joy *.

But, on this great work of creation, let

us not merely gaze with astonishment. Let
us confider how it fliould affect our con-
dud, by presenting the divine perfections
in a light which is at once edifying, and
comforting, to man. It displays the Crea-
tor as supreme in power, in wisdom, and
in goodness.

I. As supreme in power. When we con-
fider with how much labour and difficulty

* Job xiviii. 7.

human

SE R t. human power performs its inconsiderable
.a^x works; what time it cofis to rear them;

and how easily, when reared, they are de-
stroyed; the very idea of creating power
overwhelms the mind with awe. Let us
look around, and survey this stupendous
edifice, which we have been admitted to
inhabit. Let us think of the extent of the
different climates and regions of the earth;
of the magnitude of the mountains, and of
the expanse of the ocean. Let us conceive
that immense globe which contains them,
launched at once from the hand of the Al-
mighty; made to revolve incessantly on its
axis, that it might produce the vicissitudes
of day and night; thrown forth, at the
fame time, to run its annual course in per-
petual circuit through the heavens; after
such a meditation, where is the greatness,
where is the pride of man ? Into what total
annihilation do we fink, before an omnipo-
tent Being ? Who is not disposed to exclaim,
Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of
him ; or the son ns man, that tboujhouldf v/it
him P When compared wtitb thee, all men are

vanity ;

vanity; tbhir works arc nothing.-- Reve- SE, Ml
rence, and humble adoration, ought 1potl- -
taneouly to arise. He who feels no pro-
penfity to worship and adore, is dead to all
sense of grandeur and majesty; has extin-
guiihed one of the nmof natural feelings of
the human heart. Kn'w the Lord, that he
is God, we are all his people; thb workman-
jhip of his bands. Let ts worJhip and bow
down. Let us kneel before the Lord our
Maker.

Of all titles to legislation and rule, none

is so evident and direct as that of a Crea-
tor. The convicion is felt in every breast,
that he who gave us being, hath an abfo-
lute right to regulate our conduct This
gives a fanCion to the precepts of God,
which the most hardened dare not contro-
vert. When it is a Creator and a Father
that speaks, who would not liften and
obey? Are justice and humanity his de-
clared laws; and fliall we, whom but ye-
fterday he called from the dust, and whom
to-morrow he can reduce into dust again,
presume, in contempt of him, to be unjust

or

BERM. or inhuman? Are there any little interelts

Ms__x of our own which we dare to erect, in op-

position to the pleasure of him who made
us? Fear ye not me, faitb the Lord; will ye
not tremble at my prefnce, who have placed
the Sand for the bound of the sea, by a per-
petual decree, that it cannot pss it; who
firetch Jortb my band over the earth, and none
binderethb

At the fame time, the power of a Crea-

tor is encouraging, as well as awful. While
it enforces duty, it inspires confidence un-
der alHiction. It brings to view a relation,
which imports tenderness and comfort; for
it suggests the compassion of a father. In
the time of trouble, mankind are led by
natural impulle, to fly for aid to Him, who
knows the weakness of the frame which he
has made; who remembers we are dufl; and
fees the dangers with which we are envi-
roned. " I am thine; for thou haft made
" me; Forsake not the work of tlline own
"hands," is one of the molt natural ejacula-
tions of the distressed mind.- How blef-
fed are the virtuous, who can reft under the

protection

proteftion of that powerful arm, which SER M.

XIX.

made the earth and the heaven? The om-
nipotence which renders God so awful, is
to them a source of joy. In the whole com-
pass of nature, nothing is formidable to
them, who firmly repose their trust in the
Creator. To them, every noxious power
can be rendered harmless; every threaten-
ed evil, if not averted, can be transformed
into good. In the Author of nature, they
find not only the author of their being;
but their protector and defender, the lifter
up of their heads. Happy is he that bath the
God of Jacob for bis help; wbofe bope is in
the Lord his God; which made heaven and
earth, the fa, and all that therein is; 'which
keepeth truth for ever .

II. THE work of creation is the display of

supreme wisdom. It carries no character
more conspicuous than this. If, from the
firudture and mechanism of some of the mofi
complicated works of human art, we are led

Psalm cxlvi. 5. 6.

to

SERM. to high admiration of the wisdom of the
x,__ contriver, what aftoniflunent may fill our

minds, when we think of the ftrucure of
the univere ! It is not only the stupendous
building itself, which excites admiration;
but the exquisite skill, with which the end-
less variety of its parts are adapted to their
refpetive purposes. Insomuch, that the
study of nature, which, for ages, has em-
ployed the lives of Ib many learned men,
and which is still Ib far from being ex-
haufted, is no other than the Rtudy of di-
vine wisdom displayed in the creation. The
farther our researches are carried, more
striking proofs of it every where meet us.
The provision made for the constant regu-
larity of the universe, in the disposition of
the heavenly bodies, so that in the course
of several thousand years, nature ihould
ever exhibit the fame useful and grateful
variety, in the returns of light and dark-
ness, of summer and winter; and ever fur-
nifh food and habitation to all the animals
that people the earth; must be a lalling
theme of wonder to every refleting mind.

But

But they are not oniy the heavens that SERM.

decltarr the glory of God, and the finnament _r
that Jsiewetb forth his bandy wor. In the
most inconiiderable, as well as in the most il-
luitrious works of the Creator, confunmmate
art and design appear. There is not a crea-
ture that moves, nor a vegetable that grows,
but, when minutely examined, furnihes
materials of the highest admiration. The
lame wisdom that placed the fun in the
centre of the system, and arranged the fe-
veral planets around him in their order,
has no less Thown itself, in the provision
made for the food and dwelling of every
bird that roams the air, and every beat
that wanders in the desert; equally great,
in the smallest, and in the most magnifi-
cent objects; in the star, and in the inset;
in the elephant, and in the fly; in the beam
that thines from heaven, and in the grass
that cloaths the ground. Nothing is over-
looked. Nothing is carelessly performed.
Every thing that exists, is adapted with per-
fef symmetry to the end for which it was
designed. All this infinite variety of par-

VOL. 11. D d ticulars

E RM. ticulars must have been prefcnt to the mind
XIX.
a- _s of the Creator; all beheld with one glance

of hit eye; all fixed and arranged, from
the beginning, in his great design, when
he formed the heavens and the earth. Just-
ly may we exclaim with the Pfalmint, How
excellent, 0 Lord, is /hy name in all the earbth
How manifold are thy works ! In w!i/dom Lfi
tbou made them all. A;o man can Jind out the
work that God maketb, from the beginning
to the end. Sucb knowledge is too wonderjiul
for ur. It is bigb; we cannot attain unto it.

This wisdom displayed by the Almighty

in the creation, was not intended merely to
gratify curiosity, and to raise wonder. It
ought to beget profound fubmiflion, and
pious trust, in every heart. It is not un-
comalon for many who speak with rapture
of creating wisdom, to be guilty, at the fame
time, of arraigning the conduc of Provi-
dence. In the ftrufture of the universe,
they confers that all is goodly and beauti-
ful. But in the government of human as-
fairs, they can fee nothing but diobrder and
confufion,-Have they forgotten, that

both

both the one, and the other, proceed from SERM.

XIX.

the fame author ? Have they forgotten, that _
he who balanced all the heavenly bodies,
and adjusted the proportions and limits of
nature, is the fame who hath allotted them
their condition in the world, who diftri-
butes the measures of their prosperity and
adversity, and fixes the bounds of their habi-
tation ? If their lot appear to them ill forted,
and their condition hard and unequal, let
them only put the question to their own
minds, Whether it be most probable, that
the great and wife Creator hath erred in
his distribution of human things, or that
they have erred, in the judgement which
they form concerning the lot afflgned to
them? Can they believe, that the divine
Artist, after he had contrived and frnished
this earth, the habitation of men, with
such admirable wisdom, would then throw
it out of his hands as a neglected work;
would fulffer the affairs of its inhabitants to
proceed by chance; and would behold them
without concern, running into mifnile and
disorder? Where were then that consisten-

D d2 cy

E RM. cy of conduct, which we discover in all the
r-' works of nature, and which we cannot but

ascribe to a perfect Being ?- My brother!
when thy plans are disappointed, and thy
heart is ready to despair; when virtue is
oppressed, and the wicked prosper around
thee; in those moments of disturbance, look
up to him who created the heaven and the
earth; and confide, that he who made light
to spring from primaval darkness, will make
order at last to arise from the seeming con-
fulion of the world.

Had any one beheld the earth in its state

of chaos; when the elements lay mixed and
confused; when the earth was withoutform
and void, and darknlef wa on the face of the
deep; would he have believed, that it was
presently to become so fair and well order-
ed a globe as we now behold; illumined
with the splendor of the fun, and decorated
with all the beauty of nature? The fame
powerful hand, which perse&ed the work
of creation, (hall, in due time, disembroil the
plans of Providence. Of creation, we can
judge more clearly, because it Rood forth

at

at once; it was perse& from the beginning. E R M.
But the course of Providence is progreflive. x.
Time is required for the progression to ad-
vnnee; and before it is finiihed, we can
form no judgement, or at least a very imper-
set one, concerning it. We must wait un-
til the great :ra arrive, when the secrets of
the universe shall be unfolded; when the
divine designs {hall be consummated; when
Providence shalt be brought to the fame
completion which creation has already at-
tained. Then, we have every reason to be-
lieve, that the wife Crector {hall apper in
the end, to have been the wife and jtft tuler
of the world. Until that period come, let
us be conrented and patient; let uis rubmit
and adore. Although tbou fayeft tbou Jba
fotfte him, yet judgement i before bim; tbere-
fore, ttarf tou in him*, This exhortation
will receive more force, when we,

111. Confider creation as a display of ful
preme goodness, no less than of wisdom and

^ jub .ilX. 4.

D d power.

SERM. power. It is the communication of num-
XIX X_ berlefs benefits to all who live, together

with existence. Justly is the earth said to
befull of the goodness of the Lord. Through-
out the whole system of things, we behold
a manifest tendency to promote the benefit
either of the rational, or the animal crea-
tion. In some parts of nature, this tenden-
cy may be less obvious than in others. Ob-
jests, which to us seem useless, or hurtful,
may sometimes occur; and strange it were,
if in so vast and complicated a system, dif-
ficulties of this kind lhould not occasional-
ly present themselves to beings, whose views
are so narrow and limited as ours. It is
well known, that in proportion as the
knowledge of nature has increased among
men, there difficulties have diminished. Sa-
tisfactory accounts have been given of ma-
ny perplexing appearances. Useful and
proper purposes have been found to be pro-
moted, by objects which were, at first,
thought unprofitable or noxious.

Malignant must be the mind of that per-
son; with a distorted eye he must have con-

templated

templated creation, who can fufpet, that S RM.
it is not the production of infinite benigni-
ty and goodness. How many clear marks
of benevolent intention appear, every where
around us ? What a profusion of beauty and
ornament is poured forth on the face of na-
ture? What a magnificent spectacle pre-
sented to the view of man? What supply
contrived for his wants ? What a variety of
objects let before him, to gratify his senses,
to employ his understanding, to entertain
his imagination, to cheer and gladden his
heart? Indeed, the very exiltence ,of;the
universe is a flanding memorial qs the
goodness of the Creator. For nothing exr
cept goodaefs could originally prompt crea-
tion. The supreme Being, felf-exitent and
all-fuflicient, had no wants which he could
seek to supply. No new acceflion of felici-
ty or glory was to result to him, from crea-
tures whom he made. It was goodness
communicating and pouring itself forth,
goodness delighting to impart happiness
in all its forms, which in the beginning
created die heaven and the earth. Hence,

D d 4 those

E it M. those innumerable orders of living creatures
1-1 _ with which the earth is peopled ; irom the

loweCf class of sensitive being, to the high-
elt rank of reatbn and intelligence. Where-
ever there is lite, there is foine degree of
happiness; there are enjoyments suited to
the different powers of feeling; and earth,
and air, and water, are, with magnificent
liberality, made to teem with life.

Let those fttriking displays of creating

goodness call forth, on our part, responsive
love, gratitude, and veneration. To this
great Father of all existence and life, to
Him who hath raised us up to behold the
light of day, and to enjoy all the comforts
which his world prefeats, let our hearts
fend forth a perpetual hymn of praise.
Evening and morning let us celebrate Him,
who maketh the morning and the evening
to rejoice over our heads; who openethb bi
hand, and /atisfitb the desire of every living
thing. Let us rejoice, that we are brought
into a world, which is the production of
infinite goodness; over which a supreme
intelligence presides; and where nothing

happens,

happens, that was not planned and arran- ERM.
ged, from the beginning, in his decree. Con- X1X.
vinced that he hateth not the works which
he hath made, nor hath brought creatures
into existence, merely to susser unnecessary
pain, let us, even in the midit of sorrow,
receive, with calm fubmiTlion, whatever he
is pleased to fend; thankful for what he
betlows; and satisfied, that, without good
reason, he takes nothing away.

SUCH, in general, are the effects which

meditation on the creation of the world
ought to produce. It presents such an ato-
nilhing conjunction of power, wisdom, and
goodness, as cannot be beheld without re-
ligious veneration Accordingly, among
all nations of the earth, it has given rife to
religious belief and worfiip. The most
ignorant and savage tribes, when they look-
ed round on the earth and the heavens,
could not avoid ascribing their origin to
some invisible designing cause, and feeling
a propensity to adore. They are, indeed, the
awful appearances of the Cretoi's power,

by

ERM, by which, chiefly, they have been impreirf
X1X ed; and which have introduced into their

worship so many rites of dark superitltion.
When the usual course of nature leemuid to
be interrupted; when loud thunder rolled
above them in the clouds, or earthquakes
shook the ground, the multitude fell on
their knees, and, with trembling horror,
brought forth the bloody sacrifice to ap-
pease the angry divinity. But it is not in
those tremendous appearances of power
merely, that a good and well-inftruced
man beholds the Creator of the world. In
the constant and regular working of his
hands, in the silent operations of his wis-
dom and goodness, ever going on through-
out nature, he delights to contemplate and
adore him.

This is one of the chief fruits to be de-

rived from that more perfec knowledge of
the Creator, which is imparted to us by the
Christian revelation. Impressing our minds
with a just sense of all his attributes, as not
wife and great only, but as gracious and
merciful, let it lead us to view every object

of

of calm and undisturbed nature, with a per- s E R .

XIX;

petual reference to its author. We {hall x;
then behold all the tcenes which the hea-
vens and the earth present, with more refi-
ned feelings, and sublimer emotions than
they who regard them solely as objects of
curiosity, or amutfement. Nature will ap-
pear animated, and enlivened, by the pre-
fence of its author. When the fun rife#
or sets in the heavens; when spring paints
the earth, when summer shines in its glory,
when autumn pours forth its fruits, or
winter returns in its awful forms, we shall
view the Creator manifesting himself in his
works. We shall meet his presence in the
fields. We shall feel his influence in the
cheering beam. We hall hear his voice in
the wind. We hall behold ourselves every
where surrounded with the glory of that
universal spirit, who fills, pervades, and
upholds all. We hall live in the world as
in a great and august temple; where the
presence of the divinity, who inhabits it,
inspires devotion.

Magnificent as the fabric of the world

is,

BERM. is, it was not, however, intended for per-
][IX. ,_-' petual duration. It was erected as a tem-

porary habitation for a race of beings, who,
after acting there a probationary part, were
to be removed into a higher state of exist-
ence. As there was an hour fixed from all
eternity for its creation, so there is an hour
fixed for its dissolution; when the heavens
and the earth shall pass away, and their
place {hall know them no more. The con-
fideration of this great event, as the coun-
terpart to the work of creation, ihall be the
fubje& of the following Discourse.

S E R.

# SERMON XX. On the DISSOLUTION of the WORLD. 2 PETER, iii. 10. But they day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements ...

[ 41' ]

SERMON XX.
On the DISSOLUTION of the WO1LD.

2 PETER, iu. IO.
But the day of tbe Lord will come as a tbitf

in the night; in tbe which tbe heavens fial
pass away with a great noifc, and the ele-
ments Jball melt with fervent beat; the
earth also, and the works that are therein,
fihall be burnt up.
THESE words present to us an awful SERl'

view of the final catastrophe of the ._

world. Having treated, in the preceding
Discourse, of the commencement, let us
now contemplate the close, of all human
things. The dissolution of the material
fyfltem is an article of our faith, often allu-

ded

S E. M. ded to in the Old Testament, clearly pre-

xx.
xx. diced in the New. It is an article of faith

so far from being incredible, that many
appearances in nature lead to the belief of
it. We fee all terrestrial substances chan-
ging their form. Nothing that conflits of
matter, is formed for perpetual duration.
Every thing around us, is impaired and
consumcd by time; waxes old by degrees,
and tends to decay. There is rcalbn, there-
fore, to believe, that a Itrudure lo complex
as the world mutt be liable to the fame
law; and lhall, at some period, undergo
the fame fate. Through many changes, the
earth has already passed; many thocks it
has received, and fill is often receiving. A
great portion of what is now dry land ap-
pears, from various tokens, to have been
once covered with water. Continents bear
the marks of having been violently rent,
and torn asunder from one another. New
islands have risen from the bottom of the
ocean; thrown up by the force of fubter-
raneous fire. Formidable earthquakes have,
in divers quarters, lhaken the globe; and

at

at this hour terrify, with their alarms, ma- SE RM.

xx

ny parts of it. Burning mountains have, _
for awes, been difchargine torrents of flame;
and from time to time renew their explo-
sions, in various regions. All these circum-
stances lhow, that in the bowels of the
earth, the instruments of its dissolution are
formed. To our view, who behold only
its surface, it may appear firm and uniha-
ken; while its defiruclion is preparing in
secret. The ground on which we tread is
undermined. Combuflible materials are
stored. The train is laid. When the mine
is to spring, none of us can foresee.

Accustomed to behold the course of na-

ture proceeding in regular order, we in-
dulge, meanwhile, our pleasures and pur-
suits with tull ecurity; and such awful
scenes as the convulsion of the elements,
and the dissolution of the world, are so-
reign to our thoughts. Yet, as it is certain
that some generation of men mull witness
this great catastrophe, it is fit and proper
that we should sometimes look forward to
it. Such prolpets may not, indeed, be al.

luring

SE FRK luring to the bulk of men. But they carry
xx.

a grandeur and lolemnity, which are con-
genial to some of the most dignified feel-
ings in our nature; and tend to produce
elevation of thought. Amidt the circle of
levities and follies, of little pleasures and
little cares, which fill up the ordinary round
of life, it is necessary that we be occasional-
ly excited to attend to what is serious and
great. Such events as are now to be the
subjec of our meditation, awake the slum-
bering mind; check the licentioufnefi of
idle thought, and bring home our recollec-
tion to what most concerns us, as men and
Christians.

Let us think what astonishment would

have filled our minds, and what devout e-
totions would have swelled our hearts, if
we could have been fpecators of the crea-
tion of the world; if we had seen the earth
when it arose at first withoetform and eid,
and beheld its parts arranged by the divine
word; if we had heard the voice of the
Almighty, calling light to spring forth from
the darkns that was on th face of the deep;

if

if we had seen the fun arising, for the first SE ;M.

XX.

time, in the east with majestic glory; and
all nature instantly beginning to teem with
life. This wonderful scene, it was impof-
fible that any human eye could behold. It
was a fpedacle afforded only to angels, and
superior spirits. But to a fpeAacle no less
aftonilhing, the final dissolution of the
world, we know there {hall be many hu-
man witnesses. The race of men living in
that last age, shall fee the presages of the
approaching fatal day. There (hall befigns
in the Jun, as the Scripture informs us, and
signs in the moon, and fiars; upon the earth,
direfi of nations, with perplexity; the fca
and the waves roaring *. They (hall clear-
ly perceive, that universal nature is tend-
ing to ruin. They {hall feel the globe
mhake; shall behold their cities fall; and
the final conflagration begin to kindle a-
round them.- Realising then this awful
scene; imagining ourselves to be already
fpecfators of it, let us,

* Lu, xxi. ig.
VOL. III. E I. CoN.

SERMI. I. CONTEMPLATE the Supreme Being

-_.. directing the diliblution, as he directed the

original formation, of the world. He is
the great agent in this wonderful tranfac-
tion. It was by him foreicen. It was by
him intendedl; it entered into his plan
from the moment of creation. This world
was dettined from the beginning to fulfil a
certain period; and then its duration was
to terminate. Not that it is any pleasure to
the Almighty, to di(play his omnipotence
in destroying the works which he has made;
but as for wile and good purposes the earth
was formed, so for wile and good ends it
is dilrolved, when the time most proper for
its termination is come. He who, in the
counsels of his Providence, brings about lb
many revolutions among mankind; who
changeIt the times and the fieafis; who rai-
les up empires to rule, in flcceflion, among
the nations, and at his pleasure puts an end
to their glory; hath also fixed a term for
the earth itself, the feat of all human great-
ne's. He law it meet, that after the pro-
bationary courie was liniihed, which the

generations

generations of men were to accomplish, ER M.
their present habitation thould be made to xx.
pafls away. Of the seasonableness of the
period when this change ihould take place,
no being can judge, except the Lord of the
universe. These are counsels, into which
it is not ours to penetrate. But amidst this
great revolution of nature, our comfort is,
that it is a revolution brought about by
Him, the measures of whose government
are all founded in goodness.

It is called in the text, the day of te Lord;

a day peculiarly his, as known to lhim on-
ly; a day in which he ihall appear with
uncommon and tremendous majesty. But
though it be the day of the terrors of the
Lord, yet from theft terrors, his upright
and faithful fubjeds liall have nothing to
apprehend. They may remain safe and
quiet fpedtators of the threatening scene.
For it is not to be a scene of blind confu,
sion; of universal ruin, brought about by
undesigning chance. Over the ihock of
the elements, and the wreck of nature,
Eternal Wisdom presides. According to its

E c 2 direction,

S E R M. direction, the conflagration advances which
XX_ is to consume the earth. Amidst every

convulsion of the world, God shall conti-
nue to be, as he was from the beginning,
the dwelling-place of bis servants to all gene-
rations. The world may be loft to them;
but the ruler of the world is ever the fame,
unchangeably good and jut. This is the
bigb tower to which they can fly, and be
safe. The righteous Lord lovetb rigbteouf-
ness; and under every period of his govern-
ment, bis countenance beholdeth the upright.

II. LET us contemplate the dissolution of

the world, as the end of all human glory.
This earth has been the theatre of many a
great fpeaacle, and many a high atchieve-
ment. There, the wife have ruled, the
mighty have fought, and conquerors have
triumphed. Its surface has been covered
with proud and stately cities. Its temples
and palaces have raised their heads to the
skies. Its kings and potentates, glorying
in their magnificence, have ereced pyra-
mids, conftruted towers, founded monu-

ments,

ments, which they imagined were to defy S E R M

xx.

all the alfaults of time. Their inward _
tbought was, that their bouses were to conti-
nu for ever, and their dwellig-places to all
generations. Its philosophers have explored
the secrets of nature; and flattered them-
selves, that the fame of their discoveries
was to be immortal. Alas ! all this was
no more than a transient ihow. Not only
the faJbion of the world, but the world it-
self, pajfeth away. The day cometh, when
all the glory of this world shall be remem-
bered, only as a dream when one awaketh.
No longer shall the earth exhibit any of
those scenes which now delight our eyes.
The whole beautiful fabric is thrown down,
never more to arise. As soon as the de-
stroying angel has founded the last trum-
pet, the everlasting mountains fall; the
foundations of the world are ihaken; the
beauties of nature, the decorations of art,
the labours of induilry, periih in one com-
mon flame, The globe itself ihall either
return into its ancient chaos, without form
and void; or, like a star fallen from the

E e 3 heavens,

SERM. hcavcns, shall be effaced from the universe,
xx.

and its plare shall know it no more.

THIS day of the Lord, it is foretold in

the text, will come as a thief in the night;
that is, sudden and unexpected. Mankind,
notwithstanding the presages given them,
ihall continue to the last in their wonted
security. Our Saviour tells us, that as in
the days of Noah before the flood, they were
eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage, Yntil the flood came, and took them
all away; foJhall also the coming of the Son of
tan be .- How many projeits and de-
signs shall that day iuddenly confound?
What long-contrived schemes of pleasure
ihall it overthrow? What plans of cunning
and ambition shall it utterly blast? How

iiferable they, whom it shall overtake in
the midst of dark conspiracies, of criminal
deeds, or profligate pleasures? In what
firong colours is their dismay painted, when
they are represented in the book of Reve.

.Matthew, xliv. 38.

lations,

lations, as calling to the bills and mountains SE RM.

Xx.

to fall on them and cver them? --Such de- _
scriptions are apt to be confidered as exag-
gerated. The imprellion of those awful
events is weakened by the great diftancc of
time, at which our imagination places
them. But have not we had a striking
image set before us, in our own age, of the
terrors which the day of the Lord ihall pro-
duce, by those partial ruins of the world,
which the vlfitation of God has brought on
countries well known, and not removed very
far froth ourselves ? When in the midst of
peace, opulence, aid security, suddenly the
earth was felt by the terrified inhabitants to
tremble, with violent agitation, below them;
when their houses began to shake over their
heads, and to overwhelm them with ruins;
the flood, at the fame time, to rife from its
bed, and to swell around them; when en-
compassed with universal desolation, no
friend could aid another; no prospect of
escape appeared; no place of refuge remain-
ed; how similar were such scenes of de-
firuntion to the terrors of the lat day?

E e 4 What

E R M. What finilar sensations of dread, and re-
xx. -,._ morse, and too late repentance, must they

have excited among the guilty and pro-
fane ?

To such formidable convulsions o. na-

ture, we, in these happy islands, through
the blessing of Heaven, are strangers; and
strangers to them may we long continue!
But however we may escape partial ruins
of the globe, in its general and final ruin,
we also muff be involved. To us must
come at last that awful day, when the fun
shall for the last time arise, to perform his
concluding circuit round the world. They
how blest, whom that day ihall find em-
ployed in religious aAs, or virtuous deeds;
in the conscientious discharge of the duties
of life; in the exercise of due preparation
for the conclusion of human things, and for
appearing before the great Judge of the
world! Let us now,

III. CONTEMPLATE the foul of man, as

remaining unhurt in the midst of this gene-
ral desolation, when the whole animal crea.

tion

tion perishes, and the whole frame of na- SE R M.
ture falls into ruins. What a high idea xx
does this present, of the dignity pertaining
to the rational spirit! The world may fall
back into chaos; but, superior to matter,
and independent of all the changes of ma-
terial things, the foul continues the fame.
When the heavens pass away with a great
noir, and the klement melt with fervent beat,
the foul of man, stamped for immortality,
retains its state unimpaired; and is capable
offlourishing in undecaying youth and vi-
gour. Very different indeed the condition
of human spirits is to be, according as
their different qualities have marked, and
prepared them, for different future man-
sions. But for futurity, they are all de-
ftined. Existence, still, is theirs. The ca-
pacity of permanent felicity they all pof
fess; and, if they enjoy it not, it is owing
to themselves.

Here then, let us behold what is the true

honour and excellence of man. It confifls
not in his body; which, beautiful or vigo-
rous as it may now seem, is no other than

a

SE kM. a fabrick of dust, quicklyto return to;dmft
,__ again. Iris not derived ftom any connec-

tion he can form with earthly things; which,
as we have seen, are all doomed to perilh.
It c6lofifts in that thinking part, which is
ffffcepfible of intellecdual improvetent and
moral worth; which was fortned after the
image of God; which is capable of pe"re-
tual progress in drawing nearer to his ha-
ture; and shall partalke of the divine eter-
nity, when time and the world shall be no'
more. This is all that is refpetable in man.'
By this alone, he is raised above perishable
substances, and allied to those that are ce-
leftial and immortal. This part of our na;
ture, then, let us cultivate with care; andi
on its improvement, reft our felf-eftimatirn.
If, on the contrary, fufifring ourfeltes to
be wholly immersed in matter, plunged in
the dregs of fenfualiky we behhve as if we
were only made for the body and its anim
real pleasures, how degenerate and bas 'do
we become ? Destined to fhrvire this whole
material system, sent forth to rin the race of
immortality and glory, shall we thus'abnfe

our

our Maker's goodness, degrade our origi- SE R M.
nal honour, and fink ourselves into defer- _XX
ved misery? It remains, that,

IV. WE contemplate the dissolution of

the world, as the introducion to a greater
and nobler lyfttm, in the government of
God. We, acrording to bis promise, look for
new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwel-
leth rightrofteSfi *. Temporal things are
now to give place to things eternal. To
this earthly habitation is to succeed the city
of the living God. The earth had com-
pleted the purpose for which it was created.
It had been employed as a theatre, on which
the human generations were successively to
come forth, and to fulfil their term of trial.
As long as the period of trial continued,
much obscurity was of course to cover the
counrels of Providence. It was appointed,
that all things should appear as coming alike
to all; that the righteous should seem of-
ten neglected by Heaven, and the wicked be

* a Peter, iii. 1.

allowed

F.R M allowed externally to profpcr; in order that
As_, virtue and piety might undergo a proper

tef; that it might be ihown who were fin-
cere adherents to conscience, and who were
mere followers of fortune. The day which
terminates the duration of the world, ter-
minates all those teeming disorders. The
time of trial is concluded. The final dif-
crimination of characers is made. When
the righteous go to everlasting happiness,
and the wicked are dismissed into the re-
gions of puniihment, the whole mystery of
human affairs is unravelled; and the con-
dut of Providence is jultified to man.

Suited to a condition of trial was the state

and form of the world, which we now in.
habit. It was not designed to be a mansion
for innocent and happy spirits; but a dwell-
ing for creatures of fallen nature, and of
mixed characters. Hence, those mixtures
of pleasure and pain, of disorder and beau-
ty, with which it abounds. Hence, some
regions of the earth, prefentinggay and
pleasing scenes; others, exhibiting nothing
but ruggcdnefs and deformity; the face of

nature,

nature, sometimes brightened by a serene SERM.
atmosphere, and a splendid fun; sometimes XX.
disfigured by jarring elements, and over-
cast with troubled skies. But far unlike
shall be the everlasting habitations of the
just: Though how they are formed, or
what objects they contain, is not given us
now to conceive; nor, in all probability,
would our faculties be equal to the con-
ception. The emblematical descriptions of
them in Scripture, are calculated to excite
high ideas of magnificence and glory. This
one particular we know with certainty, that
therein dwelletb righteousness; that is, com-
plete virtue and eternal order; and where-
ever there are found, the molt perfec
sources are opened of joy and bliss. This
earth was never intended for more than the
outer court, the porch, through which the
righteous were to pass into the temple and
fanduary of the Divinity. When that which
is perfct is come, that which is in partJhall be
done away.

THE inference which follows from what

has

SERM. has been said on this subjet, cannot be so
Xx. L, well exprcffcd as in the words of the Apostle,

in the verse immediately following the text;
feeing that all theft things Jball be dirolved,
what manner of person ought we to be in all
holy conversation and godlinefi? Ought not
the important discoveries which have been
made to us, of the designs of the Almighty,
and of the destiny of man, to exalt our feno
timents, and to purify our life from what
is vitious or vain? While we purlfu the
bufinefa and cares of our present station,
and partake of the innocent pleasures which
the world affords, let us maintain that dig-
nity of charader, which becomes immortal
beings; let us as with that circumfpeclion,
which becomes those who know they are
soon to stand before the judgement-feat of
the Son of God: In a word, let us study to
be what we would wish to be found, if to
us the day of the Lord ihould come.

I KNOW it will occur, that the profped of

that day cannot be expe&ed to have much
influence on the present age. The events

of

of which I have treated, must needs, it will E R M.
be said, belong to fume future race of men. _
Many prophecies yet remain to be fulfilled.
Many preparatory events must take place,
before the world is ripe for final judgement.
-Whether this be the cafe or not, none
of us with certainty know.-But allow me
to remind you, that to each of us, an event
is approaching, and not far distant, which
liall prove of the fame effeA, with the co-
ming of the day of the Lord. The day of
death is, to every individual, the fame as
the day of the dissolution of the world.
The fun may continue to shine; but to
them who are laid in the grave, his light is
finally extiguiflied. The world may re-
main active, busy, and noisy; but to them,
all is silence. The voice which gives the
mandate, Return again to your duJf, is the
fame with the found of the last trumpet.
Death fixes the doom of every one, finally
and irrevocably. This surely is an event
which none of us can remove in our
thoughts to a remote age. To-morrow,
to-day, the fatal mandate may be if-

sued.

E R M. sued. Watch therefore; be fober and vigi-
_ _· lant; ye know not at what hour the Son of

Man cometb.

HAVING now treated both of the crea-

tion and dissolution of the world, I cannot
conclude, without calling your thoughts to
the magnificent view, which these events
give us, of the kingdom and dominion of
the Almighty. With reverence we con-
template his hand in the signal difpenfa-
tions of Providence among men; deciding
the fate of battles; raising up, or overthrow-
ing empires; calling down the proud, and
lifting the low from the dust. But what
are such occurrences to the power and wis-
dom, which He displays in the higher re-
volutions of the universe; by his word,
forming, or dissolving worlds; at his plea-
sure, transplanting his creatures from one
world to another; that he may carry on
new plans of wisdom and goodness, and
fill all space with the wonders of creation !
Successive generations of men have arisen
to possess the earth. By turns they have

pased

passed away, and gone into regions un- SERM.
known. Us he hath raised up, to occupy --j.
their room. We too shall shortly disappear.
But human existence never perifies. Life
only changes its form, and is renewed.
Creation is ever filling, but never full.
When the whole intended course of the ge-
nerations of men shall be finished, then, as
a shepherd leads his flock from one pasture
to another, so the great Creator leads forth
the fouls which he has made, into new and
prepared abodes of life. They go from this
earth to a new earth, and new heavens;
and still they remove, only from one pro-
vince of the divine dominion to another.
Amidst all those changes of nature, the great
Ruler himself remains, without variableneJf
,,rbhadow of turning. To him, these fuccef-
live revolutions of being are but as yesterday
when it is pqft. From his eternal throne, he
beholds worlds rising and passing away;
measures out, to the creatures who inhabit
them, powers and faculties suited to their
state; and distributes among them rewards
and punishments, proportioned to their ac-

VOL. III. F f tions.

t R M. tiors.- What an astonishing view do such
».~iX nheditations afford of the kingdom of God;

infinite in its extent; everlasting in its du-
ration; exhibiting, in every period, the
reign of perfet rightedufnefs and wisdom!
Who by farchbing can find out God who can
Jind out thb Almigbt to pcrfeAion t Great
and marvellous are all tbh worl, Lord God
Almighty! Jufi and true are all thy ways,
thou King of faint !

BRITA I
P 1 N I S.
