.SE zr2;M NTI'lNIL LEAU2Z~TES

A N D)
MIORAL DEL1.NEATIO N-S r-1

P ROd.T HE

II ·IT1N4C3S Or TrUB

-2ELE BB RA.T ~D P L. B-L AsI·Rj.
a:~D QXHERa t r MUIAXMED AUTEIO2.Si

SECLECLED WITH A-.VXEW TO

RE.IN E. H E'. T A E.
RC T IF Y THE JU D CYlN

Yiih G~d Mo,*Is
1i~~d * U~JmII d~y. ~~d·y,

1

0 T D '

0 N

VRTslT1r A 7HA rlogograp1iC cr'or yo~
WALLn,, T TTORaICES HEAD, L1XDCAErES.~tiJ.-

HiDCCLXXXVI.

# PREFATORY DEDICATION TO LORD HAWKE, BARON TOWTON.

PREFATORY DEDICATION.

T o
LORD H AWK E,

BARON 2 OWJl'ON.

My LORD,
N an sera when ambition-diffipati

and hypocritic gentleness of man-

ners are profefIedly the pursuits of the
moit diftiagui[hed chara*ers;-bhen the
external graces are more coveted, and
more assiduously cultivated than the vir-
tuesof tbheart: Il anra, mnyLord,
when many authors, and fobn the mrno
eminent, labour to ptnnnotethe firft-erb
creale the fecond-hieghteu the polifa- of
the third-and profiitute their pens, as if
determined, to extinguili the last, by
every art of false reasoning, by every in-

a ventios

vention of imagination; it may appear
singular, that this little volume, direcly
militating against tlih'c accompliflimcnts
of the great world, and attempting to
fulpply their placcs by qualities built on
the more solid basis of religion and mo-
rality, fliould ask for patronage from one
whom fate has ordained to move in that
elevated fphcre; but, my Lord, even in
courts the most notorious for the pro-
fligacy of manners, virtue has ever found
some votaries.

The corruptions of vicebecome con-

sequential in proportion as they become
falhlionable; and folly assumes the air of
ornamental grace, and diffuses itfelfal-
most universally, only when cheriflsed
and supported by those whom the little
world look up to in the superior walks of
life, and confider as an example of imi-
tation.

Fronm

From henc e efind the advocates for

error perpetually multiplying, and the
clar fountain of true happiness exchanged
for the turbid fiream of unprofitable p{¢a-
sure. For it is certain, real felicity ca:-
not be obtained but by a firm adherence
to virtue, and a determined cjnfnrmity
to its dictates. The glare of vice may,
for a while, dazzle the fight; but it
cheers not the foul, or makes glid the
heart from the purity of its luRre: like
an i.':sfalutuzs it l:ads us into perplex-
itiei-doubts-and misfortunes, and there
leaves us to struggle with the calamities
it has enticed us to pursue.

The intent,therefore, of th following

fieers, is to give a 'relil for the r.ligious
and moral duties; that the veil under
which vice approaches the young and in-
experienced may be,thiowu aside; aui its
alluremreots, too often fatally successful,
be exposed and evidently dicfovered as

a h the

the harpies of miifhicf, and the har-
bingcr3 of deih'ruaon.

The intent is by gentle means to lead

the negligent and incautious into the
path of rectitlude,-implant in their bo-
lorns a love of truth, and from the rich-
nets of tilt iuanlue and fertility of the
loil aike the young pl.;nt sloot up
wirh -igour-, and bring forth the plea-
sint fruit of goodness in abundance and
pel'st-tiu;n .

The intent is, I will not fay to make

ever3y man the buildcr of his own for-
tune, but I will fay more, the eflablifher
of bis own peace; a blekling infinitely
more valeable than fame-riches-or
power. For if he inculcates the maxims
herein contained, he will pass through
the bustle of the busy world, though
surrounded with the snares of villany,
and marchinatious of treachery, in safety
and without reproach; and when he

retires

rctires into the fcqueftered and solitary
fccne, he will provide for hinmlilf a rich
rcpail, nhce reflection will feed on the
colnfulatory comfort of flf approbation,
and his hours pass away in the sweetness
of content. He will view the misfortunes
of mankind with an eye of pity, and as-
soir them relief: He will behold the
plealilres of his neighbours with a smile
of fvmpathy, and enjoy them as his own:
he will pay every tribute due to his
Creator, with gratitude and joy, and
will hold converge with the God of his
vworfihip from the incorruptibility of his
heart, and the purity of his acions.

From your Lordship's well known love

of the social virtues,-from that. phi-
lanthropy with which your bosom is re-
plete,-from the rising progeny of little
innocents with which Heaven has blefled
you, it cannot be doubted but every
effort intended to produce there effeEs will
meet with your countenance and:prpo-

3a 3 tection

teRion. On these considerations, ihefe-
fore, I h:lve ventured to dedicate this
fclcation to your Lordship, flattering my-
self the libertyv ill not be ofcnfive, as
the mutive criginated fren' an honei: and
laudable zeal, and the desire of shewing
the gratitude and deference wit whiihs
I an:,

'My Lord,
Your Lo;dfliip's moftdevoted.

mol obedient,
and very humble Servant.

TEIE EDITOR.
C ONTENTS.

# CONTENTS.

C 0 N T E N T S.

a.

ACUTENES~in Replicatic, P-ge
Ai Affability,
Anx;c'y, the Vice of Age, 3
Aopi'~aui, ltid;scrirnitiate
Ariangement of44ea3, its Utkiity, 6
A%:arice, S
Axe,

B.

Behaviour, It
Business, Man of h)

C-.

Company, 3VI,.ed 4
Comp.iffion, x&
Confidants, 5*
Clinfeicac, '9
Conflaincy and FirmneTs,
Content, Ilk
Conversation,
Courtesy, Artificial
Coquetry, -
Courthlip,

Danger

D.

Danger and Security of Aaa in Youth, 3 z
Deceit,

33

D v-\(i:;n, -
D)r VIl ;In.i;c d Ioalityreparate!yinrufficient 37

L)V, .tiet, Scn:.mtnltal 3S

Ditc, tic!lr, 41

D:lTii-aron, 43
Dutie ofOd Age, 44

E.

Educ;iion, FcimaIe 46
Effts fs Religio.n, 4
EIntluifiifi and Supc it;nn, 56
Envy and Anger cont!aFlted 56
Events unicrrain, 58

F.

Faith, Piety, and aftive Virtue, 60
Falfi Scntimcnr, 60
Felicity equally dilfributed, 64
Felicity, Temporal 65
Felicity, Spiritual 66
Foresight, want of, rcipeAling our spiritual

St.te, 67
Friendihip, 69

G.

Gallantry, ?7
God with re£pel to Man, 73

Good~

G.;od P. d Evil, Ignorance of, iis Utility, 74
Good Man, 75
Gra-ifictions, loose, their Eff&.i , 7
Gratitude, 77
Grcacnefs and Honours, worldly 78

H.

Happiness how judged of, 79
ilappinefs not independent, So
H1Ia'th, E«
History, Sa
Honour, True 8
1I.lpe, 83
Humanity, 4
Humility in Company, 8
Humour,

InduRfry, ^
Intent of Religion, 9.
Jullice, Love of 9a

K.
aKowlidge, Self 93

L.,

Levity in Youth and chcerfulnlfs of Age

contrasted, 9

LiE:, Public, its inconvcniences, 98
Love, 9%
Lover, Artful and Sentimental zoo
'Lovc, Honourablc, its effcts, AQo

\.

Mllc Coquetry, 103
Lia.I of the World, lo5
Alar's real Dependence, a06
Min, Drvout 108
AMoI and Voman, a comparative view of,

howr diffeiing in poinr of Undertand.
ing, To

Alar liage, z
Maxims, moral 199
Meekness, true, l 8
Mldd! age, 1:o
Moraliy and Piety, their Union, i

N.
Neglei of Rtligion, 12

0.

Old Maid, 123
Old Age, 125
Palfionae Woman, 127
Piery, the Appearance of 128
Plearure, true Me., of 129
Pleasure, Man of 131
Plcafure, Sensual and Spiritual 33z
Pleasure of old Age, 133
PrefliJmpion, 134
Pride, Disappointed 136
Principle and Sentiment contrafed, 137
Prufptrity, x39

Prudence,

i', dcnce, its N..Tceffiry in (very Stage of
Life 140

R.

Redemption, 141
Rc forniatikmn, 14.z
R:elgiun, 143
Rdligious Reefteion, 145
Resignation, 146
Ridicule, 247

S.

SelF-communion, -141
Sentiments detached 196
Slence, 150
Sincerity, 15
Sloth, 15s
Sobriety of Mind, its Necessity, 154
Solitude, 157
Study of Mind, 1'6o
Study and Reading, . 16z

T.

Tameness pafive of Spirit and unlimited

Compliance, 168

Temperance, 6. 6
True genuine Sentiment, 166
Temper, Government of 169
Temper, Good, its Effets and Utility,,. 8 1

U.
Vice, its Effets 184

Villiany

Villain, IS
Vi rue and Profpcrty contrafltc, i '7
Virtue, true i ^
Voluptuary, 9o

VW.

Wit, I9 t
Woman, 193
World, '95
Wdrfllip, Religious 19

y.
Youth, 19

t~~i IE~U

# ACUTENESS IN REPLICATION.

SENTI29ENTAL BEAUTIES

A N D
rMORAL DELINEATIONS.

ACUTENESS IIT REPLICATION.
T H S has ever been. allowed a happiness

peculiar to the femate sex,. particularly'

on fubjets wherein they are in some degree.
conversant; for their.imaginations generaLy.
keep pace with. the.narration, that theyantlci-
rate its cnd, and are.ready to deliver their fen-
timents on it as foon.asitis finflled, while
some of the male hberers whose minds were.
buried in fettling the propriety, comparing the.
circumstances, and examining the confitencies
of what was said, are obliged to pause and
difcriminat before they think of answering.

B Indeed

Indeed a man of rolecion, if he does not

keep an intimate commerce with the world
will be' ometimes so entangled in'the intri-
cacies of intense thought, that he will have
the appearance of a ccnfufed and perplexed
expression, while a sprightly woman will ex-
tricate herself with that lively and raat dex-
teity which will almost always please, though
'it is very far from being always right.

It is easier to confound than convince-an

opponent; the former may be effe&ed by a
turn that has more happiness than truth in it,
'hut a young lady's vanity lhould not be too
nmuch elated with this false applause, which
is given, not to her merit, but her sex : he
has not perhaps gained a victory, though she
may be al'owed a triumph; and it flioutd
humble her to reflec, that the tribute is paid
not to her firength, but her weakness, It is
worth while to discriminate between the ap-
plause, which is given from the.complaifance
·of others, and that which is.paid to ior otn
.anrit.

AFPX-
.:~~~~~~~~~~~~~

# AFFABILITY.

# ANXIETY, THE VICE OF AGE.

A F F A BI LI T Y.
T N order to render ourfelvcs amiable in so-

ciety, we flould corre& every appearance

of barfhnefs in our behaviour. That courtesy
ihould diflinguifh our demeanour, which
springs not so much from fludied politeness,
as from amildand gentle heart. We Ahould
follow the customs of the world in matters
indifferent; but flop when they become fin-
ful. Our manners ought to be fimpleand
naturral, and of courfc theywill be engaging.
Affec&ation is certain deformity-By fotmihlg
themselves on fantastic models, and vying
with one another in every reigning foify,
the young begin with being ridiculous and
end in being vicious and immoral.

ANXIETY, THE VIC'E OF AXE.
IGNORANCE of what is good qt

evil 4hould corrcet Aintiety abhett

worldly success. As ralfnels is the vice of
youth, the opposite extremes of immo.
derate care. is the vice of advancing years,

but
B a

but since attention is so often frustrated, it
fliou!l never he allo\sed to deprive us of
tranquillity; tha: degree of uncertainty there-
fore ought to render us temperate in pursuit,
calih the perturbation of hope and fear, and
cure the pain of anxiety.

Anxiety is the poilun of human life. It is.

.il.e parent of many fins, and of moremiferies.
Ia a world where everything is so doubtful
-whhere we may succeed in our wilh, and be
iniflcrlble,-where we may be disappointed,
.ind be blessed in the disappointment ; what
means a rellefs ftirand commotion of the miad?
.olicitude cannot alter the course, or unravel
the intricacy of human events: Curiosity can-
nori pierce thro' the.cloud which the Supreme
.,cing hathl made impenetrable to the human
ree- Wifdtin commands man to retire-after
hec has done all that was incumbent on him, and
topoffels his mind in peace. By going beyond
this point, by giving himself uip to immoderate
concern about unknwvn events, he'can do o-
thing to advance his fuccefsa and.does much. to
ruin his Peace ;---he plants within.his brea
.the thorn which is long to gall.him-Totlh

vanity

# INDISCRIMINATE APPLAUSE.

vanity of life he adds vexation of spirit, which
is wholly of his own creation, not of divine
appointment.

For the dubious goods.of this world were

never defgned by God to raise such eager at-
tahmnent. They were given to man for his
nccafional refrefhlnent not for his chief
felicity: by setting an eiccfive value
upon objeas which were intended only for his
secondary regard, he changes their nature.
S:-eking more fatisfaaion from them then
they are able to afford, he receives less than
thcy might give; from a miltakeln care to fe-
cure his happiness, he brings upon himself
cc rtain misery.

INDISCRIMINATE APPLAUSE.
IT is the fault of many that they do not al-

ways carefully dittinguifh between run-

ning into the error of detra&ion, and its op-
pofite extreme of undeserved praife-This pro-
ceeds from the false idea they entertain, that
the dire&t contrary to what is wrong, must be
right. Thus.the dread of only being suspect-
cd of one fault, makes them aEtually guilty
of another.

B 3 The

# METHOD IN THE ARRANGEMENT OF IDEAS.

The defre of avoiding the imputation of

envy, impels them tobe insincere; and to
eftiblifh a reputation for sweetness of temper
ahd generosity, they affe'tto speak fometimnes
of -cry indifferent characers with the most ex-.
travagant applause. But this habit of exag-
geration greatly weakens their credit, and de-
stroys the weight of their opinion on other oc-
cafions; for people very soon discover what
degree of faith is to be given both to their
judgment and their veracity.
M1 TI IO IN T HE ARRANGE-

MENT OP IDEAS.
I N delivering our sentiments on particular

'ubjct&s, there is nothing which is attend -

ed with better effcrt, and makes us appear. to
more advantage than oftering our opinions
with clearness and precision; and this. only
can be done by arranging them in proper pr-
der, fb that they may appear regu!arly to arifit
one from the other: this is filed method,
and prevents confusion; hinders us from in-
dulging in the luxuliancc of fancy, running

into

into desultory digreflions, and makes us ap-
pear fiperior to our subjei.

Where great sprightliness is the natural

bent.of the temper, girls Ihoutd endeavour to
hibituate themielves to a cufom of observing,
thinking, and reasoning. rt is nor neccffiry
that they ihould devote themselves to abftruef
speculation, or the study of logic; but fire
who is accustomed to give a due arrangement
to herthoughts; to reason justly and pertinent-
ly on common affairs, and judiciously to de-
duce effecs from their causes, will be a bet-
ter logician than some of those who claim the
narie, because they have studied the art. That
species of knowledke, which appears to e trie
result of refletion rather than of science, fits
peculiarly well on women.

It is not uncommon to find a ady, :'ji.

though she does not know a rule of fyntai,
fcarccly eier violates one; and who conftrucs
every flntence he utters with more proprecty
than many. a learned dunce, who has c'v'ry
rule of'Ariftotle by heart, and who can lace
his own threadn-bare discourse withthe go'len
areds of Crero and Virgil. .

B 4 AVARICe,

# AVARICE.

A V A I C E.

1 '; E of the vices of old age, which ap-
pears the most unaccountable, is that

coverous attachment to worldly interest with
which it is often charged. But this too can
naturally be deduced from the sense of its
feebleness and decay.

In proportion as the vigour both of body and

rind dtc:incs, timidity may be expected to
encreafe. With anxious and fearful eye, the
aged look forward to the evils which threaten
themi and to the changes which may befal.
Hence, are they apt to overvalue riches, as
the inftrumcnts of their defence againRf these
dangers, and as the most certain means of
iccuring them againlt solitude and difrefpet.

But though this cautious frugality may be

justified.; fordid avarice can by no means be
excused.. They fliould be charitable and do
good. They ihould mix beneficence
to their friends, with a cheerful enjoyment
of the comforts which befit their slate. They

will

w;ill then receive the returns of real refpe"t and
love. Otherways, by their riches, they pro-
cure no niore than pretended demonstrations
of egard; while their ill-judged parlimony
occaions many secret wiflies for their death.

Chilled by the hand of time the heart loses

that tender sensibility, with which it once en-
tered into the concerns and sorrows of others.
1Iowever, as in every period of life, humanity
and friendlhip contribute to happiness, it is
both our duty and interest to cherish the re-
mains of the kind affections, not susser them
to be blunted or destroyed by fordid avarice.
WVe should not, from having suffered much
in the course of our long pilgrimage, become
callous to the sufferings of others. But, re-
membering we fill are men, study to keep
our heart open to the sense of human woe.

Prafiifed in die ways of men, we are ape

to be suspicious of design and fraud; for tle
knowledge and difruft of mankind too often
go together. We ihould not however sus-
ser that wary caution, which is the fruit of ex-
pericnce, to dwindle into craft; for amidls the

B 5 false.

# AWE.

falsehoods of men, integrity is the best de-
fence, he who continueth to the end to walk
uprightly, fliall continue to walk surely..

A W E..
A W E is the firR sentiment which arircs

in the foul at the view of greatness. But

in the heartof adevout man, it is a solemn
and elevating, not a dejeaed'emotion; forhe
glows, rather than trembles, in the divine
presence. It is not the superstitious dread of
unknown power, but-the homage yielded by
the heart to him, who-is at once the greatest
and best of beings.

Omnipotence, viewedt alone, would be a.

formidable object. But, confidered in con-
junction with the moral perfecions of the dI-
vine nature, it serves to heighten devotion.

BEHA-

# BEHAVIOUR.

..'' . ..-r' .'i ,^*.,

B E H AV I O0U R.

NE of the chief beauties in a fmaile
characer is that modest. reserve,

that retiring delicacy which avoids the
public eye,. and is disconcerted even at.the
gaze of admiration. For wvhen a girl
ceases to blush, the has loft the most powerful
charm of beauty. That extreme renfibiliry,
which it indicates, is peculiarly engaging.

Silence in company, particularly a large

one, is never mistaken by the judicious and
difcerningfor dulness, but bespeaks a mod-
efty essential in the.female sex. Dignity of
behaviour is necessary at pub!ic places, but
care must be taken not to mifiake that for
that confident cafe, that unabathcd counte-
nance which.feems to.fet thecomparu.at defi-
an- _ ..

Women fliould be .'autious even in difpayiang
their good sense. It is often thought assuming
a superiority over the reft of the company; but
,hcir learning ihould be kepta profound fecrer,

B 6 cfpecially

erpecially from men, who generally look with
a jealous and malign eye on a woman of great
parts, and a cultivated understanding.

The great art of pleasing in conversation,

conrifts in making the company pleated with
themselves. De'ration fllould be avoided,
tfpecially amongiv women, where their own
icx is concerned; it would be more noble for
them to flhew a compallionete sympathy to the
unfortunate, efpccially to those who are ren-
dered so by the villainy of men. It is a lau-
dable pride, as well as secret pleasure, which
ought tobe indulged, in being the friend and
refuge of the unhappy, but without the va-
nity of shewing it.

Every species of indelicacy in conversation,

flould be confidered as shameful, and highly
difguting. A sacred regard should be ever
had to truth, for lying is a mean and defpi-
cable vice; though a lively embellishment of
a humorous story, which is only intended
to promote innocent mirth, cannot be under-
ilood to fall under that head.

Gentleness of spirit and manners is extremely
engaging; but not that indiscriminate attention,

that

that unmeaning ilmper, which smiles on all
alike. For this arises either from affeaation
of softness, or from perfect insipidity.

A fine woman, like other fine things in na-

t ire, has her proper point of view, from which
ihe may be teen to most advantage. To fix
this point requires great judgment, and an in-
timate knowledge of the human heart. By the
present mode of female manners, the ladies
fcem to expe& that they shall regain their a(-
cendency over men, by the fullet display of
their personal charms, by being always in
their eye at public places, by conversing with
them with the fame unreserved freedom as
they do with one anothere in short, by refem-
bling men as near as they can. The folly of
this expecation and condu& will soon be
(hown. For the power of a fine woman over
the hearts of men, of men of the finel parts,
is even beyond what the conceives. They are
sensible of the pleasing illusion, but they can-
not, nor do they wvifh, to dissolve it. · But if
lhe is determined to dispel the charm, it is
certainly in her power, fie may soon reduce
the angel to a wry ordinary girl.

There

# MAN OF BUSINESS.

There is a native dignity in, ingenuous mb;.

defly to be expc&ted in the gentler rex, which
is their natural protcrtion fornm the familiarity
of men. The sentiment that a woman' may
allow all innocent ficedoms, provided her vir-
tue is f'ecurc, is both grossly indelicate and
dangerous, and has proved fatal to many
who have confded too much in this fallacious
duetrine.

In fine, to form a complete lady, we should

polcrfs the most perfect simplicity of heart and
manners; dignity without pride, affability
vithout meancLfs, and simple elegance with-
out affe&ation..

M.ANX OF B:USLNESS.
A N uninterrupted intercourse with the

world, opprefes the man of bufinefr

and ambition. The nrongeft spirit muff a
length fail and fink under it. The happiest
temper muff be foured by inceflant returns of
the opposition, the inconstancy, and the trea--
chery of men. For he who lives always in
.the bufile of the world, lives in a perpetual
warfare; here, an enemy encounters; there,

a rival

# MIXED COMPANY.

s rival supplants him. The ingratitude of a
friend flings him at this hour, and the pride
of a fupcrior wounds him the next. In vain
he flies for relief to u'ifingamufemtents. These
may afford a temporary opiate to cure, but
they communicate no flrength to the mind.-
On the contrary, they leave it more soft and
derencclefs, when moellfations and injuries
renew the attack...

MIX.ED COMPANY.
THE mind of each sex has some natural

kind'of bias, which conflitutes a diftinc-

tion of character, and the happiness of both
depends, in a great mearure, on the prefer-
vation and obfervancc of this diftinEton. For
where would be the superior pleasure and' fa-
tisfation resulting from mixed conversation,
if this difference was abolished r

If the qualities of both were invariably and

exaaly the fame, no benefit or entertainment
would arise from the tedious and insipid un?-
formity of such an intercourse; whereas con-
fiderable are the advantages reaped fronra
felet society o£ bothfsxes,

Tif

# COMPASSION.

'The rough angles and afperities of male

nmanners, are imperceptibly filed and grndually
worn finocth by the polifling of female conver..
fation, and the refining of female afte : while
the ideas of women acquire strength and so-
lidity by their affciating with sensible, intel-
iigenr, and judicious men.

C 0 NI P A 5 S I 0 N.
COMPASSION is an emotion of which we

ought never to be afhimed. Graceful,

.particul:rly in youth, is the tear of fympa-
thy, and the hlea:t that melts at the tale of
woe. We should not permit eafe'and indul-
gence to contraa our affeaions, and wrap us
.up in a felfinl enjoyment. But we fliould ac-
custom ourftlves to think of the distresses of
human life, of the solitary cottage, the dying
parent, and the weeping orphan. Nor ought
.we ever to sport with pain and distress in any
of our amusements, nor treat even the mean-
eft infer with wanton cruelty. -

It hasbeen objeted, and it is to be feared

.with some reason, that female conversation
is too frequently tinaturcd with a censorious

spirit,

# CONFIDANTS.

fpirir, and that ladies are seldom apt to disco-
ver much tenderness for the errors of a fallen
lifter. No arguments can justify, no pleas
extenuate it.

To insult over the miseries of an unhappy

creature is inhuman, not to compaslionate
them is unchristian. The worthy part of the
Sex always express themselves humanely on
the failings of others, in proportion to their
own undeviating goodners, and by that gen-
tle virtue are prompted to alleviate the dif-
tresses of the unfortunate and wretched: it
prevents us from retaliating injuries, and re-
firainsourfevere judgments and angry paflions.

C 0 N'S I D A N T S.
A ONGST women these appear'.to be

necessary associates, without whom fe:v

pars through life. If, therefore, they must
have a friend of this fort to pour out their
heart to, they flould be lure of their hononr
and Secrecy. She ihould not be a married
woman, especially if She lives happily with her
husband.

There are certain unguarded moments, in
which such a woman, though the best and

worthiest

worthic of her Itx may let hints efcape,which,
at other times, or to any other person than
her husband, ihe would be incapable of:
nor will a hufbard, in this cafe, feel himself
unde' the fame obligation of secrecy ahd ho-
nour, as if confidence had originally been put
in himfolf, elpecially on subje&s which rhie
'world is apt to'treat lightly..

Making confidants of servants fliould be

carefully avoided. Dignity, not .properly
underofiod, very readily degenerates into pride,
which enteis into no friendlhips, because it
cannot bear an equal, and is so fond of flat-
tery, as to grasp at it even from. fevants and.
dependents. '

The monr intimate confidants¢ therefore,'ef

proud pcrple, are valets-de-chambres, 'and
iwaiting-women. The utmolf humanity fvould'
be fteewn to fc;vants ; their situation made ro
.them as comfortable.as possible;: but if made
confidants,. we fpbil them, and: debas-e out-
felies, .

C q.

*
* -r

# CONSCIENCE.

CONS C I E N C E.

URING the gay and aaive periods of
life, linners elude, in some measure, its

force. Carried round in the whirl of affairs
and pleasures, illtent on contrivance, eager
in pursuit, amused by hope, or eated by.cn-
joyment, they are iheltered by that croud of.
trifles which surrounds them, from serious
thought. But Conscience istoo greatapowver
to remain always suppresscd..

In the dark and solitary hour of diffrefi,

the recolleation of the pad becomes dreadful.
It exhibits a life thrown aviay in vanities and
sullies, or consumed in flagitioufncfs and fim:
Crimes rife in their native deformity.-Hov.
iniferable the state of that man condemrm-
ed to endure.at once the pangs of guilt, and
the vexations of calamity !

But a clear conrcience enjoys, in the worst

conjunaion of human life, a peace, a dig-
nity, an elevation of mind peculiar to virtue,
not a presumptuous boast of innocence.-
The better a man is, he will be more humbl'

and

# CONSTANCY AND FIRMNESS OF ACTION.

and fenfiblc in his failings. Of his piety and
virtue, he reaps the frui:s in the season ofad-
vcrfity: the improvement he mates, th:e
temperate fpiri with which he enjoys those
advantages, the beneficent a&ions x.h ch he
performed, and the good example which he
iet to others, remain behind him.

By the memory of these, he enjoys his

prosperity a fecorid time in refle&ion. His
mind hIas no load,-futurity nb terrors. For
refleifion cheers the loriely house of poverty,
'and attends the conscientious fuffcrer into
prison and exile.
CONSTANCY AND FIRMNESS

OF ACTION.

I-IE great motives which produce there,
must be of a palpable and friking kind.

A Divine Lcgiflator uttering his voice from
Heaven, an Omnnifcient Witness beholding us
in all our retreats, an Almighty Governor
ftretchi.ig forth his arm to punish or reward,
disclosing the fecreEs of the invisible world,
infotmi g us of perpetual reft, prepared here-

after

# CONTENT.

..tc rior the righteous, and of indignation
id .vrath await inlg the wicked.

Thlc cuonfiderations ovetawe the world,.

f;pport integrity, and check guilt; they
aidd to virtue that lblemnity which filould
ever charaCtcrife it: to the admonitions of
conscience, thcy give the authority of law.

C N. T E N T.

V R I N G the whole progrcfs of the hu-
man course and ecents, the principal

materials of our comforts or uneafincis, lic
within ourfel"es. Every agewlll prove bur-
d&nli'me to those who have no fund ofhappinerf
in their own breafis. Could they be preferverl
from all infirmities of frame; could they have
bestowed. upon them, if it were pofible, per-
petual youth, still they, would be reftlefi andi
miserable, through the influence of.ill-governm
ed paffions.-Ic is not furprizing that. fucht
people are peevifih and.qutulous vewher old.
Unjustly. they imputse to their tirme.of. lifea
that milery.w.irt whichthlcir vices.an .d folUie
tmbittarcv¢y age . . ·. . ..

Whereas

# CONVERSATION.

VWheras, to good men, no period of life is

ionupportalhle, because they draw their chief
happiness from tources which arc independent
of age or time: Wisdom, Piety, and Virtue,
grow not old with our bodies; they susser no
decay from length of days; to them belongs
only unalterable and unfading youth.

CO N V E R SATION.
IT converting with a fellow-creature on

earth, it is not with his body we converse,

though it is his body only which we fee. From
his words and aEtions we conceive his mind;
with his mind, though invisible,. we hold
correfFondence, and diret towards this fpiri4
tral essence our affeclion and regard.; '

It has been laid down as'a rule, that in conq

vcrfation, women .ihould carefully conceal
any knowledge or learning they happen. to
possess; but there seems neither to.be necef-
sty or propriety in this.advice. Let difcretiqw
and modesty, without which all knowledge.is
little vwrth, govern a lady's underfanding,
lhe will .rsn r make an oft.niatious parade of
.,. '
" it,

'r, bccauf tlie will ra:hcr be intent on ncqui-
xing more, than on displaying whar flie has.

For why Ihould she exhibit her ikill in mu-

filck, dancing, singing, taste in dress, those
ornamental graces, and her acquaintance with
the most fashionable arts and amusements,
while her piety is to be anxiously concealed,
and her knowledge affetledly disavowed, les
the former fiould draw on her the appellation
of an enthusiast, or the latter that of a pedant.

'It would, without doubt, be to-the last de-
gree presumptuous and absurd, for a young
woman to pretend to give the ton to the com-
pany, to interrupt the pleasures of others, and
her own opportunity of improvement, by
taliing, when she ought to liften; or to in-
troduce fubjc&s out of the common road, in
order to lhew her own wit, or expose the want
of It in others; but were the sex tn be totally
silent when any topick of literature happens
to be discussed in their presence, conversation
would lose much of its vivacity, andfociaty
would be robbed of one of its most iiterefting
·harm,

a PT!-

# ARTIFICIAL COURTESY.

ARTIFICIAL COURTESY.
T HIS is that fludied finoothnefs of manners,

which is [earned in the school of the

world. Such accomplishments the most fri-
volous may possess. Too often they are em-
ployed by the artful, as a snare; too often
aftfetcd by the hard and unfeeling, as a cover
to the baseness of their minds.

Tihe imiaition of virtue has been reduced

into art; and, in the commerce of life, the
flft study of all who would either gain the
cfdeem, or win the hearts of others, is to learn
the speech, and to adopt the manners of can-
dour, gentleness, and humanity; but nothing
except what flows from tile heart, can render
even external manners truly and permanently
pleasing; for no assumed behaviour can at all
limes hide the real character.

A low voice, and a sift address, are the

common indications of a well-bred woman,
and Should fcem to be the natural effe& of a

meek
a

nieel and quiec spirit, but they are only the
lntward and visible signs of it; for they are
no m;ore m-ekne(s ittelf, than a red coat is
courage, or a black one devotion. To regu-
iaXc the features, while the foul is in tumult,
or to command the voice, while the paflions
are without restraint, is as idle as throwing
odours into a steam, when the source is pol-

luted.

It is not difficult to dilinguifl the true from

the artificial meekners. The former Is uni-
versal and habitual the latter, local and tem-
porary : and this we may be assured of, that
if we are not as gentle to our servants as to
our visitors, the spirit of gentlenes is Aot

i: us.

We must not be lhocked and disappointed,

when we behold a well-bred young lady, soft
and engaging as the doves of Venus, display-
;ng a thousand graces and attrations to win
the hearts of a laege company, and the in-
fiant they are gone, to fee her look mad as the
Pythian maid, and all the frightened graces
driven from her furious countenance, only-
because her gown was brought home a quar-
ter of an hour later than she expeEted, or her

C rlbband

riliband lent hI'if a fh.de lighter or darker
than si:c ordered;

Amongst wvomrn of breeding, the cxterlior

of gtnt'enefs is ls unifoimly aflumed, and the
whole manner is so perfcQly level and ur:i,
that it i; next to impossible for a slanger to
know any thing of their true dispositions by
con :erfilig wiih them ; and even the very sea-
tures are so exa:Ily regulated, that phyfiog-
nomy, which may sometimes be trusted among
the vulgar, is with the polite, a most lying
liicncc. That gcntlent's is ever liable to be
fufpCtccd for the counterfeited, which is so
excessive as to deprive people of the proper
use of speech and motion; or which, as Ham-
let fays, " makes them lilp and amble, and
nick-nime God's cicatures.."

Among the various artifices of fiaitious

mcekntfs, one of the most frequent and moll
plausible, is that of asseting to be always
equally delighted with all persons and cha-
raters. The focicty of these languid beings
is without confidence, their friendship withput
attachment, and their love without affection,
or even preference. This insipid mode of
condut may be safe, but is endowed with
neither. taste, fnfe, or principle. C

C O.~

# COQUETRY.

C 0 QU E T R Y.
r HERE is no characer more truly dif-

gufling than that of a Coquette; it ori-

ginates in folly, is supported by vanity, and
terminates in contempt: It is the certain mark
of a narrow mind, the illiberal slave of ful-
some adulation, and has all its enjoyments
encreafed by feif-adoration.

Yet there is a cafe where a woman may

coquette justifiably to the utmost verge which
her conscience will allow. It is where a gen-
tleman purpofcs, and declines to make his
addrefles, till such time as he thinks himself
perfectly sure of her consent. This, at bot.
tom, is intended to force a woman to give up
the undoubted privilege of her fex,-the pri-
vilege of refuting; it is intended to force her
to explain herself, in effe&, before the gen-
tleman deigns to do it, and, by this means,
to oblige her to violate the modesty and deli-
cacy of her fexg and to invert the clearest
order of, nature.

All this sacrifice is proposed to be made
merely to gratify a most despicable vanity in a

C X man,

ma-il, who would degrade the very woman
xv.'hnn he wiflies to make his wife.

But it l!iould be diiiiiguilhed, whether

from this motive he delays to fpcak explicitly,
or from a diffidence infeparabie from true
attachment. In the one cafe, he can Scarce
be uscd too ill ; in the other, he ought to be
trcated with the greatcfl kindners.

Women endcavour to justify themselves to

the world, and to their own consciences, by
a variety of excufcs, when they a& other-
wvife. SometimWs they plead ignorance, or,
-at least, uncertai'ry of the gentleman's real
sentiments. Sometimes they plead rhe deco-
-rum of their sex, which enjoins an equal be-
haviour to all men, and forbids them to con-
fider any man as a lover, till he has direftly
told them so. But they are not entitled to
plead the obligation of their virtues in oppo-
fition to the fupcrior ones of gratitude, justice,
and humanity.

The man is entitled to all these, who pre-

sers one woman to the reft of her sex, and,
perhaps, whose greatest weakness is.this very
preference. Tle truth of the matter is, va-
nity, and the love of admiration, is so pre-

vailing

vailing a paffiDn among the sex, that they can
be fond of tie love, when they are indifferent
:o, or, even when they dcfpife the lover.

But the deepest, and the most artful co-

quetry, is employed by women of superior
taste and sense, to engage and fix the heartof
a man whom the world, and whom they
themfulves esteem, although they are deter-
mined never to marry him. His conversation.
amuses them, and his attachment is the high-
eRi gratification to their vanity; nay, they
can Sometimes be gratified with the utter ruin
of his fortune, fame, and happiness.

How odious must characers of this kind

appear, especially when contrasted with those
who have principles, have generosity and dig-
nity of foul, that elevates them above the
worthless vanity recited I

Such a woman may always convert a lover,

if she cannot give him her affections, into a
warm and feady friend, provided he is a maf
of fen'e, resolution, and candour. If ihe
explains herself to him with a generous open-
ncfs and freedom, he must feel the stroke as a
man, hut he will likewise bear it as a man:
what he suffers, he will susser in silence.

C 3 Every

# COURTSHIP.

Eirery funtiment cf elieem i:.ill remain;

but love, though it requires very little food,
and is cafily surfeited with too much, yet re-
quires i.rne. He will view her in the light
of a married woman; and ihough passion
subsides, yet a man of a candid and generous
heart, always retains a tenderness fora woman
he has once loved, and who has used him well,
beyond what he feels for any other of her
fcx.

C 0 U R T S I- I P.

F the attachment of a lover is agreeable to
the object of his wilhes, a woman ihould

permit nature, good sense, and delicacy to
diret her. If she loves him, lhe thould not
discover to him the full extent of her love;
no, not although she marries him. That sus-
ficien:ly liews her preference, which is all he
is entitled to know. If he has delicacy, he
will afl for no stronger proofof her affeaion,
for her fake; if he has fcnfe, he will not ark
it fir his own,

Violent

Violent love cannot subsist, at lealf cannot

be expressed, for any time together on both
lides; otherw ifc the certain confeqtence,how-
ever concealed, is satiety and dirguft: nature,
in this cafe, has laid the reserve on woman.

If she fees evident proofs of a gentleman's

attachment, and is determined to slut her
heart against him, she should treat him ho-
nourably and humanely. She should not let
him linger in a miserable furpenfe, but be
anxious to let him know her sentiments with
regard to him; and this may be done by a
variety of ways :-From a certain species of
easy familiarity in behaviour, he may be satis-
fled, if he has any difcrcmment, he has no-
thing to hope for;-from solicitously avoid-
ing his company,-from the interposition of
a common friend, to explain matters to him.
But, if thece methods are ineligible, oppor-
tunities of letting him explain himself, ihould
not be denied; it is acting barbarously and
uniufly. If he forces an explanation, the
answer ihould be polite, resolute, and de-
cifive.

C 4 MAN'S

# MAN'S DANGER AND SECURITY IN YOUTH.

MAN'S DANGER AND SECURITY IN1

YOUTH.
IN that period of life too often chara&er-

ifrd by forward pefuumption and headlong

pursuit, fclf-cnnceit is the great source of those
dangers to which men are exposcd; and it is
peculiarly unfortunate, that the age which
tlands moni in need of the counsel of the wife,
fhou!l be the mol prone to contemn it. Con-
sident in thle opinions which they adopt, and
in the measures which they pursue, the bliss
which youth aim at, is, in their opinion, fully
apparent. It is not the danger of miflake,
but the failure of success, which they dread.
Ativity to fcize, not sagacity to discern, is
the only requisite which they value.

Tihe whole ftRte of nature is now become a

scene of delusion to the funfual mind : hardly
any thing is what it appears to be; and what
fl.tters mofl is always farthest from reality.-
There are voices nhich sing around us, but
vr:Iole strains allure to ruin. There is a ban-
quet spread, where poison is in every difih.-
Th-Lc ii a ccuch which invitcs ;o repose, but

\a

# DECEIT.

to slumber upon it is death. Sobriety should
temper unwary ardour; modesty check ralh
pl-eiump:ion; wisdom be the offspring of re-
ficlion now, rather than the bitter fruit of
experience hereafter.

D E C E I T.

H HAT darkness of charater, where wq

- can fee no heart,-thofe foldings of art'
through which no native affetion is allowed
to penetrate, present an objeEt unamiable in
every season of life, but particularly odious
in youth. If at an age when the heart is
warm, when the emotions are ftrongi and
when nature is expected to ihew itself free and
open, we can already smile and deceive, what
is to be expeted when we shall be longer
hackneyed in the ways of men, when interef
shall have completed the obduracy of our
hearts, and experience lhall have improved.
us in all the arts of guile ?

Difilmulation in youth, is the forerunnr.

of perfidy in old age: its first appearance is
the fatal omen of growing depravity, and'

C 5 future

future ftamc. It degrades parts and learn-
ing, obflcUils the lufir of every accompli'f-
ilent, and finks us into contempt with God
and man. The path of falfhood is a perplex-
ing maze. After the tirft departure from fin-
ccrl;y, it is not in our power to stop; one ar-
tifice unavoidably leads on to another; till,
as the intricacy of the labyrinth encreafes, we
are itfc entangled in our own snare.

Deceit dilcovers a little mind, which stops
it tempora y exped;ents, without rising to
comprehensive views of eondu&t. It betrays
a dastardly spirit: it is the resource of one
who wanlts courage to avow his designs, orto
reft upln himself. To set out in the world
xii'h no other principle than a crafty attention
t. interest, betokens one who is deflined for
creeping through the inferior walks of life.
I-e may be fortunate,--ie cannot be happy:
the eye of a good rman will weep at his error;
he cannot tafle the fwects of confidential
friendship, and his evening of life will be er-
bittered by universal contempt.

DE V O-

# DEVOTION

DEVOTION

S the livel y exercise of those afftaions which
we owe to the Supreme Being. It com-

prehends several emotions of the heart which
terminate in the fame objeaC. The chief of
them are veneration, gratitude, desire, and
resignation.

It implies first, profound veneration for

Got; that is, an affecion compounded of
awe and love :-Secondly, sincere gratitude
fosr all his benefits; this is a warmer emotion
than veneration; veneration looks up to the
Deity as he is himself, gratitude regards what
he is towards us :-Thirdly, the desire of the
foul after the favour of the Supreme Being,
as its chief good and final reft :-And, fourth-
ly, it advances to an entire resignation of the
foul to God: it is the consummation of trust
and hope; it banilhes anxious cares and mur-
muring thoughts ; it reconciles us to every
appointment of Divine Providence, and re-
bolves every wish into the desire of pleafin.,
im whom our hearts adore.

C 6 Ir

It is one of the nob!eft ats of whichl the

human mind is capable. It is a powerful
principle which pcnttrates the foul, which
purifies the affections from debating attach-
ments; and, by a fixed and steady regard to
God, subdues every sinful paflion, and forms
the inclinations to piety and virtue.

It expr. fcs the Ipirit which must anima'e

all rligious duties. It frands opposed not
merely to dowriright vice, but to a heart which
is cold and iorenfible to 'acred things, and
obeys the Divine commands without ardour,
love, and joy. It is rational and well found-
ed. It is of the hightft importance to every
uther part of religion and virtue; and, in fine,
is the mods conducive to our happiness. It
diffuses an auspicious influence over the whole
of virtue. It is often found a powerful in-
Rrument in humanizi:g the manners of mern,
and taming their unruly paffons. It smooth-
ens what is rough, and softens what is fierce
in our nature. It is the great purifier of the
affeaions. Is inspires contempt of the low
gratifications belonging to animal life. It
promotes a humble and cheerful contentment
with our lot, and subdues the eager defirc of

riches

# MORALITY AND DEVOTION SEPARATELY INSUFFICIENT.

riches and of power, which has filled this
unhappy world with crimes and misery. The
fpilit of devotion is the gift of God: from
his inspiration it proceeds; towards him it
telds ; and in his presence, hereafter, it fliall
at;ain its full pcrfction.
MORALITY AND DEVOTION SEPA-

RATELY INSUFFICIENT.

HE man of mere morality is a stranger
to all the delicate and refined pleasures

of devotion. In works of beneficence and
mercy he may enjoy fatisfa&in ; but it will
be dctsitute of that glow of affe&ion, which
enlivens the feeling of one who lifts his heart
at the fame time to the Father of the Universe,
and confiders himself as imitating God.

The man again who refts solely on devo-

tion, if that devotion opens not his heart to
humanity, not only remains a itranger to the
pleasures arising from beneficence, but must
often undergo the pain arising from bad pas-
sions,

MODERN

# MODERN SENTIMENTAL DEVOTEES.

MODERN SENTIMENTAL DEVOTEES.
I F we trace the liflory of sentiment from

its beginning, we fliall find that girls (for

among this class it runs to its greatest excess)
of this cast, have their heads originally turned
by pernicious reading, and the insanity con-
firmed by imprudent friendflips. They never
fail to fe'e&t beloved confidants of their own
turn and humour, though, if they can help
it, not so handsome as thcmfclves. Violent
intimacies ensue, or an intimate union of
fa:ls immediately takes place.

They represent romantic love as the great

important business of human life, and de-
scribe all the other concerns of it as too low
and paltry to merit the attention of ufch ele-
vated beings, and fit only to employ the
daughters of the plodding vulgar.

Another favourite topick, is the groveling

fpiit and fordid temper of their parents, who
will be sure to find no quarter at the hands of
their daughters, ihould they prefumc to dire&

their

:thir course of reading, interfere in their
lho:ce of f, iends, or interrupt their very im-
po;tant corrfl;ondence. For a prohibited
correspondence is one of the great incidents of
tI.-tirnntal life, and a letter clandestinely re-
ccived, the supreme felicity of a sentimental
ladt. Hence, such prohibition with them,
carries a certain air of tyranny and persecution,
·which is very delightful.

They confider the aged and experienced,
s ho endeavour to defrroy this ignisfatuuts, as
wretches utterly ignorant of the sublime plea-
fures of a delicate and exalted pallion, as ty-
rants whose authority is to be condemned, and
as spies whose vigilance is to be eluded. The
prudence of these worthy friends they term
suspicion, and their experience dotage.

But young people never shew their folly

and ignorance more conspicuously, than by
this over-confidence in their own judgment,
and this haughty disdain of the opinion of
those who have known more days. Youth
has a quickness of apprehension, which it is
very apt to mistake for an acurenefs of pene-
tration. But youth, like cunning, though very
eonceited, is very ihort-fighted; and never

more

more f), than when it difirgards the infiruc-
tions of the wiil, and the admonitions of the
aged.

These daughters of vanity imagine that none

but the young and beautiful have any right to
the pleaiures of focicty, or even to the com-
mrn benefits and blessings of life. Ladies of
this turn also assel the most lofty disregard
for useful qualities and domefticvirtues; they
principally value themselves on the enlarge-
ment of their notions, and their liberal way
of thinking. This superiority of foul chiefly
manifcfis itself in the contempt of those mi-
nurc delicacies and little decorums, which,
trifling as they may be thought, tend at once
to dignify the character, restrain the levity of
the younger part of the sex, and to eradicate
this fort of sentiment, which is only a weed
ofidlenefs; for they who are constantly and
usefully employed, have neither Icifure n6r
propensity to cultivate this delightfulfolly.

DX5,%

# DISCONTENT.

DISCONTEN T.

N the humble and fcemingly quiet shade
of private life, as well as among the great

and mighty, discontent broods over its imagi-
nary sorrows ; preys upon the citizen no less
than the courtier, and often nourishes pas-
sions equally malignant in the cottage and in
ihe palace. Having once seized the mind, it
£freads its own gloom over every surrounding
objet; it every where searches out materials
for itself, and in no direaion more frequently
employs its unhappy activity, than in creating
divisions among mankind, and in magnifying
flight provocations into mortal injuries.

In situations where much comfort might be

enjoyed, this man's superiority, and that man's
neglec, our jealousy of a fiiend, our hatred
of a rival, an imagined affront, or a mistaken
point of honour, allow us no repose. · Hence
discord in families, animofities amongfl friends,
and wars among nations ! Look around us I
every where we find a bury multitude. Ref-
lels and uneasy in their prclicnt situation, they

are

are incefr:ntly employed in accomplifiing a
change of it; and as fonn as their wifll is ful-
filled, we dircern by their behaviour, that they
are as dilatr:fied as they were before. WVhere
they expLCed to have found a paradise, they
find a defart.

The man of buinefs pines for leisure ; the

lcifure for which he had longed proves an irk.
some gloom, and through want of employ-
menr, helanguifhes, sickens, and dies.

The nan of retirement fancies no state so

happy as that of a&tive life; but he has not
engaged long in the tumults and conteRs of
the world, until he finds cause to look back
with regret on the calm hours of his former
privacy and retreat.

Beauty, wit, eloquence, and fame, are

eagerly d&fired by persons in every rank of
life. They are the parents fondest wilh for
his child ; the ambition of the young, and
the admiration of the old; and yer, in what
numberless inflanzes have they proved, to
those who paifffcd them, no other than fininng
feares, seductions to vice, infligations to folly,
and, in the end, fLurces of misery.

:DIS S1.

# DISSIPATION.

D I S S I P A T I O N.
T HE love of dissipation is allowed to be

the reigning evil of the present day: it

is an evil which many content themselves with
regretting, without seeking to redress.

It is too often cultivated as the readier re-

lief to domestic infelicity; it draws the mind
awhile from the fubict of its distress, and sus-
fcrs it to enjoy an interval of ease ; but this
resource is as treacherous as it is momentary,
and plunges the mind into more real distress
than that from which it promirfd to relieve it.

Every one seems convinced that the evil so

much complained of does really exist some-
where, though all are inwardly persuaded that
it is not with themselves. All desire a gene-
ral reformation, but few will liften to propo-
fals of particular amendment.

Diflipation not only indisposes its votaries,

by relaxing the tone of mind, and rendering
it incapable of application, fiudy, or virtue, to
every thing ufuful and excellent, but dif-

qualifics

# DUTY OF OLD AGE.

qualifies them fJr tle enjomment of pleasure
iltfcl. It iftens the fioul ob much, that the
mofl lurcrficil cineplo! mnent becomes a labour,
alid the fH;,,Itelt iincnvenecnce an agony.-
The roses of piairure fcid; t last long enough
to adorn the brow of him xnlo plucks them;
for thry are tlie only rol!s which do nor re-
tain their f\cetntfis afrer they have loft their
beaury.

DUTY OF OLD AGE.
A Material paic of the duty of the aged

confifls in fludying to be useful to the

race who fuccecds them. Here opens to them
an extensive field, in which they may so em-
ploy themfcl ves as considerably to advance the
happiness of mankind. To them it belongs
to impart to the young the fruit of their long
experience; to inftru& them in the proper
condua, and to warn them of the vaious
dangers of life; by wife counsel to temper
their precipitate ardour, and both by precept
and example to form them to piety and virtue.

It

It never apcears \ith greater dignity than

wvhcn ctenmpred withi mildncfs, anl t.nhlvened
with g 1,,d humnur; it acts as a guide and a
patron of youth.

Religion, di(flayed in such a chara&er,

firikes the beholders, as at once amiable and
venerable. They revere its power, when
they fee it adding so much grace to the decays
of nature, and filedding so pleasing a lustre
over the evening of life. The young wish to
tread in the fame etcps, and to arrive at the
clore of their days with equal honour.

They liften with attention to counsels which

are mingled with tenderness, and rendered
refpecable by grey hairs.

Aged wisdom, when joined with acknov-

ledged virtue, exerts an authority over the
human mind greater even than that which-
arises from power and fation. It can check
the most forward, abafli the mofl profligate,
and strike with awe the most giddy and un-
thinking:

FEMAL E

# FEMALE EDUCATION.

FEMALE E D C A T I ..
NOTTVITHSTANDING the great and

real improvements which have been

made in the affair of female education, and
the more enlarged and generous views of it
which prevail in the present day, there is fiil
u ma.terial defc&t, which is not in general the
objea of attention to remove. The defet
fIems to consist in this, that too little regard
is paid to the dispositions of the mind, that the
indications of the temper are not properly che-
rilhed, nor the affrtions of the heart fuffi-
ciently regulated.

Tha exterior should be made a considerable

objc& of attention, but not the principal, not
the only one. The graces fiould be induftri-
oufly cultivated, but they lhould not be cul-
tivated at the expence of the virtues. The
arms, the head, the whole person fliould be
carefully polihfed, but the heart lhould not he
the only portion of the human anatomy which
lhould be totally overlooked.

Mufick,

MIusicl-, dancing, and languages grat;fy

!tholse ho teach them, by perceptible and al-
niot immediate cffects, and every obltrvcr
can, in some measure, judge of the progress.
The effei6s of there accompliflnments addrcfs
ethemfelves to the senses; and there are more
\xho who can hear and fee, than there are who
can judge and refle&.

Personal perfeEtion is not only more obvi-

ous, it is also more rapid; and even in very
accomplilhed charaAers, elegance usually pre-
cedes principle.

But the heart, that natural feat of evil pro-

penfities, that little troublesome empire of the
paflions, is led to what is right by flow motions
and imperceptibledegrees. It mut be admonish-
ed by reproof, and allured by kindness. Its live-
litft advances are frequently impeded by the
obstinacy of prejudice, and its brighteft'pro-
.mists often obscured by the tempeits of passion.
It is flow in its acquisition of virtue, and re-
luaant in its approaches to piety.

The labours of a good and wife mother,

who is anxious for her daughter's most im-
portant interests, will seem to be at variance
*vith those of her inftruaers. Humility and

piety

piety form the fclid and durable bass on ixliicl
flie viflies to raise the fuperftrulture of tie
:.ccomplifllments, vwhile the accomplifllments
themlclves are frequently of that unfleady
nature, that if the foundation is not secured,
in proportion as the building is enlarged, it
\wi!l be overloaded and deflroyed by those very
ornaments, which were intended to embelliih
what they have contributed to ruin.

The more ostensible qualifications should

be carefully,regulated, or they will be in dan-
ger of putting to flight the mcdeft train of
retreating virtues, which cannot safely fubift
before the bold eye of public observation, nor
bear the bolder tongue of impudent and au-
dacious flattery.

Merely ornamental accomplilhments, will

but indifferently qualify a woman to perform
the duties of life, though it is highly proper
Ihe should possess them, in order to furnifix
the amu:sement of it. Yet though the well-
bred woman ihould learn to dance, sing, recite,
and draw, the end of a good education is not
that they may become fingers, dancers, play-
ers, or painters; its real object is to make them
good daughters, good wives, good mifireffes,

good

- od nitinbers ot foAicry, and gnod Chris-

To an injudicious and superficial eye, the

b.ft educated girl may make the least bril-
i-.n figure, as Ihe will probably have les;
flippancy in her manner, and less repar-
tee in her cxprefclon, and her acquirements
wili be rather enamtlled than emlojed. But
her merit will be known by all who come
near enough to discern, and have taste enough
to diflinguifh.

A truly good and well educated young lady,

vill be found in the bosom of retirement, in
ihe practice of every domeflic virtue, in the
performance of every amiable accomplish-
nienr, exerted in the ihade, to enliven retire-
ment,-to heighten the endearing pleasures of
iocial intercourfe,-and to embellifl the nar-
row, but charming circle of family delights;
and to this amiable purpose dedicating her
more elegant accomplifmecnts, instead ofcx-
hibiring them to attra& admiration, or depress
inferiority.

One great art of education consists in not

suffering the feelings to become too acute by
unnecefHary awakening, nor too obtuse by the

D . want

sar.t of exertion. The former renderc thmr.-
the source of calamity, and totally ruins the
temper; while rih latter blunts and debasLs
them, and produces a dull, cold, and fellill
'pirir. The precious fLnfibiliry ofan open tem-
per, the amiable glow of an ingenuous foul, the
bright flame of a noble and generous fpirir, arc
of higher worth than all the documents of
learning, of dearer price than all the advanta-
ges which can be derived from the most re-
fined and artificial mode ofeducation.

Sensibility, delicacy, and an ingenuous ternm-

per, are of more efleem than languageor music,
for they are the language of the heart, and the
music of the according paflions. Every ap-
pcaiance of amiable simplicity, or of honest
fliame, will be dear to sensible hearts: they
Slould carefully chcrish every such indication
in a young female; for they will perceive
that it is this temper, wifely cultivated,
which will one day make her enamoured of
the loveliness of virtue, and the beauty of ho-
liness; from which she will acquire a taile for
the do&trines of religion, and a spirit to per-
form the duties of it.

Prudence is not natural to children; how-
evcr, they can substitute art in its ftcad. But

there

there is fcinnlthing more becoming in the
very errors of nature, xihere they are und;1'-
guiscd, than in the alfeiai:ltiiJ o f virtue i fcli,
where the reality is wanting. The precise and
premature %viflom, which some girls hare
cunning enough to assume, is of a more dan-
gerous tendency than any of their natural fail-
ings can be, as it effetually covers those secret
bad dispositions, which, if they difplayedthem-
selves, might be rc&ified. The hypocrifyof
alfuming virtues which are not inherent in the
heart, prevents the growth and disclosure of
those real ones, which it is the great end of
education to cultivate.

This cunning, which of all the different

dispositions girls discover, is molt to be dread-
ed, is encreafed by nothing so much as fear.
The indiscreet transports of rage which many
betray on every flight occasion, and the little
diftinftions they make between venial errors
and premeditated crimes, naturally dispose a
child to conceal, what hie does not however
care to suppress; anger in one, will not re-
medy the faults of another.

Notwithltanding girls ihould hot be treated
ivith unkildnefs, nor the firfl openings of the

D ; paflions

yillion. blighted by cold fLvcritv, ?el they
should be accuflomcd very early in ife to a cer-
tain degreeof refraint. The natural cart of cha-
racter, and the moral diflihna:ons of the sexes,
fllould not be disregarded, even in childhood.

That bold, independent, enterprizing fpirir,

,vhich is To much admired in boys, llould nor,
when it happens to discover itself in the other
sex, be encouraged, but suppressed. Girls
thould be taught to give up their opinions be-
times, and not pertinaciously carry on a dif-
pute, even if they know themselves to be in the
right. Yet they lhould not be robbed of the
liberty of private judgment, but by no means
encouraged to contra& a contentious or con-
tradiaory turn. It is of the greatest im-
portance to their future happiness, that they
Ihould acquire a submissive temper, and a for-
bearing spirit; for it is a leflon the world will
not fail to make them frequently praciife,
when they come abroad into it, and they will
not pratife it the worse for having learned it
the sooner.

There is more piety, as well as more fenafe

in labouring to improve the talents which chil-
dren actually have, than in lamenting that

they

they do net poffcls supernatural endowments,
c.r angelic perfcttions. A girl who has doci-
hly, will seldom be found towant underlland-
ing encugh for all the purposes of a social, a
happy, and an useful life, and those who hope
to do a great deal,muft not expec to do every
thing. If they know any thing of the malignity
of fin, the blindnefi of prejudice,or the corrup-
tion of the human heart, they will also know,
that the heart will always remain,after the very
best possible education, full of infirmity and.
imiperfetion. They should confiderrthat they
are not educating cherubims and seraphims,
but men and women; creatures, who at their
bes estate, are altogether vanity: H.ow litTl,
can be expe&ted from them in the weaknes.
and imbecility of infancy L

Our palfions themselves, by proper manage.

ment, may be made subservient to some. goodr
end; for there is scarcely a tingle one.whicb.:
nray not be turnedtoprofitable account, ifpru-
dently rectified, and skilfully directed into the
road of tome neighbouring virtue. Envy ad.
lying must be always excepted;. they must be
rd(lcally cured before any good can be expect-
ed fr£om.the heart which has been infected with.

D3 .hagm.

# EFFECTS OF RELIGION.

them. For envy; though palsed. through all
the imnr;l firairlrs, cannot be refined into vir-
tuo-is c:lula:ioln, or lying improved into an
agreeable rurn, for innocent diyerfion.
- To win the pallions, therefore, over to the
c.ti l's vir)tue, anfve:rs a'much nobler end
thin tl-.ir extilt;&cn could poffibl do, even
if that.could bd'etcfed; for they refenhble
fires, whiL.h are friendly and beneficial when
under proper dirction; but if fuffcled to
blaze without rcflraint, they carry devaftationt
along wi:h thein ; and, if totally extinguiflied,
clave tl- lcinig!lted mind in a slate of cold
and coiUfurtl.is inanity.

EFFECTS OF RELIGION.

ELIGION prepaies the mind of man
for all the events.of this inconltant state,

infiru&s him in the nature of true happincfs,
early weans him from an undue love of the
wor!d ; afflilions do not attack him by fur-
prise, and theiefore do not -over-whelm him
lie is equipped for the storm, as. well as. the
calm, in this dubious navigation of life: he
is nut overcome by disappointment when that

xvhih

which is mortal dies, when that which i mu-. ,
ta;le begins to change, and when that-which
he knew to be transient passes away.

Religion not only purifies, but also fortifier

the heart; so that the devout man is neither -
lifted up by success, norenervated by fenfuali.
r;, he mects7the. changes in his lot without
unmanly dejeEtion; h'eis ilibreid to temper-
ance and reftraior; he has learned firmnels
and felf-command; he is accustomed to look
up to Supreme Providence, not with rever-
ence only, but with trust and hope.

In prosperity he cultivates his mind; stores

it with useful knowledge, with good princi-
ples, and virtuous dispositions. The refour-
ces remain entire when the day of trouble
comes. His chief pleasures are always of
the calm, innocent, and temperate kind, and
over those the changes of the world have the .
Icaft power. His mind is a kingdom to him,
and he can ever enjoy it.

D1 S SUPER-

# SUPERSTITION AND ENTHUSIASM.

# ANGER AND ENVY CONTRASTED.

SUPERSTITION AND ENTHUSIASM.
SUPERSTITION and Enrhufiafin are two

capital sources of delusion. Superltition,

on the one hand, attaching men with immo-
derate zeal to the ritual and external part of
religion; Enthusiasm, on the ether, dirceaing
their whole attention to internal emotions,
and mystical comtnunications with the fpiri-
tual world while neither the one nor the
other has paid sufficient regard to the great
moral duties of the Chriltan life. Indeed the
horror of Superfitiion has sometimes reached
so far, as to produce contempt for all external
inflitutions, whilst persons of a devout turn,
being car ied by warm aff&tions at times into
injultifiable excesses, have thence made many
conclude that all devotion was a-kin to en-
thufiafin.

ANGER Nrs ENVY CONTRASTED.
A NGER is less rearonab!e, and more

lincere than envy. Anger breaks out

abruptly; envy is a great prCfacer: anger
xilhcs to be understood at once; envy is fond,
of remote hints and ambiguities, but obscure

as

a3 its oracles are, it never ceases to deliver
th:m till they ale peifccly comprehended:
anger repeats thle ame cireumftances over
again; envy iivienrs new ones at every frcfh
recital.: anger gi.-es a broken, velrement, and
interrupted narrative; envy tells a more con-
fitent, and more probable, though a falfcr
tale: anger is cxcelfivcly imprudent; for it is
impatient to disclose every thing it knows;
envy is difcreer, for it h-s a great deal to hid;:
anger never consults times or seasons; envy
wa;ts for :he lucky moment when the wound it
mrdirates may be made the most exquifitery
painful, and the molt incurably deep :anger
uses more invective; envy does more mifcliif.

Simple anger soon runs itfelfout of'bre3ath',

and is.echautfed at the.end of itstale; butit is
for that'chofen period' that envy has tre'afurdc
"up the nmof barbed3arroxv in its whole qu'rvef'r
anger puts a man out ofliimfelf, buir the tiuly
malicious generall'y preserve the appearance,£
felf-pnflfefin, or they cou:d not so effeAutaly.
injure.:, anger ralks loudly of its own vrorgsr
envy ofits adversarys inj ultice.. anger i a vio-
lent at&; envy a conflant habit - no one can be
always angry; but he may bcalways envioos;

U s Aa.

# EVENTS UNCERTAIN.

An angry man's enmity (if he be generous)

will lubfide when the objhea of his resentment
bccumes unfortunate; . but the envious man
c.:n extraEt food for his malice out of calamity
itelf,' if he finds his advelfary bears it with
dignity, or is pited or aified in it: the rage of
the palfionate man is totally extinguiihed by the
death of his enem y; but the hatred of the ma-
licious is not buried even in the grave of his
ri al ; he vwil envy the good name he has left
behind him; he will envy him the tears of his
widow, the pro!l'erity of his children, the
efieem of his friends, the praises of his epi-
taph ; nay, the very magnificence of his fu-
neral.

EVENTS UNCERTAIN.
M AN waiketh in a vain show. His fears

are often as vain as his wilhes.. As what

flattered him in expetation, frequently wounds
him in poffeilon - so that the event to whichl
he looked forward with an nnx!fmus and fearful
eye, has often, when it arrived, laid its ter-
rors aside; nay, has brought in its train un-
expeacd blelfings.

Both

Both good and evil are beheld at a dit.lnce

through a perfpecive which deceives. The
colours of objcas when nigh, are entircly
different from what they appeared when they
appeared in futurity. It is common for men.
to be deceived in their pr-fpe&s of happi-
ncls. They judge by the (enf.tions of the
present moment, and in the fervour of desire,
pronounce confidently concernig the desircd
objet ; but reflte not, that their minds, like
their bodies, undergo great alteration from
the iituation into which they are thrown, and
tile progressive stage; of life through which
they pars.

Hence, concerning any condition which is

yet untried, they conjeEture with much un-
certlinty. In imagination they carry their
piefent wants, inclinations, and fentinenrs,
into the state of life to which they aspire; but
no sooner have they entered into it, than their
sentiments and inclinations change. New wants
and desires arise; new objects are required to
gratify them; and, by consequence, their old
dilratisfafion returns, and the void which
was to have been filled, remains as great as
i was before.

D 6 FAITIT,

# FAITH, PIETY, AND ACTIVE VIRTUE.

# FALSE SENTIMENT.

FAITH, PIETY, AND ACTIVE VIRTUE.

IFE passed under the influence of such
L dilpGit.ions naturally leads to an happy

end. It is-not enough to fay faith and piety,
joined with aftive vi.tue, constitute the re-
quifite preparation for heaven : they, in truth,
begin the enjoyment of heaven. In every state
tf our exiflence they.form the chief ingredi-
ents of felicity..

FALS.E SENTIMENT.
T IHERE is a refined jargoni which has

infested letters and tainted morals,

ullnnown to cur plain anceltors, called fen-
:iJent, ulwhiich is the 'rtrivuij6 f virtue to con-
ca[l the d'rformiiy of vice; and it is not un-
common for the.fame. persons to make a jest
cr religion, to break through the most solemn.
t'.s and engagements, to pra&fife every art of
I.tecnt fraud and open fedu&ion, and yet to
vdJuc diimt.lvcs on flucaking and writing
:c'.lul'rntallv,

E. ror.

Error is never likely to do so much mif-

chief as when it dtfguiles its real tendency,.
and puts on anengigingand attrac lie appear-
ance. Many a young woman who would be.
thocked at the imputation of an, intrigue, is
extremely fattered at the idea of a.fentimcn-
tal connection,. though. perhapa-.vith a dan-
gerous and designing man. Such an engage-
ment will be infinitely.dearer. to her vanity,,
than an avowed ad d.authorifcd-attachment.

In order to maintain the sentimental charac-

ter with dignity and propriety, anwoman enter-
taiins:he mof-elevated ideasof di'proportionate.
alliances and difinerefted love, and confiders.
fortune, rank, and reputation, as mere chime-
rical diftinaions-and-vuigar:prejudices. A'nd.
among the many smooth mifchiefsof senti-
ment, it is one of its.fure and successful frauds,.
ta amftc:the most fiigi. indiffrence. to those.
external and: pacuniar.y advantages, which is-
its great and real.obje&cto obtaio. .

A. fentimental.girl very rarely entertains

any doubt of her personal beautyj for ihe has..
been daily accustomed to contemplate it her-
ftlf, and to hear it from others. She will not,.
t.!!reforeL be very solicitous for the confirma-

tion.

tion of a truth so f elf-evident; but Ihe sus-
peas her prctcnfions to undcrftanding arc
more likely to be dilured ; and, for tl:at rea-
fbn, greedily devours every compliment of-
sered to those perfefions which are less ob-
vious, and more rtfined. Ste is persuaded
that men need only oren their eyes to decide
on her bauiy ; while it will be the most con-
vincing proof of the taste, sense, and elegance
of her adimirer, tl.it he can dilcern and flitter
tlhof qu:lities in her.

This Latent but lcainr.g foible, forms a clue

to the healt; dilcacd by this, the lover as-
ffeis to ovcrluok that beauty which attrzas
common eyes, while he bestows the most de-
lica:e praises on the beauties of the mind, and
finilhls the climax of adulation by hinting she
is fuperilr toir.

These fublinme attachments, if they end

not in flduaion, seldom conclude delightful-
]v, e cn though they Ihould terminate in the
vulgar catastrophe of marriage. The vision-
ary heaven soon fleets away, and the de-
suded goddess is shocked to find herself firip-
ped of all her cclcflial attributes. She now
beholds hcrtflf of lcfs importance in the

".treera

Jiecm of the man she has chofcn, than any
o! i.r mere mnoral zuonman.

No longer the is grlified with the tear of

coultc f-itcd pili,)n, the figll of diffe:iibld
rapture, or the language of piemeditated ado-
r.tion. No longer is the altar of her va'lity
lo.lded with the oblations of ficitiousfondnels,
rhe incense of falrehood, or the sacrifice of
flittery. Her apotheosis is ended !-She feels
hel ielf degraded from the dignities and privi-
leges of a goddess, to all the imperfctions,
vanities, and weaknelfes of a flighted woman,
and a negleced wife. Her faults, which
were so lately overlooked, or miltaken for
virtues, are now Alt in a note book. The pas-
sion which was vowed eternal, lasted only a
few short weeks; and the indiitcrence which
was so far from being included in the bargain,
that it was not so much as fufpeted, fuliuws
them through the whole tirleume journey of
:heir insipid, vacant, and joyless cxiftence.

FELICITY

# FELICITY EQUALLY DISTRIBUTED.

FELICITY EQlUALLY DISTRIBUTED.
AMON'G the different conditions and

ranks of men, the balance of happiness

is. prelerved in a great measure equal; and the
high and lotw, the rich and the poor, ap-
proach, in point of real enjoyment, much
nearer to -ach other than is commonly ima-
p.ined. Providunce never intended that any
slate here flaould either be completely happy,.
or entirely mifcrable.

If the feelings of pleasure are more numer-

ous and more lively in the higher depart:
rents of life, futh also are those of pain -
If greatness flatters our vanity, it multiplies
our dangers.-If opulence encreafes our gra-
tifications, it encreafes, in the fame propor-
tion,. our desires and demands.-If the poor
are confined to a move narrow circle, yet with-
in that circle lie molt of those natural fatisfac-
tions, which, after all the refinements of art,
are found to be the molt genuine and true.-
For the happiness of every man depends more
upon the tlate of his own mnid, than upon any

OCu

# FELICITY TEMPORAL.

,n; external circumntance ; nay, more than;
upun all external things put together.

Inordinate paffons are the great disturbers

of iifde; and unlcfs we pItffefs a good con-
ficince, and a well-governed mind, discontent
will blast every enjoyment, and the highest
prosperity will only prove difgufied misery._-
This conclusion then should bc fixed in the
mind-The delruEtion of virtue is the de-
ftrution of peace. In no Ration-in no pe-
ripd, are we secure from the dangers which.
spring from our paflions. Everyl age, and,
every station they beset; from youth to grey.
hairs, and from the peasant to the prince.

FELICITY TEMPORAL.
OU R imperfec knowledge of what is good

or evil, hould attach us the more to

those few things, concerning which there can
bc no doubt of their being truly. good.

Of temporal things which belong to this.

class, the catalogue, it must be conffflcd, is
fuall. Perhaps, the chief worldly good we.

n . A . .lA

# SPIRITUAL FELICITY.

flould wifl to enjoy, is a found mind in a found
body; hlalth and peace, a moderate forrune,
and a few friends, fi:m up all the undoubted
articles of temporal felicity.

He whose wihcs refpe&ing this world are

the molt reaunlble and bounded, is likely to
l;ad thc fiftll, and, for that rcaron, the most
dcrl-able life. 13y asiring too high, we fre-
quently miss the h3ppinels, wthich by a leta
namitious aim, we might have gained. High
hapoinefs on earth, is rather a piture which
the imagination forms, than that reality
which man is alloted to pofffas.

SPIRITUAL FELICITY.
W7 sITH regard to spiritual felicity, we

are not confined to humble views.-

Clear and determinate objcEts are propored to
our purfuitrs:and full scope is given to our
most ardent eifires. The forgiveness of our
fins, and GA holy grace to guide our life;
the proteation aid favour of the gre21ther
of all, of the blessed Redeemer of got!ti

and

# WANT OF FORESIGHT RESPECTING OUR SPIRITUAL STATE.

and of the Spirit of fancaification and comfort;
thlle are obj-ats in the purf.; of which there
i, no room for hesitation and dftruft.

Had Providence spread an equal obscurity

over happiness of every kind, we might have
had rome reafen to complain of the vanity of
our condition. But we are not left to so hard
a fate. The Son of God hath removed that
veil which covered true bliss from the fearchl
of wandering'mortals, and hath taught themt
the way which leads to eternal life.
WANT OF FORESIGHT RESPECTING

OUR SPIRITUAL SrATE.
W E foresee the dangers of our spiritual,

fill les than we do thore of our natu-

ral state, because we are less attentive to trace
them. We are fRill more exposed to vice than
misery. We cannot esteem him prosperous
v ho is raised to a situation which flatters his
palfions, but which corrupts his a inciples, dif-
orders his temper, and, finally, oversets hi&
virtue.

Ia

In the ardour of pursuit these effccEf are not

foreseen; and yet how often are they accom-
plifhcd by the change of condition. Latent
corruptions are called forth, feeds of guilt are
quickened into life, a growth of Climes arifts,
which. had it not been for the fatal culture of
prosperity, would never have seen the light.

Man, boafiful .is he is of reason, is merely

the creature of his fortune, formed and mould-
ed by the incidents of his life; incapable of
prlnouncing with certainty concerning his own.
good or evil; of furari::; he drfcerns little, and
even that little he fees thr,.agia cloud. Igno-.
rant of the alteiation which his sentiments and
defirets vil! undergo fiom new situations in life;
ignorant of the consequences. which will fAl-
low fi-om the combination of his circumstances
with those of others around him; ignorant ofi
the influence which the present may have'on
the future events of life; ignorant of the effe&
which a change of condition may produce onr
his moral character, and his eternal inte-
refts,-rlow can he know wvKat isgoodfor him.
all :Ce dlay.s of his -vain life, -wihich fpendlet as
a JIaJoeo. Inflead, therefore, of lamenting.
this ignorance only, he ihould confider how..

v.E

# FRIENDSHIP.

ought to be improved! what duiies it fug-
; cs; and what wife ends it ais intended by,
Plrovidence to promote.

F R I E N D S H I P.

N young minds there is commonly a strong
propensity to particular intimacies and

friendships. Youth, indeed, is the season
when friendlhips arefometimes formed, which
not only continue through succeeding life, but
which glow to the last, with a tenderness un.
known to the connections begun in cooler
years. The propensity therefore is not to be
discouraged; though,atthe fame time, it muf
be regulated with much circumfpction and

care.

Too many of the pretended friendships of

youth are mere combinations in pleasure.-
They are often founded on capricious likings,
suddenly contra&ted, and as suddenly diffolv-
ed. Sometimes they are the effet ofinterefted
complaisance and fiattety, on the one fide, and
of credulous fondness on the other. Such raih
and dangerous connec&ions Ihould be avoided,
left they afterwards load us with dilhonour.

We

W'e (h,,uld ever have it fixed in our memc-

ries, that by the cehaiacter of those wvhom ve
chooti so:- our friends, our own is likely to he
folr:lced, and will certainly he judged of by the
vworld. 1W'e ought, therefore, to be flow and
catitious in contraAing intimacy; but when a
virtuous friendship is once established, we must
ever confider it as a sacred engagement.

We flould not expose ourselves to the re-

proach of lightness and inconstancy, which al-
ways bespeak either a trifling or a base mind.
WVe flculd not reveal any secrets of our friend ,
but be faithful to his interest, forsake him not
in danger, and abhor the thouglt of acqui-
ring any advantage by his prejudice or hurt.

In the choice of friends, principal regard

thould be had to goodness of heart and fide-
lity. If they possess taste and genius, that
wvill make them more agreeable and useful
companions. To those who deserve the name
of friends, we should always unbosom our-
selves with the most unfufpicious confidence.
An open temper, if restrained but by tolera-
ble prudence, will make us, upon the whole,
much happier than a suspicious one, although
by it we may sometimes susser.

Coldness

# GALLANTRY.

Ct,ldnafs and di-iufs ;aue but the too rcctain

confcquenzes of age and experience; bur they
aL uni )lcifant feelings, and need nor be anti-

,ip-tcd befure their time. We fiiould never
dilcloe( the secrets of one friend to another.
Tlecy are fecrLt deposits which do not belong
to us, nor have we any right to make use of
them.

G A L L A N T R Y.
rT-HOUSANDS of women of the best hearts

anld finest parts have been ruined by men

who approach them under the specious name
of friendfllip. But supposing a man to have
the most undoubted honour, yet his friend-
Ship to woman is often so near a-kin to lover
that if she be very agreeable in her person, lhe
will probably very soon find a lover, where
the wisted only to meeta friend. Yet vomen
ihould be warned against that weakncfs so
common among the vain, the imagination that
every man who takes particular notice of them
is a lover. Nothing can expose them more to
ridicule, than taking up a man on the fufpi?
cion of being their lover, when perhafs he

never

ncevcr once thought (f them in that view, and
giv:ng themfLlves th efc airs lb common to filly
wxomen on such occasions.

For there is a kind of unmeaning gallantry

much praaifed by some men, which, by those
nho have any dilcernme.t, will readily b.
found harmlcfs. The little observances, at-
tentions,and compliments offuch men, tlhould
be regarded as things of course, which they
repeat to every agreeable woman of their ac-
quaintance. There is a familiarity they
are apt to atrume, which a proper dignity of
behaviour will be eaily able to check.

But there are people whose sentiments, and

particularly whose tafies, correspond naturally,
that like to associate together, although neither
of them have the most diflant view of any fur-
ther connecion. But this similarity of minds
often gives rife to tendcrnefs superior to what
friendflip demands; it will be prudent, in
this cafe, to keep a watchful eye over our-
selves, left our hearts become too far engaged
before we are aware of that something more
than friendly partiality, and experience the
unsuspected power of a too interested attach-
r enr.

CGO

# GOD WITH RESPECT TO MAN.

GOD WITH RESPECT TO MAN.

N the midit of his glory the Almighty is
n ot inattentive to the meanest of his sub-

jclts. Neither obscurity of station, nor im-
p:rfeaion of knowledge, finks those below
his regard who worihip and obey him. Every
rraner which they fend up from their secret
retirement is listened to by him; and every
*v.)ik of charity which they perform, how un-
known soever to the world, attracs his notice.

He is the patron of the diftreired. Com-

passion is that attribute of his nature which
he has chosen to place in the greatest variety
of lights, on purpose that he might accom-
modate his majesty to our wealkefs, and pro-
ide a cordial for human griefs.
All his creatures he-governs with justice

and wisdom; an affli&ed slate he commiec-
rates-he is the refuge of: the virtuous and
pious, and invites them, amidst all theirtrou-
bles, to pour out their hearts before him.
The neglec or scorn of the world, cxpofes

F, them

# IGNORANCE OF GOOD AND EVIL, ITS UTILITY.

them not to any contempt in his fight. !Nu
ob'curitv conceals them from his notice, and
though they ,1ould be forgotten by every
friend on carth, they are remembered by the
God of Heaven.

That sigh heaved from the afflitlcd bo!om

which is heard by no human ear, is listened to
by him; and that tear is remarked which falls
unnoticed or despised by the world. Thefc
prefcnt his administration under an aspe&t f1
mild and benign, as in a great measure to dif-
perle the gloom which hangi over human life.
IGNORANCE OF GOOD AND EVIL, ITS

UTILITY.

T serves to check prcfumption and rafli-
ness, and to enforce a diligent exertion of

our rational powers, joined with a humble
dependence on divine aid. It moderates eager
palfions refpe&ing worldly fuccels. It incul-
cates resignation to the disposal of a Provi-
dence which is much wiser then man. It re-
strains us from employing unlawful means in
order to compals our most favouritedefsgns.

It

# GOOD MAN.

It rends to attach us morc clofcly to those
things which are unqueflionably good. It is
thciefore such a degree of ignorance as suits
the present circumltances of man better than.
iorei complete information concerning good
and evil. At the fame time the causes which
render this obscurity necessary, too plainly iu-
dicate a broken and corrupted Rfate of human
nature. Thly fliew this life to be a short

ial: they suggest the ideas of a land of pil-
grimage, not of a house of reft.

GO O D M AN.
H E is devout and benevolent, and accord-

ing to his measure of religious know-

ledge, fludies to perform his duty, prays to
God always, and gives mulch alms to the peo.
pie; joining piety with charity, faith with
good works, devotion with morality, confif-
tent with the conneaion ordained by God be-
tween them; for alma.witlout .prayers, or
·prayers.without alms, mqrality without de-
votion, or devotion without morality, are ex-
tremely defective.

E z A good

A good man acts with vigour, and fuffcra

with a patience more than human, when he
believes himself countenanced by the Almigh-
ty. Injured or opprcffed by th- world, he
looks up to a Judge who will vindicate his
caufc; he appeals to a witness who knows
his integriy i he commits himself to a friend
who will never forsake him. Whecn tired
with the vexations of life, devotion opens to
him its quiet retreat, where the tumults of the
world arc hulhed, and its cares are lofl in
happy oblivion.

'1nere his mind regains its serenity, the

agitation of palffon is calmed, and a softening
balm is infuled into tile wounds of the spirit;
his heart is lightened; he does not fee! him-
self solitary or forsaken ; he believes God to
be'prefent with him, and as he hears a voice
wvhich speaks to none but the pure in heart, so
he beholds a hand which finners cannot fee.

Those affliEions which appear to others the

messengers of the wrath of heaven, appear to
him the ministers of fanaification and justice.
Where they discern nothing but the horrors of
the tempest which surrounds them, his more
enlightened eye beholds the angel who rides
in the whirlwind, and direts the storm.

EFFECT

# EFFECT OF LOOSE GRATIFICATIONS.

# GRATITUDE.

EFFECT OF LOOSE GRATIFICATIONS.

Y a continued fcries of loose, though ap-
parently trivial gratifications, the heart is

often as thoroughly corrupted, as by the com-
miffin of any one of those enormous crimes
which spring from great ambition or great re-
venge. Habit gives the passions frength,
while the absence of glaring guilt fcemingly
jufiifies them; and unawakened by remorie,
the fnner proceeds in his course, till he waxes
bold in guilt, and becomes ripe for ruin; for
by gradual and latent fleps the denfrution of
our virtue advances. We are imperceptibly
betrayed, and from one licentious attachment,
are, by a train of consequences, drawn orr to
another, till the government of our minds is
irrecoverably loft.

G R ATI T U D E.
GRATITUDE is a pleaing emotion. The

finfe of being diflinguifhed by the I' d-
ness of another, gladdens the heart, warms it

E 3 with

# WORLDLY GREATNESS AND HONOURS,

v'itih lccilr.c:il aflTR. io, and glves to any

t,,c ft.lIon ' hlch is . r'-c:ea l!eii itrelf, adouhilec

r-lii!, frim its being :hle gift of a friend.
I.ivour, :1hough conferred by men, may be-
c'nmul blh ';r,:' c; !::..r nothing of this kind
ca,. ali- t le intrercou, fe of griti:ude with
h::lvcn: it falvours are wholly difintcre.-.d.
'I i: ,h.n:i:l;y a1n:3 at no end but the bappi-
i '.1; - thiole ..hom he bleiT.s, and who de-
fircs no return fiomn them but a devout and
bhank ful hle.rt.

\V'ORLDLY G.LATNESS AnS HONOURS,

"' I EEN enjoyed with temperance and
W wvifdom, both enlarge our utility, and
cnitribute to our comfort. But we should
nec overate the m; for unless we add to them
the neccldiva correstives of piety and virtue,
bt-ides coriuptirg the mind, and ingendering
internal mifry, they lead us among preci-
rices, and betray us into ruin.

11 A P P I.

# HAPPINESS  HOW JUDGED OF.

HAPPINSSS-IIOW JUDGED OF.

1IPERFECTLY can we judge of real hap-
pir.es or nircry from external appearance.

We are seduced and deceived by that falCe
glute which prosperity throws around bad
ni.,; we are tempted to imita:e their crimes,
in order to partake of their imagined felicity.

The pageant of grandeur displayed to pub-

lick view is not the ensign of certain happi-
nels. We mnuf follow the great man into
the retired apartment, where he lays aside his
iifauife, in order to form any jufi conclusion.
We must have a faculty by which we can
look into the inside of hearts; then mfould
we behold good men, in proportion to their
goodners, fatified and easy; atrocious fin.
ners always reilefs and unhappy.

4 HHAPPI-

# HAPPINESS NOT INDEPENDENT.

HAPPINESS NOT INDEPENDENT.

O individual can be happy unless the
circumfrances of those around him be so

adiufted as to coufpire with his intcreft. For
in human society, no happiness or misery
fIands unconneEted and independent. Our
fortunes are interwoven by tlrcads innumer-
able: one man's success or misfortune, his
wiltomn-or folly, often, by its consequences,
reaches through multitudes.

Such a yftRem is too far complicated for our

arrangement.-It requires adjustments beyond
our Ikill and power.-It is a chaos of events
into which our eye cannot pierce, and is ca-
pable of regulation only by Him who perceives
at one glance the relation of each to all. We
are ignorant of the influence which the pre-
sent tranfaaions of our life may have upon
those which are future.

The important question is not, what will

yield to a man a few scattered pleasures, but
what will render his life happy on the whole

amount.

# HEALTH.

There is not any present moment that is un-
conneaed with some future one. The life of
every man is a continued chain of incidents,
each link of which hangs upon the former.
The transition from cause to effrt, from event
so event, is often carried on by secret steps,
which our foresight cannot divine, and our
sagacity is unable to trace. Evil may at some
future period bring forth good; and good
may bring forth evil, both equally unexpeced.

H E A L T H.
THOUGH good health be one of the

greatest blessings of life, it is thought

necetfary prudently to caution women against
making a boast of it, and exhort them to
enjoy it in grateful silence. For men so na-
turally aifociate the idea of female softness and
delicacy with a correspondent delicacy of con-
ftitution, that when a woman speaks of her
great strength, her extraordinary appetite, and
her ability to bear excefive fatigue, we recoil
at the description in a way she is little aware of.

E 5 HISTORY.

# HISTORY.

# TRUE VIRTUE AND HONOUR.

I{ I S T 0 R V.
II STORY is a mirror which holds up

mankind to their own view: in the cir-

cle of worldly affairs the fame characters and
tiuations arc perpetually returning, and in the
ftilics and patlions, the vices and crimes of
the generations that arc past, we read those
,if the prefenc.

The hiflory of mankind has ever been a

continued tragedy; the world a great theatre,
cxhibiting the fame repeated scene of the fol-
lies of men shooting forth into guilt, and of
their passions fermenting by a quick process
into mlfery.

TRUE VIRTUE AND HONOUR.
M E N possessed of these, value not them-

selves upon any regard to inferior obli-

gations, and yet violate that which is themoit
sacred and ancient of all,-religion.

They

# HOPE.

They should confider such violation as a

severe reproach in the most enlightened itate
of human nature; and under the purest dif-
penfation of religion, it appears to have ex-
tinguifled the fenCe of gratitude to Heaven,
and to flight all acknowledgment of the great
and true God. Such conduot implies either
an entire want, or a wilful suppression of Come
of the best and most generous affefionu be-
longing to human nature.

H O P E.
HOPE to the foul, when diflra&fed by

the confusions of the world, is as an an-

chor to a {hip in a dark night, on an unknown
coast, and amidst aboifterous ocean. In dan-
ger it gives security; amidst general fluaua-
tion it affords one fixed point of reft; it is the
mos eminent of all the advantages which re-
ligion now confers; it is the universal com-
forter; it is the spring of all human ascivity.

Upon futurity men are constantly suspend-

ed; animated by the profpet of some distant
"ood, they toil and fuffcr through the whole

E 6 course

# HUMANITY.

course of life; and it is not so much what
they are at prefenr, as what they hope to be
in some after time, that enlivens their mo-
rions, fixes their attention, and Simulates in-
duflry.

Was this hope entertained with that full

persuasion which Christian faith demands, it
would in truth totally annihilate all human
miseries; it would banish difontent, extin-
guihl grief, and suspend the very, feeling of
pain.

H U MANIT Y.

ENTLENESS, which belongs to virtue,
is to be carefully diflinguithed from the

mean spirit of cowards, and the fawning as-
sent of sycophants. It renounces no just
light from fear; it gives up no important
truth from flattery; it is indeed not only con-
fifent with a firm mind, but it necefarily re-
quires a manly spirit, and. a fixed principle, in
order to give it any real value.

It flands opposed to harihnefs and severity;

to pride and arrogance.; to violence and op-
pr.edioa it is, properly, that part of the real

virtue

virtue charity, which makes us unwillingoto
give pain to any of our brethren. It correts
whatever is offensive in our manners, and by
a conflant train of humane attentions, studies
to alleviate the burden of common misery., Its
office is therefore extensive; .it is cortinually
in aaion when we are engaged in intercourse
with men; it ought to form our address, to
regulate our speech, and to ditfufe itself over
our whole behaviour.

That gentleness which is chara&eriftic.of a

good man, has, like'every other virtue, its
feat in the heart. In that unaffe&ed civility
which springs from a gentle mind, there is a
charm infinitely mnorepowerful than in allthe
studied manners of the most finished courtier.

It is founded on a sense of what we owe to

him who made us, and to the common nature
of which we all fiare. It arifcs.from reflec-
tion on our.own failings.and wants, adn.ifomi
just views of the condition and dqty.of man.
It is native feeling heightened and improved
by principle. It is the heart whicheafily.re.
lents, which feels. for every thing.thatiil - .
man, and is backward and flow to inflid the
ecaft wound. It ia affable in it addrefs,:,aA:

--ild
C
» ^ ' ' *.~~~~~~~~_

mild in its demeanour; ever ready to oblige,
and be obliged by others ; breathing habitual
kindness towards friends, courtesy to ftran-
gers, long suffering to enemies.

It cxercifes authority with moderation, ad-

ministers reproof with tenderness, confers fa-
vours with care and modesty. It is unaffu-
ming in opinion, and temperate in zeal. It
contends not eagerly about trifles; flow to
contradi&, and still flower to blame; but
prompt to allay dissention and restore peace.
It neither intermeddles unnecessarily with the
affairs, nor pries inquisitively into the secrets
of others. It delights above all things to al-
leviate distress; and, if it cannot dry up the
falling tear, to soothe at least the grieving

heart.

Where it has not the power of being use-

ful, it is never burdensome. It seeks to please
rather than fiine and dazzle, and conceals
with caie that superiority either of talents or
of rank, which are oppressive to those who
are beneath it. It is the great avenue to mu-
tual enjoyment: amidst the strife of interfe-
ring interests, it tempers the violence of con-
tention, and keeps alive the feeds of harmony.

Ic.

It softens animofities, renews endearments,
and renders the countenance of man a refresh-
ment to man. It prepossesses and wins every
heart: it persuades when every other argu-
ment fails i often disarms the fierce, and-melts
the febbo=-

To the man of humanity the world is gene-

rally disposed to ascribe every other good
quality; of its influence all in some. degree
partake, and therefore all love it.

The man of this charaiter rifes in the world

without struggle, and lourilhes withoutenvy;
his misfortunes are universally lamented, and
his failings are easily forgiven. The inward
tranquillity which itpromotes is the first re-
quifite of'every pleairable feeling. It is the
calm and clear atmosphere, the serenity and
funlhine of the mind.

Attacked by'great. injuries, the man of

mild and gentle fpiritfwill feel what human
nature feels, and will defend and- resent as his
duty.allows 'him; but to llight provocations
he is happily uperior.-. Inipired .with noble.
sentiments, taught to regard with :indulgent
eye the 'frailies of mnen,: the omissions of the
careless, the follies oftnhimprudnc r andtihe

levity

# HUMILITY IN COMPANY.

levity of the fickle; he retreats into the calm-
mess of his fpirir, as into an undiflurbed fanc-
tuary, and quietly allows the usual current of
life to hold its course.

HUMILITY IN COMPANY.
O F all the-qualifications for conversation,

humility, if not the most brilliant, is the

safest, the most amiable, and the molt semi-
nine. The affectation of introducing fubjegs
with which others are unacquainted, and of
displaying talents superior to the reft of the
company, is as dangerous as it is foolisi.

There are many who never can forgive

another for being more agreeable and more
accomplished than themfclves, and who can
pardon any. ofence rather than an eclipsing
merit. The fable of the nightingale 'liould
be ever had in remembrance, asit conveysa
most useful lesson replete 'with valuable in-
firuaions. Had. the filly warbler conquered
his vanity, and refited the temptation of
lhewing a fine voice, he might have cfeapcd

the

# HUMOUR.

# INDUSTRY.

the talons of the hawk, The melody ofhis
singing was the cause of his deflrusion; his
merit brought him into danger, and his va-
nity cofl him his life.

U M O U R.
THUMOUR, though often miftakei for

wit, is a very different quality. It makei

our company much solicited, but we hiould
be cautious in indulging it. It is often a great
enemy to delicacy, and a frill greater one to
dignity of character. It may fomceimes.
gain applause, but will never procure re-
fpe:t.

I N D U S T R Y.
D ILIGENCE, and proper improvement

of time, are material duties of the young.

To no. purpose are they endued with the beit
abilities, if they want a&ivity for exerting
them. In youth the habits of industry are

most

most easily acquired. In youth the incentives
to it are the ftrongcft; from ambition and
from duty, from emulation and hope, all the
,rofpces which the beginning of life affords.

Induflry is not only the instrument of im -

provement, but the foundation of pleasure.-
IIc who is a franger to it may puffers, but
cannot enjoy; for it is labour only which
gives relish to pleasure. It is the appointed
vehicle of every good to man. It is the in-
difpenfible condition of possessing a found
mind in a found body.

Ve fliould seek to fill our time with em-

ployments which may be reviewed with satis-
fation. The acquisition of knowledge is one
of the mot honourable occupations of youth.
The desire of it discovers a liberal mind, and
is connected with many accompliflments, and
many virtues. But though our train of life
Ihould not lead us to Ltudy, the course of
education always furnishes proper employ-
ments to a well-difpofed mind. Whatever
we pursue, we should be emulous to ex-
cel.

Generous ambition and ferfibility to praise,
are, especially at the youthful period, among

the

# INTENT OF RELIGION.

the marks of virtue. WVe never ought to
tlink that any affluence of fortune, or any
elevation of rank, exempts us from the dtries
of application and industry; industry is the
.la of our being; it is the demand of nature,
of reason, and of God.

INTENT OF RELIGION.
F there be any principle fully ascertained
by religion; it is, that this life was intend-

ed for a fate oftrial and improvement to man.
HIis preparation for a better world required a
gradual purification, carrihd on by steps of
progressive discipline. The situation here
alilgned him was such as to anfver this de-
fi-n, by calling forth all his a&ive powers,
by giving full scope to his moral dirpofiions,
and bringing to light his whole chara&er.
Hence it became proper, that difficulty and
temptation should arise in the course of his
duty; ample rewards were promiscd to virtue,
but there rewards were left, as yet, in obfcu-
ri:y and distant profpet.

The imprefflions of sense were so balanced
against immortality, as to allow a confli6t be-

wen

# LOVE OF JUSTICE.

wveen faith and fenfe,-between conscience
and defirc,--betwcen prefcnt plcafure and fu-
ture good. In this conflic the fouls of good
men are tried,-improved and firengthencd:
-in this sild their honours are reaped;-here
are formed the capital virtues.of fortitude,
temperance, and fclf denial ,-moderation in
prosperity, patience in adversity, fubnmifion
to the will of God; charity and forgiveness to
men amidst the various competitions of world-
ly interest.

LOVE OF JUSTICE.
A S EN SE of juflice flhould be the foun-

dation of all our social qualities. Inour

most early intereourfe with the world, and
cven in our most youthful amusements, no
unfairness ihould be found. That sacred rule
of doing all things to others, according as
wev wifl they would do unto us, ihould be
engraved on our minds. For this end, we
ihould impress ourselves withadeep fcnfe of
the original, and natural equality of men.

Whatever advantages of bit th or fortune we
polfrfs, we ought never to display them with

an

# SELF-KNOWLEDGE.

an ofientatious superiority. We fhncod leave
the fu!i,,rdiiations of rank, to regulate the in-
tcrcourfe of mIore advanced years.-In youth
i. becomes us to act among our companions
as man with man. We Ihould remember
howv unknown to us are the vicissitudes of the
world; and how often they, on whom ig-
norant and contemptuous young men once
looked down with scorn, have risen to be
their superior in future years.

SELF-KNOWLEDGE.

T acquire a thorough knowledge of our-

l selves, is an attainment no lets difficult

than important. For men are generally un-
willing to fee their own imperfeaions; and
when they are willing to enquire into them,
their felf-love imposes upon their judgment.
Their intercourse with oneanother afifts their
delusion, to which, of themselves, they are
prone.

For the ordinary commerce of the world, is

a commerce of flattery and falsehood ; where
;eciprocally they deceive and are deceived,

where

,where every one appears under an alfumcd
form, proftlfcs cfieem, which he does not
fre!, and bestows praise in order to receive ir.

There are three characers which every

man Cfuflains; and these often extrlemu!y dif-
ferent from one another. One which he
poficffes is his own opinion; another, which
he carries in cftimation of the world ;- and
a third, awhich he bears in the judgment of
God :-it is only the last which afceltains
vwhat he really is. Whether the characer
which the world forms of him, be above or
below truth, it imports not much to know.
But it is of eternal consequence, that the
clharaaer which a man polleles in his own
eyes, be formed upon that which he bears in
the fight of God.

He flould enquire, after laying aside all

?artiality for himself, and exploring the heart
hith such accurate scrutiny, as may bring all
hidden defe&s to light, whether he be not
conscious, that the fair opinion which the
world entertains of him, is founded on their
partial knowledge, both of his abilities and
virtues.--c fliould be willing that all his

actions

noaions fllou', be publickly caniva!Fcd.-1- e
lhou'! bear to have his thoughts laid open.

WVhen he has kept from vice, it should be

know.n whether his innocence proceeded from
purity of principle, or from worldly motives;
whether any malignity or envy rifes within
him, when he compares his own condition
with that of others. He flould enquire whe-
;her he had been as felicitous to regulate his
heart, as to prefcrve his manners from re-
proach; profefing lhimfelfa Chriftian-whe-
ther the spirit of Chriss has appeared in his
conduct; declaring that he hopes for immor-
tality-whether that hope surmounted undue
attachment to the present life.

Such investigation, seriously pursued, may

produce to every man many discoveries of
himself; discoveries not pleasing perhaps to
vanity, but salutary and useful. For he can
only be a flatterer, but no true friend to him-
self, who aims not at knowing his own dc-
se&ts, as well as virtues.

C H E ER-

# CHEERFULNESS OF OLD AGE, AND LEVITY OF YOUTH, CONTRASTED.

CHiEERFUTLNESS OF OLD AGE, ANt LEVI-

T Y or YOUTH, CONTRASTED.
CIIIEERFULNESS in old age is gracefu!.

It is the natural concomitant of virtue.

But this is widely different from the levity of
youth. Many things are allowable in tha:
early period, which, in maturer years, would
deserve cenlure, but which, in old age, be-
come both ridiculous and criminal. By auk-
wardly affecling to imitate the manners, and
to mingle in the vanities of the young, as the
a.ed depart from the dignity, so they forfeit
the privileges of grey hairs. But if by follies
of this kind they are degraded, they are ex-
poied to much deeper blame by descending to
vicious pleasure, and continuing to hover
round those sinful gratifications to which they
were once addi&ed.

Amusement and relaxation the aged require,

and may enjoy: but they ihould confider well
by every intemperate indulgence they accele-
rate decay; instead of enlivening, they oppress
and precipitate their declining state.

pUBLIC

# PUBLIC LIFE. ITS INCONVENIENCIES.

P B L I C L Z F .

ITS INCO NV E N IENC ES.

E who lives always in public cannot
live to his own foul. Conversation and

inrercourfe with the world is, in several rc-
spa&s, an education for vice. From carlie.
vyuth we are accuflomed to hear riches and
honour extolled as the chief pffcilfions of
man, and propoed to us as the principal
aim of our future pursuits. We are trained
up to look with admiration on the flattering
marks of diftiotion which they bellow. In
quest of those fancied blessings, we fee the
multitude around us eager and fervet. Prin-
ciples of duty we may, perhaps, hear fi.we-
times inculcated ; but we seldom beholdthcnm
brought in competition with worldly profir.

The soft names and plausible colours un-

der which deceit, sensuality, and reve.ge arc
prcfented to-us in common discourse, weakee,
by degrees, our natural sense of the dilinc-
tion between good and evil. We often meet

F -with

# LOVE.

with crimes authorized by high examples, and
rewarded with the carcffes and smiles of the
world. WVe discover, perhaps, at la, that those
whom we are taught to reverence and to re-
gard as our patterns of condu&, at upon
principles no purer than those of others.

L O V E.

HAT is comrr.only called love a-
mongft the women, is rather gratitude

and a partiality to the man who prefers any
individual to the reft of the sex i such a man
f-e often marries with little of eithr personal
cfteem or affeaion. Indeed without an un-
usual fllare f natural sensibility, and very
peculiar good fortune, a woman in this coun-
try has very little probability of marrying for
love.

For love is not to begin on the part cf the

female, but entirelyto be the consequence of
a man's attachment to her. Nature has
therefore as wifely as benevolently assigned
to the tender sex, a greater flexibility of talte
on chis subjet.

Some

Sjmc agreeablc qualities recommend a gen-
:.i:an to common good liking, and friend-
1'hI. In the course of acquaintance, he con-
ilas an attachment. VWhen a woman per-
ci.:ics it, it excites her gratitude; this rifes
:!n;I preference, and this preference, per-
laps, at last advances to some degree of at-
:-;,llment, especially if it meets with crosses
and difficulries; for these, and a state of sus-
Fcnse are very great incitements to attach-
ieicnr, and are the food of love in both sexes.

The effecs of-love among men are diverfi.

fica by their different tempers. An artful
man may countefeift every one of them so
s eafGly to impofe'pn a;young girl of an open,
generous, and feeling heart, if flie is not ex-
trcnicly on her guard. The finest parts of
ftnil a girl may not always prove fufficicnt for
:ic:. fccurit-. 77te dark and crookedpaths of
fjnninzg are unsearchable, and inconceivable
;i an honourableand elevated mind.

F 2 ARTFUL

# ARTFUL SENTIMENTAL LOVER.

ARTFUL SENTIMENTAL LOVER.

T H E man versed in the wiles of deceit
puts on the mask of plauibility and vir-

tue, and, by these means, disarms the object
of his attention and apparent administration
of her prudence, lays her apprehenfiona
asleep, and involves her in misery: misery
the more inevitable, because unsuspected
For fle who apprehends no danger, will not
think it necessary to be always upon her
guard; but will rather invite than avoid the
ruin which comes under so specious and si
fair a form.

One of these sentimental lovers will not

scruple very seriously to assure a credulous
girl, that her unparalelled merit entitles her
to the adoration of the whole world; and that
the universal homage of mankind is nothing
more than the unavoidable tribute extorted by
her charms.

But ihe should refle&, that he who endeav-

curs to intoxicate her with adulation intends
.ne day most effe&ually to humble her. For

an
s

Rn artful man has always a fecrct design to

pay himflif in future for any present sacrifice.
ifiCe has addrcfi and condut, and the objeE
of his pursuit much vanity, and fume fcnfi-
biliry, he seldom f£iils of Iuccefs; or so pow-
erful will be his afcentlenoy over her mind,
that he wvill soon adopt his notions and opinions.

The lover, deeply vcrfed in all the obliqui-

ties of fraud, and tkilled to wind himself iAto
every avenue of the heart which indifcrction
lia. left unguarded, Coon discovers on which
fide it is mot acceflible.-He avails himnfel
of this weakness by addrffing her in a lan-
guage exaetly consonant to her own ideas.--
He attacks her with her own weapont, and
opposes, if a fcntimental girl, rhapsody to
fcntiment.-He profeftes so forvrign a ion-
tempt for the paltry concerns of motey, that
the thinks it her duty to reward him for so
generous a reounrciatio.-Every plea he art-
fully advances of his own unsvorhinefs, it
cunfideled by her as a frolh demand, that her
gratitude muet anfwer.-And he makes it a
point of honour to facificc to him that for-
tune which he it too noble to regard.

F 3 These

# EFFECTS OF HONOURABLE LOVE.

Tielfi prol'lffions of ihuiinity arethe corn-

-no!i artificcs f the an;ii, and these protelt-
:.trlns js gcncrolity the refuge of the rapacious

FFrECTS OF IIONOL.RABLE LOVE.

?.I A N oif dlcicacv oft bet.ays h:s paliri.l

- by ii.; too gleat anxiety to conceal i:
f,-eci'ily. if 1.e hns but little hopes of fuccef:.
'Tr.e love, in ill Its fanes, leeks concealmcnt

irjd never expicc, fuccef--,t renders a mani
n.:t n!y refpceful, but timid, to the highcel

del-rec, in i.;s bLh.iviour to the woman l:e

lo ves.

To conceal the awe he flands in of her, ih

may L:;intimcs afftc: pleasantry, but it fits
a\;.kwardly on hi ; and he quickly relaprcs
into fer:ournes, ii not dul!ncls.-He magnifies
all her real lpeifeions in his imagination,
and is either blind to her failings, or converts
them into beauties.-Like a petfon confciou;
of guil, ihe is jealous that every eye observes
him ; and to avoid this, he (liuns all the little
.,bfervalnccs of common gallantry.

I is

# MALE COQUETRY.

His heart and his character iili be improv-

i.. in every refpeEt by his attachment.-i-Ti
manners will become more gentle, and hIis
conversation more agreeable; but diffidence
and embarrassment will always make him ap-
pear to disadvantage in the company of his
mistress. If the fascination continues long,
,L will depress his spirit, and extinguiih every
-igourous and manly principle of his mind.

M A L E C 0 Q.U E T R Y.
M ALE coquetry is much more inexcuf-

able than female, as well as more per-

nicious; but it is rare in this country. Very
few men will give themnelves the trouble
to gain, or retain any woman's affeaions,
unless they have views on them either of an
honourable or dilhonourable kind.

Men employed in the pursuits of business,

ambition or pleasure, will not give themselves
the trouble to engage a woman's affectiuns,
merely from the vanity of conquest, and of

IF triumphing

tliumphing over the heait of an innocent and
defenceless gill.

A man of parrs, fentimcnt, and addrcrs, if

he lays afile all regard to truth and humanity
may engage the heart of fifty women at the
'ln:- time; and may likewise ccndut his
c.t!scery whith so muce art, as to put it out
o i, e poser of any of them to fptcify a single
<xprelffoa that could be laid to be diueatly ex-
;: eilve of love.

J'':i ambiguity of behaviour, this art 'J

t,.pirg one itt ,ffpefe, is the great surety of
coquetry of both lixes.-lt is the more cruel in
men, becaufc riey can carry it to shat length
ihey please, and continue it as long as thcy
plealf, without the women being so much as
at liberty to complain or expoflulate; whereas
men can break the chain, and force women to
explain whenever they become impatient of
their situation.

But as a xi man in this country may easily

prevent the sirs imprelions of love, every
motive of prudence and delicacy ihould make
her guard her heart againf them, till such
time as ihe has received the most convincing

proofs

# MAN OF THE WORLD.

pronfs of the attachment oF a man of such
merit as v'ill justify a reciprocal regard. She
should (ludioufly labour to poflefs such high
principles of honour and generosity, as will
lender her incapable of deceiving, and, atthe
time trime, to pofferf that acute dircerinent
which may s(ecure her against being deceived.

IMAN. OF THE WORLD.

E pretends that virtue is, at least a re-
fpe&able and honoured name, while

piety founds meanly in his ears-and claims
to be a man of honour.-He reits upon hu-
nmanity-public fpirit-probity and truth.--
Ile arrogates to himfelfall the manly and ac-
tive virtues: but devout atffecions and religi-
(,as duties he treats with contempt, as founded
on ihadowy speculation, and fit to employ the.
attention only of weak and superstitious minds.
-Hence this neglef of piety argues deprav-
ity of fottl-nfers an irregular discharge of
the duties of morality, and discovers a cold
and hard heart.

rE S He

# MAN'S REAL DEPENDENCE.

He k ho acts from worldly wiv:ldom lays

principle aside, and trust his defence to his
art and ability. He avails himitelf of every
advantage which his knowledge of the world
fuggefis-he attends to nothing but what he
confiders as his intcreft; and unconfincd by
conscience, pursues it by every course which
promises him success.

Perbons of this character condemn them-

f'clves to iive a mcft unquiet life; they pass
!heir days in perpetual anxiety,-liftening to
every moti:n,-ltartled by every alarm,
-changing their measures on every new oc-
currence,-anid when distress breaks in over
all their defences, they are left under it hoSe-
c!fs and disconsolate.

MAN'S REAL DEPENDENCE.
M A N should proceed with caution and

circumfpecion through a world, where

:evil so frequently lurks under the form of good.
- To be humble and modeftin opinion,-
to be vigilant and attentive in conduct,-to
t!iirtuft fair appearanes,-and to restrain rafi

desires-

dcfircs-are in(truaions which the darkness
of his prelcnt fate should strongly inculcate.

God hath appointed his tituation to be so
nmbiguous in order both to call forth the ex-
er:ion of those intelligent powers which he
iluth given him, and to enforce his depend-
cnce on his gracious aid.-Surrounded by so
many bewildering paths, among which the
wsifel are ready to stray, he fhculd earnestly
implore, and thankfully receive that divine
illumination which is promised to the pious
-nd humble.

What must be the fate of him who looks

not up to Heaven for direction, nor properly
excrts the realon which God hath given him ?
-wvho brings neither patience nor attention to
the search of true happiness ? who applies to
no other counsellor than present pleasure, and
with a rash and credulous mind delivers him-
sri-s up to every fuggeflion of desire ?

P.6 DEVOUT

# DEVOUT MAN.

DEVOUT M A .

TI S venration is not confined to a&s of
- inleJ.ie.;rwo lfhip. It is the habitu:l

ttmper of his foul. No place and no object
appear to him void of God. When he fur-
veys this vail universe, where beauty and
goodness are every wvheie predominant ;-
when lie refle&s on the numbetlefs multitudes
,f creatui cs, who, in their different ft.tionz
enjoy the blefi(ngs of exiftencc ;- nd
wh.n, at the lime rime, he looks up to an
universal f.ther, rhlo hath thus filled creation
with lfe and happiness ; his h-art glows
xithin him. Hc looks forward to immortali:y
;lod discovers the highest fubjets of gratitude.
-He views himself as a guilty creature,
whom divine benignity has received into grace,
whose forfeited hopes it has reltored, and to
whom it has opened the most glorious prof-
pea of future felicity. He contemplates with
afionifliment the labours of the Son of God, in
accomplining redemption for men, and hi;
Coul overflows with thankfulness to him.

To

To inferior -.n:oymcnts hc a!'ots irferior

-,nd ficondjry a:trclh'.s:rts.--IHe dic'ialns not
every e;lt':ly aff.aion-He pretends not to
rntounce all p'eafire in the comfotoi of this
p ldent slate. Such an unnatural renunci.Aion
humanity frbitls, ant! rdlilon cannot require.
Bit from heife he expeas nor fupiemc blif.
lie difcetns the vanity .which;belongs to them
a'l; and behyohd the citc:e tt mutable objeAs
which furroutle4 him, hiialtpites afier some
principles of rtiore perfeff ftlicity, which shall
art, be subjet to change of decay.

But whete is his ctmnplite and penrnaneat

good to be found ? Atbition 'putrucs it ia
coutts and palates, and returns from the pur-
suit loaded with ftrmrosi P1kalfre seeks it
atnohg sensual joyl atd tetiree with the con-
effion of difappolitnetnt.

After exploring heaven and earth for hap-

piness, to the devout rtati they betn a mighty
void, a wilderness of ihadowi *shere all
wOald be erfpty ahid utifbfiaatiat without
OGd.-Trrkte itaMiefs d*elU Oafly with GoC.

M E A

# MEN AND WOMEN, HOW DIFFERING IN POINT OF UNDERSTANDING.

MEN AND W OME N,

SloW DIFFERiNG IN POI:T OF UNDES TND;:;DI:G.
W OMEN generally have quicker per-

ceptions; men have juster sentiments.

\'omen confider how things may be prettily

j.id; men how they may be properly said.-

In women, (young ones at least) Ppeaking ac-
companies, and fumetimes precedes refletion;
in men, reflc&ion is the antecedent.

Women speak to fliine or please; men to

convince or confute.-Women admire what is
brilliant; men what is folid.-'Vomen prefer
an extemporaneous sally of wit, or a spark-
ling effusion of fancy; before the most accu-
rate reasoning, or the molt laborious invefti-
gation of faEs.

In literary composition, women are pleased

with point, turn, and antithesis; men with
observation, and a just dedufion of effeits
from their caufes.--Vomen are fond of inci-
Acnts; men of argumcnt.--W'omen admire

passion-

paffionatcly; men cautioufly.-One sex will
;i.;k it betrays want of feeling to be mode-
rate in their appllaufe; the cther will be afraid
of exposing a want of judgment, by being in
raptures with any thing.-Men refute to give
say to the emotions they aaually feel; while
women sometimes asser to be transported be-
yond what the occasion will justify.

The women of this country were not sent

into the world to flun society, but embellish
it; they were not defgned for wilds and soli-
tudcs, but for tile amiable and endearing of-
sices of social life. They have useful stations
to fill, and important characers to sustain.-
They are of a religion which does not impose
penances, but enjoins duties; a religion of
perfel purity, but of perseEt benevolence
'lli; a religion which does not condemn its
followers to indolent seclusion from the world,
but assigns them the more dangerous, though
more honourable province of living uncor-
rupted in it. In fine, a religion, which does
not direQ: them to fly from the multitude,
that they may do nothing, but which positive-
ly forbids them to follow a multitude to do
evil.

MIAR-

# MARRIAGE.

M A R R I A G E.
T IIERE is nothing which renders a wo-

man mrre dcfpicaile, than her thinking

it efetnrial to happiness to be married. Besides
the grols indelicacy of the sentiment, it is a
false one, as thousands oF women have expe-
rienced. But a martied (ate, if entered into
from proper motives of cftccm and affelhion,
is the happiest, makes women the mnot re-
fpeAable in the eyes of the woild, and the
molt uferul members of focitty. Care Ihould
be taken not to relinquifli the ease and inde-
pendence of a single life, to become the slaves
of a fool, or a tyrant's caprice.

Love is very seldom produced at first fight;

at leaf, in that cafe, it muff have a very un-
juflifiable foundation. True love is founded
on esteer, in a correspondence of tasses and
.sentiments, and ieals on the heart impercep-
tibly. Therefore, before the affteions come
to be in ite least engaged to any man, women
flould examine their tempers, their tafes, and

their

t!:-ir hearts verv severely, and fettle in their
.'n minds what are the requisites to their
iappinefs in a married ftd:e; and, as it is al-
most izpioffible that they Ihould get every
tling they with, they ihould come toa steady
dctermination wxhat they are to confider as eC-
fentia!, had what may be facifited.

Should they have hearts disposed by nature

ifr love and friendlhip, and poaifs those feel-
ilgs which enable them to enter into all the
ilfisements and delicacies of there attach-
ments, natters fihould be well confidered be-
fore they give them any indulgence.

Should they have the misfortune to have

such tempers, and fucb ftiments deeply root-
ed in them; should they have spirit and refo.
lution to rafifl the foiicitations of vanity, the
persecution of fricnds; and can they fuppert
the profpea of the many inconveniencns at-
tending the fate of an old maid, then they
may indulge themlelves in that-kind of fcrti-
mental reading and conversation whirh isa~m
courefpondent o their feclings.

But if it is found, on a firil felf-examia~

tion, that marriage is abftltely efciatial tb
lteir happinef, the lecrct ihould be kept in-

violable

viola;ble in their own bosoms; but they fl.ould
fliun, as they would do the mnoft fatal pc.ifi.n,
'.l tlit fpccies of reading ar.d converfatio:
which warnns the irnagination, which engages
and fofrtens the heart, and raises the ralte above
the level of common life. If they do other-
v.ise, !et them confider the terrible conflit
of palfions this may afterwards raise in their
brcals.

If this refinement once takes deep root in

their minds, and they do not mean to obey
its diates, but marry from vulgar and mer-
cenary views, they may never be able to era-
dicate it entirely, and then it will embitter all
theirmarried days. InRfead ofmeetingwith fcnfe,
tenderness, delicacy, a lover, a friend, an equal
companion in an husband, they may be tired
with insipidity and dulness, ihocked with in-
delicacy, and mortified by indifference.

To avoid there complicated evils, joined

to others which may arise from the opinion of
the world relative to the infelicity thence ari-
sing, women who are determined, at all
events, to marry, {hould have all their read-
i:l and amusements of such a kind, as do not

aflri

aiTf:Ct the heait nor the imaginatlon, except in
rhL. vav of wit and humour.

WVlatcvcr r ac a ,.oman's vicws in marry-

ing, flie nionid take every poflillc precaution
to prevent being disappointed. If fortune,
and the pleasure it brings be her aims, the
principal fec.rity she can have for this, will
d ccnld on her marrying a good natured, ge-
nerous man, who defp:ifcs money, and who
wil let her live where (he can bet enjoy that
p!icaure, that pomp and parade of life for
wvhich Ihe married him.

In order to ensure felicity, it is difficult to

point out in the married atate the mod effe&ual
mithod; nor can we advise whom a woman
lhould marry, but we may with great confi-
dence advise whom (he (hould not marry.

A companion that may entail any heredi-

tary disease on pofierity, particularly madness,
fllhuld be avoided. Such rifque'is the height
of imprudence, and highly criminal.

A woman should not marry a fool; he is

the most intratable of all animals : he is led
by his passions and caprices, and is incapable
of healing the voice of reason. Besides, it
mly probably too hurt a woman's vanity, to

have

have an hufblnd for wshonim he has reaf.in to
blush and tremble every time he opens his
lips in company.

But the wvoft circumfi.nce that attends a

fool, is his confiant jealoufv of nis wife's being
thought to govern him. This renders it im-
pcffible to lead him; and he is continually
doing aufurd ar.d disagreeable things, for no
other reason bur to Ihew he dare do them

A rake is always a suspicious hufbacd, be-

cause he has only known the moal worthiefc
of the fcx.

Women who have a sense of religion, thould

not think of husbands who have none. If
they have tolerable underfiandings, they will
be glad that their wives have religion forthleir
own fakes, and for the fake of their families,
but it will silk them in their elfcem.

If they are weak men, they will be conti-

nually lihecking and teasing them about their
principles.

A sudden folly of paflion Ihould never be

given way to, and dignified with the name of
love. Genuine love .i not founded on caprice;
it is founded ia naturc, or honourable vit.ws;

on

virtue, on similarity of taftc, and sympathy
of foul..

TI: point of fortune, which is necessary to

the happiness of both, a competency is requi-
site. But what that competency may be, can
only be determined by their own taftes. F
they have enough between them as will facisfy
all demands, it is sufficient.

Marriage will at once dispel the enchant-

ment railed by external btauty; but the vir-
tues and graces that first warmed the heart,
that rererve and delicacy which always left the
lover ftm.cthing furtherto vwifi, and often made
him doubtful of his mistress's fenfibilty and
attachment, may, and ought ever :ti. t

The tumult of paflion will naturally fiubL

fide; but it will be succeeded by endearment
that affecs the heart in a more equal, more
sensible, and more tender manner.

TRUE

# TRUE MEEKNESS.

TRUE E E K N L SS.
,EEKICNESS. like mofl other virtues, has

certain limnis, which it no fooncr ex-

ceeds than it becomes criminal. She who
hears innocence maligned, without'vindica-
ting it; farlelood afftrted, without contradiei..
ing it; or religion profancd, without resent-
ing it, is not gentle, but wicked.

MIeknefs is imperfect if it be not both ac-

tive and passive; if it will not enable us to lub-
due our own passions and resentments, as well
as qualify us to bear patiently the passions and
resentments of others. If it were only for
mere human reasons, it would turn to a pro-
fitable account to be patient; nothing defeats
thle malice of an enemy like the spirit of for-
bea ance; the return of rage for rage cannot
be so effetually provoking.

True gentleness, iike an impenetrable ar-

mour, repels the most pointed shafts of ma-
lice: they cannot pierce through this invul-
nerahle shield, but fall hurtless to the ground,
or return to wound the hand that shot them;

A meek

A meeck fplrit will not look out of itfclf fcr
lhppine!s, because it finds a conflant banquet
it home; yet, by a fort of divine alchymy, it
will convert all external events to its own pro-
fit, and be able to deduce some good even
from the most unpromising: it will exera&
comfort and fatisfaaion from the most barren
circumstances: " It will fuck honey out of

the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock."
Meekness may be called the pioneer of all

the other virtues, which levels every obftruc-
tion, and smooths every difficulty that might
impede their entrance, or retard their progress.
Honours and dignities are transient; beauty
und riches frail and fugacious but this ami-
able virtue is permanent. And surely the
truly wife would wish to have some one pof-
session which they may call their own in the
severest exigencies. This can only be ac-
complifhed by acquiring and maintaining that
calm and absolute felf-poffeffion, which, as the
world had no hand in giving, so it cannot, by
the most malicious exertion of its power take
away.

MIDDLE

# MIDDLE AGE.

.M1 D D L E A G E.
AS we advance from youth to midJie age, a

new field of action opens, and a different

characer is required. The flow of gay im-
petuous spirits begins to subside; life gradual-
ly assumes a graver caf; the mind a more
ftdare and thoughtful turn. The attention is
now transferred from pleasure to intcreft; that
is, to p:caflre diffuscd oier a wider extent,
and measured by a larger scale.

Fornmrly, tlhe enjoyment of the rrefent

moment occupied the whole attention; now,
no alEion terminates ultimately in itself, but
refers to some more distant aim. Wealth and
power, the instruments of lafiing gratification,
are now coveted more than any single plea-
sure: prudence and foresight lay their plan;
indufiry carries on its patient efforts; a&tivity
pufles forward; address winds around; here,
an enemy is to be overcome; there, a rival to
be displaced; competition warms; and the
fRiifc of the world thickens on every fide.

THE

# THE UNION OF PIETY AND MORALITY.

riE UNION OF PIETY AND

MORALITY.

I-I I S forms the confillent, the graceful,
the refpeEtable chara&er of the real

christian, the man of true worth. Either
of them left our, one fide of the character is
c.nly fair-; the other fide will be always open
y, much rei-roach. Hence we difihoourour-
ie'veq, and do great injunlice to religion: as
bly division it is exposed to the censure of the

world.

The unbeliever will soss at such piety,

where he fees neglet of moral duties. The
bigot will decry all morality, where he fees a
Pretcnce of virtue, though a contempt of God.
V'Whereas he who fears God, and is at the
fame time just and beneficent to men, exhibits
religion to the world with full propriety. His
character is above reproach. It is at once
amiable.and venerable. Malice itself is afraid
to attack him; and even the worfi men refpec
and honour him in their hearts. ie xvho
Jails materially either in piety, or virtue, is
;lways obnoxious to the anguilh of remorse.

G NEGLECT

# NEGLECT OF RELIGION.

NEGLEsCT OF RELIGIOn.
*'THERE P-eligion is neglcóted there

can be no regular or feady praEtiec of

lhe duties of morauly. The char.,Eter will
be often incolnfiftnt; and virtue, placed oil
a barls tao natlow to fulport it, will be a!-
ways loose and tottering. For such is the
¥ropenlity of our nature to vice, so numer-
ous are the temptations to a relaxed and im-
moral condut, that stronger restraints than
'tholf of mere reason, are neccffary to be im-
*posed on man.

The sense of right and wrong, the prin-

:iple of honour, or the inftint of benevolence,
are barriers too feeble to wihftand the firength
of passion. For the heart wounded by fore
distress, or agitated by violent emotions, foort
discovers, that virtue without religion is in-
adequate to the government of life. It is def-
titute of its proper guard-of its firmest sup-
p'ort-of its chief encouragement. It will
fink under the weight of misfcit me, or will
yield to the folicitatioris of guilt.

Humanity

# OLD MAID.

Humanity seconded by piety renders the

spring from whence it flows of course more
rcgular and constant. In forr, withdraw
religion and you lhake all the pillars of mor.-
ahty. In every heart you weaken the influ-
ence of virtue: and among the multitude,
tiih bulk of mankind, you overthrow its
xiwcr.

OLD MAID.

T is to be lamented that so universal a
stigma flould fall upon that iate, called

antiquated virginity; and that those whose
::nhappy lot it is should experience such
cenera! derision. It is a mistaken notion,
however, to conclude that it always arises in
consequence of the situation of such indi-.
-:duals; it often originates from their own.
;.eculiar condu&.

Being unable to bear with becoming for-

titude their forlorn and unproteEted allotment
'.l.ifc, chagrin and peevifanefs are apt to infecE
their tempers; and they too severely feel the
great difficulty of making a transition with
4:,nity, andcheerfulnefs, from the period

G2 <Of

of youth, beauty, admiration. and rerpea,
into the calm, silent, unnoticed retreat ofde-
clhning 'cais.

Fur ve ic fe ome unmar.ied women oF ac-

tive vigorous minds, ant great vivacity of
Jpi'its, deci;.ding themselves:; fometimns by
cnteri:;g .!to a diliparcd couife of life, un-
fuit.jlile to their years. and expofing-thcnm-
cllves to the ridicule of girls, 'who mlcg.t
have been their grand childrcn; fuinrtin.cs by
olp-rcffing their acquaintances by impertinent
i½ntrufions into their private aff3;rs; anoi
fimet:imes by being the propagators of fcand!
anti defamation.

All this is owing to an exuberant acivity -.

fpilit; which, if it had found emploiymer at
home, wouid have rendered them refpeau'!c
and useful members of f.-ciety.

WVe fee other women, in the fame situation

gen:lc, modest, blelt with fcnf, tafe, delicacy,
and every milder feminine virtue of the heart,
but of weak fpiti:s, bafLful and timid. Them
we fee finking into obscurity and infignifiance,
and gradually losing every elegant accomplifi-
ment; for ilus evident rearon, that they are
not united to a partner who has funfe a:.d

wor, .

# OLD AGE.

worth, and tale to know their value; one
wh, is ab!h to draw forth their concealed
i'.j'itics. and flew them to advantage , who
can give that support to their freble spirits
which they sand so much in need of, and
who, by his affc&tion and tendcrnefs, might
make such a woman happy in exerting every
u.lent, and accomp!iihing heifelf in every
dlegant art that could contribute to his amuse-
ment.

O L D A G E.
O LD Age is a stage of the human course

which every one hopes to reach ; it is a

period jultly entitled to general relpe&. Even
its failings ought to be touched with a gentle
hand. For though in every part of life vexa-
tions occur; yet, in former years, either
business, or pleasure, served toobliterate their
impressions, by supplying occupation to the
mind.

Old age begins its advances by disqualifying

men either from relifliing the one, or for
taking an a&ive part in the other; while it
withdraws their accustomed supports, it im-

G 3 poses

poefs, at he fameme, the additional bur-
den of growing infirmicies.

In the former fiagcs of their journey, hope

continued to flatter them with many a fair and
enticing profpe&; but as old age increaseS
these illusions vanilh. Life is contrated
wvithin a narrow and barren circle. Year as-
ter year steals Ibmewhat away from their store
of conmforr,-deprives them of fume of their
anrtient friends,-blunts some of their rowers
of fenlhtion,-and incapacitates them for some
funllion of life,

The quer-ulous temper,t to them imputed,

is to be conlidered as a natural inlirmity,
ra:her than a vice: the fame apology cannot be
nalc f .r that pcevifh disgust at the manners,
and that malignat:: renfure of the enjoymears,
of tile young, which is founetimes found to
accompany declining years.

It is too common ro find the aged at de-

clated enmity, wiith the whole if)flm of pre-
lfnt cufloms and mannrs ; perpetually com-
plaining of the growing depravity of the
world, and of the aftoniifing vices and
follies of the rising generation. All things,

accord-

# PASSIONATE WOMAN.

according to them, are rushing fast into ruin.
Decency and good order have become cx-
:inct; ever (ince that happy discipline, under
which they spent their youth, has passed
.svay.

Former follies vanifi, and are forgotten,

Those which are present, itrike observation.
and iharpen crnfure. Hadthe depravation of
the world continued to increase in proportion
to those gloomy calculations, which, so many
centuries. past have eflimated each race as
worfc than the preceding; by this rime, not
one ray of good sense, nor one spark of piety
and virtue, must have remainedc nextinguiih-
ed among mankind.

PASSIONATE WOMAN.
A PASSIONATE woman's happiness .is

never in. her own keeping; it is the

sport of accident and the slave of events. Ic
is in the power of her acquaintance, her.fecr
vant, but chiefly her enemies; and all her
somfinrts lie at the mercy of others. .So far
Som being willing to learn of him. who was

G *4 meek

# APPEARANCES OF PIETY.

meek and lowly, flie conlfers meekness as the
want of a becoming fpirir, and lowliness as a
despicable and vulgar mesnnefs.

An imperious woman will so little covet

the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, that
it is the only ornament she will not be so-
iicirous to wear. But resentment is a very
expensive vice. How dearly has it cost its
votaries, even from the fin of Cain, the first
cffender of this kind? " It is cheaper (rays
a pious writer) to forgive and save the
charges."
APPEARANCES OF PIETY.

H E S E are often substituted in the place
of the great duties of humanity and

mercy. Too many flatter themselves with
the hope of obtaining the friendihip of- their
Creator, though they neglect to do justice to
their fellow-creatures.

But supposed piety is an invention of

their own, unknown to reafon-unknown
in the word of God. For piety is a

prin-

# MEN OF TRUE PLEASURE.

principle which regenerates the heart, and
f,';ns it to goodel's. If therefore, while
!l,:ry seems ardent, moraliry shall de-
cline; or if, ever the :cgard to it Ihould to-
i.'ly fail; if whilst making prayers, no alms
mne given; if, whilst we appear zealous for
Goa, we are false or unjust to men ; if we are
hard or contraaed in heart, severe in our
cenlures, and oppressive in our condu&, then
cl ncitde what we have termed piety, was no
more than an empty name, resolving itlelf
tither into an hypocritical form of godliners
a transient imprelfion of feriournefs i an ac-
cidental melting of the heart; or the deliberate
refuge of a deluded and superstitious, but,
at the fame time, a corrupted mind. For
all men, even the molf depraved, are fubjecl,
more or less, to compuntions of conscience.

MkN OF TRUE PlLEA.SLURE.
T HE feat of enjoyment is the fiul.

None but the temperate, the regular,

and the virtuous know how to enjoy
prosperity. They bring to its comforts
the manly relifh.of a found uncorrupted mind.

G 5 They

They flop at the proper poilt before enjoy.
mcnt degencrates iito disgust, and plcalilre
is converted inco pain. They are flr;ngers
to thole complaints which fl,w from spleen
capiice, and all the fantatrical distresses of a
vitiated mind. Purity and virtue heighten
aql the powers of human fruition. Moderate
and simple pleasures relifi high with the
temperate.

Innocence confers ease and freedom on the

r.iind, leaves it open to every pleasing sensa-
tion, gives a lightness to the spirits, similar to
Tl;. native gaiety of youth and health; for
p: ofperity is redoubled to a good man by his
gecntrous use of it; it is refleted back upon
him from every one whom he makes happy.

In the intercourse of domestic aftferion,

in the attachment of friends, the gratitude of
dependents, the esteem and good will of all
s ho know him, he fees blessings multiplied
around him on every fide; like a tree in the
inidft of an inhabited country, affording to
some friendly, shelter; to others, fruit, which
is not only admired by all for its beauty, but
blessed by the traveller for the ihade, and by
the hungry for the fuftcnance it has given.

MA

# MAN OF PLEASURE.

rMAN Of PLEASURE.

O a man of pleasure every moment ap-
pears to be loft, which palt kes not of

he vivacity of amuflment. To connet one
plan of gaiety with another is his sole study,
till in a very short time nothing remains but to
tread the fame beaten round, to enjoy what
they have already enjoyed, and to fee what
they have often reen-

Pleasures thus drawn to the dregs become

vapid and tafielefs. What might havepleafecd
long, if enjoyed with temperance and ming-
led with retirement, being devoured with such
eager haste, speedily surfeits and disgusts.
Hence having run through a rapid course of
pleasure, after having glittered for a few
years in the foremost ne of public amuse-
ments, such men are the most apt to fly at last
to a melancholy retreat;. not led by religion or
reason, but driven by disappointed hopes and
txhaufted spirits to the pensive conclueon,
t-!at all is vanity.

G 6 PLEASURE,.

# PLEASURE, SENSUAL, AND SPIRITUAL.

PLEASUR E, SE. S U A L, A ND,

SPIRIT UAL.

HE refined pleasures of a pious mind
are, in many refpe&s, superior to the

eoarfc gratifications of sense; they are plea-
fures svhichl belong to the highest powers and.
best afft&tions of the foul; whereas the grati-
ficariolis of ftnfe reside in the lowefR region of
our nature. To the onethe foul sloops be-
low its native dignity; the other raises it above
it.lff. The one leaves always a comfortless,
often a mortifying remembrance behind it;
the other is reviewed with applause and de-
light. The pleasures of fbme resemble a.
foaming torrent; which, after a disorderly
course, speedily runs our, and leaves arn
empty and cftcifive channel: but the plea.
fures of devotion resemble the equable cur-
rent of a pure river, which enlivens the
fields through %shich it piflcs, and dilfufes
,Ycdure and fertility along its banks.

PLEASURES

# PLEASURES OF OLD AGE.

PLEASURES OF OLD AGE.
'T H O U G H, in old age, the circle of plea-

sure is contracted, yet within its limits

many of thole enjoyments remain which are
most grateful to human nature.

Temnperate mirth is notextinguilhed by ad-

vanced years; the mild pleasures of domeflic
life still cheer the heart. The entertainments
of conversation and social intercourse continue
unimpaired. The defirc of knowledge is not
abated by the frailty of the body, and the lei-
sure of old age affords many opportunities for
gratifying that desire. The sphere of obfer-
vation and reflei&ion is not so much enlarge4
by long acquaintance with the world, as. to
supply, within itself, a wide range of improv-
ing thought. Wlhilft the aged are engaged in
such employments as best suit the infirrities
of their nature, they are surrounded, perhaps,
with families, who treat them with attention
nnd rerpec: they are honoured by their frieods,
their charaters are established, and are placed
Leyond the reach of clamour, and the ftrifeof

tongues

# PRESUMPTION.

tongues; and free ficvm diflrati:,L cares, can
calmly attenrd to thcir eternal intlcr.!ts.

lNu age is doomed to rctal infulicity, pro-

vided that we attempt not to do violence to
nature, by seeking to extort from one age the
pleasures of another, and to gather in the
winter of life rlhoe flowers which were def-
tined to bloflom only in its summer or its
spring.

P R E S U M P T I 0 N.
T H E constant concomitant of presumption

is felf-conceit and obstinacy; and of all

the follies incidentto youth particularly, there
are none which either deform its present ap-
pearance, or blast the profpec of its future
prosperity more than these. By checking its
natural progress in improvement, they fix it in
long immaturity, and frequently produce mif-
chiefs which can never be repaired.

These are the vices too commonly found

among the young. Big with enterprize, and
elated by hope, they resolve to trust for fuc-

ces&

cfs to none bu: themcelrcs. Full of their
.i\n abilities, they deride the admonitions
..hich are given them by their friends, as the
timorous suggestions of age. Too wife to
learn, too impatient to deliberate, too forward
t.) be refrained, they plunge with precipitate
indi.cretion into the midf of all the dangers
with which life abounds. Positive in opinion,
and confident in their affcrtions as they are at
this period, the time will arrive when both
men and things will appear in a different
light. Many characters now admired, will
fink by and by in esteem; and many opinions,
of which they are at prefenr most tenacious,
will alter as they advance in years.

The glare of youthful presumption which

dazzles our eyes Ihould always be distrusted;
w e ihould not abound in our own sense, nor
put ourselves forward with too much eager-
refs; nor imagine that by the impetuosity of
juvenile ardour, systems can be overturned
which have been long eftablihed, or that the
face of the world can be changed; but by
patient and gradual progression in improve-
ment, we may in due time command lasting
cftecm. But by assuming at present a tone of

fupe.

# DISAPPOINTED PRIDE.

fuperioritv to which wevhave no tile, we flall
difgtuif thofc whufe approbati-,n it is mnoft im-
porrant to gain. Foiward vivacity may fit u;
to be the comraniuns of an idle hour: more
iulid quali:ies n:ut recommend us to the wife,
and mark vL' out for importance and confide-
ratinn in fiub(cqunt life.

DISAPPOINTED PRIDE.
TTIEN a man's sufferings afife from

the bad diltolfitions of his own heart ;

when in the height of prnfperity he is ren-
dered minielable folcly by dif.ppointed pride,
every Oldinary motive for communication
ceases. The violence of angu'/h drives hirn
to confers a paflion which renders him odious,
and a weacnefs which renders him deijicable.

In the eye of his family, every maln wilhes

to appear rcfpec&a!lle, and.to cover from their
knov.ltdge whatever may vilify or degrade
hint. AttaLkcd or reproached abroad, he con-
folcs himfeilf with his importance at home;
and in domcftic attachment and refpc&, seek's

fc;

# PRINCIPLE AND SENTIMENT CONTRASTED.

;.r forme compensation for the injuflice of the
.vorid. But the torments this fully occasions,
forces h;m to break through all restrain:s, and
publish his shame before those, from whom all
mnen seek most to hide it.

All the evils which poverty, disease, or vio-

lence can inflic, and their flings will be found
by far less pungent than those which such guilty
palfiins dart into the heart. But those difor-
ders, by feizingdiretly on the mind, attack
Iluman nature in its strong hold, and cut off
i:s last resource. They penetrate to the very
feat of sensation, and convert all the powers of
thought into instruments of torture.
PRINCIPLE AND SENTIMENT

CONTRASTED-
CENTIMENT and principle are often mif-

taken for each other, though in fat they

widely differ. Sentiment is the virtue of ideas,
and principle the virtue of action. Senti-
ment has its feat in the head; principlein the
heart. Sentiment suggests fine harangues,
and fubile diftintionsi principle conceives

just

just notions, and performs good actions
in confcquence of them. Sentiment refines
away the simplicity of truth, and the plain-
ness of piety; and, as VOLTAIRE, that ele.
brated wit, has remarked of his no less ce-
lebrated cotemporary ROUSSEAU, " gives us
virtue in words, and vice in deeds." Senti-
ment nmay be called the Athenian, who kn,:u
what was right; and principle the Lacede-
moninn, who pratifed it.

Thcefe qualities may be exemplified from

confidering two characers beautifully drawn
by the admitable pen of MILTON. BrIial,
who may be called, and nut improperly, tle
d;tm3n of fenriment; and Abdiel, the angel
of mi inciple.

B ELIAL.

A fairer perfi.n loft n.t heaven; Ee frem'd'
For dIgnity clmponJ, and high exploit,
But all was filfe and hollow ; tho' his tongue
Dropt malnna, and could make the worse appear
The betler reason, to perplex and dalh
Aaiurefl counsels: for his thoughts were low,
To vice induflrious, but to nobler deeds
Tim'rous and liothful; yet he pleas'd the ear.

ABDIEL:

# PROSPERITY.

AB D I E..

Fithful found

./Among -he faithlcfs; faithful only he
%Among innumeraoa- filre, unmov'd,
Unllhaken, JInfeduced, unterrifit d
H;s loyalty he kcpr, his love, his zeal.
Nor number nor example with him wrought
To f ervc from truth, or changc hisconftant mrird
'!nough single.-

R O S P E R I T Y.
A Single disappointment is sufficient to em-

bitter all the picafures of worldly prof-

perity. Though it might be expeted one in
pofcirfion of high power and station Ihould
disregard Qfight injuries. But prosperity de-
b:!itates, instead of strengthening the mind.-
Its common effet is, to create an extreme fen-
fibility to the slightest wound. It foments
impatient desires, and railes expeaations
which no success can fiitisfy. It softers a false
delicacy, which fiGkcns in the midst of indul-
gence; by repeated gratification, it blunts the
feelings of man to what is pleasing, and leaves
them unhappily acute to whatever is uncafy.

K1ECES-

# NECESSITY OF PRUDENCE IN EVERY STAGE OF LIFE.

NECESSITY OF PRUDEN-CE IN EVERY

S rAGE OF LIFE.
A T the first setting out in life, especially

vwhen yet unacquainted with the world

and its fnal-s, when every p!eafure enchants
vit h its finilc, and every obje& fliines wihh
the gloL. of novelty, youth should beware of
the seducing appearances ihich surround
them, and recolle& what others have suffered
from the pnwer of headstrong desire. If any
pa.lon be allowed, even though it fiould be
efclemcd innocent, to acquire an absolute as-
cendant, their inward peace will be impaired.
But if any which has the taint of guilt, they
may (date from that moment the ruin of their
tranquility.

Nor with the season of youth does the peril

end. To the impetuosity of youthful drire,
succeed the more fober, but no lets dangerous
attclhments of advancing years; when the
palfions which are connected with interest and
ambitio n begin their rLign, and too frequently
extend their influence even over those periods
of life which ought to be the nmcft tranqui'.

From

# REDEMPTION.

From the first to the last of man's abode or.

earTh, the diciip;ilii must nev-r be relaxed o£
guarding the heart from trhe dominion of pas-
sion. Eager patlions and violent delircs wver
nor made for man: they exceed his fllerlc;
they find no adequate objeb t on earth; and,
of courfc, can be produclive of nothing but
mifcry.

The certain consequence of indulging them

is, that there fliall come an evil day, when the
anguifl of disappointment ihall acknowledge,
that all which we enjoy availeth us nothing.

R E D E M PT I 0 N.

HIS is one of the most glorious works
of the Almighty.-Illuftrious is the

hour of the restoration of the world-the
hour when from condemnation and misery, it
emerged into happiness and peace.

In this hour, the long series of prophecies,

visions, types, and figures, was accomplished.
This was the centre in which they all met;
this the point to which they tended and ver-
ged, throughout the couife of fu many gene-

rations.

# REFORMATION.

r:tions. V.' behold the law and the pro-
phcts flanding at the foot of rho crofl. and
doing lnimaLe : we behold Moses nod Aaron
bearing tlh: ;ilt of tile cjvcnanc ; Da id and
Elij;ah prcli'nting the oracle of tcfiimony ; swe
behold all :le pricfis and facrificcs, all the
:i.es and ordinances, all the types and sym-
bols, airelnbled together to receive their con-
iumniation. In this hour every rite afumecd
ijs fignilicancy; every precdi&ion met its
r. cltt; every fylmbol dililayed its correfpon-
deR.:e.

R E F O R NM A T 1 0 N.

II E rage for reformation commonly
fliews itself in a violent zeal for sup-

pressing what is wrong, rather than in a pru-
dent attention to efablifh what is right: but
we fiall never obtain a fair garden merely by
rooting up weeds; we must also plant flowers:
for the natural richners of the foil we have
been clearing, will not susser it to lie barren
but whether it shall be vainly or beneficially
prolifick, depends on the sulture.

RE LI

# RELIGION.

R E L I G I t? N.

IIE. fipint of true religion fp lcads gcntie-

- net' and afitbility. It gives a n-urve
*lnaalsetcd cafe to the behaviouri it is Ibcial,
kind, and cheerful; far removed from that
gloomy and illiberal fuperfiition which clouds
the brow, fharpcns the tenrFer, dejcts the
spirit, and teaches men to fit themselves for
another world, by negleiing the concerns of
this.

On the contrary, religion conneas our pre-

paration for heaven with an honourable dif-
clhrge of the duties of ative life. It is as;
buciatcd in the imagination with all that is
lovely and useful with whatsoever things
are true, are just, are pure, are lovely, are of
.ood report; wherever there is any virtue,
and wherever there is any praise,

Religion is rather a matter of sentiment than

reasoning. The important and interesting
articles of faith ale sufficiently plain. Our
attention flould be fixed on these, and not
iuffercd to meddle with controversy: for
there we are plunged into a chaos from which

we

we never fliall be able to extricate ourfelvec,
It flpils the temper, and has no good eifec't
on the learr.

All books, and all conversation that tend to
l.d:e our faitl, on thole great points of reli
gihn xhich nlould serve to regidate cur con'.
du&, and on xhich our hopes of future and
eternal happiners deprnd, should be avoided.

\'c nIould rever indulge ourselves in ridi-

cule on religious rubjcis, nor give countenance
to it in others, by seeming diverted wirh what
they fay. This, to people of good breeding,
will be a sufficient check. It is not neccffary
to go fur:her than scripture for our religicut

ij.inions,
We ihould embrace those we find clearly

revealed, and never perplex ourselves about
such as we do not understand, but treat them
with silent and becoming reverence,

R ELI-

# RELIGIOUS REFLECTION.

I ELIGIOUS R FLCTION'.
I F there be any impression which man is

formed by nature to receive, it is religion.

As soon as his mind opens to obfcrva:ion, he
discerns innumerable marks of' his dependent
fiate: he finds himself placed, by fome'fupe-
rior power, in a vail world, where the wirdom
and goodness of the Creator are conspicuous
on every fide.

The magnificence, the'beauty; the order-of

nature, excite' him to admire and adore.-
lWhen he lobks up'to the omnipotent hand
which operates'throughout the univeire,he is
impressed with reverence; when he receives
blessings which he cannot avoid ascribing to
divine goodness, he is prompted to gratitudc.

Tribes of men, without policy, or laws, or

cities, oF any of the-arts of life are ditcovered;
but no where without some form of religion.
In every region we behold the prostrate wor-
/hipper, the temple, the altar, and-the offer-
ing.

H R ES I G-

# RESIGNATION.

RESIGNATIO N.
IGNORANCE of good or evil (hould

determine man to follow providence, and

rcfign himself to God. Resignation to his
Maker, is One of the most important lefifon
which can be given to man. He knows not
what is good for himself in the future periods
of ife; but God perfegQly knows it, and if he
faithfully serves him, he has reafin to believe
that God will a!ways consult it. Before him
lies the whole iucceffion of events which arc
to fill up man's existence: it is in his power
to arrange and model them at his pleasure.

Amidst the agitations of desire, and the

perplexities of doubt, there is one fixed point
of reft. By this let man abide, and difmini
his anxiety about things uncertain and un-
known. He flould acquire an interest in di-
vine favour, and he may safely surrender
himself to the divine administration. When
empted to repine at his condition, he should
reflet whether he would have been happier
in any other station.

. H

# RIDICULE.

Pe fliould not be too particular in his peti-

tions to heaven concerning his temporal in-
rertft, but susser God to govern the wor-ld ac-
cording to his own plan; and only pray that
lie would befltov what his unerring wifilom
fies to be IheR for him On the whole, he
flhuu'd follow wherever his providence leads,
cnmply with whatever-he requires, and leave
an the reft to him.

R I D I C U L E.
THE fatal fondness for indulging a spirit

of ridicule, and the injurious and irre-

parable consequences which sometimes attend
the too'fevere reply, can never be condermned
wi'h more asperity than it deserves. Not ta
offend, is the first ftep towards pleasing. To
gi'e pain, is as much an offence against hu-
manity as against good'breeding; -and surely
ir is as well to abstain from an'aicion because'
it is sinful, as becaafe it is impolite.

A man of sense and breeding will-fqrietimes

ioin in the laugh which'has been raised tithTs.
:xpence by an ill-natured' iepattee; bui if it

H-z ' was

# SELF COMMUNION,

was very cutting, and one of thofc niocli.;.i
oirts of truths, which :is they scarcely car.
be paldoned even in private, ought never t:
be uttered in publick, he does not laugh bt-
cause he is p!cafcd, but because he wishes to
conceal how much he is hurt, and will re-
member it as a treat of malice, when the whol;
company ihould have forgotten it as a firoke
of ridicule. Even women are so far from
being privileged by their sex -to fay unhand-
some or cruel things, that it is this very cir-
cumftance which renders them.intolerable.-
When the arrow is lodged in the heart, it is no
relief to him who.is wounded to rcflct, that
the hand which fliot it sas a fair one.

SELF COMMUNION,
AS recommended by men of virtue and

true piety, is religious recolleaion. I'

is to commune with ourselves, under the cha-
racer of spiritual and immortal beings; and
to ponder those paths of our feet which are
leading us to eternity. It is to bring home to
our fouls the internal, authoritative sense of
-God, as of a sovereign and a father; to con-

template

*.niplate what is displayed of his pcrfetions.
It is to realize the pretence of the Supremp
B,:ing, so as to produce the most profourd vce

lcration, and to awaken the earnftl dcfire of

as near an approach as our nature will permit,
:j that great fountain of happincef and life.

By tiis tie pious man walks among the

'.arious scenes of nature as within the precinct
of a great temple, in the habitual cxercife of
devotion; and from hence, when his thoughts
lhve been thus employed, he returns to the
;o.:rld like a luperior being. He carries into
alive life rhofe pure and elevating fentinents
to which the giddy crowd' are ffrangers. A
'rtrain odour of fancity remains upon his
mind, which, for a while at leal; will iepel
tile contagion of the world.

As he views the world with the eye. of a

Chriftia., he will fee,. that however menlap-
pear to move and a& after their own pleafuirc,
they are nevertheless retained in fecrec bonds
by the Almighty, and all their operations ren-
dired subservient to the ends of his moral go-
vernment. I'Ie will behold him punilingthe
finner by means of his own iniquities; from
the trials of the righteous bringing forth ;heir

H 3 reward;

# SILENCE.

rev.-a,'l; and to a If.te of seeming univerfr,i
co,.fufi n piepraing he \wis'.1 and nofl cqui.
table fiue. VWhl:e the fashion of this world
is parsing fast away, he will discern the glory
of another riling fast to succeed it. He will
behold all human events, our grief and our
j,,ys, our love and our hatred, our character
and our memory, absorbed in the ocean of
eternity; and no traces of our present exifl-
ence left, except its being for ever well with
the righteous, and ill with tnc wicked.

S I L E N C E.
SILENCE is one of the great arts of

conversation, as allowed by Cicero him-

self, who fays, " there is not only an art, but
, an eloquence in it;" and this opiion is
confirmed by a great modern, Lord Bacon.-
For a well-bred woman may easily and effec-
tually promote the most ufcful and elegant
conversation, without speaking a word. The
modes of fpcech are scarcely more variable
than the modes of silence.

The

The silence of listless ignorance, and the

fltence of sparkling intelligence, arc perhaps
as separately marked, and as diftintly ex-
pressed, as the fame feelings could have been
by the most unequivocal language. A wo-
man, in a company where she has the least in-
flutnce, may promote any fubje&, by a pro-
found and invariable attention, which (hews
that she is pleased with it; and by an illumi-
nated countenance, shich proves Ihe under-
flands it.

Attention it'the most flattering.encourage.

ment ii the world to men of sense and letters, to
continue any topic of inftru&ion or entertain-
ment they happen to be engaged in. It owed
its introduction perhaps to accident, the best
introduclion for afubjet of ingenuity; xs hich,
though it could not have been formally pro-
pitsed without pedintry, may be continued
with cafe and good-humour; but which will
be frequently and effetually flopped by the
listlessness, inattention, or whispering of filly
girls, whose weakners betrays their ignorance,
and whole impatience exposes their ill-breed-
ing.

H 4 SINCE-

# SINCERITY.

S I N' C . R I T Y.
SIN.CERITY is the bass of every vir-

tue. The love of truth, as we value the

approbarion.of Heaven, or the cleem of the
wtorld, should be cultivatcd.. In all our pro-
cecdings it will make us diref and confident.
Ingenuity and candour pliess tho most power-
ful charm; they bcfpeak univcrfal favour,.
and carry an apology fur almost every failing.

'ile path of truth is a p!ain and fdfe path.

It fupplios us with an openness of charaacer,.
v.hich displays a generous boldnefs.snecelary
to difiinguifll youth.' To give an early prc-
ference to. honour above gain, when they
frand in.competition; to despise every. advan-
tage which cannot be obtained without dif-
honet arts to brook no meanness, and stop
to.no difimulation, are the indications of a
great mind, the prefagesof future eminence
and dittinaion in life..

At the fame time, this virtuous sincerity is.

perfculy consistent with the most prudent vi-
yilance and caution. It is opposed to cun;-

nine,.

# SLOTH.

ning, not to true wisdom. It is not the fim-
plicity of the weak and improvident, but the
candour of an enlarged and noble mind; of
one *who fcorris deceit, because he accounts it
both bahf and unprofitable; and wh' fecks
no disguise, because he needs; none to hide
him.

S L O ' H.
N OTHING is so opposite to the true

enjoyment.of life, as the.relaxed .and

feeble slate of an indolent mind: Sloth is so
inconfiflent with, both soundness of mind and
body, that itris hard to determine whlitherijc
be a greater foe to virtue, or to health and
happiness.. Inaiv.e as it iit iCl4 itsel, e f-
fels are fatal!y powerful. Though it appear
a slowly flowing fiream, yet it undermines all
that is ifable and flouriflsing.. i not uily sap.
the foundation of every..virue,,btut pours upo:(
usa deluge of'crimes and evils. It. is ril;:
water, which first putrifies by stagnation, pi,l
then fends up noxiou% vap9urs, and ills tle
atmosphere witlh eath.

H 5 Idle..

# SOBRIETY OF MIND, ITS NECESSITY.

Idleness is the certain parent both of guilt

and ruin, which should be avoided. Under
this are included not mere inaaion only, but
all that circle of trifling occupations, in which
too many saunter away their youth, perpetu-
ally engaged in frivolous society, or public
amusements; in the labour of dress, or the
ostentation of their perfuns.

Amurements youth requ're. It werevain,.

it were cruel to prohibit them. Bur, though
allowable as the relaxation, they are most
culpable as the business of the young.; for
thev then become the gulph of time, and the
poison of the mind. They foment bad pas-
fions--they weaken the manly powers-they
fink the native vigour of youth into contemp-
tible effeminacy.

SOBRIETY OF MIND,

XT* It c EAIT'V.

OBRIETY of mind, is one of those
Svirtues which the present condition of hu-
man life strongly inculcates. The uncertainty
.f its enjoyments checks presumption; the

multi-

multiplicity of its dangers demands perpetual
caution.

Moderation, vigilance, and felf-govern-

ment, are duties incumbent on all, but efpe-
cially on such as are beginning the journey of
life. For the whole fate of youthful views
and palfions is adverse to sobriety of mind.-
The scenes which prefunt themselves at our
entering upon the world, are commonly flat-
tering. Whatever they may be in themselves,
the lively spirits of the young. gild every
opening profpe&. The field of hope appears
to stretch wide before them: pleasure seems
to put forth its blofiTms on every fde.-Im-
pelled by desire, forward they ruih with in-
considerate ardour :-prompt to decide and to
chafe;-averfc to hesitate or to enquire ;-cre-
dulous, because untaught by experience;-
r. lh, because unacquainted with danger;-
headstrong, because unfubdued by difapyoint-

ment.

In human aaions there ii a rightand vrong.

Those who are born with the fame advantages
of fortune, ate not all equally prufperous in
the course of life. Some of them, by wife and
fRcady Qcadu&, attain diftinctin in the wo id

H 6 and

and piss their days with comfort and honour;
othlI s, of the Camc rie k, byr mean nnd1 vici(,U.
Ihh.aviour, for-.cit the uad vantages uof ticir birtli,
involve thcmfl;lves in much mrilfery, and end ini
being a dilgrace to their friends,.and a burdeaa
on society. Early, then, we may learn, that it
is not on the external condition in which we
find ourfclves placed, but on that part on
whichl we are to a&, that our welfare or un-
hipplinefs,-our honour or infamy depend.

When beginningi to at that part, it is of the

greatc.t moment to regulate our plan of con-
dJu. with the molt serious attention, before we
have yet committed any fatal or irretrievable
errors. If, infilcal of exerting refle&ion for
this valuible purpofc, we deliver ourfeives up,
at lb c-;tical a time, to tloth and picaflre; if
we refule to liften to any counsellor but h':-
mour, orto attend to any pursuit except thatoi
amnuli'iient; if we allow ourfeves to float loole
aldl care!es on the trdeoflife, ready to receive
any direction which the current of fashion
may chance to give us, the fad confquences of
such indilcretion will extend to us :-we can-
not attain fucccfs without preparation, and
flcape dangers without precaution. Hap

pine..

# SOLITUDE.

piness will not g!owv up to us of its own ac-
.otl', and solicit our acceptancc, h Ien to the
rcll f m:nl':nd, it is the fruit of long cul-
tivation, and the acquisition of labour and
ca:e.--\re should. not deceive ouri'elves with
such arrogant hopes.

Whatever be- our rank, providence will

not, for our fakes, reverse its eftabliflied or-
der. But, by tempering the vivacity cf
youth with a proper mniture of firious thought
wve may enfuce cheerfulness for the.reft of
life; whilst by. delivering ourselves up at
prcfient to. gidduil's and lkvity, we lay the
foundation of lasting heavinels of heart.

S 0 L I T LT D E.
SOLITUDE is.the hallowed ground which

religion hath, in every age chosen fur

her own.-There her inspiration is-felt, and
her secret nmyleries elevate the foul-There,
falls the tear of.contrition ;-There,, rifes to-
wards heaven the sigh of the heart; there
melts the (ful wiLh all the tenderness of de-

votion,

vctlion, and pours itfeif forth before him who
made, and redeemed it.

The great and wvorthy,-the pious and the

virtuous, have ever been addicted to serious
retirement. Refined and enlarged minds
leave the world behind them, feel a call for
higher pleafures,--and seek them in retreat.

But a total seclusion from the world, is so

far from being the perfec&ion of religion, that
it is no other than the abuse of it.-Yet there
will be neither consistency. in the condut, nor
dignity in the character, of one who sets
apart no Share of time. for meditation and re-
fle7tion.

If we wish that reason should exert her na-

tive power, we must Itep aside from the crowd.
into th: cool and silent shade. It is there that.
with fjber and steady eye, she examines what
is good and evil, what is wife or foolish, in.
human conduEt fthe looks back on the past,
and forms plans, not for the present moment
only, but for the whole of life.

Mvan cannot discharge any parteof his duty

aright, who never suffers his passions to cool;
and his passions cannot cool, who is engaged
without interruption in the tumult of the

world'

world. This incessant stir may be called the
perpetual drunkenrefs of !ife. It raires that
eager fermentation of spirit which will ever
be fending forth the dangerous fumes of raih-
ness and folly.

VWhereas, he who mingles religious retreat

with wordly affairs, remains calm and master
of himfelf-he is not whirled round, and ren-
dered giddy by the agitation of the world, bat
comes forth with manly tranquillity, fortified
by principles which he has formed, and pre-
pared for whatever may befal. For he who
withes for an effectual cure of the wounds
which the world can infliA, ihould retire
from intercourse with men, to intercourse with
God.-When he enters .into his closer, and
fnuts the door, let him shut out at the fame
time all intrusion of worldly care, and dwell
among objeCs divine and immortal: for celcf-
tial inhabitants quarrel not.-For amongst
them there is neither ingratitude, nor envy,
nor tumult; concord and tranquillity reign for
ever-Flom such objects, upon the mind of
the pious man, there beams a pure and cn-
livening light; there is diffused ever his
heart a holy calm; his agitated spirit reaf-

fumes

# THE STUDY OF MAN.

fumes its firmnocs, and regains its peace.-
The world finks in its importance, and the
load of mortality and misery loses alinof all its
weight.-The difiurbancesand alarms, so for-
midable to thore who are engaged in the tu-
mults of the world; seem to him like thunder
only rolling afar off.

Belides, it is also neceflary to prepare us for

a life to come. For breathing habitually a con-
tagious air, how certain is our ruin, unlefi
\se fomntimnes retreat from this pestilential re-
gion, and seek for proper corre&ives of the.
dilorders which are contra&ed there ?-
Religious retirement both. abates the disease,
and furnishes the remedy. It lessens the cor-
rupting influence of-the world; and ir giver
opportunity for better principles to exert their
power.

THE STUDY OF At AN.

HE life of man is a mixed nate, full of un-
ccrt;.inty and vicillitude, of anxieties and

fears.-For no maa's prorperity on earth is
ftabie annaffuied; licince no study, to athought-

ie

ful mind, can appear more important than how
to be suitably prepared for the misfo-rtunes of
life, so as to contemplate them in prillpe
without dismay; and, if they mu!t befal, to
bear them without dejelion.

Throughout every age, power has endea-

voured to remove adversity to a distance:s-
Phi!oufphy has studicd when it drew nigh, to
conqueritrby patience,-and'wealth has IbughC
rut every plealure that can compensate oralle-
viate pain.

But religion has been no lers attentive to

thlc faic importantobjee'. The defence which
it provides is altogether of an internal kind.-
lt is the heart, not the outward slate, which it
profiTes to guard, by affording the diitreffecd
:.at security and peacei whicl arise from a
l:c!ief of divine protection.-It opens to them'
ouicces of consolation which are hidden from
o:hers. By that strength of mind'with whicli
it endowes them, it lets them upon a rock,
againit which the tempest may violently bear,
but cannot lhake ; for it prepares the mind.
for encountering with fortitude, the mos'
revcre Ihicks of adve; fiy.

READING

# READING AND STUDY.

READING AND ST.UDY.
R EADING, unless perverted, as the bell

things may be, anf£ver» many cxcellert

purposes betides the great leading one; and is
perhaps the faeft remedy fr dissipation.

The woman who dedicates a portion of her

IeiCure to ufjefu leading, feels her mind in a
von(fant progrellive state of improvement,
svhilft the mind of a dissipated female is con-
tinualiy lofingground.-An active fpiritre-
j,,iceth,, like- the fun, to run his daily course;
whilc indolence, like the dial of Ahaz gces
backwards.

As for study, we may venture to afferr,

thar next to religious influences, it is the mos
prubable prefcrvative of the virtue of young
perl;,ns.

Thsofe who critivate letters, have rarely a

firong pafion for promiscuous vifiting,ordifli-
pated society; fludy therefore induces a relilh
for domtflic life, the must detirable temper in
the wotld for women.

Study

# PASSIVE, TAMENESS OF SPIRIT AND UNLIMITED COMPLIANCE.

Study, as it rescues the min f: om an inor-

dinate fondlcrs for gaming, dress, and pub-
lic aniufCments, is an economical propensity;
for a lady may read ata much Itss expence
than le can play at cards.-As it requires
some application, it gives the mind an habit
of induflry; as it is a relief against thatmental
direare, which the French emphatical!y call
enui, it cannot fail of being beneficial to the
temper and spirits : in that moderate degree,
ir is to be understood, in which ladies use it;
-as an enemy to indolence, it becomes a so-
cial virtue ;-as it demands the full exertion
of our talents, it grows a rational duty; and
when direced to the knowledge of the fu-
preme Being, and his laws, it rifcs into an act
of religion.
PASSIVE, TAMENESS OF SPIRIT AND

UN LIMITED COMPLIANCE.
pASSIVE tameness which submits without

struggle, to every encroachment of the

violent and assuming, forms no part of Chris-
tian duty, but is deftru&cive of general hap-
pinref and order.

Unlimited

# TEMPERANCE.

LUili]iied complaisance whtch, on every

cccifion, fdill in with llc opinions and man-
rels of others, is so far from being a virtue,
that it is itclif a vice, and the parent of many
vic-s. It ovclthrows all'fleadinefs of principle
and produces that sinful conformity with the
wt rld, which taints the whole charater.

In' the present corrupted fiate of human

manners always to affcTnt and tn comply, is the
very wolft maxim which can beadopted. It
is imp:flible to support the purity and dignity
of Chlifian morals, without opposing the
world on various occasions, even though we
fliould Liand alone.

T E MI P E R A N C E.
T EMPERANCE in pleasure is eftnrialfy

necessary to be ol:ferved, partioularly. by

youth, that they may bewale of that rock on
which thousands, from race to race, continue
to fplir. The love of pleafurc, natual to man
ill every period of his life, glows at this age
wilh excelfive ardour.-Novelty adds frelh
charm;, as yet, to every gratification. The

world'

world appears to spread a continual fcafl; and
health, vigour, and high spirits invite them to
partake of it without restraint. In vain are
they.warncd of the latent danger.-The old,
when they offer their admonitions, are up-
braided with having forgot that they once
were young. And yet, towhatdo the coun-
fels of age, with repeEt to pleasure, amount ?
They may all be comprized in few words,
not to hurt ourselves, and not to hurt others
by our pursuit of pleasure, -and those wiUi
be fully effeitcd by temperance. Within
these bounds, pleasure is lawful, beyond them
it becomes criminal, because it is ruinous.

Hence by this virtue we are not called to re-

nounce pleasure, but to enjoy it in safety.-
Infteadof abridgingit, we are exhorted to
pursue it on an extensive plan; we have mea-
fures proposed for .securing its poffelfion, and
for prolonging its duration.-As we confid.er
.ourselves not only as tenfitive, but as rational
beings;-not only as rational but social ;-not
only as social but immortal-; whatever violates
our nature in any of these refpets cannot as-
-ford true pleasure.

.Have we not found that in the course of cri-

sninal

# TRUE GENUINE SENTIMENT.

minal cxccfs, picaFure was more than compei-
fared by succeeding pain ? Have we not
from every habit,' at lea(f, of unlawful grati-
fication, si und fomne thorn fprirg to wound us;
fomc confLquence to make us repent of it in
the ilrue. We ihould therefi re avoid tempt-
at'ons, for xwhch we have found ourrflves
u:nqual, with as much care as we should shun
pcftllential infc-.iron.

TRUE GENUINE SENTIMENT.

RUE genuine fentimrent.may be so connec-
ted with the virtue of action, as to be-

flow on it its brightest luPfre, and its moflap-
tivatinggraces. And enthfiafin under there
circur.mftances is so far from being disagreeable,
that a portion is indifpenfalily necelTary in
an engaging woman; but it must be rs the
heart, not es tlie fenles.-It must grow up
with a feeling mind, and be cherilhel by a
'iituous cducation, not compounded of ir-
legu'ar paifions and artificially refined by
books of unnatura.l'fiaion, and improbable
adventure

But this dangerous merit cannot be too rigid-
ly wvatched, as it is very apt to lead those who

poffcfs

poT.ss it into inconveiicncies, from which
less interesting chala&crs are happily exempt.
troong fenfihility may carry a very amhble
temper ilto tie mot alarming extremes. The
taftes of thofc so ailuated are pallionss: they
l,ve and hate with all their hearts, and scarce.
ly susser themfclves to feel a rcafonable pre-
ference, before it strengthens into a violent
attachment.

When an innocent girl of this open, trusting,

tender heart, happens to meet with one of her
own Lex and age, whole address and manners
are engaging, she is infiantly seized with an ar-
dent defire.to commence a f,iend(hip with her.
She feels the molt lively impatience at the re-
fi.aint of company, and the dccorums of.cer-
mony. She longs to be.alone with her; longs to
assure her of the warmth of her tendeFnefs, and
generally ascribes to the fair stranger all the
good qualities she feels in her own heart, or ra-
ther all ihofe which (he has met with in her
rcading,difperfed in a variety of heroines. She
is persuaded that her new friend unites them
all in herself, because she carries in her prepof.
fessing countenance the promise of them allr

If hints of her dse.&s are given, the mistakes
the voice of discretion for the insinuation of an

unchari-

minina cxcefs, plcafurewvas more than compc¢t-
fared by fucceding pain ? Have we not
from every habit, at lea(f, of unlawful grati-
fication, f und some thorn fprirg to wound us;
fume cons quence to make us repent of it in
the ilfue. We should theres< re avoid tempt-
atons, for wh'ch we have found ourselves
u:nqual, with as much care as we should shun
pcftilential infcOinn.

TRUE GENUINE SENTIMENT.
T RUE genuine sentiment. may he so connec-

ted with the virtue of aetion, as to be-

stow on it its brightel lufhre, and its mofl cap-
tivatinggraces. And enthufiafin under there
circumnftances is so far from being disagreeable,
that a portion is indifpenfahly necessary in
an engaging woman; but it must be cf the
heart, not cf tlie fenles.-It must grow up
with a feeling mind, and be cherished by a
%iituous education; not compounded of ir-
regu'ar palfions and artificially refined by
books of unnatural'filion, and improbable
adventure

But this dangerous merit cannot be too rigid-
ly v'atched, as it is very apt to lead those who

poisess

poT.cfs it into inconvenicncies, from which
leTs interesting clhara&ers are happily exempt.
strong feniGhility may carry a very amiable
temper into tie moat alarming extremes. The
tafes of those so atluated are paffioas: they
love and hate with all :heir hearts, and scarce-
ly susser themselves to feel a reasonable pre-
ference, before it strengthens into a violent
attachment.

When an innocent girl of this open, trusting,

tender heart, happens to meet with one of her
own lex and age, whole address and manners
are engaging, lhe is inflantly seized with an ar-
dent defire.to commence a fliendihip with her.
She feels the molf lively impatience at the re-
nraint of company, and the decorums of.cere-
mony. She longs to be.alone with her; longs to
assure her of the warmth of her tenderness, and
generally ascribes to the fair stranger all the
good qualities he feels in her own heart, or ra-
ther all those which ihe has met with in her
reading, dispersed in a variety of heroines. She
is persuaded that her new friend unites them
all in herself, bccaufe the carries in her prepof-
felling countenance the promise of them all,

If hints of her dse&s are given, ihe miflakcs
the voice of discretion for the insinuation of an

unchari-

uncharitable difpofiidin. At sirs fir e liflen'
to ltheln wvilt a gcneruus impatience, and as-
tcrwardcs with a cold and silent dildain, and
dcfpits them, as the effec of prejudice, mif-
rcprclcntation, or ignorance.

Yet h:is trusting confidentce, this honest in-

.discretion, is, at this early period of life, a'
amiable as it is natural; and will, if wife!ly
-culrivated, produce, at its proper sea Con, fruits
infinitely more valuable than all the guarded
-circumfpc&iion of premature, and therefore
artificial prudence. Nay, if the younger part
of the sex are sometimes deceived in the choice
of a friend, they enjoy, even then, an higher
degree of fatisfaaion than if they never trust-
cd. For to be always clad in theburthen-
some armour offufpicion, is more painful and
inconvenient,'than to run the hazard of sus-
fering, now and then, atrartfient injury.

These obfcirvtions chiefly refpe& the inex-

perienced; for it is a certainty, that women
are capable of as faithful and as durable a
friendihip as any of the other sex. They can
enter not only into all the enthusiastic tender-
lcfs, but into all the solid fidelity of attach-
.-cnt.

GOVERN-

# GOVERNMENT OF TEMPER

GOVERNMENT OF TEMPER

,VE R Y human creature is sensible of the

propensities to folme infirmity of temper,

hllich it should be his care to corre& and..---:
subdue, particularly in the early period cf life;
else, when arrived at a state of maturity, he
nay relapse into tllofe faults which were ori-
ginally in his nature, and which will require
to be diligently watched, and kept underf
through tlh whole Gourfe of life; for the cul-
tiration of an amiable disposition, is a great
part of religious duty since nothing leads
more dire&ly to the breach of charity, and to
the injury and mqleftation of our fellow crea-
tures, than the indulgence of an ill temper.

With refpe& to a woman, the principal

virtues and vices mull be of a dome(tic kindi.
Within the circle of her own. family and de-
pendents lies her sphere of aftion-the scene
of alrmoft all those talks and trials which must
deterntine her charadter and her fate here, and

I htrc-

hereafter. The happiness of her hulband,
children, and servants, muf depend on lcr
temper; and it will appear, that the grcatcd
good or evil which ihe may ever have in her
power to do, may arise from her correcting or
indulging its infirmities.

The greatest outward blessings cannot afford

enjoyment to a mind uneasy and ruffled with-
in. A fit of ill humour will spoil the finef
entertainment, and is as real a torment as the
molt painful disease. Another unavoidable
consequence of ill temper, is the dislike and
averlion of all who are witnefles to it; and,
pcrhaps, the deep and lafling resentments es
tholf who fuBfsr from its ffeCts.

We all, from social and felf-love, earnefily

desire the efleem and affection of our fellow-
creatures; and, indeed, our condition ren-
ders them so necessary to us, that the wretch
who has forfeited them, must feel desolate
and undone-deprived of all the best enjoy-
rnents and comforts the world can afford, and
given up to his inward misery, unpitied and
scorned.

Every temper is inclined, in some degree,
o passion, pecyilhncfs, o obitinacy; we lhourd

theres

;herefore always watch the bent of our nature,
and apply remedies proper foi the infirmities
:o which we are most liable. Thle sift is so
iniurious to society, and so odious in itself,
chat meni who give way to it, render them-
fcl-es not only dilgufling, but dangerous.-
Hurried on by the violence of rage, they break
through the bounds of decorum, dftroy the
order of civil society, disregard truth, facri-
fice justice, and difgracc, as well as offend,
the dignity of their Creator.

In a female chara&er, one should think

that shame alone would be sufficient to pre-
serve a young woman from becoming a slave
to it; for it is as unbecoming her character to
be betrayed into ill behaviour by paflion, as
by intoxication; and she ought to be afamed.
of the one as much as the other. Gentlenefsi
meekness, and patience, are her peculiar dif-
tinlions, and an enraged troman is one of the
sofl disgusting Jights in nature.

The placid countenance, the mild deport-

ment, and a smooth address, are strong .in
centives to juaf admiration,and to honel praise.
But these perfe&ions all fall victims to that
raonRer, passion. It behoves us therefore, to

I a retire

retire from such an occasion cf fin, and wrs
till we are cool, before we presume to judge
of what has pl.fi].

By accullfming ourselves thus to conquer

and dilappoint our anger, we shall, by de-
grees, find it grow weak and manageable, f',
as to leave our reason at liberty. We shall
be able to restrain our tongue from evil, and
our looks and geflures from all expressions us
violence and ill-will.

Pride, which produces so many evils in the

human mind, is the great source of passion.-
Whoever cultivates in himself a proper humi-
lity, a due sense of his own faults and infuf-
ficieneies, and a due refpe& for others, will
find but small temptation to violent and un-
realbnable anger.

Whenever, therefore, we feel ourfeives

highly enraged, we should fufpe& ourselves
to be in the wrong, and resolve to fland the
deliberate decision of our own conscience, be-
fore we cast upon another the puniament
wvhich is perhaps due to ourselves. This self-
examination will, at least, give us some time
to cool; and, ifwe are just, as it should be
our chief aim to be so, will difpofeus to ba-

laace

lance our own wrong with that of our aann-
gonifl, and to fetile the account with him on

*-:·ui terms.

There are many who acquire the chara&er ,

of ill-temper, when in reality they merit not
the Si:verity of the accusation; and this arises
mnerdly from their mode of replication, or their
manner of interrogating, as they are general-
ly and unfortunately attended with a- fpeciez
of tartners on every ntivial occasion. This
indicates, to common obfcrvers, a degree of
ptiulance, and seems to take its origin frorn
a j-aloufy, or rather fear of their own confe-
quenre being degraded or injured in some
rcipe't. This should be carefully avoided;
for the very appearance of peevishness is ua-
g,.-.ctfui and ponnful.

The fretful man, though he injures us less,

tdfgufts us more than him who is paflihnate;
because ie betrays a low and little mind, in-
rent o(i trifles, and engrossed by a paltry self-
love, which knows n-t howl to tear the ap-
prehcnfimn of any inconvenience. It is fcef-
hIve, the:-, which we mufl connl.at, when we
find ourfl.les affaulhrd 1y rh;s infilmtr ; and
by voluntarily endullng mionoivtniencies, we

1 3 h11A

fhla!l habituate ourfclvts to bear them with
eafs and good-humour when occasioned by

others.

We flould endeavour, by denying our-

felvcs, now and then, innocent indulgences,
to acquire a Ihabit of command over our pas-
lion. and inclinations, paiticularly such as are
likely to Icad us into evil, and abftra& our
niinds from thar a'tention to trifling circum-
frtnces.lihch usually creates this uneafinels.
Our minds fliould, therefore, have alixays
fume objec&s in pursuit worthy of them, that
they may not be engrossid by such as are in
thenmf'lves scarce worth a moment's anxiety;
yet from too minute and anxious attention,
t;idom fail to produce a teazing, mean, and
fretful difpolition.

We should fubflitute in their room the pur-

suit of glory and happineis in another life.-
Reading, reflcrion, rational conversation, and,
nbove all, conversing with God, by prayer
and medita:ion, would pteferve us from ta-
king that interest in the hlitle comforts and
conveniences of our remaining days, which
ufualiy gives birth tb so much fretfulness in
old people,

Not-

Notwithstanding this is generally attributed

to age, still we often fee the young, the heal-
thy, and those who enjoy the most outward
blclfings, inexcusably guilty of it. The small-
eft disappointment in pleasure, or difficulty
in tile modi trifling employment, will put
wcilf;l young people out of temper, and
their very amusements become sources of
vexation and peevishness. There is a degree
of resignation necelfary even in the enjoy-
ment of pleasure: we mua be ready and
willing to give up some part of what we
could with for, before we can enjoy that
which is indulged to us. The craving of
retlefs vanity, the too conflant companion of
youthful bosoms, will endure a thousand
mortifications, which, in the midst of seem-
ing pleasure, will secretly corrode the heart;
while the meek and humble generally find
more gratification than they. expeced, and
return home pleated and enlivened from
every scene of amusement. though they could
have fiaid away from it with perfert cafe and
contentment,

I *4 Sullen-

Sullenness and obstinacy, is perhaps a worre

fauir of temper than either of the former;
and, if indulged, may end in the mos fat,l
extremes of stubborn mclancholy, mslice, and
revent e. The refenrnellt, which instead of
ble;g exprefied, is paftfe in secret, and con-
tinu;:lly aggravated by tl;e imagination, will
in time become the ru!ing paiflon; and then
how horrible must be his cafe, whose kind and
pleasurable affcctiois are all I.vallowed up by
the tormentiug, as wel! as dttefiable, senti.
ments of hatred and rrve:ire !

WA'e fliould not bror;d over resentment, but

fF:eak calmly, reasonably, and kindly; then
expolulate widh our adverfrrv ;-and either
reconcile oui relves to him, or quiet our minds
under the injury we have supposed he has
done us, by the principle of Chrifian cha-
rity. But if it appeais we ourfclvos have
been the aggressors, we flIuld acknowledge
our error f-drly and hand(binely :-a gener-
ous confelfion oftentimes more than atones
for the fault which requires it.

Tiuth and juf.ice demand that we should

acknowledge copvilion as Ibon as we feel it,
a:d not n aentain a. erroneous opinion, or

juftfy

iufiify a wrong condua, nlerely from rhe
filli lhIhme of corfcliing cur il.;ti itnlorance.
'VAih a dilipolition ftr-,iigly inclined to lullen-
ness or obttinacy, this may appear perhaps
i.nlraEticable ; but by constant ute, the mint
will gain ftiengih froml the contest, and ttils
internal enemy will by degrees be folced to,
give ground.

Tlre love of truth, and a r.al defie oE

irprovement, ouglht to be the m.oly inltivesosf
a:guimentatin; alnd wher teire lth nr ceere,
no difficulty can be mad.l of embracing the
truth, as soon as it is perceived. To recceve
advice, reproof, and inltiucion prolpely, is
the lurift sign of a sincere and hulmble heart,
and Ihews a greatness of mind which com-
mands our refpet and reverence, whi!e it
appears lb willingly to yield to us in fu.pe-
riority.

WVe fhnild confider, that those wvho ttll us

of our faults, if they do it from motives of
kmndnels, and not of milice, exert tlicir
fricidflhip in a painful ofice, ,hich iliufl'
have coll them as great an ifforr, as It can
be to us to atknowledge tile lervice; and
if we refuse this encourage.uent, we c:'i-

I 5 aot

not e-xlea that any one, who is not abro-
lutcly olliged to it by duty, wiil a fecend
t ime undertake such an ill-requited trouble.

Exceflee and ill-judged indulgence, feldoin

fail: to redd.ce a woman to the mifcra,!e
condition of a.humoured child, always un-
happy, sinn having nobody's will to fludy
but its own. The insolence of such de-
mands for herself, and such disregard to the
choice and inclinations of others, can fIl-
dom fail to make as many enemies as there
are persons obliged to bear with those hu-
mours; whilst a compliant, a reasonable, and
contLntcd dilfp.fitoil, would render her hap-
py in lxrfelf, and beloved by all her compa-
nions, particularly by those who live con-
flantly with her.

Family friendships, are the friendships

made for us by an all wife Provi.lnce:-
hence ought we to employ every fa:ulty of
entertainment, every engaging qualification
which we possess, to the best advantage, for
those whose love is of the most importance
to us; for those who live under the fame
roof, and with. whom we are connected in
life, cithcr by the ties of blood, or by the

.. ill

fiill more sacred obligation of volu.tary en-
gagement. The /incere an l genuine ;m-'es
of complacency and love should adorn our
countenance. That ready compliance, that
alertness to aflift and oblige, which demon-
ftrates true affectin, must animate our be-
haviour, and endear our most common ac-
tions. Politeness must accompany our great-
eft familiarities, and restrain us from every
thing that is really offensive, or which can
give a moment's unneccifary pain. Conver-
fation, which is so apt to grow dull and in-
sipid in families, nay, in some, to be almost
wholly laid aside, mull be cultivated with
the frankness and openness of friendship,
and by the mutual communication of what-
ever may conduce to the improvement or
innocent entertainment of each other.

All these qualifications, which cannot fail

to render us pleating, will be the natural
result of a well-governed temper, as it will
derive pleasure to itself, in proportion as it
has the power of communicating it to others.
This disposition of mind ihould therefore be
cultivated with the utmost care and dili.
gence; the symptoms of that humour, against

1 6 which

which all our alrill-ry fliould be levelecd,.
Ihould be minutely vatched, and with a firm
resolution conquered as they rif ; for a lvwect
di!'pofirion is is own reward, andt is in-i:rflf
cilntial to happiness,

o00a

# GOOD TEMPER, ITS EFFECTS AND UTILITY.

G 0 0 D T E MI P E R,

ITS EFFECTS AND UTILITr.
A good natured man, uhsrevar faults he

may have, they will for the molt part

be treated with lenity;-he will generally
find an advocate in every human heart ;-his
errors wiil be lamented, ratherhian abhorred ;
and his virtues will be viewed in the .fairest
ponnt of light;-His good humour, without
rte help ofgreat talents or acquirements, will
make his company preferable to thatof the
must blilliant genius, in whom this quality ic
vanting-but sith it, fush a brightnefi will
be tdded to their ldftre, that all the world
will envy and admire, whilst his aflociates.
will almolf adore, anC labour to imitate him.
-In short, it is almost imnpolible that we
can be sincerely beloved by any bndy, uith-
out this engaging property, whatever other
ex; ellcni e-, we may pcffcfs;-but with it, wl
,f 11 !carcely fa:r of findirg feme friends and
favourels, even though we houtdbe defiitut:
of almof every other advantage.

3i

It is true .we are not at all equally happy

in our difpofitics ; but human virtue con-
flfl i : chirifliing and cultivating every good
incli.iati'n, and in checking and fubdiing
every propensity to evil.-If a man had been
born with a bad temper, it might have been
made a good one, at Itafl with regard to its out-
ward effcfls, by education, rearon, and'princi-
pie: and though he is so happy as to have a
good one while young, he must not suppose it
wvill always continue so, if he negl.ts to
maintain a proper command over it.-Power,
ficknefs-difappointncnts-or worldly cares
may corrupt, or embitter the finefl disposition
if rhey are not countervclcd by reason and re-
ligion. Hence thelie flould be ever exerted
in the exigences of life-they will teach us a
becoming submission under all the accidents
of our mortal slate, with which it is so vari-
oufly chequcred;-diveft calamity of its fe-
verelt nfing-make our enemies ashamed of
their perlecuting fpiri--and cause us to smile
even in the midst of misfonune.

By good temper is not meant an infenhbile

indifference to injuries-and a total forbear-
ance from manly rcfenmmcnt-There is a

noble

noble and generous kind of anger, a proper
and necessary part of our nature which has Io-
thing in it linful or degrading-- Ve are not
to be dead to this-forthe pe son, who feels
not an iniury, mull be incapable of being pro-
perly afttflcd by benefits; -With those, who
treat us ill withour provocation, we onght to
maintain our own d:gn ty-but whilst we shew
a lense of their improper behaviour, we must
preserve calmness, and even good breeding,
-and thereby convince them of the impo-
tence, as well as injustice of their malice.

Generous anger.does not preclude esteem

for whatever is really estimable, nor does it
destroy good-will to the person of its object
or authorize any impeachmen. to reft on the
goodness of our difpofirion :-It even inspires
the desire of overcoming our enemy by bene.
fits-and wifies to inflt: no other punilh-
mcnt than the regret of having injured one
who deserved his kindnef : It is always pla-
cable, and ready to be reconciled,.. as soon as
the offender is convinced of his error; nor
can any subsequent injury proyoke it to recuc
to patl difibligations, which had been once
forgicvn.-The fonfiufio uefs of iojured inno.

cencC

# EFFECTS OF VICE.

cence naturlily produces dignity, and usually
prevents ancer; but if tcripercd with the
calinaers of a quiet: iirir, it ever rifts supec
rior to the opprelive hand of inbfocnce and
cruelty.

EFFECTS OF VICE.
' ICE by its natural influence on the tem-

per tends to produce dejection under the

flilghl:ft trias, and' weakens that which only
can fu;pp,)rct mankind w.hen those vicilhitudes
come.-For it is their mind wvhch must then
fuppotr tham ; and their mind, by their fen-
fual attachments, is corrupted and enfeebled
-To that they have neither principles, nor
temper which can stand the alfault of trouble.

They have no principles which lead them

to l,)ok beyond the ordinary rotation of events
-and therefore, when miaf.,rtunes involve
them, the profpet must be comfortless on
every fide. S:rangers to all the temperate
faiisfaEions of a good and pure mind-Stran-
gers to every pleasure except what was sea-
soned by vice or vanity, their adversity is to
thc las degrce difconbolatc-Froin hence we

may

# VILLAIN.

may deduce the caufcs to which we must as-
crile the broken spirits; t!ie peevifli temper,
and imlniaient pallinns that so often attend the
declining age, or falling fortunes of vicious
men.

V I L L A I N.

E climbs the Reep rock, and treads on
the edge of a precipice, in order to

catch a shadow : He has cause to dread not on-
ly the uncertainty of the event which he wifnles
to accomplish, but the nature also of that
event when accompliihed: He is not only
liable to that difappointinent of success, which
so often frufrates all designs of men; but
liable to a disappointment fill more cruel, that
of being successful and mifCrable at once.

Riches and pleasure are the chief temp-

ta:ions to criminal deeds. Yet those riches,
when obtained, may very possibly overwhelm
him with unforeseen miseries. Those plea-
lures may cut fiort his health and life: And
is it for such doubtful and fallacious rewards,
that the deceiver fills his mouth with lies, the

friena

friend betrays his benefaior, the apostate re-
nounces his faith, and the afiafln covers him-
self with blood !

Whoever commits a crime, incurs a certain

evil for a most uncertain good: What wili
turn to his advantage in the course of this
life, he cannot with any assurance know;-
but this he may know, with full certainty,
that he Iill draw upon his head that difplea-
sure of the Almighty, which shall cruh
him for ever.

The advantages of this world when obtain-

ed by criminal means carry a curse in their
bosom, nay even when innocently gained, are
uncertain blellings. To the virtuous, they
are often no more than chaff: To the g;iilty
they ale always poilbn.

VIRTUX

# VIRTUE AND PROSPERITY CONTRASTED.

VIRTUE AND PROSPERITY

CONTRASTED.
T HOSE ituations which favour pleasure

are too generally adverse to virtue.-

Virtue requires internal government, and
difciplirie; prosperity relaxes the mind, and
inflames ile passions: virtue is supported by
a regard to what is future; prosperity attaches
us wholly to what is present; virtue checks
our pursuits, which are the result of intem-
perance restrains our desires, and makes
them flow in the calm tide of moderation:-
prosperity encreafes our evil propensities---
inflames our pailions-and plunges us deep
in the itream of riot and excess :-virtue is
the sovereign pilot which lteers us into the
harbour of true lafling pleafure-profperity is
too apt to turn the helm to the port of sensual
enjoyment-unites us too closely to the things
of this world-and makes us eye the moment
of our dissolution with regret and horror.-
The characeriftics of virtue are modesty and
humility-the most common attendants upon
profperiry are pride and presumption; and
often proves the motive of impiety.

VIRTUE

# VIRTUE

V I RTU E
I S the universal charm :-Even its shadow

is cnurted, lwhen the flbiltince is wanting.

It must be f;or-;nd and supported, not by un-
frequ'nt aEts, but by daily anid repeated ex-
trtions, in order to its becoming vigorous and
uleful. Great events give fccpe for great vir-
tues; but the main ten,.ur of human life is
compored of finall occurrences. WVithin the
round of these, lie the mnairials of the hap-
pincfs of most men; the fubjecs of their
duty, and lthe trials of their virtue.

Wlhatver is to he our prlfeffion, no edt-

cation is more necessary to success, than the
acquirement or viruous difrofitions and ha-
bits. This is the universal preparation for
every character, and every station in life. Bad
as the wor'd is, refpet is always paid to vir-
tue. In the usual course of human affairs, it
v;ill be found, that a plain understanding,
joined with acknowledged worth, contributes
more to Frofperlty, than the brightest parts,
without probity and honour.

Whether

%Vlctherr fcicnce, or lbu!lncl, or public life

be our air., virtue flill enicit for a principal
iliare into all thli'; great dcjal tments of Ibcirty.

It is conne&ed with eminence, in every libe-

ral art; sllth reputation, in every branch of
fair and ufe.rul bufincfs; with diftlin&ion, in.
every public flation. The vigour which it
gives to the mind, and the weight which it
adds to the characer; the generous senti-
ment which it breathes the undaunted spirit
which it inspires; the ardour of diligence
which it quickens ; the freedom which it pro-
cures from pernicious and dishonourable ave-
c.tions, are the foundation of all that is high
in fame, or great in success among men.

Whatever orna;iental or engaging endow-

ments we possess, virtue is a necessary requi-
site in order to their thining.with proper lustre.
By whatever aits we may at fiifi attra6c the
attention, we can hold the efleem, and secure
the hearts of othert, only by amiable dilpofi-
tions, and the accomplilhments of the mind.
These are the qualities whose influence will
last, when the lufire of all that once sparkled
and dazzled has passed away.

TOLUlP.

# VOLUPTUARY.

VOLUPTUARY.

HE corrupted temper, and the guilty
palriens of the bad, frustrate the effec

of every advantage which the world confers
on them. Tihe world may call them men of
picafure ; but, of all men, they are the great-
eft foes to pleasure. From their eagerncfs to
grasp, they strangle and destroy it: riotous
indulgence enervates both the body and the
mind, so that in the midst of his studied re.
finemcnt, the voluptuary languifies.

lWherever guilt mingles with profperiry, a

certain lrnom and heaviness enter along with
it. Vicious intrigues never fail to entangle
end embarrrfs those who engage in them :-
Besides, the fe!fifh gratifications of the bad
are both narrow in their circle, and ihort in
their duration.

I T.

# WIT.

W I T.
W I T is the molt dangerous talent we

can polefb --It mufi be guarded with

great dircretion and good-nature, otherwise it
will create many enemies.

Wit is petfealy confident with softness and

delicacy, yet they are seldom found united.-
Wit is so flattering to vanity, that they who
pofirfs it become intoxicated, and lose all self-
command.

Though it is the molf captivating, yet it is

the molt dreaded of all talents; the molt dan-
gerous to those who have it, and the most
feared by those who have it not. He who is
grown rich without it, in safe and fober dull-
ness, shuns it as a disease, and looks upon
poverty as its invariable concomitant.

The moralist declaims againfi it as the

source of irregularity; and the frugal citiaen
dreads it more than bankruptcy itself for he
confidera it as the parcna of extravagance and

beggaryi

'ugeSir:. 'iThi CyV!c wil! alk, of llanr ufl
is it --Of very lit':l, pclhpls :-no motie is
a P; .'r-garde ; and yet it is allowed, as an
objca of innocent amulfecnt, ard dulightful
recrlatiorn.

A w, msani who poltefies th's qu.litv, hat

rcceived a mltl dangerous pl-ctelt, pcrhap;,
not less so than beauty itself, erpecially if it be
not ficathed in a temper peculiarly inoffen-
fiv-c, chafi;i:d by a must corrccl jugmnent, and
refirained by more prudence than falls to the
eo:immon lot.

This t;lent is more likely to make a woman

vain than knowledge; for theec is much
more dang:r that folly fliou!d arise from
the conlideration of what is our own, than of
wvhat we borrow. But wit, like learning, is
not ilcar so common a thing as is imagined.-
For fl!ppancy, pertness, and impudence are of-
ten miflaken for this brilliant quality, and peo-
ple often imagine they are witty, only because
they arc indiscreet; and this makes the name
of wit so cheap, while its real exiftcnce i feo
rare.

But those who happily possess this talent,
Sanoct be too abfiinant in the use of it.-It

a ' often

# WOMAN.

oicen makes admirers, but never makes fl iends;
and fli, wxho does not deGfre friends, has a
surdid and insensible foul; but she, who is
ambitious of making eveiy man her admirer,
has an invincible vanity and a cold heart.

W 0 M A IN.
T HE prevailing manners of an agedce-

pend more than we are aware, or are

williog to allow, on the condut of the woC
men.i this is one of the principal things on
which the great machine of human fpcietr
turns. Those who:allow thebnfLuence which
female graces have, in contributing to polili
the manners ofmen, would do wclI to refie
how great an infuence.female morals must a-
so have on their conduc. How much .thel
is it to be regretted, that women lfoulieve rit
down contented to polifli, when theyare able
to reform: toenrertail-; whenthey mightin-
ftruela.ad to dazzle.foran hour, whoe eybiyrc
candidatesa or eternity !

In thisiand of civiland rdieous librty,

whlere therei-as littl d~ptifm exereii&d.over
the minds, ias over the persons of wcomen,
they have every libety of choice, and every

K opportunity

opportunity of improvement; and how great-
ly does this cncreafe their obligation to be ex-
emplary in their general conduc, attentive to
the governmentof their families, and inftru-
mental to the good orderof society.

The woman who is at a lufs to find amuse-

ment at home, cannot apologize for her dif-
fipation abroad, by Caying fie is deprived of
the benefit and pleafureof books; and flie
who regrets being doomed to a slate of dark
and gloomy ignorance, by the injustice and
tyranny of the men, complains of an evil
which does not exifl.

It is a certain truth, that women the most

accomplished are sure to acquire the universal
admiration and etceem of the world, if the im-
provement of the heart accompanies their
thirlt of other knowledge :-and vanity that
idol of the sex, be supplanted by modest
humility.

Nothing delights menmore than the'flrength

of underltanding, when true gentleness of
manners is its associate :-United, they be-
come irresistible orators-bleffed with the
power of perfuafion-fraught with the sweet-
ness of inftrution, making woman the highest
ernament of human nature,

WORL1D

# WORLD.

W O R L D.

H E world is the great deceiver; whose
fallacious arts it highly imports us to

detler. But in the midl of its pleasures and
purluits, the detelion is impollible. We tread
as within an enchanted circle, where nothing
appears as it truly is.-5We live in delusion,
fumning plans of imaginary bliss. WVe wan-
der for ever in the paradise of fools-medi-
tating in fecrct on the means of attaining
worldly fuccefs;--which acquired, has fel-
dom, in one inflance, fulfilled our expc~t-
aLion; but where we have reckoned most up-
on enjoyment, there have we generally found
the leaf.

It is too often confidered as the only field

of plcafure; and beat over and over in quest
of joys unfubflantial and tranfitory:-Pleafed
with the vifi£nary trifles which it affords, we
forget the probationary fiate of our existence,
madly pursue what at best we cannot retain:
barter our eternal welfare for vain fliadows
and empty fhew;-and as if carclefs of the
justice of God fee m to regard not his threaten-
ed vengeance, but depend solely on the ex-
tent of his mercy and divetl ourselves of the
finalleft right to demand uur promired felicity

K z RELIGIOUS

# RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.

RELIGIOUS WORSHIP.

T H E expressions of thore affc.tions under
its various forms, are no other than na-

tive effusions of the human heart. Ignorance
nay mificad, and superstition may corrupt
them, but their origin are derived from fcn-
timents that are eifential to man.

Wherever !nen have exifled, they have

been sensible that some acknowledgment was
due, on their part, to the Sovereign of the
world ; which Chr:ftian revl.ation has placed
in luch a liglt, as one should think were sus-
ficient to overawe the mott thoughtless, and to
melt the most obdurate mind.

But religious worlhip, disjoined from jus-

tice and virtue, can, on no account whatever
find acceptance with! the supreme Being.-
Because it is for the fake of man that worflip
and prayers arc required, that he may be ren-
dered berter, and'acquire those pious and vir-
tuous diipolitions, in which his highelt im-
provement confifis.

YOUTH.

# YOUTH.

Y O U T H.
XATOUTH is the fearon of warm and gene-

rous emotions ;-the heart Should then

spontaneously rife into the admiration of what
is great, glow with the love of what is fair
and excellent, and melt at the discovery of
trndernefs and goodness. In this fefion we
should endeavour, upon rational and Ibber
enquiry, to have our principles eflablifhed,
ror susser them to be shaken by the feoffs of
the licentious, or the cavilsof the sceptical.
No wantonefs of youthful fpirirs, no compli.
ance with the intemperate mirth of others,
ihould ever betray us into profane sallies.

It Should not be barren of improvements,

so iFrential to future felicity and honour.

This is the feed time of life. The cha-

raaer is now, under divine afliflance, of our
own forming; our fate is, in some measure,
put into our own hands. Nature is as yet pli-
ant and foft-habirs have not eflablifbed their

K 3 dominion

dominion: prejudices have not pre-occupied
our underfianding; the world has not had
time to contrat and dcba3e our aflcctinos.
All our powers are more vigourous, dllim-
barraffed and free, than they will be at any
future period. \Vhatever implTifcl we now
,ive to our dcfires and passions, the direaion
is likely to continue. It will form the chan-
nel in which our life is to run; nay, it may
determine its everlasting issue.

Virtuous youth gradually bring forward

accomnplifled and flourifbing manhood; and
such manhood pases of itfelfwidliout uneafi-
ness, into refpe&able and tranquil old age.
Bat if youth be trifled away without improve-
ment, manhood will be contemptible, and
old age miserable. If the beginning of life
has been vanity, its latter end can be no other
than vexation offpirit.

DETACHED

# DETACHED SENTIMENTS AND MORAL MAXIMS.

DETACHED SENTIMENTS

AND

MORAL MAXIMS.
THE things in our own pover, are in their

ovn natnlr siee, not c.pable c.f being

countermanddd or hindered , but those that
are not in our power are feeble, fervie, liable
to oppofitiol, and not ours, but anothers.

When any frigh'tful and difouraging ima-

gination aflaults us, we ihould harden our-
selves, and meet it boldly, with this TefeC-
tion, that it is only our apprehension of tbings
and'not the real nature of the things them-
selves.

We 'hould, on all oecarions, refleft with
urfelves, of what nature and'condition those
things are, that minimer delight, or are use-
ful and beneficial to us, and that we have a
natural tendency for; and tharthere reftletrins
msay answer their end, wve ihould make them
familiarr,by beginning at the flighter and most

iaconafidc

ilhcor;fdcralc tlhings, andl fc rife tu the high-
er and more valu:ible.

In every afioln we undertake, we should

tonfider firftwith oul:lfilvs, and weigh well
the nature and circumfRances of the thing;
nay, though it be a flii:t one reprefcnr, to
ourl'elves x hat accidcn ts we may probably inet
%ith, and dtrrlmine to preserve our minds
and realon undifurbed : by vhich means we
flall be guarded againil their disagreeable
effefls; which never can be done, if we sus-
fcr every one to discompose us.

That :which gives men disquiet, and makes

their lives milirable, is not the nature of
things as they really are, but the notions and
opinions which they form to themselves con-
cerning them. Wherever therefore we meet
with obRlruaions and perplexities: and fall
into them, let us be just, and not lay the blame
where it is not due; but impute it all to our-
fil tes, and our prejudicate opinions.

We should never be exalted with any ex-

cellence that is not properly our own.-We
lhould content ourselves with making a

I right

right use of our own ideas, anl.l when we
manage thcd as we ought, we may be allowed
to please ourfcves ; for this is being exalted
with omne excellence that is properly ours.

Let us not trouble ourselves with wilhing

that things may be just as we would have
themn; but well pleased that they ihould be
ju rt as they are, then we shall live easy.

Upon every frcih accident we ought to turn.

our eyes inward, and examine how we are qua-
lified to encounter it, and prepare ourselves to
meet it with patience and resolution : if we use
ourfelvestothefeby degrees, no accident what-
ever will be able to furprize or subdue us.

Our constant care should be to behave our-

selves in all the affairs of human life, with
the fame decency as at a public entertain-
ment: If any thing be offered us, we flould
receive it with modesty; if it pass by us; and
be sent to another, let us not withold it from
him, or keep what was not intended for us;
if it be not come down to us, let us not shew our-
selves eager nor snatch at it greedily, but wait

patiently

patiently till it comes to our turn. In cafe of
riches, honour, power or preferment, we
flhould manage ou.rfilvcs in the famec manner:
it will render us pleasing to man, and ac-
ceptable to Gut.

The world we flould confider as a theatre,

thla our parts in tlis play of life are determined
ty the poet; upon him it mull depend whe-
thir we flhtll aft a long or short one; whether
our characters fnall he high or low; if there-
fore he aflns us that cf a beggar, we must
be careful to humour it well;-if a c: ipplc-
or a prince-or a private obscure man, and
whatever it be, we must make the best of it.
,The playing of the parts commendably de-
penCds on ourfelves-the giving them our, and
cihonfing the alors is not ours but another
person's.

It is always in our p, wer to come off con-

querors, provide i we w 11 never engage in any
combats, but such wxhofe successes will be de-
iermi:ind by our own choice.

If we fee any person advanced to an eminent
station of honour and power, or any other kind

of

of prospcrity, we fliould avoid being presently
fui prized with a faifc idea of his condition,
nor rafllvy pronounce i him happy: for if all
the happiness and tranquillity of our minds
depend upon things within our own powers
there can be no room for envy or emulation.

When any man reviles or strikes us, we

should confider that it is not the tongue that
gives us the opprobrious language, or the
hand that deals the blow that injures or as-
fronts us, but it is our own resentment of ir,
as an injury or affront, that makes it such to
us; the provocation is entirely owing to our
own apprehensions, which swells us into re
venge.

It is necessary to keep all those calamities

of which mankind are meft afraid- constantly
before our eyes, and let them be familiar to
our minds; but, above all, death ihould ever
be present there: it is an excellent remedy
against base and mean thoughts, and a power.
ful restraint to all immoderate desires.

If we resolve to make wisdom and yirtue

the study and business of our lives, we must
be fare to arm ourfclves beforehand against
all the inconvenicncics and discouragements

that

that are like to attend this refolutiun. xxce
shall meet with many fcnffs, and much dcri-
sion; but let is not be affiacd or lupercili-

is : only flick close to whatever we are in
our judgment convinced is virtuous and be-
coming, and corfider this as our proper fna
tion assigned by God, which we must not quit
upon any terms; and remember, that if we
persevere in goodness, those very men who
derided us at tirfR, will afterwards turn our
admirers; but if we give way to their re-
proaches, and are vanquishcd by them, we
lihali render ourselves doubly, and most de-
fervedly ridiculous.

If we ever happen to accommodate our-

selves to the humour of the world, 'for the
fake of reputation and applause, we should
take notice, that it is below a philosopher;
and therefore content ourselves upon all occa-
ficr. with really being what we would be
thc;ught; but if we will need be thought so
too, we flould deserve our own good opinion
that will be sufficient.

If we observe some other perron more ca-

reffed than ourselves; invited to entertaii-
iaents, when we are left out; saluted, before

WC

'a.e are taken notice oF; thought more proper
to advise with, and his counftl followed ra-
ther than outs; we fhi.uld confider whether
these refects paid to him are good things, or
evil; if they delerve to be esteemed good,
this ought to be matter of joy to us; but
if they be evil, how unreasonable is it to
be troubled because they have not fallen to
.our share.

We Ihould confider with ourselves seriously,

what figure is most fit for us to make in the
world, and then fix upon a method and rule
in order hereunto, which we should be sure
'to observe nicely-, both at home alone;, and
abroad in company.

One of our principal rules tfould be silence,

and when we discourse, confine ourselves to
such fubjeas as are necessary, and ecprefs
our sense in as few words as possible. Lo-
quacity is a mod impertinent intruder on so-
ciety; and many afelefs words, (through the
pride of the fpeakcr) are the deftruaion.of his
consequence, an unpardonable infringement
on the laws of good breeding, and a fatigue
to his auditors.

L : Whenever

.WXhenever we happen into company, where

-we have authority and influence enough to dc
it, we should try to change the difeourfe, if
..uninfruAive, ulnentertaining, or offensive, and
bring it to becoming fubjets: but if we are
among people of another temper, such as will
.,wot endure restraint or reproof, then it be.
..ioves us:to hold our own torgues.

Loud laughing is a mark of ill-breeding;

laughing aour r-own jokes, too oft the effei.
oef ignorance: we fhould'not indolge even in
·laughing.at all but upon few occafions,..and
Cthen it should not be-much.

.If poffbie, we-hould avoid. fwear.ing.alto-
geher; it is vulgar and impious :but if we
* cannot dr.that absolutely, we hould .be furt
--to decline itras much-as is in our.power.

:All public entertainments, and.mixed.com-

-.paMies, without they-are .calculated to pro-
-duce innocent amusement, improve the. un-
derftanding, or polish the-i.mannes;i, fiould
·lbe declined: butiif-any.extraordiary.noca-
!.sion calls. us to them, -wedhould.keep,a'-ftit
guard :upon ourfclveS, left we.fiuould .be ,n-
feted with rude and vulgar -conevrfation
for though a man be never so clear kumfeif

yeC

yet by frequenting company that are tainted,.
he will of neceffiy contrat some ppllution-
from them.

Use and neceffty lhould he the.rule of. all

the provisions we make for the body: vw
fl:ould choose meat and drink, apparel, houfec,
and retinue of such kinds,, and, in. such pra-.
portions, as will most conduce to there pur-.
,pJfs. But as for all beyond this, which,
wiinifers to vanity and. luxury, let, us re-
tiech and despise,

To render us truly amiable in the fight.of.

the just and virtuous, nothing, h.oweveriit.
nmay be laughed at by the dissolute, contni.
lbutes so much to that end as cbaftiry. But.
how eeif-. foevet ours may be, the. c9nc.eit
of this lhould not; make. us, trpublefome. to.
o:hers, that are.more frail; nor ihould.we he.
(-o lavish in eithe, rep,roying: their failingr,.
nor in commendationof our ow.n virtue

If. we happen to be told: at any; time, thitr

another person hath .spoken i4 of.ut, we shoujd-.
never trouble, ourselves to.copfure, the re.Rort,
or excuse the. thing without. beiogpublicly-
called forth, and the preservation of charaaer.
raakesrit. neceffiry; but rather put up with, it.

L z -alls

all,' vith this reply :-" That we have feve-
ral fault; besides that; and if he had known,
us more, he would have fpokcn worse."

In familiar conversations with our friends

and acquaintance, we should never make it
our bufinels to entertain the company with
tcdious narratives of ourselves, or our own.
af.airs. The exploits by which we have fig-
nalifed ourselves, the successes ne have ob-
tained, the dangers we have encountered, or
the afflcqions we have undergone, may be
very ag-ceeable ftorits for us to tell, yet they
will not be eqially so for others to hear.

It will not become us to render ourselves

the common buffoon, and be always trying to
make a company laugh; for this is a nice and
very tickllf tihing, exceeding apt to degene-
rate into vice and filly and he that only
fludics men's divrtrion, shall be lure at the-
fame time to lose their refpc-.

Of all kinds of difcnurfe, none is more un-

safe, none more dcfpicable, than that which
breaks in upon modefly and good manners.-
Wherever therefore any perforn fles out into-
ebfcenity, if such a liberty dare be taken, we
ihould reprove him publicly, and put a flop

tIQ

to his lewd converlation; but if that cannot
conveniently be done, yet. at cast we may
do ourfclves the jufiice to disapprove it; and
by forbearing to join with him, by blushing
for him, and by chiding looks, let all the
company fee plainly, that we detest his filthy
ribaldry.

When the idea of any pleasure strikes our

imagination, as we must on other occasions,.
so (hould we on this especially, stand upon
our guard, and not susser ourfeives to be hur-
ried away by the imretuous t,rrent; we
fmou'd not run eagerly upon enjoyment, nor
improve the thought into a&tion, but take
titme to confider, and let that time be em-
ployed in making a just computation be-
tween.the duration of the pleasure, and that
of the repentance sure to follow it, and then.
we (hould not fail. to check our inclinations,
and chide ourselves for. indulging them in any
degree at all.

When, upon mature deliberation, we.are

persuaded a thing is fit to be done, let us do,
it boldly, and not assec privacy in it, nor
concern ourfclves at all what impertinent cen-
furea or rcfickaions the world may pass upon

it;

it-is foclilh.to Rand in fear of thofc, who x ill.
tliemfclv.s do ill, in censuring and condemn.-
ing:what we do well.

If vve take upon us a chara&er al'ove our

capacity, wt fall into a two-fold inconveni-
ence: sift, to miscarry in what we have un-
dertaken ; and then, to lose the opportunity
of.undertaking fomevwhat else, more propor--
tionableto our abiliries,.in.vhich we might;.
have come off with honour.

In all.the affairs-of human life, we fiould

take care not to hurt our mind, or offend out.
judmcent; and this rule, if cautiously ob-
served in all our deportment, will be amighcy
fecu.ity to us in all our undertakingsj and-
prvvenw us from beiog injure& by folly, or
agpieved by. iipetuolity.

At'the age of fourteen, women begin..to,

oe courted and carxfied; thn'.they think that-
the recommending themselves to, the asec-.
tions of the m.n,. it the. only business they
have to attend to, and so prefendy fall.to trick-
ing, to drefling,. and praafing all the little
engaging arts peculiar. totheir fox. In these
they place. all tclei hopes as they do all theic

harppi

sappiness in the fucccfs of them. But they
fliould underftalld, that there are other-at-
traaions much mrre pos-erful than thef';
,that the refpe&t we pay to tho.rn is not.duc
*to their beauty, so much as to thtir modesty,
.·nd innocence, and unnffected virtue ;-and that
these are the true; the irrefiflible charrns.fucth
-*as w:ll make the surest and mdft lasting con-
-quefis.

There is no rurer sign ofifitupidity,.and

-want of fen.re, than to trnfieaway-a grcar-deal
eos time in things relating.to the:body;,arto
be long at exercise, or at meals, or. drinking,
or in the other funaions of nature. For we
ought to look upon all that is done to the
body as things by the bye, and the improve-
ment ot the foul, as that which challerges
our time, and is the true and main end and
business of our lives.

We should never proTefs ourselves philofo-

phers, nor talk much of rules and wife obfer-
vations among the ignorant atA vulgar, but
let our rules be seen in. our pratice. Nor
ihould we be solicitous in making a fcew of
our erudition, or boast of our learning: it
faifei the envy of the illiterate, dilgufts the

~deft,

.mnodeft, gives us the chaii-acr of oflentatious,
and loAds us with general odium. .1lay, if vwe
* happen to fill in con verfation svithignorant and
common men, tloug they themselves flart a
difcourfc concerning some pnint in philiofophy,
we fiould forbear joining with them in it; for
,when men are f6rward to vent their notions,
it is a fhrewnv sign they are not well digefled.
We should rather labour to approve the ex-
:ellence of our doarines to the wdrld, not by
disputes and plausible harangue, but by . di-
gefling them into pratice, and .growing firourg
in virue.

TIH E tEt-..

'i 0X
O 76

*. ..\

--' . . .
,
