S t M
o O N S

B Y

HUG H BLAIR, D.D.

ONE OF THE MINISTERS OF THE HIGH
CHURCH AND PROFESSOR OF RHE-
TORICK, IN THE UNIVERSITY OF

D INBU R G H.

L O N D O N.

Printed in the Year,

.784.;

# SERMON I. ACTS, X. 4. Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God.

SERMON I,

AcTS, X. 4.
Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a me-

morial before God.
T LIE Higb and Lofty One who inhabiteth eternity

dwelleth alfl with him that is of humble and con-

trite heart. In the midst of his glory, the Almighty
is not inattentive to the meanefi of his subje&s. Nei-
ther obscurity of flation, nor imperfection of know-
ledge, finks those below his regard, who worship and
obey him. Every prayer wf.i'h they fend up-from their
secret retirements, is liltteted to by him; and every
work of charity which they, perform, how unknown
soever to tTe world, attraQts his notice. The Text
prerfnts a tingle instance of this comfortable truth.
In the city of Cxefarea, there dwelt a Roman centu-
rion, a military Officer of inferior rank, a Gentile,
neither by birth or religion entitled to the privileges
of the Jewish nation. But he was a devoat and a
benevolent man; who, according to his measure of
religious knowledge, fludied to perform his duty,
prayed to God always, and gave much alms to the people.
Such a chara&er passed not unobserved by God. So
highly was it honoured, that to this good centurion
an Angel was sent from heaven, in order to direff
him to the means of full inftrution in the truth.
The Angel accosts him with this salutation, Corneili-
us, Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memo-
rial b'fre Gad.

A X It

It is to the conjunction of prayers and alms, that I

purpose now to direc your thoughts, as describing
the respectable and amiable charaAer of a man, as
forming the honour and the blessedness of a true
Chriflian; piety joined Ai!h charity, faith with good
v.'oiks, devotion :wirh morality. These are things
which God hath conneced, and which it is impious
in man to feperate. It is only when ;hey remain
united, that they can come up as a grateful memorial
before God. I shall firtt endeavour to.ihew you, That
alms without prayers, or prayers without alms mor-
ality without devotion, or devotion without morality,
are extremely defetive; and then shall point out the
happy effets of their mutual union.

LET us begin with confidering the cafe of alms

without prayers; that is of good works without piety
or a proper sense of God and religion. Examples of this
are not uncommon in the world. With many, Virtue
is, or at least is pretended to be, a refpeEtable and
an honoured name, while Piety founds meanly in
their ears. They are men of the world, and they
claim to be men of honour. They rfit upon their
humanity, their probity, and their truth. They ar-
rogate to themselves all the manly and active virtues.
Bat devout affections, and religious duties, they
treat with contempt, as founded on shadowy fpecu-
laiions, and fit to employ the attention only of weak
and superstitious minds. Now in opposition to such
persons, I contend, That this negle6t of piety argues
depravity of heart; and that it infers an irregular
dikcharge of the duties of morality.

F:r.sT, it argues internal depravity; for it d;s-

covers a cold and a hard Feart. If there be any im-
pression which man is formed by nature to receive,
it is a sense of religion. As soon as his mind opens
to observation and refletion, he difceins imnumerable
marks of his dependent state. He finds him!elf
placed, by sorn; flhperior powecr, irr a vail world,

where

where the wlfdom and goodness of the Creator are-
conspicuous on every fide. The magnificence, the
beauty and order of nature, excite him to admireand
adore. \\ hen he looks up to that omnipotent hand
which operates throughout the universe, he is impref-
fed ei h reverence. When he receives bleflings which
he cannot avoid afctibing to divine goodness, he is
prompted to gratitude. The expressions of those as-
fetions under the various forms of religious worship,
are no other than native effusions of the human heart.
Ignorance may misead, and superstition may corrupt
them; but their origin is derived from sentiments
that are effnltial to man.

Cat your eyes over the whole earth. Explore the

most remotequarters of the eafi or the weft. You
maydifcover tribes of men, without policy, or laws,
or cities, or any of the arts of life: But no where
will you find them without tome form of religion. In
every region you behold the prostrate vorfhipper,
the temple, the altar, and the offering. Wherever
men have existed, they have been sensible that some
acknowledgement was due, on their part, to the
Sovereign of the world. If in their rudest and molf
ignorant slate, this obligation has been felt, what ad-
ditional-force mull it acquire by the improvements of
human knowledge, but especially by the great dif-
coveries of the Christian revelation? Whatever, either
from reverence or from gratitude, can excite men to
the worship of God, is by this revelation placed in
such a 4ght, as one should think were sufficient to
over-awe the molt thoughtless, and to melt the most
obdurate mind.

Canst thou, ther, pretend to be a man of reason,

nay, a man ,of virtue, and yet continue regardless of
one of the first and chief di&ates of human nature ?
Where is thy sensibility to what is right and fit, if
that loud voice which calls all nations throughout the
earth to religious ho.nage, has never been heard by

A 3 thee ?

thee ? Or, if it has been heard, by what strange and
false refinements haft thou stifled those natural
sentiments which it tends to awaken ? Calling thyself
a Ion, a citizen, a friend; claiming to be faithful
and affectionate in t efe relations; haft thou no sense
of what thou oweft to thy firfl Parent, thy highefl
Sovoreign, thy greatef Bcnefaror ? Can it be con-
fitlent with true virtue or 'honuor, to va!ue thyself
upon thy regard to inferiour obligations, and yet to
violate that which is the most sacred and the imoft
ancient of all ? When simple inftina teaches the
Tartar and the Indian, together with his alms and
good works to join his prayers to that power whom
he confiders as .he source of good, shall it be no re-
proach, in the most er.lightencd {late of human na-
ture, and under the purl-tt difpenfarion of religion,
to have extinguishcd the sense of gratitude to Heaven
and to flight all acknowledgement of the great and the
true God ? What does luch conduc imply, but ei-
ther an entire want, or a wilful fuppreifion, of some
of the best and mos generous affecions belonging to
human nature ?-Surely there must be an eflentiat
deffeE in that ht at which remains cold and insensible,
where it ought to be affiaed most warmly. Surely,
fich a degree of depravity must be lodged there, as
is sufficient to taint all the other springs of pretended
virtue.

BUT besides this, I musl contend, in the second

place, 'l'hat where religion is negleced, there can
be no regular nor steady pra&ice of the duties of
morality. The charaA er will be often inconfiftant;
and Virtue placed on a basis too narrow to support it,
will be always loose and tottering. For such is the
properfity of our nature to vice, so numerous are
the temptations to a relaxed and immoral condut,
that flrorger restraints than those of mere reason,
are necessary to be imposed on man. The sense of
right and wrong, the principle of honour, or-the in-

ftina

flina of benevolence, are barriers too feeble to with-
fland the strength of passion. In the tranquil seasons
of life, there natural principals may,, perhaps, carry
on the ordinary course of social duties with some re-
gularity. But swait until some trying emergence come.
Let the conflit of paflions arise. Let the heart be
either wounded by fore distress, or agitated by vio-
lent emotions; and you shall presently fee, that virtue
without religion is inadequate to the government of
life. It is deflitute of its proper guard, of its firmed.
fuppcrt, of its -chief encouragement. It will fink
under the weight of misfortune; or will yield to the
solicitation of guilt.

The great motives that produce constancy and

firmness of aaion, muvf be of a palpable and firiking
kind. A divine Legislator, uttering his voice from
heaven; an omoifcient Winess, beholding us in all
in our retreats; an almighty Governour, stretching
forth his arm to punish or reward, diflofing the fe-
crets of the invinfible world, informing us of perpe-
tual reft prepared hereafter for the righteous, and of
indignation and wrath awaiting the wicked: These are
the considerations which over-awe the world, which
support integrity, arFd check guilt. They add to virtue
that solemnity which should ever characaerize it. To
the admonitions ofconscience they give the authority of
a law. Co-operating with all the good dispositions of
a p;ous man, they ftrenghten and injure their influence.
On his alms you can ha\ e no certain dependance, who
thilks not of God, nor has joined prayer to his charita-
ble deeds. But when humanity is seconded by piety,
the prnng from which it flows is rendered of course,
more regular and conflant.--in 'hort, withdraw reli-
gion, and you shake all the pillars- of morality. In
every heart you waken the influence of virtue: And
among the multitude, the bulk of mankind, you
overthrow its power.

HA VI G thus ihewn that morality without devo--

A 4 icn

thee? Or, if it has been heard, by what fIrange and
false refinements haft thou stiflcd those natural
sentiments which it t nds to awaken ? Calling thyself
a son, a citizen, a fiie:d ; claiming to be faithful
and affecionate in t efe relations; haft thou no sense
of what thou oweft to thy firt P'arent, thy highest
Sovoreign, thy greateR Benefator ? Can it be con-
fitlent with true virtue or 'honuor, to value thyself
upon thy regard to interiour obligations, and yet to
violate that which is the most sacred and the fmof
ancient of all ? When simple initina teaches the
Tartar and the Indian, together with his alms and
good works to join his prayers to that power whom
he confiders as 'he source of good, shall it be no re-
proach, in the mod erlightened fate of human na-
ture, and under the purcti difpenfarion of religion,
to have extingu-ihcd the lense of gratitude to Heaven
and to flight all acknowledgerent ofthe great and the
true God ? What does iuch conduct imply, but ei-
ther an entire want, or a wilful fuppreflion, of rome
es the best and most generous affecions belonging to
human nature ?-Surely there muff be an efclniiat
dcfseCl in that hea t which remains cold and insensible,
where it ought to be ass eQed most warmly. Surely,
si h a degree of depravity must be lodged there, as
is sufficient to taint all the other springs of pretended
vir ue.

BUT besides this, I muff contend, in the second

place, That where religion is negleced, there can
be no regular nor Ready practice of the duties of
morality. The character will be often inconliftant;
and Virtue placed on a basis too narrow to support it,
will be always loose and tottering. For such is the
properfity of our nature to vice, so numerous are
the temptations to a relaxed and immoral conduct,
that firorger restraints than those of mere reatfon,
are necessary to be imposed on man. The sense of
right and wrong, the principle of honour, or'the in-

ftinc

RinEt of benevolence, arc barriers too feeble to with-
fland the strength of paflion. In the tranquil seasons
of life, these natural principals may_, perhaps, carry
on the ordinary course of social duties with some re-
gularity. But wait until some trying emergence come.
Let the conflic of passions arise- Let the heart be
either wounded by fore difirefs, or agitated by vio-
lent emotions; and you shall presently fee, that virtue
without religion is inadequate to the government of
life. It is deflitute of its proper guard, of its firmest
fuppcrt, of its -chief encouragement. It will fink
under the weight of misfortune or will yield to the
solicitation of guilt.

The great motives that produce constancy and

firmness of aaion, must be of a palpable and striking
kind. A divine Legislator, uttering his voice from
heaven; an omniscient Witness, beholding usin all
in our retreats; an almighty Governour, firetching
forth his arm to punish or reward, disclosing the fe-
crets of the invinfible world, informing us of perDe-
tual reft prepared hereafter for the righteous, and of
indignatian and wrath awaiting the wicked: These are
the considerations which over-awe the world, which
support integrity, and check guilt. They add to virtue
that solemnity which should ever characerize it. To
the admonitions ofconfcience they give the authority of
a law. Co-operating with all the good dispositions of
a p;ous man, they ftrenghten and insure their influence.
On his alms you can ha\ e no certain dependance, who
thinks not of God, nor has joined prayer to his charita-
ble deeds. But when humanity is seconded by piety,
the ipring from which it flows is rendered of course,
more regular and conflant.--In short, withdraw reli-
gion, and you shake all the pillars- of morality. In
every heart you waken the influence of virtue: Arid
among the multitude, the bulk of mankind, you
overthrow its power.

HAVI N G thus ihewn that morality without devo--

A4 ticn

tion is both defetive and unstable, I proceed to con-
fider the other extreme, of prayers without alms,
devotion without morality.

In every age the pratice has prevailed, of fubftitu-

ting certain apperances of piety in the place of the
great duiies of humanity and mercy. Too many
there have always.been, who flatter themselves with
the hope of obtaining the friendIhip of their Creator,
though they neglet to do justice to their fellow-crea-
tures. But such persons may be afiured, that their
supposed piety is'altogether of a spurious kind. It is
an invention of their own, unknown to reason, un-
knuwn in the word of God. In scripture me are e-
ver dire&ed to try our faith by our works, our love
of God by our love of men. We are direced to con-
fider piety as a principle which regenerates the heart,
and forms it to goodness. W/e are taught that in vain
we address any acts of homage to Christ, unless we
do the things wbicb he faith ; and that love, peace,

rtltenjefs,' oodnels, nreeknefs and temperance are not

only the >rJuncions of his'law, but the native fruits
of hisfpirit. If, therefore, while piety seems ardent,
morality fha:l decline, you have full reason to believe
that into that piety Iomecorrupting ingredients haveen-
tered. And if ever your regard to morality shall totaly
fail; if, while you make many prayers, you give no alms;
if, while you appear to be zealous for God, you are
sale or unjust to men; if you are hard or contraced
in heart, ievere'in your censures, and opprefive in
your condu&; then, conclude with certainty, that
what you had termed piety was no more than an
empty name; For as soons according to the scripture
similitude, will bitter waters flow from a Jwreetfoun-
tain, as such effets be produced by genuine piety.

What you have called by that name, resolves it-

self into one or other of three things. Either it is an
hypocritical form of godliness, affrumed in order to
impose on the world; or which is the most favou-

rable

rable fuppolition, it is a transient impreflion of feri-
oufnefs, an accidental melting of the heart, which
p.,ffe away like the morning cloud and the early dew;
or, which I am afraid is too often the cafe, it is the
deliherate refuse of a deluded and superstitious, but
at the fame time a corrupted mind. For all men,
even the most depraved, are fubjet'more or less,
to cnmpunctions of conscience. It has never been.in
their power to withdraw totaly beyond the reach of
that warning voice, which tells them that something
is ntceffary to be done, in order to make their peace
with the Kulcr of the world. But, backward at the
fame time to resign the gains of difhonefly, or the
plca:ures of vice; averse from submission to that sa-
cred law wh;ch enjoins ri:hteoufinefs in its whole ex-
tent, they have often attempted to make a fort of
conpofition with Heaven; a composition, which,
though they dare not avow it in words, lurks in secret
at the -botcm of many a heart. If God will only
d;fpenfe with some articles of obedience, they- will
repav'him with abundant homage. If they fail in good
prac6ice, they will fludy to be fourd iu belief; and
by the number oftheir -prayers, will atone, in some
mearure, for their deficiency in chariatable deeds.

But the attempt is as vain, as it is impious. From

the simplest and plaineR principals of reason it rmuft
appear, that rcligeous worship, disjoined from justice
and virtue, can upon no account whatever find ac-
ceptance with tle Supreme B ing. To what purpose
is the multitude of your acrjfices unto me? faith the
Lord. Bruig no mare vain oblations. Incene is an
ahoiirnalion unto m,. The ne-ne mnonf andJablbatbs, the
call. ng of aflemblies, I cannot away with; it is iniquity
rven t.4e fo!rm meetings.- Cei(e, foolish and impi-
ousnman ! Cease to confider the Almighty as a wealk
or vain-glcricus being, who is to be appealed by thy
devout pro'irations, and thy humble wods ; or to
be gr:atified !y thle pa.rade and oltcetation of external

A 5 worflip

wrrfhip. What is all thy worship to him ? Will he
cat the fltsl ofthyfacrificer, or drink the blood foffered
goats ? Was worship required of thee, dost thou
think, upon his account, that thou mightelt bring
any increase to his glory and felicity by thy weak
and insignificant praises? Sooner mighteft thou in-
crease the splendour of the fun by a lighted taper, or
add to the thunder by thy voice. No: It is for the
fake of man, not of God, that worflip and prayers
are required; not that God may be rendered more
glorious, but that man may be made better; that he
may be confirmed in a proper sense of his dependant
tfate, and acquire those pious and virtuous dilpcfiti-
ons in which his highest improvement confifls.

Of all the principles in religion, one she u'd take

this to to be the most evident; and yet frequent ad-
monitions are needed, to renew the impression of it
upon mankind. For what purpose did thy Creator
place thee in this world, in the midst of human foci-
ety, but that as a man among men thou mighteft cul-
tivate humanity, that each in his place might con-
irihute to the general welfare; that as a spouse, a
brother, a son, or a friend, thou mighteft a- thy
part with an upright and a tender heart; and thus
aspire to resemble Him who ever consults the good
of his creatures, and whose tender mercies are overall
his ,orrk! .? And dareft thou, who has been facrifi-
cirg u fuipicicus innocence to thy loole pleasures;
thou, who haif been diflurbing.the repose of society
rb thine ambition or craft; thou, who, to-increafe
ty treasures, halt been makeing the widow and the
orphan .veep; dareft thou approach God with thy
wvorfhip and thy prayers, and entertain the hope thathe
v.ill look down uponithee in peace ? Will the God of
ordier and judticc acccpt*luch poor compensation for
ihis viocated laws? Wil¥ the God of love regard the
services of one who is an enemy to his creatures ?
Si-'"~ - corrupter of the society of men aspire to the

habitatio .-

h: bitations of putre and breffed spirits ?-T-elieve ,r,
He that faith he Iwsvth God, mu.fl love his brstber
also. CeaJe to do evil; learn to do well. Seek
judgmen t relieve the oppreflF, judge the fatherl./s,
plead for the widow : And then, Draw nigh to God,
and he will draw nigh o thee ; call upon him in the day
of troŽble, and lie will answer thee Thy prayers and
thine alms, -fiall then ascend, in joint memorial, be-
fore-the Mofit High.

I H AVE now shewn the evil of maiming and split-

tirg rligion ; of dividing asunder two things, which
though in theory they may be separated, vet in prac-
tice must always co-exist if either of them be rtat,
Devotion to God and Charity to Men. Let us con-
fder next the happy cffc-ts of ',heir union.
-- Their union forms the confiftert, the graceful, the
refpc&table characer of the real Christian, the man
cf trute worth. If you leave either of them out of
your lyflem, even though you excel in the other, you
can fland trial- only in cne point of view. It is only
on one fide your ch:racer is fair; on theother, it
will always be open to much reproach.. And as you
difionour yourfeclves, so you do great injustice to re-
ligion. V'or,' by dividing its parts from one another,
3 ou never fail to expose it to the censure of the vwotid:
Ard perhaps, by this fort of partial anddivided good-
ness, religion has suffered more in the esteem of man-
kind, than by open profligacy. The unbeliever wi!l
fccff at your piety, when he fees you regligent of
mrral duties. The bigot will-decry all morality,
when he fees you preterding to be a follower of vir-
tue, -though you be a derpifer of God. W.hereas he
vwho stars God, and is at the fame tirre just end be-
reficent to men, exhibits religeon to rle w rld with-
full p;opriety. It shines in h's condba with its na-
ti' e splendour; and its rays thiow a glory- round I im.
Hi;s charaacr is at;oe repio.ch. It is at once ami-
allc and vsnetb.ie. Malice itse;f is afraid to attnck

-him ;

him; and even the worst men refpea and honour
him in their hearts.

This too is the man whose life will be mofl peace-

ful and happy. He who fails materially either in
piety or in virtue, is always obnoxious to the angufltl
of remcrfe. His partial t oodnels may flatter him in
the day of superficial observation ; but when 'soli-
tude or difire's awakens the powers of refletion, he
shall be made to feel, that ore part of duty perform-
ed, atones not for another which is neglected. In
the midls of his prayers, the remembrai ce of in-
jufRice will upbraid him with hSpccrily ; ard in the
diflribution of his alms, the prayers which the poor
put up for him, will make him blit h for his neglect
of God. Conscience will supply the place of the
hand coming forth to wr;te over against him on the
xvall, T/hoM art rweighed in the balance, and art found
wanting. Whereas he who holds both faith und a
gold colncietre, who attends equally to the discharge
of his duty towards God and towards Mar, enjoys,
as far as human imperfeaion allows, the fenle of
fairness and confiflency in conduct, of integrity and
soundness of heart.

The man of mere morality, is a ftranger-to all the

delicate and refined pleasures of devotion. In works
of beneficence and mercy, he may enjoy fatiifa&ion.
But his latisfaaion is destitute of that glow of assec-
tion, which enlivens the feelings of one who lis;s his
heart at the fame time to the Father of the univerle,
arnd confiders himself a; imitating God. The rnan-
again who refls solely on devotion, if that devotion
open not his heart to humanity, nmt only remains a
stranger to the pleasures of beneficence, but must
often undergo the pain arising fiom bad paflior.s.
But when beneficence and devotion are united, they
pour upon the rran in wl-ho they meet, the full
pleasures of a good and a pure heart. His alms con-
.nct&d him wiih men ; his [rayers with God. He

looks

looks without dismay on both worlds. - All nature has
to him a benign aspet. If engaged in aaive lite,
he is the friend of mn ; and he is happy in the ex-
ertions of that friendship. If left in retirement, he
walks among the works of nature, as with God.
Every tbject is enlivened to him by the sense of the
Divine pretfnte. Every where he traces the bene-
ficent hand of the Author of nature; and every
where, with glowing heart, he hears and answers his
feciet voice. When he looks up to heaven, he re-
joices in the thought that there dwells that God whom
he serves and honours; that Saiour in whom he
trusts; that Spirit of grace from whose inspiration
his piety and hischarity flow. , When he locksaround
him on the world, he is.foothed with the pleating re-
membrance of good offices which he has done or at
least has fludied to do, to many.who dwell there.-
How comfortable the reflecion, that him no poor
man can upbraid for having withheld his due; him
no unfortunate man can reproach for having seen and
despised his sorrows; but that on his head are de-
scending the prayers of- the needy and the aged; and
that the hands of those whom his protecion has sup-
ported, or his bounty hasifed, are lifted up in secret-
to bless hiimn

Life passed under the influence of such difpofiti-

ons, naturally leads toa happy end. It is not enough
to fay, that faith and piety, joined with aiyve vir-
tue, constitute the requisite preparation for heaven.
They in truth begin the enjoyment of-heaven. In
every f(ate of our existence, they form the chief in-
gredients of felicity. Hence they. are the great marks
of Chriifan regeneration. They are the signature
of that Holy Spirir, by which good men are said to
be jealedunto the day of redemption.-The text affords
a firiking proof of the estimation in which they are
held by God. Am,dft that infinite variety of human
events which pass under his eye, the prayers and the

'aim

alins of CORNELIUS attracted his particular notice.
He remarked the amiable dispositions which rose in
the heart of this good man. But he saw that they.
were vet imperfect, while he remained.unenlightened
by the principles of the Christian religion. In order
to remove this ubflrucaion to his rising graces, and to.
bring him to the full knowledge of that God whsam
he fought to honour, he was favoured with a super--
natural message from heaven. While the princes of
the earth were left to act by the counsels of their own-

ilfdom; while, without interpolition from above,
Generals coi.quered or fell, according to the victi-
tude of human things to this good centurion an An-
gel was commiflioned f.om the throne of God.

What can I fay mere or higher in praise of this

-blefied charater, than that it is what God delights
to honour? Men single out as the objeas of diLlinc-
tion, the great, the brave,. or the renowned. But
he who /feth nt as man feeth, pafling by those qua-
I;ties whikh often shine with talfe splendour to human
observation, looks to the inward principles of a&ion;
to tho'e principles which forms the eflenceof a wor-
thy charaaer ; and which, if called forth, would
give birth to whatever is. laudable or excellent in con-
duc.--Is there one, though in humble station or
ob'cure life, who fearetkfGcd and worketb rirhteouf-
nefi ; xhcfe prayers and alms, proceeding in regular
unaffeted tenour, bespeak the upright, the tender,
the devout heart ?-Those alms and prayers come up
in rmemorial before that God who is no re/bec7er of
.:rfons. The Almighty beholds him from his throne
with complacency. Divine illumination is ready to
inltrua him. Angels. minifler to him. They now
mark him out on earth astheir future afociate; and
for him they make ready in paradise, the.white robes,
the palms, and the frptres of the jufl.

To this honour, to this bletfedn f', let 6ur hearts
continually aspire; and throughout the whole oflife,

kte

# SERMON II. PSALM xxvii. 5. In the time of trouble, he shall hide me in his pavilion; in the secret of his tabernable shall be hide me; he shall let me up upon a rock.

let thofe'folemn and sacred words, with which I con-
clude, found in our eats, and be the great direEtory
of our condu : He hath Jfewedtbee, 0 man, what
is good ; and what doth the Lord thy God require of
thee, but---to do jul/lv, and love mercy-and to walk
humbly with thy God?

SERMON IT.

PSALM XXVii. 5.
In the time of trouble, be f./all hide me in his pavilion;

in the secret of his tabernable jball be hide me; he
fball jet me up upon a rock.

HE life of man has always been a very mixed
state, full of uncertainty and viciflitude, of

anxieties and fears. In every religious audience;there
are many who fall under the denomination of the un-
fortunate; and the refR are ignorant how soon they
may be called to join them. For the prosperity of
no man on earth is lable and assured. Dark clouds
may soon gather over the heads of those whose Iky
is now most bright. In the midst of the deceitful
calm which they enjoy, the storm that is to over-
whelm them has perhaps already begun to ferment.
If a man live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet
let him remember the days of darkne/s, for they lball be
many.

Hence, to a thoughtful mind, no fludy can appear

more important, than how to be suitably prepared for
the misfortunes of life; so as to contemplate them in
profpe& without dismay, and, if they must befall,
to bear them without dejction. Throughout every
age, the wifdo.n of the wife, the treasures of the

rich,

rich, and the power of the mighty, have been em-
ployed, e;ther in guarding their fiate against the ap-
proat.h of dilftefs, or in rendering themielves less vul-
nerable by its attacks. Power his endeavoured to re-
remove adversity to a distance. Philolbphy has fludi-
ed, when it drew nigh, to conquer it by patience;
and Wealth has fought oct every pleasure that can
compensate or alleviate pain.

XVh;le the wisdom of the world ^s thus occupied,

religion has been no less attentive to the farme im-
p,:i tat objet. It infcrmns us in the Text, of a pavi-
lisn which God erects to shelter his servants in time of.
trouble of a Jcrret place in bis-tabernacle into which he
brink s them, of a rock on which he sets them uip? and
clfewhere he tells us, of a fiield and a buckler which
he spreads Lefore them, to cover tbemfrom the terrcur
by night, :rl the arrow that flieth by day. Now of
. lhat nature are those instruments of defence, which
God is rcprefented' as providing with fich Solicitous
care to thi fe who fear him? Has he rejred up any
bulwarks, impregnable by misfortune, -in order to fe-
parate the plot s and virtuous from 'he reft of man-
kind, and to icreen them from the common dilifters
of life ? No: To thole difaflers we behold them 1-
able no less than others. The defenc, which religion
provides, is altogether of an internal kind. It is the
heart, not the outward fiate, which it profess s to
guard. When the time of trouble comes, as come it
must to all, it places good men under the pavilion of
the Almighty, by affording them that security and
peace which arise from the belief ofdivine protecion
It b;ings them into the secret of his tabernacle, by
epertiig to them sources of confulation which are hid-
den from others. By that -trength of mind with
which it endows them, it sets them up upon a rock,
againfl which the tempest may violently beat, but
which it canr.o shake.

Iu w

How far the comforts proceeding from religi n

merit those high titles under which they are here
figuratively described, 1 shall in this discourse endea-
vour to show. I shall for this end compare together
the situation of bad men and that of the good, when
both are filffering the misfortunes of life; and then
make such improvement as the fubje& will naturally
suggest.

I. RELXGIO N prepares the mind for encountering,

with fortitude, the moit revere shocks of adversity;
whereas vice, by its natural influence on the temper,
tends to produce dejecions under the slightest trials.
While worldly men enlarge their poleffions, and ex-
tend their connecions, they imaginethey are strength-
ening themselves against all the poflihle vicissitudes of
life. They fay in their hearts, My mountain Jlands
Jlrwng, and I Jball never be moved. But so fatal is
their delufionj that instead of strengthening, they are-
wakening that which only can support them; when
those vicissitudes come. It is their mind, which mutf
then support them; and their mind, by their sensual
attachments is corrupted and enfeebled. Addiced
with il.temperatefondnefs t the pleafuresoftheworld,
they incur two great and certain evils; they both ex-
clude themselves from every resource except the
world, and they increase their sensibility to every
blow which comes upon them from that quarter.

They have neither principles nor temper which

can (land the assault of trouble. They have no prin-
ciples which lead them to look beyond the ordinary
rotation of events; and therefore, when misfortunes
involve them, the profpea nmuft be comfortless on
every fide. Their crimes have disqualified them for
looking up to the alliftance of any higher power than
their own ability, or for relying on any leter guide
than their own wisdom. And as from principle they
can derive no support, so in a temper corrupted by
prosperity they find no re!ief. They have loft that

moderation

moderation-of mind which enables a wife man to ac-
comodate himself to his situation.. Long fed with
false hopes, they are exasperated and flung by every
dilappointment. Luxurious and effeminate, they can
bear no uneasiness. Proud and presumptuous, they
c-n brcck no ,ppofiticn. By nourishing difpofitionr
·which lo little fuii this uncertain slate, they have in-
fused a double portion of bitternegs into the cup of
woe; they have sharpened the edge of that sword
which is lifted up to frIite them. Strangers to aH
the temperate fatisfaaions of a good and a pure mind;
firangers to eveiv pleasure except what was sea oned
by v;ce or vanity, their adversity is to the last degree
disconSolate. Htalth and opulence were the two pil-
lirs on which they rcfed. Shake either of them ; and
their whole edifice of hope and comfort falls. Prost-
rate and forlorn, they are left on the ground; obliged
tojoin with the man of Ephriam in his abjea lamen-
tation, The have taken awvay my gods, which I have
made, arid what have I more ?-Such are the causes to
to which we niuft ascribe the broken spirits, the
peevifli temper, and impatient passions, that Co often
attend the declining age, or falling fortunes of vicious
men.

But how different is the condition of a truly good

man in rhofe trying situations of life! Religion had
gradually prepared his mind for all the events of this
inconlant slate. It had inftruaed him in the nature
of true happiness. It had early weaned him from
the urdue love of the world, by discovering to him
its van.ty, and by letting higher profpeEs in his
vie:'. Afflidions do not attack him by surprise, and
therefore do not overwhelm him. He was equipped
for the florm, as well as the calm, in this dubious
navagation of life. Under thole conditions he knew
himself to be brought thither, that he was not to re-
tain always the enjoyment of what he loved: And
therefore ie is not overcome by disappointment, when

t hat

lhat which is mortal, dies; when that which is mu-
table, begins to change; and when that which he
knew to be transient, passes away.

All the principles which religion teaches, and all

the habits m hich it forms, are favourable to firength
of mind. It will be found, that whatever purifies,
fortifies a!lb the htart. In the course of livingrigbt-
teouiJly, soberly, and godly, a good man 'acquires a
steady and well-governed spirit. Trained. by Divine
grace, to enjoy with moderation the advantages of
the world, neirhr lifted up by success, nor enerva-
ted with sensuality, he meets the changes in his lot
without unmanly dejection. He is inured to tempe-
rance and reftraiit. He has learned firmners and
felf-command. He is accufloned to look up to that
Supreme Providence, which di!pofcs of human affairs,
not with reverence only, but with trust and hope.

The time of pro per ity was to him not merely a

season of barren joy, but produaive of much useful
improvement. He had cultivated his mind. He had
stored it with uleful knowledge, with good principles,
and vir uous dispositions. Thele refourfes remain en-
tire when the days of trru)le come. They remain
with him in sickness, as in health; in poverty, as in
the inidft of riches; in his dark and solitary hours,
no le's than when Surrounded with friends and eay
society. From the glare of prosperity, he can, with-
out dejeaion withdraw into the shade. Excluded
from several advantages of the world, he may be
obliged to retreat into a narrower circle; but within
that circle he will find many comforts left. His chief
pleasures were always of the calm, innocent, and
temperate kind; and over there, the changes of the
world have the least power. His mind is a kingdom
to him; and he can flill enjoy it. The world did
not beflow upon him all his enjoyments; and there-
fore it is not in the power of the world, by its molt
cruel atracks, to carry them all away.

II. THE

II. THE diFreffes of life are alleviated to good

men, by refletions on their pafl condua'; while, by
such reflections, they are highly aggravated to the
bad. During the giy and acive periods of life, fin-
ners elude, in some measure, the force of conscience.
Carried round in the whirl of affairs and pleasures;
intent on contrivance, or eager in pursuit; amused
by hope, or elated by enjoyment; they ar fiheltered
by that crouc! of trises which surrounds them, from
serious thought. But conscience is too great a power
to remain always suppressed. There is in every
man's life, a period when he ihall be made to fland
forth as a real objec to his own view: And when
that period comes, Wo to him who is galled by the
fight ! In the dark and folitarv hour of difirefs, with
a mind hurt and fore from some recent wound of for-
tune, how shall he bear to have his chara&er for the
firfi time difcloled to him, in that humiliating lIght
under which guilt will necessarily present it ? Then
the recollecion of the pail becomes dreadful. It ex-
hibits to him a life thrown away on vanities and fol-
lies, or consumed in flagitiousness and fin; no (tation
properly supported; no material duties fulfilled.
Ci-mes which once had been easily pallitated, rife
before him in their native deformity. The sense of
guilt mixes iifelf with all that has befallen him. He
b-hold%, or thinks that he beholds, the hand of the
G.,d m horn he hath offended, openly stretched 6ut
againll him.-At a season when a maun sands most in
nied offlpport, how intolerable is the weight of this
additional load aggravating the depression of disease,
di!hppcintment, or old age! I ow miserable his slate,
who is condemned to endure at once the pangs of
guilt, a-d the vexations of calamity ! Thejpirit of a
man nzJy fiefaim his infirmiies ; but a wounded spirit,
vwho can bear?

Whereas, he who is blessed with a clear conscience,
enjoys, irxthe worst conjunAcures of human life, a

peace,

·peace, a dignity, an elevation of mind, peculiar to
virtue. The teflimony of a good conscience is indeed
to be always--diftingui4hed tronm that presumptuous
boast of innocence, which every good Christian to-
tally difciaims. The better he is, he will be the
more humble, and sensible of his failings. But ihough
he acknowledge that lie can claim nothing iiom God
upon the footing of desert, yet he can trust in his
merciful acceptance through Jesus Chrifl, acc rding
.to the terms o; the gospel. He can hope, that his
prayers and his aims /a' e come p in memorial before
God. The'piety and virtue of his former life were as
feeds sown in his proiperous slate, of whih. he -eaps
the fruit in the sea on ofadverfity. The ritkes, the
pleafurss, and the friends o: the world, may i ave
made wings to themselves, and flwn away. But he
improvement which he made of tl.ofe advantages
whle they laided, the temperate fp rit wi h whi h
he enjoyed th..,- the benefici.n. ac&!(ns wh ch he
performed, and the good example which he let to
other., remain behind. By the. memory of thtfe,
.he enjoys his.prolferltv a lecond time in refecRtie:;
..and perhaps this second and refle&ed enjoyment is
not inferiour to the firfl. It arrives at a more critical
.and needful time. It affords him the igh attisfassion
.of hvirg extraaed laftii g p'eafure from that wh ch
is fhart ; and of havirg fixed that .w ich by its nature
was changing.-" If my race be now about to end,
" I have this comfcrt that it has not been run in vain.
" I have fought the gcodfight; I have kept the Jait.A.
"c My mind has no lead. Futurity has no terlours.
" I 1 ave endeavoured to do my duty, and to make
" my peace with God. I leave the reft to Heaven,"
These are the refPec;ions which to the upright make
libgt arije in,da kne/s; refle&ions which chear the
lone'y ho.!se of virtuous poverty, and attend the con-
fcientious sufferer into prilon or exile; which looth
.the complaints of grief, lighten the preflure of old

age,

age, and furnish to the bed of fickners, a cordial of
more grateful relish, and more Sovereign virtue, than
any which the world can afford.

Look abroad into life, and you will find the general

fenle of mankind bearing witness to this important
truth, that mind is fuperiour to fortune; rhat what
one feels within, is of much greater importance than
all that befalls h'im with ut. Let a man b: b;ought
into some such severe and trying fituatin, as fixes
the attention of tle publick on his behaviour. The
firit quellion which we put concerning him, is not,
What does he fiffer? but, How oocs he bear it?
Has he a quiet mind ? or, Does he appear to be un-
happy i.hin ? If we judge him to be conmpoed and
firm, refigred to Providence, and supported by con-
1cious integrity, his charancr rifes, and his misery
liffens in our view. We esteem and admire, rather
than pity him. RecolleEt what only man have en-
dured for the fake of conscience, and with what
checrfulnefs thty have fuflsered. On the othef hand,
when conscience has concurred with outward misfor-
tunes in diftleflinz the guilty, think of the dreadful
consequences which have ensued. How often upon
a reverse of fortune, after abused prosperity, have
they madly hurried therrfelves over that precipiece
from which there is no return; and, in what nature
moil abhors the voluntary ext nalon of life, have
foaglt relief from that torment of reflecion, which
was become tco great for them to bear ?

Never then allow youirflves to imagine, that mif-

fortunes alone form the chief misery of man. None
but the guilty are completely miserable. The mif-
giving and diflruft, the accusations and reproaches of
their minds, the sense of having drawn down upon
their heads the evils which they. susser, and the ter-
rifying expecation of more and wolfe evils to come;
these are the essential ingredients of human misery.
They rot only whet the edge, but they envenom the

darts

darts of affliction, and add poison to the wound.
Whereas, when misfortunes assail a good man, they
carry on such fatal auxiliaries in their train. They
may ruffle the surface of his foul-; but there is a
flrength within, which refills their fanrher impref-
sion. The constitution of his mind is found. The
world can inflict uFon it no wounds, but what admit
of cure.

III. ILL men in the time of trouble, can look up

to no prote&or; while good men commit them-
selves, with trust and hope, to the care of Heaven.
The human mind, naturally feeble, is made to feel
all its weakness by the pressure of adversity. De-
jected with evils which overpower its strength, it re-
lies no longer on itself. It cafls every where around,
a wishing, exploring eye, for some shelter to screen,
some power to uphold it; and if, when abandoned
by the world, it can find nothing to which it may fly
in the room of the world, its slate is truly forlorn.
Now, whither should the ungodly, in this situation,
turn for aid ? After having contended with the storms
of adverse fortune till their spirits are exhausted, glad-
ly would they, retreat at lafR to the fan&Auary of re-
ligion. But that fanauary is shut against them; nay,
it is environed with terrours. They behold there,
not a Protetor to whom they can fly, but a Judge
whom they dread; and in those moments when thev
need his friendship the mol, they are reduccd to de-
precate his wrath. If he once called when they refuf-
ed, and fretched out his hands wben they would not
regard, who much reason have they to fear that he
will leave them now to eat the fruit of their own
-ways, and to be filled with ther own devices; that he
will laugh at their calamity, and mock rwhen their fear
¢ometb ?

But of all the thoughts which can enter into the

mind, in the fealbn of distress, the belief of an inte-
reft in his favour who rules the world is the most-

soothing.

soothing. Every form of religion has afforded to vir-
tuous men foine degree of this confolatior. But it
was referred for the Chritian revelation, to carry it
to its higleft point. For it is the direa scope of that
revel:.tion, to accommodate itself to the circumflan-
ces of man, under two main views; as guilty in the
i' hit of God, and as tfruggling with the evils of the
wvcr!d. Under the tormer, it diTcovers to him a Me-
diator and an atonement; under the latter, it pro-
miles him the Spirit cf grace and consolation. It isa
fyflem of complete relief, extending from our fpiri-
tual toour temooral difireffes. The fame hand'which
holds out forgiveness to the penitent, and affiflance to
the frail, dispenses comfort and hope to the affliced.

It cde!eves )our particular notice, in this view,

that there is no characer which God more frequent-
ly aTfumes to himself in the sacred writings, than
that of the Patron of the distressed. Compafflon is
the attribute of his nature which he has chosen to
place in the greatest variety of lights, on purpose that
he might accommodate his majefly to our weakness,
and provide a ccrdial for human griefs. He is tl;e
.hearer of all prayers; but with particular attention
he is represented as liltering to the cry of the poor,
and regarding the prayer of the destitute. All his
creatures he governs with jutlice and wifdona; bqt
he takes to himself, in a special manner, the charge
of executing judgment for the oppressed, of protefing
the flranger; of delivering him who batb no helper from
the hand of the spoiler. for the opprejfion of the poor,
and fir thefighing of the needy, "will I arise, faith the
Lord, to set him in safety from him that piffeth at
him. lie is the Fathcr of the fatberleJf, and the fudge
of the wiaow, in his holy habitation. He raised up
them that are bowed down. He dwelletb 'with the con-
trite. He healeth the broken in heart. For he know-
eth our frame ; be remembereth that, we are dut/;.-
If the wisdom of his providence saw it necessary to

place

place so many of his creatures in an afflited f1ate,
that slate, however, he commiserates. He disdains
not to point out himself as the refuge of the virtuous
and pious; and to invite them, amidfl all their trou-
bles, to pour out their hearts before him. Those-
circumstances which estrange others from them, in-
terett him the more in their situation. The neglect
or scorn of the world exposes them not to any con-
tempt in his fight No obfcurityconceals them from
his notice; and though they Ihould be forgotten by
every friend on earth, they are remembered by the
God of heaven. That sigh, heaved from the as-
flited bosom, which is heard by no human ear, is
listened to by him; and that tear is remarked, which
falls unnoticed or despised by the world.

Such views of the Supreme Being, impart the

most sensible consolation to every pious heart. They
present his adminifiration under an afpe& so mild and
benign, as in a great measure to disperse the gloom
which hangs over human life. A good man ats
with a vigour, and su'ers with a patience more than
human, when he believes himself countenanced by
the Almighty. Injured or oppressed by the world*
he looks up to a Judge who will vindicate his cause;
'e appeals to a witness who knows his integrity; he
commits himrelf to a Friend who will never forsake
him. When.tired with the vexations of life, devo-
tion opens ,o him its quiet retreat, where the tumults
of the world are hushed, and its cares are loft
in happy oblivion; where tbe wicked rcafe frorn
troubling, and the weary are at rejf. There his mind
regains its serenity ; the agitation of paflion is calm-
ed; and a softening balm is infused into the wounds
of the spirit. Disclosing to an invisible Friend tbofe
secret griefs which he has no encouragement to make
known to the world, his heart is lightened. He does
not feel himself solitary or forsaken. He believes
God to be present with him, and the Holy Ghoss to

B -be

be the inspirer of his consolations. From that fcret
place of the divine tabernacle, into which the Text re-
prefcnts him as admitted, he hears this voice iffuei
· Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will an-

fwer thee. Fear not; for I am with thee. Be
not difinayed; for I am thy God' And as he

hears a voice which speaks to none but the pure in
heart, so he beholds a hand which finners cannot fee.
He beholds the hand of Piovidence conducting all the
hidden springs and movements of the universe; and
with a secret, but unerring operation, directing every
event towards the happiness of the righteous. Those
afflitions which appear to others the messengers of
the wrath of Heaven, appear to him the ministers of.
lanctification and wisdom. Where they discern no-
thing but the horrours of the tempest which fur-
rounds them, his mere enlightened eye beholds the:
Angel who rides in the whirlwind, and direas the
form. Hence a peace keeping the mind and heart,
which is no where to be found but under the pavi-
lion of the Almighty.

IV. Go o D men are comforted under their trou-

bles by the hope of Heaven; while bad men are not
only deprived of this hope, but d fireffed w;th fears
arising from a future slate. The foul of man can
never diveit itself wholly of anxiety about its fate
hereafter. There are hours when even to the pro-
fperous, in the midst of their pleasures, eternity is an
awful thought. But much more whenthofe pleasures,
one after another, begin to withdraw; when life al-
ters its form, and becomes dark and cheerle!s ; when
its changes warm the moftinconfiderate, that what is
so mutable will soon pass entirely away ;. then with.
pungent earnestness comes home that question to the
heart. Into what world are we next to go ?-How
miserable the man, who, under the dittractiors of
calamity, hangs dcubiful about an event which so

r." ...1....-. :-n : *-o. in the midst of doubts

and

and anxieties, approaching to that awful boundry,
which feperates this world from the next, (hudders at
the dark profpe& before him; wishing to exist after
death, and yet afraid of that exiflance.; catching at
every feeble hope which fuiperflition can afford him,
and trembling in the fame moment, from refle&ion
upon his crimes !

But ,blessed be God who hath brought life and. im-

mortality to light: who hath not only brought them
to light, but ferured them to good men; and by the
death and refurreaion of Jesus Christ, bath begotten
them unto 'he lively hope of an inheritance incerruptibie,
undefitid, and that fadeth nt away. Justly is this hope
styled in scripture, the anchor of the foul, bothfure and
/fedfaif. For what an anchor is to a ship in a dark
night, on an unknown coast, and admidfl a boiflerous
ocean, that is this hope to the foul when diffra&ed.
by the confusions of the world. In danger, it gives,
security; admidfl general flucuation, it affords one
fixed point of reft. It is indeed the most eminent of
all the advantages which religion now confers. For,
confider the mighty power of hope over the human
mind. It is the universal comforter. It is the spring
of all human acivity. Upon futurity, men are con-
flantly suspended. Animated by the profpe&of ome
difant good, they toil and susser through the whole
course of life; and it is not To much what they are at
present, as what they hope to be in some after time,
that enlivens their motions; fixes attention, and fli-
mulates industry. Now, if in the common affairs of
life such is the energy of hope, even whenr its objeEt
is neither very confideralle, nor very certain; what
effets may it not be expeted to produce, when it
refis upon an objec lb splendid as a life of imm6rtal:'
felicity? were this hope entertained with that full perfuai-
sion which Chriflian faith demands, it would, in truth,
not merely alleviate, but totally annihilate, all human

B a miseries,

mifeties. It would banish discontent, extinguish
grief, and suspend the very feeling of pain.

But allowing for the mixture of human frailty;

admitting those abatements which our imperfection
makes upon the effect of every religious principle,
Lill, you will find, that in proportion to the decree
in which the hope of heaven operates upon good men
they will be tranquil under sufferings; nay, they will
be happy, in comparison of th6fe who enjoy no such
relief. What indeed, in the course of human affairs,
is sufficient to distress, far less to overwhelm, the
mind of that man who can look down on all human
things from an elevation so much above them ? He is
only a passenger through this world. He is travelling
to a happier country. How disagreeable soever the
occurrences of his journey may be, yet, at every
flage of that journey, he receives the assurance that
he is drawing nearer and nearer to the period of reft
and felicity-Endure and thou /halt overcome. Per-
fcvere, and thou shalt 'be successful. The time of
trial haftcns to a close. Thy mansion is prepared
above; thy.reft remaineth among the people of God.
The disorders which vice has introduced into the
works of God, are about to terminate, and all tears
2re soon to be wiped away from the eyes of the just.
-The firm assurance of this happy conclusion to the
vexations and the vanities-of life, works a greater es-
sea en the sincere illiterate Christian, than all the re-
finements of philosophy can work on the moll learned
infidel. These may gratify the mind that is at ease;
may sooth the heart when slightly discomposed; but
but when it is fore and deeply torn, when bereaved
of its best and mofl beloved comforts, the only
consolations that can find access, ariTe from the hope
of another world; where those comforts (hall be a-
gain restored; and all the virtuous shall be assembled
in the presence of him who made them. Such hopes
bnifh that difpair which overwhelms, and leave

only

only that tender melancholy which softens the heart,
and often renders the whole charauer more gentle
and amiable.

OF this nature are the refourfes whichreligion pro-

vides for good men. By its previous difciplinc, it
trains thenl to fortitude; by the refle&ions ofa good
conscience it sooths, by the sense of Divine favour it
supports them; and when every comfort fails them.
on earth, it cheers them with the hope: of Heavet..
Difinguifhing his fervints with such advantages, God
is justly said to ereft iis pavilion over them in' the
evil time. He not only Jpreadt a tint fr tiem in tleV
wildernw/s, but he transforms-in some measure the
late of nature around them. To use the beautiful
language of ancient prophecy.; Intic defart, the thirly
land, where no water is, be openetb Jprings; Inflead
of the tbort, he maketb the fir-tree to come up; inj/ead
of tie briar; tihe myrtle to spring.. In mid/i of thv
habitation of dragorn, b? ma.ret green paf/urei to riff,
and jill vwaters otu ' around 'iJ people. -

Tea improveament to be made of these truths, is,

as obvious, as it is important. Let us fiudy so to
condua our lives, that'we may be qualified for de-
riving such consolations from religion. To their re-
ality, and their importance, all mankind bear witness.
For no sooner are they overtaken by distress, than to
religion they fly. This, throughout every age, has
beenr the universal Ihelter which the young and the
old,. the high and the low, the giddy and the serious,
have fought to gain, as soon as they found that ref
could be no where else procured for the weary head,
or the aching heart. But admidft those multitude*
that croud to religion for relief, how few are entitled
to approach that sacred source of comfort ? On what
feeble props do their hopes and pretensions reft. How
much fuperitition mingles with that religion to which
men are driven by diflrefs and fear ?--You mull first
apply to it as the. guide of life, before you can have

B 3 reourf,

recourse to it as the refuge of sorrow. You must
'submit in\ its.legiflative authority, and experience its
rerewing influence, before you can Icok for its con-
fplatury effec. You must secure the teftimoney of
a good conscience, and peace with God through
Jesus Chrit ? otherwise 'when the floods fall come,
and the rains descend, and the 'winds blow, the house
which you had propcfed for your retreat, ihall prove
the, houje founded on the sand, not on the rock.

There are two plans, and there are but two, on

which any man can propose to condut himself through
the dangers and dflireffes of human life. The one is
the plan of worldly wisdom; the other, that of de-
termined adherence to conscience. He who aCs upon
the former, lays principle aside, and thrusts his defence
to his art and ability. He avails himself of every
advantage which his knowledge of the world fuggefis.
He attends to nothing but what he confiders as his
interest; and unconfined by conscience, purfuesit by
every course which promises him success. This
plan, though too often adopted, will be found on trial,
ineffe&ual and deceitful, for human ability is an un-
equal match for the violent and unforeseen viciflitudes
of the world. When these torrents rife in their
might, they fweepaway in a moment the banks which
worldly wisdom had reared for defence; and over-
whelm alike the crafty and the artless. In the mean
time, persons of this characer condemn themselves
to live a most unquiet life. They pass their days in
perpetual anxiety, liflening to every motion; start-
led by every alarm; changing their measures on e-
very new occurence; and when diftrtfs breakes in
over all their defences, they are left under it, hope-
less and disconsolate.

The plan which, in opposition to this, religicn re-

commends, as both mere honourable in itselF, and
more effe&ual for security, is, at all hazards, to do
·vour duty, and to leave the consequences to Gad.

Let

# SERMON III. PSALM i. 3. He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.

Let him who would ad upon this plan, adopt for
for tie ruleof his condua that maxim oft)e Psalmist's.
Trujf in the Lord, and do good. To firm integrity,
let him join an humble reliance on God. Let his
adherence to duty, encourage his religious truit. Let
his religious trust, inspire him with fortitude in the
performance of his duty. Let him know no path
but the firaight and direc one. In tFe most critical
moments of ation, let him ak .no further quellions,
than, What is the right, the fits the worthy part?
How as a man, and as a christian, it becomes-him
to a ? Having received the difcifion of conscience,
let him commit his way to the Lord. Let him with-
out trepidation or wavering, proceed in discharging
his duty; resolved, that though the world may make
him unfortunate, it shall never make him base; and
confidering, that in what God and his conscience re-
quire him to a& or susser, God and a good confci-
ence will fuppoit him-Such principals as these, are
the best preparation for the viciflitudes of the human
lot. They are the shield of inward peace. He who
thinks and a&s thus, shall be exposed to no wounds
but what religion can cure. He may feel the blows
of adversity: but he ihall not know the wounds of
the heart.

S E R M O N III.

PSALM i. 3.
He fjall be like a tree planted by the rivers of wvatr,

that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his Ivaf
also /ball not wither, and whatJoever he daeth ball-
prosper.
'rT H E happy influence of religion upon human

life, in the time of adversity, has been con-

B 4 - fidered

fidered in the preceeding discourse. Concerning this
the sentiments of men are more generally agreed,
that with refpea to some other prerogatives which
religion claims. They very readily assign to it the
office of a Comforter. But aS long as their slate is
prosperous, they are apt to account it an unnecfcrary
guefl, perhaps an unwelcome intruder. Let us not
be thus unjust to religion, nor confine its importance
to one period only in the life of man. It was never
intended to be merely the nurse of sickness, and the
staff of old age. I purpose now to show you, That
it is no less eflential to the enjoyment of prosperity,
than to the comfort of adversity: That prosperity is
profferous, if ,e may be allowed the exprefflion, to
a good man only: and that to every other person, it
would prove, notwithstanding its fair appearance, a
barren and joyless slate.

The Pfalmifl, in ite Text, by an image taken

from one of the moRs beaa'iful obje&s in nature,
describes a man who flouriihes in full prosperity. But
to whom is the difcription limited? To him as the
preceding verses inform us, that walketh not in the
counsel of the ungodly, nr /fandetm in the way ofj inmw
nor fitterh in the feat of te scornful, but bath his delight
in the law of God. He only is like the tree planted by
the rivers of water ; whilfi the ungodly, as he adds,
are notfo; 'but, how prosperous soever they may ap-
pear to the world, are in truth but like the cbaff
which the dr driwts au-ay. In confirmation of this
do&rine, I fhai--lay before you some of those cir-
cumftances which diftinguiih the prosperity of the good
man beyond that of the finner and shall conclude,
with pointing out the dangers and mireries, into
which the tatter is apt to be betrayed, by his favour-
able situation in the world.

I. PIETY, and gratitude to God, contribute in a

ligh degree to enliven prosperity. Gratitude is a
pleasing emotion. The sense of being diflinguiihed by

the

the kindhnfs of another, gladdensthe heart, warms
it with reciprocal affection, and gives to any posses-
sion which is agreeable in itself, a double relish, from
its being the gift of a friend. Favours conferred
by men, I acknowledge may prove burthenfome.
For human virtue is never perse&; and sometimes
unreasonable expecations on-the one fide, some-
times a mortifying sense of dependence on the other,
corrode in secret the pleasures of benefits, and con-
vert the obligations of friendship into grounds of
jealousy. But nothing of this kind can affect the in-
rercourfe of gratitude withHeaven. Its favours are
wholly disinterested; and with a gratitude the.moft
cordial and un!ufpicious, a goon man looks up to
that Almighty Benefa&or, who aims at no end but
tihe happiness of thole whom he blesses, and who de-
fires no return from them but a devout and thank-
flat hetar.' While others can trace their prosperity to
no" higher source than a concurrence of worldly causes
and, often, cf mean or trifling incidents,- which oc-
cafionallty favoured their designs; with what fuperi-
our 'fatisfa&iem does the servant of God remark the
Latid of that gracious Powtr, which ha:h raised him
up ;. wtich hath happily conduu&ea him through the
various steps of life, and crowned hifm with- the moit
favourable diftilntion beyond his equals ?

Let us farther confider, that not only gratitude for

the pad,. but a chearing sense of God's favour at the
prelent, enters into the pious emotion. -They are
only the virtaous, who in their prosperous days hear
this voice addressed to them :- Go tby way; eat thy.
bread with joy, and drink thy. wine .wi:h a merry heart;
for God now acceptejh thy works. HWe. ,ho is the
*Author of their profpeliity gives them a titlelto erjoy,
with complacency, his own g;fr. While bad mert
snatch the pleaftLr:s of the world as by stealth, 'with-
out countenance fiom Grd the proprietor of the
world; the righteous fit openly down to the feast. of

B5 l:fe

life, under the smile of approving heaven. No guilty
fears damp their joys. The blessing of God refis
upon all that they possess; lis protecion surrounds
them; and hence, in the habitations of the rigbteous,
i. found the nvoice f rejeicing and falvatian. A lustre
* unknown to others, invetfs in their fight, the whole
face of nature. Their piety reflets a funfliine from
Heaven upon the prosperity of the wolld.; unites in
one point of view, the smiling afpe&, both of the
powers above, and the objets below. Not only
have they as full a relish as others, of the inno-
cent pleasures of life, but, moreover, in these they
hold communion with God. In all that is good or
fair, they trace his hand. From the beauties of nature-
from the improvements of art, from the enjoyments,
of social life, they rife their affecaion to the source of
all happiness which surrounds them; and thus widen
the sphere of their pleasures, by adding intelleaual,
ar.d spiritual, to earthly joys.

For illustration of what I have said on this head,

remark that cheerful enjoymert of a prosperous
slate which King David had, when he wrote the
twenty-third Psalm; and compare the highest plea-
fiures of the riotous finner, with the happy ar.d satis-
sied spirit which breaths throughout that Pfalm.-In
the midst of the splendour of royalty,. with what ami-
able simplicity of gratitude does he look up to the
Lord as his Shepherd; happier in ascribing all his
success to divine favour, than to the policy of his
counsels, or to the force of his arms! How many
inffances of divine goodness arose before him in plea-
fng rememb;rnce, when with such re'ifh he speaks
of the green paJ7urers and ./ill waters beside wbich God
.had laid bim; of his cup which be hatb made to overflow;
.and of the table which he bath preparedfor him in pre--
jfnce of his enemies WVith what perfec tranquility
does he look forward to the time of his pafirng through
the v,.'ly of the Jbcdow of decth; unappalled by that

Spe Le,

-Speare, whose molt distant appearance blafls the
profperiry of finners ! He fears no evil, as long as the
rod and the PJff of his Divine Shepherd are with him;
and, through all the unknown periods of this and a
of future exitlar cc, commits him.elf to his guidance
:with Itcire and thriumphant hope. Surely goodness
and mercy Jballfollow me all the days of my life; and I
will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.-What a
purified, fen'imental enjoyment ofprorperity, is here
exhibited! How different from that gross relish of
worldly plealures, w! ich belongs to those who behold
only the terreflrial fide of things; who raise their
-views to no higher objecs than the fucceflion of
human contingencies, and the weak efforts of human
ability; who have no protector or patron in the
hra-ens, to enliven their prosperity, or to warm
their hearts with gratitude and trut !

II. RE LIG 1 0 N affords to good men peculiar fecu-

rity in the enjoyment of their prosperity. One of the
firlt refletions which muf itrike every thinking man,
after his situation in.the world has become agreeable,
is, That the continuance of such a situation is moit
urcertain. From a variety of causes, he lies open to
change. On many fides he fees that he may be pier-
ced ; and the wider his comforts extend, the broader
is the mark which he spreads to the arrows of mi;-
fortune. Hence many a secret alarm to the refleA-
ing mind; and to those who reject all fiich alarms,
the real danger increases, in proportion to their im-
provident security.

By worldly aff:lance it 's vain to think of provid-

ing any effeaual defence, feeing the world's muta-
biliiy is the very.caule of our terrour.i It is from a
higher pri-lciple from a power fuperiour to the worl;,
that relief m:ifl be fought, arnidflt itch difqiietudes
of the heart. tie who in his profrierits can look u1
to One who is witres to his noderation, husmarit'.,
and cllrity ; he who can appeal to [leaven, that h!

.a-

ias not been elated by prides nor overcome by plea-
sure; but has fludied to employ its gifts to the honou'r
or the giver; this man, if there be any truth in re-
ligion, if there be any benignity or goodness in the
adminifration of the universe, has julf cause for en-
couragement and hope. Not that an interest i, the
Divine gracewill perpetuate to a good man,more than
to others, a life of unruffled prosperity. Change
and alteration form the very essence of the world,
But let the world change around him at preafure, he
has ground to hope that it shall not be able to make
him unhappy. Whatever may vary God's provi-
dence is fill the fame; and his love to the righteous
remains unaltered. 'If it fhaHl be theDivir.e will to
remove one comfort, he trufls that some other fhalf
be given. Whatever is given, whatever is taken a-
wzay, he confides, that in thelaft refolt all JbaliworI
for his gold

Hence he is not dilturbed, like bad men, by the'
inffability of the world.

Dangers, which overcome others, (hake not his

more steady mind. He enjoys the pleasures of life-
pure and unallayed, because he enjoys them, as long
as they lass, without anxious terrours, They are not
his all, his only good. Fie welcomes them when
they arrive; and when they pass away, he can. eye
them, as they depart, without agony or despair. His-
prosperity flrikes a-deeper and firmer root than that of
tre ungodly. And for this reason he is compared in
the Text, ,to a tree plantedby tAe rivert of swater ;. a'
tree, whose branches the tempefl may indeed bend, but
whore root it cannot touch i a tree, which may occa-
fionall be ftripp d of its leaves and blofloms, but which
fill maintains its place, and in due season flouriihes a-
·new. WVhertas the finner in his prosperity, accord-
ing to the allusion in the book (f Job, lefembles ste
rul fib'at . r-ueth up in the mire; a slender reed, that:
may floutrifi gleen fora whileby the fide of thebrook,
Aslorg as it is cheriged by the fun, and fanned by

tihe

the breeze; till the first bitter blast breaks its feeble
siem, roots it out' from its bed, and lays it in the dull.
Lo I such is the prosperity ao them that forget God ;
and thus their bope jbail perifb.

IlI. RELIGION forms good-men to the moif pro-

per temper for the enjoyment of prorperity. A lit-
tle reflecion may satisfy us, that mere poffefion, even-
granting it to be secure, does not confitute enjoy-
ment. Give a man all that is in the power of the
world to bellow; surround him with riches; ciowrx-
him with honours; inveflin, if you will, with ab-
solute dominion; but leave him at the fame time un-
der some secret opprefldon or heaviness of heart; you
beflow indeed the materials of enjoyment, but yotr
deprive him of ability to e'traftit. You set a teaft
before him, but he wants the power of tailing it.--
Hence prosperity is so often an equivdcal word,-denot-
ing merely affluence of poffeflion, but unjustly appli-
ed to the miserable pofTeffor.

We all' know the effeas which any ind}fpofition of

the body, even though flight, produce on external
prorperity. Visit the gayefi and mofl fortunate man
on earth, only with sleepless nights ; disorder any fin-
gle organ of his senses; corrode but one of his smallest
nerves; and ycu' Ihall presently set all his gaiety
vanish ; you (hall hear him complain that he is-
a miserable creatures and express his- envy of the
'peasant- and the cottager.-And can you believe,
that a disease in the foul is less fatal to enjoyment,-
than a disease in the animal frame; or that a- found:
mind is not as essential. as a found bodv, to
the prosperity cfman?-Let us rate sensual gra-
tifications' as high as we please, we ihall be made
to feel that the feat of enjoyment is in the foul. 'rhe-
corrupted temper, and the g9ilty paffibns of the'bad,-
ftllrate the- effect of every advantage which the world
confers on them. The world may call-them-men of
pleasure but of all men they a.e the greatell foes to
pkafure. From their eag emrfs tografp, they tlr' -

gle and deflroy it. None but the temperate, the re-
gular, and the virtuous; know how to enjoy profre-
rity. They bring to its comforts the manly re!ifh of
a cfund-uncorrupted mind. They flop at the proper
point, before enjoyment degenerates into disgust, and
pleasure is conver:ed into pain. They are strangers
to those complaints which flow from spleen, caprice,
and all the fantaftica! distresses of a vitiated mind.
While riotous indulgence enervates both the body
and the mind, purity and virtue highten all the
powers of human fruition. Moderate and simple
pleasures relihf high with the.temperate; in the midst
of his fludied refinements, the voluptuary languishes.

W\herever guilt mingles with prosperity, a certain

gloom and heaviness enter alcng with it. Vitious in-
trigues never fail to entangle and embarrass those
who engage in them. But innocence confers ease
and freedom on the mind; leaves it open to every
pleasing sensation; gives a lightness to the spirits.
similar to the native g,.iety of youth and health; il.
imitated and ill supplied, by that forced levity o.
the vitious, which arises not from the health, buc
from the drunknefs of the mind.

Feeble are all pleasures in which the heart has n.>

part. The selfish gratifications of the bad, are bott>
narrow ;n their circle, and (hort in their duration.
But prosperity is redoubled to a good man, by hi:
generous use of it. It is refleced back upon hiri
from every one whom he makes happy. In the ir.-
tercourfe of domeftick affeQion; in the attachment o
friends, the gratitude of dependants, the esteem an.I
good will of all who know him, he fees blefftng.s
multiplied around him en every fide, When the etL-
heard me, then it b!esed me, and when the eye farx.
me, it gave witneJs to me; Becaure I delivered the
poor th: t criea, the fatherlers, ard him tbat had none
to help .him. The blefing of him that was ready to
pcri/f came ixpon me, and 1 caused the wuidJ.w's bar.

to

tofing witb joy. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was
Ito the lame: I was a father to thepoor; and the cause,
which I knew not, I Jearcbed out.--'hus while the
righteous flourijheti} like a tree planted by the rivers of
water he bringetb forth also bis fruit in his seaso/n:
And that fiuit, to pursue the allusion of the Text,
he brings forth not for himself alone. He ffouifihes
rot like a tree in rome solitary defart, which scatters
its blossoms to the wind, and communicates neither
fruit nor shade to any living thing: But like a tree
in the midit of an inhabited country, which to some,
affords friendly fhelttr, to others, fruit; which is
not only admired by all for its beauty, but blessed by
the traveller for thefliade, and by the hungry for the
lubfiftance it hath given.

IV. RE LIGION hightens the prosperity of gord

men, by the profpet which it affords them of great-
er happiness to come in another world. I (howed,
in the foregoing discourse, the mighty effet of the
hope of Heaven, in relieving the mind under the
troubles of life. And sure, if this hope be' ablo
to fopport the falling, it cannot but improve. the
flourishing slate of man ; if it can dispel the thickest
gloom of adversity, it mutR needs enliven prosperity
by the additional lufire which it throws upon it.
What is present, is never sufficient to give us full
fatisfaaiorr. To the present we must always j-in
some agreeable anticipations of futurity, in order to
complete our pleasure. What anacceflion then must
the prosperity of the righteous man receive, when,
born with a fmooth.and gentle gale along the current
of life, and looking round on all the blflfings of his
state, he can confider these as no more than'an in-
troduaion to higher scenes which are hereafter to
open; he can view hisprefent life, as only the porch
through which he is to pars into the palace of bliss ;
and his present joys, as but a feeble stream,- dilpenfed
for his occasional refrefhmemt, until he arrive at that

river

river of life which flows at God's right hand ?-Such
profpeas purify the mind, at the fame titre that
they gladden it. They prevent a good man from
setting tco high a value on his prefent-poffeffions;
and thereby afilft him in maintaining, amidst the
temptations of worldly pleasure, that command of
himself which is ib essential to the wife and tempe-
rate enjoyment of prosperity,

It is the fate of a!l human pleasure', by continuance

to fade; of mofl of them to cloy. Hence, in the
most prosperous fate, there are fiequent intervals of
langour, and even of dejetion. There are vacuities
in the happiest life, which it is not in the power of
rhe world to fill up. What relief so adapted to those
vacant or dejeQed periods, as the pleasing hopes
which arise trom immortality ? How barren and im-
perfea that prosperity, which can have recourse to
no such fublidiarv comnfort, in order to animate the"
flagnation of vulgar life, and to- fulply the infuffici-
ency of worldly pleasures ?:

Worldly prolper ty declines *ith declining life. fnr

youth its relish was brisk and poignant. It becomes'
mot e fober as life advances; and flattens as life de-
scends. He who lately overflowed with cheerful fpi-
rits ard high hopes, begins to look back with heavi--
nels on the days of fermer years. He thinks -of his
cid companions, who are gene, and, reviews past
scenes, more agreeable than any which .ree likelv to
return. The a&tivity of pursuit js--veakned. The
gaiety of amufemert is fled. The gratifications of
fenic languish. When his accustomed p:leasures, onie
after the other, thus sie.l tneacherously away, what
can he, who is an utter flrangeo to religion, and to-
the hoe of h aven, fublitute--in their place ?-But
even in that dooping period, the prornifes and -hopes
of religion fuplxrt the spirits of a good man till the
lattft hoLr. His leaf, it is said in the Text fLall-
tote wither. It lhall :otl e in the power of tire. to

blast

hafit his profptrity: But old age shall receive him
into a quiet retrtat, where if lively sensations fail,
gentle pleasures remain to sooth him. That hope of
immortality, which formerly improved his other en-
joyments, now in a great measure supplies their ab-
fcence. Its importance rifes, in proportion as its ob-
je& draws near. He is not forsaken by the world,
but retires from it with indignity; reviewing with a
calm mind the part which he has a&ed, and trufing
to the promise of God for an approaching reward
Such sentiments and expecations ihed a pleasing t'an-
quility over the old age of the righteous man. They
make the evening of his days go down unclouded;
and allow the lream of life, though fallen low, to
run clear to the last drop.

THus 1 have shown, I hope, with full evidence,

what material ingredients religion and a good confci-
ence are in the prosperity of life. Seperated from
them, profpei;:y, how fair soever it may seem to the
world, is insipid, nay frequently noxious to the pof-
feffor: United with them, it rifes into a real bleiling
bestowed by God upon man. God giveth to man that
is good in bi Jigbt, i.sfdom, and knowledge, andjoy
but to the finer be gieth fsrt travel, te gather and to
heap up, that he ma.n give to hir that is good before
God.
- ALLOW me now to conclude the fubje&, with re-
presenting to the prosperous men of the world, those
crimes and miseries into which the abuse of their con-
dition is likely to betray them, and calling upon them
to beware of the dangers with which they are threat-
ened.

It is unfortunate for mankind, that thole situations

which favour pleasure, are too generally adverse to
virtue. Virtue requires internal government and dif-
cipline; prosperity relaxes the mind, and inflames
the pallions. Virtue is supported by a regard to what
is future; prosperity attaches us wholly to what ;s

prelent

present. The chara&eriflicks of virtue, are modefly
and humility ; the most common attendants of prof-
perity, are pride and presumption. One fhouid
think, that prosperity wouldprove the ftrongeff in-
citement to remember and to honour that God who
beflows it. Yet such is the perverfnefs of human
nature, that it proves much oftener the motive to
impiety. The changes of the world call the attention
of men to an Invisible Power. But a train of events
proceeding according to their wish, leads them to
nothing beyond what they fee. The supreme Giver
is concealed from view by his own gifis. This in-
flance of success they ascribe to a fortunate concur-
rence of worldly caures; that acquisition, to their
own skill and industry; unmindful of him, who from
the beginning arranged that series of causes, and who
placed them in circumflances where their industry
could opperate with success. From forgetting God,
they too often proceed to difpife him. All that is
light or giddy in their r inds, is set in motion by the
gale of prosperity. Arrogarce and felf-filfficiency
are lifted up; and their slate is confidered, as secured
by their own firength. Hence that pride of counte-
nance, through which the wicked, intheir prosperity
as David observes, refu/e to seek after God. They
are described as speaking loftily, and cftting their
mouth againfl the Heavenr. They take the timbrel and
harp, and rejoice at the jound of the organ; and they
fay unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the
kneswtIdge of tby ways. What is the Alwighty, that
wejuh7uld serve him ? Or what profit jbould we have
ifwe pray unto him ?

Tbey fay unto God. depart from us.-What an im-

pious voice ! Could we have believed it poflible, that
worldly pleasures should so far intoxicate any ;human
heart ? Wretched and infatuated men ! Have you
ever examined on what your confidence reits ?-
You have said in your hearts, 5ouJball never be mov-

ed,

ed; you fancy yourfe!ves placed on a mountain which
jlandeth strong. Awake from those fletterring dreams,
and behold how every thing totters around you ! You
{land on the edge of a precipice; and the ground is
'fiding away below your feet. In your health, life,
poffeflTons, connecions, pleafilres, principles of de-
ftru&ion work. The mine advances in secret, which
saps the foundations, while you revel on the surface.
No mighty effort, no long preparation of events, is
needed to overturnyour prosperity. By flow degrees
it rose. Long time much labour; and the concur-
rence of many aftifting causes, were necessary to rear
it up; but one flight incident can entirely overthrow
it. Sulpicions are infused into the patronor theprince
on whom you depend; and your disgrace ensues.
Exercise, or amusement, kindles a fever in the veins
of those whom you loved; and you are robbed of
your comforts and hopes. A few grains of sand lodge
themselves within you; and the reft of your life is
disease and misery. Ten thousand contingences ever
float on the current of life, the smallest of which,
if it meet your frail bark in the passing, is sufficient to
dash it in pieces.-Is this a place, is this a time, to
swell with fancied security, to riot in unlawful plea-
sure, and, by your disregard of moral and religious
duties, to brave the government of the Almighty ?
He hath stamped every polTeffion of man with this
inscription, Rejoice with trembling. Throughout eve-
ty age he hath pointed his peculiar displeasure against
the confidence of presumption, and the arrogance of
prol'perity. He hath pronounced, that wbooever e.--
alteth himjelf jball be Jbafed. And shalt neither the
admonitions which you receive from the visible in-
cgnftancy of the world, nor the declarations of the
Divine difpleafure,be sufficient to check your thouaht-
less career ? Know, that by your impiety, you mul-
tiply the dangers which already threaten you on eve-
ry fide; you accelerate the speed with which the

changes

changes of the world advance to your deflruaion.
The Almighty touches with his rod that edifice of
dufd, on which you fland, and boast of your strength;
and, at that instant, it crumbles to nothing.

As men, then, beth nk yourselves of human in-

stability. As Chrifliars, reverence the awful govern-
ment of God. Insure your prosperity, by confecrat-
ing it to religion andvirtue. Be humblein your ele-
vation; be moderate in your views; be fubmiflive
to him who hath raised and distinguished you. For-
get not, that on his providence you are as dependent,
and to the obedience of his laws as much bound, as
the meanest of your fellow-creatures. Difgracenot
your Rtation, by that groffiefs of sensuality, that levity
of dissipation, or that insolence of rank, which bespeak
a little mind. Let the affability of your behaviour,
show that you remember the natural equality of men.
Let your moderation in pleasure, your command of
pailion, and your steady regard to the great duties of
life, show that you possess a mind worthy of your
fortune. Establish your eharacer on the basis of es-
teem ; not on the flattery of dependents, or the ptaife
of sycophants, but on the refpe& of the wife and the
good. Let innocence preside overyour enjoyments. Let
usefulness and beneficence, not oflentation and vanity,
direc the train of your pursuits. Let your almn, to-
gether with your prayers, come up in memorill hbefer
God. So shall your prosperity, under the blelling of
Heaven, be as the jLining light which Jiineth more and
mere unto the perseet day. So shall it resemble thofi
celestial fires which glow above, with beneficent,
with regular, and permanent lustre i and not prove
that mirth of /oolr, which by Solomon is compared to
the crackling of thorns under a pot, a glittering and
fervent blaze, but speedily extina.

On the whole, let this be our conclusion, That

both in prosperity and in adversity, religion is the
faele guide of humana life. Conduaed by its light,

we

# SERMON IV. 1 COR. xiii. 12. For now we see through a glass darkly. —

we rcap the pleasures, and at the fame time escape
the dangers, of a prosperous state. Sheltered under
its protecion, we (land the shock of adve, fity with
moll intrepidity, and susser least from the violence of
the form. He that deireth life, and lovetb many days
that be may fee ood, let him keep his tongue from vil,
Md his lips fromguilt. Let himdepart from evil, and
do good. Let him seek peace with God, and pursue it.
Then in his adversity, God lallhide him in his pavi-
lion. In his prosperity, be Jhall flurijb like a tree
planted by the rivers of watar. The ungodly are not
Jo; but are like the chaff, light and vile, ,whicA the
wind drivefh awry.

SERMON IV,

I C R. xiii. 12.

Far noaw we fee tkrough a glass darlly.---
H E Apofile here describes the imperfeaion of
our knowledge with relation to spiritual and

eternal obje&.q. He employs two metaphors, to re-
present more firongly the disadvAntages under which
we lie: One, that we fee those obje&s through aglaP,
that is, through the intervention of a medium which
obscures their glory; the other, that we fee them in
a riddle or enigma, which our translators have ren-
dered by feeing them darkly ; that is, the truth in
part dilcovered, in part concealed, and placed be-
yond our comprehension.

This description, however julf and true, cannot

fail to occasion some perplexity to an enquiring mind.
For it may seem (trange that so much darkness should
be left upon those celestial obje&s, towards which we

ar4.

are at the fame time commanded to aspire. We are
itrangers in the univerle of God. Confined to that
spot on which v e dwell, we are permitted to know
nothing of what is tranfaeing in the regions above us
and around us. By much labour, we acquire a fu-
perficial acquaintance aith a few sensible obje&s
which we find in our present habitation; but we en-
ter, and we, depart, under a total ignorance of the'
nature and laws of the spiritual world. One fubjSEt
in particular, when our thoughts proceed in this train,
must often recur upon the mind with peculiar anxie-
ty i that is, the immortality of the foul, and the fu-
ture slate of man. Exposed as we are at present to
such variety of afflictions, and fubjeaed to so much
liilappcintment in all our pursuits of happiness. Why,
it may be said, has our gracious-Creator denied us
the consolation of a full discovery of cur future exif-
tence, if indeed such an existence be'prepared sorus s?
-Reason it is true, lu -gefls many argumnerits in be-
half of immortality: Revelation gives full assurance
of it. Yet even that Gospel which is said to have'`
brought life and imtnortaiitf to light, allows us to fee
only through a glass darkly. It doth not yet appear

bwhat ve /ball be. Our knowledge of a future world,
is very imperfec ; our ideas of it,- are faint and con-
fused. It is not displayed in such a manner, as to
make an impression Irited to the importarce of the
dbject. The faith even of the best men, is much in-
feriour, both in clearness and in force, to the evidence
of sense ; and proves, on many occasions, insufficient
to counter balance the temptations of the present world.
Happy moments indeed there sometimes are in the
lives of pious men, when fequeflred from worldly
cares, and born upon the wingsof divine conrempla-'
tion, they rife.to a .nearer and transporting view of
immortal glory. But such efforts of the mind are
rare, and cannot be long rupported. When the
spirit of meditation fubides, this lively sense of a fu-

ture

ture state decays, and though the general belief of it
remain, yet even good men, when they re:urn to the
ordinary business and cares of life, seem to rejoin the
multitude, and to re-afume the fame hopes, and
fears, and interelfs, which influence the relt.of the
world.

From such reflecions, a considerable diffi:ulty le-

fpeaing this important lubjea, either arises, or.feems
to arise. Was such an obscure and imperfect disco-
very of another life worthy to pi oced from God?
Does it not afford some ground, either to tax his
goodness, or to suspect the evidence of its coming
from him ?-TIhis is the point wh;ch we arc now to
confider; and let us confider it with that close atten-
tion which the subjec merits. Let us enquire,
whether we have any reason, either to complain of,
Providence, or to objet to the evidence of a future
state, because that evidence is not of a more sensible
and frliking nature. Let us attempt humbly to trace
the realons, why, though permitted to kno.w and;to
fee somewhat of the eternal world, we are neverthe-.
less permitted 6nly to know in part, and to ee through
a glas darkly.

IT plainly appears to be t!-e plan of the Deity,

in all his difpenfaticas, to mix light x ith darkness,.
evidence with uncertainty. Whatever the reasons of
this precedure be, the faE is undeniable. He is-.
described in.the Old Testament, as a God tFat-hidetb
himself. Cloud and darkne/s are said tofurround bisn
His way is in the lea, .and bis path in the great waters;
his lootfeps are not known. Bath the words and the
ways of God are 'full of mitlery.. In the ordinary
course of his government, innumerable events occur
which perplex us to the utmost. There is.a certain
limit to all our enquiries in religion, beyond which
if we attempt to proceed, we are lo.s in a maze of
inextricable difficulties. Even that revelationwhich
affords such material inaruSion to man concerning

his
I '

his duty and his happiness leaves many doubts unre-
solved. Why was it not given sooner; why not to
all men; why there should be so many things in it
bard to be underfpood, are difficulties not inconsiderable
in the midst of that incontefiable evidence by which
it is supported. If, then, the future t{ate of man
be not placed in so full and clear a light as we desire
this is no more than what the analogy of all religion,
both natural and revealed, give us reason to expe&.

But such a solution of the difficulty will be thought

imperfet. It may, perhaps, not give much satis-
faaion, to Ihow that all religion abounds with dif-
fculties of a like nature. Our situation, it will be
said, it so much the more to be lamented, that not
on one fide only we are confined in our enquiries,
but on all hands invironed with mysterious oblcurity.
--Let us then, if so much dissatisfied with our con-
dition, give scope for once to Fancy, and confider
how the plan of Providence might be rectifed to our
with. Let us call upon the Septick, and desire him
to fay, what measure of inforrmaion would afford
him entire fatisfaaion.

This, he will tell us, requires not any long and

deep deliberation. He desires only to have his view
enlarged beyond the limits of his corporeal state. In-
flead of.refing upon evidence which requires discus-
sion, which must be supported by much reasoning,
and which, after all, he alleges yields very imper-
set information, he demands the everlasting man-
sions to be so displayed, if in truth such mansions
there be, as to place faith on a level with the evi-
dence of sense. What noble and happy effecs, he
exclaims, would instantly follow, if man thus beheld
his present ard futuie exiftance at once before him.
He would then become worthy of his rank in the
creation. Intead of being the sport, as now, of de-
grading palsions and childish attachments, he would
at foley on the principles of immortality. His

pt:rfuit

pursuits of virtue would be steady; his life would b=
undisturbed and happy. Superiour to the attacks of
distress, and the solicitations of pleasure, he would ad-
vance, by a.regular progress, towards those divine
rewards and honours which were continually present to
his view.-Thus Fancy, with as much cafe and con-
fiderce as if it were a perfect judge of creation,
ere&s a new world- to itself, and exults with admira-
tion of its own work. But let - "-a::fe, and suspend
this admiration, till we coolly examine the confe-
quences that would follow from this fuppoled refor-
mation of the universe.

CONSIDER the nature and circumfiances of man.

Introduced into the world in an indigent condition, he
is supported at firfi by the care of others; and, as
soon as he begins to a& for himself, finds labour and
induflry to be necessary for sustaining his life, and sup-
plying his wants. Mutual defence and interest give
rife to society; and society, when formed, requires
diftina.ons of property, diversity of conditions, sub-
ordination of ranks, and a multiplicity of occupations,
in order to advance the general good. The services
of the poor, and the plotecion of the rich, become
reciprocally necefTary. The governours, aud the
governed, muff co-operate for general safety. Va-
rious arts must be studied; some refpeaing the culti-
vation of the mind, others, the care of the body;
tome to ward off the evils, and some to provide the
conveniences of life. In a word, by the deflination
of his Creator, and the neceflities of his nature, mani
commences, at once, an ascive, not merely a contem-
plative being. Religion assumes him as such. It sup-
poses him employed in this world, as on a busy sage.
It regulates, but does not abolish, the enterprizesand
cares of ordinary life. It addresses itself to the va-
rious ranks in society; to the rich and the poor, to
the magitfrate and the subjet. It rebukes the sloth-

C , ful;

ful; diress the diligent how to labour ; and requires
every man to do his o.n blfnnefs.

Suppose, now, that veil to be withdrawn which

conceals another world from our-view. Let all ob-
fcurity vanish ; let us no longer 'fee darkly, as through
a glas ; but let every man enjoy that intuitive per-
ception of divine and eternal objeas, which the Scep-
tick was supposed to desire. The immediate effect
of such a discovery would be, to annihilate in our eye
all human objecs, and to produce to a total flagna-
tion in the affairs of the world. 'Where the celefliai
glory exposed to our admiring view; did the ange-
lick harmony found in our enraptured ears; what
earthly concerns could have the power of engaging
our attention for a single moment? All the studies and
pursuits, the arts and labours, which now employ the
activity of man, which support the order, or promote
the happiness of society, would lie negleced and
abandoned. Those desires and fears, those hopes and
interests by which we are at present s{imulated, would
cease to operate. Human life would present no ob-
jeEts sufficient to rouse the mind; -to kindle the spirit
of enterprize, or to urge the hand of induflry. If
the mere sense of duty engaged a good man to take
tome part in the business of the world, the talk, when
submitted to, would prove diftafleful. Eventherpre-
servation of life would be flighted, if he were not
bound to it by the authority of God. -Impatient of
his confinement within this tabernacle of dutl, lain-
guilhing for the happy day of his translation to those
gloi ioJs regions which were displayed to his' fight, he
'would sojourn on earth as a melancholy exile. What'
trer Providence has prepared for the entertainment
of man, Would be viewed with contempt. 'Whatever
is now attra&ive in society, would appear insipid.
In a word, he -would be no longet a fit inhabitant of
this world, nor-be qualified for'thofe-exertions which
Tre allotted to him in his piefent sphere of being.

But,

But, all his faculties being sublimated above the mea-
sure of humanity, he would be in the condition of a
being of fuperiqur order, who, obliged to reside among
men, would regard their pursuits with scorn, as
dreams,: riles',; aid Fi.eile amufenents of a day.

·But to.thls 'reafonjng it, may perhaps be replied,

Thiat fuich .con.sequenc'es as J have now fated, fuppo-
sing them to folow, .deserve not much regard.-Fort-
w'hat.though tie 'present arrangement of human as-
fairs were entirely ..canged, by a clearer. view, and
a stronger im'ip-re'iTod . of .,or future fate ? Would not
such. a chatga pr'g y i'the- higheft'blefling to man ?i It
not ,is.attac:hpeti to worTdl, objecs the great source
both' of:'his .misery and his guilt ? Employed in per-
petial contem plation of heavenly objecs,, and in pre-
paration for the enjoyment of them, would he not
become more virtuous, and of course more happ.y,
than the nature of his present employments and at-
'tacrberfietspermnits him to be ?-Allowing, fora mr
hrien,. the cqpFequence to be such, this much is yield-
ed, thatjlpqinthie ippofitiopt which was made, man-
would not b ile tecreature.which he now is, nor hu-
man life thi:e Rate which'we now behold. How far
the.change would contribute to his welfare, comes to
be confidered. .

f tbere.be .any: principle fully ascertained by re-

I'igton, it is, That ihis life was intended for a state of
- trial. ,and' limnproivement tq. rman.... His preparation for
a. better.srd 'r ig.u1ired a gradna piurification, carried
on 6y. fleps of.progreTilve-difiipline. ' Tefitiation.
therefore, here aligned him, was such as to answer
this d'esign, by calling forth all his aaive powers, by
giving full scope. to. his moral dispositions, and bring-
.ing to l'ht is s whole chara&er. Hence it became
propor, thattr i'Fiultyi,and.temptation ihould arise in
tlbe..courfe -o his..dutty. , Ample rewards were pro-
mifed to virtu ;f. ;,b these rewards were left, ar yet,
in ofcurityg and ditant proepet.. The imprcilona

C. of

of sense were so balanced against the difccveics of
immortality, as to allow a conflit between faith and
sense, between conscience and desire, between pre-
sent pleasure and future good. . In this conlica, the
foulsof good men are tried, improved; and'ftrengthen-
-ed. In this field, their honours. are reaped. Hre
are formed the capita .virtues of-fortiiude, remrie-
rance, and felf-denial ;.moderation in prosperity, pa-
tience in adverfity,.fubmflion to the will of God,
and charitv apd forgiveness to men, amidst the vari-
,ous competirions.of worldly interest;

'Such' -is the plan of Divine wisdom for man's im-

.provement. But put the cafe, that the plan devised
'by human wisdom were to take place, and that the
rewards of the just were to be now fully difjlayed to
the view; the exercise of all those graces which I
have mentioned, would be entirely superseded. Their
very names would be unknown. Every temptation
being withdrawn, every. worldly attachment :being
subdued by the ov erpowering discoveries of eternity;
no trial of sincerity, no difcrimation' of'characters,
would remain; no opportunity would be afforded for
tho'e acive exertions, which are the means of puri-
fying and perfeaing the good. . On the competition
between time and eternity, depends the chief exercise
of human virtue. The obscurity which.at present
hangs over eternal objects, preserves the competition.
Remove that obscurity, 'and you remove human vir-
tue from its place. You'overthrow thati-whole sys-
tem of discipline, by which imperfe&t creatures are,
in thislife, giadually trained up for a more pertle
Jtate.

This, then, is the conclusion to which at last we

arrive, That the full display which.was denmanded, of
the heavenly glory, would be so'far from improving
the human foul, that it would abolish tbofe virtues
and duties which are the great ihftrumtnts of its im-
provement.: It would be unsuitable to the claracer

of

of man in every view, either as an a&ive being, or a;
moral agent. : It would disqualify him for taking.part
in the. affairs of the world; for relishing the plea-
fures, or for difcharging.the duies of life: In a word,
it would entirely defeat the purpose of his being
placed on this earth. And the question, Why the
Almighty has been pleased to leave a spiritual world,
and the future existence of man, under so much ob-
fcur;tv, resolves in the end into this, Why there should
be fich a creature as man in the universe of God?-
Such is the issue of the improvements propofed'to be
made on the plats of Providence. They add to the
discoveries of the fuperiour wisdom' of God;- and of
the .presumption and folly of man.

FROM what as been said, it now appears, That no

reasonable obje&ion! to the belief of a future state,
arises, from the imperfec difcoveriesof it which we
enjoy ; from the'difficulties that are mingled with its
evidence; from our feeing as througb a glass darry,
and being left to: walkby /aith and not by fiht. It
cannot be otherwise, it ought not to be otherwise,-
in our present f-tte. The evidence which is afford-
ed, is sufficient for the convicion of a candid mind,
sufficient for a rational ground of condu&; though
not so firiking as to withdraw our attention from the
present world, or altogether to overcome the impref-
sion of sensible obje&s. In such evidence it becomes
us to acquiesce, without indulging either doubts or
complaintsi on account of our not receiving all the
fatisiaaion which we fondly desire, butwhich our pre-
sent immaturity of being excludes. For upon the
supposition of immortality, this life is no other than
the childhood of exiitence; and the measures of our
knowledge mult be proportioned to such a fate. To
the fucceflive fRages of human life, from infancy to
old age, belong certain peculiar attachments, certain
cares, desires, and interelts; which open not abrupt-
ly, but by gradual advances on the mind, as it be-

C 3 comes

cAmes it to receive them, and is prepared for aqaing
the part. to which, in their order, they pertain.
Hence, in the education of a child, no one thinks of
inspiring. him at once with the- knowledge, the senti-
ments, and views of a man, and with contempt for
.he exercises and amusements of childhood. On the
contrary, employments suited to his age are allowed
to occupy him. By these his powers are gradually
unfolded; and, advantages is iikenr of his youthful
puifuits, to improve and strengthen his mind; till,'
tlep by flep, he is led on to higher profpeas, and pre--
,pared for a larger and more important Icene of aaion.

This analogy, which so happily illufirates the pre-

sent conduc6 of the Deity $owa ds man,deferve atten-
tion the more, as it is the very illustration used by the
Apofile, when treating of this fuljte in the context.
.Now, fays he, <we know in tart.-But when tlat wbich
ih perjefi is come, that which is in part /ball be done a-
-way. Wthen 1 was a child, Ifpake ua a h'ld, lunJder-
falod ot a child, I tcrzoght as a child; Iut wben I became
a man, Iput away childijb things. For nowuwe ee througb
a glass darkly; but then, face to face - Now I know in
part, bat then Ifball lnow even ai I am known. Under
the care of theAlmighty, our education is now going
op, from amDrtal to a immortal flati. As much light
is let in upon us, as we can bear withoutinjury,. When
th.e objes become too splendid and dazzling for our
fight, the curtain is drawn. Exerc.ifed-in.fuc a field
'of:aCion, as suits the fire'ngth-of Or unriperredpow-
ers6 we are, at the fame time by proper profpeai
and hopes, prompted to aspire towards the manhood
of our nature. the time wvben childijb things /ball be
pat. away. But flill,'betwixt thole future prorpeas,-
and the. imprefion of present objets, such an
accurate proportion is eflabliflied,, hs on the one
hand fhal not produce a total contempt of earth-
ly things, while we aspire to those that are heavenly;
and on the other, lhall not encourage-uch a degree

of

ofatt.chreht:to our prefeB.ft ,ae; as would render us
unworthy of future advancement. In, a-word, the
whole course of things- is so ordered, that we may
neither by any irregular and precipitate education,
become .men.too soon ; not by a. fond and trifling in-
dulgence, be suffered to continue children for ever.

Let those reflections not only remove the doubts

which may arise from our oblcure knowledge.pf im-
mortality, but likewise produce the highest admira-
tion of the wisdom -of our Creator. The flruaure
ofthe natural world-affords innumerable instances of
profound design, which no attentive fpe&ator can
survey without wonder. In the moral world, where
the workmanship is of much finer and more delicate
contexture, fubjeas of ftillgreater admiration open
to-view. But admiration must rife to its highefl
point, when those parts of. the moral conflitution,
which at first were reputed blemishes, whizh carried
th appearance of objecions, either to the wisdom
or the goodness. of Providence, are discovered, on
more accurate infpeation, to be adjufled with the
moftexqiifite propriety. We have now seen, that
the darkness of man's condition is no less essential to
his well being, than the light which he enjoys. His
nternal- powers, and his external situation, appear
o beexratly fitted to each other. Those complaints
vchicn we are apt to make, of our limited capacity
nd- narrow views, of our inability to penetrate far-
her into the future. ditination of man, are found,
-om the foregoing obeervations, to bejuft as unreafo-
.ble, as the, childish complaints of our not being for-
,led with a microscope eye, nor furnished with an
gle's wing; that is, of not being endowed with pow-
!'s. which would subvert ith nature, and:counterat
he laws, of our present state.

In order to dojuftice to the fubje&, I mull observe
:hat the fame reasoning which has been now em-
Iloyed with rerpec-tto our knowledge of immortality,

is

is equaly applicable to many other branches. of intel-
le&ual knowledge. 1 hus, why we are permitted
to know so little of the nature of that Eternal Being
who rules the universe; why the. manner in which
he operates on the natural and moral world, is wholly
concealed; why we are kept i*f such ignorance, with
refpe& to the extent of his works, to the nature and
agency of spiritual beings, and even with refpea to
the union between our own foul and body: To all
thele, and several enquiries of the fame kind, which
often employ the solicitous refarches of speculative
mnen, the answer is the fame that was given to the
in;erefting queflion which makes the subjea of our
discourse, the degree of knowledge desired, would
prove incomptable with the design, and with the
proper business of this life. It would raire us to a
sphere too exalted; would reveal objecs too great
and striking for our present faculties; would excite
feelings too firong for us to bear; in a word, would
unfit us for thinking or a&ing like human creatures.
It is therefore reserved for a more advanced period of
our nature; and the hand of Infinite wisdom hath in
mercy drawn a veil over seenes which would over-
power the fight of mortals.

One inflance in particular, of Divine wisdom, is

so illufrious, and corresponds so rermarkably with our
present subjea, that I cannot pass it over without
notice; that is the concealment under which Provi-
dence has placed the future events of our life on earth.
The desire of penetrating into this unknown region,
has ever been one of the mofl anxious paflions of
men. It has often seized the wife as well as the credu-
lous, and given-rife to many vein and impious superstitions
throughout the whole earth. Burning with curiosity
at the approach of some critical event, and impati-
ent under the perplexity of conjeaure and doubt,
How cruel is Providence, we are apt to exclaim, in
denying to man the power of foresight, and in limi-

ting

ting him to the knowledge of the prefent-moment ?
Were, he permitted to look forward into the course
of diftiny, how much more suitably would he be pre-
pared fnr the various turns and changes in his life ?
WVith what moderation would he enjoy his prosperity,
under the fore-knowledge of an approaching reverse ?
And with what. eagerness be prompted to improve
the flying; hours, by feeing the inevitable term draw
nigh which. was to finifih his course ?

But while Fancy indulges such vain desires and

criminal, complaints, this coveted fore-knowledge_
must clearly appear to the eye of reason, to be the
molt fatal gift which the Almighty could bellow. If
in this present mixed fate all the fuccefive scenes of
distress through which we are to pass, were laid be-
fore us in one view, perpetual sadness would over-
cast our life. Hardly would any transient glemes of
intervening joy be able to force their way through
the cloud; Faint would be the relish of pleasures,
of which we foresaw the close: Insupportable the
burthen of afflicions, under which we are oppressed
by a load, not only of piefent, but of anticipated
sorrows. Friends would begin their union, with la-
mnenting the day which was to dissolve it; and with
weeping eye, the parent would every moment be-
hold the child whom he knew that he was to lose.
In short, as loon as that mysterious veil, which now
covers futurity, was lifted up, all the gaiety of life
would disappear; its flattering hopes, its pleasing illu-
sions, would vanish; and nothing but its vanity and
fadaefs remain. 'The foresight of the hour of death
would continually interrupt the course of human as-
fairs; and the overwhelming profpe& of the future,
instead of exciting men to proper acivity, would
render them immoveable with corifternation and dif-
nay.--How much more friedly to man is that
mixture of knowledge and ignorance which is alloited
him in this tlate ! Ignorant of the events -which are

C to

befall us, and of the precise term which is tdicoh-
ilude our life, by this irgnorance our enjoyment of
present objects is favoured; ard knowing that death
is certain, and that human affairs ar. full of change,
by this knowledge our attachment to those objects is
moderated. Precisely in the fame manner as, by
the mixture of evidence and obscurity which remains
on the profpe& of a future slate, a proper balance is
preserved betwixt our love of this life, and our de-
fire of a better.

The longer that our thoughts dwell on this subjeo,

the more we must be convinced, that in nothing-the
Di'ine wifdcm is more admirabte, than in propor-
tioning knowledge to. the necessities of man. Instead
of lamenting our condition, that we are permitted
only tofee a: through aglafr darkly, we:have reason to
bless our Creator, no less for what he has concealed,
than for wvlat he hath allowed us to know. Ho is
.wonderful in counsel, as be is ex:ellent in working. He
is wife in heart, and his thoughts are deep. How un-
Jearchable are the riches of th' wisdom of the knowledge
f God !
FR o the whole view which we have taken of

the subjec, this important infiruaion arises. That
the great design of all the knowledge and- in parti-
cular of the'religtous knowledge which:God hath as-
forded us, is, to fit us for discharging the duties of'
life. No useless discoveries are made to us in religi-
on: No discoveries even of useful truths, beyond the
precise degree of information, which is futbfervient
to right cordut. To this great end all our infor-
mation points. In this center all'the lines of know-
ledge meet. Life and immortality are brought to ligbt
in the gospel; yet not so di'played as to gratify, the
curiosity of the world with an aflonifhirg spectacle;
tut only so far made known, as to afifit and firpport
us in- the Fra&ice of our duty. If the difco'.cry
w-re more imnpcrfta it .wvuld excite 'no desire of

immortality

immortality; if it were more full. and fiiking, it
would render uscairelefs of life. On the first fuppo-
fition, no sufficient motive to virtue would appear;
on 'the fccon4 no proper trial of it would remain. In
the one cafe, we should think and a& like men who
have their portin only in this world; in the other
cafe, like men who have no concern with this world
at all.. Whereas now, by tlie wife constitution of
Heaven, we are placed in the molf fa-vourable fitua-
tion for aaing, with propriety., our allotted part
here; and for iriing in due course, to higher ho-
nour and happiness hereafter.

Let us then second the kind intentions of Provi-

deace, and at upon the plan which it hath pointed
out. Checking our inquisitive solicitude about what
the Almighty hath concealed, let us diligently im-
prove what he hath made known Inhabitanttof the
earth, we are at the fame time candidiits for Hca-
ven. Looking upon these as only different views of
one confifent charater, let us carry on our prepara-
tion for Heaven, not by abltra&cing ourselves firm
ti,e concernsof this worM, but by fulfilling the dcties
and offices of every station in life. Living soberlys
riz.4teoufly, and godly in the present eworld, let us look
for that lSfed hcpe, and the glorious appearing of the
great God, an--our-Sa~iour Jy-ui Crif.

Before I conclude, it may be proper to observe,

That the reasonings in this difcourf, giver'o gsound
to apprehend any-danger of' our being too much in-
fuenced by the belief of a future slate. I have shown
thi hurtful e 'esctvhich would-follow from too bright
and full a di'covery of the glory of that f(ate; and
in fheiinrg this, I have juf4fed the decree of Provi-
dence, whici permitsno fuch-di;coyery. B:t as our
nature is at p-efeint conltituted, attached by so many
-trong connecdions to. the world of sense, and enj y-
inr a communication ob ftcble and dif-int wi:iitlie
world of fpiri:s, w-e-nccd fear no danger from c'.:i-

va;::" L

# SERMON V. JOHN xvii. 1. Jesus lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father! The hour is come; —

vating intercourse with the latter as much as poifible
On the contrary,- from that intercourse the chief fecu-
rity of our virtue is to be fought. - The bias of our
nature leans so much towards sense, that from this
fide the peril is to be dreaded, and on this fide the
defence is to be provided.

Let us then walk by faith. Let us strengthen this

principle of a&ion to the utmost of our power. Let
us implore the Divine grace, to ftrengihen it within
us more and more: That we may thence derive an
antidote againif that subtle poison, which inceflant
commerce with the objeas of sense diffuses through
our fouls; that we may hence acquire purity and
dignity of manners, suited to our divine hopes; and
undefiled by the pleasures of the world, unshaken by
its terrours may preserve to the end one conflant te-
nour of integrity. Till at las, having, under the
condu& of Chrifian faith, happily finished the period
of difciplioe, we enter on that state, where a far ro-
bler scene shall open; where eternal objeas ihall
Ahine in their native splendour; where this twiligbtof
moral life being pafi, the Sun of righteoufnefi ihall
rife; and that which is perfect being coare, that uwhik
is in part ball be done away.

SERMON V,

j H Xvii. 1.
yefu lift up bi, eyes to heavens and fai;, Father

The hour is come;-

H E S E were the words of our bleTed I.ord
on a memorable occasion. The feast of the
pairover drew nigh, at which he knew that he was to

susser.

susser. The night was arrived wherein he was to be
delivered into the hands of his enemies. He had
spent the evening in conference with his disciples;
like a dying father in the midfi of his family, ming-
ling consolations with his lad inftrufions. When he
had ended his discourse to them, he lifted up bis eyes
to heaven, and with the words which I have now
read, began that solemn prayer of interceflion for the.
Church, which cloted his ministry. Immediately as-
ter, he went forth with his disciples into the garden
of Gethsemane, and furiendered himself to those
who came to apprehend him.

Such was the ituation of our Lord at the time of

his pronouncing there words. He saw his million on
the point of being accomplished. He had the pro-
fpe9 full before him, of all that he was about tofuf-
fer.-Father ! The hour is came:-What hour? An
hour the mol critical, the moil pregnant with great
events, since hours had begun to be numbered, since
time had begun to run. It was the hour'in which-
the Son of God was to terminate the labours of his
important life, by a death till more important and il-
lufrious; the hour of atoning, by his trffering, for
the guilt of mankind; the hour of accomplihing
prophecies, types, and symbols, which had been car-
ried on through a series of ages; the hour of con-
cluding the old, and of introducing to the world the
new dispensation of religion; the hour of his tri-
umphing over the world, and death, and hell; the
hour of his erecing that spiritual kingdom whi.h is
to lai for ever. Such is the hour, such are the events
which you are to commemorate in the Sacrament of
our Lord's Supper. I shall attempt to set them be-
fore you as proper fubjecs, at this time of your de-
vout meditation. To display them in their genuine
majesty, is beyond .he ability of man.

I. THIS was-the hour in which ChriRi was glorifi-
ed by his sufferings. The whole of his life had dif-

covered
/

covered much real greatness; under a mean appear-
ance. 'Through the cloud of his humiliationi his na-
tive lustre often broke for;h, but never didit'fhine so'
bright, as in this last, this trying hour. It was in-
died the hour of distress, and of blood. He knew it
to be such; and when he uttered the words of the
Text, he had before his eyes, the executionet and
the cross, the scourge, the nails, and the spear. But-
by plofpeEts of this nature, his foul was not: to be
overcome. It is distress which enrobles eery .great
characer; and distress was to glorify the Son of'
God. He was now to teach all mankind, by his
example, how to luffer and to die. He was to tland
foith before his enemies, as the faithful witnefa of the
truth; justifying by his behaviour the chara&er
which he assumed, and fealing with his blood- the
Doarine which he-taught.

What magnanimity in all his words and' aions on

this great occasion ! The court of Herod, the judg-
ment-hall of Pilate, the hill of Cavalry, were ib
many theatres prepared for his displaying all the vir-
tues ofa confiant and patient mind. When led forth
to susser, the firl voice which we hear from him, is
a generous lamentation over the fate of his unf6rtu-
rate, though guilty, country; and, to the lat mo-
ment of his life, we behold him in peffeffion' of-the
fame gentle and benevolent spirit. No upbra'drmg,
no complaining expression escaped from his lips, dur-
ing the long and painful approaches of a crute dearth
He betrayed no symptom of a weak or a vulgar, of a
discomposed or impatient mind. With the--utrrof
attention of filial tenderness, he committed his aged
mother to the care of his beloved disciple. Wich all
the dignity of-a Sovereign, he conferred pardon on a
penitent fellow-fufferer With a greatntfs cf mind
beyond example, he spent his last moments in apclo-
gies and prayers for' those who were fhleddirg his
bleod.

By

By wonders in heaven, and wonders on earth, was

thishour diflinguified. AII-nature,feemed to feel it;
and the dead and the living bore witness to its impor-
tance. The veil of the temple was rent in twain.
The earth shook. There was darkness over all the
land. The graves were opened, and many who lept
arose and went into the Holy City. Nor were there
the only prod;gies of this awful hour. The molf
hardened hearts were subdued and changed. The
Judge, who in order to gratify the multitude palid
fentenceagainft him, pubickly attefied his innocence.
The Roman centurion, who presided at the execu-
tion glorifed God, and acknowledged the sufferer to
be more than man. After he fa the things which
had pzfJed, he said, Certainly this 'was a righteous per-
son; truly, this was the Son of God The Jewish
malefactor who was crucified with him, addressed
him as a King, and implored his favour. Even the '
crowd of insensible fpe&ators, who had come forth
as to a commonr fpe&acle, and who began with cla-
mours and insults, returned home, Jniting their breas?.
-Look back on the heroes, the philosophers, the
legislators of old. View them in their last moments.
Recall 'every circumstance which distinguishes their
departure from the world. Wherecan you findfuch
an assemblage of high virtues, and of great events,
as concurred at the death of Christ ? Where, so
many teftimohies given to the dignity of the dying
person, by earth, and by heaven-?

II. THIs was the hourin which Chrifl atoned for

the.fins of mankind, and accomplihed our eternal
redemp-ion. It was the hour when that great facri-
fice was offered up, the efficacy of which reaches
back to the first tranrgrefifon of man, and extends
forward to the end of Tiime; the hour when, from
the cross, as from an high altar, that blood was flow-
ing, which washed away the guilt of thk nations.

This

This awful dispensation of the Almighty, contains

mysteries which are beyond the dilcovery of man.
It is one of those things into which the angels desire ta
look. What has been revealed to us, is, That the
death of Christ was the interposition of Heaven for
preventing the ruin of human kind. We know, that
under the goverment of God, misery is the natural
cons quence of guilt. After rational creatures had,
by their criminal conduct, introduced disorder into
the Divine kingdom, there was no ground to believe,
that by their penitence and prayers alone, they could
prevent the deflruaion which threatened them. The
prevalence cf propitiatory sacrifices throughout the
earth, proclaims it to be the general sense of ma.ikind,
that mere repentance was not of sufficient avail to
expiate fin, or to flop its penal effecs. By the con-
Ifant allusions which are carried on in the New Tef-
tament to the sacrifices under the Law, as pre-figni-
lying a great atonement made by Chrifl ; and by
the strong expreflSons which are used in describing
the effecs of his death, the sacred writers show, as
plainly as language allows,, that there was an efficacy
in his sufferings, far beyond that of mere example
and inftruaion. The nature and extent of that effi-
cacy we are unable, as yet, fully to trace. Part we
are capable of beholding; and the wisdom of what
we behold, we have reason to adore. We discern ir
this plan of redemption, the evil of fin firongly ex-
hibited; and the justice of the Divine govermcnt
awfully exemplified, in Christ suffering for (inners.
But let us not imagine, that out present discoveries
unfould the whole influence of the death of Christ,
It is conneEed with causes into which we cannot pe-
netrate. It produces consequences too extensive for
us to explore. God's thoughts are not as our thoughts.
In all things, wefee only in part; and here, if any
where, we fee alto as through a glof darkly.

This, however, is fully manifest, that redemption
is one most glorious works of the Almi.hty. If the

hour

hour of the creation of the world was great and illus-
trous; that hour, when, from the dark and formless
mass, this fair fyftemn of nature arose at the Divine
command; when the. morning Jfars fang togeter,
and all tbe son of God bouted for joy; no less illuftri-
ous is the hour of restoration of the world; the
hour when, from condemnation and misery, it emer-
ged into happiness and peace. With -leis external
majesty it was attended, but is, on that account, the
more wonderful, that under an appearance so simple,
such great events were covered.

III. IN this hour, the long series of prophecies,

visions, types, and figures, was accomplished. This
was the center in which they all met: This the point
towards which they had tended.and verged, thiough-
out the course of so many generations. You behold
the Law and the Prophets flanding, if we may speak
so, at the foot of the cross, and doing homage. You
behold Moses and Aaron bearing the ark of the cove-
nant; David and Elijah presenting the oracle of telfi-
money. You behold all the priefis and sacrifices,
all the rights and ordinances, all the types and sym-
bols, assembled together to receive this confumation.
Without the death of ChriR, the worship and cere-
monies of the law would have remained a pompous,
but unmeaning inflitution. In the hour when he was
crucified, the bookwith the seven fealswas opened. Eve-
ry rite assumed its significancy; every predicion met
its event; every symbol displaytd its correspondence.

The dark, and seemingly ambiguous method of

conveying-important discoveries under figures and
emblems, was not peculiar to sacred books. The
Spirit of God, in pre-signifying the death of ChrifR,
adopted that plan, according to which the whole
knowledge of those early ages was propagated t hrough
the world. Under the veil of mylfelious aliufiol,
all wisdom was then concealed. From the sensible
world, images were every where borrowed, tc di -

scribe

scribe things unseen. More -was underitood to be
meant, than.wvas openly exprefled. By enigmatical
rites, the Priest communicated his doarines;Iby pa-
rables and allegories, the Philosopher inflrta&ed his
iifciples, even the Legislator, by figurative sayings,
commanded the reverence of-the people. Agreeably
to this prevailing mode of inftrucion, the wholedif-
p nfation of the Old Teflament was so conduced,
as to be the shadow and the figure of a spiritual fyi
flem. Every remarkable event, every diftingu'ilhed
personage, urder the Law, is interpreted in the
New Teitament, as bearing some -reference to the
hour of which we treat. If Isaac was laid upon the
al'ar as an innocent vitim; 'if David was driven
from his throne by the wicked, and restored by the
hand of God ; if the brazen. serpent was liftd up,
to heal the people ; if the rock was smitten by Moses
to furnish drink in the wilderness; all were types-of
Christ and alluded to his death.

In prediaing the fame event, the language of an-

cient prophecy was magnificent, but seemingly con.
traditory: For if foretold a Messiah, who was to
be at once a sufferer and a conqueror. The Star
swas to come out of Jacob, and the Branch t spring
o'rom theJicm 'of JI'. The 4Angel /f the Covenant,
:Ze Defrre of all Nations, was to come fidder.l to bit
-mple; and to him was to be the gatbe:'ng of people.
itet at the fame time, he was to be despised and re-
. ied of men; he wa to be taken from prifnan ad fron
',dgment, and to be led as a lamb to the Jlaughter.
1hough he was a man of fJrrows and acquainted with
rief, yet the Gentile were to come ti his light and
.ings to lbebrirhtne/i of hi rjing. In the hour when
Christ died, those prophetical riddles were solved;
those seeming contraditions were:reconciled&. The
obscurity of oracles, and. the ambiguity of-types va-
niihed. The Sun of rightreoufrei rose; arntegether
with the dawn of religion, thoie shadows pafled awav.

s*'.

IV. THIS was the -hour of the abolition of the

Law; and the introdóutiocnof the Gospel; the hour'
of terminating the old,, and of beginning the new
dispensation of reigibus knowledge and worship,
throughout the earth; Viewed in'ths light, it forms the
most august era which is to be found in the history of
mankind. When Chrill was suffering on the cross;
we are informed by one of the Evangelilfs, that he
said, Itbirj ; and thatthey filleda fpungewithvinegar,
and put it to'his mouth. fter he had tafted the vine-
gar,' kngwing that all thing; were now accompliJbced, and
the fcipturefu/filredj e f aid, It is finibhed; that is,.
This offered draught of viliegar was the 'aft circum-
fiance predi&ed by an ancient Prophet, that remained
tobe fulfilled. The vision and the prophecy are now
fealed: The Mofaick dispensation is closed. And be
bowed bis bead, and gave up the ghoj.

It isfioisbed.-When he uttered these words, he

changed the slate of the universe. At that moment,
the Law ceased, and the Gofple commenced. This
was the ever-metnorable point of time, which fepa-
rated the old and the new world from each other.
On one fide of the point of reparation, you behold
the Law, with its prrefts, its sacrifices, and its rites,
retiring from fight. On the other fide, you behold
the Gospel, -with its simple and venerable institutions,
coming forward into view. Significantly was the veil
of the temple rent. in this hour; for the glory then
departed from between the cherubims. The legal
High Priet delivered up his Urim and Thummim,
his bread plate, his robes, and his incense: And
CHRIST fiocd forth as the Great High l'rielt of all
fiucceeding generations. By that one sacrifice which
he. now offered, he' aboli/hed'facrifices for ever.
Altars on which the fire had blazed for ages, were
now to rlmoke no more. Vicims 'were no more to
bleed. Not with the-blood of bulh and gats, but with

bit

his own Blood, he now entered into the tly Plaee,
there to appear in the prejence of God Jor us.

This was the hour of association and union to all

the worihippers of God. When Christ faiJ, I/ is
fini/bed, he threw down the wall of partition which
had so long divided the Gentile from the Jew. He
gathered into one, all the faithful, out of every kin-
dred and people. He proclaimed the hcur to be come
when the knowledge of the true God fheuld be no
longer confined to cne nation, nor his worship to one
temple; but over all the earth, the worshippers of
the Father ihould serve him in spirit and in truth.
From that hour, they who dwelt in the utternmtl
ends of the earth, /frangers to the covenant of promi/e,
began to be brought nigh. In that hcun, the light of
the Gospel dawned from afar on the Brittifh islands.

During a long- course of ages, Providence seemed

to be occupied in prepairing the world for this revolu-
tion. The whole Jewish economy was intended to
usher it in. The knowledge of God was preserved
unextinguifhed in one cornerof the world, that thence,
in due time, might issue forth the light which was.
to overspread the earth. Succiffive revelations gra-
dually enlarged the views of men beyond the narrow
bounds of Judma, to a more exterlfive kingdom of
God. Signs and miracles awakned their expecatjon;
and direced their eyes towards this great event.,
Whether God descended on the flaming mountain,
or spoke b y the Prophet's voice; whether he scatter-
ed his chosen people into captivity, or re-assembled
them in their own land; he was still carrying on a
progrelfive plan; which was accomplished at the
death of Chrifl.

Not only in the territories of Israel, but over all

the earth, the great dispensations of Providence Fef-
peaed the approach of this important hour. If em-
pires rose or fell; if war divided, or peace united the
nations; if learning civilized their manners, or phi-

lofophy

lofophy enlarged their views; all was, by the secret
e.-ree of Heaven, made to ripen the world for that
fulneI of time, when Christ was to publilh the whole
counsel of God. The Persian, the Macedonian, the
Roman Conqueror, entered upon the flage, each at
his pp-editled period; and, though be n:e-nt not so,
neither did his heart think so, mniniftei ed to this hour.
The revolitricns of power and the fuccefiT.n of .mon-
archies, were so aranged by Providence, as to facii-
'tatethe pr grers of the Gospel through the habitable
woi Id, alter the day had arrived, when theJfIne wbich
'wfas cut but of tbe mountain without hands, Jhoield be-
come a great mountain, and fill the earth. This was
the day, which Ahrabam law afar off and wvas glad.
This was the day, which meny vProphets and King/,
and righteous men deJired t»fer, but could not; -the day
for which the earnest ecpesation of the creature, long
loppreffed with ignoratice, and bewildred in fuperlii-
tion, might be justly said to ¢uait.
V This was the hour of Christ's triumph over all

the powers of daeknefso; the hcur in which he ove(e-
:threw dominions and thrones, led captivity-captive,
end gavegifts unto men. 'The contest which the
kingdom of daiknefs had long maintained againfl the
kingdom of light, was now brought to its crisis.
'Tfie.period 'vas com±e, when the /eed of the weman.
jhduld brui/e tAc head of tbe erpent. For many ages,
the most gross fuperftltion had filled the earth. The
glory of the uncorruptable God was, every where ex-
-c¢pt in the land of Judea, changed into images made
like to corruptable man, and to birds and beajfs, and
creeping thing.. The world which theAlmighty created
,for himsel, seemed to have become a temple of idols.
Even to vices ard paflions, altars were raised; and
*what was intitled Religion, was in effe& a discipline
of impurity. -In the midst of this trniverfal darkness,
Satan had ere&ed his throne;'and the learned and
poTlfhed, as well as the savage nations, bowed down

- before

before him. But at the hour when Chritl apptered
on the cross, the signal cf his defeat was given. His
kingdom suddenly departed from him; the reign of
Idolitary pasTed away : He was beheld tofall/ike ligbten-
ing from heaven. In that hour,. the ftund,0tin of
every Pagan temple shook. The flatute of' every
falle God tottered on its b.jfe. The Priest fled
from h;s falling shrine; and the heathen oracles be-
came dumb for ever.

As on the cross Christ triumphed over Satan, so

he overcame his auxiliary, the world. Long had it
assailed him with its temptations and dilcouragements
In this hour of revere trial, he surmounted them all.
Formerly he had derpifed the plealures of the world.
He now baffled its terrours. Hence he is justly said to
have crucified the world. By his sufferings, he en-
nobled diltrefs; and he darkened the lufire of the
pomp and vanities of life, he discovered to his fol-
lowers the path which leads through afflicion, to
glory and to vi&ory; and he imparted to them. the
fame spirit which enabled him to overcome. My
kingdom is notof tbis world. In this world yejball bave
tribulation; but be of good cheer; ] have &vercone the
world.

Death also the last foe of man, was the viaim of

this hour. The formidable appearance of the spec-
tre remained; but his dart was taken away. For, in
the hour when Christ expiated guilt, he disarmed
death, by securing the refurreaion of the just. When
he said to his penitent fcllow-fufferer, To-day .thou
Jhalt he with me in Paradije, he announced to all his
followers the certainty of heavenly bliss. He sleclar-
ed the cherubims to be dismissed and the flamingf word
to be sheathed, which had been appointed at the fall,
to keep from man the way of the Tree of Life. Faint,
before this period, had been the hope, indiftinet the
profpe&, which even good men enjoyed of tie hea-
venly kingdom. Life and immortality were nowbrougbt

to

it light. From the hill of Calvary, the firfl clear
and certain view was given to the world of the ever-
lalling mansions. Since that hour, they have beeri
the parpetual consolation of believers in Chrilt.. Un-
der trouble, they sooth their minds , amidll temp!a-
tion, they support their virtue; andin their:dying
roments, enable themn to fay, O Death ! where is
thy Jling? 0 Gravel where i thy vi7ory?

VI. THIS was the hour when our Lord ereted

that Ipiritual kingdom which is never to end. How
vain are the ccuniels and designs of men ! How fhal-
low is the policy 'of the wicked! How short their
triumphing! The enemies of Christ imagined, that
in this hour they had successfully accomplished their
plan for his deflruaicn. They believed, that they
had entirely Icattered the small party of his'followers,
and had extinguished his name and his honour for ever.
In derision they addrefled him as a King. They cloth-
ed him with . purple. robe ; they crowned him with
a crown of. thorns; they put a reed into his hand ;
and, with :insulting mockery, bowed the knee before
him. 'Blind and impious men ! How little did they
know, that the Almighty was at that moment Jetting
him as. a King on the hill Sion; giveing him the
Heathen for the inheritance, and the uttermoll parts of
the earth for bis poffefion I How little did they know,
that their. badges of mock royalty were at. that moment
converted into the. signals of absolute dominion, and
the;iniruments bf.irrfiftible powerl' The reed which
they put into his hands, .became a rod of ire, with
which he was to break inpieces bis enemies; a sceptre,
with which he was. torulethe usiverfe in rightoufnefs.
The cross, which they thought was to stigmatize
him withl infamy, became the. ensign of his renown.
Infleadof being the reproach of his followers, it was
to b.e their boait and their. glory. The cross was to
fhine.on;plapes and. churches throughout the earth.
It was:to be. assumed- as the diftin&ion of the morl

powerfu-

powerful monarchs, and to wave in the banner of
viacricus armies, when the mem ry of Herod and
Pilate should be accurled; when Jerusalem should
be reduced to ashes, and the Jews be vagabonds
over all the world.

These were the triumphs which commenced at

this hour. Our Lord saw them already in their
birth; he saw of the travail of his foul, and was
satisfied. He beheld the word of God going forth,
conquering, and to conquer; subduing to the obedi-
ence of his laws, the subduers of the world; car-
rying light into the regions of darkness, and mild-
ness into the habitations of-cruilty. He beheld the
Gentles waiting below the cross, to receive the
Gofple. He beheld Ethiopia .and the IJe /firetching
out their-hands to God; the deert beginning to rejoice,
and to blfom as the rok7e and the knouwdge of the
Lord filling the eartb, u .the uaters cover the sea.
Well pleased, he said, Jt is finibed. As a conquer-
or, he retired.from.the field, reviewing his triumphs:
He bowed his head andgave.up the gbo/f.-From that
hour, Christ was no longer a mortal man, .but Head
over all things to the Church ; the glorious King of
men and Ange.s, -of.whofe dominion there shall benno
end. His triumphs shall perpetually increase. His
name ,b41 endure for eer; ii .ball lafi as Ing as the
fun; men rball be blerfed in.him, and all nations fJalI
call him bleed. ' .

.Su,cs were the tranfa&ions, such the effe&s of

this ever-memorable hour. With all those great
events was the mind of bur Lord filled, when he lifted
up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father thehouris
come.

From this view which we have taken of this sub-

je&, permit me to fuggefi, what ground it affords to
confide in the mercy of God, for the pardon of fn;
to trufi to bis faithfulness, for the accomplifhmmnt of
all his promises; and to approach to him, with gra-
titude and devotion, in ats of worihip. IN

Is the first place, The death of ChriA affords us

ground to'confide in the Divine mercy, 'fr'the par-
don of fin. Al the steps of that high dilpenfation
of Providence, which we have confidered; lead di-
recly to this conclusion. He that fparednot his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all, how ball he not
'witb bim al/o freely give us all things. This is the
final result of the discoveries of the Gospel. On this
refis that great sysem of' consolation, which it hath
reared up for rAen. We are not left to dubious and-
intricate reasonings, concerning the condut which God
may be expeced to hold' towards his offending crea-
tures. But we are led to the view of important and
illufirious fa&s, which strike the mind with evidence
irrefillible. For, is it possible to -believe, that such
great operations as I have endeavoured to describe,
were carried on by the Almighty in vain ? Did he ex-
cite, in the hearts of his creatures, such encouraging
hopes, without any intention to fulfil them ? After
so long a preparation of goodaefs, could he mean to
deny forgiveness, to the penitent and the humble?
When, overcome by the sense of guilt, man looks up
with an astonished eye to the Justice of his Creator,
Aet him recolle& that hour of which the Text spakes,
and be comforted. The signals of Divine mercy,
erected in his view, are too confpicibus to be either
distrusted or mistaken.

IN the next place, The discoveries of this hour

afford the highefi reason to trut in the Divine faith-
fulness, for the accomplishment of every promire
which remains yet unfulfilled. For this was the hour
of the completion of God's ancient convenant. t'
was the performance of the mercy promi/ed t the fa-
thers. We behold the confurmmation of a great plan,
which throughout a course of ages, had been uniform--
ly pursued; and which, againif every human ap-
~peararice, was, at the appointed moment, exacly
fulfilled. No word that is gone out of the mouth of te

D' ' Lord,

Lord, Fjl1 fail. No length of time al:ers his pur-
pose. No obslacles can retard it. Towards the ends
accomplished in this hour, the moil repugnant intiftu-
ments were made to operate. We discern God
bending to his purpose, the jarring passions, the op-
pofite irterefts, and even the vices of men; uniting
seeming contrarieties in his scheme; making the wrath
of man to praise him; obliging the ainbition.of Princes,
the prejudices of the Jews, the malice of Satan, all
to concur, either in bringing forward this hour, or in
completing its dettined effects. With -what entire
confidence ought w:e to wait for the fulfilment of all
his other promises in their due time; -even when
events are moif embroiled, and the profpe& is mofi
discouraging ? Although thou fayejf, Thou can/s not fee
.iyn ; yet judgment is before him; therefore trul/ thou
in him. Be attentive only to perform thy duty;
leave the event to God; and be assured, that under
the dire&icn.of.his Providence, all things Jkall work
.together for a happy ilfue.

LAST LY, The consideration of this whole fubje&

.tends to.excite gratitude and .devotion, .when we ap-
proach .to God in ats of worship. The hour of
which I have discoursed, presents him to us in the
amiable light .of the Deliverer of mankind, the. Re-
tlorer of our forfeited hopes. We behold the great-
,less of the Almighty, ioftened by the mild radiance
Of condelcenfion and mercy. We behold him di-
minifhing the awful.diftance at which we fland from
lis presence, by appointing for us a Mediator and In-
terceffor, through whom the humble may, without
idifmay, approach to Him who made them. By such
views of the Divine nature, Chriilian faith lays the
foundation for a worship which flall be at once rati-
onal and affecionate; a wo ship in which the light of
.the understanding shall concur with the devotion of
.the heart, and the mcl profound reverence be unit-
sd with the most cordial love. Chriiliari faith is not

a iyftem

# SERMON VI. JAMES iii. 17. The wisdom that is from above, is — gentle —

a fyfRem of Speculative truths. It is not a lefionbof
moial i:;ftlucain only. By a train of high difcove-
ries which it reveals, by a succession of interesting
objets which it places in our view, it is calculated
to elevate the mind, to purify the affections. and, by,
the afliftance of devotion, to confirm and encourage
virtue. Such, in particular, is the scope of that di-
vine institution, the Sacrament of our Lord's Supper.
To this happy purpose let it conduce, by concentring,
in one iriking Foint of light, all that the Gospel has
displayed of what is mofiimportant to man. Touch-
ed with jufi contrition for pail offences, and filled
with a grateful sense of Divine goodness, let us come
to the altar of God; and, with a humble faith in his
infinite mercies, devote ourselves to his service for
ever.

SERMON VI.

JAMES iii. 17.

The wisdom that is from akve, is-gentle-

O be wife in our own eyes, to be wife in the
opinion of the world, and to be wife in the fight

of God, are three things so very different, as rarely
to coincide. One may often be wife in his own eyes,
who is far from being so ini the judgement of the
world; and to be reputed a prudent rtan by the
world,i s no security for being accounted wife by God.
As there is a wordly happinels, which God perceives
to be no other than disguised misery; as there are
wordly honours, which in his estimation are reproach;
so there is a wordly wisdom, which, in his fight, isfe-
li/bnefs. Of.this wordly wisdom the characters are
given in the context, and placed in contrast with those
ps the wilfdm which is from above. The one is the
wisdom of the crafty ; the other that of the upright.

D 2 The

'Fhensne terminates in felfifhnefs; the other, in ela-,
rity. The one is full of f/rife and bitter envyings ; the
other, of mercy and of goadfruits. One of the chief
chara&ers by which the wisdom from above as dif-
tirguilhed, is gentleness, of which I am now to dif-
course. Of this there is the greater occasion to dif-
course, because it is too seldom viewed in a religious
light ; ard is more readily confidered by the bulk of
men, as a mere felicity of nature, or an exterior ac-
complifhment of manners, than as a Christian virtue
which they are bourd to cultivate. I shall first ex-
plain the nature of this virtue; and shall then offer
some arguments to recommend, and some directions
to facilitate, the pracice of it.

I BEGIN with the diflinguifhing true gentleness

from passive tameners of spirit, and from unlimited
compliance with the manners of others. That pas-
five tameness -which submits, without struggle, to
.every incroachment of the viclent and assuming, forms
no part of Christian duty ; but, on the contrary, is
.defrutive of general happiness and order.. That
unlimited complaisance, which on every occasion,
falls in with the opinions and manners of others, is
so far from being a virtue, that it is itself a vice, and
the parent of many vices. It everthrows all fleaxli-
ntfs of principle: and produces that sinful cunformi-
.ty with theworld, which taints the whole character.
In the present corrupted state of human manners, al-
ways to assent and to comply, is the very word maxim
we can adopt. It is impossible to support the purity
and dignity of Chriflian morals, without opposing
the world on various occasions, even though we
should fland alone. That gentleness therefore which
btlongs to virtue, is to be carefully diftinguifted from
the mean spirit of cowards, and the fawning assent of
sycophants. It renounces no just right from fear.
it gives up np important truth from flattery.-.
it is indeed not only consistent with a firm mind, but

it

it necefTarily requires a manly spirit, and a fixedprrin-
ciple, in order to give it any real value. Upon this
solid ground only, the polish of gentleness can with
advantage be fuperinduced.

Ir hands opposed, not to the moat determined re-

gard for virtue and truth, but to harshness and feve-
rliy, to pride and arrogance, to violence and oppref-
sion. It is, properly, that part of the great virtue of
charity, which makes us unwilling to give pain to any
of our brethren. Companion prompts us to relieve
their wants. Forbearance prevents us from retaliat-
'ingtheir injuries. Meekness reftrainsourangry pas-
sions; candour, our severe judgments. Genylenefs
correcs whatever is offensive in our manners; and,
by a constant train of humane attentions, itudies to
alleviate the burthen of common misery. Its office,
therefore, is extensive. It is not, like some other
virtues, called forth orly on peculiar emergencies;
but it is continually in acion, when we are engaged
in intercourse with men. It ought to form our ad-
dress, to regulate our speech, and to diffuse itsel
over our whole behaviour.

I mull warn you, however, not to confound this

gentle .vifdom wvhic is from above, with that artifi-
cial courtesy, that flTdied smoothness of manners,
which is learned in the school of the world. Such
accomplishments, the mofi frivolous and empty may
poIsess. Too often they are employed by the artful,
as a snare; too often affe&ed by the hard and un-
feeling, as a cover to the bafenefsof their minds.
We cannot, at the fame time, avoid observing the
homage, which, even iniuch inflances, the world is
conitrained to pay to virtue. In order to render lociety
agreeable, it is'found neceflary to assume somewhat,
that may at least carry its appearance. Virtue is the
universal charm. Even its shadow is courted, when
the substance is wanting. The imitation of its form
has been reduced into an art; and, in the commerce

D 3 of

of life, the first fludy of all who would either gain
the elteem, or win the hearts of others, is to learn
the speech, and to adopt the manners, of candour,
gentleness and humanity. But that gentleners which
is the chara&erick of a good man, has, like every
other virtue, its feat in the heart. And, let me add,
nothing except what flows from the heart, can ren-
der even external manners trtlf pleasing. For no as-
fumed behaviour can at all times hide the real cha-
rater. In that unaffected civility which springs
from a gentle mind, there is a charm infinitely more
powerful, than in all the studied manners of the mofL-
finished courtier.

True gentleness is founded on a sense of what we

owe to him who made u', and to the common nature
of which we all share. It arises from reflecion on
our own failings and wants; and fronm just views of
the condition, and the duty of man. It is native feel-
ing, heightened and improved by principle. It is the
heart which easily relents; which feels for every
thing that is human; and is backward and flow to
inflict the least wound. It is affable in its address,
and mild in its demeanour; ever ready to oblige,
and willing to be obliged by others; breathing habi-
tual kindness towards friends, courtesy to itrangers,
long-fuffering to enemies. It exercises authority
vwith moderation; administers reproof with tender-
ness; confers favours with eafc an. modesty. It ia
unassuming in opinion, and temperate in zeal. It
contends not eagerly about trifles; flow to contra-
dit, and still flower to blame; but prompt to allay
dissention, and to reflore peace. It neither inter-
meddles unnecessarily with the affairs, nor pries in-
quifitively into the secrets of-others. It delights
above all things to alleviate dflreEs, and, if it cannot
dry up the falling tear, to sooth at least the grieving
heart. Where it has not the power of being useful,
it is never burdensome. It fecks to please, rather

thai

than to shine and dazzel; end conceals with care
that fjperiority, either of rallents, or of rank, which
is oppressive to those who are beneath it. In a word
it is that spirit, and that tenor of manners, which the
ofpel of Christ enjoins, when he commands us to
ar one another's burtbens ; to rejoice with thsfe who

rejoice, and to weep with those who weep; ti please
every one his- neigbour for his good; to be kind and
tender-hearted; to be pitiful and courteous; to tupport
the weak, and ts be patient towards all mern.

Having now 'ufficiently explained the nature of

this amible vii tue, I proceed to recommend it to your'
practice. Let me for this end, desire you to confi-
der, the duty which you owe to God'; to confTder
the relation which you bear to one another; to con-
fider your o n interest.

I. CoN SIDER the Duty which you owe to God.

When you. survey his works, nothing is so confpicu-
ous, as his greatness and majesty. When you con-
fult his word, nothing is more remarkable, than his
attention to soften that greatness, and to place it in'
the mildest and least oppressive light. He not only
characterizes hirr.fef as the God of confolaiion, but,
with condescending gentleness, he-particularly ac-
commodates himrelf to the situation of the unfortu-
nate. He -dwelleth 7with the bumble and contrite. He
hideth not his face when the afliLaed cry. He healetb
the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wound--W hen
his Son came to be the Saviour ft the world, he was
eminent for the fame attribute of mildand gentle
good-ners Long before his birth, it was prophesied
of him, that he should not /frive, nor cry, nor cnrfe
his voice to be heard in the jfreets; that the bruised
reed he h/buld not break, nor quench the fmoaking flax
And after his death, this distinguishing feature in his
charnaer was so universally remembered, that the
Apofle Paul, on occasion of a request which he makes
to the Corinthians, uses thole remarkable exprefflons,

D 4 beseech

I befeec yeu by the meekness and gentlenef of CAriJfl
During all his intercourse with men, no harshness, or
pride, or stately diflance, appeared in his demeanour.
In his access, he was easy; in his manners, simple;
in his answers, mild; in his whole behav:uur, hum-
ble and obliging. Learn of mc, said lie, for I am meek
and lowly in heart.-As the Son of God is the patren,
so the Holy Ghost is the inspirer of gentlenef. His
name is toe Comforter, the Spirit ofgrace and peace,
His fruits or operations on the human mind, are
love, meeknefi, gentleness, and lng-fuffering. Thus,
by every discovery of the Godhead, honour is con-
ferred upon gentleness. It is held up to our view,
as peculiarly conneced with Celeflial Nature. And
suitable to such discoveries, is the whole drain of the
Cofpel. It were unneceflary to appeal to any single
precept. You need only op. the New Teftement,
to find this virtue perpetually inculcated. Charity
or love, is the capital figure ever presented to pur
'view; and gentleness, forbearance, and forgiveness,
are the founds ever recurring on our ear.

So predominant, indeed is this spirit throughout

the Christian dispensation, that even the vices and
corruptions of men have not been able altogether to
defeat its tendency. Though that dispensation is
far from having hitherto produced its full effe& up-
on the world, yet we can clearly treace its influence
in humanizing the mannersof men. Remarkable,
in this refpea, is the vicory which it has gained
over those powers of violence and cruelty, which
belong to the infernal kingdom. Whereever Chri-
fiianity prevails, it has discouraged, and, in some
degree, abolished slavery. It has rescued human
nature from that ignominious yoke, under which
in former ages, the one half of mankind groaned.
It has introduced more equality between the two
sexes, and rendered the conjugal union more rational
and happy. It has abated the ferociousness of war.

It

It has mitigated the rigourof difpotifm, mitagated
the cruelty of punishments; in a word, has reduced
mankind, from their ancient barbarity, into a more
humane and gentle ftate.-Do we pretend respect
and zeal for this religion, and at the fame time allow
ourselves in that harshness and severity, which are so
contradiEtory to its genius? -Too plainly we show,
that it has no power over our hearts. We may re-
tain the Chrilian name; but we have abandoned the
Christian spirit.

II. CONSIPER the relation which you bear to

one another. Man is a solitary individual, is a very
wretched being. As long as he flands detached from
his kind, he is possessed, neither of happiness, nor
of strength. We are formed by nature to unite; we
are impelled towards each other, by the compaf-
fionate inftinis in our frame; we are linked by a
thoufind connecions, founded on common wants.
Gentleness therefole, or, as it is very properly ter-
med, humanity, is what man; as such in every
fattion, owes to man. To be inacceflible, contemp-
tuous, and hard of heart, is to revolt against our
own nature; is in the language of scripture, to hide
o:,rfelves /ram dfur own. flelb. Accordingly, as all
feel the claim which they have to mildness and hu-
irnanity, so all are sensibly Iurt by the want of it in
others. On no fide are we more vulnerable. No
complaint is more feelingly made, than that of the
harsh and rugged manners of persons wih whom we
have intercourse. But ho; fz.dom do we transfer
the cafe to ourselves, or examine how far we are
guilty of infiiaing on others, whose sensibility is the
fame with ours, those very wounds of which we fci
loudly complain ?

But, perhaps, it will be pleaded by some. That

this gcntlenefs, on which we now insist, regards only
those fmiller offices of life, which in their eye are
not effeinial to religion and goodness. Negligent,

D 5 they

they confers, on flight occasions, of the government
of their temper, or the regulation of their behaviour,
they are attentive, as they pretend, to the great duties
of beneficence ; and ready whenever the opportunity
presents, to perform important services to their fel-
low-creatures. But let such persons refle& that the
occasions of performing those important good deeds,
very rarely occur. Perhaps their situation in life, or
the nature of their connecions, may in a great mea-
sure. exclude them from such opportunities. Great
events give scope for great virtues; but the main
tenour of human life, is composed of small occurren-
ces. Within the round of there, lie the meterials of
the happiness of moif men; the fubjels of their duty,
and the trials of their virtue. Virtue must be formed
and supported, not by unfrequent aEts, but by daily and
repeated exertions. In order to its becoming either
vigorous or useful, it mufi Le habitually a&tive; not
breaking forth occasionally with a transient lufire,
like the blaze of a comet ; but regular in its returns
like the light of day: Not like the aromatic gale,
which sometimes feasts the sense; but like the ordi-
nary breeze, which purifies the air, and renders it
healthful.

Years may pass over our heads, without affording

any opportunity for aasi of high beneficence, or ex-
tensive utility. Whereas not a day passes, but in
the common tranfadions of life, and-efpecially in the
intercourse ofdomefiic society, gentleness finds place
for promoting the happiness of others, and, for
ilrengthening in ourfelvts the habit of virtue. Nay,
by seasonable discoveries of a human Ipirit, we some-
times contribute more materially to the advancement
of happiness, than by acions which are seemingly
more important. There are situations, not a few,
in human life, where the encouraging reception, -the
condescending behaviour, and the look of sympathy,
brirg greater rlief tq the he.rt, than the mort

bountiful

bountiful gift. While on the other fide, when the
-hand of liberality is extended to bestow, the want of
geitleels is sufficient to frustrate the intention of the
benefit. We four those whom we meant to oblige;
and, by conferring favours with oitentation and harfi-
r.efs, we convert them into injuries. Can any difpo-
fition then be held to lofrefs a low place in the scale of
virtue, whose influence is io considerable on the hap-
piness of the world ?

Gcntlentfs is, in trnth, the great avenue to mu-

tual enjoymeent. Amidfl the fIrife of interfering in-
terefis, it tempers the violence of contenticn, and
k. eps alive the feeds of harmony. It softens aiiimo-
fi!ies; renews endearments ; and renders the coun-
tenance of man, a reftrcehment to man. Banish gen-
tcenefs from the earth; suppose the world to be fill-
ed \ ith none but harsh and contentious fpirirs ; and
what fort of society would remain ? The solitude of
the defart were preferable to it. The conflic of
j iriri-g elements in chaos; the cave, where fubter-
ranious winds contend and roar; the den where ser-
pents hiss, and beasts of the forest hoa l; would be
the only proper representations of such assemblies of
men.- that I had wings like a dove f or' then 1
would fly uwar, and be at ress. Lo ! then ' would
wander rfar cjf, a:d remain in the wilderness ; I would
hafrln my e/rjpe from tRe windy Jform and tempe/ :
For I have Jcen vilcence andj rie/ in the ity. Mil chief
and sorrow v are in the midfl of it: Deceit andguile de-
part not from the Jlreets.---Strange ! that where
men have a!l one common intereff, they should so of-
ten, absurdly concur in defeating it ! Has not Nature
already provided a fuffcient cpiantity of unavoid!able
evils for the ilate of man ? As if we did not susser
enough from the storm which beats upon us without,
mufl we conrFira al!o, in tho'e societies where we as-
feinble, in order to f. a re:re:it from that florm, to
ihrr;.:- one ano:ihcr ?-But if the sense of duty, and

c.f

of common happiness, be insufficient to recommend
the virtue of which we treat, then let me desire you,

III. To confider your own interest. Whatever

ends a good man can be supposed to pursue, gentleness
will be found to favour them. It prepoflefs's and
wins every heart. It persuades, when every other
argument fails ; often disarms the fierce, and melts
the fIubborn. Whereas harshness confirms the op-
position it would subdue; and, of an indifferent per-
fIn, creates an enemy. He who could overlook an
injury committed in the collision of interefis, will
long and severely resent the flights of acontemptuous
behaviour. To the man of gentlentfs, the world is
generally disposed to ascribe every other good quali-
ty. The higher endowments of the mind& we admire
at a diflance; and when an impropriety of behaviour
accompanies them, we admire without love. They
are like some of the d.ftant stars, whose beneficial
influence reaches not to us. Whereas, of the influ-
ence of gentlentrs, all in some degree partake, and
therefore all love it. The man of this charaEter rifes
in the world without firuggle, and flourishes without
envy. His misfortunes are universally lamented;
and his failings are easily forgiven.

But whatever may be the effect of this virtue on

our external condition, its influence of our internal
enjoyment is certain and powerful. That inward
trarquill.ty which it promotes, is the first requisite to
every pleafitiable feeling. It is the calm and clear at-
rr.oiphere, the fteenity and sun-shine of the mind.
%Vhen benignity and geatlenefs reign within, we are
always least in hazard of being ruffled from without ;
every person, ard every occurrence, are beheld in
ihe most favourable hight. But let some clouds of
dirguft and ill-humour gather on the mind ; and im-
mediately the scene changes,; Nature seems trars-
formed; ard the appearance of all things is blacken-
ed to cur view. I he gentle mind is like the frnooth

stream

iream, which refleas every objea in its julf propor-
tion, and in its fairest colours. The violent spirit,
like troubled waters, renders back the images of things
distorted and broken; and communicates to them all,
that disordered motion which arises solely from its.
own agitation.

Offnces mu/f come. As soon may the waves of the

sea cease to roll, as provocations to arise from hu-
man corruption and frailty. Attacked by great in-
juries, the man of mild and gentle spirit will feel
what human nature feels; and will defend and refenr,
as his duty allows him. But to those flight provoca-
tions and frivolous offences, which are the most fre-
quent causes of disquiet, he is happily fuperiour.
Hence his days flow in a far more placid tenour than
those of others; exempted from the numberless dif-
composures which agitate vulgar minds. Inspired
with higher sentiments; taught to regard, with indul-
gent eye, the frailties of men, the omiflions of the
carelers, the follies of the imprudent, and the levity
ot the fickle, he retreats into the calmness of his fpi-
rit, as into an undiiturbed fanauary; and quietly al-
lows the usual current of life to hold its course.

This virtue has another, and still more important

connecion with our interest, by means of that rela-
tion w hich our present behaviour bears to our eternal
fate. Heaven is the region of gentleness and friend-
lhip; Hell, of fierceness and animosity. If then, as
the scripture inflruas, us, according to what we nowu
few we ml-? hcreafter rea p; it follows, that the cul-
tivation of a gentle temper is necessary to prepare us
for heavenly felicity; and that the indulgence of
harsh dispositions, is the introducion to future mile-
ry. Men, I im afraid, too often feperate those arti-
cles of their belief which relate to eternity, from the
ordinary affairs of the world. They connfe them
with the seasons of seriousness and gravity. They
leave them with niuch refpea, as in a high regio-,

t ^

to which, only on great occasions, they retort; and,
when they defccnd into common life, confider them-
selves asat liberty to give tree Icope to their humours
and patlions. \Vhereas, in faa, it is their, behavi-
our in the daily train of social intercourle, which,
niore than any ( ther caufe/fixes and determines their
spiritual characer ; gradually inffling thor difpofi-
ti.;ns, and forming those habits, which affect their
everlasting condition. With regard to trifles, per-
haps, their -alignant dispositions may chiefly be in-
dulged. But let them remember well, that those
trifles, by ir.creafing the growth of. eevithnefs and
paflion, become pregnant with the mefl serious mif-
cliefs; anti may fit them, before they are aware, for
bing the future companions of none but infernal
fpiiits.

I nmean not to fay, that in order to our preparation

for Heaven. it is enough to be m Id rad gentle; or
that this virtue alone, will cver all our fins. Through
the felicity of natural corfitution, a certain degree
of this ben:gnity may be poffeifcd by some, whose
heaits are in other reipcOs colrupt, and their lives ir-
regular. But what I mean to aftcrt, is, That where
no attention is given to the government of temper,
mectnels for Heaven is not yet acquired, and the re-
gineiating power of rclig:on. is as yet unknown. One
of the fir ti wov.ks of the Spirit of God, is, to in!u'le
into every heart which it inhabits, that egntle tvijdiom
v/iac/ is jrcin above. They v'wo are Chri/'I's have cru-
ci/icd the flefl,, with its flsecnians and ltis ; but let it
rot be foigotten, that anlong the wcrks of tfe fle'b,
hatred, variance, e.ulatcns, wrath, firije and envy-
ings, are as cxprcl'ly enumrerattd, as uncieannefi,
muorders, drui.dniim,, and rcvellintg. TI'ey m ho con-
tinie e;ther in the one or 'he o:her,-Zsil not inherit,
indeed cannot :r!,rit', the kingdm l: f God.

I-aving lth:s ihown the inmportance of gcntlnefs,
both as a n cral virtue, and as a Chriilian grace, I

miall

tha!l conclude the fubje&, with briefly fuggefling
fon;.-confideratipns which may be of use to facilitate
the praaice of it.

FOR this end, let me advise you to view your

charaEter with an impartial eye; and to learn, fiom
your own failings, to give that indulgence which in
your turn you claim. It is pride which fills the world
with so much harshness arid severity. Ini the fulners
of felf-eftimation, we forget what we are. We claim
attentions, to which we are not entitled. We are rigo-
rous to offences, as if we had never offended ; unfeel-
ing to diflrefs, as if w-e knew not what it was to sus-
ser. Fro.p thole airy r:gions of pride and folly, let
us descend to our proper level. Let us survey the
natural equality on which Providence has placed man,
Mwith maa,and reiec onthe infirmities common toall. If
the refleaion onnatural equalityand.mutual offences be
insufficient to prolrpt humanity, let us at leafl remem-
ber what we are in the fight of God. Have we none
of that forbearance to give to one.another, which
we all so earneitly intreat from Heaven? Can we
look for clemency or gentleness from our Judge,
when we are so backward to show it to our own
brethren ?

Accustom yourselves, also, to reflect on the small

moment of those things which are the usual incentives
to violence and contention. In the ruffled and angry
hour; we view every appearance through the false
medium. The most inconsiderable point of interefl,
or honour, swells into a momentous objec ; and the
flightefl attack seem to threaten immediate ruin. But
after passion or'pride has subsided, we look round in
vain for the mighty mischiefs we dreaded; The fa-
bric, which our disturbed imagination had reared,
totally difapreirs. But though the cause of conten-
tion has dwindled away, its consequences remain. We
have alienated a friend; we have embittered an ene-
my; we have sown the feeds of future suspicion,

malevolence,

malevolence, or dirguft.-Sufpend your violence. I
beseech you, for a moment, when causes of discord
occur. Anticipate that period of coolness, which,
of itself, would soon arrive. Allow yourtelves to
think, how little you have any profpe& of gaining
by fierce contention ; but how much of the true hap-
piness cf life you are certain throwing away. Eafly,
and from the smallest chink, the bitter waters of firife
are let forth; but their course cannot be foreseen;
and he fcldom fails of suffering molt from their poi-
fonous effeas, who firIf allowed them to flow.

But gentlcncfs mill, most of all, he promoted by

frequent views of thole great' bjeas which our holy
religion presents. Let the prolpeas ofijmmortality
fill your minds. Look upon this world as a late of
passage. Confider yourselves as engaged in the pur-
iuit of higher interests; as aaling now, under the
eye of God; an introductory part to a more import-
ant scene. Elevated by such lentiments, your minds
will become calm and sedate. You will look down
as from a uiperiour station, on the petty dilturbances
of the world. 'I hey are the selfish, the sensual,
and vain, who are mofl subjec to the impotence of
passion. They are linked lo closely to the world;
by to many fides they touch every objea, and every
person around them, that they are perpetually hurt,
and perpetually hurting others. But the spirit of
true religion removes us to a proper distance from
the grating objects of worldly contention. It leaves
us sufficiently conneEed with the world, for asing
our part in it with propriety; but tfifengages us from
it so far, as to weaken its power of disturbing our
tranquillity. It inspires magnanimity; and mag-
nanimity always breaths gentleness. It leads us to
view the follies of men with pity, not with rancour;
and to treat, with the mildness ofa fiperiour nature
what in little minds would call forth all the b.tternefs
of paGon.

Aided

# SERMON VII. ESTHER v. 13. Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the King's gate.

Aided by such considerations, let us cultivate that

gentle wisdom which is; in so many refpe&s, im-
portant both to our duty and our happiness. Let
us alfume it as the ornament of every age, and of e-
very ltation. Let it temper the petulance of youth,
and soften the moroseness of old age. Let it miti-
gate authority in those who rule, and promote dif-
ference among those who obey. I conclude with re-
peating the caution, not to miflake for true gentle-
ness, that flimzy imitation of it, called polished man-
ners, which often, among the men of the world,
under a smooth appearance, conceals much asperity.
Iet yours be native gentleriefs of heart, flowing from
the love of God, and the love of man. Unite this
amiable spirit, with a rroper zeal for all that is right,
and just, and true. Let piety be combined in your
chara&er with humanity. Let determined integrity
dwell in a mild and gentle breast. A chara&er thus
supported will command more real refpe&, than can
be procured by the mofl shining accomplishments,
when separated from virtue.

S E R M O N VII.

ES THE R .

v 3.

'el all tbis availetb me nothing, so long as Ifee Mar-
decai the Jew ifting at tri King's gate.
rTs HE S E are the words of one, who, though

high in station and power, confessed himself to

be miserable. They relate to a memorable occur-
rence in the Persian hiflory, under the reign of Aha-
fuerus, who is supposed to be the Prince known a-
tnong the Greek historians by the name of Artaxer-

xes.

Xes. Ahasuerus had advanced to the chief dignity of
his kingdom Hamcn an Amalekite, who inherited
all the ancient enmity of his race to the Jewish nation.
He appears, from what is recorded of him, to have
been a very wicked minister. Raised to greatness'
without merit, he employed his power foley for the
gratification of his pafiions. As the honours which-
he p( feffred were next to royal, his pride was every
day fed with that servile homage which is peculiar
to Afiitic courts; and all the feivants of the King
prostrated themfelvts before him. In the midst of
this general adulation, one person only blooped'not
to H-aman. This was Mordecai the Jew who
knowing this Armalkite to be an enemy to the people
of God, and with virtuous indignation, defp;fing
that insolence of prosperity with which he law him'
lifted up, bowed not, nor did him reverence. On this
appearance of difrefpec from Mordecai, Hanati
tras full of wrath; but he thought scorn to lay hands
on Mordecai alone. Personal revenge was not fuffici-
ent to satisfy him. So violent and black were his
paflTons. that he resolved to exterminate the whole
nation to which Mordecai belonged. Abusing for this
cruel purpose, the favour of his credulous Sovereign,
he obtained a decree to be sent forth. that, against a
certain day, all the Jews throughout the Perfiari do-
minions flould be put to the fwolid. Mean while,.
co sident of luccefs, and blind to approaching ruin,
he continued exulting in his prosperity. Invited by
Ahasuerus to a royal banquit, which E ther the Qteen
had prepared, he went fo-tb that day joyful, and wvith
a glad heart. B.it behold ho fl:ght an incident
was sufficient to poison his joy ! As he went forth,
he fawv Mordecai in the (i:g's g-te; and observed
that frill he refused to do him homage: He flood nit
rp, nor was moved fir him: although he well knew
the tormadable defigrs which Haman was preparing
to execute. One private man, who despised his

greatness

greatness, and disdained fubmifion, while a whole
kingdom trembled before him; one fpiii, which ihe
utmolt itretch of his power could neither subdue nor
humble, blafled his triumphs. His whole foul was
shaken with a florm of paflion. Wrath, pride, and
defile of reveige, rose into fury. With difficulty
he restrained himself in public; but as soon as he
came to his own house, he was forced to disclose the
the agony of his mind. He gathered together his
friends and family, with Zerifh his wife. He told
them of the glory cf his riches, and the multitude of
his children, and all the things rvhesrein the King had
promoted him, and how he had advanced him above the
princes andfarvants of the King. He /aid moreover,
Tea, Efjher the Sueen did let no man come in with the
King, unto the banquet, that fbe had prepared, but my-
/elf; and to-morrow also I am invited unto her witb
the King. After all this preamble, what is the con-
clufion ?-ret. all this availeth me nothing, fe long as I
fee Mordeeai the Jew, fitting at the King's gate.

The sequel of Haman's hiflory I shall not -now

pursue. It might afford matter for much inlfruc-
tion, by. the conspicuous juflice of God in his fall and
punishment. But contemplating only the singular
fituatiop in which the Text presents him, and the
violent agitation of his mind which it displays, the
following reflecions naturally arise, which together
with some practical improvements, shall make the
fubje& of this difeourfe. I. How miserable is vice,
when one guilty passion creates so much torment!
11. How unavailing is prosperity, when, in the
height of it, a single difappointraent can destroy the
relish of all its pleasures! III. How weak is human
nature, which, in the abfcence of real, is thus prone
to form to itself imaginary woes !

I. How miserable is vice, when one guilty paflion

is capable of creating so much torment! When we
discourse to you of the internal, misery of finners;

when

when we repreftnt the pangs which they ruffer, from
violent pafliors, and a corrupted heart; we are
sometimes fufpeted of chufing a theme for declama-
ticn, and of heightening the piaure which we draw,
by colours borrowed from fancy. They whose minds
are, by nature, happily tranquil, or whose situation
in life removes them from the difturbance,and tumult
of paflion, can hardly conceive, that as 'ong as the

c.rly is at eafc, and the externaf condition prosper-
ous, any thing which passes within the mind should
cause luch exquisite woe. Eut, for the truth of our
assertions, we appeal to the fiiflory of mankind. We
might reason from the constitution of the rational
frame; where the underfianding is appointed to be
lupteme, and the pailions to be subordinate; and
where, if this due arrangement of its parts be over-
thrown, misery as necessarily ensues, as pain is con-
-feqfent in the animal frame, upon the distortion of its
members. But laying speculations of this kind aside,
it is sufficient to lead you to the view of fa&s, the
import of which can neither he controverted, nor
nmifaken. This is, indeed, the great advantage of
hiflory, that it is a mirrour which holds up mankind
to their own view. For, in all ages, homan nature
has been the fame. In the circle of worldly affairs,
the fame characters and situations are perpetually re-
turning; and in the follies and.paffioiui,: the vices and
crimes, of the generatiois lhait are past, we read those
of the present.'

Attend, then, to the instance now before us;

and conceive, if you can, a person more-thoroughly
wretchcd, than one reduced to make this humiliating
confeflion, that though surrounded with power, opu-
lence and pleasure, he was loft to all happiness,
through the fierceness cf his resentment; and was at
that moment stung by disappointment, and torn by
rage, beyond what 'he could bear. All this availeth
me nothing, of long as I fee Mordecai the Yew fitting

i,~~~~ ~~at

at tSe King's gate. Had this been a soliloquy of FHa-
man's within himself, it would have beer. a lifficient
discovery of his misery. But when we confider it as
a confeflion which he makes to others, it is a pro of
that his misery was become insupportable. For such
agitations of the mind every man firives to conceal,
because he kiows they dishonour him. Other griets
and sorrows, he can, with freedom, pour out to a
confident. What he suffers from the injustice or
malice of the world, he is not ashamed to acknow-
ledge. But when his suffering arises from the bad
dispositions of his own heart; when, in the height of
prosperity, he is rendered miserable, solely by difap-
pointed pride, every ordinary motive for communica-
tion ceases. Nothing but the violence of anguifi,
can drive him to confess a passion which renders him
odious, and a weakness which renders him despicable.
To what extremity, in particular, mufi he be reduc-
ed, before he can disclose to his own family the infa-
mous secret of his rnifery ? In the eye of his family
every man wishes to appear refpedable, and to co-
ver from their knowledge whatever may vilify or de-
graJe him. Attacked or reproached abroad, he
confoleshimfelf with his importance at home; and
in domestic attachment and refpeE, seeks for rome
ccmpenfation for the injustice of the world. Judge,
then, of the degree of torment which Haman endur-
ed, by. its breaking. through all these restraints, and
forcing him to publiih his shame before those, from
whom all men seek rmot to hide it. How severe muit
have been the conflici which he underwent within
himself, before he called together his wife and all his
friends for this purpose ! How dreadful the agony he
suffered at the moment of his confession, when, to
the aftoniftied company, he laid open the cause of his
diflrefs !

Assemble all the evils which poverty, disease or vio-
lence can indlia, and their flings will be found by far

less

less pungent, than those which such guilty passions
dart into the heart. Amidfl the ordinary calamities
of the world, the mind can exelt its powers, and fug-
gefl relief: And the mind is properly the man; the
fuffere'-, and his fuffetings, can be distinguished.
But those disorders of passion, by sei7ing directly on
the mind, attack human nature in its ft.ong hold, and.
cut oft its last resource. They penetrate to the very
feat of sensation; and convert all the powers of
thought into instruments of torture.

Let us remark, in the event that is now before un,

the awful hand of God; and admire his juflice, in
thus making the finner's own wuickcdnefs to reprove
him, and bis backflidings to correc bim. Scepticks rea-
son in vain againIt the reality of divine government.
It is not a subjet of dispute. It is a faL. which car-
ries the evidence of sense, and displays itself before
our eyes. We fee the Almighty ranififlly pursuing
the Jinner with evil. We fee him connecting with
every single deviation from duty, those wcunds of the
spirit which occasion the moil exquisite torment. He
hath not merely promulgated his laws now, and de-
layed the distribution of rewards and punishments un-
til a future period of being. But the fan&ions of his
laws already ta'ke place; their effeds appear; and with
such infinite wisdom are they contrived, as to require
no other executioners of juflice against the finner,
than his own guilty passions. God needs not come
forth from his secret place, in order to bring him to
punishment. He needs not call thunder down from
the heavens, nor raise any minister of wrath from
the abyss below. He needs only fay, Epbraim is
joined to his idols ; let him alone: And, at that instant,
the finner becomes his own tormentor. The infernal
fire begins, of itself, to kindle within him. The
worm that never dies, seizes on his heart.

Let us remark also, from this example, how im-
perfecty we can judge from external appearances,

-concerning

concerning real happiness or rhifery. All Pertia, it
is probable, envied -Hanan as the happiest person in
the empire; while yet, at the moment of which we
now treat, there was not within its bounds, one more
thoroughly wretched. We are reduced, and deceiv-
ed by that false glare which prosperity fornetimes
throws around bad men.. We are tempted to imi-
tate their crimes, in order to partake of their ima-
gined feiicity. But remember Hamanr, and beware
of the snare. Think not, when'you beheld a page-
ant of grandeur displayed to public view, that you
discern the ensign of certain happiners. In order to
form any just conclusion, you muff follow the great
man into the retired apartment, where he lays aside
his disguise. You muff not only be able to penetrate
into the interiour of families, but you must have a
faculty by which you can look into the inside of
hearts. Were you endowed with fich a power, you
would rnoft commonly behold good men, in propor-
tion to their goodness, satisfied and ea-sy; yon
would behold atrocious finners, always reftles and
unhappy.

Unjutf are our complaints, of the promifci)us di-

ftribution made by Providence, of its favours among
men. From superficial views fuich complaints arise.
The difIribution of the goods of fortune, indeed,
may often be promifcuobs; that is, difproportined
to the moral .characers of men; but the allotment
-of real happiness is never so. For to the wicked there
,ir no peace. They are like the troubled sea whbn it can-
not reft. They travel witb pain all their days. Trouble
-and angruiJb prevail again/f them. Terrours mcke them
afraid on every fide. A dreadful foundl is in their e rr;,
and they are in greatfear where nofear it.--Hither-
to we have confidered Haman under the charater of
a very wicked man, tormented by criminal passions.
Let us now confider him, merely as a child of fortune,
a prosperous man of the world; and proceed to
observe. 11. How

II. How unavailing world!iy prosperity is, since,

in the midtl of it, a ingle cfilappointmrent is fiifficient.
to embitter all its plearures. We might at firfl irna-
gine, that the natural effect of prosperity would 'be
to defuse over the mind a prevailing fatistation,
which the lesser evils of life could not ruffle or disturb.
'We might expet, that as one in the full glow¢
of health, despises inclemency of weather; fio
one in poffefli in of all the advantages of high power
and fRation, should difregaid flight injuries; and at
perse& ease within himself, should view, in the molt
favourable light, the behaviour of others around
him. luch effe&s would indeed follow, in worldly
prosperity contained in itself the true principles of
human felicity. But as it possesses them not, the
very reverse of those consequences generally obtains.
Prosperity debilitates, instead of strengthening the
mind. Its most common effe& is, to create an ex-
treme sensibility to the slighteds wound. It foments
impatient desires; and raises expecations which no
success can satisfy. It softers a false delicacy, which
sickens in the midfi of indulgence. By repeated
gratification, it blunts the feelings of men to what is
pleafig ; and leaves them unhappily acute to what-
ever is uneasy. Hence, the gale which another would
scarcely feel, is to the prosperous, a rude tempest.
Hence, the rofe-leaf doubled below them on the
couch, as is told of the effeminate Sybarite, breaks
their reft. Hence, the difrefpea (hown by Morde-
cai, preyed with such violence on the heart of Ha-
man. Upon no principle cf reason can we aflign a
sufficient cause for all the distress which this incident
occasioned to him. T'he cause lay not in the exter-
ternal incident. It lay within himself; it arose from
a mind dillempered by prosperity.

Let this exemple corre& that blind eagerness, with

which we ruhl to the chace of worldly greatness and
honours. I fay not, that it liculd altogether divert

us

ws from pursuing them; since, when enjoyed with
temperance and wisdom, they may doubtless both en-
large our utility, and contribute to our comfort. But
let it teach us not to over-rate them. Let it con-
vince us, that unless we add to them the necessary
correaives of piety and virtue, they are, by them-
selves, more likely to render us wretched, than to
make us happy.

Let the memorable fate of Haman fuggefd to us

also,- how often, besides corrupting the mind, and
engendering internal misery, they lead us among
precipices, and betray us into ruin. At the moment
when fortune feerned to smile upon him, with the
most serene and fettled asped {he was digging in fe-
cret the pit for his fall. Prosperity was weaving a-
round his head the web of difrusion. Succels in-
flamed his pride; pride increased his thirst of revenge;
the revenge which, for the fake of one man, he
fought to execute on a whole nation, incensed the
Queen; and he is doomed to susser the fame death
which-he had prepared for Mordecai.-Had Haman-
remained in-a private fiation, he might have arrived-
at a peaceable old age. He might have been, I shall
not fay, a good or happy man, yet probably far less
guilty, and less wretched, than when placed at the
head of the greatest empire in the East. Who knw-
eth what is goodfor man in this life, all the days es his
vain line, which hefpendeth -as a/badoaw .

An extensive contemplation of human affairs, will

lead us to this conclusion, That among the different
conditions and ranks of men, the balance of happiness
is preserved in a great measure equal; and that the
high and low, the rich and the poor, approach, is
point of real enjoyment, much nearer to each other,
than is commonly imagined. In the lot of man,
mutual compensations both of pleasure and of pain,
universally take place. Providence never intended,
that any slate here Iaould be either completely happy,

E ; or-

or entirely miserable. If the feelings ofpleafurc are
more numerous, and more lively, in the higher de-
partments of life, such also are those of pain. If
greatr:efs flatters our vanity, it multiplies our dangers.
If opulence increases, our gratifications, it incrcales,
in the fame proportion, cur defites and demands.
It the poor are confined to a more narrow circle,
yet within that circle lie molt of ihofe natural
fatisfa&ions, which, after all the refinements of art,
are found to be the molt genuine and true. In a
state therefore, where theta in neither so much
to be coveted on the one hand, nor to be dreaded on
the other, as at first appears, How fubmifiive ought
we to be to the difpolal of Providence ! How iern-
perate in our desires and purluits! How much more
attentive to preserve our virtue, and to improve our
minds, than to gain the doubtful aud equivocal ad-
vantages ot worldly prosperity !-But now, laying
aside the consideration of Harnan's great crimes; lay-
ipg aside his high posterity; viewing him simply as a
inan, let us observe, from his hifiory.

'III. How weak human nature is, which, in the

.abfcnce of real, is thus prone to create to itfcif ima-
ginary woes. All this availetb me nothing, so long as
IJfee Mordccai the e-v fitting at the King'.s gate.-
"What was it, 0 Hatnan ! to thee theugh Mordecai
had continued to fit there, and negleced to do thee
homage ? Would the banquit have been on that ac-
count the less magnificent, thy palace less splendid,
or thy retinue less numerous ? Could the dli'efpet
of an rbfcure flrangcr diflonoir the tav,.urite of a
mighty King ? In the midif of a thoufald submillive
courtiers, was one fullcn countenance an objec
woithy of drawing thy notice, or of troubling thy re-
pose ?-Alas I in Haman we behold too jult a picture
of what often passes within ourselves. We never
know what it is to be long at ease. Let the world
cease from changing, around is. Let external things-
keep that situation in which we most wifls them to

remain;

remain; yet romewhat from within itall ooin arise,
to disturb our happiness. A MAsrdecai appears;, or
seems to appear, fitting at te gat. Some vexation,
which our fancy has either entirely created, or-at
least ha unreasonably aggravated, corrodes usin secret;
and until that be rtrnoved, all that we enjoy availetA
us nothing. Thus, while we are incessantly com-
plaining of the vanity and the evils of human life, we
make that vanity, and we increase thofeevils. Un-
skilled in the art of extracting happiness from the ob-
jecs arcund us, our ingenuity foley appears in con-
verting them into milery.

Let it not be thought, that troubles of this kind

are incident only to the great and the mighty. Though
they, perhaps, from the intemperance ot their pas-
fionsj are peculiarly exposed to them; yet the dif-
ease itself belongs to human nature, and spreads
thr.ough all ranks. In the humble and seemingly
quiet shade of private life, difccntent broods over its
imaginary sorrows; preys upnn tile citizen, no less
than upon the courtier; and often nourilhes passions,
equally malignant in the c.t:age and in the palace.
Having once leized the mind, it Ipreads its own gloom
ever every surrounding object; it every where search-
es out materias for itself; and in no direction more
frequently employs its unhappy aCtivity, than in creat-
ing divilions amongst mankind, ard in magnifying
flight provocations into mortal injuries. Those self-
created miseries, imaginary in the cause, but real in
the fuiffcring, will be found to form a proportion of
human evil, not infcriour, either in leverity or inr
number, to all that we endure fiom the unavaidable
caljmitics of life. In situations where mtuchcomfort
might be enjoyed, this man's superiority, and that
man's agclec, our jealousy of a friend, our hatred
of a rival, an imagined affront, or a mistaken point
of honour, allow us no repose. Hence discords ia.
families, anamofitics among fricnds, and wars among

E 3z nations

nations. Hence, Haman miserable in the midf of all
that greatness could bestow. Hence, multitudes in
the most obscure flations, for whom' Providence
leemed to have prepfared a quiet life, no les eager
in their petty broils, nor tels tormented by their piaf-
sions, than if princely honours were the prize for
which they contended.

'FROM this train,of observation, which the Text

-has fuggefled, can he avoid refleting' upon the dif-
order in which human nature plainly appears at pre-
sent to lie ? We have beheld, in Haman, the pic-
ture of that misery which- arises frcm evil paftions;
of that unhappiness, which is incident to the highest
prosperity; ot that discontent, which is common to
every slate. Whether we confider him as a bad
man, a prosperous men, or firrple as a man, in
every light we behold reason too weak for paflion.
This is the source of the reigning evil; this is the
root of the universal disease. The ltory es Haman
only thows us, wh"at human nature has too generally
appeared to be in every age. Hence, when we read
she hiltory of nations, what.do we read but the hifto-
ry of the follies and crimes of men ? We may dig-
nify those recorded tranfaEtions, by calling them the
intrigues of statesmen, and the exploits of conquer-
ours; but they are, in truth, no other than the efforts,
of discontent to efcapa-fror its misery, and the firug-
gles of contending paflions among unhappy men. The
hiitory of mankind has been a continued tragedy; the
world, a great theatre exhibiting the fame repeated scene,
of the follies of men fhocting forth into guilt, and of
theirpaflions fermenting, by a quick process, into mi'el y.

;But can we believe, that the nature of man came
orth in this flatefrom the hands of its gracious Crea-
tor? Did he frame this world, and store it with inha-
tants, solely that it might be replenished with crimes
and misfortunes ?-In the mural, as well as in the na-
tural world, we may plainly discern the signs of forre

violent

violent convulsion, which has shattered the original
morkmar.ihip of the Almighty. Amidst this wreck
of human nature, traces fill remain which indicate its
Aut hor. Thole high powers of conscience and realon,
that capacity for happinesS, that ardour of nterprize,
that glow of affiction, which often break through the
gloom of human vanity and guilt, are like the scat-
tered colu-ns, the broken arches, and defaced fculp-
tures of some failen temple, wiofe ancient splendour
appeals amidfl its ruinm. So conspicuous inhuman
nature are thole clharaaaers, both of a high origin,
and of a degraded tlate, that, by many religious fees
throughout the earth, they hav'e been seen and cor-
fefred. A tradition seems to have prevaded almofl all
rations, that the human race had either through rome
offence forfei:ed, or through oIme misfortune. loft,
that flation of rrnmieval honour which they once
peforffed. But while, from this do.&rine, ill under-
fcod, and involved in many fabulosa tales,, the nati-
ons wandering in Pagan darkness ccuild draw. no con-
sequences that were jutt wihile, 'totally ignorant of
the nature of the disease, they !ought in. vain fcr the
remedy; the fame divine revelation,' which has in-
formed us in what manner our apoftacy arose, from
the abuse of our rational powers, has inftru&ed us
also how we may be reflored to virtue and to happi-
ness. "

LET us, therefore, Rudy to improve the afiflanrc

which this revelation affords, for the refloration of our
nature, and the recovery of our f'elicity. With ra:
'ble and grateful minds, let us apply to those medici-
nal springs which it hath opened, for curing the dif-
orders of our heart and paflions. In this view, let
us, with reverence, look up"to that Divine Perfo-
nage, who delcended into this world, on purpose to be
the lght and the life of men: who came, in the ful-
ness of grace and truth, to repair the drfalaticns f
nmny 'geeraticns, to restore order among the works

E 3 of

of God, and to raise up a necw earth, and ne.wuiheq-
vens, wherein rig.fteuJncfrs /fiuld dwxell for evrr.
Under his tuition let us put ourselves and am idft'
the florrrs of paifion to which we are here exposed,
«nd the slippery paths which we are left to tread,
never trust prefumptuounly to our own underffanding.
Thankful that a Heavenly Conductor vouchsafes his
aid, let us earnestly Fray, that from him may descend
divine light to gu:dc- our fleps, and divine firength to
fortify our mindc. Let us pray, that h s grace may
kecp us :r,m all i: temperate raffions, and mifaken
Fpurfiits of tClcalure ; that whether it shall be his will
to give cr to deny us earthly prosperity, he may bless
us \witli, a caln,, a round, and well-regulated mind;
may give us moderativn in fuccefi, and fortitude un-
der difappointn ent; and may eriable us so to take
warning from the crimes and miseries of others, as to
escape the snares of guilt.

WHILE we thus maintain a due dependence on

God, let'us also exert ourselves with care in ascing
our own part. From. the whole of what has been
said, this important inriru&iion'ar ifs, That the hap-
piness of every man depends more upon the slate of
his owri mind, than upon any one external circum-
ffince ; nay, rrdre than upon all extetrial things put
together. We have seen, that incrdinate paflions
are th? great diltirbers of life ; and that, unless we
posses a 9od conscience, and a well-goverpned mind,
dicontent will' blafl erery enj1oyrment; and the
lighle4 prorpferit'y will prove only dirguifcd misery.
Fixuthen this conclusion in your minds, that the de-
iFiu&ibn of3 y.ur virtue, is the deftruaion of your
peace. Keep t4y heart aith all diligence; govern it
*iith the greatelt care,; for out of it ae i ueJ of life.
In no tlifiin, in no period, think yourfClves recurc
from the' daners which fpringi from your pflfons.
Every age, and every ilatiori, they beset; from youtli
to grey hairs, and from the peasant to the prince.

At

At your firfl setting out in life, elpecially, when

yet unacquainted with the world and its fnares,whem
every pleasure enchants with its smile, and every obh,
je fihines with the gloss of novelty; beware of the
reducing appearances which surround you, and recol-
lect what others have suffered from the power of
hcadllrong desire. If you allow any paflion, cve-
though it be esteemed innocent, to acquire an abfo-
lute ascendant, your inward peace will be impaired.
But if any, which has the taint of guilt, take early
poflcffion of your-mind, you may date from that mo-
ment the ruin of your tranquillity. Nor with the
Icalon of youth does the peril end. To the impe-
tuofity of youthful desire, fuccced the more fober,.
but no less dangerous, attachments of advancing
years; when the palions which are conneted w.ith
interefltand ambition begin their reign, and too free
ltucntly extend their malignant influence, even over
thole periods of life which ought to be most tranquil.
From the first to the las of man's abode on earth*
the discipline amuf never be relaxed, of guarding the
heart from the dominion of paflion. Eager passions,
and violent desires, were not made fo!riman. They
exceed his sphere. They find no adequate objc&e
on earth ; and of course can be producive of na-
thing but misery. The certain consequence of in-
dulging them is, that there lhall come an evil dayr
when the anguitl of difppointment thall drive us to
acknowledge, that all which we enjoy availetb ur:
nothing.

You are not to imagine, that the warnings which

I have given in this dilcourfe, are applicable only to
tile cafe of Ilch signal offenders an.he was, of whom
the Text treats. Think not, as I am afraid too
many do, that, because your paflions have not huc-
ried you into attrocious deeds, they have therefore
wrought no mischief, and have left no fting behind
them. By a continued ferics of loose, though appa-

E 4 rently

rently trival, gratifications, the heart is often tho-
roughly corrupted, as by the commiflicn of any one
of those enormous crimes which sprang from great
ambition, or great revenge. Habit gives the pafiions
flrength, while the abltnce of glaring guilt seemingly
justifies them ; anrd, unawakened by remorse, the
(inner proceeds in his courte, till he wax bold in
gult. and become ripe for ruin. For by gradual
and latent f¢ ps, the d.trutlion of our virtue, advan-
ces. Did the evil unveil itself at the beginning;
d d the ilorrn which is to overthrow cur pe:¢ce, dif-
cover, as it role, all its iorrours, precautions would
more freqtenJdy be taken against it. But we are im-
leerceptably betrayed; and from one licentious at-
tachr-icnr, one criminal paflion, are, by a train, of
coifequences, dravgn on to another, till the govern-
ment of our minds is irrecoverably loft. The entic-
ing and the cdious paffionsare, in this refpe&, fimi-
lar in their process; and though by different roads,
conduCt at last to the fame iflue. David, when he
firif beheld Bathsheba, did not plarn the death of
Uriah. Haman was not delivered up all at once-to
the madness of revenge. His pafTions rose with-the
rising tide of prosperity ; and pride cornpleated what
prolperity began. What was originaly no more than
displeasure at Mordecai's difrefpe&, increased with
every invitation he received to the banquet of the
Queen; till it impelled him to devise the slaughter
of a whole nation, and ended in a degree of rage,
which confounded his realbn, and hurried him to
ruin. In this manners every criminal passion, in its
progress, swells and blackens; and what was at .rft
a small cloud, such as the Prophet's servant saw,
so bigger than man's Aand, ri/ing from the lea, is
Soon found to carry the. tempest in its womb.

S ERMON.

t.

# SERMON VIII. ECCLES. vi. 12. Who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the days of his vain life, which he spendeth as a shadow?

SERMON VIII.

E C C LE S. Vi. 12.
Wh, knowetb vwhat is goodfor man in this life, all the

days of his vain /ife, which he fpendeth ai a badowv

H E measure according to which knowledge
is dispensed to man, affords conspicuous proofs

of divine wisdom. En many instances we clearly
perceive, that either more or less would have proved
detrimental to his fate';, that entire ignorance would
have deprived him- of proper motives to aRion; and
that. complete discovery would have raised him to a
sphere too high for his present powers; He is there-
fore,. permitted to know only in part; and ta fee
througb a glass, darkly. He is left in that lrate of
conjecure, and partial information, which, though
it, may occasionally subject him to diflefs, yet, on
the whole, conduces mot-to hisimprovement; which
affords him knowledge filfficient for the purposes of
virtue, and: of; afive life, without diflurbing the
operations of his mind, by a light too bright and
dazzling: This evidently holds,- with refpet to that
decree of' obfurity which now covers the great laws
of Nature, the decrees-of the: Supreme Being, the
slate of the invisible world, the future-events of our
bwn life; and the thoughts and designs which: pass
iwithin the breafis of others.

But there is an ignorance of another kind, with re-

spec to which the aFplication of this remarli.'may
appear mere dubious; the ignorance under which
men labour concerning their happiness in-the present
lite, and the means of attaining it. -If there be foun-
E'.dation for Solomon's complaint in the Tex-. who

E 5 kt;o-etA

hvwetb wblat is goodfor man in this life? this con-
sequence may be thought inevitably to follow, That
thed,~d -oftbis ife-muf -be vain, in every-fnfe,; not
only beeatfe they -are fleeting, but because they are
empty too, like the Jfladow. For, to what purpose
are all his labours in. the pursuit of an objeEt, which
it is not in his power to discover or ascertain ?-Let
us then fer.iotfly enquire, what accoisnt can be given
of otur present igriorance, refpeaing what is good for
u ns in this life; whether nothing be left, but only to
wander in uncertainty aridnl this darkness, and to
lament it as the fad consequence of our fallen flete;
or whether such inltruaions. may not be derivred
from it, as giv ground for acknowledging, that by
this, as by all its other appointments, the wisdom Of
Providence brings real good out of seeming evil. I -
shall, in order, to determine this point, first, en-
deavour to illustrate the docrine of the Text, That
we know not, or at moR know imperfealy, wabat is
good fr us in this lfi.: I fhiall next explain the causes
to which this defea in our knowledge is owing:
And then fihall ihow the purposes which it was in-
tended to. serve, and the effe&s which it ought to
produce on our cor.ui.

THE whole hiftory.of man kind seems a comment

on the dctrine of the Text. When we review- the,
courfs of human affairs, one of the firfR objets
which every where attrats our notice, is, the mif-
taken judgment of men concerning their own interest.
Tnat /ore evil, which Solomon long ago remarked
with refped to riches, of their being kept by the ow-.
ners thereef to their hurt, takes place equally with
refpe& to dominion and power, and all the splendid
objecs and high fIations of life. We every day be.-
hold men climbing, by pairful fleps, to that danger-
cus height, which, in the end, renders their fall:
more severe, and their ruin more conspicuous. But
it is not to high fations that- the dcQrine of the Text

_ is

's limited. In the crimes by which too often therf
are gained, and in the misfortunes which they after-
wards bring forth, the-greater part of every audience
ray think themselves little concerned. Leaving fubc
themes, therefore, to the poet and the biftorian,, let
us come nearer to curfelves, and survey the ordinary
walk of life.

Around us, we every where: behold a busy multi-

tude. Refilefs and uneasy in their present fituatior,
they are incessantly employed in accompliihing a
change of it; and, as soon as their wifh.is fulfiled,
we discern, by their behaviour, that they are as dif-
satisfied as they were before. Where they expe&ed
to have' found a paradise, they find a desert. The
man of' bbfinefs pines for leisure. The. leiCure.for
which he had longed, proves an irksome gloom; and',
through want of'employment, he languiftis, sickens,
and dies. The man of retirement fancies no ftate-to
be so happy,. as. that of. acive life- But he has
not engaged long in the tumults and contests of the
world, unlill he finds cause to loak back with regret
on the calm hours of his former privacy and retreat.
B auty, wit, eloquence, and fame- are egerly de. -
filed by persons in every rank of life.. They are the
parent's' fondefl wilh for his child; the ambition of-
the young, and -he' admiration of the old.'. And yet
in what numberless instances have they proved, to
those who possessed' them,- no other than fhiinig
snares; fedutions to. vice, instigations to folly, and
in the' end, sources of-mifery? Comfortably might
their days have pafled, had they been less confpicua -
ouis. But the.dittirr&ions-which brought them forth
to notice, conferred splendour, and withdrew hap-
pinefi. Long-life is, of all orhert, the moit -ge-
neral, and feemiruly the most innocent, object-of de-
fire. With refpet.to this.too, we so frequently err,
that it would have. been a blefling to many io h:>ve
had there wiih denied. Thete was a period, when

they

they might have quitted the stage with honour, and
in peace. But by livirg too long, they outlived their
reputation; outlived their family, their friends, and
comforts; and reaped nothing from the continuance
of days, except to feel the pressure of age, to talle the
-dregs of life, and to behold a wider comnpafs of human
mi ery.

Man walketb in a vain rbo¢w. His fears are often

as vain as his wishes. As what flattered him in ex-
peaation, frequently wounds him in poTeffion; so
the event to which he looked forward with an anxi-
ous and fearful eye, has often, when it arrived, laid
its terrours aside; nay, I-as' brought in its train un-
expe&ed blessings. Both good and evil are beheld at
a distance, through a perfpe&ive which deceives.
The colcurs of objeas when nigh, are entirely dif-
ferent from what they appeared, when they were
viewed in futurity.

THE saC& then being undoubtedly certain, that it

is common for men to be deceived in their profpeas
of happiness, let us next enquire into the causes of
that deception. Let us attend to those peculiar cir-
cumftances in our (late, which render us such in-
competent judges of future good or evil in this life.

First, le are not sufficiently acquainted with our-

selves, to foresee our future feelings. We judge by
the fenrations ofthe present mroment: and, in fervour
of desire, pronounce confidently concerningthe defir-
ed oeljc&. But we reflea not, that our minds, like
our bedies, undergo great alteration from the fituati-
ons into which they are thrown, and the progreffivc
flages of life through which they pals. Hence, con-
cerning any condition which is yet untied, we conjec-a
ture with much uncertainty. In imagination, we car.
ry cur present wants, inclinations, and rentiments,
into the state of life to which we alpire. But no fcon-
er have we entered on it, than our sentiments and
ir.clination- change. New wants and desires arise;

new

new obje&s are required to gratify themn; and by con-
sequence cur old diffatisfacion returns, and the void,
which was to have been filled, remains as great as it
was before.

But, next, supposing our knowledge of ourselves

fufticient to diret us in the choice of happiness, yet
fill we are liable to err, from our igrorance of the con-
necions which fubfiff between our own condition and
that of others. No individual can be happy, unless
the circumstance of thole around him be so adjusted
as to conspire with his interest. For, in human foci-
ety, no happiness or misery lands unconne&tedand in-
dependent. Our fortunes are interwoven by threads
innumerable. We touch one another on all fides.
One man's misfortune or success, his wisdom or his
folly, often, by its consequences, reaches through
multitudes. Such a siftem is far too complicated for
our arrangement. It requires adjustments beyond our
ikill and power. It is a chaos of events, into which
our eye cannot pierce; and is capable of regulation,
only by him who perceives at one glance the relation
of each to all.

Farther, As we are ignorant of the events which

will arise from the combination of our circumstances
with those of others, so we are equally ignorant of
the influence which the prefent--tranfa&ions of our
life may have upon those which are future. The im-
portant question is not, What is good:for a man one
day ; but what is goodfor him all be days of ha life ?
.Not, what will yield him a few scattered pleasures;
but what will render his life happy on the whole a-
mount ? And is he able to answer that quettion, who
knoweth not what one day may bring frth ; who can-
not tell, whether the events of it may not branch out
into 'consequences, which will assume a direcion
quite opposite to that in which they set forth, and
'fpread-themlelves oVer all his life to come ? There
isanot any present moment that is upconne&ed with

fom,

some future. oe. The life of every man is a contirm-
ed chain of incidents, each link of which hangs upon
the former. Thetranfition from caufetoeffea, from
event to event, is often carried on by secret fleps, which
our foresight cannot divine, and our sagacity is una-
ble to trace. Evil may, atfome future period, bring
forth good; and good may bring forth evil, both e-
qually unexpeced. Had the Patriarch, Joseph, con-
tinued to loiter under his father's fond indulgence, he
migl-t have lived an obscure and infignificanl life.
From the pit andthe prison, arose the incidents which
made him the ruler of Egypt, and a saviour of his
father's house.

Lafily, Supposing every other incapacity to be re-

moved, our ignorance of the dangers to which our
lpirltual state is exposed, would disqualify us for judg-
ing icundly concerning our true happiness. Higher
interests, than those of the present world, are now
depending. All that is done or suffered by us here,
ultimately refers to that immortal world, for which
good men are trained up, under the careof an Almigh-
ty Parent. We are as incompetent judges of the mea-
fures necessary to be pursued for this-end, as children
are, of the proper condua to be held in their educa-
tion. We foresee the dangers of our spiritual, itill
less than we du those of our natural slate; because-
we are less attentive to trace them. We are fill more
exposed to vice than to misery; because the confi-
dence which we place in our virtue, is yet worse
founded than that which we place in our wisdom.
Can yoG esteem him prosperous, who is raised to a-
situation which flatters his paflion, but which corrupts
his principles, disorders his temper, and, finally, o-
verlets his virtue ? In the ardour of purfuif, how Lit-
tie are these efftcs frefeen ? And yet, how. often
are they accomplished, by a change of condition ?
Latent corruptions are calld forh ; feeds of guilt are
quickened into life: a growth of crimes arise, which*

had

had it not been for the fatal culture of prosperity,
would never'have seen the light. How often is mnan,
boallful as he is of reason, merely the creature of his
fortune; formed, and moulded, by the incidents of
his life ?-Hazael, when yet a private man, detested
the thoughts of cruelty. Thouflhalt flay the young men
with the jword, said the. Prophet: Tbou fbalt dafl the
children, and rip up the women with child. Is thy ser-
qvant a dog, replied Hazael, that he /bould do thefethings?
But no sooner was he cloathed with the coveted pur-
ple, than it seemed to taint his nature. He commit-
ted the crimes of which, at a distance, he believed
himself incapable; and became the bloody tyrant,
whose characer his fioul once abhorred.

S c H then at present is man ; thus incapable of

pronouncing with certainty concerning his own good
or evil. Of futurity he discerns little; and even that
little he fees through a cloud. Ignorant of the alte-
ration which his sentiments and desires will undergo
from new situations in life; ignorant of the confe-
quences which will follow from the combination of
his circumstances with those of others around him;
ignorant of the influence which the present may have
on the future events of hislife ; ignorant of the effeA
which a change of condition may produce, on his
moral chara&cer, and his eternal intereits; how carn
he know what is goodJor him all the days of his vaair
life, wbich he fpendeth as a Jbadow P

Instead of only lamenting this ignorance, let us,

in the last place, confider how it ought to be improv-
ed; what duties it suggests, and what wife end it
was intended by Providence to promote.

I. ILET this dolrine teach us to proceed with cau-

tion and circumfpeaion, through a world where evil'
so frequentry lurks under the form of good. To be
humble and modest in opinion, to be vigilant and
attentive in condo&, to distrust fair appearances, and
tv reirain ralh desires, are inftiruions which the

darkness

darknefc of our present slate should strongly incul-
cate. God hath appointed our situation to be so am-
biguous, in order both to call forth the exertion of
those intelligent powers which he hath given us, and
to enforce our dependence on his gracious aid. It
is not in man that walketh, to dircA his fleps. Sur-
rounded with so many bewildering paths, among
which the wisest are ready to firay, how earneflly
should we implore, and how thankfully fihould we
receive, that divine illumina-ion which is promised
in scripture to the pious and -the humble ! The secret
of the Lord is with them thatfear him. He will guide
them with his council, He will teach ibem the way
that they should chufe. But what mu.f be the fate of
him, who amidst all the dangers attending human
condut, neither looks up to Heaven for direcionr,
nor properly exerts that reason which God hath-given
him ? it to the moit diligent enquirer,. it proves so
dificult a talk to distinguish true good, from those
f.llacious appearances with which it. is ever blended,
how should he discover it,. who brings neither pati-
ence nor attention to the Icarch; who applies to no
other counsellor than present pleasure, and, with a
rash and credulous mind, delivers himself up to every
suggestion of desire ?

This admonition I particularly direct to those,

who are in a period of life too often characterized
by forward presumption, and headlong purluit. The
felf-conceit ot the young, is the great lource of Lhofe
dangers to which they are expoled; and it is pecu-
liarly unfersunate, that the age which Ltands most
in need. of the council of the wife, should be the
most prone to contemn it. Confident in the opini-
ons which they adopt, and in the measures they pur-
sue, they seem as if they understood Solmon to fay,
not, U'o Inoaweth, but, WVho ih ignorant of what is
goad /ir man all the days of his life ? The bliis to be
aimed at, is, in their opinion, fully appearant. It

iI

is not the danger of mistake, but the failure of fuc-
cess, which they dread. Activity to seize, not fa-
gacity to discern, is the only requisite which they
value. -How long shall it be, ere the fate of your
predecessors in the fame course, teach you wisdom ?
How long (hall the experience ofall ages, continue to
lift its voice to you in vain ? Beholding. the ocean
on which you are embarked, covered with wrecks,
are not those fatal signals sufficient to admonish you
of the hidden reck ? if in paradise itself, there was a
tree which bare fruit fair to the eye, but mortal in
its effecs, how much more in this fallen state, may
such deceiving appearances be expecEed to abound !
The whole fiate of Nature is now become a scene of
delusion to the sensual mind. Hardly any thing is
what it appears to be: And what flatters most, is
always farthest from reality. There are voices which
sing around you; but whose Irains allure to ruin.
There is a banquit spread, where poison is in every
dish. There is a couch which invites you to repose;
but to slumber upon it, is death. In such a situation,
be not bigb minded but fear; Let sobriety temper
your unwary ardour. Let modefly check your rallb
presumption, Let wisdom be the offspring of re-
-fle&ion now, rather than the fruit of bitter experi-
ence- hereafter.

II. LET our ignorance of what is good or evil,

*correc anxiety about worldly success. As rashness
is the vice of youth, the opposite extreme of immode-
rate care is the vice of advancing years. The doc-
trine which 1 have illufirated, is equally adapted for
checking both. Since weare so often betrayed into
-evil, by the mistaken pursuit of good care and atten-
tion are requisite, both in forming otr choice, and
in conducting our pursuit; but since our attention
and care are liable to be so often furfirated, they
Should never be-allowed to-deprive us of tranquility.

The

The ignorpnce in wh:ch we are left concrni.fg

good and evil, is n t such as to supercede prudence
in ccrdut: For v.'idon is ftiil found to excel folly,
as fur ós lkght xccr'ltb darkne/f. But it is that de-
gree of ii c.rtnintv, whch .-ug .t to render us tempe-
rate In pui luit ; whiLlh o:ught to calm the p.rtuiba-
tion of hope and fe:ui, ar.' to cuue the pain of anxiety.
Anxiety_ is the poif(,n of tuim.ini life. It is the parent
of many fins, and cf more miseries. In a world
where every thing is so doubtful; where you may
fuccted in your nxifn, and be miserable; where you
may be difa)ppinted, and be b!cft in the disappoint-
rnent; what means this realefs flir and commotion
of mind ? Can vour solicitude alter the course, or
unravel the intricacy of human events ? Can )our
curiocfity pierce through the cloud w hich the Supreme
Being hath made impenetrable to mortal eye ?-To
provide against every apparent danger, by the em-
ployment of the most promising means, is the-office
ofwifdom. But at this point-wildom fops. It comr
mands you to rp*;--. after you have done all that
was incumbent on you, andto poflefs your mind.in
peace. By going beyond this point, by giving yout-
selves up to immoderate concern about unknor.n.e-
vents, you can do nothing to advance your fuccef,
and you do much to ruin your peace.. You plant
within yourbr.eaf the thornwhich it long to galllyou.
To the vanity of life,. you add a vexation of fpiri..
which is wholly of your ovwn creation, not qs Diline
appointment. Fox the. dubious goods of this world
were never designed by God to raifefuch eager at-
tachment. They were given, to. man for- his occafi-
onal refreshment, not for his- chief felicity, By, set-
ting arn excessive value upon objeas& which were in-
tended only for your secondary regard, you change
their nature. Seeking more fatisfation from them
than they are able to afford, you receive leTs than
they might give. From a miflaken care to secure

your

your happiness, you bring upon yourselves certain
mii ery.

Ill L- r our ignrorance of good and evil, deter-

mine us to t.llow Providence, and to resign ourselves
to God. One of the moss impoftant lessons which
can be given to man, is a rcfignation to his Maker;
and noth ng inculcates it more, than the experience
{ahis own inability to guide himfelf.-You know
not what is good ior vru, in the future periods of
life. But God perfealy knows it; and if you faith-
fully serve him, you have reason to believe that he
will always consult it. Before him. lies the whole
succession of events, which are to fill up your exif-
tence. It is in his power to arrange and moddle them
at his pleasure; and so to adapt one thing to another,
as to fulfil his promise of making them all work to-
getber for good to those who love him. Here then,
amidst the agitations of desire, and the perplexities
of doubt, is one fixed point of reft. By this let us
abide; and dismiss our anxiety about things uncertain
and unkpown. Acquaini yyurfeilvs wit God, and b$
at peace. Secure the ,Me: thng. needful. Study to
acquire an interest in the Divine favourr And you
may safely surrender yourselves to the Divine ad-
m iniftr 'n.

When tempted to repine at yoaw condition, refle&

how uncertain it is, whether you should have been
happier in any other. Remermbing the vanity of
many of your former wifies, and the fallacy which
you have so often experienced in your schemes of
happinels, .be thankful tlat you are placed under a
wiser direction than ypur own. Be not oo particular
in your petitions to Heaven, concerning. your tem-
poral interetls. Suffer God to. govern the world ac-
cording to. his qwn plan; and only pray, that he
would bestow what his unerring wisdom fees.to be
best' or yoti on the. whole. In a word, Commit ynor
·way unto tbe Lord,. Trust in him and do good. Follow

wherever

wherever his Providerce leads; cemply with what-.
ever his will requires; and leave all the reft to him.

IV. LET cur ignorance of what is good for u; in

this life, prevent our taking any unlawful ftep, in
older to compass our mofl favourite dcfigns. 'Were
the finner bribed with any certain and unqueflonable
advantage; could the means which he employs en-
sure his fucce!s, and could that fucccis enlirethis
comfcrt; he might have some apology to offer for
deviating from the path of virtue. But the d,.tline
which I hive il!u!trated, deprives him es all excule,
and places his fully in the must flriking light. -IHe
climbs the ftcep reck, and treads on the edge of a
precipice, in order to catch a shadow. He ha. cause
to dread, not only the:uncerra:nty of the ceent which
he withes to acomplith, but the nature albo of that
event when accomplifled. He is not only liable to
that dilappointment of success, which so eften hfuf-
trates all the designs of men; but liable to a difap-
pointment still more cruel, that of being fuccefslul
and miserable at once. Riches and pleasures are the
chief temptations to criminal deeds, yet thos'e ricles,
when obtained, may very possibly overwhelm him
with unforeseen miseries. ' hose pleasures may cut
short his health and life. And is it for such doubt-
ful and fallacious rewards, that the deceiver fills his
r-outil with lies, the friend betrays h'is bercfav.r,
the apostate renounces his faith, and the affaflrn co-
vers himself with blood ?

Whoever commits a crime, incurs a certain evil,

for a mos uncertain good. What wilt turn to his
advantage in the courle of this life he cannot with
any assurance know. But this he may know, with
full certainty, that by breaking the Divine com-
mandments he will draw upon his head that difplea-
sure of the Almighty which shall crush hirn for ever.
The advantages of this world, even when innocently
gained, are uncertain blessings; when obtained by

criminal

criminal means, they carry a curse in their bosom. -
To the virtuous, they are often no more 'than chaff.
To the guilty, they are always poilon.

V. LET our imperfec knowledge of what is good

or evil, attach us the more to ttlofe few things, con-
cerning which there can be no doubt of their being
truly good. Of temporal things which belong to
this class, the catalogue, it must be confessed, is
small. Perhaps the chief worldly good we fuould
ivifh to enjoy, is a found mind in a found body.
Health and peace, a moderate fortune, and a few
friends, fum up all the undoubted articles of tem-
poral felicity. Wife was the man who addressed
this prayer to God;. Removefar from me vanity and
lies. Give me neither poverty nor riches. Feed me
with food convenient for me. Leafl I be f/ll and deny
thee, and fay who is the Lord P or les I be poor and
/teal, and take the name of my God in vain. He
whose wishes, refpeaing the possessions of this world
are the most reasonable and bounded, is likely to lead-
the safest, and for that reason, the most desirable
life. By aspiring too high we frequently mils the
the happiness, which by a less ambitiouis aim, we
might have gained. High. hapinefs on earth is
rather a picure which the imagination forms, than a
reality which man is allowed to possess.

But with regard to spiritual felicity, we are not

confined to such humb lviews. Clear and determi-
nate objects are proposed to our pursuit; and full
scope is given to the molt ardent desire. The for-
givenefs of our fins, and the afflifance of God's holy
grace to guide our life; the improvement of o;:r
mninds, in knowledge and wisdom, in piety and virtue;
the protecion and favour of the great Father of all
of the blessed Redeemer of mankind, and the Spirit
of fantification and comfort; these are objecs in
the pursuit of wiich there is'no room for hesitation
and diltrult, nor any ground for the question in my

Text

Tent, Who knoweth wohat is' good for man ? Had
Providence spread an equal oblcurity over happirief
of every kind, we might have had forlie realon to
complain of the vanity of our condition. But we
are not left to so hard a fate. The Son of God hath
descended from heaven, to be the Light of the orld.
HI hath removed that veil which covered true bliss
from the search- of wandering mortals, abd hath
taught them the way which leads to life. Worldly en-
joyments are shown to be hollow and deceitful, with
an express intention to direa their affe&iors towards
those which are spiritual. The fame discoveries
Y hich diminish the value of the one, serve to increase
that of the other. Finally,

VI. LET our ignorance of what is good or evil

here below, -lead our thoughts and desires to a better
world. I have endeavoured to vindicate the wiifd6n
of Providence, by shewing the many useful purpdfcs
which this ignorance at present promotes. It serves
to check presumption and rafhrnefs and to enforce a
diligent exertion of our rational powers, joined with
an humble dependence on Divine aid. It moderates
eager passions refpeaing worldly success. It incul-
cates resignation to the difpofat of-Providence which
is much wiser than man. It reitrains us from employ-
ing unlawful means, in order to compass our miorl
favourite designs. It tends to attatch us more closely
to those things which are unquestionably good. It is
therefore such a degree of ignorance as suits the pre-
sent circumstances of man better than more complete
information concerning good and evil.

At the fame time, the causes whichrender this ob-

fcurity necessary, too plainly indicate a broken cr cor-
rupted state of human nature. They shew thislife
to be a tlate of trial. They suggest the ideas of a
land of pilgrimage, not of the house of reft. Low
mined and base is he, who aspires to no higherportion;
who could be satisfied to spend his whole exitence,

in

in chafing treacherous appearances of good, which so
often mock his pursuit. What shadow car be more
vain than the life of the greater part of mankind ? Of
all the eager and baflling crowd which we behold on
the earth, how few discover the path of true happi-
ness; How few can we find, whose a&ivity has not
been misemployed, and whose course terminates not
in confessions of disappointments? Is this the slate,
are these the habitations, to which a rational spirit,
with all its high hopes, and great capacities, is to be
limited for ever ?-Let us bless that God who hath-
set noble profpeas before us; who, by thedeath and
relurredion of his son Jelus Chrill, hath begotten us
to the lively hope of an inheritance itcorruptable, undefi-
led, and that adeth not away, rcferved in the heavens.
Let--us shew ourselves worthy of such a hope, by
setting our afftlfons upon the things above, not upon
things on the earth. Let us walk by faith and not by
fight; and, ,amidfl the obscurity of this faint and du-
bious twilight, console ourselves with the expe&ation
of a brighter day which is foon'to open. This earth
is the land of shadows. But we hope to pass into the
world of realities ; where the proper objecs of hu-
man desire shall be displayed; where the fubfiance
of that bliss shall be found, whose image only we now
pursue; where no falicious hopes shall any longer al-
lure, no smiling ,,,ppeara-ne fa! betray -. o insidious
joys halt sing; but. where truth shall be infeperably
united with pleasure; and the mists which hang over
this preliminary fRate being diflipated, the perfec
knowledge of gotid shall lead to the full enjoyment
of it for ever.

SER-MON

# SERMON IX. PSALM iv. 4. Commune with your own heart, upon your bed, and be still.

SERMON IX.

PsALM i. 4.
Commune with your cwn heart, upon your bed, and be

Ifill.
M U C H communing with themselves there has

always been amrong mankind; though fre-

quently, God know,, to n:o purpose, or to a purpose
worse than none. Could we dilcover the employ-
ments of men, in retirement, how often should we
find their thoughts occupied with subjects, which they
w culd be alhamedto own ? What a large share have
ambition and avarice, at lome times the groffefi pafii-
ons, and at other times the meanest trifles, in the so-
litarymufings? They carry the world, with all its
vices, into their retreat ; and may be said to dwell
in the midst of the world, even when they seem to
be alone.

'I his surely is nrt that fort of communion which the

Pfalmitl recommends. For this is not properly
commuting with our heart, but rather holding secret
intercourle with the world. What the Plalmift means.
to recommend, is religious recolle&ion ; that exer-
;if of thought whch ..isconneaed with the precept
given in the proceeding words, tofland in awe, andfin
not. It is tocommune with ourselves, under the cha-
ra&er of spiritual and immrortal beings; and to ponder
thofepatbh of ourfeet, which are leading us to eternity.
I ihall in the first place, shew the advantages of such
serious retirement and meditation: and Ihall, in the
second place, point out some of the principle fubjets
which ought to employ us in our retreat.

The advantages of retireing from the world, to

commune with our -beart, will be fo'nd to be great,
whether we-regard our happiness in this world, or our
preparation for the world to come. LET

L[et us confider them, firlr, with refped to our

.tappinefs in this world. It will readily occur to you,
that an entire retreat from wordly affairs, is not what
religion requires; nor does it even enjoin a great re-
treat from them. Some stations of life would net per-
mit this ; and there are few flations which render it
necessary. The chief field, both of the duty and of
the improvement of man, lies in a&ive life. By the
grace and virtues which he exercises amidit his'fellow-
.creatures, he is trained up for heaven. A total re-
treat from the world, is so far from being, as the
-Roman Catholic Church holds, the perfe&ion of re-
ligion, that, some particular cafes excepted, it is no
other than the abuse of it.

But though entire retreat' would lay us aside froth

the part from which Providence chiefly intended uc,
it is certain, that without occasional retreat, we must
a.t that part very ill. There will be neither consist-
-ency in the conduac, nor dignity in the character, of
one who sets apart no share of his time for meditati-
on and reflection. In the heat and bustle of life,
while paflion is every moment throwing false colours
on the objets around us, nothing can be viewed in a
just light. If you wish that Reason should exert her
native power, you mufl siep aside from the crowd,
into the cool and silent thade. It is there that, with
.fober and fleady eye, Ihe examines what is good or
ill, what is wife or foolish, in human condua ; nme
looks back on the patl, she looks forward to the fu-
ture ; and- forms plans, not for the prefent'moment
.only, but for the whole of life. How (hould that mant
difchrage any part of his duty aright, who never sus-
sers his palfion to cool ? And how should his paflions
cool, who is engaged without interruption, in the tu-
mult of the world ? This incessant stir may be called,
the perpetual drunkenness of life. It raises that ea-
ger fermentation of spirit, which will be ever fending
forth the dangerous fumes of raihnefs and folly.

~F, Whereas

XVhereas he who mingles religious retreat, with word-
ly affairs, remains.calm and mailer of himself. He
is not whirled round, and rendered giddy, by the
agitation of the world; but, from that sacred retire-
ment, in which he has been conversant among. higher
objeas, comes forth into the world with manly tran-
quility, fortified by principles which he has formed,
and prepared for whatever may-befall.

As he who is unacquainted with retreat, cannot sus-

.tain any character with propriety, so neither can he
enjoy the world with .any advantage. Of the two
classes of men who are most apt to be negligent of
this duty, the men of pleasure, and the men of bufi-
ness, it is hard to fay.w"hich susser most, in point of
enjoyment, from that neglec. To the former every
7noment appears to be loft, which partakes not of
the vivacity of amufernent. To ccnnea one .plan
of gaiety with another, is their sole Rudy_; till, in a
very short time, nothing remain but to tread the
-fame beaten round : to enjoy what they have already
enjoyed, and to fee what they have often seen. Plea-
fures thus drawn to the dregs, become vapid and
tasteless. What might have pleated long, it tnjoyed
with temperance, and mingled with retirement,
being devoured with filch eager haste, speedily lurfeits
and difgults. Hence, there are the persons, who
after having run through a rapid course of pleasure,
after having glittered for a few years in the foremost
line of public amusements, are the most apt to fly
at last to a melancholy retreat ; not led by religion
or reason, but driven by disappointed hopes, and ex-
lhaufted spirits, to the pensive conclufiun, that all it
vanity.

If uninterupted intercourse with the world wears

crut the man of pleasure, it no less oppresses the man
of business and ambition. ' The ftrongelf spirits must
at length fink.under it.. The happiest temper nruft
be foured by incessant returns of the opposition, the

inconstancy

inconstancy, and treachery of men. For he who
lives always in the bustle of the world, lives in a per-
-etual warfare. Here an enemy encounters; there,
a rival-fupplants him. The ingratitude of a friend
flings him this hour; and the pride of a fuperiour
wounds him the next. In vain he flies for relief to
trifling amusements. These may afford a temporary
opiate to care; but theycommunicate no strength to the
mind. On the contrary, they leave it more soft and
defenceless, when moleltations and injuries renew
their attack.

Let him who wishes for an effeaual cure to all

the wounds which the world can inflict, retire from
intercourse with men, to intercourse with God.
When he enters into his closet, and shuts the door,
let him shut out, at the fame time, all intrusion of
worldly care; and dwell among objeas divine and
immortal.--- Those fair proIpe&s -of order and
peace (hall there open to his riew, which form the
most perfe&contraft to the confusion and misery of
of this earth. The celestial inhabitants quarrel not;
among them there is neither ingratitude, nor envy,
nor tumult. Men may harass one another; but in
the kingdom of God, concord and tranquillity reign
for ever.-From such obje&s, there beams upon the
mind-of the pious man, a pure and enlivening light;
there is -diffused over his heart a holy calm. 'His
agitated spirit re-affumes its firmness, and regains
its peace. The world finks in its importance; and
the load of mortality and misery loses almost all its
weight. The green pa/lures open, and the fJil
swaters flow around him, besides which the Shepherd
of I/real guides his flock. The disturbances and
.alarms, so formidable to those who are engaged in
the tumults of the world, seem to him only like
thunder rolling afar off; like the noise of distant wa.
ters, whose. found he hears, whose course -he traces,
but whose waves touch him not.-As religious.re-

- iremetn

tiremeht is thus evidently conducive to our happinefa
- in this life, so

IN the second place, it is absolutely necesTary in

order to prepare us for the life to come. He who
lives always in public, cannot live to his own foul,
'The world lieth in wickednefi; and with good reason
the Christian is exhorted, nut to be conformed to it,
Aut transformed by the renewing as his mind. Our
conversation and intercourse with, the world, is, in
several refpeas, an education for vice. From our
earliest youth, we are accustomed to hear riches and
honours extolled as the chiefpoifeflions of man; and
proposed to us, as the principal aim of our future
pursuits. 'Te are trained up, to look with admira-
tion on the flattering marks of diftin&ion which they
bestow. In quest of those fancied bleflings, we fee
the multitude around us eager and fervent. Princi-
ples of duty we may, perhaps, hear sometimes in-
culcated; but we seldom behold them brought into
competition with worldly profit. The soft names,
ard plaufable colours, under which deceit, sensuality,
and revenge, are presented to us in common discourse
weaken, by degrees, our natural sense of the diG.
tincion between good and evil. We often meet
with crimes authorized by high examples, and re-
-warded with the carreffes and smiles of the world.
We discover, perhapss at last, that those whom we
are taught to reverence, and to regard as our patterns
ofconduc-, act upon principles no purer than those
of others.-Thus breathing habitually a contagious
air, how certain is our ruin, uniefs we sometimes
retreat from this peflilential region, and seek for
proper correcives of the difordtrs which are con-
traaed there? religious retirement both abates the
disease, and furnishes the remedy. It lessens the
corrupting influence of the world; and it gives op-
pertunity for better principles to exert their power.
- lie who-is accustomed to turn aside, and commune

with'

with himself, will sometimes at least, hear of truths
which the multitude do not tell him. A more found
inltruaor will lift his voice, and awaken within the
heart those la:ent suggestions, which the world had
overpowered and suppressed.

The ats of prayer and dovotion, the exercises of'

faith and-repentance, all the great and peculiar duties
of the religion of ChrfiR, necessarily suppose retire-
ment from the world. This was one chief end of:
their institution, that they might be the means of-
cccaficnally fequefleting us from that great scene of
vice and folly, the continued presence of which is so
hurtful. Solitdde is the hallowed ground which re-
ligion hath, in every age, chosen for her own. These
her inspiration is felt, and her secret mysteries elevate
the foul. There, falls the tear of contrition; there
rifes towards heaven the fight of the heart; there,

-ielts the foul with all the tenderness of devotion,

and pours itself forth, before him who made, and
Y.im who rcd-emed it. How can any one, who is'
unacquainted with such employments of mind, be
fit for heaven ? If heaven be the habitation of pure
affecions, and of intellecual joy, can such a state
be 'relished by him who is always immersed among
sensible objets, and has never acquired any tafe for
the pleasures of the understanding, and the heart ?

The great and the worthy, the pious and the vir-

tuous, have ever been addiced to serious retirenient.
It is th

. haraaeriftic of little and frivolous minds,

to be wfitrly occupied with the vulgar objeas of life.
There fill up their 'desires, and supply all the enter-
tainment which their coarle apprehensions can relish.
But a more refined and enlarged mind leaves the
world behind it, feels a call'for higher pleasures, and
seeks them in retreat. The man of public spirit has
recourse to it, in order to form plartifor general good;
the man of genius, in order to dwell on his favourite
themes, the philosopher, to pursue his difcov<ries,

the

the faint, to improve himself in grace. Isaac went
out to meditate in the fieldJ, at the evening tide. David,
amidfl all the splendour of royalty, often bears wit-
r.cfs both to the pleasure which he received, and the
benefit which he reaped, from devout meditation.
1 communed wiith my own heart, and my spirit mode
diligent search. I thougt on my ways, and rned nm
feet unto God's tejlimonier. In the multitude of

ts ghti

owithin me, his cornfrts delight my foul. Our blessed
Saviour himself, though of all who ever lived on
earth he needed least the aflfffance of religious retreat,
yet, by his frequent pralcice, has done it fignat
honour. Often were the garden, the mountain, and
the silence of the night, fought by-him, for inter-
course with heaven. When be bad jent the multitude
away, be wcnt up into a mountain, apart to pray.

The advaitages of religious retirement will tlilf.

more clearly appear, by confidering, as was propo-
fed, in the next place, some of those great objeas
-which should there employ our thoughts, I fhal
mention only three, which are of the most plain and.
acknowedged importance; God, the world, and our
own charaatet.

I. WHEN you retire from the world commune witi/

your hearts concerning God. Impreflions of Deity,
besides their being the principle of what is ftricly-
termed religion, are the great support of all morat
sentiment, and virtuous condu&, among men. But
with what difficulty are they preferred in any due
degree of force, amidst the affairs and avocations of
the wcrld ? While the crowd of surrounding objecs.
is ever rushing on the imagination, and occupying.
the senses and the heart, what is not only absent
from view, but, by its nature, invisible, is apt to,
vanish like a shadow. Hence it is given as the charac-
ter of ni.ked men, in scripture, that they are with-.
out, Gcd in t'e world. They deny net, perhaps,
that he does exifi; but it is the fame to them as

though

though he did not: For having loft him from their
view, his existence has not effeaed on their conduct.
If, at any time, the idea of God rife in their mind,
it rites like a terrifying phantom which they haiten to
expel ; and which they gladly fancy to be unreal, be-
cauie they fee it make so little impreflion on others
around them.

-Let him who retire to serious meditation, begin
with impressing deeply on his mind this important
truth, That there is undoutedly a Supreme Gover-
nour, who presides over the universe. But let him:
rot imagine, that to commune with his heart con-
cerning God,. is to search into the myftries of the Di-
vine Na ure, or to attempt a discovery of the whole
plan of Providence. Long enough he may bewilder
himself in this maze, without making any proficiency
in the partical knowledge of God. Shall he who knows
so little of his own nature, or of the.nature of the ob-
jecs with which he is turrounded, expect to com-
prehend the Being who made him ? To commune
with ouffelves,~to any useful purpose, on this subje't,
is to bring. home to our fouls: the internal, authori-
tative sense of God, as of a Sovereign 'iad'aFather.
It is not to speculate about what is mysterious in his
essence, but to contemplate what is displayed of his
perfecions. It is to realize the presence of the Su-
preme Being, lo as to produce the molt profound ve-
neration ; and to awaken the earner desire of as near
an approach as our nature will permit, to that great
Fountain of happiness and life.

Alter this. manner'was that holy man effe&ed,

who uttered his ardent wish. 0 that I Anekw Swbere
I might find him, that I might come even to his feat !-
If with such a frame of mind you seek after God, be
assured, that he is not far from you; and that, though.
you are not permitted as yet to come to hisfeat, you
may, at least, reach the foottlool of his throne, and
touch the robe that covers him. In the midst of your

F 4 solitary

fdlitary amuernents lift your eyes, and behold al na-
ture full of God. Look up to the firmament, and
admire his glory. Look round on ihe earth, and
observe his presence every where displayed. If the
gay landscape or the fruitful field, present themselves
to your eye, behold him smiling upon his works. If
the mountain raise is lofty head, or the expanse of
waters roll its tide before you, contemplate in thole
great and solemn obje&s, his power and majesty,
Nature, in all its diversities, is a varied manifeflati-
on of the Deity. If you were to take the wings of t&t
Morning, and dwell in the uttermost part of the ea, even
there you would find him. For in him you live and
move. He fills and animates all space. In the barren
wilderness, as in the peopled region, you can trace
his footsteps ; and in the deepest lolitude, you may
hear a voice which reftifies of him.

Him, indeed, you are never to confound with the

workmanship of his hands. Nature, in its mots aw-
ful or molt pleasing scenes, exhibits no more than dif-
ferent forms of inanimate matter. But on these dead:
forms is impressed the glory of a-living Spirit. The:
beauty, or the greatness, which appears in them,
flows from the fountain of all greatness and beauty ;:
in him it centers; of his perfection it reflecs an;
image and towards him fhc.id lead your view.-In
converting with a fellow-creature on earth, it is not,
with his body we c-'nverfe, though it is his body only.
which we fee. From his words And aairns we con-
ceive his mind ; with his mind though invisible, we
hold correspondence, and direc towards this Spiritual
Essence, our affection and regard. In like manner,.
though here we behold no more of God than what
iis works display,. yet, in those displays, we'are ca-
pable of perceiveing the Universal Spirit, and of hold-
ing correfpondeace with this unseen Being, in vene-
iation, gratitude, and love.

It is thus that a pious man, in his retired medi.a-

;Lios,

tions, viewingr natural objecs with a spiritual eye,
conmmunes wi;h his heart concerning God. He walks
among ,he various fcines of Nature, as within the
precineas of a great temple, in the habitual exercise
of devotion. To ihofe ditcoveries of the Supreme
Being' in his works, let him apply the cowment of his
word. Fiom the world of Nature, let him follow
God into the world of Grace. When conduced from
the outward co:lrts, into this inmost fanetuary of the
temple, he shall feel hinifelf brought-ftill more nigh
to Ihe Sac-ed Prc!cnce. In the great plan of Divine
Wifd(or, for extirpating the evils produced by fin, he
filall receive the interpretation of many of the hidden
r.myfteies of Nature. He (hall discover in Chrilt,
the Deity made, in sonic degree, visible to sense. In
the benificenr vorks which he performed, and the
gracious unde taking which he accomplished, he flhall
hehrld tle brithinc/sf of the Father's gliry, and shall
difrern it to he 'i of grace an truth.-From the fh-
crel retrcat, wherein his thoughts have been thu; em-
ployed, he returns so the wor;d like a fuperiour being.
He carrics into acive life, those pure and elevating
'lentiments, to which the giddy crowd are firangers.
A certain odcur of fanatity remains upon his mind,
Which for a while at leafl, will repel the contagion of
the wo, id.

IT. COMMUNE with your heart, in the season of

rctirement, colcernirg the world. The wo, Id is the
great deceiver, whose fallacious arts it highly imports
us to dete&t. But in the midll of its pleasures ard pur-
suits, fl-edetecion is imponible. We trade as with-
in an inchanted circle, \ here nothing appears as it
truly is. It is oly in retreat, that the charm can be
broken. Did men employ that retreat,' not in car-
rying on tl;e delusion which the wr.rld has begun, not
in forminft pl.ns or inmainary bliss, but in fubijeting
the !,a!tpinefs which the world affnrds to a triEt discus-
sion, the spell would dissolve ; and in the room of the

F 5 unreal

unreal profpe&s, which had long amused them, the
nakedness of the world would aprear.

Prepare yourselves, then, to encounter the light of

truth. Refclve rather to bear the difappoirtment of
some flattering hopes, than to wander forever in the
paradise of fools. While others meditate in secret on
the mains of attaining wordly success, let it be your
employment to scrutinize that fuccels itself. Calculate
fairly to what it amounts; and whether you are not
losers on the whole, by your apparent gain. Look
back, for this purpefe on your pall life. Trace it
from your earliest youth; and put the quellion to
yourselves, what have been its happiest periods ? were
they those of quiet and. innocence, or those of ambi-
tion and intrigue ? Has your real enjoyment uniform-
ly kept pace with what the world calls prosperity t
As you advanced in wealth or flation, did you propor-
tionally advance in happiness ? Has success, almof
in any one infsance, fulfilled your expectations ?
WVhere you reckoned upon molt enjoyment, have ye u
net often tound least ? Wherever guilt entered into
your pleasures, did not its Ring long remain, after
the gratification was past ?-Such questions as there,
candidly answered, would in a great measure unmask
the world. They would expose the vanity of its pre.
renfions; and convince you, that there are other
springs than those which the world affords,. to which
you must apply for happiness..

While you commune with your heart concerning

.-wiat-the world now is, confider also what will one
day appear to be. Anticipitate the awful moment of
your bidding it an eternal farewell. Think, what re-
flecions shall most probably arise, when you are quit-
ting the field, and looking back on the scene of aicion.
In what light will your clofingeyes contemplate those
vanities which now shine so bright, and those interells-
which now swell into such high importance ? What
part ' ill you then wiih to have aacd ? What shall:

tlic: .

then appear momentous, what trifling in human con-
dua ?-Let the lober sentiments which such anticipa-
tations guggefl, temper now your misplaced ardour.
Let the latt conclusion which you shall form, enter
into the present eltimate, which you make of the
world and ol life.

-Moreover, in communing with yourselves concern-

ing the woild, contemplate it as subjea to the Di-
vine dominion. The greater part of men behold no-
thing more than the rotation of human affairs. They
fee a great crowd ever in motion ; the fortunes of men
alternately rising and falling; virtue often difireffed,
and prosperity appearing to be the purchase of word-
ly wifdorn. But this is only the outside of things. Be-
hind the curtain, there is-a far greater scene, which
is beheld by none but the retired, religious fpeEator.
Lift up that curtain, when you are alone with God.
View the world with the eye of a Chrifian; and you
shall fee, that while man's heart devijeth his way it
is the Lord who direfieth his /leps:. You fhallfee, t iat
however men appear to move and acE after their own
plealitre, they are, nevertheless, retained in secret
bonds by the Altnighty, and all: their operations, ren-
dered subservient to the ends of his moral government.
You shall behold him obliging the vrrath of man to
praise him ; punniffiirg-- the finer by means of his
own iniquities; from the trias' of the righteous,
bringing forth their reward; and to a fiate ot seem-
ing uriverfal cootufion, preparing the wileft and most
equitable issue. W:hile the fafgion of this world is
paffed-tadt.away, you thall discern the glory of an:
other rising to succeed it. You shall behold all human
events,. cur griefs and our joys, our love and our ha-
tred, ourcharacter and memory, absorbed in the o-
ceanof eternity ; and no trace of our present exilt-
ence left, except its-being for ever well with the.righ-
tccus, and ill with the wicked.-Such a view oi the
vorld, frequently presented to our minds, could net

t.il

fail to enforce those solemn conclusions ; 'Thee ii n
-vijdom, nor coutn t, again/t the Lord. Feair God,-
and keep his commandmenth.; ftrb this is the whole of main.
F'h-at is a man profited, if he /hall gain rhe whole
'world, and lose his ovwn foul

III. COIMMUNE with your hearts, concernirg

yoorfelves and your ral' chara&er. To acquire
a thorough knowledge ofourfelves, is an attainment no
less difficult than important. For men are generally
unwilling to fee their own imperfeEions; and when
they are u illing to enquire into them, their felf-love
impole, on their judgment. Their intercourse with'
one another afilfts the delufioh to- which,. of them--
selves, they are pione. For the ordinay commerce
of the world is a commerce of flattery and falsehood;
where reciprocaliy they deceive, and are deceived;
where ever one appears under an afTumed form, prc-
fesses' eeem vhich he does not feel, and befrows
praise in order to receive it. It is only in retreat,
where thole false iemblanices disappear, and those flat-
tering voices are silent, that a man can learn to tbink
/jberl) cf chim ds, rand ct he cught to think.

It has been laid, that there are three characters

which every man fufsains ; and those cften extlemely
di crert from one another ? One, which he poffeiTes
in his ow-n opinion ; an ther, which he carries in the
eflimation of the world ; and a third, which he bears
in the judgrment of God.' It is only the lafi which
aicerraiis what he really is.-\lWhether the characer
v, iich the world forms of )ou, he above orbelow the
truth, it imports you not much to know. But it is of
eternal consequence, that the characer which you
poiThf, in your own eyes, be formed upon that which
yon bare in the fight of God. rn order to try it by
this great flandard, you mutl lay aside, as much as
prii!.L'e, all partiality to yourselves ; and in the season
of ;tircpeten:, explore your heart with filch accurate
scrutiny, as may bring your hidden defeas to ligt..

Enquire

Fn'qtiire for this purpose, whether you be not con-

fcious, that the fair opinion which.the world enter-
tertains of you, is founded on their partial knowledge
bcth of your abilities and your virtues? Would you:
be willing that all your aaions should be publickly
canvasscd ? Could you bare to have your thoughts. laid
open ? Are there no parts of your life which you:
would he unealy if an enemy could discover ? In what
light, then,.muft thefe-appearto God ? When you-Jiave
kept Free of vice, has your innocence proceeded horn
purity of principle, or from wordly motives ? Riles-
there no envy or malignity wit-h you, when you com-
pare your own condition with that of others ? Have
you been as foricitous to reg:late your heart, as to-
preserve your manners from reproach ' Profeffirig
yourselves to he Chrif(ians, has the Spirit of Chrifl
appeared'in your conduat Declaring that yotrhope for
inmortality, has that hope surmounted undue attach-
ments to the p; efent life.

Such inveftiga ions as this, seriously purrued, might

produce to every man many difcovcries of himself;-
discoveries pot pleasing, perhaps, to vanity, but fa-
lutary and-ufeful. for he can be only a flatterer, but
no true friend to himself, who aims not at knowing
his own defe&s, as well as-virtues. By imposing on
the world, he may carry on .!ome plan of fancied
proit ; but by imposing on his heart, what can he
propose to gain ? He feedetb of ajbes: A deceieed beart
bath turned hinf aftde, that he cannot deliver bisfoul,
norfay, is there not' a lie in my right band ?

't'Hus I have set before you, fame of those great

ebjeis which ought, to employ your mcdiliation in
religious retirement. 1 have endeavoured to introduce
you into a proper intercourse with your heart, con-
cerning God. t:e world, and .your own chara&er.
Let this inte courle terminate in fixing the principfes
oF your future condu'5. Let it rerve to introduce con-
fia&ncy into your life. Nothing can be more waver-

ing

# SERMON X. ACTS X. 2. Cornelious — A divout man —

ing and disjointed, than the behaviour of those who
are wholly men of the world, and have never been in-
ured to commune wiLh themselves. Dfilipation is a
m re frequent cause es fteir- ruin; than determined
impiety. It is not so much because they have adopted
bad principles, as becaute they have never attended
to pi nciples of any kind, that their lives are to full
of incoherence and diforder.-You hover on the bor-
ders of fin-and'duty' One day you read the scriptures,
you hearreligious discourses, and form good refoluti-
ons. Nest day, you plunge intothe world, and for-
get the serious impression,. as if it had been never
made. The impression is again renewed, and again
effaced; and in this circle your life i evolves. Is luch
conduct worthy of creature endowed with intelligent
potwers? Shall the close of life overtake you, before
you have determined how to live ? Shall the day never
come,. that is to find you fieady in your v.evs, decid-
ed in- your plans, and engaged in acourfe of aation
which your mind approves ?-If you wish that day
ever to arrive, retirement and meditation muff first
bring you home to yourselves,. from the dilfipation in
which you are now scattered; mull teach you to fix
such aims, and to lay down such rules of conducA, as
are suitable to rational'and immortal beings. Then
will your character become uniform and refpetable.
Then you may hope, that your life will proceed in
such a train as fh4ll prepare you,. when it is finished,
for joining the society of more exalted spirits.

SERMON X.

A C T S. X. 2.

Cornelious--A divout man-
T H A T religion is essential to the welfare of

man, can be proved. by the mout convincing

argumentIs.

arguments. But theft how demonltrative afever, are
insufficient to ~fpport its authority over human con-
dua. For arguments may convince the understand-
ing, when they cannot conquer the passions. Irrefifti-
ble they seem in the calm hours ot- retreat; but, in
the season of aaion they- often vanish into Imoke.
There are other and more powerful springs, which
influence the great movements of the human frame.
In order to operate with faccefs on the acive powers,
the heart mull be gained. Sentiment and- affetion
must be brought to the aid of reason. It is not e-
nough that men believe religion to be a wife and ra-
tional rule of condut, unless they relish it as agree-
able, and find it to carry its own reward. Happy is
the man, who, in the confliat of desire between God
and the world, can oppose, not only argument to
argument, but pleasure to pleafatre; who, to the ex-
ternal allurements of sense, can oppose the internal
joys of devotion ; and to the uncertain promises of a
flattering world, the certain experience of that peace
as God wAhi A pfetb under /anding, keeping his mind
and beart.-Such is the temper and spirit of a devout
man. Such was the character of Cornelius, that good
centurion, whose prayerr and alms are fsid to have
come up in a memorial bef4re God. Of this charaEter
1 intend, through Divine afi1tance,'to discourse; and
shall endeavour, f.. To explain the nature of devoti-
on; II. To justify, and recommend it; and, III. To
re&ify some mistakes concerning it.

I. DEvoTIo.N is the lively exercise of those as-

feaions, which we owe to the Supreme Being. It
comprehends several emotions of the heart, which-all
terminate on the Iame great obje&. The chief o
them are, veneration, gatititude, desire, and refigna-
tion.

It implies, first, profound veneration of God. By

veneration, I tnderftand an affealion compounded of
awe and love the.affeition which, of allothers, it

best

befl becomes creatures to bear towards their irfini-
teiv pcrftcL Cleator. Awe is the first lrentimrnnt that
ii-es in the fcul, at the view of his gre!nefs. BP:t,
in ihc heart ofa devout man, it is a solemn and ele-
vat int, not a dejeaing emotion ; for he 'I-ws, rather
than trembles, In the Divine presence. It is nut the
fupcl-r.iticus dre.id of uliknown power, but the ho-
magnc x tided bv the heart to-himt who is, at once,
the gricatrft and ethe belf of Beings. Omnipotence,
vi.-. o.l a!onn, wuuld be a forniidable obict. But
cr :ildr-td cin conjuntion wvih tie moral perTecions
o; thc Divine nature, it feives to hiLhten devotior.
GC.rcd: e'.: nsiic-As the heart with double encrgy, vhen
rihd;l in II One so exalted. The goodnoise v.hich.we
acd,'- in him, is not like that which is common
a.-rorg men, a weak, mutable, utidifcern;ng fond-
ln;s, ill qualifed to be the gromid of affluted trust.
Rt la tile tgcdnefs of a perfeCl Governour, aling upon
a regular exienfive plan ; a steady principle of bene-
v(',-l, cc, condtlcted by wifdoin; which fubje& to no
jzri.;'!etie/}s or jfad-w cf turning, tree from all parti-
ality and capiice, incapable of being either soothed
by flatcerv, or ruffled by refe.;tmtnt, resembles, in
its (ain and equal lustre, the eternal feren:ty of the
highitf, heavens. i'y mercy, 0 Lord! is in the hea-
Vcon,, and thy fJi thfiJtlnes reacbeth unto the cleudi. Tby.
riFut'r.ufine/s is like the great nmountaiis, and'thy judg-
nmernt are a great dpth.

Such are the conceptions of the great God, which

fill with vencration the heart of a devout man. His
veneration is not ccnfined to aits of immediate wor-
Ship. It is the habiual temper of his foul. Not'only
when engaged in prayer or praise, but in the silence
of retirement, and even ami'if the occupations of
the word, the Divine Beir- dAells upon his thoughts.
No pl.lce and no cbjc'ct, appear to him void of God.
On the woiks of nature, he views the impression of
his hand; and in the aflions of men, he traces the

operation

operation oT his Providence. Whatever he -beholds
on earth, that is beautiful or fair, that is great or
good, he refers to God, as to the supreme origin of
all the excellence which is scattered throughout hiss
works. From thole effe&s he riles to the first cause.
From those fireams, he ascends to the fountain
whence they flow. By those rays,-he is led to that
eternal oource of light in which they centre.

Dtvor'fo N implies, secondly, sincere devotion

to God, for all his benefits. This is a warmer
*emotion than finp!e veneration Veneration looks
up to the Deity, as he is in himself; Gratittude re-
gards what he is towards us. When a devout man
surveys this vast universe, where beauty and good-
ness are every where predominant; when he reflets
on those numberless multitudes of creatures, who in
their different stations, enjoy the blessings of exir-
tance; and when at the fame time lie locks up to an:
Universal Father, who hath thus filled creation with
life and happiness, his heart glows within him. He
adores that difinterefled goodness, which prompted
the Almighty to raife-up so many orders of intelli-
gent beings, not that he might receive, but that he
might give and impart; that he might pour forth
himself, and communicate to the spirits which he
formed, some emanations of his felicity,

The gcodnets of this Supreme Benefactor he grate-

fully contemplates, as displayed in his own fate,
He reviews the events of his life; and in every com-
fort which has sweetened it, he difcerns.the Divine
hand. Does he remember with affection the parents
under whose care he grew up, and the companions
with whom he pafled his youthful life? I. he now
happy, in his family rifiogaround him ; in the spouse
who loves him, or in the children who give him cem-
fort and joy ? I-nto every tender remembrance of the
pafi, and every pleating enjoyment of the prefenrt
devotion enters ;. for. in all those beloved objets, it

rcognizee

recognizes God. The communication of love from
heart to heart, is aneffufion, of his goodness. From
his inspiration, descends all the friendship which ever
glovcd on earth ; and therefore to him it julily re-
turn, ingratitude, and terminates on him.

Bat this life, with all its interests, is but a small.

part of human existence. A devout man looks for-
ward to immortality, and discovers lill higher sub-
jees of gratitude. He views himself as a guilty crea--
ture, whom Divine berignity has received into grace;
whole forfeited hopes it has restored; and to whorn
it has opened the moss glorious profpets of future
felicity. Such generosity shown to the fallen and
miserable, is yet more affecting tb the heart, than
favours conferred on the innocent. He contemplates,
with astonishment, the labcurs of the Son of God,-
in accomplishing redemption for men; and his foul.
overflows with thankfulness to him, who loved us, and
t.vaJhetb us fron our Jins in his own blood -What lball
I render to the Lord for all hit benefits.? Bbefs the Lord,
0 my foul! and all' that is ,aithin me, blej his holy
arne ; volo forgiveth all thine iniqtrites, anda ealeth-alt
thy difafes ; who redeemth thy life from deJfrut7ion,
" and roawneth thee with lhving kindness and with tender
mercies.

DEVOTION implies, thirdly, the desire of the

foul after the favour of tihe Supreme Being, as its
chief good, and final reft. To inferiour enjoyments,
the devout man allots infer.iour and secondary attach-
ment. He difclains not every earthly affection,
He pretends not to renounce all pleasure in the com-
fort, of his present slate. Such an unnatural renun-
ciation humanity forbids-, and'religion cannot require.
But from thele he expeas not his supreme bliss. He
discerns the vanity which belongs to them all; and'
beyond the circle of mutable obje&s which surround
him, he aspires after some principle of more perfc
felicity, which shall not be subjet to change or de-

cay.

cay. But where is this complete aid- permament
good tobe tound ? Ambition pursues it in courts and
palaces; and returns from the pursuit, loaded with
sorrows. Pleasure seeks it among sensual joys; and
retires with the confeflitn-of dif.ippointment. The
deep faitb, it is not in me ; and the fta faitb, i is not
witb me. It cannot be gotten for gold; neitherfball
/ilver be weighedfor the price thereof. Its place s not
in the land of the living. True happiness dwells
with God; and from the light of his countenance, it
beams upon the devout man. His voice is, Whom
have I in beaven b6it thee P and there is none upont
earth that I defjre brfide tbe. After exploring heaven
and earth for happiners, they seem to him a mighty
void, a wilderness of shadows, where all would be
empty and unsubstantial without God. Sut in his
favour and love, he finds what supplies every defect
of temporal objecs; and assures tranquillity to his
heart, amidst all the changes of his exitlence. Tbe'u
bSalt guide me writh thy counfet; and thou /balt receive.
Wne t* thy glory. My flejb and my Aeart faileth ; but
God is te ftrmngtb of my heart, an my prtion for
ever.

FROM there sentiments and affections, Devotion

advances, fourthly, to an entire resignation of the
foul to God. It is the consummation of trust and
hope. It banishes anxious cares, and murmuring
thoughts. It reconciles us to every appointment of
Divine Providence ; and resolves every wish into the
desire of pleasing himn, whom our hearts adore. Its
genuine breathings are to thiseffet : " Conduc me,

O God in what path soever feemeth good to

"thee. In nothing shall I ever arraign thy sacred

.will. Dost thou require me to part with any
worldly advantages, for the fake of virtue and a
good conscience ? I give them up Dost thou
command me to relinquish my friends, or my
" country ? At thy call I cheerfully leave them.

" Dost

' Doil thnu summon me away from this world? Lo t
- I am ready to depart. Thou haft made, thou

haft redeemed me, and I am thine. Myself, and

-" all that belongs to rme, I surrender to thy disposal.
" Let the men of the world have their portion in thia
"life. Be it mine, to behold thy face'in righteouj--

n/jf; and when I awake, to be fatified witb'th
likenefi.,S
This, surely, is one of the noblest aas of which'

the human mind is capable, when thus, if we may
be allowed the expression, it unites itself with God.
Nor can any devotion be genuine, which inspires not
sentiments of this nature. For devotion is not to be
confidered as a transient glow of affe&ion, occasioned
by some casual impreflions of Divine goodnefs,which
are suffered to remain unconneced with the conduct
of life. It is a powerful prirciple, which penet ates
the foul , which purifies the affetions from debasing
attachments; and by a fixed and steady regard to
God, subdues every sinful paflion, and forms the in-'
clinations to piety and virtue.

Su c H in general are the dispositions that constitute

devotion. It is the union of veneration, gratitude,.
desire, and resignation. It expreifes, not so much-
the perfoi mance of any particular duty, as the spirit
which must animate all religious duties. It stands
opposcd, not merely to downright vice; but to a heart
which is cold, and inferfible to.facred things which,.
from compulsion perhaps, and a sense ofintereft, pre-
serves fame r,.gard to the divine commands, but obeys'
them withliut ardour, love, or joy. I proceed.

If To recommend this devout spirit to your imita-

ticn. 1 begini wtlh observing, That it is of the utmost
conreqaence to guard againfl extremes of every kind
in religion. We mutt bewere, leit, by seeking to a-
void one reck, we split upon another. It has been
long the Subjec of remark, that fuperfitiion and enthu-
filai are two capital sources of delusion; fupyrfiti-

on

eon the one hand, attaching men, with immcd;rate
:zeal, to the ritual and external part of religion; and
enthusiasm on the other. directing their whole attenti-
on to internal emotions, and mystical communications
with the spiritual world; while neither the one, nor
the other, has paid sufficient regard-to the great moral
duties of the-Chriftian life. But, running with in-
temperate eagerness from there two great abuses of
religion, men have neglected to.obferve, that there
are extremes opposite to each of them, into which
they are in hazard of precipitating themselves. Thus
the horrour of Iuperftition has sometimes reached so
far, as to produce contempt for all external inflituti-
ons; as if it were possible for religion to subsist in the
world, without forms of werfhip, or public acknow-
ledgment of God. At has also happened, that form
who in the main are well affeLed to the caule of
goodness, observing that persons of a devout turn have.
at times been carried, -by warm affecions, into un-
jtftifiable excess, have thence haflily concluded, that
all devotion was a-kin to enthufiafn ; and, fepara-
ting religion totally from the heart and affe&icns,
-have reduced it to a friged observance of what they
call the rules of virtue. This is the extreme which I
purpose at present to combat, by ihowing you, filft,
That true devotion is rational, and well founded;
next, That it is of the Ihigheft importance to every
.other partof religion and virtue; and, laitly, That it
is modt conducive to our happiness.

IN the first place, True devotion is rational,. and

well founded. It takes its rife from affecions which
aree'lential to the human frame. We are formed by
Nature, to admire what is great, and to love what is
amiable. Even inanimate objeEts have power to ex-
cite those emotions. The magnificent profpetof t-he
natural world, fill the mind with reverential awe.
Its beautiful scenes create delight. When we fur-
,vey-the acions and behaviour of our fellow-creatures,

the

the affeaions glow with greater ardour ; and, if, te
unmoved, in the former cafe, argues the defec& of
sensibility in our powers, it discovers, in the latter,
an odious hardness and depravity in the heart. The
The tenderness of an affecionate parent, the genero-
fity of a forgiving enemy, the public spirit of a pa-
triot or a hero, often fill the eyes with tears, and
swell the breatl with emotions too big for utterance.
The obje& of those affections is frequently raised
above us, in condition and rank. Let us suppose him
railed alo above us, in nature. Let us imagine, that
an Angel, or any being of fuperiour order, had con-
descended to be our friend, our guide ard patron;
no per!bn, sure, would hold theexaltaion of his be-
nefador's characer, to be an argument why he
should love and revere him leis.-Strange ! that the
attachment and veneration,the warmth'and overflow-
ing of heart, which excellence and goodness on every
other occasion command, fihoild begin to be account-
ed irrational, as loon as the Supreme Being becomes
their objet. For what reason must human fenfibili-
ty be extina towards him alone ? Are all benefits en-
titled to gratitude, except the higheRl and the bell?
Shall goodness cease to be amiable, only because it is
perse& ?

It will, perhaps, be said, that an unknown and

invifable being, is not quallified, to raise affetion in
the human heart. Wrapt up in the mysterious obfcu-
rity of his nature, he escapes our learch, and affords
no determinate objea to our love or desire. Wege
farward, bt he is not there; and backward,. but we
cannot perceive, him; on the lft hand, where be work-
eth, Abt we cannot behold him: He bidith himself on the
right band, that we cannotfee im -Notwirhllanding
this obscurity, is there any being in the univerfel
more real and certain, than the Creator of the world
and the fupport^r'of all existence ? Is he, in whom we
live and move, to distant from us too excite devotion ?

Ei.

'His form-and essence, indeed, we cannot fee; but to
be unseen, and.imperfetly known, in many other in-
stances, precludes neither gratitude nor love. It is
not the fight, so much as the strong conception, or
deep impression, of an objec, which affecs the pas-
sions. We glow with admiration of personages, who
have lived in a dillant age. Whle nations have been
transported with zeal and ass, ction, for the generons he-
ro, or publicdeliverer, whom they-knew only by fame.
Nay, properly speaking, the direa obje& of our love,
is in every cafe invisible. For that on which affecrion
is placed, is the mind, the foul, the internal charac-
ter of our fellow-creatures; which surely, is no less
concealed than the Divine Nature itielf. is, fhom the
view. of sense. From actions, we can o' ly infer the
dispositions of men; from what we fee of their beha-
viour, we collect what is invlfible; but the conjec-
ture which we form, is, at bell, imperfe&t; and
when their acions excite our love, much of their
.heart remain still unknown. Iafk then, in what re-
fpe& God is less quallified than any other being, to
-be an object ofaffedion ? Convinced that he exists;
beholding his goodness spread abroad in his works, ex-
erted in the government of the world, displayed in
in some measure to sense, in the ations of his Son
Jesus Christ; are we not'furnifhed with every eftential
requefite which the heart demands, in order to in-
dulge the molt warm, and at the farne.time the most
rational emotions ?

If these considerations jultify the reafonablenefi of

devotion, as expeffed in veneration, loxe. and grati-
tude, the fame train of thought will equally justify it
when appearing in the forms of desire, delight, or re-
fignation. The latter are indeed, the ccanfquence
of the former. For we cannot but desire some com-
munication with what we love; and will naturally re-
-sign ourselves to one, on whom we have placed the
full ,confidence of affetion. The aspirations of a de-

Iutl -

vout man after the favour of God, are the effeta
of that earnest wish for happiness, which glows in eve-
ry breast. All men have. somewhat that-may becal-
led the objeas of their devotion; reputation, plea-
sure, learning, riches, or what ever apparent good
has itrongly attatched their heart. ' his-becomes the
center of attra&ion,- which draws them towards it;
which quickens and regulates all their motions..
While the men of the world are thus influenced by
the objeas which they severally worship, lhall he only
who dire&s his devotion towards the Supreme Being,
be excluded from a place in the fyflem of rational con-
dua ? or be censured for having paflions, whose fen-
fibility corresponds to the great cause which meves
them ?-Having vin4icated the reasonableness of de-
votion, I come,

IN the second place, to ihow its imprtance, and

the high place which it pogffeff in the fyftm of reli-
gion. I addreCs myself now to those, who, though
they rejcEt not devotion as irrational, yet confider it
as an unnecessary refinement; an attainment which
may he lafely left to recluse and fequefteled persons,
who aim at uncommon fanaity. 'i'he solid apd ma-
terial duties of a good life, they hold to be in a great
measure independent of devout affe&ion; and think
them sufficiently supported, by their necessary connec-
tion with their interest, both' in this and in a future
world. They infilt much upon-religion being a calm,
a fober, and rational principle of .conduct.-1 admit
that it is very laudable to have a rational religion.
But I must admonish you, that it is both reproachful
and crimnal, to have an insensible heart. If we re-
duce religion into so cool a slate, as not admit'love,
affecion, and desire, we shall leave it in poffeflion of
small influence over human life. Look abroad into
the world, and observe how few aa upon deliberate
and rational views of their true interest. The bulk of
mankind are impeled by their feelings. They are at-

traal

trated by appearances of good. Talte and inclinati-
on rule their condua. To dire& their inclination and
taste towards the highest ohjets.; to form a relish
within them, for virtuous and Ipiritual.enjoyment:; to
introduce religion into the hearts is: the province of
devotion.; and hence arifesits importance to the inte-
reif of goodness.

Agreeably to this docrine, the great Author of our

religion,. who well knew.-what 'tes in man, laid the,
foundation of his whole fyitem in the regeneration of
the hearl.. The change which was tobe. accomplith-
ed on his follow.rs, he did not purpose to effec, me-
rely by regulating their external condut.; but by form-
ing with them a new nature; by taking away the
beart of. jaie, and giving tbhm a heart offifjh,. that is,'
a heart relenting and tender, yielding to the Divine
impulse, and readily susceptible ofdevotut imprefions.
Thou Ibalt love the,Lord thy God, witih all thy heart,
and mind, anj/qul, and jfrexgth : This is the.firfl ani
great commandment. My fan give me thy heart, is the'
call of God to each of us: And, indeed, if the heart
be with-held, it is pot easy to convince what other
offering we can present, that will be acceptable-to
him.

Of what nature muftl that maniy' religion be, who

profffes to wcrflip God, and to believe in Ghrift; -
and yet raises his thoughts.towards God, and fiis Sa-
viour, without any warmth of gratitude or love ?. I
(peak not of those occasional decays of pious assec-
tion, to which the best are fiobje&, but of a total in-
sensibility to this part of teligion. Surely, let the
outward behaviour be ever so irreproachable, there
mufl be some essential defe& in a hearts which re-
mains always unmoved at the view of infinite gocd-
.ness. The affetions cannot, in this cafe, be deemed
to flow in tieir natural channel. Some concealed.
maliznity must have tainted the inward frame. This
is not the man whom you would chufe for your bo-

'
G fom-

fem-friend; or whose heart.you could'expea to an-
fwer, with reciprocal warmth, to yours. His virtue,
if it deserves that name, is not of the mofi arnial.le
fort; and may, with reaforn, receive the appellationr
(often injudiciously bestowed) of cold and dry morali-
ty. Such a persionmuff, as yet, befarfrem the king-
dom of Heaven.

As devotion is thus essential to religionin its prin-

ciple, so it enters into the proper'difchtrge of all its
duties. 'It diffuses an anfpicious influence over the
whole of virtue. The prevailing temper of the
mind is formed by its moit'frequent 'employments.
Intercourse with Supreme perfet&i6t cannot, there-
fore, but ennoble and improve it. The pure love of
G3od, naturally conneos itself with the love of man.
Hence, devotion has been often found a powerful in-
-trument, in humanizing the manners of men, and
taming their unruly passions. It smooths what is rough,
and softens what is fierce, in our nature. It is the
great purifier of the.affecions. 'It inspires comnempt
of the low gtatifications belonging to animal life. It
promotes an humble and cheerful contentment with
our lot ; and subdues that eager deflre of riches and
- f power, which has filled this unhappy world uith
crimes and misery.' Finally, it beflows that enlarge-
.ment of heart in the service of God, which is the
great principle, both of perseverance, and of pro-
grefs in virtue. He who, unacquainted with devout
affe&ions, sets himself to keep the l-ieine cornmand-
ments, will advance in obedience with a -low and
languid peace; like one who, carrying a heavy bur-
den, toils to mount the hill. But-he whose heart de-
votion has warmed, will proceed on hiscay, cheerful
and rejoicing. The one performs his duty, only be-
cause it is commanded the other, because he loves
it. The one is inclined to do no more than necessity
requires; the other seeks to excel. The one looks
for hisxicward-in fomewhatiefides religion; tie other,

*..- ·, ~.find-&

Ends it in religion itself : It is hit mest mnd drink te
4o the 'will of that heavenly Father, whom he loves
and adores. Which of there two are likely to make
the greatest improvement, in. goodness, is easily dif-
cerned. Let us now confider,

IN the third place, the influence of devotion on

the happiness of life. Whatever promotes and fireng-
thens virtue, whatever calms and regulates the ternm
per, is a source of happiness. Devotion, as I have
just now ihown, produces those effets in a remark-
*ble degree. It inspires composure of spirit, mild-
ness, and benignity ; weakens the painful, and ch-
fishes the pleasing emotions; and by these means, car-
ries on the life of a pious man in a smooth and pla-
cd1 tenour.

\Besides exerting this habitual influence on the mindj

.devotion opens a field of enjoyments, to which the
vicious are entire firangersy enjoyments the more
valuable, as they peculiarly belong to retirement
when the world leaves us, and to adversity when it
becomes our foe. These are the two seasons, for
which every wife man would most with to provide
some hidden flore of comfort. For let him be plac-
ed in the most favourable situation which the human
ftate'admits, the world can neither always amuse him',
nor always liield him from distress. There will be
many hours of vacuity, and many of dejecion in his
fife. If he be a stranger to God, and to devotion,
how dreary will the gloom of solitude often prove ?
With what oppressive weight will sickness, disappoint-
mefnt, or old age, fall upon his spirits ? But for those
pensive periods, the pious man has a relief prepared.
From the tiresome repetition of the common vanities
of life, or from the painful corrosion of its cares and.
sorrows,, devotion transports him into a new region ;
and surrounds him there with such objects, as are the
meft fitted to cheer- the dejeaion, to calm the tu-
nylts, and to heal the wounds of his heart. If the

G a . wiold

world has been empty and delufiva, it gladdens him
with the profpe& of a hig ler and better order of
things; about to arise. If nen have-been ungrateful
and base, it displays before him the faithfiulnefs of
that Supreme Being, who, though every other friend
fail, will never forsake him. -Consult your experi-
ence, and you will find, that the two greatest sources
of inward joy, are the exercise of love direced to-
wards a deserving objet, and the exercise of hope
terminating on some high and affired happiness. Both
there are supplied by devotion; and therefore we
;have no reason to be surprised ;. if on some occasions,
it fill the hearts os.good men with a fatisfa&ion not
to be expressed.

The refined pleasures of a pious mind, are, in

many refpe&s, filperiour to the coarse gratifications
of sense. The are plealures which belong to the
highest powers, and best affecions of the foul;
whereas the gratifications of sense reside in the lowelf
legion of our nature. To the-one the foul loops he-
low its native dignity. The other, raise it above it-
self. The one, leave always a comfortlels, often a
mortifying, remembrance behind them. . The other,
are reviewed with applause and delight. Tie plea-
fures of sense resemble a foaming torrent, which, as-
ter a disorderly course, speedily runs out, and leaves
-n empty and offensive channel. But the pleasures
f devotion resemble the equable current of a pure
iver, which enlivens the fields through which it
¢asses, and diffuses verdure and fertility along its
r"anks.-To thee, O Devotion ! we owe the highest
rnprovement of our nature, and much of the enjoy-
nent of our life. Thou art the support of our vir-
ue, and the reft of our fouls, in this turbulent world.
Fhocu compofeft the thoughts. Thou calmest the
xffions. Thou exalteft the heart. Thy commu i-
.Aions, and thine only, are imparted to the low no
L-ss than to the high; to the poor, as well as to the

:ichl

rich. In 'thy pretence, worldly diftin&ions cease;
and underthy influence, wordly sorrows are forgot-
ten. Thou art the balm of the wounded mind. Thy
fantuary is ever open tb the miserable ; inacceflible
only to the unrighte6us and-tmpure. Thou beginnefr
on earth, the temper of heaven. In thee the hosts of
angels and blefled tpirits eternally rejoice. It now re-
mains, that,

Iil. I ENDEAVOUR to correa some errours, into

m hich men are apt to fall concerning devotion. For
it is but too obvious that errours are often committed
in this part of religion. These frequently disfigure
its appearance before the world, and fuibje& it to un-
juitf reproach. Let us therefore attend deliberately
to its nature. so as to distinguish pure and rational de-
votion, of which I have hitherto treated, from that
which is, in any degree, spurious and adulterated.

In the first place, It is an errour to place devotion'

in the mere performance of any external aa of wor-
ship. Prayer and praise, together with the ordinan-
ces peculiar to the Christian religion, are the appoint-
ed means of raising the heart towards the Supreme
Being. They are the irntituted signs of devotion
the language.in which it naturally expresses itself.
But let us remember, that they are figris and exprefli-
or.s only , and we all know, that; in various caes,
thele may not correlpond to the things signified. -It
is in'the disposition of the heart, not in the motion of
the lips, or in the polture of the body, that devotion
confiils. The heart may' pray or praise, when no
words are uttered. But if the heart be unconcerned
or ill affeced, all the words we can utter, how pro-
perly framed soever, are no other than empty and un-
acceptable founds in the ear of the Almighty.

IN the second place, -It is an errour to conceive the

pleasures and advantages of devotion to be indifcrimi-
nately open to all. Devotion, like many parts of
riliiion, may in some lights be confidered as a privi-

G 3 lege,,

lege, and in others as a duty. It is the duty of alIt
to love God, and to resign themselves to his will.
But it is the privilege of good men only, to rejoice in
God, and to confide in his friendlhip. Hence a cer-
rain preparation is requisite, for the enjoyment of de-
'otion in its whole extent. Not only mull the life be
reformed from grors enormities, but the heart mulf
have undergone that change which, the Gospel de-
mands. A competent knowledge of God nmuf be
acquired. A proper foundation muit be laid in fairhl
and repentance, for intercourse with Heaven.

They who would ruth all at once from the arms

of the world, into rhe sacred retreat of devotion;
they who imagine that retreat to land always ready
for the reception of such as betake themselves to it,
for no reasbn, but because every other refuge ex-
cludes them, betray gross ignorance of this part of
religion. They bring to it, faculties unqualified' to,
-tfte its pleasures; and they grasp at hopes, to which
they are not entitled. By incorporating with devoti-
on the unnatural mixture of their unlan&ified pali-
ons, they defile and corrupt it- Hence that gloom
which has often spread over it. Hence, those super-
ftiticus mortifications aRd aufterities, by which the
falsely devout hope to purchase favour from God';;
hb ited by the terrours of a guilty conscience, and.
vainly Aruggling to substitute a servile and cringing
homage, in the room of the pure affeaions of a re-
newed heart. On such altars, the hallowed fire of
'uue- devotion cannot burn; nor can any incense as--
cend frosn them, that filall be grateful to Heaven.
Bring o maore vain ob4lticn.r. Waa ye, make you clean,
put away tshe evil of your doings from before mine eyes,
faith tha Lord. CeaJe to do evil, learn to do well..
Then draw nigh to God, and be will draw nigA to you.
-- ut though devotion requires a pure heart, and
a virtuous life, apd neveflarrly supposes the exercifeof
frequeat stireilert, I mufl obfervec,

IN

T.t the third place, That it is an errour to conceive

ii. is requiring an entire retreat from the-worlds. De-
votion, like eyery other, branch of religion, was in-
tended to fit ns for discharging the duties of life. We
ferye God,b.y being ufeful.t one another. It is evi-
dent from the frame of our nature,. and from our
,omrmon une:efiities and .wants, that we:were defignse
by Piovidence for an aaivepart.on thi: eartih.. Thte
Go.pjl of Chrilt, accordingly conliders'us as.engaged
in the concerns of the world;, and dires. its .exhor-
tations to men, i aUl the. various relations^ chara&eers,
and employments of civil life. Abfira&ion. from
society, .terefore, and total dedication of our time
to devout exercites, cannot be the most proper me-
thod of acquiring the favour of .God.
* I mean. not however, to throw any blame on thoe,
who having loss all elifh for the ordinary puwfuits of
life,: in consequence of severe wounds which they have
received .from affliien ;. who, being left to stand
alone, and disierning their connecrions with the world
to be in some measure broken off, choose to seek tran-
quillity in a religious retirement, and to confecrat
their days entirely to :God. Situations sometimes
oecur, :which.. both jutify a great degree of retreat
fron the world,. and entitle it to refpet,_ ..But with
regard to the bulk of mankind, Christian devotion
neither requires nor implies any, fuch.fequettration
from the a-airs of men. Nay, for the ioft part,' it
Ywill he ,cuwivated with ,greater. fucefs by those who
iirglekit ,with. the aEive empklyments -of life.. For
the mind, i when entirely eocapied byr any oneobjeat,
isin hazaed of: viewing it. atd Ja through a falfe-me-
dium. Objets, especially, iso great and sublime aS
those of devotion, when we'attempt tb fix upon them
Unremittingi attention.. overiftetch and disorder oup
feeble powers. : The-mind, by being relaxedi returns
to them with more advantage. A s.none of your or-
gaus can .bear intt¢fe fenfatik wth tbost:iijury.; . as the

G4
G eye,

eye, when dazzled with overpowering light, behollf
imaginary colours, and loses the real diflinction of ob-
je&s; so themind.when overheated by perpetual con-
templation of celefial thirgs, has been fomnetimes found
so miffake the firong irpreflionsof fancyfoc fiperna-
tural communications from above. To the emplov-
ments of devotion,:as to all other things, thereare due
linmits.Thereis a certaintemperatefphere, within which
it preserves longei its proper exertion, and moit success-
fullypromotes the-purpofes for which it was designed.

In the fourth place, It isan erour toimagine, that

devotion enjoins a total contempt of all the pkafures
and amusements of human society. Itchecks, indeed,
that spirit ofdiffipation which is too prevalent. It not
only prohibits pleasures which are unlawful, but like-
wife that unlawful degree of attachment to pleafirres
in themselves inncce :t, which withdraws the attention
of men from what is serious and important. But it
bi ings amusement under due limitation, without eX-
tirpating it. It forbids it as the business; but permits.
it as-the relaxation, of hfe. -For there is nothing it#
the fpirit-of true religion, whichishoftile to a cheer-
ful enjoyrnet of our situation in the-world. ; :

They.who look-with a severe ands-indignant eye,

upon all the recrertions by which the cares of men' ar
relieved, and the. union of feciety is cemented, arer
in two.refpets,. injuricus to religion. - Fir.,, ,they: ex-
hibit. to it others under;a Torbiding; form,: by cloth-
ing. it with the garb of so. much unrieeffay asufterit-y
Aid neat; they deprive the world of-the. benefitv hicb
their example might :afford, in.drawing -th;-line beL
tween innocent and dsagerous pleasures. By-a tem-
perate participation of those whichare innoen.,,,- they
might fuccefsfilly evert that authrirty,: which a -hit
t*inus and refpeaable; Ihara.ter: aiways: pffefiles in'
refraining undue excess. 'They would ihow tie-youreg
and unwary, at what. point they ought to flop; , They
would. lhve it.in their piower to regulate, in fomen degree

-the_

the public manners; to check extravgance, to humble
presumption, and put vice to tle bulfh. But, through
injudicious severity they fall short of the good they
might perform. By an indiscriminate cenfire of all a-
mulement, they detract from the weight of their re-
proof, when amutement becomes undoubtedly finfu!.
By torally withdrawing themselves from the circle c i
cheerful life, they deliver up the entertainments of so-
ciery, into the hands of the loose, and the corrupted'
and permit the blind power of fashion, uncontroulect.
to effablifh its own flandards, -and to exercise its dan-
gcrous way over the world.

IN the- fifth place, It is an errour to believe that

devotion nourishes a Ipirit of severity, in judging of
the manners.and characers of others. Under this re-
proach, indeed, it has so long fuffered.in the world;
that, with too manyr the-appellation of devout, fug-
gefIS no other character, but -that of a four and re-
clu'e. bigot, who delights in censure. But the re-
proach is unjuR ; for such a fpilitis entirely opposite
to- the nature cf true devotion. The very firit traces
which it imprints on- the mird, are candour and hu-
mility. Irs principles are liberal. Iss-genius is unaf-
fuming and.mild. Severe onlytoitfeif, ir-makes eve-
ry allowance for others which humanity can fuggel-t
Itclaims no privilege of looking' into their hearts,- or
of deciding with- refpe&-'to their eternal fRate.-If
your supposcd devotion produce contraryeffe&ts; if it
infuse hatithnefs into your- sentiments, and acrimony
into your speech ; you>may-conclude, that under a
serious appearance, carnal paflions lurk, And, if ever
it shall so far lift you tip with -elf-conceits as to make
you eftablilt your own- opinions as an infallible ftan-
da.d- for-the whole chrrftiarn world,- and lead you to
consign to perdition; all who differ from you, either
in fome'dotrinal tenets, cr in the mode ofexpreffirg
them; you may reft assured, that to much pride -yv u
have joined much ignorance, both of the nature of dc-
votiun, and of the Gospel us Christ. Finally, I'

IN the sixth place, It is an errour to think, that

perpetual rapture and spiritual joy belong to devoti-
on.. Devcut feelings admit very different degrees of
warmth and exaltation. Some persons, by the frame
of their minds, are much more susceptible than others
of the tender emotions.' They more readily relent at
the view of Divine gooduels, glow with a warmer
ardour of love, and, by consequence rife to a higher
elevation of joy and hope. But, in the midt of still
and calm affections, devotion often dwells; and,
though it produce no transports in the mind, diffufee
over it a steady serenity. Devout sensations not only
wary in their degree according to the frame of different
tempers; but, even among the best disposed, susser
much interruption and decay. It were too much to.
expet, that in the present slate of human frailty, those
happy feelings should be uniform and constant. Op-
pression of wordly cares, languor of spirits, and infir-
mities of health, frequently indispose us for the enjoy--
ment of devout affections.. Pious men, on those cc-
cafions, are in hazard ofpaffing judgment on their own
Rate with too much severity; as if, forfome great
iniquity, they were condemned by God to final hard-
ness of heart. Hence arises that melancholy, which
has been seen to overcloud them; and which has givers
occasion to many contemptuous scoffs of ungodly men.
But it is a melancholy which deserves to be treated with
tenderness, not with contempt. It is th'e excess of
virtuous and pious sensibility. It is the overflowing of
a heart asseted, in an extreme degree, with the hum-
ble sense of its own failing, and with ardent concern
to attain the favour of God. A weakness, however,
we admit it to be, though not a crime; and hold it to
be perfe&ly separable from the essence of devotion.
For contrition, though it may melt, ought not to fink
or overpower the heart of a Chriflian. The tear of
repentance brings its own relief. Religion is a'fpring
of consolation, not of terrour, to every well-inform-

ed

# SERMON XI. TITUS. ii. 6. Young men likewise exhort, to be sober-minded.

ed mind, which, in a proper manner, refs its hope
on the infinite goodness of God, and the all-fufficient
merit of Chrilf.

To conclude, Let us remove from devotion, all

those miffakes, to which the corruptions of men, or
their ignorance and prejudices, have given rife. With
us let it be the worfhipof God, in fpiri and in trutbh
the elevation of the foul towards him, in simplicity
and yove. Let us prrfue it as the principle'of virtu-
ous condut, and of inward peace. By frequent and
fericus meditation on the'great objeasof religion, let
us lay ourselves open 4o its influence: By means of
the inrltitutions of the Gospel, l-et us cherish its im-
prefTions. And above all, let us pray to God, that he
may efa:blifh its power in our heart. For here, if
any where, his alfftance is requisite. The spirit of
devotion is his gift. From his inspiration it proceeds.
Towards him it tends; and in his pretence hereafter,
it thall attain its full perfecion.

SERMON XI,

T r

T u;. iiL 6.

'roung men liewijrf exhart, to :be fibr-minded.
SOBRIETY of mind, is one of t:hose virtues

which the prefent-condition Qs human life firong-

ly inculcates: The uncertainty of its enjoyments,
checks-prerfumptiori; the multiplicity of its. dangers,
demands perpetual caution. Modertion, vigilance,
and felf-government, are duties incumbent on all;
but efpt4iatly on such as are beginning the journey of
life. To them, therefore, the admonition in the
Text is, with great propricty, direced; though there

. - * '
" a~~e

is reason to fear, that by them it is in hazard of being:
Icaft regarded. Experience enforces the admcnition.
on the moit giddy, after they have advanced in years.
But the whole state of youthful views and pafions, is.
adverse to fi-briety of mind. The scenes which pre-
sent themseLves, at our entering upon the world,, are.
commonly flattering. Whatever they be in them-.
selves, the ively spirits of the young gild every open-
ing profpe&. The field of hope appears to stretch.
wide before them. Pleasure fems. to put forth its.
blossoms on every fide. Impelled by desire, forward.
they rush with inconsiderate ardour: Prompt to de-
cide, and to chooe ;. averse to hesitate, or to en-
quire; credulous, because untaught by experience;
rash, because unacquainted, with danger; head-
strong, because unfubdued by disappointment. Hence
arise the perils, of which it is my design at present to
warn them. I'ihall takefcbriety of mind, in its most
comprehensive fenCe, as including the whole cf that,
d;'cipline which religion and virtue Erefcribe to youth.
Though the words of the Text are direcly addressed,
to youtg men, yet, as..the fame admonition-is given in.
a preceding v.eife-to the other- sex, the.infitruions.
which arise from the Text are to be confidered as-
common to both. I' intend. first, to show them the
importance of beginning early to give serious attenti'--
on to their condu&.; and, next, to point.out.thofe
virtues which they cught chiefly to cultivate.

As. soon- as you are capable of refle&ion, youz mu*

perceive that there.is a. right- and a wrcng, in hunadi
* a&ions You. fee, that ihofe who are born A ith the .
famne advantages of fortune, are not all equally pro-
.fperous in the course of life. While come of them.
by wife and ifeady condu&, attain ditlin&ion in the
world, and pass their days with comfort andlxn0our ;
others of. the fame rank, by mean ard vicious beda-
viour, fcrf£,it the .advantages of ;heir birth, involve
.:themselves in much rmicry,' and end in being. a dif--

o rtcee

grace to their friends, and a burden to society. Early,
then, you may learn,. that it is not on the external
condition in which you find yourselves placed, hut
on the part which you are to a&,. that your eMfair-
or unhappiness,. your honour or infamy, depend.-.
Now, when beginning to aEt that part, what can be
of greater moment, than to regulate your plan of
condu'& with the moll serious attention, befoga.yu
havemet committed any ftta. or irretrievable errours ?
If, instead of exerting refliecion for this valuable pur-
pose, you deliver yourselves up, at so critical.a time,
to sloth and pleasure; if you refuse to liften to any
counsellor but humour, or to attend to any pursuit
except that of amusement; if you allow yourselves
to float. loose and careless on the tide of life, ready to
receive any dirEtion which the current of fashion
may chance togive you; what can you expect to sorb
low from such beginnings.? While so many around
you.,are undergoing the fad consequences of a. like in,
dilcretion, for what reason (hall not those confequen-
ces extend to you ? Shall you only attain success with-
out that preparation, and escape dangers without that
* precaution, which-is required of others ? Shall hap-
.piness grow up to you, of its own accord, and solicit
.your acceptance, when the reft of mankind, it is the
fruit of long cultivation, and the acquisition of labour
and.care ?-Deceive not yourselves with such arro-
gant hopes. Whatever be your. rank,. Providence
will not for y)our fake, reverse its eflablilhed order.
The author of your being hath enjoined you to take
heed to your ways ; to.punder thepatbh of your feet ; to
remember your Creator in the days of your youth. He
.hath dec reed,_ that they only who seek after wijdom,
Aballfind it.; that fools fball be affliced, because of
their tranfgrefjion ; and that who/o refujetb inSfruc-
tioni,,Jball delfray bit own fouL. By liflening to there
admonitions, and tempering the vivacity - of youth
with a proper mixture of terious thought, you may

enCfu e

ensure chearfulnefs for the ref of life; but by de-
livering yourselves up at present bt giddiness and
levity, you lay the fonndation of lafir.g heavinefa
of heart.

'When you look forward to these plans of life,

which either your circumAtances have suggested, or
you friends have proposed, you will not hesitate to
acknowledge, that in order to pursue them with ;d-
vantage, some previous discipline is requisite. Be
assured, that whatever is;tp be your profession, no
education is more necessary to your success, than the
acquirement of virtuous dispositions and habits.
This is the universal preparat on for every clharater,
and every station in life. Bad as the world is, ref-
pet is always paid to virtue. In the ofual course of
human affairs, it will be found, that a plain unde-
standing joined with acknowledged worth, contri-
butes mere to prosperity, than the brightet parts with-
out probity or honour. Whether science, or bufi-
ness, or public life, by your aim, virtue fill enters,
for a principle share, into all thofc great departments
of society. It is conne&edwith eminence, in every libe--
ral art ; with reputation, in every branch of fair and
useful business; with diftinaion, in every public ita-
tion. The vigour which it gives the mind, and the
weight which it adds to charater ; the generous fen-
timents which it breaths, the undaunted spirit which
it inspires, the ardour of diligence which itquickens,
the freedom which it procures from pernicious and
dishonourable avocations, are the foundations of all
.that is high in fame, or great in success, among men.

Whatever ornamental or-engaging endownments

you now possess, virtue is a necessary requisite, in
order to their ihining with proper lirter. Feeble are
the attrations of the fairest form, if it be fifpecae&
that nothing within, corresponds to the pleasing ap-
pearances without. Shorf, are the triumphs of wit,
when it is supposed to be the vehicle of malice. By

whatever

you can hold the esteem, and secure the hearts of o-
thers, only by amiable dtfpofitions,. and the accom-
plifhments of the mind. These are the qualities
whose influence will last, when the lufire of all that
once sparkled and dazzled has passed away.

Let not then the season. of youth be barren 6f im-

provements so tffential to your future felicity and ho-
nour. Now is the seed-time of life; and according
to what you sow, you fkal reap; Your characer is
now, under Divine afilftance, of your own forming ;
yourfate is, in some measure, put into you own hands.
Your nature is at yet plain and soft. Habits have
not established their dominion. Prejudices have not
pre-occapied your understanding. The worldhas not
had time to contra& and debase your affections.- All
your powers are more vigorous, disembarrassed, and
free, than they will be at any future period. What-
ever impulse you now give to your desires and pafii-
ens, the direcion is likely to continue. It will from
the channel.in which yourlife isto ru ; nay, it may
determine its everlafling ilTue. Confider then the
employment of this important period, as the highest
trust which flall ever be committed to you; as, in
a great measure, decisive of your happiness, in time,
and in eternity. As in the succession of the seasons,
each, by the invariable laws of Nature, affeas the
produ&ons of what is next in course; so, in human
life, very period of our age, according as it is well
or ill spent, influences thehappinefs of that which is to
follow. Virtuous youth gradually brings forward
accomplished and flourishing manhood ; and such man-
hood paffesofitfelf, without uneaflmefs, into respect-
able and tranquil old age. But when Nature is tur-
ned out of its regular course, disorders take place in
the moral, just as in the Vegetable world. If the
Spring put forth no blossoms, in Summer there will
be no beauty, and in Autumn no fruit. So, if youth

be

be trifled away without. improvement, manhood
will be conterrtibte. and old age miserable. If the
beginnings of tie rave been vanity, its latter end
canr be no other than vexation offpirit.

Having thus lhown the imprrance of beginningeatly

to give fericus attention-to conduc, P cofne, ne"k,
*o point out the virtues which are molt necesSary to
be cultivated in youth. What I-fhall,

I. RECOMMaED, is piety to God; With this I

begin, both as the foundation of good mcrals, and as
a-difpcfition particularly graceful and becoming in
vouth. To be void of it, argues a cold heart, defli-
tute of some of the best affecions wh'ch belong to
that age. Youth is the feabon of warm and generous
emotions, Tile heart should then, fpontaneotfln,
rife - to the admiration of what is great, glow -with
the l Ye of what is fair and excellent, and- melt at
the discovery of tenderneis and goodness. Where
can any objet be found, fcT proper to c ndle those as-
fedions, as the Father ofthe universe, andthe Author
of all felicity ? Unmoved by veneration ? can yta
contemplate that grandeur and majesty, which his
works every where di(play ? Untouched by gratitude,
can you view that profusion of gnod, which, in this
pleasing season of life) his beneficent hand -pours a-
round you? Happy in the love and affections of
those with whom you are conneaed.look up to the
Supreme Beirg,. as the inspirer of all the iriendfhip
which has ever been shown you by others ; himsel,
your best and your first friend-; formerly, the sup-
porter of ycur infancy, and the guide of your child-
hood; now the guardian of your youth, and the
hope of your coming years. View religious homage,
as a r atural expression of gratitude to him for all his
gcodntfs. Confider it as the service of the Gsd of your
father ; of him, to wlom your parents devoted you,
of him, whom in former ages your anceficrs honour-
ed; nrd by whom they are now rewarded, and blef-

fed

fed in heaven. ' Conrre'ted with so many tender fen-
fibilities of foul, let religion be with you, not the cold
-and barren offsprings of speculation, but the warmr and
vigorous ditates:of the heart.

But though piety chiefly belong'to the heart, yet

the aid of the understanding is requisite, to give a
-proper direction to the devout affetions. You mull
endeavour, therefore, to acquire juif views, both of
the great. principles of natural religion, and of the pe-
culiar doLrines of the gospel. For this end, fRudy
the: secret scriptures. Consult the word of God,
more than the fyflems of men, if you would know
the truth in its native purity. When, upon rational
,and fober enquiry, you have established your princi-
ples,. susser them not to be shaken, by the scoffs of
-he licentious, or the cavils of the sceptical. Re-
-member that in the examination of every great and
comprehensive plan, such as that of Christianity,
difficulties.ray be expe&ed to occur; and that rea-
fenable evidence is riot to be rejeced, because the
.nature cf our. present slate allows us only to knww in
part, and to jee 'thrugh a glafy darkly.
: Impress your minds with reverence for all-that is
-sacred. Let no wanrohnefs of youthful spirits, no
compliance with the intenmperate'mirth of others,
ever betray you into profane sallies. Besides the
guilty which is thereby incurred, nothing gives a more
odious appearance of petulance and prefu.T.ppin' to
youth, than the affeEtation of -treating religion with
levity. Inflead of beingan evidence of fuperiour un-
derfianding, it difcovers'a-pert and Ihallow mind;
which. vain of the first inmatterings of knowledge, pre-
-fumes to make light of what the reft of mankind re-
vere.

At the fame time, you are not to imagine, that

when exohrted to be religious, you are to call upon, to
.become more formal and solemn .; your manners
than others cf the fame years, or to ere&' your

selves

elves into supercilious reprovers ofthQrc arutd- yti.-
T'he Ipirit of true religion breaths gentleness and as-
fability. It gives a native .unaffeied ease to the be-
haviour. It is social, kind, and .cheerful: far re-
moved from- that gloomy and illiberal superstition
which clouds the brow, fhalpens the temper, dejecas
the spirit, and teaches men to fit themselves for ano-
ther world, by neglecing the coacerns. of this. Let
your religion, on the conrary, connec preparation-
for heaven, with an honourable dicharge of the du-
ties of acive life. Let it be associated in.your ima-
gination, with all that is manly and. ufef.ul:;-.witA
wakatfoevor things are true, are jus/t, are fr; wr
lovely, are ofgsod report,- wherever.there is any gita.,
and wherever there is any praise. Of such religion
discover, on every proper occasion, that you-are not!
ashamed ; but avoid making any. unneceflfry oetn-
tation of it before the worli,

II. To piety, join modesty and docility,. reverence

of yourparents, and fubriiiion -to those who are your
fuperiours in knowledge, in flation, and in year.
Dependance and obedience belong to youth.. Mo--
deity is one of its chief ornaments ; and has ever
been efieemed a presage of rising merit. Whien n-
lerina' on the cafrer of- lifer it is your part, not tr-
sffinme the reins as yet into your hands ;. but to cam--
ilit yoaurflves to the guidance of the more experi-
tenced, and to become wife by the wisdom of those
who have gone before you.

Of all the follies ic ident to youth, there are

* one-which. either deform .its. present appearaner, .or
blast the profpe.t of its future prosperity, more than
felf-conceit, prefumptionr, andobftinacy. By check-
ing its natural pfogrefs in improvement, they .fix it-
rn long immaturity; and frequently proddice mif-
chief,, which can never be repaired, Yet thfe are
vices too commonly fouod among the yoang. Big
wuith- enteprise, aind elated byr:hope, 'hey refBlie to

trul'

trufl for furccer to none but themfelws. Full of
their own abilities, they deride the admonitions whieh
are given them by their friends, as the timorous
fuggeflions of age. Too wife to learn, too iitpatr
tient to deliberate, too forward to be restrainted,
they plunge with precipitant indiscretion, into the
midst of al the dangers with which life abounds.
Sees thou a young man wtifi in his own conceit ? There
is more hope of a soel than cf him.-Pofitive as you
now are in your opinions, and confident in your as-
fertions, be assured, that the time approaches, whea
both men and things will appear to you in a different
light. Many characers which you now admirce
wilt, by and by, fink in your esteem; and many opi-
nions, of which you are at present moll tenaciou',
will alter as you advance in years. DiftrufR, thee-
fore, that glareof youthful presumption, which daz-
zles your eyes.. Abound not in your own sense. Put
aot yourselves forward with too much eagerness;
nor imagine, that by the impetuosity of juvenile ar-
dour, you can overturn systems which have been long
established, and change the face of the world.
Learn not t tthink more highly of yourselves than-you
oaght to thitik, kat to think JaberLy. By patient and
gradual progreflion in improvement, you' may in due
time, comrmand laling esteem. But by assuming at
prerent, a tone of superiority, to which you have no
title, you will disgust those whole approbation it ii
mofl important to gain. Forward vivacity may fit
you to be the companions of an idle hour. More
solid qualities must rceomnend you to the wife, and
mark you out for importance and consideration inl
subsequent life.

III. IT is necessary to recommend to you, finceri',

ty and truth. This is Ihe basis of every virtue. That
darkness of characer where we can fee no heart ;
those foldings of art, through which no native affeci-
on is allowed to. penetrate, present an objec&, una.

miable

miable.in every season of life, but particularlyodiouir
in youth. If, at an age when the heart is warm,
when the emotions are firong, and when nature is ex-
peaed to shew itself free and open, you can already
smile and deceive, what are we to look for, when
you shall be longer hackneyed in the ways of men:
when interest shall have completed the cbduration of
your heart, and experience fh.ll have improved you.
in all the arts -of guile ? Dissimulation in youth, is
tie fore-runner of perfidy in old age. Its first ap-
pearance, is the fatal omen of growing depravity,
and future Ihame. It degrades parts and- learning;
obscures the lulfre of every accomplishment; and
finks you into contempt with God, and man.

As you value therefore, the approbation of Heaven,

or the efleem of the world, cultivate the love of
truth. In all your proceedings, be direct and con-
fiftent. Ingenuity and candour pcfiefs the most pow-
erful charm; they befpepk universal favour, and
carry an apology for a-hnoft every failing. Tbe lip
of truth, fiall be ejtablifbed for ever; but a y.ing
mtngue is but for a moment.-The path of truth, is ar
plain and safe path; that of falehood, is a perplex-
ing maze. After the fifti departure from finceriry,
it is not in your power to flop. One-article una-
voidably leads on to another; till as' the intricacyof
the laberinth increases, you are left entangled in your
own snare. Deceit discovers a little mind, which
flops at temporary expedients, without rising to
comprehensive views ofcondut. It betrays at the
fame time a dastardly spirit. It is the relource of
one, who wants ccurage to avow his designs, or to
redt upon himself. Whereas openness of charaaer
diplays that generous boldness, which ought to dir-
tinguifh youth. So set out in the world with no
other principle than a crafty attention to inreret
betokens one who is defti ed for creeping through
the inferiour walks of life. But to give an early pre-

ference

ference to honour above gain, when they fland in
competition .; to difpife every advantage, which cin-
not be attained without difhonelt arts ? to brook no
-meanness, and to (loop to no dissimulation; are the
indications of a great mind, the prefagesof future
eminence and deflin6tion in life.

At.the fame time,- this-virtuous sincerity is per-

fetly confiltent with the most prudent vigilence and
caution. It is opposed to cunning, not to true wis-
dom. It is not the fimp!icity of a weak and impro--
vident, but the candour of an enlarged and noble
mind; of one who -corns deceit, because he ac-
counts it both base and unprofitable; and who seeks
no disguise, because he needs none to hide him.
Lord ! who fall abide in thy taberncle ? Who 17alll a-
feend into thy holy hill? He that walketh uprigbtly,
and worketb rightetoufnefs, and fpeaketh the truth in
hit heart,

TV. YOUTH is the proper season of cultivating

the benevolent and humane affecions. As a great
part of your happiness is to depend on the connecions
which you form with others, it is of high importance
that you acquire, betimes, the temper and the man-
rers which vill render such connections comforrable.
JLet a sense of juiftice be the foundation of all youtr
locial qualities.- In your most early intercourse with
the world, and even in your youthful amusements,
letno unfearnefs be found. Engrave on your mind
that secret rule. of doing in all things t others, ac-
cording asyou wijb that they J/iould do unto you. For
this end impress yourselves, with a deep sense of the
originl, and natural, equality of men. Whatever
advantages of birth and fortune you pofTefs, never
di'play them with oflentatious superiority. Leave
the subordinations of rank, to regulate the intercourle
of more advanced yeara. At present, it becomes you
to act among your companions, as man with man.
Rememnbr how unknown to you are the vicitudes

of

of ther world ; and how often they, on whom igno~
rant and contemptious young men once looked dowri
with scorn, have risen to be their fuperiours in futu-
ture years.

Companion is an emotion, of which you ought

never to be ashamed. Graceful in youth is the tear
of sympathy, and the heart that melts at-the tale of
wo. Let not ease and indulgence contraat your as-
feaiotn, and wrap you up in felfinl enjoyment.
But go sometimes to the bouse of mornirn, as well as
to the bouse as seasing. Acculom ynourfelves to think
of thediflreirtes of human life; of the solitary cottage,
the dying parent, and the weeping orphan; Thou
flalt not harden thy heart, nor tlut thy hands from thy
poor brother ; but thou /halt surely give unto him in the
ddy of his need: And thine beart haollnot begrie'ved
-when thou give/J unto him; because that for this thing,
the Lcrd thy God Jball bless thee in all thy works.-
Never sport with pain and distress, in any of your
amufrnments ; nor treat even the mearieft insec, with
wanton cruelty.

In young minds, there is -commonly a frong pro-

penfity to particular intimacies and frendfhips. Youth,
.indeed, is the season when friendhlips are fornetimes
formed, which not only continue through succeeding
life, but which glow to the last, with a tenderness un-
known to the connections begun in cooler years. The
propensity therefore is not to be discouraged; though
at the fame time it mull be regulated with much cir-
cumfpecion and care. Too many of the pretended
friendships of youth, are mere combinations in plea-
sure. They are often founded on capricious likings;
suddenly contra&ed, arid as suddenly dissolved. Sor'e-
timesthey are the effet of inrterefed conplaifance and
flattery on the one fide, and of credulous fcndnefs o.
the other. Bewere of such rash and dangerous connec-
tions, which may afterwards load you with dishonour.
Remember that by the charac&er of those whom you

choose

.c hoofe for your friends, your own is likely to be
formed, and wis certainly be judged of by the world.
Be flow, therefore, and cautious in contracting inti-
macy; but when a virtuous friendship is once elfa-
blifhed, confider it as a facredengagement. Expote
not yourselves to the reproach of lightness and incon-
ftancy, which always betpeak, either a trifling, or a
.5base mind. Re.eal none'of the secrets cf your friends
Be faithful to his interefis. Forsake him. not in dan-
ger. Abhor the thought of acquiring any advantage
by his prejudice or hurt. Fhere is afritend that loveth
at all times, and a brother that is born for adversity.
-T7bine awtnfriend, and tby father's friend, f[rJke no.

Finally, on this head; in order to render your-

selves amiable in society, correct every appearance of
harshness in behaviour. Let that courtesy diflingui^l
your demeanour, which springs, not so much from
fludied politeness, as *from a mild and gentle heartr
Follow the cuffioms of the world in matters indiffe-
rent; but flop when they become sinful. Let your
manners be limple and natural; and of courle they
will be engaging. Affecation is certain deformity.
By forming themselves on fantastic models, and vying
with one another in every reigning foily, the young
-begin with being ridiculous, and end in being vicious
.and inmoral.

V. LET me particularly exhort youth to tempe-

rance in pleasure: Let me admonish them, to be-
-ware of that rock on which thousands, from race to
race, continue to split. The love ofpleafure, natu-
ral to man in every period of his life, glows at this
age with exceflive ardour. Novelty adds freth charms,
as yet, to every gratification. The world appears to
-spread a continual feast ; and health, vigour, and high
spirits, invite them to partake of it without reflraint.
,In vain we warn them of latent dangers. Religion is
accused of insufferable severity, in prohibiting enjoy-
.ment ; and the old, when they offer their admoniti-

ons,

ons, are upbraided with having forgot that they once
were young. -And yet, my friends, to what do the re-
firaints of religion, and the counsels of age, with re-
fpea to pleafore, amount ? They may all becormpriz-
ed in few words, not to hult your elves, and not to
hurt others, by your pursuit of pleasure. Within
these bounds, pleasure is lawful; beyond them it bc-
comes criminal, because it is ruinous. Are these re-
firaints ary other, than what a wife man would choose
to impose on himself ? We call you not to re-
nounce pleasure, but to enjoy it in safety. Inflead
of abridging it, we exhort you to pursue it on an ex-
tenfire plan. We propose measures for securing its
possession, and for prolonging its duration.

Consult your whole nature. Confider yourfelvesnot

only asFenfitive, but as rationalbeings , not only as ra-
tioral, but social; not only as social, but immortal.
Whatever violates your nature in any of thefexerpeCs,
cannot afford true pleasure; any more than that which
underrnines an essential part of the vital system, can
promote health. For the truth of this conclusion, we ap-
peal, not merely to the authority of religion, nor to the
teftimcny of the aged, but to yourselves and your own
experience. We ak,W/hether you have not found, that
in a course of criminal excess, your pleasure was more.
then comperfated by ficceeding pain ? Whether,
if not from every particular instance, yet from every
habit, at leafi, of unlawful gratification, there did
net spring some thorn to wound you, there did not
arise tome confcquence to make you repent of it in
the issue ? Hswv long then, ye Jimple ones ! swill ye l.ve
imnplicity ? How long repeat the fame round of per-
nicious folly, and tamely expose yourselves to be
caught in the fame snare ? If you have any confl-
deration, or any firmneSs left above temtations, for
which you have found yourselves uneaqual, with as
much care, as you would shun peltilential infecion.
Break off all conne&ions with the loofc and profiig.!te.

I hrn

j'ben finners entice thee, consent tou not. L-soL not en
'the wine when it is red, when it giveth itt colour in tae
cup ; for at. the la/I, it biteth like afrpent, and/linget/
like an adder. Remove thy way. from thej/range womat
and come not near the doorof her house. Let not thine
,eart decline to her ways ; for her house is the way te
hell. Thou goeJf after hers a bird hafleth.to the fnar
and knoweth not that it it for his life

By there unhappy excels of irregular pleaftrre in

youth, how many amiable dirpqfitions are corrupted
or deflroyed ! How many rising capacities and
powers are suppressed'! How many flattering hopes
of parents.and friends, are totally extinguished 1 Who
but mull-drop a tear over human nature, when he
beholds that morning which arose so bright, overcame:
with such untimely darkness; that good.humer whick-
oncc captivated all hearts, .that vivacity which fparc-,.
·led in every company, tbofe abilities which were fit-
ted for adorning the highest flation, all sacrificed at
-the shrine of-low sensuality; and one who was form-
ed for running the fair career of life in the midQ of
public esteem, cutoff by his vices at the beginning
-of his course, or funk, for the whole of it, into in-
significancy and.contempt !-These, O sinful Plea-
sure! are thy trophies. It is thus that, co-operating:
with the foe o(God and man, thou degrades human,
honour, and bllaeft the opening profpe& of human
'felicity.

VI. DILILGENCE, indulfry, and'properimprove-

ment of time, are -material duties ofthe-young. To
-no-purpofe are they endowed with the bell abilities,
if:they want acivity for exerting them. Unavail-
-ing, in this cafe, will be every direction that can be
:given them, either for their temporal or spiritual wet-
fare. In youth, -the-habitsof industry aremodl_ easily
acquired. In youth the incentives to it are flrqngeft,
-from ambition and from duty, from emulation andt
-hope, from l41 the.prorpeas which the beginning of

H life

life affords. If, dead to these calls, you already
latguifh in slothful inacion, what will be able to.
qiuicken -the more sluggish current of advancing
years ?

Industry it not only the inflrument of improve-

ment, but the' foundation of plealure. Nothing
is. so opposite to the true enjoyment of life, as
the relaxed and feeble slate of an indolent mind. He
who is a stranger to industry, may possess, but he can-
not enjoy. For it is labour only which givesthe re-
lifh to pleasure. It is the appointed vehicle of every
good to man. It is the indefpenfable condition of
ur possesing a found mind in a found body. Sloth
isfo inconsistent with both, that it is hard to deter-
mine whether it be a greater foe to virtue, or to
health and happiness. Ina&ive as it is in itself, its
effects are fatally powerful. Though it appear a
Aowly flowing fiream, yet it undermines all that is
liable and flouritshing. -It not only saps the foundation
of every:virtue, but pours upon ycu a deluge of crimes
and evils. It is like water which firfl purifies by
flagnaticn; and then-fends up noxious vapours, and
fills the atmosphere with death.

Fly, therefore, from idleness as the certain parent

both of guilt and of ruin. And under idlenels I in-
clude, not mere inaaion only, but all that circle of
trifling occupations, in which too many saunter away
their youth; perpetually engaged in frivolous society,
or public amusements, in the labours of dress, or the
ofentation of their perfons.-Is this the foundation
which you lay for future usefulness and esteem ? By
fach accornplifhments, do you hope to recommend
yourselves to the thinking part of the world, and to
answer the expectations of your friends and your couc-
try ?-Amusements, youth requires. It were vain,
it were cruel to prohibit them. But though allow-
able as the relaxation, they are most culpable as the
bufilefs of the young. For they then become the

gulph

.bad paflions.They weaken the manly powers.They fink
the native vigour of youthinto contemptible effeminacy4

Redeeming your time from such dangerous ware,

seek to fill it with employments which you may re-
view with fatisfaaion. Theacquiftion of knowledge
is one of the molt honourable occupations of youth.
The desire of it dilcovers a liberal mmd, and is con-
neaed with many accomplishments, and many vir-
tues. But though your train of life should not lead
you to fludy, the course of education always furnishea
proper employments to a well-difpofed mind; What-
ever you pursue, be emulous to excel. Generous
-ambition, and sensibility to praise, are, especially at
your age, among the marks of virtue. Think not
that any affluence of fortune, or any elevation of rank,
exempts you from the duties of aDDlication and in-
duflry. Industry is the law of our being; it is the
demand of Nature, of Reason, and of God. Re-
member always, that the years which now pass over
your heads, leave permanent memorials behind them.
From your thoughtless minds they may escape; but
they remairrin the remembranceof God. They forrm
an important part of the register of your life. They-
will hereafter bear testimony either for or againit
you, at that day, when, for all your acions, but par-
ticularly for the employments of youth, you muil give
an account to God.

THus I have set -before you, some of the chief

,qualifications which belongs to thatfaber mind, that
virtuous and'religious charaEcer, which the Apofile it
my-Text recommends to youth; piety, modelty, truth,
benevolence, temperance, and induRtry. Whether
your future course is defined to be long or short, after'
this manner it should commence; and, if it continue
to be thus condu&ed, its conclusion, at what time
soever it arrives, will not be inglorious or unhappy.
For, hnouwi, aka ae i not that whirb flaamntb in kngbt.

H 2 i

es time, or that whicb is measured by number of yars.
But wifdlom is the gray hair to men, and an unspotted lift
is old age.

LET nm finish the fubje&, will recalling your at-

tention to that dependence on the blessing of Heaven,
which, amidfi all your endeavours after improvement,
you ought continually to perferve. It is too common
with the young, even when they resolve to tread the
path of virtue and honour, to set up with presumptuous
confidence in themselves. Truiting to their own abi-
lities for carrying them successfully through life, they
are carelefs.of applying to God, or of deriving any
afliitance from what they are apt to reckon the gloomy
discipline ofreligion. Alas how little do they know
the dangers which await them? Neither human wis-
dom, nor human virtue, unspotted by religion, are
equal for the trying situations which often occur in life.
By the shock and temptation, how frequently have the
nmoftvirtuousintentions been overthrown ? Under the
pressure of disaster, how often has the greatest con-
tlancy funk-? Every good and every perfecf gift it from
abeve. -Wifdonm and virtue, as well as riches and ha-
wour, cane from God. DefRitute of his favour, you
are in no-better situation, with all your boasted abili-
ties, than orphans left to wander in a trackless desert,
without any guide to conduc them, or any fheiter to
cover them from the gathering storm. Corre&, then,
this ill-founded arrogance. Expea not, that your
happiness can be independent of him who made youth..
By faith and repentance, apply to the Redeemer of
the world. By piety and prayer, seek the protecion
of the God of heaven. I conclude with the solemn
words, in which agreat Prince delivered his dying
charge to his son, words which every young person
ought to confider as addressed to himself, and to en-
grave deeply on his heart. IThou-Solomom, myfon, know
thou the God of thyfathers ; and firve him with a per-
seA ieart, and with a wiYling mind, For ite Lord

/earchetb

# SERMON XII. PROV. xvi. 31. The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.

fearcheth all bearts, and underfiandeth all the imaginations
of the thougbts. If thoufeek him, 'he will be found of
thee ; ut if thou forsake him; be will cast thee off fe
ever.

*.
S E RM ON XII.

P KO v. xvi. jIr
Tbe hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found it

the way of righteousness.

O fear God, and to kep bis commandments, is the
rule of our duty,, in every period of life.

But, as the light which guide our Rleps, varies with
the progress of the day, so the rule of religious con-
dua is diversified in its application, by the different
flages of orr present existence. To every age, there
belongs a difin& propriety of behaviour. There
aries from it, a series of duties peculiar to itself.

Of those which are incumbent on youth, I-have'

treated in the preceding diicourfe. As we advance -
from youth to middle age, a new feld of a&ion opens,
and a different characer is required. The flow of
gay and impetuous spirits begins to fiubfide. Life
gradually assumes a greaver caf ; the mind, a more'
sedate and thoughtful turn. 'The attention is now
transferred from pleasure to 'interest ; that is, to
pleafure-diffufed over a 'wider extent, and measured
by alarger scale. Formerly, the enjoyment of the
present moment occupied the whole attention. Now,
no a&ion terminates ultimately in itself, but, refers'
to some sncre difant aim. Wealth and power, the
infiruments of ladling gratification, are now coveted
mncre than any ingle pleasure. Prudence and fore-

- 3 fight

fight lay their plans. Indutry carries on-its patient
efforts. Ativity pushes forward; address, winds
around. Here, an enemy is to be overcome ; there
a rivel to be displaced. Competitions warm ; and
the firife of the world thickenson every fide, to guide
men through this bu) .period, without iofs of inte-
grity; tq guard them againfi the temptationswhich
arise from mistaken. or interfering, interests ; t
call them.from wordly pursuits, to serious thoughts
of their fpiiitual concerns, is the great office of reli-
gion.

But as this includes, in a great measure, the whole

compass of moral duty ; as the general ftraia of reli-
gious exhortation is addressed to thofew who are in
this season of life ; a delineation of the virtues, pro-
perly belonging to middle age, may appear unnecef-
fary, and would lead us into too wide a field. Let
us therefore turn our view to a bounded profpe&';
and contemplate a period of life, the duties of which
are circumscribed within narrower limits. Old age
is a flage of the human course, which every one hopes
to reach; and theretfore.the consideration of it, interest
us all. Is it a period ju-fly entitled to general re-
fpeEt. Even its failin s ought to be touched with a
gentle hand ; and though the petulent, and the vain,
may difpife the hoary head, yet the wisest of men has
asserted in the Text, that when foundin the wvay vs
rigbteoufJne/, it it a crown ofglory. 1 shall, first,
offer some counsels, concerning the errors which are
most incident to the aged. Secondly, I shall fuggefl
the peculiar duties they ought to praaife ;- and,
thirdly, point out the consolations they may enjoy.

L As the follies and vices of youth, are chiefly de-

rived from inexpeiience and resumption ; so, alt
most all the e',rours of age, may be traced up to the
feebleness and diftrefspeculiar to that time of life.
Though in every part of life, vexation occurs, yet,
in former years .eiihe. bufnlcfs, or pleasure, ferveC

to.

to obliterate their impression, by fapplyinzg occupation
to the mind. Old age begins it' advances, with:dif-
qualifying men for relishing the one, and for taking
an alive part in the other. While it uwithdraws
t-leir accustomed supports, it imposes, at the fane
time, the additional burden of growing infirmities.
In the former stages of their journey, -hope continued
·to flatter them with many a fair and enticeing prof-
pec.. But in proportion as old age increales,. tlhol
pleasing illusions vaniifl. Life is contra&ed within a
narrotv and barren circle. Year after year,,fteal
fdMnethat away from their store ofcofitor.i, depriver
tliem of some of their antient friends, blunts some of
their powers of sensation, or incapacitates them for
Some function of life.

Though, in the plan of Providence, it is wifely

ordered, that before we are called away from tfe
;'orld,;our attachment to it should be gradually loosen.
-cd'; though it be fit in itself, that as in the day ds
human life, there is a morning- and a noon, so there
ihould he an evening also, when the lengthening iha-
dows lhail admonith usof approaching night ; yet we
have no reason to. be futprifed, if they who are ar-
rivred at this deje&ing season, feel and lament tte
lchainge which they susser. The complaints, there-
fore,'of the aged,- should meet with tendernefs,-tat-
ther than censure.. The burden under which thtIr
labour, ought to be viewed with fympathrT by thoiek
'Who mutl bear it in their turn, and-who perhaps,
hereafter may complain of it as bitterly. At the
game time, the old should confider, that all the fes-
kfns of life have their several trials allotted to them
and that to bear the infirmities-,of age with becoming
patience, is as much their duty, as it is-that of th
young to refill the temptations of youthful pleasure.
By calmly induring, for the short time that remains,
what Providence is pleased to.inflit, they both er-
press a resignation molt acceptable to God and recom-

H 4 mend

mend.themfelves to. the. esteem and assistance of .al
who are around them.

But though the querulous temper imputed to old

age, is to be confidered as a natural.infiTmity, ra-
ther than as a. vice; the fame apology cannot- be
made.for that peevish difgulf at the manners, and.
that malignant censure of the enjoyments, of the young
which. is sometimes found to- accompany declining.
years. Nohing can be more unjust, than to take.of-
fence at others, on account of their partaking of plea-
fures, which it is pas your timerto enjoy. By in-
dulging this fietful.temper, you both aggravate the
uneasiness of age, and you alienate those On whore
affe&ion much of your comfort depends. - In order.
to make the two extremes of life unite in:amicable
society, it is greatly to be wilhed, thatl the young.
would look forward, and confider that they ihall one
day be old; and that- the old would look back, and.
remember that they once were young, make proper.
allowances for the temper and the manners of youth.

But instead of this) it is too common to find the

aged at declared emnity with. the whole fyilem of
present customs and manners ; perpetually complain-
ing of the growing depravity of rhe world, and of
the astonishing' vices and follies of the rising generati-
on. All, things, according to them, are rushing fast
into ruin. Decency and good order have become ex-
tina, ever since the happy difcipitne, under which
they spent their youth, has passed away.-Part, at
liaft, of this displeasure, you may fairly impute to the:
infirmity of age, which throws its own gloom on every
surrounding objet. Similar lamentations were in the
days of your youth, poured forth by your fathers;
and they who are now young, fiall,. when it comes
to their turn, inveigh, in the like ilrain, againft-thofe
who succeed them. Great has. been the corruption of
the world in every age. Sufficient ground there isfor
the complaints made by serious obferversat all times

of

of abounding iniquity and folly. But though parti-
cular modes of vice prevail in one age, more than in
others, it does not follow, that on that age all iniquity.
is accumulated. It is the form, perhaps, more than
the quantity of corruption, which makes the diftinc-
tion. In the worfl of times, God has assured us, that
there fhallbe always a feed whbchballferve him. Say,t
not thou, What is te cause tha the former days were bet-
ter than tbefe ? for thou dofl not enquire wifely concerning
thi.i Be not righteous overmuch ; neither make thyself
over-wife. Former follies pars away, arid are for-
gotton. Those which are present, firike observation,
and sharpen cenliure. Had the depravation of the.
world, continued to increase in proportion to those.
gloomy calculations, which, for so many centuries
past, have eftimated.each race as worse than the pre-
ceding,; by this time, not one ray of good sense, nor
one fpark-of piety'and virtue, must have remained un-
extinguished among maPkinrd.

One of the vices of old age, which appears the mot-:

unaccountable, is that covetous attachment to wordly.
interest, with which it is often charged. But this too, -
can naturally be deduced from the-fenfe ofits feeblenels
anddecay. In preportion as the vigour both of body
and rhiaddtclines, timidity may be'expeCed to increase.
With anexious arid fear.ul eye, the aged look. forward
to the evils, which threaten them, and to the cti.u
which may befall. Hence, they are fbmetimes apt"
to overvalue riches, as the instrument of their defence
againfi these dangers, and as the molt certain means
of securing them against soli-tude and difrefpe:.' But
though their apprehension may justify a cautious fru-
gality, they can by no means excuse a fordid ava icc. -
It is no lefs'abfiurd, than it is culpable, in the old,.
from the dread of uncertain futurity, to deny them-
selves the enjcoyment of the present; and to increase.
in anxiety about their journey,:in proportion .as i>:
draws nearer to its close. There are more effeCtal
rmlhods of commanding refpee from the world, than

i- 5 - the

the mere poeffion of wea!th. Let them be charitabre,
and do good. Let them mix beneficence to their
friends, with a cheerful enjoyment of the comforts
which befit their slate. They will then receive the-
returns of real refpe. and love. Whereas, by their
-riches, they prc.cure no more then pretended demon-
.Rrations of regard; while their ill-judged parsimony
occafiors many secret withes for theirdeath.
' As increafig years debilitate the body, so they
weaken the force, and diminiih the warmth Of the
affeaions. Chilled by the hand of time, the heart
loses that tender c-nf bility,with which it once entered:
into the concerns and sorrows of others. It is, in
truth, a merciful appointment of Providence, that as-
they who fee many days, mutl behold many a fad-
fcne, the imprefliors of grief upon their heart should
be blunted by being often repeated; and that, in pro-
portion as their power cf advancirg the prosperity of
others decrease, theirparticipition of the mifortunes of
ethers shall allo leffcn. However, as in every period
es life, humanity and friendship contribute to happi-
refs, it is both the duty and the iritereft of the aged,
to clerifil the remains of the kind &ffeAions; and, from
the 3avs of former years, to recall such imprcffions as
may tend to obfien their hearts. Let them not, from
having suffered much in the course of their long pil-
grimage, become callous to the sufferings es ethers.
]3 :t, remembering that they till are men, let them
fludy keep their heartsopen to the fenfeof human we.
Pzactifed in the ways of men, they are apt to be fu'-
picious of design and fraud; for the knowledge, and
the distrust of mankind, too often gotogether. Let not,
however, that wary caution, which is the fruit of
their experience, degenerate into craft. Experience
eught all to have taught them, that amidst all the
faliehood of men, integrity is the bell defence; and:
that he w ho coniinueth to the end to walk uprigbily
thall continue to walk surly. Having thus offered

fir~rn

fomne admonitions concerning the errours most incident
to age, I proceed,

II. To point out the duties which peculiarly belong
to it

The fii'fi which I shall mention, is, a timely retreat

from the world- In.every pai-t of life, we are in hazard
of bcir too deeply. immersed in its cares. But, during
its vigouroys periods, th: iimpulfeoof aaive spirit, the
iieceffa'' .firyufefs of ourif, IEtiion, and tbh allgiviabl
er.deavours" o advannc' our fortune by' fair indtlfry,
render it' difficult t6 observe due rioderation. In old
age, all the motives.of eager pursuit diminish. Tho
voice of nature then calls yCu to '.eave tb others the
buhile and content of the voiid ; and gradully to dif-
engage yourselves from. a burthen which begins to ex-
ceed your firength. Having borne your fliare of the
heat and labour of the day, let the evening of life be
passed in the cool and quiet Ihade. It is only in the
shade, that the viritus of old age can flourifli. There
i s duties are dirchia'rgcd with the molt success; and
there, its coniforts are enjoyed with greatefl fatisfac-
tion.

By the retreat of old age, however, I do not mean

a total cefslation from every worldly employment.
There'is an errour in this, as well as in the opposite
extreme.. Persons who 'have been long haraff'd with.
bufine's and care, sometimes imagine, that when Tlif
declEnes, they cannct make their retirement from the
wol 'd' too ccmplete. But where they expected.a de-
licious enjoymeni of leisure and ease, they have often
found a r'eliancioly solitude. Few are able, in any
period of their days, to hear a total abftraaion from
the world. Tihere- remains a vacancy which they
cannot fill up. Incapable of being always employed
;i thre exefcises of religion, and ptfen little qualified
for the entertainments of the underftarding, they are
in hazard of becoming a burden to themselves, aind to
all with whlicm they are coni;vaed. It is, therefore,

the

the dhut' of the aged, not so much to wit}idi-aw-en-
tirely from wordly business, as to contrat its circle ;
not so much to break off, as to looftn their commu-
nication with active life. Continuing that train of oc-
cupation to which they have been most accustomed,
let them purfee it with lets intenseness; relaxing their
efforts, as their powers decline- retiring more and'
more, from public obfervatioirto domestic seenes, ard:
serious thoughts; till as the decays of life advance,
the world shall of itfetf withdraw to a greater distance
from their view; its cbjecs shall gradually yield their
place to others of more importance; and its tunmults
shall fourd in their ears, only Like a noise which is
heard from afar.

If it be the duty of the old, to retreat betimes from7

the fatigue of worldly care, it is still more incumbent
on them, to quit the pursuit of such pleasures as are
unfuitableto their years. Chetrfulnefs, in old age,,
is graceful. It is the natuial concomitant of virtue.
But the cheerfulness of age is widely different from--
the levity of youth. Many things are allowable in-
that early period, which in maturer years,. would de-
serve censure ;. but which, in old age, both becomeri--
diculcus and criminal. By awkwardly affecting to
imitate the manners, and to mingle in the vanities of'
the young, as the aged depart from the dignity, si
they forfeit the privileges of gray hairs. But if, by:
follies of this kind, they are degraded, they are ex--
posed to much deeper blame, by descending to vicious
pleasure, and continuing to hover round those sinful:
gratifications to which they were once addiced.
Amurfement and relaxation itheaged require,.and may-
erjoy. But let them confider well, that by every in-
temperate indulgence,. they accelerate decay; instead
of e-livening., they oppress, and precipitate, t-eir
declining state. Ease, safety, and refpe&, are the
proper enjoyments of age. Within these bounds let
it remain, and not vainly attempt to break through

that

that barrier, by which nature has separated the plea-
fores of youth, from the comforts left to the conclud-
ing years of life..

A material' part of the duty of the aged, confiftst

in fludying to-be useful to therace who are to succeed
them. Here opens to them an extensive field in
which they may so employ themselves, as confidera-
bly to advance the interest of religion, and.the happi-
ness of mankind'. To them it belongs,, to impart to
rl-e young the fruit of their long experience; to in-
ftrud them in the proper condia&,.and' to warn them
of the various dangers, of life; by wife counsel,. to
temper their precipitate ardour; and both by pre-
cept and example, to form them to piety and virtue.

It is not by rigorous discipline and unrelaxing au-

flerity, that they can maintain an ascendant over
youthful minds. The'confraint which their presence
will impose, and the aversion which their manners will
create, if the one be constantly awful,. and the other
severe, tend to fruffrate the effec of all their wifdon.
They must assume the spirit of the companion, and
the friend ; ,and mix with the authority of the age, a
proper degree of indulgence to the manners -of the
young. Instead of lessening the refpe& due to their
years by such condescension, they take the surest me?
thod to increase it. Old age never appears with great-
er dignity than when tempered by mildness, and en-
livened with good humour, it ats as the guideand the
patron ofyouth. Religion displayed in such a cha-
ra&er, strikes' the beholders, as at once amiable and
venerable. They revere its power, when they lee it
adding so much grace to the decays of nature, and
shedding so pleasing a lufere over the evening of life.
The young wifi to tread the fame steps, and to arrive
at the close of their days with equal honour. They
liften with attention to counfejs, which are mingled
with tenderrefs, and rendered refpecable by gray
hairs. For notwithtfanding all its presumption, youth

naturally

naurally berrds before fuperiour knowledge and years.
Aged wildoin, when joined with acknowledged virtue,
exerts an authority over the humain mind, greater even
than that which arises from power and llation. It
ian check the mors forward, abalh the most profligate,
and tlrike with'awe the mAst giddy and unthinking.

In the midfR of their endeavours to be ufefulto others,

let not the aged forget tho!e religious employments,
which their own state particularly requires. The sirs
of these, is reflection on their padl behaviour, with a
view to discover the errours which they have conmmit-
ted ; and, as fat as terhainig life allows, to apply them-
fclves to repentance and ainerdmrent.-'Long his the
world bewildered you in its maze, and imposed upon
.you by its arts. The time is now conrie, when its
great -,ducer fliould meflead you no more. From the
calm station at which you are arrived, fequeflered
from ths crowd of the deceiving and the deceived,
review your co':duca, with the eye cf Chriflians and
imncrial beings. After all the tumult oE lif is over,
what r.ow remains to afford you foild fatisfa&ion ?
Have you lerved God with fidelity, and discharged
your part to your feflow-creatures with integsicy and
a good confcicnce'? Can you look forward, withcut
terrour, to that day which is to dffolve your connec-
tion with this world, and to bring you into the pre-
fence es him who made you, in order to give account
of your acions ?-The retrofpe& of rife is feldoin
whollv unattended, by uneafine s and 'hame. Thou/gh
to the good and the bad-, it prerents a very differert
scene; yet, to all the men, it recalls much guilt in-
curred, and much time mifpent.. It too much refem-
bles the view, which a traveller takes from some erhi-
rence, of a barren country, through which he-has
pa2l:d, where the heath and the defart from the chief
profpeE ; divcrfitied only by a few scattered Ipots of
impereat cul ivation.

Turn then your thoughts to the proper methods of

l.i.;ia I

making your peace with God through Jefius Christ;
and implore, from Divine grace, that new heart,
and right spirit, which will fit you for a better world.
Let devotion fill up niany of these hours, which are
now vacant from wordly business and care. l.etyour
affections dwell among divine and immortal objets.
In silent and thoughtful meditation, walk as on the
shore of that vast ocean, upon which you are soon to
embark Summon up all the considerations, which
fliould reconcile you to your departure from life;
and which may prepare you from going through its
lafi scene, with firnmnes and decency. Often let
your thanksgivings ascend to God, for that watchful
care with which he hath hitherto conducted you,
thiough the long journey of life. Often let your
prayers be heard, that in what remains of your pil-
grimage, he may not forsake you ; and that, when
you enter into the valley of the J7ado7w of death, he
may there support you with hisjaff, and defend you
with his red.-Amidfl such thoughts and cares, let
old age find you employed; betaken yourfelve to a
prudent and timely.retreat disengaged, both from the
oppressive load of bufinefs,and from the unseasonable
pursuit of pleasure; applying yourlelves to form a
the succeeding race, by your counsels to virtue and
widom ; reviewing seriously your past life ; by re-
pentance and devotion, preparing yourselves for a
better; and, with humble and manly co;npofure,
expeaing that hour, which Nature cannot now long
delay. It remains,

III. To suggest the consolations which belong to

old age, when thus found in the way of rigbtcauJ-
neff.

I mofl introduce them with observing, That no-

thing is more reasonable in itself, than to submit pa-
tiently to those infirmities of Nature, which are
brought on by the increase of years. You knew be-
forehand what you had to expea, when you num-

bered

bcred: the facceflive Summers- and Winters which
were passing over your heads. Old age did not at-
tack you by surprise, nor was it forced upon you a-
gainft your choice. Often, and earnestly, did your
wish to fee long life, and many days. When arrived'
at the desired period, have you any just cause to corn-
Llain, on account of enduring what the conflituitior
of our being imposes on all'? Did you.expecS, thar-
for your fake, Providence was to alter its established
order ? Throughout the whole vegitable, fenfibleand
rational world, wliatever makes progress towards ma-
turiry, as soon as it has pasTed that point, begins to.
verge towards decay. It is as natural for old age to
be trail, as for the corn to bend under theripened ear,.
or for 'the autumnal leaf to change its hue; To
this law, all who went before you, have submitted;.
and all who shall come alter you, must yield.. After.
they hav'e flourishcd for a season, theyfhall:fade like
you, when the period of decline arrives, andbow-un- -
der the prcffure of years. .

During the whole progress of the human course .

the principle materials of our comfort, or uneasiness,
lie within ourselves. Every age will prove burden---
some, to those who have-no fund of happiness in their
own breast. Preftrve thenc, if you could, from
all infirmity of frame; bestow upon them, if it
were poflible, perpetual youth; still they would be
rtftlefs and miserable, through the influence of ill-go-
verned passions. It is not furprifing,.-that such per, -
sons are pcevifh, and-querulous, when old. Unjufily
they impute to their time-of life, that misery with
which their vices and follies- embitter every age.
Whereas to good- men, no period of life is unfup--
portable, btcaufe they draw their-chief happiness
firm sources, which are independent of age or time,
'-, Wisdom, riety, and virtue, grow not old with our

bddies. They susser no decay from lergth of dayss
To themonly belongs unalteable and unsaiding youth.

- 2holi

hoa/ that be phlnted in the house of the Lord, fall flu-

rib in ls4 courts of ur God. 'hey Pball /ill bring
forth fruit in old age; they jball be fat and iouritb-
ing.- am

You can now, it is true, no longer relish many of

those pleasures which once amused you. Your sensa-
tions are less quick than formerly; your. days more
languishing; But if you have quitted the region of
ofpleafure, in return, you possess that of tranquillity
and repose. If you are firangers to the vivacity of
enjoyment, you are' free, at the fame tine, from the
pain of violence and often disappointed delire. Much
fatigue, much vexation, as well as vanity, attend
that turbulence'of life, in which the younger part of
mankind are engaged. Amidst those keen pursuits, and
seeming pleasures, for which you envy them, often
they feel their own misery, and look forward with a
wishful eye to the season of cahnnefs and retreat.
For, on all fides of human life, the ballance of hap-
piness is adjufled with more equality than at first ap-
pears; and if old age throws lome new diitrefles into
the scale, it lightens also the weight of others. Many
paflions which formerly difsurbed your tranquillity,
have now subsided. Many competitions, which long
filled your days with disquiet and firife, are now at
an end. -Many -affliL:ions, which once- rent your
heart with violent anguish, are now foftned into a-
tender emotion, en the remembrance of past woe..
In the beginnings of life, there was room for much
apprehension concerning what might befall in its pro-
grefs. Your security was never untroubled. Your
hopes were interupted by mansyanxietys and fears.
Having finished t recareer of labou'.and danger, your
anxiety ought of course to lessen. Ready to enter
into the harbour, you can look back, as from atfe-
cure ftation,upon the-perilsyou have efcaped,upon the
temefl by which you was tolled, and upon the mul-

titudes

titudes who are fill engaged in conflicing with'tr-
storm.

If you have acted your part with integrity and ho-

nour, ybu are jufily entitled to refpe&, and you will
generally receive it. For rarely, or never, is old-age
contemned, unless when, by vice or folly, it renders
itself contemptible. Though length of time may
have worn off superficial ornaments, yet, what old
age loses in grace, it often gains in dignity. The
veneration as was before observed, which gray hairs
command, puts it in the power of the aged, tomrain-
tain a very important place in hunma focietyl They
are so far from being insignificant in the world, that
families long held together by their authority, and so-
cieties accuflomed to be guided by their counsels,
have frequently had cause to regret their loss, more
than that of the most vigorous and young. To .fut-
cess of every kind, the head which direcs, is no-ess
-essential than the hand which executes. Vainj nay
often dangerous, were youthful enterprife,.if not con-
duaed by aged prudence. I said, days Jhuhl /fpeik,
and multitude of yearsJtould teach 'wisdom. Therefor, -
thou fl7alt rife up before the boary head, and honour the
face of the old man, andfear t.'y God.

Though, in old age, the circle of your 'pezfures:is

more contraeed- than it has formerly been; yet,
within its limits, many of those enjoyments reimaih,
which are most grateful to homan nature. Tempe-
rate mirth, is not eextinguifhed by advanced years..
The mild pleafurew of domeffic life, lill cheer the
heart. The entertainm'ents of conversation, and so-
cial intercourse, conrinue unimpaired. The defireof
knowltede, is not abated by the ,railty of the body;
and the lei;r.e of old age, affords many oppcrtunities
for gra;ifying that desire. The sphere of your obler-
vation and refletio-, is so. much enlarged by long ac-
-quaintance with the world, as to supply within itlelf,
a wide range of improving thought. To recall the

vai iou

various revolutions which have occurred since you be-
gan to at your part in life; to compare the charac-
ters of paLt and present times; to trace the hand of
Providence, in all the incidents of your own.lot.; to
contemplate, with thoughtful eye, the fucceffive.new
appearances which the world has assumed around
you, in government, education, opinions, customs,
and modes of living; there are employments, no Ilib
entertaining, than inilru&ive to the mind.

While you are engaged in such employments, yol.

are perhaps furroutided with your families, who treat
you with attention and refpe&; you are honoured by
your friends; your characer is established; you are
placed beyond the reach of clamour, and the frifeof
tongues; and, free from difira&ing cares, you can ar-
tend calmly to your e:ernal interests. For such com-
forts as thcfe, have you not cause mofl thankfully to
acknowledge the goodness of Heaven ? Do they not
afford you ground to pals the remainder of your days
in resignation and peace; disposing youffelves to rife
in due time, like satisfied guefis, from the banqnet
that has been set before you; and to praise and bless,
when you depart, the great Mafler of the feapt ? To a
man that is good in bis fight, whether he be young or
old, God givetb wifdorn, and knowledge, and joy. For
every season of life, the benignity of his providence
hath prepared its own fatisfa&ionr, while his wifdomr
hath appointed its pecular trials. -No age is doomed to
total infelicity; provided that we attempt not to do
violence to Nature, by reeking to extort fromnone age,
the pecafure of another; and to gather, in the Winter
of life, those flowers which were deflined to bloffonrr,
cnry in its Summer, or its Spring.

BU.T perhaps it will be said, That I have confider-,

ed old age, only in its first fRages, a'd in its mofl
favourabie point of light ; before the faculties are as
yet much impaired, and when difeafeorafflittion has
aid no additonal load on tie burthen of-years. Let

us

us then view it, with all its aggravations of diltrers.
Let us suppose it arrived at its utmost verge, worn
eut with infirmities, and bowed down by sickness and
sorrow. Still there refmains this consolation, that it
is not long ere thewearyjballbe at refl. Having'paffed
through ol many of the toils of life, you may now,
surely, when your pilgrimage touches on its close, bear,
without extreme impatience; the hardships of its con-
cluding itage. From the ineflimable promises of the
Gofple, and from the gracious presence of God, the
afflicions of old age cannot seclude you. Though
your heart jbould begin to faint, and your fel/ tofail,
there is One, who can be the strength of yotr heart,
and your portionfor ever.Even to your old age, faith the
Lord, I am le; and even to hoary hairs, will Icarry
you. I have made, and I will bear; even I will carry,
and will deliver you. Leave thy fatherles children; F
willpreferve them alive, and let thy widows truf/ in me.

There is undoubtedly a period w-en there ought to

be a satiety of life, as there is of aH other things; and-
when death should be viewed, as your merciful dif-
mission from a long warfare. To come to the grave ir-
a full age, like as ajbock of corn cometh in, in its season,
is the natural termination of the human course. Amidst
multiplying infirmities, to prolong life beyond its usual
bounds, and to draw your existence here to the last
and foulest dregs, ought not to be the wish of any wife
man. Is it desirable, to continue lingering on the
borders of the grave, after every tie which connects
you with life is broken; and to be left a solitary indi-
vidual, in the midst of a new generation, whose faces
-you hardly know ? The shades of your departed-
frierds rite up before you, and warn you, that it is
time to depart. Niture and providence summon you,
to be galbered to your fathers. Reason admonishes
you, that as your predecessors made way for you, it
is jus that you should yield your place to those, who
·have arisen to facceed you on this bury flage; who,

for

for a while, ihall fill it with their aaions and their
sufferings, their virtues and their crimes; and then
/hall, in their turn, withdraw, and be joined to the
forgotten multitudes of former ages.

Could death indeed be confidered in no other view,

than as the close of life, it would afford only a me-
lancholy retreat. The total extintion of being, is a
fhought which human nature, in its mp9f distressed
circumstances, cannot bear without dejection. But,
blessed be God ! far other profpeas revive the spirits
of the aged, who have fpeft their life in piety and
virtue. To them, death is not the extintion, but
the renovation of the living principle ; its removal
from the earthly house of this tabernacle, to the beufe not
made with bands, eternal in the heavens. Having fought
the goodfight; havingfinifbed their ceurfe, and kept the
faith; there is laid up far them the crown of rigbteouf-
ness. The Saviour of the world hath not only brought
immortality to light, but placed it within the reach of
their hope and trust. By making atonement for their
guilt, he hath prepared their way within the veil;
and secured to them, the poffeflion of an inheritance,
incorruptible and undefiled, reserved in the heavens.-
Such are the hopes and profpeas, which cheer the
sorrows of old age, and surmount the fear of death.
Faith and peity are the only adequate supports of hu-
man nature, in all its great emergencies. After they
have guided us through the various trials of life, they
uphold us, at lad, amidst the ruins of this falling
frame; and when the silver cord is juji ready to be
loosed: and the golden bowl to be broken ; wben the pitch-
er is broken at the fountain, and the wheel broken at the
cmlern; they enable us to fay, 0 Deatb ! wher is thy
fling t- 0 Grave.! where it thy viAory.?

SERMON

# SERMON XIII. GENESIS. xlii. 21, 22. And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he be sought us, and we would not hear; ...

SERMON XIIIL

GENz S S. xlii. 21, 22.
And they /aid one to anrtber, We are verily guilty con-

erning our brother, in that we saw the angui/b of
bis oul, when he besought us, and we would not bear;
Tberefore is this dif/refs come upon us. And Reuben
anJwered them, faying, Spake I not unto you, faying,
Do not fin again/t the child; and ye wouldnot bear
Therejore, behold also his blood is required.
T- HIS book of Genesis displays a more fingulhr

and interefling scene, than was ever presented

to the world, by any other hiflorical record. It car-
ries us back to the beginning of time; and exhibits
mankind, in their infant and rising state. It shows us
human manrersin their primitive simplicity, before the
arts of refinement had polilhed the behaivour, ordif-
guised the charalers of men; when they give vent
to their passions without dilfimulation, and spoke their
sentiments without reserve. Few great focities were,
as yet, formed on the earth. Men lived in scattered
tribes. The transaCtions of families made the chief
materials of history; and they are related in thisbook,
with that beautiful simplicity,- which in the highe:
degree, both delights the imagination, and asse&s the
heart.

Of all the Patriarchal hiflories, that of Joseph and
l-is brethren is the most remarkable, for the characers
of the ators, the inflru&ive natureof the events, and
the surprising revolutions of worldly fortune. As far
as relates to the Text, and is necessary for explaining
it, the flory is to the following purpofe.-Jofeph, the
youngest, except one, of the sons of Jacob, was dif-
tinguilbed by his father with such mrarks of peculiar as-

feQioas

feaion, as excited the envy of his brethren. Having
related to them, in the opennels of his heal t, certain,
dreams which pretended his future advancement above
them, their jealousy rose to such a height, that tlhy
unnaturally coirfpired his defirution. Seizing the op-
portuuity of his being at a distance from hums, they
first threw him into a.pit, and afterwards fold hLn for
a slave; imposing on their father, by a falie relation
of his death. When they had thus gratified their re-
fentnlent, they loft all remembrance of their crime.
The family of Jacob was rich and powerful; and fe-
veral years palled away, during which they lived in
prosperity without being touched, as far as appears,
with the lea.f remorse for the cruel deed which they
had committed.
.Mean while Joseph was safely conduaed, by the
hand of Providence, through a variety of dangers,
until, from the lowest condition, he role at last to
be chief favourite of the King of Egypt, the most
powerful monarch at that time in the world. While
he possessed this high dignity, a general famine dif-
tressed all the neighbouring countries In Egypt alone,
by means of his foresight, and prudent administration,
plenty still reigned. Compelled to have recourse to
that kingdom for supply of food, the brethren of
Joseph, upon this occasion, appeared in his presence,
and made their humble application to him, for liberty
to purchase corn; little fufpeding the Governour of
the land, before whom they bowed down their facet to
the earth, to be him, whom, long ago, they had
fold as a slave to the Ishmaelites. But Joseph no soo-
ner saw, than he knew his brethern ; and, at this
nnexpe&ed meeting, his heart melted within himn.
Faternal tenderness arose, in all his warmth; and
totally effaced, from its generous breast, the inpref-
sion of their ancient cruelty. Though, from
that moment, he began to prepare from them a fur-
prise of joy ; yet he so far constrained himself, as to

afiume

assume an appearance of 'great severity, by this he
intended, both-to oblige them to bring into Egypt
his youngest and mos beloved brother, whose presence
he inflantly required ;' and also to awaken within
them, a due fence of the crime which they had for-
merly perpetrated. Accordingly, his behaviour pro-
duced the designed effe. For, while they were in
this situation; firangers in a foreign land, where they
had fallen, as they conceived, into extreme diflrets;
where they were thrown into prison by the Gover-
nour, and treated with rigour, for which they could
aslign no cause; the refletion mentionedin the Text
arose in their minds. Conscience brought to remem-
brance, their former fins. It recalled, in particular
their long forgotten cruelty to Joseph ; and without
hesitation, they interpreted their present distress, to
be a judgment for this crime, infliced- by Heaven.
They said, one to another, We are verily guilty con-
cerning our brother, in that we saw the augui/b of
his fcul ahen be bejought us, and we would not bear :
Therefore is this dijqref come upon us.-Behold alfi
bis blond is required.

From this infirueive passage of history, the follow-

ing observations naturally arise. I. That a sense of
right and wrong in. condua, or of moral good and
evil, belongs to human nature. II. That it produces
anapprehenfionof merited punishment, when we have
committed evil. III. That although this inward fen-
timent be fifled during the season of prosperity, yet, -
in adversity, it will revive. And, IV. That when
it revives, it determines us to confider every diltrefs
which we susser, from what cause soever it has arilen,
as an acual inflicion of punishment by Heaven. The
consideration of these particulars, will lead us to a very
serious view of the nature of man, and of the gover-
ment of God.

I. TH E R belongs to human nature, a sense ofmo-
ral good and evil, or a faculty which diftiuguifties

tight

iigiht fiom wrong, in action and conduc. Ty- Jfail
one to another, We are verily guilty.-w-In an age when
the law was not yet given, when no external revelation
of the divine will, subsisted, except what had beent
handed down among the Pa'riarchs, from one genera-
tion to another; the brethren of Joseph reafbned con-
cerning theirconduE, upon the fame moral principles,
and were.affe&ed by the fame feelings, of which we
are conscious at this day. Such sentiments are coeval
with human nature.; for they are the remains -of a
law, which was originally written in our heart. In the
darkness regions of the earth, and among the rudest
tribes of men, a diftinEtio has ever been made, be-
tween jufl and unjust, between-a duty and a crime.
Throughout all the intercourse of'human beings, these
diflitions are supposed. They are the foundation o f
the mutal trult, which the tranfaEions of life require ;
nay, the very-entertainments of society constantly ap-
peal to them. The Hiflorian, who feudies to magnify
his hero, by representing him as just and generous; the
Poet, w ho seeks to interest the world in his fi&tions,
by engaging the heart in behalf of distressed virtue,
are sufficient to confute the Sceptic, who denies any
natural perception of a diftin&ion in acions.

But though a sense of moral good and evil be deeply
impressed on the heart of man, yet it-is not of fuficiene
power, to regulate his life. In his present corrupted
slate, it is both too general to afford him full direction
in condut, and too feeble to withstand the opposition
of contrary principles in his nature. It is often per-
verted, by ignorance and superstition; it is too easily
overcome by pafflon and desire. Hence,the importance
if that Divine revelation, which communicates both
light and strength; which by the infiruaive difcove-
ries it makes, and by the powerful afliftance it sup-
plies, it raises man to a station infinitely fuperiour to
that which he possesses under the mere light of Nature.

It is of conlequence, however, to remark, That

L this

this revelation necessarily supposes an antecedent feefc
of right and wrong to take place in the human mind.
It addresses itself to men, as possessed Qs fucha faculity;
and, it commands them in general terms, to purlue

lwhatfoever things are true, whatsoever things are bone/l,

%ubatfeeser things are jul, pure, lovely or of good report,
if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, it
plainly appeals to the native diEtates of their heart.
Nay, unlels men were endowed by Nature, with
some sense of duty, or of moral obligation, they could
reap no benefit from revelation; they would remain
incapable of all religion whatever. For, in vain were
a fyflem of duty prescribed to them by the word of
God; allegiance were in vain required towards, their
Creator, or love and gratitude enjoined towards their
Redeemer; if, previously, there was no principle in
their nature, which made them feel the obligations.
of duty, of allegiance, and of gratitude. They could
have no ideas corresponding. to such terms; nor any
conviAion, that, independently of fear or iutere f, they
were bound to regard, either him who made, or him
who redeemed thern.-,This, therefore, is to be held
as a pirnciple, fundamental to all Teligion, That there
is in human nature, an approving or condemning sense
of condut ; by means of which, they who have not
She law, are a law unto themlelves. They who,-from
a mistaken zeal for the honour of Divine revelation,
either deny the existence, or vilify the authority, of
natural religion, are not aware, that, by disallowing
the sense of obligation, they undermine the foundaticn.
on which revelation builds its power of commanding
heart.

Ti1c Text leads us to observe, That one of the cafes,

in wvhich the natural sense of good and evil operates
rnoi forcibly, is, when men have been guilty of in-
juttice or inhumanity. We Jaw the angui/b of fur
rothgr.' sfoul when he befJught us, and. we would nsthear.
An inward principle prompts us to do good to others;
_ - but

btit with much greater authority, it checks, and con-
demns us, when we have done them injuries. This
part of the human conflitution deserves to be remarked»
*s a signal proof of the wifdorr, of its Author, and of
the gracious provision which he has made for the wel-
fare of mankind. We are all committed, in some
measure, to the care and aflltance of one another,
-But our muu..l influence reaches much farther with
refpec to the evils, than with refpea to the enjoy-
ments, of those around us. To advance their prof-
perity, is often beyond our ability; but to inflia in-
juries, is almoRf always within our power: And, at
the fame time, felf-interefl very frequently tempts
us to commit them. With the utmost propriety.
therefore we are so framed, that the influence of the
moral principle should be most authoritative, in cafes
where its aid is moil needed ; that to promote the hap-
pinels of others, should appear to usas praife-wortly,
indeed, and generous; but that, to abstain from injur--
ing them, should be felt as matter of the ftrjieff
duty.-Amidll the diftrels which'the Patriarchs fils-
sered in Egypt, had only this suggestion occurred,
"We saw our brother beginning to prosper, and war
"contributed not to his advancement," their riind,'
would have been more easily quieted. But, wheti'
their reflection was, We saw bis angui/b when 'he be-'
/ergbt ui, and we wuuld nit hear, then compuntion
turned upon them its {harpeft edge. I proceed to ob-
fevre,

II. THAT cur natural sense of right and wrong-

prcduces an apprehension of merited punishment when
we have committed a crime. When it is employed
in surveying the behaviour of others, it dilftnguiihee
rome aQions, as laudable and excellent; and difap-
proves of others, as evil and base. But when it is
direced upon our own conduct, it assumes a higher of-
fice, and exercises the authority of a judge. It is
then properly termed, Conscience; and the senti-

1 a mene

ments which it awakens, upon the perpetraticn oft
crime, are ftiled, Remorse. Therefore, said the bre-
thren of Joseph, is this diJfref come upon us; behold
also hiLblood is required. They acknowledged, not
only that they had committed a wrong, but a wrong,
for which they were jultly doomed to susser.

Did not conscience suggest this natural relation be-

tween guilt and punishment, the mere principle of
approbation, or disapprobation, with refpea. to mo-
ral condua, would prove of small efficacy. For
disapprobation attends, in Come degree, every con-
vition of impropriety or folly. W'hen one has aaed
unsuitably to his interest, or has trefpeffed againfti he
rules of prudence or decorum, he refles upon his
condu& with pain, and acknowledges that he deserves
blame. But the difference between the sense ofmif-
conduct, and the sense of guilt, consists in this, 1 hat
the latter penetrates much deeper into the heart. It
makes the criminal feel, that he is not only blameable,
but juRly punishable, for the part which he has a&-
nd. With reference to this office of confcierce, the
inlpired writers frequently speak of it, in terms bor-
rowed from the awful folemsities of judicial proce-
dure; as, bearing vuitrnef for or againfi us ; acciflng
r excusing, judging and condemning. It will be ft cnd
that in the language of most nations, ternms of the
fame import are applied to the operations of con-
isience; expreffingthe sense, which all mankird have,
of its palling sentence upon them, and pronouncing
rcward, or puuifhments to be due to their actions.

The fenfe.of punishment merited, You are further

to observe, can never be separated from the dread,
that at some time or other, punishment tball be aCu-
ally infliced. This dread is not confined to the
vengeance of man. Fcr, let the finner's evil deeds he
ever so thoroughly cor.ceald from the knowledge of
the world, his inward alarms are not quiettd by that
ccifderati.,p. Now puniifthmet is the fan&aion of a

law.

saw. Every law supposes a rightful fuperiour: And
therefore, when conscience threatens punishment to
secret crimes, it manifestly recognizes a supreme Go-
vernours from whom nothing is hidden. The belief -
of our being accountable to him, is what the moll
hardened wickedness has never been able to eradicate.
It is a belief which rifes, not merely from reasoning,
but from internal sentiment. Conscience is felt to at
as the delegate of an invisible Ruler; bath anticipating
hi' sentence, and foreboding its execution.

Hence ar'se the terrours, which so often haunt

guilt, and rife in proportion to its atrocity. In the
history of all nations, the Tyrant and the Opp'ressor,
the bloody and the flagitious, have been ever pointed
out, as fearful, unquietr and restless; fubjeEf to alarmi
and apprehcnfions of an unaccountablekind. And surely,
to live under such disquietude, from the dread of me-.
rited punishment, is already to undergo one of the
mofl levere punishments which human nature can sus-
ser. When the world threatens us with any of itd
evils, we know the extent, and discern the limits of
the danger. We fee the quarter, on which we are
exposed to its attack. We measure our own strength
with that of our adverfary-i and can take precautions,
either for making refitsance, or for contriving escape.
But when an awakened conscience places before the
finner, the jufi vengeance of the Almighty, the prof.
pe& is confounding, because the danger is boundless.
It is a dark unknown which threatens him. The arm
that is firet ched over him, he can neither feenor refif.
On every fide, he dreads it; and on every object
which surrounds him, he looks with terrour, because
he is conscious that every objea can be employed a-
gainft him as an infirument of wrath. No wonder
that the lonesome solitude, or the midnight hour,
should strike him with horrour. His troubled mind
beholds forms, which other men fee not and hears
voices, which found only in the ear of guilt. A hand

1 3 appeal

appears to come forth, and to write upon the wail
over against him as it is of old, in the fight of an im-
pious monarch. He fall find no ease nor re/f. For
ibe Lord Jhall give him a trembling heart, and failing of
rye,, andiforrow of mind: And his life Shall hang in
doubt before him; and be fball f,ar day and night, arn
Aave none assurance of his life. In bte morning te /ball
fay, Would to dod it were even; andat even be Fhailfay,
fVouldto God it 'were morning, for the fear of his hearS
mwherewith be bail fear, and for thefight 'which bji
tyes JTall fee. His live flall be grievous unto him.--
Adversity ! how blunt are all the arrows of thy qui-
ver, in comparison with those of guilt!--But if such
be the power of conscience, whence, it may be asked,
comes it to pass, that its influence is not more gene-
ral, either in restraining men from the cormmiflior
of fin, or in leading them to a timely repentance ?
This brings me to observe,

III. THAT, during a course of prosperity the ope-

rations of conscience are often suspended; and that
adversity is the season which restores them to their
proper force. At the time when crimes are committed
the mind is too much heated by passion, and engross-
ed by the objet of its pursuit, to be capable of pro-
per refleEion. After this tumult of spirits has sub-
fided, if a train of new palirons be at hand to employ
its a&ivity, or a fucceflion of pleasurable obje&s oc-
Lur to engage its attention, it may for a while remain,
though not entirely free from inward mifgivirgs, yet
uncnnfcious of the degree of its guilt. Dissipated a-
mong the amusements of life, the finner escapes, in
obme measure, from his own view. If he refle&s
upon himself at all, the continuance- of prosperity
feeras to him a strong jultification of his condut. For
it will be found, that in the hearts of all men, there
is a natural propensity, to judge of the favour of the
Supreme Bting, from the course of external events.
V/hen they are borne with a fiiooth gale along the

llream

iream ot life, and behold every thing proceeding ac-
cording to their wish, hardly can they be brought to be-
lieve, that Providence is their enemy. Basking in the
sun-shine of prosperity, they suppose themselves to en-
joy thefmile of indulgent Heaven ; and fondly conclude
that they are on terms of friendship with all above, and
with all beln.w. Easy they find it, then, to spread over
the groffefl crimes, acovering, thin, indeed, and flight,
yet sufficient conceal them from a superficial view.

Ot this we have a very remarkable inflance in those

brethren of Joseph, whose history we now confider;
Not only from the-filence of the inspired writer, we
have ground to believe that their remorse was stifled,
while their ptolperity remained; but we are able to
trace lome of the pretences, by which, during that
period, they quieted their minds. For when they
were contriving the deftrulion of Joseph, we find
Jundah 'aving to his brethren, WHhat profit is it, if w
jlay our brot.ler, and conceal his blood? Let us fll bira
to the l/m;naeli:es; and let hot our hand be upon him;
f7r he is c:.' brother, and ur feJh : Alnd his brethren
,aere content. Here you behold them justifying their
clime, by a fort of pretended humanity; and mak-
ing light of felling their brother for a slave, because
they did not take awayhis life. How strangely are the
opinirns of men altered, by a change in their conditi-
on ! How different is this sentiment of the Patriarchsi
from that which they afterwards entertained of the
fame aaion, when as you fee in the Text, the Re-
memberance ofit wrung their hearts with angusfh ?

but men, in truth, differ as much from themselves,

in prosperity, and in adversity, as if they were dif-
ferent creatures. In prosperity, every thing tends
to flatter and deceive. In adversity the illusions of
life van;fli. Its avocations, and its pleasures, no
longer afford the finner that shelter he was wont to
find from conscience. Formerly, he made apart ofi
thc crowd. He now feels himself a solitary individual,

1 4 left

left alone with God, and with his own mind'. f-t
fpirits-are notfupported as before, by fallacious views
of thefavour of Heaven.. The candle ofthe Lord
ifines net on his head, his pride is humbled; and
his affecions are softened for receiving every serious
imprefilon. In, this situation, a mas's iniquity is fwre
tofindhim cut. Whatever has been notor oully crimi-
nal in his former conduc, lifes as. a fpetre, and
places itself before him. The increaled sensibility of
his mind, renders him alive to feelings which lately
were faint ; and wounds which had been ill healed,
bleed afresh. When men take the timbrel and t'he hrp,
and rejoice at the found of the organ, they.fay, FWANt it
the Almighty that we Jhould serve him ? But when they
are holden in the cords of affli2fion, then he jbeweth them
their work, and their tranfgrefflon, that they have ex--
·eeded. He openetb alJo their ears to discipline; and
omnmarldeth, that they return /rom iniquity.

Hence, we may perceive the great utfefulnefs, and

propriety, of that interchange of conditions, which
takes place in human life. By prosperity, God gives
fope to ourpaflions, and makes trial of ourdifpofitions.
By adversity, he revives the serious principle within.
Neither the one, nor the other, could be borne en-
tire and unmixed. Men, always prosperous, would
be giddy and insolent; always afflided, would be ful-
ken and despondent. Hopes and fears, joy and- for-
row, are, therefore so blended in his life, as both to
give room for worldly pursuits, and to recall, from
time to time, the admonitions of conlfcience. Of the
iproportion in which they should be mixed forthis pur-
pose, we are very incompetent judges. From our
ignorance of the degree of discipline, which the fpi-
ritual state of others requires, we often censure Pro-
vidence unjustly for its severity towards them: And,
from tle vanity and rashness of our wishes, we com-
plain, without reason, of its rigour, to ourselves..
While we confvlt nothing but our ease, God atter:s

to

to our spiritual improvement. When we seek what
is pleasing, h. fends what is useful. When, by
drinking too deep of worldly prosperity, we draw in
a secret poison, he mercifully infuses a medicine, at
the time that he troubles and embitters the waters.
It remains now to observe,

IV. THAT when conscience is thoroughly awa-

kened, it determines the finner, to confider every
calamity which he suffers, as a positive inflicion of
punishment by Heaven. As it had before alarmed him
with threatenings of Divine displeasure, it tells him,
when he falls under diflrefs, that the threatened day
ot account is come. Afflitions, on rome occasions,
rile direcly out of our fins. Thus, diseases are
brought on by intemperance; poverty springs from
idlerefs ; and diigrace, from presumption. In such
catss, the punishment is so closely connected with the
crime, that it is impofllble to avoid discerning the
relation which the one bears to the other. But the
appointment of Providence, which we now confider,
reat hes farther than this. God has framed us so, that
dill;efles, which have no perceivable conneEtion with
our former crimes, are, nevertheless, interpreted by
c,)nfcience to be infliced on their account. They
force themselves upon our apprehension, under this
view. They are made to carry, not only that degree
of pain which properly belongs to themselves, but
that additional torment also, which rites from the be-
lief of their being the vengeance of the Almighty .

Let a man fall unexpectedly into some deep cala-

mi!v. I.et that calamity be brought upon hiin, ei-
ther by rreans which the wo.ld calls fo-tuito.is; or by
a train of incidents, in which his own mifcoiduA, or
tuilt, has appa.ent!y had no part; yet o:.e of the
first queflions, w: ch, in such a situation, he puls to
him'eiJ, iF, \ 1 at h.:e I do e to 'eferve thih.? Hi
erea;ol is, aln.o.t inftinciiely, diawn back tiro!s
his :o;n.er lifer ar.d if, in the course of that lieto-

., 5 ,fp b,

fre&, any flagrant guilty deed occur to fmtte his con-
-fIcince, on this he canrot avoid refling with anxiety
and terrour, and conneEting it in his imagination
with what he now suffers. He fee., or thinks that
he fees, a Divine arm lifted up; and what, in other
-circumflances, he would ha' e called a reverie of for-
tune, he now views as a judgment of Heaven.

When the brethren of Jtfeph, confined in the E-

gyptian priCon, were bewailing the difltres into which
they had fallen, there was no circuinmtance which
pointed out any relation between their present misfor-
tune, and their former cruelty to their brother. A
long co.irfe of years had intervened, during which
they flourished in wealth and ease. They were now
far from the scene of their crime; in a foreign land,
where they believed themselves utterly unknown, and
were tthey had done nothing to offend. But tonfci-
ence formed a connea.io! between events, ihich ac-
cording to the ordinary apprehension of men, were
entirely indepednent of each olier. It made them
recolle&t, that they, wro once had been deaf to the
supplications of a brother, were now left frierdlels and
forlorn, imploring plty in vain fiom an unrelenting
Goveir.ot!r; and that they who had first confpiied to
kill their brother, and afterwards fold him for a slave,
--ere themftlves deprived of liberty, and threatened
with an ignominous 'eath. How urdefervedly foe-
ver there evils befell them on the part of men, they
cohfefled them to be just on the part of Providence.
They concluded the hour of retribution to be arri-
ved; and, in the person of the Governour of Egypt,
they beheld the Ruler of the world callinig them to
account for guilt. Therefore if this diflrefs come upo

Bs. Bcbldh also his blood is required

Similar sentiments, on like occasions, will be found

not unconmon among mankind. Pious men, there
is no doubt, are at all times disposed to look up to
God, and to acknowledge his hand in cvery event of

life.

life. But what I now observe, is, That where no
hab:tual acknowledgment of God takes place; nay,
where a daring contempt of his authority has prevail-
ed, conscience, nevertheless, constrains men, in the
d;, of their diflrefs, to recognize God, under the
rnmo awful of all chara&cers, The avenger of past
guilt.

Herein the wisdom of God appears in such a
iC;ht, as juftlv to claim our highest admiration. The
ordinary course of his providence, is carried on by
human means. He as fettled a train of events, which
proceed in a regular succession of causes and effecs,
Wvithlut his appearing to.interpofe, orto a&. But
these on proper occarions, are made to assea the
human mind, in the fame manner as if he were be-
held delcending from his throne, to punish the fin-
ner with his cwn hand. Were God to.fufpend the
laws of Nature on occasion of every great -crime that
was committed on earth, and to govern the world
by frequent interpositions of a miraculous kind, the
M hole order ot human affairs would.be unhinged ; no
plans of aAidn could be formed; andno scope wonld
he given' for the probation and trial of men. .On
the other hand, were the operation offecond cause.
allowed to conceal a Divine hand totally from view,
all sense of fuperiour government would be loft-; the
world would seem to he void. of God; the finner
would perceive nothing but chance and fortune, in
the diftreftfs which he suffered. Whereas by its
being'To ordered- that several incidents of life, shall
carry the fame force. and itrike the mind with tha
fame' impreliofi, as if they were supernatural interr
pofitrins, the fear of Gcd is kept alive among men,
and the order of-human affairs is, at the fame time,
preserved unbroken. The finner fees his distress to
be tlhe immediite effe&t of hunan violence or op-
peflion ; and is obliged, at the fame moment, to con-
fiddrit as a Divine judgmert. : ilis conscience gives

to

to an ordinary misfortune, all thle edge and the fting-
of a visitation from Heaven.

FROM .he train of thought which the Text has

fnggefted, several inferences naturally follow. But-
I shall confine myielf to two, which claim your par-
ticular attenticn.

The fitft is, the clear evidence which the pre-

ceding observations afford, of a Divine government
now exercised over mankind. This noft important
and awful of all truths, cannot be too often presented.
to our view or too fisongly impressed on our mind.
T'o the imperfect eonviaion of it, which obtains in
the world, mr.ut be ascribed, in a great measure,.
the prevalence of fin. Did men firmly believe, that
the Almighty Bting, who formed them, is carryingT
on a system of adminifiration which will not leave
guilt urpunifhed, it is impossible that they could re-
main so inattentive, as we often behold them, to
their moral conduct. But the balk of mankind are
giddy and thoughtless. Struck by the superficial ap-
pearances of pleafore, which accompany licentious-
·ess, they enquire no farther ; and deliver themselves
up to their senses, and their paflions. Whereas, were
they to refle&, but for a moment, upon that view
which has now been given of human nature, they
might soon be satisfied, that the moral government
of God, is no matter of doubtful discussion. It is a
faet, no lcfs obvious and incontestable, than the go-
vernment exercised by those earthly rulers, whorm
we behold with the ensigns of their office before our
eyes

To govern, is to require a certain course of aaion,

or. to prescribe a law; and to inforce-that law, by
a suitable diftr:bution of rewards and pnnifhments.
Now, God has not only invested conscience, as we
have seen with authority to promulgate, but endow-
ed it also with power to enforce, his law. By plac-r
ing inward approbation and peace on the fide of vir-

tue,

tue, he gave it the fanaion of reward. But this was
not enough. Pain is a more powerful principle, than
pleasure. To escape milery, is a tlronger motive
for action, than to obtain good. God, therefore, Co
framed human nature, that the painful sense of ill-
desert should attend the commififon of crimes; that
this sense of ill-defert should necelFarily produce the
dread of punishment; and that this dread flould so
operate on the minrd, in the tirne of diltrefs, as to
make the finner conceive Providence to be engaged
against him, and to be concerned in inflicting the pu-
nillment whih he suffers. All there impieffions he
hath flamped upon the heart with his own hind.
He ha h made therm onflituent parts of our frame;
on purpose, that by the union of so many firong and
pungent sentiments, he might enforce repentance and
reformation, and pLtblilh to the human race hisdeteft-
ation of fin. Were he to speak to us from the clouds,
his voice could not be more decisive. What we
discern to be interwoven with the contexture of hu-
man nature and to pervade the whole course of ht-
man affairs, carries an evidence not to be resifted.
We might with as much reason, doubt whether the
fun was intended to enlighten the earth, or the rain,
to fertilize it ; as whether he, who thus framed the
human mind, intended to announce righteoufnels to
mankind, as his law.

TH E second inference which I make from the fore-

going discourse, refpets the intimate conne&ion,
which those operations of conscience have, with
the peculiar and distinguishing do&rines of the Gof-
pel of Chrill. They will be tbund to accord with'
them so remarkably, as to furnilh an answer to some
of those objections, which superficial reasoners are apt
to raise againfi the Chriflian revelation. In particu-
lar, they coincide wvith that awful view which the
G.fpel wives us, of the future consequences of guilt.
It the fiiner is now confirailed by conscience, to

view

view the Almighty as pursuing him with evil for long-
fnr-gvlten crimes, how naturally must he conclude,
thai in a ftbl-quent period of exillence, the Divine ad-
n-.iit ration will lroceed upon the fame plan, and
complete vhat has been left imperfec here? If,
durirg th;s life, which is only the time of trial, the
diifpleafure of Providence at fin is displayed by to-
kens so manifest, what may be apprehended to follow,
when juilice, bhich at prelfnt only begins to be exe-
cuted, shAll be carried to its consummation ? What
councience forbodes, revelation verifies; assuring us,
that a day is appointed, when Gcd wi/il render to eve-
rv man iccrdting to /lis works ; to tbrem, wbo by Pa-
tetint ct;!:r nuance in 'tci1l-di5ig, Jerk for glory, bosnour,
and immsrtality ; eternal /if e Bat unto them that are,
c:,!entisr.r, anld obiy not the truth, but o6ey unrighteou/-
nfjs ; inlignaticn and wratb, tribulati:n and angzi/,b,
upon every foal o' man tbat doth evil, of the Jreu
fir/l, and clj'9 G the Gentile. For thtere is no 'repec7
of persi,;s w 'it6 God. For as many as have' Jnne4t
swit ,ozt the law, /uH lii lfo perijh witout the law ; and as
mniy as ,:vefJir:,ed in the law, /polbe julged by the law.

W'riie the thlreatenings es conscience thus firength-

en the evidence of the scripture do&rine concerning
future pur.lfhicnrts, they likewi!e pave the way for
the helief of what is revealed concerning the mtthod
of tur deliverance by Chrill. They suggest to the-
finner,' fcme deep and dark malignity contained in
guilt, which has drawn upon his head such high-dif-
pleasure from Heaven, They call forth his most
anxicus efforts, to avert the effects of that diFplea-
sure, and to propitiate his offended judge. Some a-
torernent, he is conicious, rust be mnaste ; and the
voice cf nature has, in every age, loudly demanded
suffering, as the proper atonement for guilt. Henice
mankind have conflantly fled for refuge to such fuhfli-
tutions, as they cculd devile to place in the room'of
the offerder ;.and, as by general consent, vit&i-s iiare

every

every where been slain, and expiatory facrificeshave
been offired up on innumerable altars. Wherewith
J7all I come before the Lord, and bow myself before
the nzUifl high God ? Shall I come before him 'uith burnt
/oferi-r",!, and ca!ver of a year ild ? Will the Lord be
pla/rd with tbor/andr of rams, or with ten thousand
of rivers of oil ? Or, /hall 1 give my firJl-born for
my tranfgreffon; the fruit of my body, for the fm of
my s/3 lP These perplexities and agitations of a guilty
conlcience, may be termed preludes, in fonme mea-
sure, to the Gospel of Christ. They are the point-
ings of unenligthtened Nature, towards that method
of relief, which the graceof God has provided. Na-
ture felt its inability to extricate irlelf from the con-
sequences of guilt: The Gorpel reveals t-he plan of
Divine interposition and aid. Nature concrTfed some
atonenent to be necessary: The Gospel discovers,
that the necessary atonement is made. The remedy
is no sooner presented, than its suitableness to the
dileafe appears; and the great mystery of redemption,
though it reaches, in its full extent, beyond our com-
prehension, yet, as far as it is revealed, holds a vifi-
ble congruity with the sentiments of Cadence, and
of Nature. ^

Natural and revealed religion proceed from the

fame Author; and, ofcourfe, are analogous and con-
lifltnr. They are parts of the farme plan of Provi-
dence. They are connected measures of the fame
system of government. The serious belief of the one,
is the best preperation for the reception of the other.
Both concur in impressing our mind with a deep sense
of one most important truth which is the result of
this whole discourse, That as we /ov now, we must
reap ; that under the goveinnent of God, no one
/hall be permitted, with impunity, to .gratify his
criminal passions, and to make light of the great
duties of life.

^,i SERMON

# SERMON XIV. PSALM ii. 11. Rejoice with trembling.

SERMON XIV.

P S A L M ii. I .

Rejoice with trembling.

)O Y and F ar, are two great springs of humar
ttion. The mixed condition of this world, gives

ic:ep tor both ; and, according as the one or the o-
ther predominates, it influences the general tenour
of our condua. Each of them poflelTes a proper
place in religion. Toferve the Lord -with tlatine/ls,
is the exhortation of the Plalmitt D.ilvid.-'to ser-ve
him -vtitz rever,-rce and gidly fear, is the admonition
or tl.e Apofite Paul-But under the present imper-
te&ion of human nature, each of there principles may
be carried to a dangerous extreme. When the whole
of religion is placed in joy, it is in hazard of rising
into unwar. aable rapture. When ifreits altogether
on fear,^-degenerates into fuperflitious servility.
The Text enjoins a due mixtuie of both; and in-
culcates this important maxim, That joy, tempered
with fear, is the proper disposition of a good man.
In discoursing of this subjea, I shall endeavour to
1hew, firlt, That joy is essential to religion . and
next, That, for various reasons, this joy ought to be
mixed with fear; whence we shall be able toafcer-
tain the nature of that steady aud composed fpiri,'
which is molt fuiiable to our present condition, and
most acceptable to Gcd.

I. JOY is essential to relijions m two refpets; as

relieic- inspires joy, and as it requires it. In other
wo.di, To re occ, is blth the privilege, and the as-
ty, of good. m.e.

IN

IN the frfi place, Religion inrp:resjoy. It affords

jitl ground of gla.r-nefs, to all who firmly believe its
dotines, and sincerely fludy to obey its laws: For
it confers on them, the two mofl material requisites of
joy; a favourable situation of things without, and a
proper iiTfpofition of mind within, to relish that fa-
vourable f.tuation.

When they examine their lituation without, they

tlehold themselves placed in a world, wh;ch is full of
the influence of a gracious Providence; where beau-
ty and good are every where predomirant; where va-
rious comforts are bestowed; and where, if any be
:vithheld, they have reason to believe, that they are
withheld by parental wisdom. Among the crowd that
encomrafs them, they may be at a loss to discern, who-
are their friends, and who their enemies. But it is
sufficient to know that they are under the protecion
of an invisible Guardian, whose power can keep them
from every evil. All the steps of his conduc, they
may be unable to trace. Events may befallthem, of
which they can give no account. But as long as they
are satisficd, that the fyflem of Divine goverment is
founded on mercy, no present occurrences are able to
destroy their peace. For he vwo /pared not his own
Son, but delivered hiz up for them, bow Jhall he not
with him freely give them all things ? If their nature is
frail, Divine afi!lance is promnifed to flrenghren it.
If their virtue is imperfect, a dispensation is- opened,
which gives them the hope of p-rdon. If their ex-
ternal gircumflancts be in any refpea unfavourable,
it is because a h'gher interest is conrulted. All things,
they are assured, batll cork together for their good.
On their profpcrity reds, the blefling ; on their ad-
nerfity, the fandilying Spirit, of the Almighty. Old
age may advance, and life decay ;- but beyond those
boundaries of Nature, faith opens the profpea of
tteir lasting felicity. Wito'out anxiety, they pals
through thi different periods of their pFcfent exiitence

because,

because they know it to be no more than an introduc-
tion to immortality.

As such a situation of things without, lays a solid

foundation for joy; so the disposition which religion
forms within, promotes, the relish of it. It is indeed
from within, that the chief sources of enjoyments or'
trouble rife. The minds of bad men are always dif-
orderly; and hence their lives are so generally uneasy.
In vain they tuke the timbrel and the harp,-.and endea-
vour to rejoice at the found o/ the organ. Spleen and
diiguft pulhue them, through all the'haunts ot amuse-
mept. Pr;de and ill hnmour torment them. Oppref-
fed with discontent, their Ipi.i-s flag; and their worn-
out pleafur:s afford them entertainment no rnore. But
re!igion fixbdues tho'e malignant palsions, which are
tle tioublers of human repose; which either overcafi
the mind v ith the gloom of peevishness, or disquiet it
by ihe violence of agitation. It infuses, in their room,
those mild and gentle d!fpcfitions, whose nat.ural es-
fcCi is to smooth the tencut of the foul. Benevolence
and candour, mcdeiation and temperance, wherever
they reign, produce chterfu'ners and serenity. The
conlclou!i els of integrity, gives ease and freedom to
the mind It elable goo.l mento extract 'rom every:ob-
jec&, the whole fatistaaion which it is capable of yield-
ir, ; and adds the flavour of innccance, to all their
exterr.a! pleasures

Is 'the second place, A, religion naturally inspires

joy ; (o what it ilfpires, it commands us to chcl'h.
As a ncccflary proof of our ficerity, it requires c.cer-
iuli:fs in the perfcrinarce of our duty because, if
this be v. antirg, our religion discovers itfeil not to be
genuine in principle, and in practice it cannot.; be
ftlarle.

Religious obedience, destitute of joy, is not genu'ne

in n: priii;i.le. For, did either faith or hope, the
love of ¢nl,, or the love of goodness, rule the heart;
thev could not fail to produce fatisfaaion in piety and

viltue.

.·irlue. All those cautes of joy which I have menti'
oned should then operate; and their native effec on
the mind, would follow. The prorpecs which rehi-
gion opens, would gladden, and the affections which
it inspires, would oooth the heart. We serve, with
pleasure, the benefacor whom we love. We re-
joice in every ftudv and pfrfuit, to which we are
sincerely attached. If we serve not God with plea-
sure, it is because we know him not. If we rejoice
not in virtue, it is because our affetion is alienated
from it, and our inclinations are depraved. We
give too evident prooT, that either we believe not the
principles of religion, or that we feel not their power.
Exclude joy fiom religion; and you leave no other
motives to it, except compulsion and interest. But
are there suitable grounds, en which to reft the whole
of our obedience to the Supreme Being ? My /on,
give me tby beart; is the call of God. Surely if there
be no plealure in fulfilling his commands, the heart
is not given him ; and, in that cafe, the multitude of
faJrifices, and burnt offerings, is brought to his altar
in vain.

As religion, detitute of joy, is inlperfe& in its prin-

ciple; so in pratice, it muff be rnftable, In vain
you endeavour to fix any man to the regular perform-
ance of that in which he finds no pleasure. Bind him
ever so fast by interest or fear, he will contrive some
method of eluding the obligation. Ingenuity is ne-
ver so fertile of evasions, as where pleasure is all on
the one fide, and mere precept on the other. He
may fludy to save appearances. He may dissemble
and conftrainhimfelf. But his heart revolts in secret,
and the weight of inclination will, in the end, draw
the pratice after it. If perseverance is not to be ex-
pe'ted, still less can zeal be looked for, from him,
who in his religious duties, trembles with rejoicing.
Every attempt towards virtue which he forms, will be
feeble and awkw.ard. 1-e applies to it as a tak ; he

dreeds

dreads the tafk-mafier ; but he will labour no more
than necessity enjoins. ro escape from punifhmentr
is his sole aim. HIe bargains for immunity, by every
duty which he performs; and all beyond, he esteems,
furerfluous toil.----Such religion as this, can neither
purify the heart, nor prepare for heavenly bliss. It
is the refuge of an abjec mind. It may form the ri-
tual of the monk, or prescribe the penance of the ido-
later ; but has no concern with the homage of him,
wsho worJfips the Father in /pirit and in truth. His
character is, that the jcy of the Lord is his Jr.ngth.-
It attaches his heart to religion. It inspires his zeal.
It fupp rts his conflancy; aad accelerates his pro-
g ess.

There is no man, but has some objea to which he

cleaves forenjoymetnt; somewhat that ffatters him with
dillant hope, or affords him present pleafuje. Joy is
the end towards which all rational beings tend. For the
fake of it, they live; it rcfembles the air they breathe,
which is necessary for the motion of the heart, and all
the vital funlicns. But as the breathing of infectcd air
proves fatal to life ; in the fame manner, joy drawn
from a ct rrupted t u ce, isde(trulive, both of virtue,
and of true happinels. When you have no pleasure in
goodrefs, you may vith certintay conclude the reaforn
to be, that your pleasure is all derived from an-oppo-
site q arer. Yoi have €chaulted your afftct.on upon
the world. You have drunk too much of its poiflned
v.-arers, to have any telifl for a pure spring.

Estimate, therefore, the genuinneefs of your reli-

gio !s principles ; estimate the degree of your stability
in religious practice, by the degree of your fatisfaai-
on in piety and virtue. Be afTured, that where ydur
tieafure is, there will your delight be also. The
worldly man rejoices in his pofft ions ; the volup-
tuous, in his pleaCures ; the social, in his friends
and companions. The truly good man rejoices in do-
ing ju/Jily, loving mercy, and walking bumbly with the

Lord

Lord hAi God. He is happy when employed, in the
regular discharge of the great duties of life. Spon-
taneous they flow from the affetions of a pure heart.
Not only from the keeping of the divine command-
ments he expeas, but in Ite keeping of them, he
enjoys agreat reward.-Accordingly, inthe sentiments
of holy men recorded in scripture, we find tt-is fpi-
rit- every where prevalent. Their language was; T'y
/fatrttes have I taken as mine heritare Jr ever; far they
are the rejoicing of mv heart. They are my /fngs in
the haife of' my pilgrimage. They are fweetar than ho-
ney, and the honey-comb. Whom bave I in heaven but
thee ? And there is none upon earth that I desire belfdes
thee. They did not receive the.jpirit of bondage, but
the pirit of adoption.. They Were fillcd with peace and
joy in believing. They rejoiced in bope of the gliry of
God. As soon as the .Ethiopian eunuch received from
Philip the light of the Gospel, that light revived and
cheered his heart. A new fun teemed to arie ; a
new glory, to rhine around him. Every objec
brightened; and he went an his waay t ejoicing.-After
the fame manner should every good man proceed in
his journey through life, with a serene and cheerful
spirit. Consternation and dejection let him leave to
- te slaves of guilt, who have every t ing to dread
both from this world and the next. If he appear
before others with a dispirited aspet, he dishonours
religion;_ and affords ground for suspicion, that he is
either ignorant of its nature, or a firanger to its power.

Thus I have shown joy to be efTential to religion.

It is the spirit which it inipires, and which it requires
in good men, but in our present slate, the bed
principles may be carried to a dangerous excess ; and
joy, like other things has its due limits. To serve
3Gol with unmixed delight, belongs to more advan-
ced spirits in a happier world. In this region of
imperfecion, some infusions from adifferent cup, must
-f neceflity tinaire ourjoy. Let us then,

11I TURal

II. Tvun to the other fide of the argument, and

confider the realc.ns which render it proper, that
when we rejcice, w e should rejoice with trembling.

In the sift place, becaule all the obje&i of religion,

which affords ground for joy, tend to inspire, at the
fame time, reverence and fear. We ferre a Benefac-
tor, it is true, in whom we have reason to delight;
whose purposes are gracious; whose law is the plan
of our happiness. 3ut this Benefactor, is the King,
eternal, immmrtal, and invisible; at whose presence, ihe
mrcuntains fhakc, ard Nature trembles. Every good
and every perfcfi gift, come dcwn fram him. But thee
hand which confers them we cannt fee. Myfierious
obscurity refts uron his essence. He dwelleth in the
J-cret place *f tiurd7dcr; and clouds and darkness fur-
round him. He is the Hearer of prayer; but we
lift cur voice to him from afar. Into his immediate
presence no accels is permitted. Our warmest devo-
tion admits no familiarity with him. Gsd is in heaven,
and thuz upin earth ; therefore, let thy uwo, d be few. If
his orrnilcicr.ce adrrinifiers comfort in our secret dif-
trefs, it likewise fil's with awe the heart that is con-
scions of guilt. For, if he knows our frame, ard re-
members we are dufi ; cur iniquities, also, are ever be-
fore him ; or fecretfins, in the light of his countenance.

Throughout all his dispensations, greatncfs, in con-

junQion with goodness firikes our view; and, whare-
ever we behold the Parent, we behold the Lgiflator
allb. The death of Christ, in behalf of a guilty world,
is the chief ground of religious hoie and joy. But
it is no lcis thc ground of reverence; when in this high
tranfadion, we contemplate God, as at once ftric in
justice, and great in mercy. - I the Lord keep mercy
fcr tboifaurds of them that fear me I forgive their ini-
Vnity, tran/grejJion, and fin: but I will by no means
shlar tir guilty. When we open the baok of the L-aw,
we find promires an! threateninns mingledin the fame
p:,ge. On the one fie, we fee Heaven dilplayed in

all

all its glory: On the other, Hell opening its trerours.
Infhort, in what ever light we view religion, it appear
folcmn and venerable. 'It is a temple full of majetlv,
to which the worshippers m y approach with comfort,
in the hope of obtaining grace, and finding mercy; hut
where they cannot enter, without being impressed
with awe. If we may be permitted to compare Ipiri-
tual with natural things, religion resembles not those
scenes of natural beauty, where every objeEt smiles.
It cannot be likened to the gay landscape, or the
flowery field. It resembles more the august and sub-
lime appearances of Nature; the lofty mountain, the
expanded ocean, and the flarry firmament; at the
fight of which, the mind is at once overawed and de-
lighted; and, from the union of grandeur with beau-
ty, derives a pleasing, but a ferions emotion.

IN the second place, As joy, tempered by fear,

suits the nature of religion, so it is requisite for the
proper regulation of the conduc of man. Let his
joy flow from the best and.pureft fcource; yet, if it
remain long'unmixed, it is apt to become dangerous
to virtue. As waters which are never fi;rred, nor
troubled, gathera sediment, which putrifies them;
so the undifiurbed continuance of placid sensations rn-
genders ditorders in the human foul. It is wifely or-
.dered in our present slate, that joy and fear,.hope and
grief, fhculd a& alternately, as checksand balances:
upon each other, in order to preven, an excess in any
of them, which our nature could not bear. If we
werc fubjeal to no alarms of danger, the wifefl would,
soon become improvident; and the.mofl hu:nbtc. pre-
sumptuous. Man is a pilgrim upon earth. Were
his path to be always smooth and flowery, he would
be tempted to rtlinquifi his guide, and to forget the
purpose cf his journey. Caution and fear are the
Shields ofhappinelfs. Unguarded joy begets indolence;
indolence produces security; security lead. ro raih-
e ; and ralhnefs ends in ruin. In o;d:r to rejoice

lon.

long, it is necessary that we rejoice with trembling.
Had our first parents observed this ru!e, man might
have been ltill in paradise. He who faith in his heart,
My mountain flands Jlrng ; I fJll never be moved; may
be assured, that his slate already begins to totter.
Religion, therefore, performs a kind office, in
giving us the admonition of the Text. It inspires
cheerfulness in the ferviee of God. It proposes joy,
as our chief spring of acion. But it supports joy,
by guarding it with fear; not suppressing, but regu-
lating its indulgence; requiring us to rejoice, like
perlbns who have obtained a treasure, which, through
want of vigilance, they are exposed to lose. Depen-
dent beings are formed for submission; and to submit,
is to fland in awe. Because the Lord reignetb, let the
earth be glad. \Ve are the fubjecs of God; and
therefore may justly rejoice. But flill we are subje&s;
and therefore, trembling mufl mix itself with our joy.

IN the third place, The unitable condition of all

human things, naiurally inspires fear in the midst of
joy. The spirit to which religion forms us, muRl
undoubtedly c.orrespond to the state in which we are
placed, and to the part which is afligned us to a&.
Now the first view under which our present slate ap-
pears, is that of fallen creatures, who are undergo-
ing, is this world, probation and trial for their reco-
very; and are commanded to work out their alvati-
en with fear -and trembling. This view of our condi-
tion infers not habitual dejeation of mind. It requires
not melancholy abflra&ion from the affair., or total
contempt of the amusements, of life. But it inspires
humility. It enforces dependance on Divine aid;
and calls forth the voice of supplication to Heaven. In
a situation so critical, and where interests so impor-
tant are at a flake, every reasonable perfoir mufl
confess, that seriousness ought to temper rejoic-
ing.

WERE there in human life any fixed point of

flability

liability and reft, attainable -by man; could we at
any one moment, assure ourselves, that there remain-
ed no latent source of danger, either to our tempo-
ral, or our spiritual - slate ; then I admit, we might
lay trembling aside, and rejoice in full security; But
alas ! no such safe station, no such moment of confi-
dence, is allowed to man during his warfare on earth.
Vicissitudes of good and evil, of trials and confola-
tions, fill up his life. The best intentioned are some-
times betrayed into crimes; the moit prudent,: over-
whelmed with misfortunes. The world islike a wheel
incessantly revolving, on which human things alter-
nately rife and fall. What is past of our life,, has
been a chequered scene. On its remaining periods
uncertainty and darkness ret. Futurity is an un-
known region, into which no man can look forward
wit out awe, because he cannot tell what forms of
danger or trial may meet him there. This we know
well, that in every period of our life, the path ds
happiness shall be found steep and arduous; but fwikt
and easy, the descent to ruin. What, with much:ect-
ertion of care and vigilance, we had built up,' one
unweary aation may, in an evil hour, overthrow.
The props of human confidence are, in general, in-
secure. The sphere of human pleasures is narrow.
While we form fclhemes for flrenghthenin'g the oie,
and for enlarging the other, death, mean ;:while,
advances. Lite, with a swift., though insensible eourlfe
glides away; and. like a river which undermines:its
banks, gradually impairs our slate. Year after :year
dfeals fcmething from us; till the decaying fabric tlt-
ter of itself, and crumble at length' into-duft. i-So
that, whether we confider life or death, time 'or
eternity, all things appear to concur in givingito
man the admonition- of the Text, Rejoice wttfi
trembling. .: :

Itt AVE now liown, in what refpeds religionboth
prcnmotes joy, and inlpires seriousness. It place.us

K ia

in the motl favourable situation, which human life as-
-fords, for joy; and it gives us every afliftance, tur
relifhingthat joy. It renders it our duty, to cultivate
the fatisfaaion which it yiekls. It demands a cheer-
-ful spirit; in order to alcertain the lincerity ot our
principles, and to confirm us in good prac&ice. At
the fame time, the joy which it inlpires, is tem-
pered with fear, by the genius of religion ittelf; by
the dangers to which unguarded joy would expose us;
and by the impropriety of indulging it, in a situation
so mixed as the prelent. The trembling which is here
enjoined, is not tobe understood as signifyi.ng a pufilla-
nimous dcje&ion. It imports no more than that cau-
tion and sobriety, which produce dicates, as belong-
ing to our.ftate. By connecing such trembling with
our joy, religion means to recommend to us, a cheer-
ful, but a composed, Ipirit, equally remote from the
humiliating depression of fear, and the exulting fevity
of joy. Always to rejoice, is to be a fool. Always
- to tremble, is to be a slave. It is a modest cheerful-
ness, a chastened joy, a manly seriousness, which be-
comes the servant of God.

B Tr is this, it may perhaps be said-, the whole

amount of that boasted fatisfacion which rcligion be-
sows?. IS this all the compensation w .ich it makes,
for thole lacrifices it exas ? Are not the terms
which vice holds out, far more enticing, when it
permits us to gratify every desire; and, in return for
our furmountine the temorous scruples of conscience,
prbnifes usa life of gaiety, festivity, and unreftrain-
ed joy ?-Such-promifes, vice may indeed make;
but, how far it fulfils them, we may safely refer to
the determination of the greatefli sensualist, whenhe
has inifhed his career, ard locks back on what he
has enjoyed. Ask him, Whcther he would recom-
n:end to his children, and his friends, to hold the
fame course; and whether, with his dying btcatli, lie
l are assure them, that the gralificaticns of licenli-

coufneli

lioufnef; afford the greatest. enjoyment of.life? What-
ever hopes vice may at the.beginnivg iqfpire, yet,
after the trial is made, it has been always found,
:that criminal pleasures are the bane of happiness.; the
.poi'on, not the cordial, of our.prefent iftate. They
are pleafures,.compenlated by an infinate overbalance
.or pain; moments-.of delight, succeeded by years of
:regret-; purchafed.at the oxpence of'injured reputa-
*tior, broker, health, and ruined peace. Even ab-
-trating from their pe~tidous,confequences, they are
for most part,. in themrfevea treacherous pleasures-;
'unsound anj dift-urbed.in:the:.romeots of enjoyment.
.In the midjlt f such laughter, -the heart irs forrowfui,
Often is the Imile of gaiety assumed, while the heart.
.akes within-: And .though folly may laugh, guilt
will fling. CorreAingthis pernicious phrenzy of
.,pleasure, and reducing itrto a more fober and regulated
.ltate, religiort is in tsuth, -no other than wisdom, in-
·troducing. peace and order into the life of man.

While religion condemns .fich pleasures as are im-

-moral, .it'is chargeable with no improner.auflerity, in
*relped o'f thoie which are of an innocent kind. Think
not, that by the cautious dlfcipline which it prefcibes,
*it excludes you -from all gay enjoyment of life.
Within the .compass of that sedate fpiFit, to which
it forms you, all that is innocently plafing will be
found ,to lie. It is a rniftake to imagine, that, in
,constant effusions. bfgiidy mirth, or in that flutter-of
fpirirs which is excited by. a round of diversions, the
.chief erjoyment of--our state confifls. Were this
the- cafe, the vain and the frivilous would be on
'better terms for happineis, than the wife, the great,
and the good. To arrange the plans cf amusement,
or to preside in the haunts of jollity, would be more
delirable, than to exert the highest effort of mental
powers for the benefit of nations. A consequence so
a.bsurd, is sufficient to explo1e the principle from
which it flows. To the anmfements and leser joys

K eos

of the world, religion assigns their proper place. It
admits them, as relaxations from care,' as inftrumentr
of promoting the union of men, and of enlivening
their bfcial intercourle. But though, as long as they
are kept within due bounds, it does riot censure nor
condemn them; neither does it propose them as re-
wards to the virtuous, or as the principal objets of
their pursuit. To luch, it points out nobler ends of
acion. Their felicity it engages them to feck, in
the discharge of an useful, an upright, and honour-
able part in life; and, as the habitual tenour of their
mind, it promotes cheerfulness, and discourages levi-
ty.

Between these two their is a wide diflinaion; and

the mind which is most open to levity, is trequently
a firanger to cheerfulness. It has been remarked,
that transports of inten.perate mirth, are often no
more than flifhes.from the dark cloud; and that, in
proportion to the violence of the effulgence,
is the succeeding gloom. Levity may be the
forced production of folly or vice; cheerful-
ness is the natural offspring of wildor and sirtueonly.
The one is an occasional agitaticn; the other, a
permanent habit. The one degrades the chara&er;
the other is perfealy confitient with the dignity of
reafcn, the fiteady and manly spirit of religion. 'I o
aim at a cordiant lucceffion ot high and vividfe~n-
fations of plealure, is an idea ofhappinefs altogether
chimerical. Calm and temprate enjoyment, is the
utmotl tl'at is allotted to men. Beyond this, we
struggle in vain to raise cur flatc ; and, in' fat, de-
prtfs our joys, by endeavouring to heighten them.
Inflead of thole fallacious hopes of perpetual festivity,
with which the world would allure us, religion con-
sers upon us a cheerful tranquility. Inltead of daz-
zlirg us withl meteors of joy, which sparkle and ex-
pire, it fleds around us, a caln and Heady light. lBy
mrixinlg trembling with our joy, it renders that joy

more

# SERMON XV. GALAT. vi. 9. And let us not be weary in well-doing; for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

more solid, more equal, and more lading,

In this spirit, then, let us serve God; 'and hold

our course through life. Let us approach to the
Divine Being, as to a sovereign of whom we ftand-in
awe, and to a father in whom we trul. In out
condut, let us be cautious and humble, as those who
have ground to fear; well pleased and cheerful, as
those who have canfe to rejoice -Let:us show the
World, that a religioustempte, is a temper, sedates not
fad; that a religious behaviour, is a behaviour, regu-
lated, not fliff and formal. Thusv-we (hall use the
world, asnot abusing it; we shall pass through its va-
rious changes, with theleaftdifcompofure; and we hal -
vindicate religion, from the reproaches of those who
woulld ai tr;bute to it, either enthufaftic joys,. or flav-
ifh terrorirs. We shall show, thatit is a, rational
rule of life, worthy of the perfection of God, and
fuiled to the natue and slate of man.

SERMON XV..

GALAT. vi. 9;
And let 11r noet e wcess in uwel-doirg; for in due fta-

fan we Jball reap, if , e faint not.
D ISCONTENT is the most general of all the

evils which trouble the life of man. It is a

difeafet which every where finds materials to fepd it-
self; for, if real difirfses be wanting, it substitutes
such as are imaginary in their place. It converts even
the good things of the world, when they have been
long enjoyed, into occasions of disgust. In the midlt
of prosperity, it disposes us to complain , and renders
tranquillity tiresome, only because it is uniform,

K 3 There

There is no wonder, that this spirit of'refiletfnefs
and diffatisfaaion, .which corrupts every terrefrialF
enjoyment, should have sometimes penetrated into.
the region of virtue. Good men are not without'
their frailties; and the perverseness incident to humaa..
nature, to readily leads us, who become weary of all.
other things, to be weary, allo in w-ell-doing.

l et me put a cafe, which perhaps, will be found

n.t unfrequent in ordinary, life. Suppose a-perfon,
after much commerce with the world, to be con--
vinced of its-vanity. He has leen its- moftlflatte.ing
hopes to be fallacious;, He has' felt its most boafled
pleafurcs-to be unfatisfaEtory. He resolves, there-
fore, to place his happirrefs in virtue ;. and disregard--
ing all temptations from interest,- to adhere to what'
is right and honourable in condua; IHe cultivates-
acquaintance with re:ligion He performs, with feri-
oulnefs, the offices of devotion. He lays-down to;
himself, a rational and-ueful pln oft life r and, with.
fatisfaClion, holds..n for. a. while in this reformed'
course. But, by degrees, difcouragemer.ts arise.
The peace which he hoped to enjoy, isinterrupted,
either by his own frailties, or by the vices of others.
Passions, which had not been thoroughly subdued,
struggle for their accmitomed gr4tification. 'Tho
plealure which he expected to find in devotion, some-
times fails him; and the inju4tice of ihe world ofteni
fours and frets him. Friends- pro e: ungrearful ;
tremies mifreprelent.. rivals supplant him: And.
part, at leai,. of the mortifications which he suffers,.
he eegins to ascribe to virtue.-s thisall- the reward
of my serving God, and renouncing the pleasores of
fin ? V.rily in vain s bave clearuled my heart, andr
waJhed my hands i innocency. Behold the ungodly
prcjper in the world, and have .more than heart can
-awiJb; uhbile, .all the day- long, I am p'lagued and
cshfltened every morning.--- To uch pertons as these,
and to all who are in hazard'of being infeaed with

tiheir-

their fpiri,. I now address myself. In reply to their
complaints, I ptirpo!e to show, That in.no state they
can cthoole on earth, by no plan of condu& they can
form, it is possible for them to escape uneasiness and
disappointment'; that in a life of virtue, they will
susser less uneasiness, and fewer difappointreints,
than in a course of vice ; they will poflefs much high-
er resources and advantages; and they will be affur-
ed of compleat ieward-at the end. t'rom these con-
fiderati: ns, 1 hope to make it appear, that there is
no sufficient reason for our being weary in- wek-doin'g ;
and that taking human life upon the whole, Virtiie is
far the moss eligible portion of man;

1. U.N E ASI s s and disappointment are inrepa-

rable, in some degree. from every slate on earth.s
vWere it in the power of the world, to render those
who attach themlelves to it, satisfied and happy, you
might then, I admit, have some title to complain,
if you sotmd yourfefves placed upon worse terms in
the lt evice of God. But this is so far from being
the cafe, that among the multitudes who 'devote
themselves to earthly' pleasure, you will not find a
single person who has compleatly attained his aim.
Enquire into the condition of the high and the low,
of the gay and the 'serious, of the men of business-
and the men of pleasure, and you (hall behold them
all occupied, in ftpplyirg some want, or in re-
moxing tlme diftfels. No man is pleaSed with e--
' ing precifly what he is. Every where there is a

void ;. generally, even in the most prosperous life,
there is some corner poffiefed by sorrow. He who
is engaged in buifinefs, pines for leisure. He who
enjoys leisure, languiftes for want of emplbyment.
In a single (iate, we envy the comforts of a farlily.
in conjugal life, xe are chagrined with domestic
cares. In a safe flation, we regre't the want of ob-
jeas for enterprise. In an enterprising life, we la-
ment the want of safety. It is the doom of man,

K 4 that

tlhat his lky lhould never be free from all clouds. He
is, at present, in an exiled and fallen slate. The
objeAs which surround him, are beneath his native
dignity. God has tinged them all with vanity, onpur-
pose tomake him feel, that this is not his reft ; that here
h is not in his properplace,nor arrivep at his true home.

If, therefore, you aim at a condition which laall

be exempted from every disquiet, you pursue a phan-
tom; you increase the vanity and vexation of life,
by engageing in a chace so fiuitlefs. If you com-
plain of viitue, because there is incident to it a por-
it n of that uneasiness which is found in every other
tlate, your complaint is mofi unreasonable. You
claim an immunity from evil, which belongs not to
the lot of man. Reconcile yourselves, then, to your
condition; and, inflead of looking for perfee happi-
ness any where on earth, gladly embrace that slate
which contains the fewest sorrows.

II. TH o u G H no condition of human-life is free

from uneasiness, I contend, That the uneasiness be-
longing to a sinful course, is far greater, than what
attends a course of well-doing If you be weary of
the labours of virtue, be assured, that the world,
whenever you try the excliange, will lay upon you
a much heavier load. It is the outside, only, of a
licentious life, which is gay and smiling. Within,
it conceals toil, ard trouble, atd deadly fcrrow.
For vice poisons human happiness in the spring, by
introducing disorder into the heart. Thcfe pafrons
vhich it teems to indulge, it only feed with imper-
sect gratifications; ar.d thereby Itrenghteiis them for
·preying, in the end on their unhappy vilims.

It is a great miltake to imagine, that the pain of
feif-denial is confined to virtue. He who follows
the world, as much as he who follows Christ,
nmuft take up his crfs ; and to him, assuredly
it will prove a more oppreflive burthen. Vice allows
all ou paflions to range uncontrouled; and where

each

each clails to be fuperiour, it is impossible to gratify
all. The. predominant desire can only be indulged at
the expeace of its rival. No mortifications which
vitiuc exacts, are more severe than those, which
ambition impoles upon the love of ease, pride upon
ifiterft, and covetousness upon vanity. Self-denial,
therefrte, belongs, in common, tcvice and virtue;
but with this, remarkable diffierence, that the pas-
sions which virtue requires us to mortify, it tends
to weaken; whereas, those which vice ob'iges us
to deny, it, at the fame time, ftrenghtens. The
one deminifhes the pain of felf-denial, by mrodera-
ting the demand of paflion; the other increases it,
by rendering those demands impearious and vio-
lent.---What difireffes that occur in the calm life
of virtue, can be compared to those tortures, which
remorle of conficience iRfli&s ;on tie wicked; to
those le-vtre humiliations, arising from. guili combined
with misfortunes, which fir k them to the dul ; to those
violint agitations of liameand diiappointment, which
sometimes drive them to the moflt fatal extremitie%,
nd. -make them abhor their exiffence ? How often,.
in ths midst of those ditaftrous situations, into which
their crimes have brought them, have they cursed
tle feduidtions of vic ; and, with bitter regret, look--
ed bick to the day on which they firt forsook the
path of innuoternce 1

But, perhaps, you irmaine, that to firch miseries

as illefc, grt a cr minalS only 'are exposed'; and
'that, by a waty and cautious managemen, it is pol0
fil le to avoid them. Take vice and virtue, tieri,
in the mors geneil point of view. Compare God
- and the worll as two matters, !he one or other of
wihom you rr.ul obey ; and confider fairly, in wihofe
-tvice their will be Icafon for your bein-c ueary
l;iin'.it, ard lepenting most frcqtiently, 'fTh worlId
is both a hard, and a caplicious ni.fler. To utbmit.
·, a lorg fervitu!e,. ip lhe vitw v of a recon.pl:o'

ftom xwhich they'are excluded in the end-, is knowrp
to be often ihe fate of Ihole, who are devoted to the
world. They sacrifice their preienr eife, to their
fiture prospects. They ccurt the great, and flatter
t}e multitude. They prontitute their confcierce, and:
1lifhonour their charater : And,: after all their es-
forts, how uuce;iain is their ftccefs ! Competitors-
iitfle, and ouitr;p them. The mere artful deceive,.
ihe more violent overthrow thern. Fair profpe&s-
,iimce smiled ; but clouds soon g :her; the sky is-
darkened; the scene changes; and that fickle world,
rhich, a moment bteo:e, had Pattered, the next,
mnoment, forgets them.

God is never miftIaken in the chara&ter of his ser-

v.nts; for he frtth tbeir heart:, andJ;i dget'hbacording.
o: the ruth. But the world is oiftin deceived in ihofe
v ho court its favour; antr of course,, is unjoft in
thc diftribntion of its rexards. Flattery gains the-
ear of power. Fraud fupplaints innocence; and the
pretending, and affiinirg, occupy the place if the
k orth v and the mcdefi. I'l vain you claim any merit,
1with the wolld, on account of your good intentions.
The world knows them not ; regards them not. It
judges of you- solely by yodr a&ion; and, what is
worse, by the success cf your ations; which otten
depends not on yoursel cs. But, in the fight of the
Supreme Being, good intentions supply the place of
gcod deeds, which you had not the opportunity of
performing. The welmreat endeavours of the poor,
find the fame acceptance with him, as the generous-
aclions of the rich. The- widrw,'r miet, is, in his
eye, a costly offering; and even he who givetb to a-
.difrciple a cup of cold water, when he car give him
no more, goetb not without hbis reword.

As the world is unjust in its judgments, so it is

u-greatefa! in its requitals. Time speedily effaces
the memory of the greatest services; and when we
can repeat thte. no mnore, wte ar negleaed, arid

( " UI~tlaOwB

thrown aside. It was the laying of a noted great man
of the world, on the fall of hin fortnness " Had I
" served God as faithfully as I have done my King,
" he would not have cast me cff in my old age.
Unfaithfulness, and ingratittrde, aie unknown to God.
With him no new favourites arise, to ufirp the place,
or to bear off the rewards, of his ancient servants.
E'ven to your old age, I am He; and even to boary
hairs, I will carry you. 1 have made, and I will
'bear; even I wvill carry and will deliver you, faitb
Pihe Lord Almighty .--Since, then, in our several
departments, we mufl labour, What comnparifon is
there, between labouring for God, and' for the
world ? How unjust are they, who become weary
so much sooner in the service of God, than they
do in that of the most fcvere and imperious of all
mlfei sI

'I1l. 'rHE refourccs of virtue are rmch greater
than those of the world; the comnpenfations which
it makes; for our dillreffTs, far mere valrable. Per-
petual success belonus neither to the one nor the
othtr. But onder tifltppointmerts, when they oc-
cur, virtue beats us up; the world allows:us to fink.
W'hen the mind ot a good ma.n is hurt by-misfortunes,
r-ligic.n administers the cordial, and infuse, the balm.
Whereas tlhe world infliQs wounds, and then leaves
thenl to feller. It brings sorrows, but it providts
ro co: I.-lation. Contllatiio is entirely the provi-
dence of religion. Supcofing religion to be inferiour
to vice in cxternal advantages, it muff he allowed
to profcTl'fs internal peace, in a much higher degree.
T'hi, is so certain, that almost all men, at some pe-
ri,,d or other ot their Ii-e, look forward ro ir, as to
a detirable retreat. When the erdsof their present
pu ftuit shall be accomplifled, they-purpofe to them-
ft.lves much fatilacftion, in an honourable difcctarge
cf the (iuti-s of their tlatiolT, amidll those moderate
paiiFon, ard temrnici-ae Flca'-tree, which innocence

allows.

allows. That which all men agree in holding to
be second in .irn.prtance to the purflit which they
follow, may be tafely esteemed to be the firfi in real
vorth ; and it may be concltuded, that if they were
not blinded by some prevailing pafiony they would
difeern and adopt it as fach.

It is tlie pecultiar ffeat of virtue, to make a ma-ns

chief happiness arile from himfell and his. own con--
'duc. A bad.man is wholly the creature of the
world. He hangs upon. its favour, lives by its
frmiles, and is happy or mif.rible, in proportion to,
his fuecefs. But to a vil.tuous man, luccefs, ii
uerldl-y undertakings, is but a secondary objeEt.
To dtirfharge his own part with integrity and hc-

- nour, is his chief aim. If he has done properly

what was incumbent on him to do, his rrind is at
ref ; to Providence he leaves the event. HIs wit.-
ness is in heaven, and his record is on biA. Satisfied
wvith the approbation of God, and the testimony
of a good conscience, he enjoys himself, and despises-
the triumphs of gilt. In proportion as such manly
principles-rule your heart, you will become inde-
pendent of the: world ; and will forbear complaining
of its discouragemen.ts. It. is the imperfe&ion of
your virtue; which occafiors you to be weary in.
'ell-doiwng. .It is because your hearts remain divided
·between God and the world, that you are so often
difcontenred ; partly wishing to discharge your duty,
and partly seeking your happiness from fomewlat-
that is repugnant to your duty. Study'to be more
confiflent in principle, and more uniform in pra&ice,.
and your peace wilt be more unbroken.

Though virtue may appear at first fight to con-

traC t!ie bounds- of employment, "ou will find, up-
on refiaion,. that, in truth, it enlarges them If
it restrains the excess of Come plea(ures, it favours
ard increaift s others. It precludes you from none,
but fuIeh as'ae- either fantalick and imaginary, or

gcrnIe us-

pernicious and deffruaive, Whateve is truly vaiahble
in human enjoyment, it allows to a good rran, no less-
than to others. It not only allows him such plea-
fures, but heightens them, by that greatful relish
which a good conscience gives to. every pleasure.
It not only heighters. them, but adds to them, alfi,
the pecular fatisfaaions which flow from virtuous
fentimrenls, from devout affeaions,- and religious
hopes. On how much worse terms is the finner
placcd, in the midit of his boaated gratifications ?
His portion is confined to this world. His- good-
thlings are all ot one fort baly ;. he has neither knotw-
ledge, nor relilh, of any thing beyond them . His
enj,,ymcnt, therefore, refts on a much narrower
basis, than that of the servants ot God. Enlarge,
as much as you. please the circle of wordly gra.ifica-ti-
ons; yet, it nothtngofthe mindand the heart, noHfi-g
ofa refined and moralinature,enter into th-t circle, and
vary the enjoyment,s lilngouland weariness soon succeed
Among whom do youhear more peevish exprefliors of
difcontcnt, or mor-efrcqauent complaints of low spirits,
than among theprofeflel votaries of worldly pleafuie ?

Vice and virtue, in their progress, as in every

other refpee, hold an opposite courle. 'The begin-
nings of vice are entming. The sirss steps of worldly
advance-rrnt, are flattering and plcafing. But the-
continuince of. succe-ss blunts enjoyment, and flatter-
ing desire. Whereas -the beginnings of virtue are
1h' orious. But, by perseverance, its labours- diminifi,
and its- plearures increase. As itripens iit!o confirmed
habit it becomes both frnoother in praaice, and more
compleat in its reward. in a worldly ;ife, the terminati-
on of our hopesall ways meets our view. We fee a
boundary before us, beyond which we cannot reach.
Bur the profpeas of virtue are growing, and endlets..
ThAe rigltcui s/hill ,iold on in his wav ; and be thatEhath
clean hands, jhall wax ftroer andflro'zger. 7he parr
of the jult -ii aJ the fining light, tbat l7indt4. mre at

flire

mor' unto the perfeA day. This bri-gs me to con-
fider,

IV. TPE affiured hope, which good men enjoy,

of a full reward at last. I have endeavoured, by
several ccrfiderations, to corret your impatience
under the present discouragements of virtue.- I have
shown many high advantages, which it already pof-
fesses. But now, laying all thele aside s fuppnofing
virlue to have brought you no advantage, but to
have only enga ed you in perpetual firuggles with
an evil world ; the Text fuggelts what is sufficient
to answer every objecion, and to filenceevery eom-
plaint ; In due /eaJan yis flJall reap, iJ yeu faint not.
It is rot a loose encouragement, or a dubious hope,
uhich is htl fcrth to us. A dire& and explicit
declaration is made by the Spirit of God, that piety
and' virtue,. how dilconraged foevel, or opprefied,
they may be for a while, shall not be frultrated of
their reu ard; but that in dwefeafin, when the pert-
od which i: fixed by the Divine decree fiall come,
all who have not been 'eary in vea!i-ding, though
they may bave jswn in tears, Jlall reap in joy. As-
this great Frirciple of faith is 1o eiferitlil to our pre-
sent argument, and is indeed the foundation ot all'
religion, it will be proper that we now take a view
of the grounds on which it refis. By fxing our at-
tention, both -on the proofs which reason fuggefls,
and on the discoveries which revel.:tion has made,
of a slate of future retribution,, we fiall take an ei-
fe&ual method of confirming our adherence to reli--
gion, and of h.ffling those temptations bhich migt:t
lead us to he rstry in .ttell doing

THE filft, and mofl obvious prefumprion, which

reason affords in behalf of future lewards to the righ-
teoui, arises from the imperfe& difiribution of g< od.
and' evil in our preient slate. Notrwitiftand ine
wha.t I have advanced concerning the pleasures andt
advantages ot virtue it cannut be denied, that the

.a ppinea e

tlappinefsof good men is often left incomplt*e. TAle vi-
cious pofrefs advantages, to which they have no right ;
while'the confientious susser for the fake ofvirtue, and
groan under dilrelTes.whiehthey havenot merited'from
the world. Indeed, were the distribution of good and.
evil, in this lrfe, altogether promiscuous; could it be
said, with truth, that the mioral condition of men had
no influence whatever upse their happiness' or misery;
1 admit, that from such a ifate of things, no prefump-
tion would arise, of any future retribution beinginten-
ded. They who delight to aggravate the aileries of
fife, and the distresses of virtue, do no service to the ar-
gument int behalf of Providence. For, if total difordzr be
tounil toprevail now, fufpiciuns may toojuftly, arise,
of itprevailing for ever. If he who rules, the universe,
entirely negleis virtue here, the probability mut bhe
small, of his rewarding it hereafter. But this is far
from being the true slate of the fia. What hu-
man life prefeits to the view of an impartial obfer-
ver is.by no means a scene of entire confusion; biTi
a state of order, begun, and carried on, a certainu
tenght. Virtue is so far from being neglected by the
Governour of the world, that from many evident
marks, it appears to bae a chief objt:et of his care.
In the conflitution of human riature, a foundation is
laid, fpr comtort tothe righteous, and forinternal pu-
nifhment to the wiektd. Throughout the course of
Divine govctiment, tendencies towards the happir.es.
of'the one, and the misery of the other, constantly
appear. They'are so confpicucu:. as not to have efca-
ped the notice oftherudefi nations. Overthe whole
ear.h, they have diffused the behalftthat Pbovidence
is propitious fovirtue,and adverfetoguilt. Yet thcle
tendencies are, sometimes disappointed of their el-
-fe&; and that which Providence visibly favours, is
left, at present, without an adequate reward.

From such an imperfeEt diilribution of happiness,
what are we to conclude, but, that this fyfl'e;n is the

beginning.

beginning,: not the whole of things; the opening on-
ly.of a -more extensive plan, whole- confmnnation
reaches intp, a future world? If God has alreadyJet
his throne for judgments; if he has visibly begun to
reward and to punish, in rome degree, on earth, he
cannot mean to leave the exercise of government in-
complete. Having laid the foundation. of a great
and noble ftfruure, hewill. in due time rear it .up to
pei fe&ion. The unfinished parts of the fabriek evi-
dently shew, that a future building is intended. ,All
his other works are conftruaed accordingto the
molt full andt exac'proportion. In the natural world,
nothing is deficient,.nothiQg redundant. It is in the
moral world, only, that- we discover, irregularity and
de:cat. It falls flort of that order and!perfe.aion,,
which appear in the reft of the creation.; It exhibits
not in ils present state, the fame features of com-
pleat wifdome, jutice, or goodtnefs.: But can we be-
lievc, that, under the government of the Supreme
Being, those apparent.difordcrs shall not be retified
at the last ? Or, that from his condilt towards his
rational creaturcs, the chief of his works, the sole
objection againll his perfection shall be. allowed to
rife, ard fbhall continue unreipoved for ever.

On the fupppfiti:on of future rewards and pun:fh-

nents, a satisfying account can be given, of al1 the
disorders which at. present take place on earth. Chris-
tianity explains their origin, and traces them to trlhe
issue. Man, fallen frorr his prinmval lelicity, is
now undergoing probation and discipline for his final
ilate. Divine justice remains, for.a 'eafnn, conceal-
ed; and allows men to at their pa.ts with freedom
on this theatre, that their charaaers may he formed
and ascertained. Amidst discouragements and as-
flitions,. the rightebus give proof of their fidelity,
and acquire the habits of virtue. But if you ft!p-
pose the events of this life to have no refelence to
anuother., the whole slate us man becomes,, not only

ineX pllcat)1:

inexplicable but contradi&ory, and inconsistent. The
powers of the inferiour animnals are perfealy suited
to their flation. They know nothing higher than
their present condition. In gratifying thei appetites,
they fulfil their destiny, and pass away. Man, alone,
comes forth to aA a part, which carries no meaning,
and tends to no end. Endowed with capacities, which
extend far beyprd his present sphere; fitted by his
rational nature, for-running the race of immortality,
he is flopped short in the very entrance of his course.
He squanders his acivity on pursuits, which he dif-
cerns to be vain. He languishes for knowledge,
which is placed beyond his reach. He thirfis after a
happiness, which he is doomed never to enjoy. He
fees, and laments the disasters of his state; and yet
upon this fiippofition, can find nothing to remedy
them--Has the eternal God any pleasure in sport-
ing himself with such a scene of misery and folly, as
this life, if it had no connection with another, must
exhibit to his eye ? - Did he call into exiftehce this
magnificent unierfe, adorn it with so much beauty
and splendour, and surround it with those. glorious
luminaries which we behold in the heavens, only
that Come generations of mortal men might arise to
behold these wonders, and then disappear for ever ?
How unsuitable, in this cafe, were the habitation to
the wretched inhabitant ! How inconsistent the com-
mencement of his being, and the mighty preparation
of his powers and faculties, with his despicable end !
How contradi&ory, in fine, w ere every thing which
concerns the slate cf man, to the wildom and per-
fe&ion of his Maker!

Throughout all ages, and among all nations, the

perfiafion of a future life has prevailed. It sprung
not from the refinements of Icience, or the fpecula-
tions of philosophy ; but from.a deeper and stronger
root, the natural fentirnents of the human heart.
Hence it is common to the philosopher and the fa-

vage

vage; and is found in the moR barbarous, as weil ay
'in the molt civil zed regtons.. Even the belief of
the being of a God, is not more general on the earth,
than the belief of immortality. Dark, indeed, and'
confused, were' the notions which men entertained
concerning a future state. "'et ftin, in that flater
they looked for retribution, both to the good, and
the bad; and inr the perfecion of such pleasures, as
they knew bell, and valued molt highly, they placed
the rewards of the virtuous. So 'universal a consent
seems plainly to ilditate, an original determination
given to the foul by its Creater. It fhbws this great
truth, to be native and congenial to man.

When we look into our own breafis, we find v*-

rious anticipations and presages of future existence,
Molt of our great and high passions, extend beyond
the limits of this life. The ambitious and the self-
denied, the great, the good, and the wicked, all
take interefi, in what is to happen after they shall
have eft tFe earth. That passion for fame, which
inspires so much cf the acivity of mankind, plainly
is animated by the persuasion, that consciousness is
to survive the dissolution of the body. The virtu-
ous are supported' by the hope, the gailty tormented
with the dread, of what is to take place after death.
As death approaches, the hopes of the one, and the
fears of the other, are found to redouble. The
foul, when ifuing hence, seems more clearly to dif-
cern its future abode. All the operations of con-
science, proceed upon the belief of immortality. The
whole moral cond-u of men refers to it. All le-
giflators have supposed it. Al religions are built up-
on it. It is'lo e!ential to the order of society, that
were it erased, human laws would prove ineffectual
restraints from evil, and a deluge of crimes and mi-
series would overflow the earth. To- suppose this
universal and powerful belief to be without founda-
tioa in truth, is to suppose, that a principle of delu-

sion

ion was interwoven with the nature of man; is to,
suppose, that this Creator was reduced to the neeer-
fity of imprefling his'heart with a falsehood, in or-
der to make him answer the purposes Gs his being.

BuT though these arguments be fhrong, yet all'

arguments are liable to olijetion. Perhaps, this ge-
neral belief, of.which E have spoken, has being ow-
ing to inclination arid desire, more than to evidence.
Peihaps, in our reasonings on this subS-ea from the
Divine perfections, we flatter ourselves with being
of more consequence, than we truly are, in the
system of the universe. Hence the great importance
of a discovery prcceeding froim God himself, which
gives full authority to all that reason had suggested,
and places this capital truth beyond the reach of sus-
picion or diltruft.

The method which Chrirfianity has taken to con-

vey to us the evidence of a future Itate, highly de-
serves our attention.. Had the Gbfpel been addrefT-
ed, like a system of philosophy, solely to the under-
standing of men; had it admired only at.enlightet.-
ing the fludious and -refleeting it, would hav-e con-
fined itself to abfiraa truth; it would have fmyly
informed us, that the righteous are hereafter to be
rewarded, and finnets to be punished. Such a decla-
ration as'that contained in the 'Iext, would have
been sufficient: Be not weary in .well-doing ; fat in
duefeafjn you fall reap, if you faint not. But the
Gospel has not flopped, at barley annotuning life
and immortality to mankind. It was calculated for
popular edification. It wa's intended to, be the religi-
on not merely of the few, whoef underfianding was
to be informed , bat of the many, also, whose iaa-
gination was to be irmprefed, and whose passions
were to be awakened, in order to give the truth its
due influence over them. Upon this account it not
only reveals the certainty of a future slate, bur,in the
person of the great Founder of our rel;giun, ex hibits a

fries

series of faas relating ro it; by means of which, our
senses, our imagination, and paflions, all become in-
terested in this great objea -

The refurreaion of Chrifi from the grave, was

designed to be a sensible evidence, that'death infers
not a final extintion of the living piinciple. He
rose, in order to [how, that, in our name, he had
conquered death, and was become the firfl fruits of
them tbat leep. Nor did he only rife from the grave,
but by'alcending to heaven in a visible form, before
many witnefles, give an ocular specimen of the
t anfition from this world, into the region of the
bleifed. The employments which now accupy him
there, are fully declared. As our fore-runner, he
hath entered within the veil. He appears in the p-re-
Jence of God for us, He maketh perpetual interceifon
for his people. 1 go, faith he, to my Father and your
Father, to my God ond to: your God. In my Fatber s
house are many mansions. I go to prepare a place for
you. I will come again, and receive you to nmyjelf, that
where I am , there ye may be also The circum-
flances of his coming again; are diffintly foreiold.
The founding of the last trumpet, the refurretion
of the dead. The appearance of the Judge, and the
solemnity with which he shall discriminate the good
from the bad, are all described. The very words
in which he shall pronounce the final fentance, are
recited in cur hearing: Come, ye blefed of my.Father!
inherit the kingdom prepared-for you from the foundati-
on of the world. Then fihill the holy and the just be
caught up in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air.
They shall enter with him into the city of the livng
God. 'They shall possess the new earth and new hea-
vens . wherein dwellrtb righteousness. God Jball wipe
away all tears fronttheir byes. 7r ey fall behold his
face in righteousness, and be satisfied with his likenejs
for ever.- By recording such a train of iriking
circnmitances and fats, the Gospel familiarizes us

in

in some measure with a future f1ate. By accom-
modating this great difcovely, in so useful a man-
ner, to the conceptions of men, it furnishes a strong
i!tri nfic evidence of its divine origin.

THus, upon whole, whether you consult your

reason, or lilten to the discoveries of revelation, you
behold our argument confirmed; you behold a hie of
tiety ane virtue, issuing in immortal felicity. Of
what worldly purluit can it be pronounced, that its
reward is certain ? Look every where around you,
and you shall fee, that the race is far from being al-
wvays t I the swift, or the battle to the ?frong. The
motl diligent, the mofl wife, the accomplished, may,
after all their labours, be disappointed in the end;
and be left to susser the regret, of having /pent their
flrenght for nought. But, for the righteous, is laid
up tbe crown of life. Their -final happiness is prepar-
ed in the eternal plan of Providence, and lecured by
the labours and sufferings of the Saviour of the
world.

Cease, then, from your unjutf complaints againfl

virtue and religion. Leave discontent and peevish-
ness, to worldly men. In no i. riod ol difleefs, in
no moment of disappointment, allow yourselves to
fufpea, that piety and -integrity and fruitless. In
evLry flate.of biing, they lead to hl.ppinefs. If you
enjoy not at present their full rewards, it is because
the leafon of recompence is not yet come. For, in
due Jea/sn you /ball reap. There is a time which is
proper for reward; and there is a period which belongs
trial. How long the one fliould lall, and whtn the
other should arrive belongs not to you to determine.
It is fixed by the wife, though unknown, decree of
the Almighty. But, be assured, that lfe that comethi,
[bail come, and 'will not tarry. He (hall come in
dueejoean, to restore perfet order among his works;
to bring refi to the wear), comfort to the affliaed,
and just retribution of all men. Beb;1d, faith the

Ja;thful

# SERMON XVI. 1 CORINTH. xiv. 40. Let all things be done — in order.

faithfrl and true W/itnef, I come quikly, and myre1
'ward is -with me.. To him that avercometh, *willt Igive
to eat of the tree of lifr, wbicb is in the pmidji of tbe
paridiJe of .Gd. I tll give him the morning /par.
I will make him a pillar in my temple. ie /ball he
cloathedl in white raiment; and Jball/it do-wn witb mne
on my throne.

S E R M N XVI.

I CORINTH. xiv. 40

Let all things be done- in order.

ELIGIOCN, like every regular.and wel-con-

neated f)ftem, is composed of a variety of

pal t-, each of which polTeffes its leparate importance,
and contributes to ilie lerft&ion of.the whole. Some
graces are effintial to it such as faith and repen-
tance, the love of CGod, and -the love of our neigh-
hour; which, ftr that reason, mufi be often incul-
.cated on men. There are oiler dispositions and ha-
bits which though they hold -not so high a ranks, yet
are.neceflary to the introducion and fuppont of the
.former; and therefore, in religious exhortations,
these also justly claim a place. Of tlhis .nature is
that regard to order, method, and regularity, which
the apofik enjoins us in the text to cairy through
the whole of life. Whether you confider it as, in
iticlf, a moralduty, or not, yet I hope soon to con-
vince you that it is-efential to the prolper dicharge
of almon all duties; and merits iupon that account
a greater degree of attention than is commonly paid
to it in a religious view.

IF

If vou look abroad into the world, you may be

satisfied at the firfl glance, that a vicious and liber-
*tine life is always a life of collfiuilI. Thence it is
-natural to infer that order-is fiiendly to relizion. As
the naglea of it .co-opperates with vice, to 'he pie-
servation of it must asfilt virtue. By the appcirt-
ment of Providerce, it is irudifpenfably requisite to
worldly prosperity T'hence arises a prerLurption
that it is connected also with spiritual improvement.
W'hen you behold a man's affairs, through inegligence
and mifconduc, involved .in dirorder, you ntaturally
conclude that his ruin approaches. You may at the
fame time jufily fufpec, that the caufcs which as-
fe& his temporal welfare, operate also to the pre-
judice' ot his moral interests. 'Ihe apo!lie teaches
us in this chapter, that God is not the author of conJu-
sion He is a lover of order; and all his works are full
of order. Put vihrere csnfii/iz is, there is, its clole
attendant, every evil wwk. In the sequel of this d f-
course -I hall point out some of thd'e parts of con-
dut where;n it is rmon material to virtue that order
take place; and then 'hall conclude with (hewing
the high advantages which attend it. Allow me to
recommend to you, order in tie condut of your
affairs; crder in the distribution of your time; order
in the management of y.ur fortune; order in the re-
gulation of your'amufements; order in the arrange-
ment of your fcciety ' Thus let all thinga be done in
order.

I. MAINTAIN order in the condui& of your

worldly affairs. Every man, in every flation of life,
has fbme concerns, private, domeltic, or public,
which require fuccefive attention; he is placed in
some fphere-of acive duty. Let the employments
whlich belong to that sphere be so arranged, that each
may keep its place, without johling another; arid
,that what retards tqle world may not interfere with
What is due to God. In proportion to the multipli-

city

city of affairs, the observance of order becomes more
indispensable. But scarcely is there any train of life
so simple and uniform but what will susser through
tl e neglet of it. I spake not now of suffering in
point of worldly intrefl. I call upon you to attend
to higher intrefls; to remember that the orderly
conduEt of your temporal assais forms a great part
of your duty as Christians.

Many, indeed, can hardly be persuaded of this

tru h. A strong propenfitr has, in every age, ap-
petred among men to sequestrate religion from the
commerce of the lvcrld. Seasons of retreat and de-
votion they are willing to appropriate to God. -But
the world they confider as their own province.
They carry on a fort of separate intreft there. Nay,
by the refpe& which, on particular occaffons, they
pay to religion, they too often imagine that they
have acquired the liberty of acing in worldly mat-
ters according to what pain. they chufe. How en-
tirely do such persons mitiake the design of Christ-
ianity !-In this world yon were placed by Provi-
dence as on a'great field oftrial. By the necef-
fities of your nature you are called forth to different
employments. By many ties you are connected with
human society. From fuperiours and inferiours, from
neighbours and equals, from friends and -enimies, de-
mands arise, and obligations circulate through all the
ranks of life. This a&ive scene was contrived by the
wisdom of heaven, onpurpofethat it might bring into
exercise all the virtue of the christian chara&cer; ) o '
juflice, candourand veracity in dealing with one ano-
ther; your fidelity to every trufi, and your conrcien-
tious discharge of every office, which is committed to
you; your affeEtion for your friends ; our forgivenels
of enemies; your charity to the difireffed; your atten-
tion to tte interefis of your fam:ly. It is by ful-
filling all these obligations, in proper succession, that
you liow your conversation to be fucb as bccsnmcth the

gojpel

.o1fpel of Cbrij?. It is thus you make yeur light fa
·to bine before men, that they may fee their good waorks,
and glrrifj your Fatber .whicb it in heaven. It is
thuis you are rendered meet for the inheritance of the
faints in light.- But how can those various duties
be discharged by persons who are-ever in that hurry
and perplexity which disorder creates ? You wifl,
perhaps, to perform what yourchara&er and flation
require. But from the.spnfuiion in which you have.
allowed yourselves to be involved, you find it to have
bocone impoflible. What was negle&ed. to bedone
in its .proper place, thrusts itself forward at an incon-
venient season. A multitude of affairs crowd up-
on you together. Different obligations difirat you;
and this diftraaion is fornetinles the cause, some-
times the pretence, of equally neglecing them all,
or, at leaf, of sacrificing the greater to the latter.

Hence arise so many inconftent chara&ers, and

such frequent instances of partial and divided good-
ness, as i'e find. in the world; appearances of genero-
fity without juRice, honour without truth, probity to
tmen without reverence to God. He who conducs
his affairs with method and regularity, meets every
duty in its proper place, and -assigns in its due rank.
But where there is no order in condpt, .there can
be no uniformity in charac:er. -The natural connex-
ion and arrangement of duties is loft. If virtue ap-
pear at all, it will be only in fits and (larts. The
authority of oonfcience may occasionally operate,
-when our situation affords it room for exertion. But
in other circumRfances of equal importance, every
moral sentiment will be overpowered by the tumul-
tuous butle -of worldly.affairs; Fretfulness of temper.
too, will generally characerize those who are negli-
gent of order. / 'lhe hurry in which tl ey live, ard
the embarrialments with which they are Surrounded,
keep theit spirits in perpetual ferment. Confliaing
with difficulties which they are unable to overcome,

L conicious

conscious of their own mifcnndu t, but ashamed to con-
felsit, they are engaged in many a secret ltl uggle, -and
the uneasiness which they fufferwithin, recoils in bed
humour on all who are aroupd them. Hence the wret h
ed resources tc which, at latf, the are oulli ed to fly, in
order to quiet their cares. In.defpair of bilng able to
unravel wvhat they have suffered to bccome so perplex-
ed, they fometimts fink into supine indolence, Iome-
t mcs throv: ti-emfe.l:e into the arms of,intemrperance
and loole pleasure ; by either c wlhich they aggravate
their guilt, and accelerate thcir ruin. To the nd that
order may be maintained in ycur affairs, it is ecefiary.

I1. I hat you attend to order in the diftribuiion of

your time. Time you ought to confidcr as a sacred
trufl committed. to you by God; of \vh,ch ou are
now the depcfitaries, and are to render account
at the lafl. That portion of it which he has al-
lotted you is intended partly for the concerns of this
vorld, partly for those of the next. Let -ar:h of
these occupy in the distribution of your time that
fpdce which properly belongs to it. Let not the
hours of hospitality and. plc:lure interfere with ti-e
difcl arge of your necefiary affairs ; and let net what
you call necelfary affairs encroach rupon thetimewhiicb
is due to devotion., To c-ry tlii t/in tere is a frafon,
a timi jcr 'vcr, prirpojc rmndclr th/ie heavcn. If you
delay till tc-morrow what ought to be done to-day,
yon overcharge the morrow with a burden which be-
longs not to it. You loadl the wheels of tinie, atnd
prevent itirom carrying y)ou alon filloo lly. I!'e w-o
evey mrly omiii'! pl:inl tile ttlan:'l'iiol! of tile (;: a:nd
follo,'.:, { ( hOllt

i ,l:li , cail ti'; in :1 tlhrr :.l vInlcil will

p'uide hinl) thrliillgh lie i:ll) tiltil tle inollt blly
lite. '1'hi orllderly : r:ini sltent (of hli; time is like
a ray of lilhl which darts illcitf I}lloulgh all his iif-
f.iirs. 1litt whieie no plan is; laid, wlIcre tlhe iifpolil
oi tinic is Ilitiretuldred merely oi tliel.cIhnce of incli-
dclti,t all rlsi;'ig: lie luddlcd tc,;cthll in one clihais,.

Xwvich

wvhick admits neither of distribution nor.review.

The firflt rquifite for introducing or:der into the

management of. time, is to be impressed with a jui
sense of its value.. Confider w'ell how much depends
upon it, and how fafi it flies away. The bulk of
men arein 'nothing more capricieus and inconsistent
than is their apprecation of time. When they think
of' it as the measure of thei'r continuance on earth,
they highly prize it,' and with the greatefQ anxiety
seek to lengthen it out. But when they view it in
separate parcels, they' appear to hold it in contempt,
and fqluander it with incon'ftderate profiifion. While
they comIlain that life is'fhort, they are often wifll-
ing its different periods at an end. Covetous of
every other poffefTion, of time only they are pro-
digal. They allow every idle man to be master of
this property,"iand make every' frivolous occupation
welcome that can help them to consume it. Among
those who are so careless of time, it is not to be ex-
peEed that order flould be observed in its diftribu-
tion. But by this fatal negle&, how mnany materials
of fevee Uad laftirig regret are they laying up in
flcre for themselves The time which they susser
to pals away in the tnidfl of confusion, bitter repen-
tanct:e'f cee afterwards in vaiii to recall. WXlVht was
omitted to be done at its proper moment, arises to
lie the tormlcnt of tome future season. l\4anheod is
<lil raccd by the confequeonces of negletled youth.
)Old age, oplprcfi: d by carcs that belonged to a for-
iner period, lboiurundcr :i burden not its own At
tlhe clo!e ol life, Ihe dyiing man hbeihlds with ilguifil
tll:it ins davi; are ftpifhirinh, wliln hlis, lrep:lr:l ion for

tclrnlity i ; 11:'ldly co(I11: ned.ll Sluch rc

: Lr C cfi re ds

ol a dilorderly wafle of lime, thruli(lh not attend-
iioi to its v.liuc. I'vce'y thling in tile life of Iflici
pe'rlobn, is n-iilplccld. Ntthing is performed alight,
tiom milt being perflormied in due Cealirn.
'1ul t e who is urdcely in the diriibution of Iii

L timne,

time, takes the proper method of escaping those ma-
nifold evils. He is justly said to redeem the time. By
proper management, he prolongs it. He lives much
in little space,; more in a few )ears than others do in
many. 'He can live to God and his own foul, and
at the fame time attend to all the lawful interests cf
the present world. He looks back'on the pafl, and
provides for the future. He catches and arrests the
hours as they fly. They are marked down for use-
ful purposes, and their memory remains. Whereas
those hours fleet by the man of confusion like a (ha-
dow. 'His days and years are either blanks of which
he has no remembrance, or they are filled up with
'such a confused and irregular fuccefflon of unfinilhed
tranlaaions, that though he remembers he has been
busy, yet he can give no account of ihe business
which has employed him. Of him, more than of
any other, it may with justice be pronounced, that
he, Owalketh in a vain /bew ; he is difqguieted in vain.

11. INTRO DUCE order into the management of

your fortune. W hatever it be, let the adminiltra-
tion of it proceed with method and ceconomy. -From
time to time examine your situation; and proportion
your xpence to your growing or diminishing revenue.
Provide what is necessary, before you indulge in what
is superfluous. Study to do juflice to all with whom
-you deal, before you assea the praise of liberality.
In a word, fix such a plan of living as you find that
your circumstances will fairly admit, and adhere to
it invariably against every temptation to improper ex-
cess.

No admonition refpecing morals is more necefrary

than this to the age in which we live ; an age mani-
feftly diflinguifhed by a propensity to thoughtless pro-
fusion; wherein al the different ranks of man are ob-
lerved to press with forward vanity on those who
are above them; to vie with their fuperiours in evry
nmode of luxury and oflentaticn; and to seek no far

their

tfier argument for. juflifying extravagance, than the
fashion of the times, and the supposed neceflity of li-
ving like others around them. This turn of mind-
begets contempt for fober and orderly plans of life.
It overthrows all regard to domestic concerns and du-
ties. It puifes men on to hazardous and visionary
schemes of gain; and unfortunately unites the two
extremes, of grasping with rapaciousness, and .of
squandering with profuficn. In the midit of such.
disorder no prosperity can be of long continuance.
While confusion grows npon men's affairs, and pro-
digality at the fame time uafles their fubflance, po-
verty makesits advances like an armed man. They trem-
ble at the view of approaching evil ; but have loft the
force ofm nd to make provision against it. Accullom-
ed to move in a round of society and pleasures dif-
proporticncd to their condition, they are unable to
break through ihe inchantments of habit; and with
their eyes open fink into the gulph which is before
them. Poverty inforce dependance; and dependance
increases corruption. Neceflity first betrays them
into main compliances; next, impels them to open
crimes; and beginning with oflentation and extra-
vagance, tiey end in infamy and guilt. Such are
the consequences of neglecing order in our worldly
circumstances. Such is the circle in which the pro-
fuse and the diffiolute daily run.-To what caule, so
much as to the want of order, can we attribute those
fcencs of distress which so frequently excite ourpity
families that once were flourishing reduced to ruin.; and
the melanch;ly widow and negleaedorphan thrown
forth, friendless, upon the world ? What cause has
been more fruitful in ingendering those atrocious
crimes which fill society with disquiet and terrour ;:
in training the gamester to fraud,. the robber to-vio-
lence, and even the afiaffin to blood ?

Be assured, then that order, frugality, and caco-
nomy are the necessary supports of every personal

L 3 and

and priva:e virtue. How humble soever tlefe qua-
lities may appear to some; they are, nevertheiefs,
the basis on which liberty, indepndendce, and true
honour, muff rife. He who has the flcadinefs to
arrange his affairs witi- method and regu!arity, and
-to conduc his train of life agreeable to his circuin-
fiances, can be matler of himnfclf in every :situation
into which he may be tl.rown. He ib under no ne-
ceffity to flatter er to lie ; to sloop to what is mean,
or to commit what is criminal. But he who wants
that firmness of mind * Ihich the cbfervance of order
requires, is held in bon:dage to the world; he can
neither aa his part wvith courage as a man, nor
with fidelity as a Christian. From the moment )oLI
have allowed )ourfclves to pass the line of cecoonny,
and to live be) ond your fortune, you have entered
on the rath of danger. Preci-ices furrcunued you on
all fidcl. Every ttcp which you take' may lead to
mifchieis that, as yet, lie hidden ; and to clim es that
will end in ycur cverlflinig perdition.

IV. OB SER VE order in ycur amulements ; that is,

nllowed them l.o more than their proper pl.ce ; flt;dy
to keep them within due bounds ; minle theln in a
temFerate fiiceflion with ferlious du:iei, and the
higher buflnes of life. Hluman life cannot proceed
to advantage without foime measure f rel:lxation
and cnrctitainiment. Xe lIeluire lelief from care.
'Vc a:C not tformnd fsr a perlpetal itretch of serious
thought. By too intenle anid continied applicatioi,
our feeble poweris would loon be worn out. At the
lame tim'n, fromn our propenfily to ca:fe a:id pile:lurle

nmtiltcenlt pro'vce', no:1111ng all r;:ik',, oi .nlct'1, tli
nioltl (!iits cl'oiiU: lo to oldel' r [,1' il tet]!, iicfl..i!t-
ly t() ulurp and ent rtoach, lo wilv!ne its trliilOi(.', to
thriift itfcll in the Il. e of rmor: inimolt:iltn conieril:; ,
:ind thereby to dilllihb 'iud oittlirti:t ile in:ttiil
coulfe ol thiligsi. ()Ol flivolous ai',linelt ildulg-
ed out of lcalbnl, will ofteL caruy perplelYity ntldl

ountuliolt

confufionr rtrough a long focceffion of affairs.

-Amuifeiments,.therefore, though they be of an in-

·nocent kind,. require lleady government, to keep
them within a due and limited province. But such
.as ire of an irregular and vicious nature, require not
to he governed, but to be banished from every or-
delly: lociety. As soon os a man fieks his happi-
neis from lhe giming-table, the midnighit-revel, and
the .other haaunts of licentiousness, confusion seizes
upon him as its own. There will no longer be or-
der. in hisfarniiy, nor order in his affairs, nor order in
his lime. The most importarntconcerns of life are
a!,a.idoir:e. ILv'nn the o:der of nattie is by such per-
flns ii.Vcrted; 'nghlt is changed into day, and day
i-'to -igisl. ChuraEer, honcur, and interest itself, are
trampled under foot. You may with certainty.prog-
noRlc.ite the ruin of ..there men tbobe j'ust at -haid.
Disorder, arifien to its height, has nearly accrriplifh-
ed iis wvcrk. T'he spots of death are upon them.. Let
ever one who would escape the pestilential contag'ibn
fly witli halte from their company. '

V. PR s K: R'. E order in the arrangement of your

society ; tlht is, entangle not yourselves in a per-
petual and promiscuous crowd ; fcle with prudence
and liropriety thcfci with whomi you chule to uafioti-
ate-; let company and retreat fieceed eachiofiierlat
meIl'ured intervals. There can be no order in lhis
life who allots not a due hiare of his time to retirc-
ment and refleaion. Fie can nieithdr-prudelitly ar-
ratnge his temptoral niffairs, nor prblerly attend to
Iiis rFpiritnual iuiere .Is. lie livts n1ot ro lirlelf,'but
to the \voild. '-y continutl dflipation,'lie'isichn-
dl:ci:.l I'i( ddy a:dl t lion>hlitli-fs. ' i-e collt :trI!s utllavoidll-
bly fIroln the- world tlha:t plilit of d(ilorder :ind coll-
fulfin v wliich is so prev:lcnt in it.

.It is it

not l I rfcicnt Iclprefiv:tive against this evil,

'tli.tt llie circles of 'ocicty in which you :ie enatged
utc liut of a libertine and vicious kind. II they

L .I withIidawv

withdraw yon from that attention to yourferves, and'
your domestic concerns, which becomes a good man,
they are subversive of order, and inconsistent with
your duty. What is innocent in itself, degenerates
into crime from being. carried to excess;, and idle,
trifling society is nearly a-kin to such as is corrupt-
ing. One of the first principles of order is, to learnr
to be happy at home. It is in domestic retreat that
every wife and virtuous man finds his chief fatisfac-
tion. It is there he forms the plans which regulate
his public conduuE. He who knows not how to enjoy
himself when alone, can never be long happy abroad.
To his vacant mind, company may afford a tem-
porary relief; but when forced to return ,-- himfeif,
he will be so much more oppreflfd ana languid.
Whereas, by a due mixture of public and prnra'e
life, we keep free of the snares of both, and enjoy
each to great advantage.

WH EN we review those differentparts of behaviour

to which I have shewn that order iseffential, it mull
naturally occur to you, that they all mutually con-
ne&ed, and hang upon each other- Throughout
your affairs, your time, your expence, your amuse-
ments, your society, the principle of order must be
equally carried, if you exped to reap any of its hap-
py fruits. For if into any one of those great de-
ipartments of life you susser dilorder to enter, it will
spread t'rough all the reft. In vain, for'inftance,
you purpose to be orderly in the condua of your
affairs, if you be irregular in the distribution of your
time. In vain your attempt to regulate your ex-
pencer if into your amafements, or your society, dif-
order has crept. You have admitted a principle of
confufiori which will defeat all your plans ? and per-
plex and entangle what you fought to arrange.
Uniformity is above all things necessary to order.
If you desire that any thirg should proceed accord-
ing to method and rule, let all' things, as the text

exhorts,

exlho; ts, Ae dlone in order.

I must also admonish you, that in small, as well as

in great affairs, adue regard to orders is requiiflte.
I mean not that you ought to look, on those minute
attentions which are apt to occupy frivolous minds,
as conneaed either with virtue or wisdom. But I
exhort you to remember, that disorder, like other
-immoralities, frequently takes rife from inconfidera-
ble beginnings. Tlshey'who, in the leffertranfaaionb
of life, are totally negligent of rule, will be in hazard
of extending that negligence by degrees to such affairs
and duties as will render them crimnal. Remiffinefs
grows on all whfo fRudy not do guard againff it; and
it is ortly by frequent exercise that'the habits of order
and punctuality can be throughly confirmed.

FR OM what has been said, the great importance

of- this principle to-moral and religious conduc
muR already be evident. Let us, however, coi-
elude with takirg a summary view of the advantages
which attend it.

Firtll the oberivance of order ferves-to correó&

that riertaience wvbih makes you omit some duties,.
and that hurry and precipitancy which makes you
perform others imper-fealy. Your attention isthere-
by direEted to its'proper cbji. You- foHow the'
ftreight path which Providence has pointed out td
man; in the course of which all the different bufi-
ness of-,life presents itfelf-Pegularly to him on every-
fide. God and'man;.time and eternity, possess their
proper tations,- arise in. fucceflion to his view, and'
attrac his care; · Whereas he iwho runs on in a dif--
erderly course, speedily involves himself in a laby-'
iinth. w.tihre, he is surroundea with' intricacy and'
darkness The crooked paths into which he frikes,
turn him aside irom the proper line of human pur-
suit; hide fronmhis fight the- objects which he eught
chiefly to regard, and bring others under his view,
which fe;ve no purpose but to d!tlraa and mifleadhim.

L5 Next

Next, by attending to order, you avoid idi!ener,

that most fiuitiul fotnice f climes andevils. Aiding
upon a plan, nmeetig erery thing in its own place,
you conilantly find inlnocent and useful employment
for time. You are never at a loTs how to dispose
of your hours, o: to 11 up life agreeably. In the
courle of human acion, there are two extremes
equally dangerous to virtue ; the multiplicity, of as-
fairs, and the total want of thenl. The miar of or-
der flands in the middle betxeer,,-tefe two extremes,
and fiffets from neither. He is occupited, but not
appreired. \'Whereas thei di'oir dirly, overloading one
part of time, and leaving another vacant, are at one
period overwhelme d with bufintfs, and at anot'her,
either idle thrrught want ol employment, or indolent
thrcugh perplexity. Trhofe feaibns of indolence
and idlenei., which lecur so often in their life, are
their most dangerous moments. 'I he mird, unhap-
py in its filuation, and clinging to every tbe<9 which
can occupy cr arnt:c it, is tihen apteft to throw it-
self into the arm of cvery vice hn.! eery:lully.

Farther, by tili ple.icvatirn of ordcr, you check

inconfitincy iand levity. tickle by lnatlie is the lu-
man heart. I: i, fond of clhane ; and perpetually
tends to flar taiic'. fruIom ihe fliaiglit line of conduct.
Hlence aritfst ihe p, pr;ict)' of britlgin g curltlves un-
(ler fulbjecti('r n toi nicthnlo and itle; lx hicl, though
at first it may t i[..ve confiraining, y:t by Iegrces,
and from the cxperience of its i:ippV efietts, be-
comes natural and agricable. It reCtifies hlole irre-
gul .uities C f :eruper :;inl manners to whi; h ixe give
tlhe n.n: e of c:qpiie ; and a.l

hic ite dliliiniliiilling

cl~ar:;ri erilic' o. a dlilderly riai td. It is tle p:lrCnt
<if 1 :ld; i;cf; ( si coriduc'. It follit; colfi(lelly y o
c¢l.a;;lelcr. 1i i:' Iic groilnd ofl all Il:e cornti dc'nce Xe
rn plfe in one :ncther. l;'or, the difotderlly we know
not whlcic to find. In hinl only can v,c place any

.
tu. .Ut

trurt w ho is uniform and regular; who lives by prin-
ciple .not by humour; who acs upon. .a plan, and
not by desultory motions.

'I'e .idvnartagcs of o;der, hitherto mentioned.be-

long to r:eitude of conduct. Confider also how
inipoltart it is to yonr felf-enjoymenlrt .and felicity.
Oider is thei lource of peace , ad- peace -is tli-htigi-
eft of ;ail ecmpor-;l b!.cfli'ig.; Order is indeed the
o;ly region in which trarnqiillity dwells. The very
menticn of confufio:i impotlts.sldiurbgn'ce and Vexati-
on. Is it pcofiulic for ilhnt n;an to be happy who
caninot oik ;rtt: tle ftatc or his affiirs, or the tenor
of i-risvcndiu:i, -iil.out di!c -rning all to be embroil-
ed; who is either in the mid,.of remo-le for what
he ha1s reglc&ed to do, or in the midst of ihurry to
overtake v.hlirt liC iinds, too late, .-was neceilary to
have beci don ? Such as live acco ding to order
m:lay be tonpared t tho e ccleftial bodies which move
in rgul.ti. cc i-urfc, and by f{tatd laws ; whose infllu-
once is bi.;Lficnt; ,vhofe op:rations are quiet and
tra:;;i;;l. 'lIhe (li:orderly reftimble those: tumdltu-
ois l!ci;len!s on ca:;h,' which; hy fuidden andi violefit
ini;lis 5 :I, diinuri the course of nature. By mit-
mrnai:len:a:cltt a(i aflii:s, y .ect.fs in cxpencc, by ir-
reinlairi;y in tlih indulsrelce ofcornniny andam.un!e-
nicnti, tie :;r e erliclually creating Iniolefl.ation both
to iliemnelvcs i-4Ld others-.. .'l:hey dep:rt from their
roai to fe( ik lc alure ; and iril cad of it, they every
wha'lil' ri ri lp 1I rl'ov.s. 's I e; ig. nlwisi foind ou? of
thei'r proper -p1cc,t -etl'ycir colirTc e itcrlec' aindl'j ar
wit othi el s. '! lie sol(i. l-i. vr hi'll they l.11ic nl-vt'r
f.il to I-l , ;tl I

' ond d tlit ir o'i lirf , alnd to invIltve

;.:ilpy i:;. c, Iltililn :i;t.! tii ltl'.; v. llcl c lli y i .(-c l-
1,ll)' .ci'>, '~!lI lt ;i::11thI, :i; otf tllliillt a:ndl c)t;li,-.l mio ,
ol dit t.l{ . c...i cnn\ii,. \'Wherecas older is tlhe fi.in-
d:ttitlii tl uit(,ii It v..'li:s (very niatn to carry oin
hit (wn ;1 ,:, l 'i ;iliaio 't' diiltlurbing: hisi- neighl oti'.
lti, itlicu tltvii thxiii n \\llt.bi holds togctlicr:ti.: Io-
.. .. ~cic icis

# SERMON XVII. PROVERBS iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out of it are the issues of life.

cities of men in friendship and peace.

In fine,'-the man of order is corne'ed with all

the higher powers and principles in the universe.
He is the follower of God. He walks with him,
and acts upon his plan. His character is formed on
-the spirit which relig;on 'breaths. For religion in
-general, and the religiono ofChrift in particular, may
be called the great discipline of order. To vItalk/in-
fully, and to walktdiJoiderly, are fynonymons teims
in Scripture. From jueb as iualk disorderly we' are
commanded, in the name of the Lord fefus Chris, to
-withdraw ourJelves *. The kingdonf of Satap is tre
reign of di'order and darkness. To restore order a-
mong the wcrks of God, was the end for Which the
Son of God descended to the earth. He requires
orderto be cbfervedin his church. His undertaking
is to be consummated in that perfec order which
he shall introduce at the last' day. In'thA'new eartb
end the new heavens, undisturbed erder shall for ever
prevail among the fpirik of the jruf made perfeA ;
and whatever farther preparation may be requisite
for our being admitted to join their society, it is
certain that we shall never share in it, unless we
make it now our study to do all things decently amd
in order.
S E R M ON XVIL.

PRovERBS iv. 23.
Keep thy reart wits all diligence . for out of it re tfr

issues of Sle.

MONOG the many wife .eounfels given by this
inspired writer, there is none which deserves

greate

greater regard than that contained in the text. Its
importance, however, 'is too leldom ierceive.d by
the generality cf men. They are apt toconfider the
regulation of external ccndcuc as the chlitfohject of
religion. If they can a& their part with decency,
and mcntain a fair charaEter, the conceive their duty
to be fulfilled. What passes in the'main time within
their mind, they suppose to be of no great confe-
quence either to themselves, or to the wot Id, In og-
position to this dan'er'ous plan of morality, -the wie
man exhorts us to keep the heart; that is, to attend
not only to our a&ions; but to our thoughts and
desires ; and to Aecp their heart witb all diligence, that
is, with sedulous and unremiiting .ae ; lolr which
he afligns this reason, that,' out oafte heart are tke
iiues of life.- In discoursing ofthis fubije I pur-
pcfe to confider, separately, the government of the
thoughts, of the phffibohs, and of'the 'temper. But
before entering on any of thele, let us begin with
enquiring in what sense the ilfueaof life are said to be
out of tbe heart; that we may dilfern the force of
theargumentnwhich thetext suggests, to recommend
this' great duty of keeping the heart.

The ijfues of .''e are jufly said to be out of the

heart, becaule the slate of the heart is what deter-
'mies our moral characer, and what forrns our chief
happiness or misery. '

FtIRsr,.it is the slate of the heart which deter-

mines our moral chata&er; The' tenor of ourac-
tions will always correlpond to the diCpofitions that
prevail within. 'To difleemble or to ftrpprefs theri,
is a fruitleft attempt. In spite of our efforts,
they will perpetuaily break forth il our behaviour.
On whatever fide the weight bs inclination hangs,
it will draw the pracice as'er it. In vain there-
fore you flrdy to preserve your hands clean, unless
you resolve at the iame time to keep your 'heart
pure. Make' tsi tree gopei, as our Savio.r'dires,

and

and tben its fruit will be good al/o For out of tbe
heart procir'd not only evil thoughts, but murders, a-
duilteries, jO.nicatlaNs, te/t, falje w:itneft, blafphc-
mics -. If that fiuntain be once polloned, you can
never expet tl a; salubrious fireams will flow-frcmr
it. Throughout' the whole of their course, they
will car'y the taint of the i a-ent fpi'ing.

But it is not merely from its influence on exter-

nal a&-ion that the importance ot the heart to our
-ioral charaAer arises. Independant- of all. action,
"it is, in truth, the llate of the. heart itself, mhioe
forms.our character in the fight of God. Wlth-our
fellow creatures, /a&icns mutt ever hold the chief
rank; bcc.ufe, by these only we cat jidge of one
another; by tliefe we assec each .therss.teifare;
and tllerefore to tihefe alone the regulation of htuman
law extends. But in the eye of that Supreme Be-
. ing, to whom our-whole i.!tcrnal framne-is uncov.ered,

dispositions held the place of acions; arnd it .is not
so much what we pertorm as the nioutJ .whhich
nieves us to performance, lia.t, coriniitutes ulgo;d
or evil in his figit. Eveen among men, the rior?.-
lity of a8ions is e:timated by the rinipfrom
which they are judg'd to proceed i a'd nch .as the
principle is, such is the man accounted to be. .Oner
for instance, may spend mu.h :6 his frrtune .in
charitable alions; and yet, if' he ,is believcd to be
infitenced by mere oflentation, he is: deemed! nr
charitab!e, 'but vain. He .may labor-.. tmnwear.i;diy
to ei ve;c-e i-ublic; bht ishe:is op!-mpled by the- d-e
fire ol t liig intp po er he i hell or publc. pirited,
but ambitious: And if he belltws a benefit.purely
that he may receive a greater in .retyrn no man
would rck(in him generotit, Pti sellh and interie-
ed. It reafop thus clearly. teaches usrto.eflimate.tlpe
value es a'ti( ns by the dipofitions,.which give th5jn
b;rtj, it is an obvious col;clufica, th'rt ccprdingc.t
those dilipfitipns we are all ranked and-clafld ;br

- hn

him who feeth into every heart. The reCtification
of.our principles of a ; on is the primary object of
religious dilcipline, ard tn proportion as this is more
or less advanced, we are mole or less religious. Ac-
cordingly, the. regeneration bs the hea t is evety
where repre'entedi in the Gospel as tl.e motl efrentia}
requisite in the character of a Christian.

SECONDDLY, the slate of the heart not only de-

termines our moral charaaer, but forms our prinei-
- pal happiness or misery. External situations of sot-

tune arc no fartlher of conCequence than as they
operate on the heart ; and their operation rhere .is
far from correlponding to the degree of worldly
prosperity or adversity: If, from any internal cause
a man's peace of mind 'be disturbed, in aain yu.t
load him with all the honours or riches which tl e
world can bellow. They remain without, like
things at-a diftante fromhim. - They reach not the
source of enjoyment. Discomposed thoiluhts, agi-
tated pTrfflns, and.a ruffled temper, poton every
irgredient 6f plearu ue which the world, holds out-
aniid.overcaft every objec v."hich presents itself, with
a melancholy gluonm. In order to acquire a capi-
city fdr happiness, it must be bur firfi study to re&ify
fuct inward d:forders. Whatever discipline tends to
accornpifh this puirpcfe, i of' greater importance tb
mar than t'he acquii'ition of the advantage= of fortune.
The.e are precarious and doubtful in their effe& ;
internal; tranquillity is a certain 'good. These are
only.:means; but that is the. end' These are ro
more than inftiuments of fatisfa&ion: that, is satis-
fa&tioh itself.

j:qtly. it is said by the Wife Man, that he tVo

' go rnle rva=h/isrfpi4itis

i ike:tt city that'YS broken

dtun:nand wuithout walltr.' All is waste; all is in
disorder and: ruins withirrhim. He pofiTff.s no de-
fence agairft:dangers' of any fort. ' He sics ip'en
to every iifurseeion of ill-humour, and' every in-

-. .

:
- vafio.l

vafion of diflrefs. Wherea, he who is employed.;n
regulating his mind is making provision against alt
the accidents of life. He is eleting a fcrtrefs into
which, in the day of danger, he can retreat with
·fafty. And hence, amidst those endeavours to fe-
cure happiness which incessantly employ the life of
man, the careful regulation, or the improvident
negle& of the inward frame, forms the chief dilinc-
tion between' wisdom and folly-

TItus it appears with how much propriety the

if.ues of life are said to be out of the heart. Here
rite those great springs of human condut whence
the m.iin currents flow of our virtue, or our vice-
of our .-.ppinefs, or cur milery. Besides this pow-
erful argument for keeping the heart..witb ill diligence,
I must mention anori.er important-confideration taken
from the present irate of..human nature. Think
what your heart now is, and what nruft be the confe-
quence of remitting your vigilance in watching over
',.: it. 3hn too much juflice it is said in. Scripture, to-

be deceitfjl abvee all things, and deperately wicked.
Its bia- of innate corruption gives it a perpetual ten-
dency.downuards into vice and disorder. To direc
and impel it upwards, requires a conflant effort.
Experience.may convince yon, lhat almot every de-
fire has a propensity to wander into an improper di-
reEt.on ; that every paflion tends to excess ; and that'
aroumd. yoir imagination there perpetually crowds a-
whole fiwa'm of vain and corrupting thcughts?
Alter all t. care that can be befiowed by the befl
men on th .egulation of the heart, it frequently bas-
fles their.liorts to keep it under proper dicipline.
Into wha eliverfal tumult then mutt -it. rile, if 'o
vrgilance may be employed, and no government be
exercised overit ? Inattention and remifinefs is all that
the great adversary of mankind desires, in order to
gain full advantage. wbhile you jeep, he . fro s his
tares in the field. The house which he finds vacant

an.-i

and ungaded, he presently garni/fes wit' - evil
Jpiriti. , A

Add to this, that the human temper is to be con-

fidered as a fyflem, the parts of which have a mu-
tual.dependaance on each other. Introduce disorder
into any one part, and you derange the Whole. Sus-
ser but one paflion to go out of its place, or to ac-
quire an unnatural force, aud presently the balance -
of the foul will be broken; its powers will jar among
themselves, and their operations become difcordmit
-Keepr thy heart bherefart with all dilige,*e ; for all
thy diligence is here required. And though thine
own keeping alone will not avail, unless the as-
fiflance of a higher power concur, yet of this be
well aslured, that no aid from heaven is to be ex-
peced, if thou flalt negled to exert thyself in per-
forming the part assigned thee,

HAVINGo now shown ihe importance of eaerci-

sing government over the heart, I proceed toconfcler
more particularly in what that government confifs,
as it relpeas the thoughts, the paflions, and the tem-
per.

I begin with the thoughts, which are the prime

movers of the whole human condutr. All that makes
a figureon-the great; theatre of the. world, the em-
ployments of the bafy, the enterprize of the am-> '
bitious, and the exploits of the warlike, the virtues
which form thehappinefs, and the crimes which cc-
cafion the mifcry of mankind, originate in that silent
and secret recess of thought which-is .idden from
-.every' hnman ee;. The secrecy and silence wfich
reign there favour the piejudice entertained by too
many, that thought is exempted from all controul.
Paflipns,. they perhaps admit, require govenrnmcnt
and refiraint, because they are violent emotions and
diifurb society. But with their thoughts, they
plead, nq one is concerned. By thel'e; as long as
they remain in their bofotn, no offence can be given,

and

and no injury conmitted.' .To enjoy. unreflrained thz
full range of imagination, appears to them the-native
right and' privilege, of rion. .

Had they to do with none but their fellow creature,

such reaio.'ning: miglh: b. e ,pecious....But. they, ought
to remember, that in the fight of the Supreme Being,
thoughts. beaj the characTer of good.or 'evil;'.as much.
as aEtions ; and that .they are,..in efpelial manner,
the subjects of. divine j.iril'dicions 'because they are
cognizable ;by. no. othecl tribunal. ' he .moral regu-
lation of our tl:ot liht, is the particular'.ttf-fof-our
reverence for C'.d. It we ritrain our passions :orm
bralking 'forth into open hfa:-dera, while w. ,abticllorl
our inair:.atioln in Iccret to corrilption, we Ilhow that
vir!ue rclles 'vith . us tipo. regard to men'; and that
however we may act a part in. publ;c with propriety,
there is bei. re l

ur -eyes no fear of that God who

fcarck/,ct the-chrt, and reqzui'-hc trut in tle invward'
part:.

But even ab!lrac: ng from this awful colfideration,-

the governimeht ut our thoughts muft.,yi. cir'to be
of highl conrfenuence, from their direct influence on
conuItt. :It is p! lin that thought' gives rile:firll im-
pulkl to cvety p.rinciple of acibn, Aicions: are, in
truth, no oihet ti!an tliotghltsripenrci intoconfliltcncy
and fiibitl:c.t ' So certain is this; .thatto judge

d v.!ti

precision of the clhra6cer of any nian, and tolforetell
with confidence what part he vill 'at, no more were
requilite, than to l:e rendered capable of iejwing the
ctlrr.-nt of tl :,ght which patfts mofit :reriuently
.'i hini itt. '.l l:i;gh by hlich a minetod( we hiav no
:ixcc-'li to jnio 'f ;t;i .uiloher, vet thus it i.; alwnys
in our ?n, . er' t) lu.:,- oflouirfcl's. Elchi of'ris, )by
illp: I ti.ilv fl'c u:ii ,,i'.ii lIr hlis ii ulgitd(lI aind Iatv irile
thoui,-ljs, nmaiy tlif C)ovr the whole l fecrtt of his real
cilhaf atc. l'lThi cc<rlIilecitin alonu, is futiicient to
fitow ot what inmpir n nce the goverinent.s o-tliouglht
iL to the kOtpint l

.o/' ;ic ar/i,
.

Bua

BuT, supposing us convinced of its importance,

a queflion rray arise, -low far. it is within our pow-
er, and in what degree theuights are fubjiec& to the
command of the wvill? It is plain that they are not
always the offspring of choice. Often tlhy are in-
evitably expr.ifTd upon tile mind by furro(iding
objecs. Often. ihe,,ftart u?, as of rhemlelyea, with-
out any principle of introduction which we are able
to trace. As; / tc Uind

h l !svcliz where it lifl!'t, aen

tioA cCan/I not tell wh trnce it conelt, nitr f' itber it gt,,/i
equally rapid in its tranfi'ion, and inscrutable in its
pro rces, is tl-e couile .' tItouglit. Moving aloig a
train us coi:ni.tions ',:'!ici .letoodeli ate tur our ob-
fervatior, it defeats all endiavo -crs either to explore
or to ftup its path. H-ncc vain iand fantattlic ima-
ginations fonmctimes. brcaek in upon the minl lieitled
attention, and diiuib c-vr-n the devout exerciles of
pious minds. InfLtncc= of tilis so;t 'mull be plqtced
to the account of lhlunln hri'iltv. They arc misfor-
tunes to he deplored, latlier.than crirnes to be con-
demned ; and our graciions Creatur, v lol.kowus o,7r
frame, and rcimenmbtrs -we aie dlJ/, will not b lcYere-i;
marking eviry lfucih e;-or and and' rllg of .he
mind. But, at;i:r thelc ;u aiiownces are made, still
there remains inuch lcope, for thle ptip..r goveln-
ment of thought ; and a mnul itude ol ciafs occu-r,
in which we are no lsS a.E:!;oi-.': Xif wvhl.t vwe
think, than for what we do.

As, firll, when the iiUrnduotion of anv t'; on of

thougliht depcnds upotn (u1 Iclvcs, a :d s <'il i volult.iry
aCa ; hv tur;iln]l[ tOur :tcr 'liou toon:d- l fucl objec-is,
awv. kcning 01.I; h t ]'.lilo';:, orI

c ]ig;ilt'_', in I1u;.l, Ci;.-

pl',ynetml)l, a', we kinow nu11l}

111 c

i pcml.Ft:' dlt<;iii-

n.ittlit to our lie's u

I t . I\'cxt wh, en tlin'l:;, .lby

hllatevcr :Iccidciin thiy nI:my l have I,:n1 l;:ly

si l le'cttcd, are indlilt'tl d \iltl delil)ratiri on aInd con-
p.accncy. 'icugltl the milld Ias bicn paflivc in
their receptioln aid, thnd lilrfore, tfrCu of bl..; ytr,

'if

if it be acive in their continuance, the guilt becomes
its own. They may have intruded at first, like
unbidden guells; but if, when entered, are made
welcome, and kindly entertained, the cafe is 'the
fame as if they had been invited from the begin.ing.
If we be thus accountable to God for thoughts either'
voluntarily introduced, or deliberately indulged, we
are no lels so, in the last place, for those which find
admittance into onr hearts from supine negligence,
from total relaxation of attention, from allowing
our imagination to rove with entire licence, liXe the
eye. of the fool towards the ends of the earth. Our
minds are, in this cafe, thrown open to folly and va-
nity. They are proflituted to cvy evil thing which
pleafie to take peffeffion. The consequences mu#
all be charged to our account; and in vain we plead
excuse from human infirmity. Hence it appears,
that the grtat obje&t at which we are to aim in
governing our thoughts, is, to take the mos effec-
tual measures for preventirg the introducion of such
as are sinful, and for haltening their expulsion, if
they shall have introduced themselves without con-
sent of the will.

But when we deftend into our breads, and exa-

mine low far we have studied to Keep this obje&
in view, who can tell how f.t he has offnded? In
no article of religion or morals are men more cul-
pably remiss than in the unretfrained indiulgence they
give to fancy ; and that too, for modt part, withodt
rcmorfe. Since the time that Reason began to exert
her powers, Thought, durine our walking hours, has,,
been active in every breaf, without a moment's luf-
pension or pauie. The current of ideas has been
always flowing. The wheels of the Ipiritual engine
have circulated with perpetual motion. L-t me alk,
what has been the fruit of this incessant activity
with the great part of mankind ? Of the innutrora-
ble hou s that have been employed in thought, how

tew

few are marked with any permanent or urfuil esTe6 -
How many have either palled away in idle dreams;
or have been abandoned to anxious difconrented mu-
sings, to unsocial and malignant passions, or to irre-
gular and criminal desires ? Had I power to lay o-.
pen that storehouse of iniquity which the irart of too
many conceal; could I draw out and read to them a .
lift of all -the imaginations they have devised, and all
the pafions' they have indulged in secret; what a
pitureof men would I present of themselves? What
crimes would they appear t have perpetrated
in fancy,; which to their motl intimate&i compari-
ons they durst not reveal ?-

.Een when men imagine their thoughts to he in-

nocently employed, they too commonly susser them
to run out into extravagant imaginations, and chi-
merical plans of what they would wish to attain, or
chufe to be, if they could frame ther course of
things according to their desire. Thoutgh ilch em-
ployments of fancy come not under the description
with those which are plainly criminal, yet wholly
unblameable they seldom are. Besides the waRfeof
time which they occasion, and the misapplication
which they indicate of those intellectual powers that
were given to us foQr mugh n ,bler.purpofes, such
romantic speculations lead us always into the neigh-
bourhood of forbidden regions. They place us on
dangerous ground. They are for the most part co.-
ncaed with some one had pafilon; and they aIwaya
nourilh a giddy and frivolous turn of thoughti
They unfit the mind for applying with vigour to
rational pursuits, or f r acquiescing in fober plans of
condut. From that ideal world in which it allow'
itself to dwell, it returns to the commerce of men,
unbent and relaxed, sickly and tained, averse from
discharging the duties, and sometimes ciifqualified
ever for relifhin the pleafule3 of ordinary life. 0
Jerujalem ! tvafi fIirne hiartfrom wvickidnIs. Howv

ls»S

long jhall thyv vain thoughts lodge witbih thee P-~
In order to guard against all such corruptions and a-
bules of thought as I have mentioned, it may be
profitable to attend to the following lules.

*IN the first place, tfudy to acquire the habit' of

attention to thought. No study is more importafit;
for in proportion to the degree in which this habit'is
pofiffled luch commonly is the degree of intellectial
improvement. It is the power' of attention-which
in- a gecat measure diftineuifhes the wife and the
great frem the vulrar and trifling 'hed dt men.
The latter are accuitomed to think, or -ratheir to"
dream, without knowing the ftbjea'oftheiirthoughts.'h
In-their tncorineAted'rovings, they pursue no 'end';
they fellow no traa. Every thing floats lobfe ard
disjointed on the surface of their mind; like leaves
icatte;ed and blown about on the face of the
waters.

In order to lead your thoughts into any useful di-

recio;n, your firlt care must be,; to acquire the'
power of fixing them, and of reftraining'their irre-
gitar morioms. Inure yourselves to. form i plah of
proper meditation; to pursue it steadily; and with
revere authority to keep the door shut against in-
trufions of wandering fancy. Let your mind, for
this purprfe, become a frequent objet to itfetf ' Let
your thoughts be made the subject of thought and
review.--" To what is my attention at present di- '
" Feed ? Could I disclose it without a blush to the
" wrld ? Were God instantly to call me into judg-
"mert., what account could I give of it to him ?
"Shall I be the wiser or the better for dwelling on
"' ch thoughts as now fill my miind ? 'Are they
"entirely confiilent with my innocence, and with
"my present and- future peace ? If they are not,
"to what purpose do I indulge fuah unprofitable or
"dangerous musings.? "--B frequent exercire of
this inward scrutiny, we might gradually' bring ima-

gination

gination undr dici pline, and turn the powers of
thought td'their proper use as means ofimplrovemer.t,
instead of suffering .them to be only the inilrumer.ts
of vanity and guilt.

IN, the second place,: in. order to the government

ofthought, it is pecefTalv to guaid againlt idleness.
Idlenelsa is the.great funtenter of all corruptions in
the human heart. In paiticular, it is the parent of
loofeimnaginatiois and inordinate desires, . The ever'
attive and restless power of thought, if not employed
about: what is good, will naturally and unavoidably
engender evils. Imagine' not that -mere'occupation :
of whatever kind it be, will exempt .you from the
blame and dangtr of an idle life.: Perhaps the worst
species of idlene sis dissipated, though seemingly bu-
fy life, spent in the haunts of loose society, and in
the:chace..of perpetual Lamufiement. . Hnce a.giddy.
miid:alternately elated and dejected with trifles, oc-
cupied with no. recolletion of the pafl but what is
fruitless,; and;,ith 'no .plans of the future,. but wtat
are-either. frivilous or guilty. . . ;

As, therefore, you-would govern your tfioughts,-

or indeed ad .you would have any thoughts that4arc
worthy of been goterhed, provide holaurabie eml
ploy.rent fog the. native. aciivitv of your minds,
Keep knowledge, virtue, and usefulness, ever in
view. Let. yoirr life proceed in a train, of such pur-
suits .as ar: worthy of a Chriflian, of a rational and
a focial;beiflg. : iWhile.- thele are r, .ilarly carried
on as-the main bafinefa of life, let amufemenitpoflefs
no more-'than its proper place in the distribution of
your time. Take particular care that your amuse-
mejms beo-an ifrepi'oachable kind, and that all your
society be either improving or innocent, So shall the
stream of your thoughts be made to run in a pure
channel. Manly . occupations and virtues principles
will expel the taint which idleness never fails to com-
municate tn the vacant mind.

1Ž4

IN the third placd, when criminal thoughts;arifce

attend to all the proper methods of speedily sup-
pressing them. ' ake example from the unhappy
indilflry u hich finners dilcover in banishing good ones,
when a natulal felrfe of religion forces them on
their conscience. How anxiously do they fly from
themeivcs ? how fludiotfly do they drown the voice
which upbraids them in the noile of company or
diversion ? wlhat numerous artifices do they employs'
to evade the uneafirefs which returns of reflexions
would produce ?-Were we to uie equal diligence
in preven.ing the entrance of vicious i'uggellions, or
in repelling them when entered, why should we not
be equally successful in a much bettecr aufe ?--As
soon as you are fenfille that any dangerous pafflion
begins to ftrmcnt, intlantly call in otherpaffions, and
other ideas, to your aid.. H:flen to turn .your
thoughts into a differnt directiorn. Summon up
lwhatever you have found to be of pow.er for corm-
posing harmonizing your mind. Fly for afiiftance
to serious fltdies, to prayer and devotion ; or ever
fly to business or innocent society, if solitude be in
hazard of favouring the fedution. By fulcl r mears
ycn may flop lhe progress of the growing evil.
You may apply an antidote, before-the poison has
had time to work its full effet.

INl the fourth place, it will be particularly use-

ful to impress y,''r minds with a habitual f`cnfe of
the presence ol * e Almighty. When we reflct
what a flrong chclck the belief of divine omrifciente
is calclllated to give to all criminal thoughts, we are
tempted to fufirCi, tiat even by Christians this ar-
ticle of lf;tlh i' !tot received witlih finccre convicion.
Fur wviho but I:iiit conftfs, lilat if he knew a parent,
a tiicnd, or a ncighbourl to have the power nt
looling into hiis lhcar, he ldu it not allow hinmfclf that
unbounded fcopc whiclh he now gives to his imagina-
tion and desire ? Whence, then, comes it to pass,

that

that rren, without fear or concern, bring into the
prelence of the awful majrfly of Heavenr that fotty
and lieentioufaefs of thought -which 'would make
them blush and tremble, if one of their own fellow-
creatures could descry ? At the farn time, no princi-
p!c is fipportcd by clearer evidence than the -omnifci-
ence of God. All rcligious.fkshave admitted it.
All societies of men, in their oaths and covenants ;
appeal to it. The favereign of-the universe cannot
but know what passes throughout his dominions. He
who supports all nature mnuft needs pervzde and fill
it. He who formed the heart is certainly conscious
to what pafles within it.
. Never let this great article 'of faith escape fromn
-your view. In thinking, as well as- in acing, ac-
cuftor yourfelvesto look up: with reverence to that
piercing eye of divine observation which nevsrflum-
bers nor 'eeps. Behold a pen always writing over
your head, and maki g up that great record of your
thoughts, words, and aaions,. from which at last you
are to be judged. Think that you. are never less
alone'than when by yourfelvce; for thenis He. still
with you, whofe.infpe:bon is of greater consequence
than that ofaHl mankind. Let these awful confiderati-
ons not only check the diflipation of'corrupt' fancy,
but infife into your piritsthat. folemnn cornpofure
which is the parent of meditation a.d wisdom. Let
them not only expel what is evil, but introduce in its
·stead what is pure and holy ; elevating your thoiight to
divine and eternal objecs, and acting as the co(hter-
poise to tlhoe attrrations of tlhe world, which would
draw your whole attCntillon dlownwvinrd to fcnsf and

I\MI SERMON

# SERMON XVIII. The same SUBJECT continued. PROVERBS iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out of it are the issues of life.

S E R M ON XVIIT.

The fame SUBJECT continued.

PRo.VERB s i. 23.
Kept -iby heart with all diligence: jor out of it are

the if.ues of life.

TJ AVING treated, in the foregoing discourse,

JL . of the government of the thoughts, I proceed
to confider the government of the- pailions, as the.
next great duty included in the keeping of the heart.

Paflions are firong emotions of the. mind, occafi-

oned by the viewof apprehended good orevil. They
are original parts of the conifitution of our nature;
and there.ore, to extirpate them is a miflaken aim..
Religion requiresno more of us than.to moderate.
andrule them. - When our blefed Lord alTumed-the
nature, without the corruption of man, he was sub-
je&.to like paflions with us. On some occafionshe telt
the rirings of-anger.;, He was often touched with pi-
ty. He was.grieved in jpirit.; he, sorrowed and he
wept.... : , .
: PaRions, when. properly direaed,-,riay be fubler-
vieait to very.ufeful ends. They rouze the..dormant
powers of the foul. - They are even found to exalt
theni. They often raise a man.above hirnmelf, and
render him more penetrating, vigorous, and rpafter.
ly, than he is in his calmer hours. A&uated by
some high paflion, he conceives great designs, and
.firmonnts all difficulties in the execution. He is in-
spired with more lofty sentiments, and endowed with
more persuasive utterance, than he poffeffcs at any

other

other -time. Passions are the aaive forces of the
tbul. They are its highest powers 'brought .into'
movement and exertion. But, like all other great
powers, they are either useful or deftru&ive,'ac-
cording to their direaion and degree: as wind aArid
fire are intfrumental in carrying on many of 'ihe
bencficient operations of riature ; but when they r£ie
to undue violence,.or deviate from their proper courses
their path is marked with ruin.

'It is the present infelicity of human nature, tht '

those strong emotions of the mind are 'become too'
powerful for the principle which ought to regfilhe'
themr. This is one of the unhappy consequences of
our apoftacy from God, that the influence of reialfa'
is weakened, and that of passion ftrengtheried with- '
in the heart. When man revolted from his-Maker,
his passions rebelled againfl himself; and from'be-
ing originally the infiruments of reafotn have be-
come the tyrants of the foul. Hence, in treating
of this lubjeci , two things may'be assumed as prin
ciples: first, that through the pre'ent we'knefs iof
tji'e understanding, our paflions are: often dire&ed to 'a
wards improper dbje&s; and next, that even whenr'
their direEion is jufi, and their objeas are innocent,
they perpetually tend to run into exctfs: they al -
ways hurry us towards their gratification with a.
blind and dangerous impetuosity. On these two
points then turns the whole government of our pas-
lions: first, to ascertain the proper objeEts'of 'their
pursuit; anti next, to restrain them in that pursuit-
when they would carry us beyond the bounds of rea-
son. If there be any pafiion which intrudes 'itself'
unseasonably into our mind, which darkens and trou-
bles our judgment, or habitually dincompofes our
temper; which unfits us for properly discharging.
the duties, or disqualifies us for cheerfully enjoyitng
the comforts of life, we may certainly conclude it:
to have gained-a dangerous ascendant.- The'.grea

IM a Xobjec

objea which we ought to purpose to ourselves is, to
acquire a firm. and fedfafR mind, which the infatua-
tion. of paflion (hall not seduce, nor its violence
{hake; which, refting on fixed' principles, shall, in
the midst of contending emotions, remain free, and
maller of itself; able to lifen calmly to the voice
of conscience, and prepared.to obey its dictates with-
out hesitation.

To. obtain, if potfible, such command of passion,

is one of the highest attainments of the rational. na-
ture. Arguments to show its importance crowd up-
on us from. every quarter. If there .be any feitile
source of mischief to human life, it is, beyond doubt,
the misrule of paifion. .It is this which poisons the
enjoyment of individuals, overturns the order of so-
ciety, and strews the path of life with so many
niTferies, as to render it indeed the vally of tears.
All.thofe great scenes of public calamity, which we
beebold with aftonifhmenRt.and horrour, have originated
from the source of violent pailions. T-hese have
..overspread the earth with bloodibed. These have
:.pilnted the afaffin's. dagger, and filled the poisoned
bb9l. 'I'hefe, in every age, have furnished too
copious materials for the orator's pathetic declamati-
.o, and for the poet's tragicalfong.

'When from public life we descend. to private con-

dua, though paTion operate not there in such a
wide.and.deftruaiv.e sphere, we shall find its influ-
ence to be no lefs.baneful. I need not mention the
black and fierce pallons, such as envy, jealousy,
and. revenge, whose effecs are. obviously noxious,
anid whose agitations. are immediate misery. But
take .any of the licentious and. sensual kind. Suppose
it to have unlimited scope; trace it throughout its
.course ; and you.will find that gradually, as it rifes,
it taints the soundness, and troubles the peace of his
nindi.over whom it. reigns; that in its progress it
a'ogages him in pursuits which are marked---eitier

with

with danger or with fhlme ; that in the end it waftes
his fortune. defiroys his health, or debases his cha-
ra&ter; and aggravates all the miseries in' which it
has involved him with the concluding pangs of bitter
rcmorfe. Through all the itages of this atal cburfe,
how many have heretofore run ? What ntiltitudes
c'o we daily behold pursuing it, with blind and s-ead-
long fieps ?

But, on the evils which flow from unrtefthained

pafions, it is needless to enlarge. Hardly ate 'there
any so ignorant or inconsiderate as not to admit, that
,there passion is allowed to reign, both happiness and
virtue mull susser. 1 proceed therefore to what is
of more consequence, to fuggedt tome dire&ions whith
may be useful in aflifting us to preserve the gove'rn-
ment of our paflions.

IN the first place, we muflt'fudy to acquire jufl

views of tlit comparative importance of thbfe ob-
jects that are molt ready to attract desire. The
erroneous opinions which we form concerning happi-
ness and misery, give rife to all she mifaken and
dangerous passions which embroil our life. We rfif-
ser ourselves to be dazzled by unreal appearances of
pleasure. We follow, with precipitancy, whither-
soever the crowd leads. We admire, without cx-
amination, what our predeceffcrs have admired. We
fly from every shadow at which we fee others trem-
ble, Thus, agitated by vain fears and deceitful
hopes, we are hurried into eager contelts about ob-
jeas which are in themselves of no value. By rectify-
ing our opinions, we would firike at the root of the
evil. If our vain imaginations were chastened, the
tumult of our passions would subside.

It is observed, that the young and the ignorant are al-

waysthemoft violent in pursuit. The knowledge which
is forced upon them by longer acquaintance with the
world, moderates their impetuosity. Study then to
anticipate, by reflexion, that knowledge which ex-

M 3 ' perience

perience often purchases at too dear a price.. Inure
yourfelvts to frequent confiieration of the ernptinefs
of those pleasures which excite so much ftrite and
commotion among mankind. Thlk how much
more of true enjoyment is loft by the violence of
passion, than by the want of those things which
give occasion to that passion. Perfnade yourselves
that the favour of God and the poffTllion of. virtue
form- the chief happiness of the rational nature.
Let a contented mind, and a peaceful life, hold the
next place in your estimation. These are the con-
clufiors which the wife and thinking part of man-
kind have always formed. To there conclusions,
after having run the race of paffionr you will pro-
lably come at the last. By forming them betimes,
you would make a seasonable escape from that tern-
peftuous region, through which none can pass with-
out suffering misery, contraacing guilt, and under-
going severe remorse.

IN the second place, in order to attain the corn-

irand of passion, it is requisite to acquire the power
of felf-denial. The felf-denial of a Christian con-
fits not in perpetual austerity of life, and universal
renunciation of the innocent comforts of the world.
'Religion requires no such unnecessary sacrifices, nor
is any such foe to present enjoyment. - It consists in
our being ready, on proper occasions, to abstain
from pleasure, or to submit to suffering, for the fake
of duty and conscience, or from a view to some
higher a.d more extensive good. If we. polTefs not
this power, we shall be the prey of every loose in-
cliiation that chances to arise. aPampered by continu-
al indulgence, a'l our passions will become mutinous
and headltrong. Desire, not reason, will be the ru-
ling principle of our conduct.

s, therefore, you would keep your passions with-

in due bounds, you m,.ft betines accutlom them to
know the reins. You muf not wait tll romne criti-

cal

cal occasion for the exercise of felf-denial occui.
In vain you will attempt to ac- with authority, if
your firit essay be made when temptation has inflam-
ed the niind. if t cboter hours, you must sometimes
abridge your enjoyment even of what is innocent.
In the nidfl of lawful pleasure, you muft'maintain mo-
deraitin, tbfitemioulnefs, and felf-command. The ob-
lervanceeAf this difcipine is the only methodof filpport-
in-g reason in its proper ascendant. For if you allow
-ycurfelves always to firetch to the utmost point of in-
nocenceand fatety, beyond that pointyouwill be hurried
when'paflibn lhall arifein it.s might to fliake'the heart.

IN the third place, impress your minds deeply

with this.perfiafion, that not'hing is"' hat itappeats
-to be when you are under the power of paflion.. Be
afiurcd, that no judgment which you can fofm can
be in the least depended upon as' found or true.: The
fumes whi h arise from a heart boiling with violent
passions, never fail to darken and trouble the under-
flanding.' When the-gourd- withered, under the
shade of which the prophet Jonah reposed, lis mind,
alredy ruffled by the disappointment of his predi&i-
ons, loft, on cecafion of this flight incident, all coi-
mand of itself . and irvthe midst of his impatience,
he wished to die rather than to live. Instead of be-
ing calmed by that expoRulating voice, Do/f thou
well, 0 Jonah I to be angry because of the gourd'? He
replied with great emotion, 1 do well to be angry evAn
unto death. But did Jonah think so when his paflion
had abated ? Do these fenthnents bear the leaf re-
semblance to that humble and devout prayer which,
on another occasion, when' in his calm mind, lie
put up to God ? No two persons can differ more
from each other, than the fame person differs from
himself when agitated by paflion, and when mailer
of his reason. I do wtell to be angry, is the language
of every man when his mind is inflamed. Every
palien juflifies itself. It brings in a thousand pre-

M 4 tences

tences to its aid. It borrows many a false colour td
hide its deformity. It possesses a fort cf magic, by
-which it can magnify or diminilh objeas at pleasure,
and transform the appearances of every thing within
its sphere.

Let the knowledge of this impoflure which pafli-

on pra&ices, place you continually on your guard,
Let the remembrance of it be ever at hand, to check
the extravagant judgments which you are apt to pais
in those moments of delusion. Liften to .no fuggefli-
on which then arises. Form no conclusions on which
you are to a. Afiure yourselves that every thing is
beheldtbrough a false medium. Have patience for
a Iktle, and the illusion will vanish ; the atniorfplere
will dare up around you, and obje&s return to bh
viewed in their native colours and just dimensions.

IN the fourth place, oppose early the beginnings

of pafion. Avoid particularly all Ifch objecs as are
apt to excite paflions which you know to predomi-
nate within you. As soon as you find the tempef
rising, have recourre to every proper method, either
of allaying its violence, or of escaping to a calmer
shore. H1asen to call up emotions of an opposite
nature. Study to conquer one passion by means of
some other which is of less dangerous tendency.
Never account any thing small or trivial whioh is irt
hazard of introducing disorder into your heart.
Never make light of any desire which you feel gain-
ing such progress as to threaten entire dominion.
Blandithing it will appear at the firtr. As a,gentle
and innocent emotion, it may steal into the heart;
but as it advances, is likely to pierce you thranugit with
nmany forritvu. What you indulged as a favourite
amulement, will shortly become a serious business;
and in the end may prove the burthen of your life.
MkLfl of our paions flatter us in their rife. But
their beginnings are treacherous; their growth is im-
perceptible i and the evils which they carry in their

train

train lie concealed, until their dominon is eftabli(hed.
What Solomon fays of one of them, holds true of
them all, that their beginning is as when one letteti
out water. It issues from a small chink, which
once might have been easily flopped; but be-
ing negle&ed, it is soon widened by the fiream; till
the bank is at lalt totally thrown down, and the flood
is at liberty to deluge the whole plain.

In the fifth place, the excess of every paflion will

be moderated by frequent meditation on the vanity
of the world, the short continuance of life, the ap-
proach of death, judgment, and eternity. The ima-
ginary degree ot importance which the negleca of
such meditation suffers us to bestow on temporal
things, is one great cause of our vehemence in desire,
and our eagerness in purluit. We attach ourselves
to the objets around us, as if we could enjoy them
for ever. Higher and more enlarged profpets of
the detlination of man would naturally cool this mif-
placed ardour. For what can appear so considerable
in human affairs, as to diftompole or agitae the
mind of him to whose view eterrity lies open, and
all the greatness of the universe of God ? How con-
temptible will seem to him this hurry of spirit, this
turmoil of pafllon, about things which are tb soon to
end?-Wherre-are they who once disturbed the
world with the violence of their contests, and filled
it with the renown of their exploits ? What now re-
mains of their designs and enterprises, of their pas-
sions and pursuits, of their triumphs and their glory ?
The flood of time has passed over them, and swept
them away, as if they had never been. The fatbien
of the world changes continually around us. We
succeed one another in the human course, like troops
of pilgrims on their journey. Absurdly we Ipend our
time in contending about the trifl.s of a -day, while
we ought to be preparing for a higher exillencc.
Eternity is jtfl at iaind tc close this introdutory scene.

- bM 5 It

Tt is fast rolling towards us, like the tide of a valf
ocean, ready to swallow up all human concerns, and'
to leave no trace behind it, except the co fequerces
of our good or bad deeds, w hich shall last for ever.
Let such reflections allay the heart of paflion.
Let them reduce all human things to their proper
flandard. From frivolous plirltits let them recal
our attention to objects of real importance; to the
'proper business of man ; to the improvement of our
nature, the di'charge of our duty, the rational and
religious conduct of I uman lite.

IN the lall place, to our own encdeavours for regu-

lating our paflions, let us join earnest prayer to God.
Here, if ary where, divine afliflance is rcqiifite.
For such is the present blindness ard imperfection of
human nature, that even to dilcover all the difordcrs
of our heart is become difficolt; much more, to
ectify them, is beyond our power. To that superior
aid, then, which is p:omi'fed to the pious and up-
right, let us look up with humble minds; beseech-
in tLhe Father of mercies, that, while we fludy to
as our own part with resolution and vigilance,
he wrculd forgive our returning weknef ; would
firergthen ourcornt:ncy in refining the aftaults of
pafion: and enable us by his grace ro to govern
cur minds, that without confiderab!e interruptions
we may proceed in a course of piety and virtue.

IT row remains to treat of the government of

temper, as included in the keeping of the heart. Pal-
firns are quick ard strong emotions, which by degrees
fitbfidc. Temper is the disposition which remains
after there .emotions are part, and which forms the
habitual propensity of the foul. The one are like
the flream when it rs fwo!n by the torrent, and ruf-
fed by the winds. The other refembtes it when
ronninr within its bed, with its natural velocity and
f.rce. T-e influence of temper is more silent and
imperceptible than that of passion. It operates witht

less

less violence ; but as its operation is cbnfRant, it pro-
duces effeEts no leis considerable. It Is evident9
therefore, that it highly deserves to be confidered
in a religious view.

Many, indeed, are averse to behold it in thislight.

They place a good temper upon the fame tooting
with a healthy contfitution of body. They confider
it as a natural felicity which some enjoy; but for
the want of which, others are not morally culpable
nor accountable to God ; and hence the opinion has
sometimes prevailed, that a bad temper might be
confident with a state of grace. If this were true,
it would overturn that whole docrine, of which the
gospel is lo full, that regeneration, or change of na-
ture, is the essential charaaeriftic of a Chriltian. It
would suppose that grace might dwell amidfl mele-
volence and rancour, and that heaven migh be en-
joyed by such as are itrangeis to charity and love.-
It will readily be admitted, that some, by the oi'-
ginal frame of their mind, are more favourably in-
clined than others towards certain good dirpofitions
and habits. But this affords no jutiification to those
who negle to opFore the coiruptiona to which they
are prone. Let no man imagine that the human
heart is a Ibil altogether unfufceptible of culture; or
that the worst temper may not, through the afliftance
of grace, be reformed by attention and discipline.
Settled depravity of temper is always owing to our
own indulgence. If, in place of checking, we nou-
rifh that malignity of' disposition to which we are
inclined, all the confeqtuences will beplaced to our ac-
count, and every excuse from natural conltitution be
ejcaed at the tribunal of Hease l.

The proper regulation of temper affeas the cha-

raaer of man in every relation which he bears; and
includes the n hole circle of religious and moral du-
tits. This, therefore, is a subjea of too great ex-
tent to be comprehe-r.ded in one difcourlf. Bit it

may

may be useful to take a general view of it; and,. be-
fore we conclude the do&rine of keeping the heart,
to shew what the habitual temper of a good mart
ought to be, with refpec to God, to his neighbour,
and to himself.

FIRST, with refpet to God, what he ought to

cultivate is a devout temper. This imports more
than the care of performing the ossies of religious
worship. It denotes that sensibility of heart towards
the Supreme Bing, which fpring,-fron a deep im-
pression of his perfcEtions on the foul. It (lands op-
pored, not only to that disregard of God which
forms the defcriptitn of the impiouS, but to that
absence of religious affeaions which sometimes pre-
vails among those who ate imperfealy good. They
acknowledge, pcihaps, the obligations of duty. They
feel fcme concern to wwork out their fraultion. But
they apply to their %luty through mere cenflraint;
x.nd fcrve God without affetion or complacency.

rco:e liberal ard generous sentiments animate the
man v.bo is of devout temper. God dwells upon
lis thoulght as a benefacror and a father, to whose
yoice he hearker. with joy. Amidst the-occurrenccs
bs life, his mind natur.l!y opens to the admiratiorr
of his wildom, the reverence tf his power, the lose
of his tranicendent gocdnefs. All nature appears to
his view as flamped with the impress oi there per-
fcricns. Habitrl p ratitude to his M.Lker for mer-
c;es pafl, and clheiful resignation to his will in al
time to come, are the native cffufions of his heart.

Such a temper as this deserves to be cultivated

with the utmct, at:enticn ; for it contributes in a
high degree, both to our improvement and our hap-
hi:.;ss. It refines, and it exalts human nature. It
softens that hardness which our hearts are ready to
contract from frequent intercourse with this rugged
world. It facilitates the discharge of every duty to-
wards God and man. At the fame time it is a

temper

temper peaceful and serene, elevated and rejoicing.
It forms the current of our affc:aions to flow in a
placid tenour. It opens pleasing profpets to the
mind. It banishes harsh and bitter palions; and
places us above the reach of many of the annoyan-
ces of worldly life. When the temper is truly de-
vout, the peace of God wvbich pafett underflanding
keepeth the heart anddfoul. I proceed,

SI C O N D LY, to point out the proper fiate of our

temper with refpeC to one another. It is evident,
in the general, that if we consult either public wel-
fare rS private happiness, Christian charity ought
to regulate our disposition in mutual intercourse.
But as this great principle admits of several diver-
fified appearances, let us confider tome of the
chief forms under which it ought to show itself it
the usual tenour of life. Universal benevolence to
mankind, when it rells in the abflract, is a loose
indeterminate idea, rather than a principle of real
effeat; arid too often floats as an ufelels fpeculatiorn
in the head, instead of asseting the temper and the
heart.

What, first, presents itself to be recommended

is a peaceable temper; a dilpofition averse to give
offence, and desirous of cultivating harmony, and
amiable intercourse in society. This supposes yield-
ing and condescending manners, unwillingness to
contend with others about trifles, and, in contests
that are unavoidable, proper moderation of spirit.
Such a temper is the firlf principle of felf-enjoy-
ment. It is the basis of all order and. happiness
among mankind. The positive and contentious, the
rude and quarrelsome, are the bane of society. They
seem destined to blast the frnall Ihare of comfort
which nature has here allotted to man. Bat they
cannot disturb the peace of others, more than they
break their own. The hurricane rages firfi in their
own bosom, before it is let forth upon the world.

In

In the tempests which they raise, they are always
tolt; and frequently it is their lot to perish.

A peaceable temper mufl be fuppoited by a can-

did one, r a disposition to view the conduct of
others with fairness and impartiality. This flands
opposed to a jealous and suspicious temper, which
afcribhs every asion to the worst motive, and
throws a black ihade over every character. As you
would' b happy in yourselves, or in your connriei-
ens with others, guard againfl this malignant spirit.
Study that charity ,whbicb tbinketh no evil; that tem-
per which, without degeneration irto credulity,
mill difpoce you to be just; and which can allow
you to obferxe an error, without imputing it as a
crime. 'I hus you will be kept free from that con-
tinual irritation which imaginary injuries raise in a
liupic.ious breail ; and will walk among men as your
br t hrcn, not your enemies.

But to be peaceable, and to be candid, is not all

that is icquircd of a good man. He muff cultivate
a kind, generous, and sympathizing temper, which
feels for distress, wherever it is beheld; which en-
ters into the concerns of his friends with ardour;
and to all with whom he has intercourse is gentle,
obliging, and humane. How amiable appears such
a difpofi:ion, when contrasted with a malicious or
ervious ternrer, which wraps itself up in its own
narrow irterefls, looks with an evil eye on the fuc-
cess of others, and with an urnatural latisfalion
feeds on their disappointment or mileries ! How lit-
tle does he know of the true happiness of life; who
is a firanger to that intercourse of good offices and
kird affeaions, which, by a pleasing charm, attach
men to one another, and circulate joy from heart
to heart !

You are not to imagire that a benevo'ent temper

finds no exercise, unless when opportunities offer of
pelfcrming adicns of high gcnerofity, or of csten-

hive

five utility. There may seldom occur. The con-
dition of the greater part of mankind, in a good
mealure, precludes them. But in the ordinary round
of human affairs, a thousand occasions daily present
themselves of mitigating the vexations which others
susser, of soothing their minds, of aiding their in-
terests, of promoting their cheerfulnels, or ease.
Such occasions may relate to the smaller incidents of
life. But let us remember that of small incidents
the system of human life is chiefly composed. The
attentions which refpeE thele when suggested by
real benignity of temper, are often more material to
the happiness of those around us, than ations which
carry the appearance of greater dignity and fplen-
(lo'ir. No wife or good man ought to account any
rules of behaviour as below his regard, which t.nJi to
cement the great brotherhood of mankind in comfort-'
able union.

Particularly in the..courfe of that familiar inter-

courlf wvhich belongs to dome-fic lfe, all the virtues
of temper find an ample range. It is very unforttr-
nate, that within that circle, men too often think
themselves at liberty to give unrellrairied vent to the
caprice of pafion and humour. Whereas there, on
the contrary, more than any where, it concerns them
to attend to the government of their heart ; to check
what is violent in their tempers, and to Ibften what
is harsh in their manners. For there the temper is
firmed. There, the real chara&er di'plays itself.
The forms of the world difgulfe men when abroad.
But within his own family, every man is known to-
be what he truly is.-In all our intercourse, then,
with others, particulary in that which is closest and
most intimate, let us cultivate a peaceable, a can-
did, a gentle and friendly temper. This is the tem-
per to which, by repeated injundions, our holy reli-
gion seeks to form us. This was the temper of
Christ. This is the temper of Heaven.

.r;

XWE are now to confider, thirdly, the proper slate

of temper, as it refpeas the individual himself.
lThe basis of all the good dispositions which be-
long to this head, is humility. By this I understand,
not that meanness of spirit which leads a man to un-
dervalue himself, and to fink below his rank and cha-
raCQer; but what the scripture expresses with great
propriety, when it exhorts every man, r t to think of
himself more hig6ly than be ought to think, but to think
Jberrly. He who adopts all the flattering fuggefli-
ons ot felt-love, and forms claims upon the world
prnporttoned to the imaginaly opinion which he- has
conceived of his merit, is preparing for himself a
thousand mortifications. Whereas by checking the
risings of ill-founded vanity, and retreating within
thole bounds which a moderate estimation of our
charater prescribes, we escape the miseries which
always Fuifue an arrogant mind, and recommend
ourselves to the favour both of God and man.

Hence w:ll naturally arile' a contented temper,

which is one of tle greatest blessings that can be en-
joyed by man, and one of the most material requi--
fires to the proper discharge of the duties of every
flation. Fur a fretful and discontented temper ren-
ders one incapalle of performing aright any part in
life. It is unthankful and impiots towards God;
and towards men, provoking and unjuit. It is a
gangrene which preys on the vitals, ahd infeEct the
whole constitution with disease and putrefaaionm.
Subdue pride and vanity, and you will take the
mnift effc:tual method of eradicating this diitemper.
You will no longer behold the objeas around you
with jaundiced eyes. You will take in good palt
the blkflings which Providence is pleated to beflow,
and the degree of favour which your fellow-creatures
are disposed to grant you. Viewing yourselves,
with all your imptrfeaiions and failings, in a jutl
light, you will rather be ft rprifed at your enjoying

fr'

io many goad things, than discontented because
there are any which you want.

From a humble and contented temper will spring

a cheerful one. This, if not initfelf a virtue, is at
least the garb in which virtue fhfould be always array-
ed. Piety and goodness ought never to be marked
with that deje&toie wic-hfSnetimes takes rife from
fipterflition, but which is the proper portion only
of guilt. At the fame time, the cheerfulness belong-
ing to virtue is to be carefully diftinguiifhed from that
light and giddy temper which charaterizes folly,
and is so often found among the difipated and vicious
part of mankind. Their gaiety is owing to a total
want of reflexion ; and brings with it the usual con-
fequencet of an unthinking habit, flhame, remorse,
and heaviness of heart, in the end. The cheerful-
ness of a well-regulated mind, springs from a good
conscience and the favour of heaven, and is bounded
by temperance and reason. It makes a man happy
in himself, and promotes the happiness of all around,
him. It is the clear and calm sunshine of a mind illu-
minated by piety and virtue. It crowns all other
good difpofitions,'-and comprehends the general effec
which they ought to produce on the heart.

SUCH , on the whole, is the temper, or habitual

frame of mind, in a good man :'Devout towards
God; towards men ; peeaable, candid, affecionate
and humane; with himself, humble, contented and
cheerful. To the establishment of this happy tern-4
per all the direfcions which I before fuggefled for Ihe
due regulation of the thoughts, and for the govern-
ment of the pafliois, naturally conduce; in this they
ought to issue'; and when this temper is thoroughly
formed within us, then may the hart. be fleemed to
have been kept with all diligence. Ths.t we may be
thus enabled to keep it, for the fake both of piefenr
enjoyment and of preparation for greater happiness,
let us.arneftly-pray to Heaven.. A greater bitfliig

we

# SERMON XIX. JAMES i. 17. Every good and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.

we cannot implore of the Almighty, than that he
who made the human heart, and who knows its fral-
ties, would afifit us to fubje& it to that discipline
which religion requires, which reason approves, but
which his grace alone can.enable us to maintain.

S E R M N XIX.

JAMES i. 17. .
Every go.d and c-very perf t7 gift is from above, and

conmeth down from the Father of Lights, wit/ wbom
is no variableness, neither .fladsw of turniong.

T HE divine nature, in fomre v:iews, attracts our
T love ; in others, commands our reverence; in
all, is intitled to.the highet-atreptiort romthe-human
mind. WVe never elevate our thoughts, inta proper
manner towards the Supreme Being,. withott return-
ing to our own sphere with fentienteit morre improved;
and if, at any time, his greatness oppresses our
tboughts, his moral perfeaions always afford us relief.
His almighty power, his infinite wildom. and. fu-
preme goodness, are founds familiar to our ears.
In his immutabilit-y we. are less accuflomed to confi-
der him; and yet it is this perfe&iorr which, per-
hnps, more than any other distinguishes the d:'.ine na-
t.ure from the human ; gives complete, energy to all
its other attributes, and entitles it.to the highert ado-
raticn. For Ahence are derived the regular-order of
natute and the fledfaitnefs of the universe. Hence
flows the unchanging tenour of those laws which,
from age to age, regulate the condua of mankir.d.
H-nce the uniformity of that government, and the
certainty of those protnifes, which are the gFound of

our

our trust and security. Goodness could produce no
more than feeble and wavering hopes, and power
would command very imper set reverence, if we
were left to fulpeEt that the plans which goodness
had framed might alter, or that the power of car-
rying them into execution might decrease. The
contemplation of God, therefore, as unchangeable
is his nature and in all his perfecions, mull undoubt-
edly be fruitful both of inltruc&ion and of consolation
to man. I shall, firlt, endeavour to illustrate in
some degree the nature of the divine immutability;
and then i;iake application of it to our own conduc.

EVERT'good and every perfeA gift cometh down from

the Father of Lights. The title which in the text is
given to tbe Deity, carries an elegant allusion to the
Sun, the source of light, the mo(t universal benefac-
tor of nature, the molt regular and conaant of all
the great bodies with which we are acquainted in the
universe. Yet even with the Sun there are certain
degrees of tariablenefs. He apparently rifts and
sets; he seems to approach nearer to us in summer,
and to retire farther off in x inter ; h:s influence is
varied by the seasons, and his luflre is affeced by
the clouds. Whereas with him who is the Father
of Lights, of whose everlafling brightness the glory
of the Sun is but a faint image, there is no s/adow
es turning, not the moll distant approach to change.
In his being or effenre it is plain that-alteration can
never take place. For as his exift.nce is derived
from no prior cause, nor dependent on any thing
'without himself, his nature can be influenced by no
power, can be affeeed by no accident, can be im-
paired by no time. From everlafling to everlaffing,
he continues the fame. Hence it is said, that be only
hash immortality ; that is, he possesses it in a man-
rer incommunicable to all other beings. Eternity
is described as the bigh and holy place in which he
dwetetb ; it is a habitation in which none but the

Fasher

Father of Lights ran enter. The name which he'
taketh to himsel' is, I :,tr. Of other things, rome
have been and olhiil ilhill be; but this is he which
i,, whirb was, and t';Airb is t, come. All time is his';.
it is meiafured out by him in limited portions to the
various crders of created beings; but his own exist-
ence fills equally every point of duration; the sirs
and the lift, the beginning and the end, the fame
yefierday, to-day, andfor ever.

As in his essence, so in his attributes And perfeti-

ons, it is inpoifble the;e can be any change. To
imperfect natnres only it belongs to improve and to
'decav. Every alteration which they undergo in
their abilties or difpofiti( ns, flows either fromi in-
ternal defet, or from the infTerience of a filperior
cause. But as no higher taufc can bring fr6m with-
out any acceilion to the divine nature, so within it-
self it contains no principle c t dccay. For the fame
reason that the felf-exiftent Being was from the be-
ginning powerful and wife, just and good, he mufl
continue unalterably so for ever. Hence with much
propriety the divine perfe&ions are described in
scripture by allusions to those obje&s to which we
ascribe the most permanent liability. His righteous-
nef/ ir like the frong mountains. His mercy is in the
heavens; and bis faithfulness reacheth unto the clouds.
These perfceqions of the divine nature differ widely
from the human virtues, which are their faint fha-
dows. The justice of men is at one time revere, at
another time relenting, their goodness is sometimes
confined to a partial fondness for a few, sometimes
runs cut into a blind indulgence towards all. But
goodess and juflice are in the Supreme Being calm
and fleady principles of ation, which, enlightened
by perfet wisdom, and never either warped by
partiality, or dilturbed by paflion, persevere in one
regular and conftarit tenor. Among men they may
foinetimes break forth with transient splendour, like

those

those wandering fires which illuminate for a little the
darkness of the night. -But in God they shine i th
that uniform brightness, which we can liken to no-
thing so much as to the untroubled, eternal luflre of
the highest heavens.

From this follows, what is chiefly material for us

to attend to, that in the course of his operarions to-
wards mankind, in his couacels and decrees, in his
laws, his promiles, and.his threatenings, there is no
variablenefi nor shadow o/ turning with. the Almighty.
Known to him fram the beginning were all Hil works.
In the divine idea the whole fyflem of nature existed,
long before the foundations of the earth were laid.
When he said, Let there be light, he only realized
the great plan which. from evelalfing he had sorned
-in his own mind. Soresen by him was every revoh:-
tion which the course of ages was to produce. What-
ever the counsels of men can effect was comprehend-
ed in his decree. No new emergency can arile to
surprise him. No agitations of anger or of sorrow,
of fear or of hope, can ihake his mind or influence
his conduc. He reis in the.eternal poffeifon of that
supreme beatitude, which neither the virtues nor the
crimes of men can in-the least asset. From a mo-
tive of overflowing goodness, he leared up the uni-
verse. As theeternal lover of righteoulnefs, he rules
it. The whole system of his government is'fixed;
his laws are irrevocable; and whathe once loveth,
.c lovethbt the end. In scripture, indeed, he is some-
times said to:begrieved and to repent. But such ex-
preflions, it. is obvious, are employed from accom-
modation to common conception; in the fame man-
ner as when bodily organs are in other passages afcrib-
ed to God. The-fcripture, as a rule of life addref-
fed to the multitude, mufl make use of the language
of men. The divine nature, represented in its na-
tive sublimity, would have transcended all human
conception. When, upon the reformation of finners,

God

God is said to repent of the evil which he had
threatened againlt them, this intimates'no more,
that he suits his dispensations to the alterations which
take place in the characters of men. His disposition
towards good and evil continues the fame, but va-
ries in its application as its objeos vary; just as
the laws themselves, which are capable of no change
of affection, brings rewards or punifhnents at dif-
ferent times to the fame person, according as his
behaviour alters. Immutability is indeed so closely
conrreaed with the notion of supreme perfeition,
that 'wherever any rational conceptions of a D-ity
have taken place, this attribute has been ascribed to
him. Reason taught the wife and refle.cing in every
age to believe, that, as what is eternal cannot die,
so what is perfect can never vary, and that the
great Governor of the universe could be no other
than an unchangeable Being.

FROM the contemplation of this obvious, but.

fundamental truth, let us proceed to the praaical
improvement of it. Let us confider what effeac
the fericus consideration of it ought to produce on
our mind and behaviour.

It will be proper to begin this head of discourse

by removing an objecion which the doerine I have
illufirated may appear to form against religious ser-
vices, and in particular against the duty of prayer.
T'o what purpose, it may be urged, is homage ad-
dressed to a Eeing whose purpose is unalterably fixed;.
to whom our righteoufnrJs extendeth not; whom by
no arguments we can persuade, and by no- fupplica-
tions we can mollify ? The objection would have
weight if our religious addrcffes were designed to
work any alteration on God; either-by giving him
information of what he did not know; or by excit- -
ing affecions which he did not possess; or by in-
ducing him to change measures which he had pre-
vioufly formed. But they are only crude and imper-

ftQ

sea notions of religion which cm fuggelt such ideas.
The change which our devotions are intended- to-
make is tpon ourftl\es, not-upon the Almighty.
Their cliief eiFcacy is derived from the good dif-
positions which they raise and cherish in the human
foul. By pouring out-pious fentimenrs and desires
before Gods, by adoring his perfeetion and consef-'
ing. dur own unworthiness,, by.exprefling our depen-
dence on his aid, our gratitude for his palt favours,
our fubmiflion to his,prefent will, ou- trust in his fu-
ture mercy, we cultivate such affe&ions as suit our
place and flaion in the universe, and are thereby
prepared for becoming obje&s of. the divine grace.
Accordingly frequent assurances are given us in Scrip-
ture, that the prayers of sincere worshipers, prefer-
red through the great Mediator, shall be productive
of the happiet effects. When they a/k, tbqy /ballre-
ceive; when they .eek, they Jbali:find; woeen they
knock, itJhall be opened to them. Prayer is appointed -
to be the channel for- conveying the divine grace to
mankind, ;because the widom: of 'Heaven saw it to
be one of the mofi powerful means of improving
the human heart. -

When. religious hojpge is confidered in this light,

as a great- infltument of fpirituaJ and moral improve-
ment, all the ¢Qbje&ions which scepticism can form '
from the divine immutability, conclude with no more
force against prayer, than-againft every other msean
of improvement which reason has fugge'fled to 'man.
If prayer be liperfluous because God is -uinchange-
able we might upon similar grounds conclude, -that-
it is needless tolabour.the earth, to noutril our bodies,
or to cultivate our minds, because the fertility of
the ground,.the.continuance.of our'life, and 'the de-
gree of our ulnderitanding,. depend-upon an immuta-
ble Sovereign, and were from all eternity- fore-seen by
him.' Such absurd. conclusions reason hus-ever re-
pudiated. To every plain and found underfianding

it

'it has clearly di&ated,that to explore the unknownpur-
poses of Heaven belongs not to us; but that He who
decrees the end, certainly requires the means; and thzat
in the diligent employment oithe means which can ad-
vance either our temporal orfpirit.al felicity, the chief
exertions of human wisdom and human duty consist.
Affumingit then for an undoubted principle, that reli-
gion isa teafonable fervice,and that, though with the
Father of Lights there be no variablenefi, the homage
of his creatures is nevertheless for the wiseP reasons
required by him, I proceed to Show what sentiments
the contemplation of divine immutability should
raise in our minds, and what duties it fhould.chiefly
enforce.

I. LET it excite us to admire and adore. 'Filled

with profound reverence, let us look up to that Su-
preme Being who fits for everlasting on the throne
of the universe j moving all things, but remaining
immoveable himself; direaing every revolution of
the creation, but affcted by no revolutions of events
or of time. He beholds the heavens and the earth
cuLx old as a garment, and decay like a ve/ture. At
their appointed periods he raises up, or he diffolvea
.wvords. But amidst all the convulsions of changing
and perishing nature, his glory and felicity remain
unaltered.-The view of great and flupendos ob-
jeas in the natural world tirikes the mind with so-
iemn awe. What veneration, then, ought to be
inspired by the contemplation of an objec so sub-
lime.as the eternal and unchangeable ruler of the uni-
verse ! The composure and stillness of thought intro-
duced by such a meditation has a powerful tendency
both to purify and to elevate the heart. .It effaces,
for a time, those trivial ideas, and extinguishes those
low pallions, which arise from the circle of vain and
parsing objets around us. It opens the mind to all
the sentiments of devotion; and accompanies devo-
tion with that profound reverence- vhich guards it

from

from every improper excess. When we confider
the Supreme Being as employed in works of love;.
when we think of his condescension to the human
race in!fending his Son to dwell on the earth; en-
coaraged by favours. and warmed by gratitude, we
are sometimes in danger of presuming. to much on
his goodness, and of indulging a certain fondners of
affe&ion, which is unsuitable to our humble and
dependent slate. It is necessary that He (hould fre- :
quently appear to our minds in all that majesty with
which the immutability of his nature clothes. him;
in order that reverence--may be combined with love,
and that a-mixture of sacred awe may chasten the
rapturous .effusions ofwarmdevotion. Servile fear,
indeed, would crush the spirit of ingenuous and es-
feaionate homage. But that reverence which springs
from. elevated conceptions of the divine nature, has
a happy. effet in checking, the torwardnef. of ima-
gination, refiraining our affeeions within due bounds,
and composing our thoughts at the fame timqthat
it Mxalts the;r. . .

When from the: adtftion of- the unchangeahlq

perfecion ot the Almighty, we return-to the view.
of our own slate, the firil sentiment which ought.
naturally to arise, is that of felf-abafement. We:.
are: too apt to be lifted up by any little diitinaions
which we.po.fefs; and to tarcy ourselves great,. only
because there are others whom we confider as less.
But what is man whi all lis advantages an4db.aied.
powers before the eternal Fatber of Lsights? Witii
God thrc is no variablenls; with man there is no
iability. Virtue and vice divide the empire of his
mind; and wisdom and folly alternately rule him-
Hencer he is changeable .in his.defigns, fickle in hisi
friendships, flucuating in his whole characer. His
life is a series of contradi&ions. He is one thing to-
day, and another to-morroi.; sometimes obliged by
exp rienceto alter his pur oet and often led to change

p * .

...9~~ e
~o ....g.~it

it through levity. Variable and unequal hr'mfelf,
he.is surrounded with fleeting objecs. He is placed
as in the midst of a torrent, where all: things are
rolling by and nothing keeps its place. He has hard-
ly time-to contemplate this scene of viciffirude, he-
fore:he too is swept away.-Thus circumfranced in
hiinfelf, and in all the objects with which he is'con-
nected, let him be admoniffed to be humble andt
rnodefl. Let the contemplation of the unchanging
glory of his'Creator inspire him with sentiments of
due fubmiflion. Let it teach him to know his prc-
per place; and check that vanity which is so ready
2o betray him into guilt.

Let the fame meditadtion cffe& him with a deep

sense of what he ows to the goodners of the Deity,
His goodhefs never appears in so striking a light, as
when viewed in connexion with his greatness. The
description which is given of him in the text.calls)
in.this view, for our particular attention. It prfeents
to us the most amiable union of condescension with
rnajefty, of the moral with the natural perfe&ion:
of God,'which can pofibly be exhibited to the ima-
gination of man. From the Father of Lights, vwitiz
ti;born there is no variablcnefi;' neitherJbadow) of turn-
ing, concib. down cvery good and perfci7 gift.. The
molt independent of all Beings is represented as the
nmoft beneficent. He who is eternal and immutable,
exalted-above all, and incapable of receiving returns
from '.any, is the liberal and unwearied Giver of'
every thing that is good.- Let such views of the:
divine nature not only call forth gratitude and praire,
but prompt us to imitate what we adore. Let them
tlhw us that benevclence i' divine; that to ltoop
from our fancied grandeur in order to aftift and ic-
lievc one another, is so far from being any dcgrada-
tion of character, that it is our truet honour, and
our nearelt refemblnnce to tie Fatkter of Lightr.

11. LEr the confidcradion of the divieic immuta-

bility

bility convince us, that the method of attaining the
favour of Heaven is one and invariable. Were the
Almighty a capricious and. inconflant Being, like
man, we fhoull be at a loss what tenour of conduct
to hold. In order to conciliate his trace, we might
think of applying sometimes to one supposed principle
of his inclination, sometimes to another ; and bewil-
dered amidfl various attempts, wouldbe overwhelmed
with dismay. The guilty would efay to flatter him,
The timid, sometimes by auflere mortifications,
sometimes by cosily gifts, sometimes by obrequious
rites, would try to appease him. Hence, in faCt, have
ai ifen all the corruptions of religious worihip among
men; from their forming the divine character upon
their own, and ascribing to the Sovereign of the Uni-
verse the mutability of human passions. God is repre-
sented by the psalmist David as faying to be wicked.
TLou thoughtefl tiat 1 was altogether fucb an one as
IMyfelf. This continues to be the description ot all
the superstitious and enthufialtic sects which, since
the days of David, have sprung up in the-world.

It is our peculiar happiness under the gospel to

Have God revealed to us in his genuine character,
as withiout variableneJf ar o17adow of turning. We
know that at no time there is any change, either in
his affeEtipns, or in the -plan of his adminifiration.
One light always shines upon us from above. One
clear and diret path ix always pointed out to man.
The Supreme Being is, and was, and ever will be,
the fupportcr of order and virtue ; the righteous Lord
loving righteoliz.f;. ''he external form!; of religion
may vary ; but under all difp';nfations which proceed
from God, its ibufl)fince is the lamne. It tends con-
tiniallly to one point, the purification of man's heart
and lile. 'his was tlh objcEt of the oligilal law
of nature. This was the (cope of the Mosaic in-
flitution amidtl all its laciifics and rites ; antd t-hi.
iu unquellionably the end of the golpel. Son invaria-

N bli

bly conltant is God to this purpose, that the difpen-
fation of mercy in Christ Jesus, which -admits of
the vicarious atonement and righteoufnels of a Redee-
mer, makes no change ie our obligation to fulfill the
duties of a good life. The Redeemer himself hath
taught us, that to the end of time the moral law
continues in its full force; and that til heaven and earth
pafi away, one jot or tittle jball in no wife pass from
it. This is the only inifitution known to men, whose
authority is unchanging and constant. Human laws
arise and fall with the empires that gave them
birth. Systems of philosophy vary with the progress
of knowledge and light. Manners, sentiments, and
opinions, alter with the course of time. Bit
throughout all ages, and amidst all revolutions, the
rule of moral and religious conduc is the fame. It
partakes of that immutabiltity of the divine nature,
on which it is founded. Such as it was delivered
to the first worshippers of God, it cortinues to be,
at this day, to us ; and such it shall remain to our
posterity for ever.

IIl. LET the contemplation of this perfecion of

the divine nature teach us to imitate, as far as our
4railty will permit, that constancy and ftedfailnefs
which we adore. All the moral attributes of the
Supreme Being, are flandardsof characer towards
which we ought to aspire. But as in all thete per-
fecions there are proFerties peculiar to the divine
mature, our endeavours to resemble them are laid
under great reftriaions by the dilTimilaiity between
our nature and the divine. With refpe& to that
attribute which we now confider, the circumstances
are evident which preclude improper imitation. To
man it is frequently t ecelfary to correc his errours,
and to c'iange his condut. An attempt, therefore,
to continue wholly ir.variable would, in our fituati-
on, be no other than imprudent and criminal oblti-
r:acy. But withal, the immutable reacitude cf the

Deity

Deity should lead us to aspire after fixedness ofprinci-
ple and uniformity of condu&, as the glory of the
rational nature. Imprelfcd with the sense of that fu-
preme excellence which results from unchanging
goodness, faithfulrefs and truth, let us become a-
shamed of that levity which degrades the human
character. Let us ponder our paths, a& upon a well-
regulated plan, and remain confiltent with ourselves.
Contemplating the- glory of the Father of Lights,
let 'us aim at being transformed, in some degree,
into the fame image from glory to glory. Finally.

IV. LET the divine immutability become the

ground of confidence and trust to good men, amidf all
the revolutions of this uncertain world. This is one
of the chief improvements to be made of the subjet:
and therefore requires full illustration. There are
three lights in which we may view the benefit re-
bounding to us from that attribute of -God which we
now confider. It aflures us of the conflancy of na-
ture; of the regular administration of Providence;
of the certain accomplishment of all the divine
promires,

Frft, it gives us ground to depend on the confant

and uniform courle of nature. On the unchangea-
blenefs of God reds the Liability of the universe.
What we call the laws of nature are no ether than
the decrees of the Supreme Being. It is because
He is witbout variablene/ or fiadow of turning that
those laws have continued the fame since the begin-
ning of the world; that the Sun so constantly observes
his time of rising and going down; that the seasons
annually return; the tides periodically ebb and flow;
the earth yields its fruits at stated intervals; and
the human body and mental powers advance to ma-
turity by a regular progress In all those motions
and operations which are incessantly going on through-
out nature, there is no flop nor interruption; no
change nor innovation; no deflection from their

N 3 min

main scope. The fame powerful and fleady hand

.which gave the first impulle to the powers of na-
ture, restrains them Ircnm ever exceeding their pre-
fcribed line. Hence arises the chief comfort of our
perfent life. We find ourselves in a regular and
orderly world. We look forward to a k; own fuc-
cession of events. We are enabled to form plans
of acion. From the cause we calculate the effet;
and;from the past, we reason with confidence con-
cerning the future.

Accuftamed from our infancy to this conflancy

in nature, we are hardly sensible of the blessing.
Familiality has the fame eff'et here, as in many
other enjoyments, to efface gratitude. But let us,
for a moment, take an opposite view of things.
Let us suppose, that vwe had any cause to dread ca-
pricioufnels or charge in the power who rules the
course of nature ; any ground to fufpe that, but
for one day, the Sun might not rife, r.or the current
of the waters hold their usual courre, nor the laws
of motion and and vegetation proceed as we have
been accuflomed to behold them. 'What dismay
would instantly fill all hearts ! what horror would
seem to overspread the whole face of Nature ! W'ha
part could we aE, or whither could we run; in the
,nidlt of convulsions which overturned all the mea-
fures we had formcd for happiness, or for lafety ?
The present abode of man would then become, as
Job describes the region of the grave, a land of dar/:-
rels, as darkness itJtlf, anid thA /7jhad'w of deati;
-wi/tourt any order ; andl -where the liglht is a: ldrIrnejr.
"Vith what joy ought we then to tncogni'ze :!n un-

'ar 3.'il.g: and fidtt'afi ruler, ui, cr ..: iil' dciniiiiti:
.vre litve no such dilalllcs to drl::tl ; btt cIn dlceicl;d
on the courtl of N-ature continU:inUi; to procced as it
ias ever gone en, until the pcricid h.a.!l arri'.e of it
firnal dissolution

Busr though the great Fraw. o1' Naturc be conf:lnt

like

;ike their Author, yet in the affairs of'men there is'
much varicty and change. All. that regards otir pre-
sent poffefiions and enjoyments was, for wife reasons,
left, in a great -reafure. uncertain; and fromthis un-
certaintv arises the distress of human life. Sensible
of the changes to which we lie open, we look round
with anxious eyes, and eagerly grasp at every 9b-
je&t which appears to promire us security. But in
vain is the whole circle of human things explored
with this view. There is nothing on earth so stable
as to assure us of undisturbed reft, ror fodpowerful
as to afford us conflant protection. Time, death,
anl change, triumph over all the labours of men.
V'ihat we build up, they incefantly destroy. The
public contition of nations, and the private fortunes
ol individual-, are alike fubjecct to reverse. Life
rx.ver retains lorg the fame form. its whole scene-
ry is conli;l.ually ihifting around us.--Amidft those
clnd'.efs vicifTitudes, vwlhat can gi"e any firm confola-
tior, any .satisfying refl to, the heart, except the
(csm.i:'.;n of a wife and righteous Icvereign, vuit/t
.vtiW.m there is nro v,,riableneys or haiiau as turning-?
Thoughl all things change, and we ourselves be i-
volved in the general mutability, yet as long as
there is fixcd and permanent goodness at thd -heal
of the universe, we are assured hbat the:great inter-
efts of all good men shall be safe. That river per-
petually flows, the fireami whereof make glad -g.
city of God. We know that the Supreme Being
loved righteoufncls frori the beginning of days, and
that Ire will continue to love it io the 'laflT, UCCer
hIs goveinmnent none tof those revoltiions happen

lwhich haive place otlon; tlhe kiingdoms of tlhe earth;

wxvllc plinces (lie 1ad nc.w fovcrcigns aS clcnd tlie
thronc l; new niiniitclira and new counlcls fuccced ;
the whole face of a:llairs is changed ; and former
plans fall into oblivion. But the throne of the Lord
ii fjlhblilhtdl for ever ; and hil thougbts of iis heart

N .t. endu.e

endure to all generations. We serve the fame God
whom our fathers worfhi pped, and whom our pof-
terity fha!t adore. His unchanging dominion com-
prehends all -events and all ages-; establishes a con-
ne&ing principle which holds together the pafi, the
present, and the future; gives liability to things
which in themselves, are ftu&uating, and extra&s or-
der from those which appear mofl confused. Well
may the mrth rejoice, and the m:ltitude of iJles be
glad, because their reigneth over the universe luch
an immutable Lord.

Were you to-unhinge this greatraticle offaith;

were you either to fay zvitb the fool, that there is
c God, or to suppose with the fuperfitious, that the
God who rules is variable and capricious ; you would
indeed lay tbe axe to the rcot of the tree, and cut down,
, with one blow, the hope and security of mankind.
For you would then leave nothing in the whole corn-
pass of nature, but a round and caftal and transitory
being; no foundation of trui., no protecion to the
righteous, no stedfast principle to uphold and to re-
gulate the fuccefion of exiltence. Instead of that
~gnificent fpesical which the world now exhibits,
when beheld in connexien with the divine govern-
ment; it would then only present to. view; a multi-
tude of liort-lived creatures springing out of the dust,
-wandering on the face of the. earth without guide or
*ptotectot, fruggling for'a fe* years.againlt the tot-
rent of uncertainty and change 1 and then finking inr-
to' utter oblivion- and vanii.iing like visions of the
night. Myfleribus obfiurity would inrolve the be-
ginding of things d iforder woidd tnirk their pro-
Xfs; and the blacknets of darlnefs would cover their
oinaf efult. Whereas, when Faith enables us to dif-
cover an universal Sovereign, whose power never
fails, and whose wisdom and gootiefsntever charge,
the'profpea clears up on every fide. h A ray from the
great source of light feemsi o illuminate the whole

-·. ·,~-, '~ ~creation

cteation. Good men discover a parent and a friend.
They attain a fortress in every danger; a refuge a-
midst all forms, a dwelling-place in all generations.

Jrley are no longer afraid of evil tidings. Their hewr
is fixed, trufling in the Lord.

THOU H these reasonings fiom the unchanging

tenour of Divine government cannot but afford much
comfort to good men, their fatisfa&ion, however,
becomes fill more complete, when they confider the
explicitpiomifes which are given them in the world of
God. The immurability of the divine purpofeaffures
them most perfecly of those promises being fulfilled
in due time, how adverse soever circumstances may
at present -appear to their accomblifhment. The
flrengtb of I/rael is not a man that be jbould lie, nor
tie /fn of man that he /bould repent. Hatb hefaid it,
and /ball he not do it P Hath be spoken, and /ball be
not make- it good ? Men have the command only of
the pre'ent time. When that is suffered to pass,
changes may befal, either in their own slate, or in the
situation of things around them, which (hal defate
theii bell intentions in our behalf, and render all their
promises fruitlers. Hence, even setting aside the dan-
ger f human inconstancy, the confidence which we
can repose cn any earthly protecoris extremely imper-
sea. Mar, in his hiheft glory, is but a reed float-
ing on the fream of time, and forced to follow every
new direaicn of the current. But God is the rock of
ages. All time is equally in his hands. Intervening
accidents cannot embarrass; him nor any unforeseen
obstacle retard the performance of his most distant
promile. One day is with the Lsrdas a thousand years;
and a thoujand years are as one day. There is no vi-
cilTitude of the human fate in which good men can-
not take fan&uary with him as a sure and abiding
friend; the safe conducor of their pilgrimage here,
as well as the eternal reft of their fouls hereafter.
All their patrons may desert them; and all their

N 5 friends

friends may-die: but the Lord flill lies, who is tbci
rock; and themoft high God, who it their -edeemgrr. He
hath promised that he toiltnct leave them when theyare
old, nor forake them wben tbeir ft-ength failtb ; and
that even when their heart ball faint, -and tbeir fief
fail, he will be the. (Irength cf their heart and tbeir
porlion for ever. His immutab lity is not only the
ground of trust in him during their own abode on
earth, but gives them the fatisfa&ion of looking f;r-
ward to the fame wife and good adminiffration as con-
tinued to the end of time. When departing hence,
and bidding adieu to life, with all itschangefut scenes,
they can with comfort and peace leave their family,
their friends, and their dearest concerns, in the hands
of that God who reigneth for ever ; and whose coun-
tenance ball always behold the upright xi*th the fame
complacency. My days ar like a fJiJa(As that declineth,
snd lam withered like the graft. But thou, 0 Lord,
fJall endure for ever ; and thy remembrance to all ge-
nerations. The children of thy servants ball continue ;
and theirfeed stall be eftabli/bed before thee.

SUCHR are the-benefits which good men may derive

from meditation on God as ewithat variablesne/ or
/badow of turning. It in'pires them with sentiments
of devout, humble, and'grateful adoraticn. It points
out to them the unvarying tenour of conduc which
they ought to hold; checks their fickleness and in-
conflancy, and amidIf all distresses and fears affords
them comfort. The immutability of God is the
surest basis on which their hopes can be built. It
is indeed the pillar on which tele whole universe
Trfls.-On such fericus and Ifolemn meditations let
our thoughts often dwell, in order to corre&t that
folly and levity which are io apt ro take poffeflion
of the human heart. And if our minds be over-
awed, ar.d even depressed, with so high a view of
the divine nature, let them. be relieved by the reflec-
tior, ihat to this unchangeable God we are permit-

,.9^~~~~ ~~~ted

# SERMON XX. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. HEBREWS iv. 15. We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all ...

ted to look up through a gracious Mediator, who,
thotigh possessed of divine perfeation, is not uaconfci-
ous of human distress and frailty.

S E R M 0 N XX.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.

HEBREWVS iv. 15.
We have not an high piief/ whlch cannot be tfuceed

uwith the feeling of our infirmiies ; but was in all
points tempted like at we are, yet luithout fin.
W rX-HEN we compare the councels of Providence

V with the plans of men,. we find a like'diffe-

rence obtain as in the' works of nature compared with
those of art.' 'The wotks of art may, at firit view,
appear the most finished and beautiful ;'but when the
eyeis is flited to Fry into their contexture, the nicest
oorkmanfhip is discerned to be rough and blemished.-
Whereas the works of nature gain by the modt accu-
rate exaumination; and tho3e which on' a fuperfical
fuevey appeared 'defe&ive or rude, the more inti-
mactely they are. inspeCted, difeoyer the more exa&t
coritruEion' and consummate beauty. In the fare
mainner the systems of worldly policy, though at'firft
they seem plausible and profound, soon betray in their
progrels the narrowness of the human underftandig g;
while those dispensations of Providence which appear-
ed to furnifil objetions eithes againtt the goodness or
the wisdom of Heaven, have, upon a more eltenfive
view of their confequencer, trequently afforded' the
moIt friking proofs of both,

God

God manif/efed in the .frJbI was t the 7uws ajtumb-

ling-block. and to the Greeks foolijhnefs. It contradi&-
ed every profeflion which their confined ideas of reli-
gion and philofuphy led-tbem to entertain. If a fu-
periour Being was to interpose for. the refioration of
a degenerate world, they concluded that he would
certainly appear in celetlial majesty. B4ht the tAobgbts
of God are not as the thoughts of tmen. The divine
wisdom saw it to be fit that'the Saviour of mankind
should in all things be made like unto those -whom he
came to save. By living as a man among men, he
dispensed diftrucion in the.moi winning manner. lie
added to inftrucion the grace and the force of his
own example. He accommodated that example to.
the most trying and.xifficult fituaticns of hunman life ;
and by suffering a painful death, he both taught men
how to susser and die, and in that nature which had
offended he offered a solemn expiation to God for
human guilt.

Besides these ends, so worthy of God, which were

accomplished by the incarnation of Christ, another,
of high importance, it fugpefted irr the text. Hu-
man life is to good men, as well as to others, a ftaie
of suffering and diftrels. To ftipply them with pro-
per consolation -and encouragement during such a
slate, was one great purpose of the undertaking of
Christ. With this view he assumed the office of
their high priest, or mediator with God; and the
ercouragemen which this office affords them; will
be proportioned to their- assured belief, first of his
power, and next of his companlion. His power is
set forth in the verse preceding the text, and the pro-
per argument is founded upon it. Seeing that we have
a great bigh prie/l tbho is passid into the heavens,
7e/ut the Son of Gd, let us hold fast our profeLion.
But though it be encouraging to know that our high
rrieft is the Sen of God. and that he is paed into the.
44aw.ens, yet these fats alone are not fufIicient to

rend c

render him the full obje& of our confidence. For,
as the Apoflle afterwards observes, it belongs to the
characer of a high priest to be iakenjrom among men,
that he may bave conmpaifon. on the ignorant, and them
that are- out of the way, feeifg that be himfell is cam-
passld witb infirmity. In order then to satisfy us
ot, our high priest's polT, sing also the qualifications
of mercy and compailion, we are told that he is
touched wvith the feeling of our infirriities, and twa in
all points tempted like as we are The force of this
consideration I purpose now to illustrate. I shall sirs
explain the fads which are flated in the text, and
then show how from these our Saviour'scompafilon is
to be.infe red, and in what manw er it may be accom- 4
modated to the consolation and hope ot good men a-
midlt various exigencies of life.

THE assertion in the text of Chrifl's being toue-.
d with the feeling of our infirmities, plainly implies
that he had full experience both of the external dif-
teriTes, and of the internal sorrows of. human nature.
Assuming 'a body such as ours, he fubjeced himself
to. all the natural confequenfes of corporal frailty.
He did not chufe for himself an easy and opulent
condition, in order to glide through the world with
the leaf molestation. H- did not. suit his mission to
the upper ranks of mankin chiefly, by aflimilating,
his itate to theirs. But, born in meanness, and bred
up to labour, he submitted to the inconveniencies of
that poor and toiltome life wvhich falls to the share
of the mod numerous part of the humara race.
Whatever is severe in the dirregard of relations or
the ingratitude of friends, in the scorn of the proud
or the insults of the mean, in the virulence of re-
proach or the sharpness of pain, was undergone by
Chrilt. Thoueh his life was short, he familiarized
himself in it with a wide compass to human woe;
and there is almost no diilrefsful situation to which
we can be reduced, but what he has experienced be-

fore

fore s. There is not the left reason to imagine
that the eminence of his nature raise him above the
fenfaticns of trouble and grief. Hid this been the
cafe, he would have been a sufferer in appearance
only, net in reality; there would have been no me-
rit in his patience, or in the resignation which he
expressed. On the contrary, it appears'from many
circumstances, that the fenfib:lity of his nature was
tender and exqifite. He asseted none of that hard
indifference in which some ancient philosophers'
vainly gloried. He felt as a man, and he fympa-
thized with the feelings of others. On different oc-
cafions we are informed. that he was troubled infpi-
rit, that be groaned, and that hewept. The relati-
on of his-agony in the garden of Gethsemane exhi-
bits a firiking pi&ure of the sensations of innocent
nature oppressed with anguish. It discovers all the
conflict between the dread of suffering on the one
hand, and the.fenfe of duty on the other; the man
firuggling for a while with human weakness, and in
the end recollected in virtue, and rising fuperiour to
the objeas of dismay which were then in his 'view.
Father I if it be pffible, let this cup pajs from- w.
Neverthelees, not as I will, but as tbou wilt. Thy
will be done. Thus was our Saviour tuched with khe
feeling of our infirmities. He was a man of forrowi,
and acquainted 'with grief.

It is added in the text, that he was in all poinrt

tempted Ike as we are. To be tempted is, in the
language of Scripture, to undergo such trials of vir-
tue as are accompanied with difficulty and conflic.
Though our Lord was not liable to any temptations
from depravity of nature, yet he was perpetually
cxpofed to such as arise from situations the moil ad-'
ver.e to virlue. His whole life was in this refpeac
a course of temptation; that is, a severe trial of
his coftlancy by every discouragement. He suffered
repeatld provocations both from friends and foes,

H' i:

His endeavours to do good were requited with the
noit obfinate and perverse oppofitidn. Sometimes
hy the solicitations of ignorant multitudes he was
tempted to accept the proffers tof worldly greatness.
Oftner, by the infilts of multitudes, more blind and
brutal, he was tempted to desert an office which
expofde him to so much mifiry. Together with the
world, the powers of datknefs also combined ther
efforts against him. We are informed that he war
led into the wilderneli, and amidst the horrours of a
wild and dreary solitude, was tempted of the devil.
The great adverfaty of mankind seems to have been
permitted to exert unusual proofs of his power aad
malice, on purpose that the trial of our Saviour's
constancy might he more complete and this viaory
over him more illustrious and diftinguithed.

From all these circumstances, the conclusion is ob-

vious, that our Lord knows from personal experience,
all the difcouragementsand tempt tions which virtue
can susser. Though he participated not of the cor-
ruption, yet he felt the weakness. of hnman nature.
He felt the strength of paflion. He is no stranger to
.the disturbance and commotion which either theat-
tacks of the world, or the powers of darkness, are
able to raise withiin the breads of man, One remark-
able difference, indeed, takes place between our
temptations and those of Chrilt. Though he was.
tempted like as we are, yet it was without fin.
Though the confliawas the fame, the issue was diffe-
rent. We are often foiled'; He always overcame.
But his disconformity to us in this refpea is far from
weakening the fRrength of our present argument. For
fin contracs and hardens the heart. Every degree
of guilt incurred by yielding to temptation tends to
debate the mind, and to weaken the generous and
benevolent principles in human nature. If from our
Lord's being tempted like a cwe" are, we have any
ground to expea his sympathy, from his being tempt-

ed

ed, yet Witbout fin, we are entitled to hope that his
sympathy, unallayed and perse&, will operate with
more complete energy.

F R M this view of the fa&s which are Rated in

the text. I proceed to show how jufly we may infer
our Saviour's compaflion, andin what manner it is
to be accommodated to the consolation of good men
amidfl various exigences of life.

It has been the universal opinion of mankind, that

personal experience of suffering humanizes the heart.
In the school of afflicion. companion is always sup-
posed to be most thoroughly learned: and hence in
the laws of Moses, when the Israelites are command-
ed not to oppress the firanger, this reason is given,
for yc know the heart of a Jiranger, feeing ye wtere
flrakgers ysurfelver in the land of Egypt. 'he difiref-
fed, accordingly, flie for confi;lation to those who
have been their companions in woe. 'Ihey decline
the prosperous, and look up to them with a fulpi-
cious eye. They confider them as ignorant oft heir
feelings, and therefore regardless of their complaints.
Alnidft the manifold sorrows of life, then, how sooth-
ing is the thought that our great intercessor with
God was a fellow-fuffered with ourselves, while he
palled through this vally of tears

But was it necessary for Chfiit, it may be said,

to alfume our nature in order to acquire the know-
ledge of its infirmity and distress? As a divine per-
son, was he not perfealy acquainted with our'frame
before he defiened to the earth ? Did he tland in
need of being prompted to companion by the expe-
rience of our sorrows ? Could his experimental
knowledge of human weakness increase the benevo-
lence of a nature which before was perfeE ?-No:
he submitted to be toutbed with tbe feeling of our in-
tfrmities, and to be tempted like as 'we are; nor in order
to become acquainted with our nature, but to satisfy
us that he knew it perfectly; no in order to acquire

t any

any new: degree of gocdnefs, but to give us the firmer
confidence in the goodners which he poIfeffed, and to
convey the sense ot it to our hearts with greater effect.

'Distrust is a weakness peculiary incident to the

miserable. They-are apt to reje& hope, to indulge
'fear, ard to tinge with the dark colour of the'r
:-'own minds every objet which is offered' for their

encouragement. - The representations given us of the
Deity in Scripture afford undoubtedly much ground
for trutR in his gocrdnefs. 'But the perfection of an
Almighty Being, who dwelleth in the secret place of
eternity, tvAtib no man hath seen or can fee, is over-
whelming to a timind apprehension. The goodnefr
which it promires is a new and unknown form'of
goo'dness. -Whatever proceeds from a nature fc far
fuperiour to our own, is beheld with a degree of
a-e which is ready to overpower hope. Upon this
account, under the Old Teflament difpenfatidn,. the
Supreme Being is often described with the attributes
of a man, in order to give a shade and softening to
his greatiefs; and to accommodate his goodness
more to our capacity. The relentirigs of a friend,
the pity of a parent,' and the sighs of a mourner, are
:-fcribed to- the Almighty. But we easily perceive
fiucl-'attributes to ie no more than figures and allufi-
'os.' The comfort wh ch they assrd is not definite
'nor precise. They leave the mind under an enxious
uncertainty left 'it eir in its interpretation of those
allegories'-s mercy. In the 'person of Jesus Christ
thie bjea-ofour trust is brought nearer to ourlelves;
-and f course adapte&' more effe&ually to our en-
couragement. Those well-known tended affecions,
which are 'only figuratively ascribed to' the Divinily,
are in our gaeat Mediator thoroughly realized. His
.goodness is the goodness. of human nature exalied
and rendred perfet, - It is that species of goodness
with which, of all others, we are best aquainted,
compaflon to the unhappy; and compafflon cultiva-

ted

ted by that discipline which we know to be the r.o6
powerful, the- experience of sorrows.

For fucb reafbns as these, because the children are

partakert of fleb and blocd, Cbritl him/elf likrewife
took part of the fame. In all things it bebo~d him te
be made like unto his bretbren, that he might be a mer-
ciful, as well as afaithful high priJef. W hen we
confider his assumption of our nature in this light,
what a mild and amiable aspea does it give to the
government of heaven.! What attentive solicitude
of goodnels is shown in carrying on the dispensation
of .our redemption upon a pl.n so perfe&cly calcula-
ted to banish all distrust, and to revive the most
timid and dejefed heart! How naturally does ithat-
inference follow which the Apoflle n;:a!es i a.the
verse immediately succeeding the tect; let ufAhffe-
fcre come boldly to the throne of grace, tat ,.rqmay
obtain mercy, an4 find grace to. help in time.-f.nsedl
More particulary, in consequence of the -dotrine
wht;h I have illufirated, we ate taught to hope.

I TH AT undtr allourinfirmites a:d:errors,Xregaid

will be had to human. imperfe&io ; .th., a.nmecful
diftindion will be made between what is weak ald
what is wilfully criminal in our cornduQl; qrl that
fulch measures of obedience only-wil, be:exaiqeilas
are proportioned to our circumrfances and powers.
What can more. encourage our religious fcrvices,
than to be aufured that the God whom we worlhip
knews ar frame, and remembens e~ are. 4dujf and
that the MEediator, through whom we wty~3-yihm,
ir touched wih ,the feelingsl f our infirmit'iiei, Tihe
most virtnous.are the molf apt to be dejted 4 ith
the fenoe of their frailty. While van and fuieficial
men are easily flattered with favourable views of
themrelves, and fond hopes of divine acceptance,
the slightest apprehension of guilt is ready to alarm
the bumble and delicate mind; juil as on coarse bo-
dies an impreflion is not easily made, u hilcthofe of

firer

finer contexture are soon hurt; and as on an exqui-
site polish the leaf i'peck is visible. But though re-
ligion promotes great sensibility to all feelings of a
moral nature, yet it gives no countenance to.excef-
five and fuperflitious fears. That humility which
checks presumption, and that jealousy which inspires
vigilance, are favourable to piety; while those sus-
picions which lead to despondency are injurious to
CGod, hurtful to ourselves. and repugnate to that
whole system of mercy which I have been illuftra-
ting.

You complain, that when you engage in the so-

lemn exerciles of devotion, your spirits are depressed
by a load of cares and sorrows; that in your thoughts
there is no composure, and in your affeEions no ele-
vation; that after your utmost essays you are inca-
pable of fixing your attention t(eadily on God, or of
fending up your prayers to him with becoming
vwarmth and fulness of heart. This debility and
wandering of mind you are apt to impute to some un-
common degree of guilt. You confider it as the
symptom of incurable hardness of heart, and a me-
lancholy proof of your being abandoned by God.-
Such fears as there ir a great measure refute them-
felve,. If you were really obdurate, you would be
insensible of guilt. Your complaints of hardr.efs of
heart are an evidence of vour heart being at that
moment contrite and-'a&tualfy relenting.-Are there
any circumstances of inward discomposure and per-
plexity of which He is uncunfcious who at a c'rtical
period of his life was heavy and fore am.ized; who
was obliged to cormp'ain th'at his foul was troubl.d
within him ; and to acknowledge, that though t7.Z
Jpiril wa$l willing, yet the flejh wat weak P To a
fupericur nature, untouched -i:h human frailty, you
mnight in such situations look up with some degiee
of terrour. But he who remembers the firuggles of
his own foul, will sot, lurcly, judge -Aours like a

hard

hard and unfeeling mailer. Acquainted with the ir-f
most recesses of human nature, he perceives the
sincerity of your intentions; he fees the combat you
maintain; he knows how much of your present con-
fusion and disorder is to be imputed, not to your
i :clination and will,but to an infirm,an aged or difea-
fed body, or to a weak and wounded spirit; and there-
fore will be far from rejecing your attemps to serve
him, on account of the infirmities which you lament.
He hears the voice of those secret aspirations
which you are unable to express in words, or to form
into prayer. Every penitential tear which your
contrition sheds,. pleads-your cause more powerfully
with him, than all the arguments with which you
could fill your mouth.

II. FROM onr Saviour's experience of human

misery, we may jufily hope that he will so compaf-
fionately regard our distressed eilate, as to prevent
us from being loaded with unnecessary troubles. He
will not wantonly add affli&ion to the affliced; nor
willingly crush what he fees to be already broken.
In the courre of that high adminiltration which he
now exercifcf, he may indeed judge certain enter-
mixtures of adversity to be proper for our improve-.
ment. These are trials of virtue tlrough which a'',
without exception, muff pass. Rugged was the road
by which our divine Mediatorhimfelf went before
us to glory; and by becoming our companion in dif-
trefs, he meant to reconcile us to our lot. He en-
nobled adversity, by sharing it with us. He raif d
poverty from contempt, by alTuming it for his own
condition. The severity ol his trials tends to lighten
ours. When the general of an army lies on the
fame hard ground, drinksof the fame cold fiream,
carries the fame weight of armour with the lowedl
centinel, can any of his fo!dicers repine at what
they endure ?

WVhatever afflictions our Lord may judge to be

necessary

tiecelary for us, of this we may reft aflured, that
he will deal them forth, not with harsh and imptri-
ous authority, but with the tenderness of. one who
knows from experience how deeply the human heart
is wounded by every stroke of adversity. He will
not lay more upon us than he fees we are able to
bear. Thougb be cause grief, yet will be have con-
paJon according to the multiude of his tender mercies.
HIe will/lay his rotgb -wind in the day of the east wind.
For it is his slate, but not his nature, which is now
changed. 'Notwithitanding his high cxaltation, he
.Rill retains the compafiionate fenttments of the man
of forrowr. Still, we are assured by an inspired wri-
ter, he is not ejbamed to call us his brethren. And
with the heart of a brother he regards those few
and troubled days, such as his own once were,
which good men are doomed to pass in this evil
,world.

From his compailiohn indeed, we are not to expec

,that fond indulgence or unseasonable relief by which-
the weak pityof men frequently indures its ob;e&s.
It is to the material interests, more than to the pre-
sent ease, of good men, that he attends. When un-
der the, impatience of sorrow we exclaim, Hath he
forgotten to be gracious ? hath be in anger jbut up his
tender mercies -we recolle& not in whose hands we
are. Hiscompaffion is not diminished when its ope-
rations are moaft concealed It continues equally to
flew, though the channels by which it is conduaed.
towards us lie to deep for our observation. AmidP
our present ignorance of what is good or ill for us in
this life, it is iufficient for us to know, that the
immediate administration of universal government is
placed in- the hands of the molt attentive and com-
passionate friend of mankind. How greatly does this
cor.fideration alleviate the burden of human woe ! How
happily does it conne& with the awful dispensations of
religion the mildest ideas of endernefs and humanity.

III. ToEr
(.

III. THa text leads us to hope that anidff all

the infirmities of our Rate, both under the temptations
arid under the d.firffes of life, our' blessed Lord'will
afford us a proper measure of affilance and support.
In that he hathjuffered being tempted, he ii abe to fuc-
cour them who either susser or are temptzd ; that is,
he is perfe&ly qualifitd for dicharging this benefici-
ent office; he knows exacily where the wound bleeds,
where the burden presses, what relief will prove mol
seasonable, and how it can be mofl successfully applied.
The manner in whih it is conveyed by him to the
heart we may be at a loss to explain; but no argu-
ment can be thence drawn aginft the credibility of the
fat:. The operations which the power of God car-
ries on in the natural world are no less' myferious
than those which we are tought to believe that his
spirit performs in the moral world. if we can give
no account of what is every day before our eyes,
how a feed becomes a tree, or how the child rites in-
to a man, is it any wonder that we should be unable
to explain how virtue is supported, and confaancy
flrengthened, by God within the heart ? If men by
their counsels and fuggeflions can influence the minds
of one another, muff not divine fuggeflion and coun-
fel produce a niuch greater effec ? Surely, the Fa-
ther of Spirits must, by 'a houfand ways, have ac-
cefsto the spirits which he has made, so as to give
them what determination, or impart to them what
afliftance he thinks proper, without injuring their
frame, or disturbing their rational powers.

Accordingly, wherever any notions of religion have

taken place among mankind, this belief has in some
measure paevailed, that tothe virtuous under distress
aid was commnrnicated from above. This sentiment
is so congruous to our natural impressions of the di-
vine benignity, that both among poets and philofo-
phers of antient times it was a favourite idea, and of-
ten occurs in their writings. But what among them

was

was no more than loose conjeaure or feeble hope has
received full confirmation from the gospel of Chrifi.
Not only is the promise of divine afliftanae expressly
given to Chriftfans, but their faith in that promise is
Iregthened byan argument which muff carry convic-
tion to every heart. If Christ had full experience of
.the insufficiency of human natureto, overcome the
difficulties wherewith it is now, surrounded, will lie
withhold from his followers that grace withoit which
he fees they must perish in the evil day ? If. in the
season of his temptation and diftiefs, an' angel was
sent from heaven toJfrenghtei him, shall no celestial
mefTenger be employed by him -on the like kind er-
rand to those whc.n he stiles his brethren ? Can we
believe that he who once bore our griefs and carried
our frrows will, from that height of glory to which
he is now exahed, look down upon us here contend-
ing with the storm of adversity, labouring to follow
his steps through the sleep and'difficult-parts of vir-
tue, exposed on every fide to arrows aimed against
.us by the powers of darkness ; and that, feeing our
.dilrefs, and hearing our supplications, he will re-
inir an unconcerned fpe&ator, withoutvoachfafing
us eithef1ffifance to support our frailty, or protection -
to screen us amidst furroundihrg dangers? Where
were then the:benevolerce of divine Nature? Where,
the compafllon of that mediator Who was trained to
mercy in the school of sorrow ? Far from us be;
fuih: urigreatful 'suspicions of the generous: friend of
htinan-kind si- Let its eetet -'ourselves: as we can,
and we shall be adflled.- Let--ns pray, and we shall be
heard-; for-there-is one to'prefent!our.prayers whom
ihe father heareth always. These, will he fay, are my
followers-on earth, pafling through that thorny patb-
of temptation and sorrow which I once trode. Now
I am no more in the world; but there are in the wsurld.
HSy Fatirr i thine tbhei werr, and 'tbou gave/f t/hm
me.- Keep lAem tbrotzgb Ibine uoin - name. Santify.

them

them through thy trufl. Keep them from te evil one.;
that they may be where am, and may behold the glory
.which thou bafl given me.

Suchj is the comfort which arises to us from oup

Saviour's participation of the infirmities of human na-
ture; andithus it may be applied to various fituati-
ons of anxiety and diftrels. -

W\VHEN we review what has been said, it is necef-

farythat, in the first. place, I guard you against a
certain mifinprovement which may be made of this
doctrine. The amiable view which it gives of our
Lord's clemency may flatter some men with unwar-
rantable hopes, and lead them to imagine that in his
experience of human weakness an apology is to be
found for every crime. Perfons.of this charaEter
must be taught that his corfipaion differs widely
from that undiftinguifhing and capricious indulgence
w hich is sometimes found among men. It is the
companfion of an impartial mind, enlightened by wis-
dom andlguided by justice, extending to the frailties
of the sincere, but not to the fins of the prelumptuous,
and least of all, to the crimes of those who enco.urage
themselves in evil trom-the hope that they shall meet
with commpaffio.n

A course of deliberate guilt admits of no bpology

from the weakness of human nature. For notwith-
standing all the infirmities incident to it, no man is,
urider a neceflity of being wicked. So far is our, Sa-
viour's experience of our nature from affording anry
ground of hope to piefumpntuous offenders, that:,it.
ought to fill them with teFrour. For it shows them
how thoroughly qualified he is to discriminate ac-
curately the characters of men, and to. markI the
boundaries between frailty and perverfnefs. He who
from his cwI feelings well knows all the workings
of the humian heart, clearly discerns how different
their temper is from what was once his own. He
perceives that vice, .not virtue, is their choice; and

that,

·'flat inflead of refiting temptation, they refilt con-
sfcience. Hle fees that infirmity affords them no ex-
*cufe; and that the real cause of their acing a cri-
.minal part, is not because they cannot do better,
*but, in truth, because they will not. Having for-.
feited every title to.compaffiQn, they are left in.the
hands of jultice, and according as they have sown,
they muif expet to reap.

;BUT, ,in the next place, to such as are lincere

.and upright, the docrine which I have illuftlrted
.affords high encouragement and powerfully recom-
mends the Christian Religion. It places that religi-
·no in its proper point of view, as a medicial plan,
-intended both .fr the recovery of mankind frorn.
guilt, and for their consolation under trouble. The
law was gi.ven by Mpe es; hut grace and truth rame ky
Yefus Christ. The law was a dispensation of mere
authority. The Gospel is .a dispensation, not of au-
thority only, but of relief. If it discovers new du-
ties., and'impofes new obligations, it opens also sources
.of comfort which,, were before unknown to the
world.

A Mediator between God and his creatures was

an objet after which -men in all nations, and
under all forms of religion, had long and anxiously
fought. The folliec of superstition have served to dif-
close to us, in this inllance, the fentimentslof na-
ture. The whole religion of Paganism was a sys-
tem of mediation and interceflion. Depressed by a
conscious sense of guilt, nature shrunk at the thought
of adventuring on a dire& approach of the Sovereign
of the universe; ,and laboured to.find out some aufpi-
cious introduclor to that awful presence. With blind.
and trembling eagerness, the nations fled to fubordi-
nate deities, to tutelar gods, and to departed spirits,
as their patrons and advocates above. Them they
itosdied to ooth with such coPfly gifts, such pompous
rites, or such humble supplications. as they thought

O - might

.might incline them to favour their cause, and to
support their interest with the Supreme Divinity.
While mankind were bewildered in this darknels,
the Gospel not only revealed the true Mediator,
who in this view may be jufily called .tbe desire of
.sll nations, but placed his charater and office in a
light most admirably fitted, as has been shewn in
this Discourse, to.lupport the interest of virtue in
the world.; and to encourage the humble, without
flattering the presumptuous. What plan of religion
could be' more 'fiitd to the circumstances of man,
,or more worthy of the' goodners of his Creator?
W.lhat more animating to the pious worshipper in
.*erforming those solemn aas of devotion to which
we are called by the service of this day ?

I CAN N OT conclude without taking notice hovz

remarkable this dispensation of religion is calculated
to promote a spirit of humanity and conipaffion a-
rnong men, by those very means .which it employs for
inspiring devotion towards God. We are now draw-
itag nigh to the Supreme Being through a Mediator,
for whose compaflion we. pray on account of the
experience which he has had of our frailty, We
trust, that having been acquainted with distress, he
·will 70ot defpi/e nor abhor the afflifoion of Ite afsliced.
'The argument by which we plead for his compassion
Concludes still more firongly for mutual charity, and
sympathy with one another. He who, in .te midfl
of the common sufferings of life, feels not for the
diftrecfed; he who relents not at his neighbour's
griefs, nor scans his failings with the eye of a bro-
thler, mufl: be fcnfible that lie excluclcs himcflf front
the comniferation of Chrifr. -Ic nmakes void tlhe
:ligum1cnt by which he plc:(ls for his mercy ; niy
h3e eflabliihcs a precedent againf li imellf. Tihus the
;Chrlinian religion approves itself as worthy of God,
by conncaing devotion in firic union witll charity.
As in its precepts the love of God anid the love of

i;a11

# SERMON XXI. JOHN xii. 43. For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.

:man-are joined,. so in its inlirutions the exereife of
'both is called forth; -andto worship God .through
the mediation of a cormipafflioate -high priest, necef-
farily'fuppufes in the worlhippers a spirit of .compaf-
.iuon towards their own brethren.

S E R M N XX

JOHK ; .1. 43.
,-For Ihey lo6Vd the praifc of rnC tn ore iba the pra;Je of

God.
-' HE slate of man on earth is manifeftly.deigmn-

j ed for the trial of his virtue. Temptations

every where occutr

. and perpqtual vigilance and at-

tention are required. There is no paIffon, or prin-
ciple of aRion in .his: nature, which may not, if
left to itself, betray him into some criminal excess.
Corruption gains entrance, not only by thofe-paffions
which -are apparently of dangerous tendency, such
as covi:toufnies, and love of pleasure; but by means
of thole allo: which are seemingly the mo4s fair and
innocent, such as the desire of fleccm and p'raise.
Of this. the text suggets ,a remarkable instance.
WVhen our Lord appeared in the land of Judea,
.the purity of his doLtrine, and-the evidence of his
·miracles acquired him a confidciaible number- of fol-
lotvcrs, chiefly among tlhe lower l:aflis of meln. But
hie Phiariflies, who were the lcaling r and fathiona-
Ilc tIdc, galled v.itrl the frcciloii of hi:; reproof;,
decried him ai ant inipoflor-. HIence it camle to pass,
that though /oI'c: of the rtllet i bIli'cevrd ir hijn, yet,
/ccaujl oj tIhe' l'barfee) , th/y -di/ l ntt conr efj .im.
Kulcl rl, peribfol whIo, by thcir rank and cducation,

0 z ought

ought-to have been fuperiour to any popular preju
dice, were so far overawed by the opinions of others,
as to flifle their convi&ion, to dissemble their faith,
and to-join- with.the prevailing party in condemni
ing one whom in -their -hearts they .revered: for
which, this reason is given, that they lovetb the raise
of men more. trat-the praif -of-Ged. Since, then,
the love of praise can misead men into such cul-
pable and difhonief condu&,'" et us, with £ome'atb
tiorn; examrine thle nature oF this palion. - Let' us
confider how far it is an allowable principle of aci-
on; when it begiais to be crimiina; and upon what
accounts we ought to guard againfl its acquiring the
entire ascendant .'-

WE are intended by -Providence to be conneted

with one another infeciety. Single unaflited indi-
viduals .culd make small advances towards any va-
guable inprovement. By means of -lociety our wants
are supplied, and our lives rendered comfortabte; .our
capacities wire enlarged, and our virtuous affie&ions
called forth into proper exercises. I-n order to con,
ifirm our mutuala connec&ion, it was necefTary that
some attra&itg power, which.dad the effeE of draw-
ing men together, and itrengthening the social ties,
Ihould pervade the humanfyftem: Nothing could more
happily fuffilthis purpose, than our being so formed as
to desire the eflteem, and to delight in the good .opini,
on, of each other. -Had fch a propensity been want-
ing, and' felfiifi principles left to occupy its place,
society muit have proved an- unharmonious and dif-
cordant tlate. Inftead-of mutual attraion, a reput-
live power would have. prevailed. - Among men who
had 'no regard to the approbation of one another, all
intercourse would have been jairng. and offensive.
For the wiset lends, therefore, the difire of praise
was made -an original and powerful principle i he
liuman brealt. - -
' To a variety of good purposes -it is fihfervient,

and

atid on many occasions co-operates with the princi-'
pie of virtue. It awakens us from sloth, invigorates'
a&tivity, and stimulates our efforts to excel. It has
given rife to most of the splendid, and to many of
the -uefuFehnterprizes of men. lIt has animated the
patriot, and fired the hero. Magnanimity, generofi-
ty and fortitude' are what all mankind' admire.
Hence such as were atuated by the desire of exten-
five fame, have been' prompted to deeds which ei-
ther participated of the spirit, or, at leat, carried
the appearance of difhinguifhed virtue. The desire
of. praie isr generally connected , with all the finer:
sensibilities of human. inture. It affords a groufnd
ou which exhortation- counsel and'reproof ctn: work?
a proper effe&.. Whereas to be entirely destitute :of
this paflionr betokens an ignoble.mind, on which no'
moral impreflon iseafily made. Where their is no
dcfire of praise, there will be affo no sense of re-
proach; and if that be exinguifhed,. one of the
principal guards of virtue' is removed, and the mind.
thrown open to many opprobrious pursuits. ' He
whose countenance never glowed with shame, and
whose heart never bear at the' foand' of praise,! is;
not deflined for inv honourable.diftinaion; is likely
to grovel in the fordid' quest of gain, or to slumber
life away in the indolence of felfith pleasures.

Abftra&ing from the sentiments which are con-

neced with the love of praise as a principle of ac-
tion, the efleem of our fellow-creatures is an objec
which,, on account of the advantages it brings, may
be lawfully. pursued. Ik is necessary to our fuccefi
in every fair and honest undertaking. Not only our
private interest, but our public usefulness, depends
in a great zeafure upon it. The sphere of our in-
fluence is contraced or enlarged in proportion to the
degree in which we enjoy the good opinion of the
public. Men liften with an unwilling ear to one
whom they do- not _h..our; while a.refpe&ted cha-

0 raaer

ra&er adds weight to example, and authority to,
counsel. To dofire the esteem of others for the
fake of its effets is not only allowable, but in ma-
ny cafes is our duty: and to be totally. indfferent to-
praifc or cetoure, is so far from being a virtue, that
it is a real.defeEt in character.

BvT while the love of praise is adnit'ted to be,

in so many rerpets a natural and nfeful principle of
aCion, we are at the fame time to obferve.that it is'
entitled ro no more than our secondary regard. It-
hlas its boundaries set ;.; by tranfgrefling which, it is'
at once transformed frgm atinnoctnt into amoft dan-
gerous passion;' lMore.fac.edi and venerable princi-
ples claimr the chief direraion of human .cohdu;.-
All the good. effett9 which we have ascribed. to the
desire of praise, are produced by it when remaining im
a subordinate station. But when pasing its naturali
line, it becQmes the ruling spring of condu& ; hen
the regard which we pay to the opinions of mener in-
croaches on that reverenice which we. owe to the voice
of conscience and tJe. fence of duty:; the lave.ofpraife'
having then gone, out.of its. proper pkaceb. instead of
imtrioiveig,. corrupts;: a.d ieftead of;ele~ating, de-
bales our nature. The p.roportion which .thispaflion
holds to other principles of-a&ion,is what rtuders it
cithte innocent or criminal. The crime:with which
thr Jewish rurers are charged in the text)- Wa not-
that they loved the praise of men; but that'they: lvedc
it more than the praif: of God.

Even in cafes. where there is no dire& compefitioa

between our duty, and our. fancied honour, between
the praise. of men and. tha praise of God, the paflion
for applause may become criminal by occupying the
place of a better principle. When vainglory usurps
the throne of virtue, when ostentation produces ac-
tions which conscience ought to have dictated-; such-
aSions, hcwever foacious, have Po-'claim to moral
or religious praise, We. kniow tliat Sg .eeds don. e

mereiy

merely to be seen of men lose their reward with God.
t;f, on occasion of some trying conjunaure which
makes us hesitate concerning our line of corpdut, the
first question which occurs to us be,: not whether .n
acion is right in itself, and .such as a good man
ought to perform, but whether it is such as will siid
acceptance with the world, and be favourable. t our
fame, the conclafion is too evident that the desire of
applause has obtained an undue ascendant. Wliat a
wife and good man ought to ffudy, is-to-preftve hist
mind free from any such solicitud conrcenring praise
as may be in hazard of overcoming- hsfetfe of: dity.
The approbation of men he may wish: to btail, as
far as is confifent with the-approbation ofRG'od. pt
when both cannot be enjoyed'together;, ttiere o ught
to be no fufpence. He is to retire contented with the
testimony of a good conitiencc ; and: to show by the
firmness of his behaviour,. thatm in- the cause of truth
and virtue,.he is fuperiour.to all opinion.-Let .s:naqw
proceed to confider the arguments which Ihould ftp-
port such a tpirit, and guard us against the improper
influence of praise or censure .i the course of cur
duty.-

IT the firfi place,- the praise of men is not an ob-

jea of any such value in itself as to be intitled to be-.
come the leading principle of condu&. We degrade
our characer when we allow it more than fubordi-
nate regard. Like other worldly goods, it is apt.to
dazzle us with a false lustre; -but if we would afcer-
tain its true worth, let us reflec both on whom it is
bestowed, and from whom it proceeds. Were the
aFplaufe of the world always the reward of merit;
wereit appropriated to such alone as by real abilities,
or by worthy actions, are entitled to rife above the
crowd, we might jutfly be flattered by poffefling a
rare an valuable difincion. But how far is this from
being the cafe in fai ? How often have thedefpicable
and the vile, by-dexteroufly catching the favour of.the

0 4 multitude,

multitude, feared upon the wings of popular applause,-
while the virtuous and the deserving have been ei-
ther buried in obscurity, or obliged to encounter the
attacks of unjust reproach ? The laurels which human
praise confers are withered and blasted by the unwor-
thinefs of those who wear them. Let the man who
is vain of public favour be humbled by the refle&ion
that, in the midst of his success, he is mingled with a
crowd of imposters and deceivers, hypocrites and"
enthusiasts, of ignorant pretenders and superficial rea--
joners, who, by various arts, have attained as high:
a rank as himself in temporary fame.

We may easily be satisfied that applause will be of-

ten fhared'by the undeferving, if we allow ourselves
to confider from whom it proceeds. When it is the-
approbation of the wife only and the good which is
pursued, the love of praise may then be accounted to
contain itself within just bounds, and to run in its pro-
per channel But the tefiimony of the discerning few,
modest and unassuming as they commonly are, forms
but a small part of the public voice. It- seldom
amounts to more than a whisper, which amidit the
general clamour is drowned. When the love of praise
has taken poffeflion of the mind, it confines not itself
to an objeat so limited. It grows into an appetite for
indilcriminate praise. And who are they that confer
this prase ? A mixed multitude of men, who in their
whole condua are guided by humour and caprice, far
more than byreafon y who admire faire appearenccs,
and puftue false goods; who inquire superficially,.
and judge rashly; whose sentiments are for the mt .
part erroneous-, always changeable, and often incon-
filtent. Nor let any one imagine, that by looking
above the crowd, and courting the praise of the fafhi-
onable and the great, he makes sure of true honour.
There are a great vulgar, as well as a'fmall Rank of-
ten makes no difference in the underfiandings-of men,
or in their judicious diflribItion of praise. Luwury,

pride,

pride, and vanity, have frequently as much influence
in corrupting the fentiments'of the great, as igno-
rance, bigotry, and prejudice, have ih misleading the
opinions of the crowd.-And is it to such judges as
there that you submit the supreme direcion of your
conduc ?. Do you sloop to courtCtheir favour as your
chief diftin&ion, when an objeEt of so much julter
and higherambition is presented to you in the praise of
God? God is the only unerring judge of what is ex-
cellent. His approbation alone is the substance, all
other praise is but thelhadow, of honour. The cha-
raaer which you bear in his fight is your only real
one. flow contemptible does it render you to be
indifferent with lefpe&: to this, and to be solicitous
aLout a name alone, a fictitious, imaginary charac-
ter, which has no existence except in the opinions of
a few weak and' credulous men around you? They
fee no farther than the outside of things. They can
judge of you by ations only; and not by the com-
prehenfive view of allyour a&ions,but by fuchmere-
ly as you have had opportunity of bringing forth to pub-
lic notice. But the Sovereign of the world beholds
you in every light in which you can be placed. The
silent virtues of a generous purpose and a pious heart
atlrat his notice equally with the moltfplendid deeds.
From him you may reap the praise of good a&;ons
which you had no oprortunity of performing. For
he fees them in their principle; he judges of vou by
your intentions ; he knows what you would have
done. You may be.in his eyes a hero or a martyr,
without undergoing the labours of the one, or the
fiffering of the other. His infpeaion, therefore,
'opensr a much .wider field foi praise than what the
world can afford you; and for praise, too, certainly
tar wore illustrious in the eye of reason. Every
real artist fludies to:approve himself to such as are
knowing in his art. To their judgment he appeals.
On their approbation he refts his characer, and not

05 on

on the praise of the unskilled and rude. In the
highest art of all, that of life and condut, shall the
Opinions of ignorant men come into the molt diflant
Competition with his approbation who is the searcher
of all hearts,. and the (tandard of all perfection ?-
The testimony of his praise is not indeed, as yet,
openly bestowed: But though the vice of the Al-
mighty found not in your ears, yet by confcienfce, his*
lacred vicegerent, it is capable of being conveyed to&
your hear The softest whisper of divine approbati-.
on is sweeter to the foul of a virtuous man, than the
loudest flouts of that tumultuary applause which pro-
ceeds from the world.

Confider, farther, how narrow and circumscribed

in its limits that fame is which the vain-glorious
man so eagerly purlues. In order to thow'.htm thisi
I shall not bid him reflec that it is ccnfined to a
small diffl-i of the earth; and' that when he rooks
a little beyond the region which he inhabits, he will
find himlelf as much unknown as the mofl obscure
person around him. I fhal not dzfirc him to confider,
that in the gulph of oblivion, where all human me-
morials are fwalloxved up, his name and fame mufi
soon be inevitably loft. He may imagine that. amkle
horn urs remain to gratify ambition, though his re-
putaion extend not over the whole globe, nor lad
till ti e end of time. But let him calmly reflec,
that within the narrow boundaries of that country
to which he belongs, and during that small portion
of time which his life fills up, his reputation, great
as he may fancy it to be, occupies no more than an
tnconfiderable corner. L't him think what. multi-
tudes of those among whom he dwills are totally
igrorart of his name and chara&er; how. many ima-
gine themfdlves too important to regard him ; how
many are too much occupied with their own wants
and yurfuits to pay him the least attention; and
where -his reputation is in any degree spread, how of-

ten

ten it has been attacked, and how many rivels are
daily rising to abate it. Having attended to there
circumstances, he will find sufficient materials for
humiliation in the midst of the highelt applause.---
From all there considerations it clearly appears, that
though the esteem of our fellow-creatures be pleasing,
and the pursuit of it, in a moderate degree, be fair
and lawful, yet that it affords no such objea tode-
fire as entitles it to be a ruling principle.

IN the second place, an excessive love of praise

never fails to undermine the regard due to conscience,
and to corrupt the heart. It turns off the eye of
the mind from the ends which it ought chiefly to
keep in view; and sets up a false light for its guide.
Its influence is the more dangerous, as the colour
which it affiimes is often fair; and its garb and ap-
pearances are nearly allied to that of virtue. The
love of glory, I before admitted, may give birth to
actions which are both splendid and useful. At a
distance they strike the eye with uncommon bright-
ness; but on a nearer and ftriter survey, their lufIre
is often tarniihed. They are found to want that fa-
cred and venerable dignity which characerizes true
virtue. Little passions and selfish interests entered
into the motives of those who performed them.
They were jealous of a competitor. They fought
to humble a rival. They looked round for fpeaa-
tors to admire them. All is magnanimity, generofi-
ty, and courage, to public view. But the ignoble
source whence there seeming virtues take their rife is
hidden. Without, appears the hero; within, is
found the man of dust and clay. Consult such as
have been intimately conneced with the followers
of renown; and seldom or never will you find that
they held them in the fame esteem with those who
viewed them from afar. There is nothing except
simplicity of intention, and purity of principle, that can
stand the test of near approach and firia examination.

But

But fi-ppofing the virtue of vain-glorious men not

to be always falle, it certainly cannot be depended
upon as firm or lure. Conflancy-and fteadinels are
to be looked for from him only whose conduct is re-
gulated by a sense of what is right ; whose praije i=.
not of men, but of God; whose motive to discharg¢e
his duty-is always the fame. Change, as much as
you please, the fitnation of such a man; let applause
or let censure be his-lot; let the public voice, which
this day has extolled him, to-morrow as loudly decry
him; on the tenour of his behaviour these changes
produce no effet. He moves in a-higher phere.
As the fun in his orbit is not interrupted by the
mists and forms of the atmosphere -below, so, re-
garfdles of the opinions of men, thr'ogh bonour and
di/7lonour, through goad report and bad report, he pur-
lues the path which conscience has marked out.
'Whereas the apparent virtues of that man whose eye
is fixed on the world, are precarious and temporary.
Supported only by circumttances, occasions, and par-
ticular regards, they fluctuate and fall with these.
Excited by public admiration, they disappear when
it is withdrawn; like those exhalations which, raif-
ed by heat from the earth, glitter in the air with md-
rmentary fplesndt.ur, and then fall back to the ground
from whence they spring.

They intemperate love of praise not only weakens

the true prirciples of probity, by fubtituting inferior
motives in their {lead, but frequently'a4lirimpets men
to afions which are directly criminal: It obliges
them to follow the current of popular opinion whither-
soever it may carry them; and hence JI3ipwreck is
often made both of faitb and of a good olicilmce. Ac-
cording as circurntances lead them to court the ac-
clamations of the multitude, or to pursue the applause
of the great, vices of different kinds will slain their
charascer. In one situation they will make hypocri-
tical professions of religion. In another they will be

athamed

ashamed oftheir Redeemer, and of his words. They
will be afraid to appear in their own fo-m, or tout-
ter their genuine fentitnents. Their whole chaacter
will become ficitious; opinions will le assumed,
speech and behaviour modelled, and.even the coun-
tenance formed, as prevailing tafle exat. From
one who has fubmtited to roch prostitution for the
fake of praise, you can- no longer expe& fidelity or
attachment on any trying occasion. in private life
he will be a timorous and treacherous friend.i In public
condut, he will be supple and versatile;' ready to
desert the cause which he had espoused, and to veer
with lhifting every wind of popular favour. In fine,
all becomes unfotnd and hol!ow in that heart where,
instead of regard to the divine approbation, there
reigns the sovereign desire of pleasing men.

IN the'third place, this piflion, when it becomes

predominant, molt commonly defeats its own end,
and deprives men of the-honour which they are so
eager to gain. Without preelrving liberty and in-
dependence, we can never command refpe&. That
servility of spirit which fubjecs us to the opinions of
others, and renders us tributarie .to the world for
the fake of applause, is what all mankind despise.
They look up with reverenice:to one who unawed
by their censures, acts according to his own fenCe of
things, and follows the free impulle of an honourable
mind. But him who hangs totally on their judgment,
they confider as their vassal. They even enjoy a
malignant pleafure-in humbling his.vanity, and with-
holding that praise :which he is seen to court. By
artifice and Ihow he'may rhine for a time in the pub-
lic eye; but it is only.a-long'as he can support the be-
liefofacingfrom prineiple. When theinconlifencies
into which he fallskdetect his chsaacer, his reputati-
on pafles away, like the pageant of a day. No man e-
ver obtained ladsing fame who did hot, on several oc-
cafions, contradi&'the prdjudices of popular opinion.

There

There is no course of behaviour which will at all

times please all men. That which pleases most uni-
verfally, and which only conmmnds durable praise,
is religion and virtue. Sincere piety towards Ged,
kind affecion to men, and fidelity in the discharge
of all the duties of life; a confeience pure and unde-
filed ; a heart firm to jtftice apd to truth, fuperiour
to all terrours that would Ihake, and insensible to all
pleasures that would betray it; unconquerable by the
oppofitioa of the world, and resigned to God alone;
these are the qualities which render a man truly re-
fpeaable and great. Such a charaCer may, in evil
times, incur unjust reproach. But the clouds which
envry or prejudice has gathered around it will gradu-
ally disperse; and its brightness will come forth, in
the end, as the noon day. As Coon as it is through-
ly known, it finds a witnefq inevery breast. It forces
approbation even from the molt degenerate. The
human heart is so formed as to be attuned, if we
may use the expression, to its praise. In tac, it is
this firm and inflexible virtue, this determined regard
to principle beyond all opinion, which has crowned
the characers of such as now hand highest in the
rolls of lafding fame. The truly illustrious are they
who did not court the praise of the world, but who
performed the a&ions which deserved it. They were
perhaps traduced, in their lifetime, by those whom
they opposed. But poflerity has done. them ample
jutlice; and they are the men whom the voice of
ages now concurs in celebrating. 7he memorial of
virtue ii immortal; beraufe it ir approved of God and of
men. When it is present, men take example at it; and
·when it is gone, they deire it. It vweareth a crown,
and triumphetb for ever ; bhaing gotten the v1tory;
firiving for undefiled rewards.

IN the fourth place, as an immoderate paflion for

human praise is c'agerous to virtue, and unfavoura-
bie of true honour, to it is dcftruatve of felf-enjoy-

ment

ment and inward peace. Regard to the praise of God
prescribes a simple and confidant tenour of conduc,
which in all situations is the fame; which engages us
-in no perplexities, and requires no artful ref nemnnt.
'IValking uprightfy, cue walk. Jurely, because we
tread an even and open path. But he who turns aside
from the Rfraight road of duty in order to:gain ap-
plause, involves himself in an intricate labyrinth.
He will be otten.embarraffed concerning the course
which he ought to hold. His mind will be always on
the fireatch. He will be obliged to liftin with anxious
attention to every whisper of the popular.voice. Thi
demands of those mafRers whom he has fibmitted to
serve, will prove frequently contradicory and iocor-
filfent. He has prepared a yoke-foF his neck which
he muff resolve to bear, how' much soever it may
gall him.

The toils of virtue are honourable. The mind is

fuprorted under them by the consciousness of a&ing
a right and becoming part. But the labours to which
he is doomed who is enslaved to the'defire. of praise,
are aggravated by reflexion: both on the uncertainty of
the recompence which he pursues, and on the debase-
ment to which he submits. Conscience will from
time to time remind him of the improper sacrifices
which he has made, and of the forfeiture which he
has incurred 6f the praise of God for the fake of
praise from men. Suppose him to receive all the re-
wards which the mistaken opinion of the world can
betow, its loudest applause will often be 'unable to
drown the upbraidings of an inward voice; and if a
man is reduced to be ashamed of himself, what avails
it him to be-carefed by others ?

But, in truth, thereward towards which he looks

who proposes human praise as his ultimate obje&t,
will be always flying, like a shadow, before him. So
capricious and uncertain, so fickle and mutable is the
favour of the multitude, that it proves the moRt un-

fatisfaaory

satisfactory of all pursuits in which men can be en-
gaged. He who sets his heart onlit, is preparing for
himself perpetualmortifications. If the greatest and
befl can seldom retain it long, we may easily believe
thit from the vain and undeferving it will suddenly
escape. There is no chara&er but what on,'omenfide
is vulnerable by censure. He who lifts himself up to
the obfcrvation and notice of the world is, of alt men,
the least likely to avoid it. For he draws upon him-
self a thouland eves that will narrowly infpet him in
every part. Every opportunity will be wached of
bringing him down to the common level. His errurs
will be more divulged,and his infirmities monola~gni-
fled, than those of others. In proportion rdtis ea-
gernefs tor praise will be his fgfibility tocreproach.
Nor is it reproach alone that-will wound hire. Me
will be astnuch dejected by filknce and neglect. He
puts himrelf under the po'weriof every one to-humble
him, by with-holding expoead praise. Even when
praise is bestowed, he is mrortified by its being either
faint or trite. He pineswhen his reputation flagnates.
The degree of applause to which he has been accuf-
tomed grows insipid ; and to be always praised from
the fame topics, becomes at lafl much the fame with
not being praised at all.

All thele chagrins and disquietudes are happily l-

voided by him who keeps so troublesome a passion
within its due bounds; who is more desirous of be-
ing truly worthy than of being thought so; who pur-
sues the praise of the world with manly temperance,
and in subordination to the praifeofGod. He is nei-
ther made giddy by the intoxicating vapour of ap-
plause, nor humble and catl down by the unmerited
attacks of censure. Relfing on a higher approbation
he enjoys himself in peace, whether human praise
flays with him, or flies away. With me it is amall
thing to be judged of you, or osman's judgment. He that

- dgethM

judgeth me i: the Lord. My witnefr i ir Heaven,
and my record is on high.

Ivs the fifth and las place, the advantages which

redound from the praise of men, are not such as can
bear to be put in competition with those which flow
from ihe praise of God. The former are necefrarily
confined within the verge of our.prefent exiftenct.
The latter follow us beyond the grave, and extend
through all eternity. Not only is the praise of men
limited in its effets to this life, but also to particular
situations of it. In the days of health and ease it
may brighten the funlhine of prosperity. It may
then sooth the ear with pleating accents, and garify
the imagination with fancied triumpls. But when
the difrefsfut season of life arrive, it will be found al-
together hollow and substantial. And surely, the va-
lue of any poffeflion is to be chiefly eflimated by the
relief which it can bring us in the time of our greatet
need. When the mind is cast down with sorrow- and
grief when ficksees spreads its gloom around us, or
death rifes in'awaty profped to ort view, tHi&' opini-
ons and the difcbitrfe''of the world . ;1 apiper 'trifliig -
and insignificant. 'So ,one who l occupied' with
nearer antd more sffc&Seg ' merere, the praise or the
censure of the world will leem like the noise of d4if;
tant voices, in which he has frall concern. But then
is the season when ihe praise of God supports and up-
holds the labouring foul. Brought home to the heart
by the teflimony of a good conscience; and by the
divine Jpirit bearing wuitnef with ur'fpiritr,; it in-
spires fortitude, and produces a peace .which paffrb
unldcrJlandling. '

'At present we behold an irregular and disordered

state of things. Virtue is often de rive of its proper
honours, and vice usurps them in its flead. 'The
charaters of men are mistaken; and ignorance and
folly.difiDfe of human applause. but the day haflens
apace which ihall close this scene of errours, and vin-

dicate

dicate the rights of juffice and truth. Then f/bahb'
rendered to every man according to hir wuerks. Envy
shall no longer have the power of obscuring rnerit,
nor popular prejudices be able to support the unde-
serving. Hidden worth shall be brought to light,, and
secret crimes revealed., Manny who' passed thrtogh.
the world ir! the silent obfcyrity of humble, but fRea-
dy goodness, shall be diflinguifhed as the favourites of
Heaven; whiie the proud, the ambitious, and the-
vain, are left to everl.:ling' difhnnour. The great
Judge hath declared, that ubofrever har been alia~c d
of him and of hit works, of that man /al he be

b alamed

.wvomn be cometh in tbe glory of his Father, witk all the
Acly angels. Every departure from duty fhaUalt the'
period of final distribution terminate in igneminy.
True honour and true virtue shall be seen to coincide ;.
and when all human fame has paffed.away like fnmoke,-
the only praise which shall be for ever remembred
is that divine teflimony, Well done; thou. good and
Jaitbgul servant - enter tbou into the joy of Ihy Lord.

THKIaf arguments clearly ihlaw the ifmportance of

preserving the love of praise under praler fubordinati-
en to the principle of duty. In itfeif, it is an useful
motive to aaiorn; but when allowsd to- ertend its in-
Bilence too far, it corupt'S the whole ch'ara6er, and
produces guilt, difgracc- and misery. To beentirely
deflitute o, it, it a defeEb. To be governed hy it, is
depravity. The proper adjustment of the several
principles-of a6ion in human n.ture is a matter that
deserves our highest attention. For when any one
of them- becomes either too *eak or too frong, it
endanigers both our Virtue and our happiness. Keep
thy heart tteri-jJe with all diligencr; pray that God
would enable thee to keep it with fmicefs; for Out of
the kheart are tihe iyuoof tlife.

SERMON
S. , :, ., - . ....

# SERMON XXII. ECCLESIASTES xii. 8. Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher, all is vanity.

S E R M 0 N XXII.

Ee c LES AST!S. xii, 8.
.anity *f vanities, faith the preacher, all is vanify.

!N O serious matim has been more generally adopt-

Anin ed than that of the text In every age, the
vanity of human life has been the theme of declama-
tiori, and the subjec of complaint. It is a conclufi-
on.in which men of all characers and ranks, the high
and the low, the young and the old, the religious and
the worldly, have more frequently concurred then in
any other. But how jut fover the conclufiin may
be the premises fram.which it is drawn are often false.
For it is prompted-by various motives, and .drived
from very difforent views of things. Sometimes
the. language of the text is afliumed -by a sceptic who
cavils at Providence, and.cenfures.the conftthuions of
ihe:wborld., Sometimes itis- the complaintof'a pee-
rith man who is' drfontented with his station, aind
ruffled by the disappointment of unreasonable hopes.
Sometimes it is t-he fPyle of. thi licentious, when
groaning under-miferies in which their vices have in-
volved them. InveEives againfl the vanity of the
.world which come from any of!thefe quarters de-
serve no regard ; as they are the diclates' f impiety,
of rpleen, or of folly. 'The only cafe in which the
sentiment of the teat claims our attention, is when
uttered, not as an aspersion on Providence, or a re-
.fleaion on human affairs in general; not as the lan-
guage of private, discontent, or the result of guilty
./uflerings -bur'as the fober conclusion of a wife and
good-a~-rconcerning the imperfecion of that happi-

ness

nets which reft lolely on worldly pleasures. Tfiefe,.
in their fairest forrt, are.nbt Chat they seem trobe.
They never bestow that complete fatisfa&tio. which'
they promise; and therefore he a ho looks to nothing.
beyond them fbatl have fe~nucatufeto deplore their
vanity.

Nothing is of higher importancetoids- as men and

as Christians, than to form a proper eftirnate
of human life, without either loading it with imagi-
nary evils,, or expecing from it greater advantages
than it is able to yield: kI fhalf be my bulinefsijie.re--
fore, in this Difceurfe, to distinguish a jufl and "ieljF
gious sense of the vanity of the. world from the onrea-
lonable complaints:of.it which we often hear. I lhall;
endeavour, 1. To shew in what sense -it is true ihat
all earthly pleaftres are vanity. HI. To inquire how
this vanity of the world can be reconciled with the
perfe&ions of its. great Author. .111; To. examine
whether there are not rome real and solid enjoyments,
in human life which fall not under this.general charge
of -vanity. And, IV. To point out-the proper. im-
provement to be made of such a Rate as the life of
man shall appear on the whole to be. . :. -: ..

I, I AM to (hew in: what ferfe it is true that. il

'human pleafurcs-are vanity. This is a topic which,
might be embellished with the pomp of much de-
scription. But I lhall ftudiouly avoid exaggeration,
and only point out. a threefold vanity, in human life
which every impartial observer cannot but admit;
disappointment irn purfuit,4di$atisfaation in enjoyment,
uncertainty in poffcfion. -
. '

First, difappointment.iip pursuit. When we -look

around us on the world, we every where behold a
busy multitude, intent on the-profecution of various
designs which their wants or desires have suggested.
We behold :them employing every :method which
ingenuity can devise, some the patience. of industry,
some the boldmefs of enterplfo¢ others the ddxteriry

.of rfratagen, in order:to.4ompafs their ends. -Ofalthi
incessant Itir and a&ivity, what is the fruit ? In com-
parison of the crowd who have toiled in vain, how
small is the. number.of the, fiuccefsful -? Or ratht'r;
·vhere. is the mnan whb will declare that in every point
he-has completed his plan, and attained his utmost
wish .? No extent of human abilities has been able to
.difcoKer.a.path which, inany ine of life,- leads un-
erringly ,to success. The racre is not; al ways- to the
/wist, nor the battle-to.-the .pirng, sor, richeb t. men of
.indrrftindiig. We may forrz our plans withb the molt
prok)oud fag'city, alnd with the-mofl. vigilan caution
pnay guard against dangers on every fide.. But some
unforeseen 'gccurxence comes across wlii:h baffles our
wifdor, andl lays our labours in the dudt.

W.ere fuih -disappointments confined. to those who

aspire at engrofling the higher departments of life, the
mtisfortune were leAs. The humiliation of ti-e mighty,
and the fall of ambition from its towering height,
Jitte.concern .the bulk of manking. -Thee are7,ob-
je&s on which, as on didtant meteors, they.gaze from
afar, without drawingperfoial irftrcuQion from events
so much above them. But, alas!. when we descend
into the rigions of private life, we find disappointment

tand, blafed hope.equally prevalent there. Neither

-the moderation of our views, nor the juflice of our
.preterfions, .can enoure fuccefa. But time aun chance
.fap~pen to 411. ,Againfl the Rream of events both the
.worthy..and tihe undeferving are obliged to ftrugglcg
;andd both are frequentlyover-bgrn alike by the current.

.Bs4nDEd difappointmeaat inp.,urfiit, diiTatisfaaion

in enjoyment is a farther vanity .to which the human
-state is fubje&. This is the fevredl of all mortifica-
tions,. after having been fucccfsful in the pursuit, to
..be baffled in the eajoyment itself. Yet this is found
to be an 'evil: till more, general than the former.
Some may be :f fortunate.as to attain what they have
:puirfued ; but none .ar. rendered completely happy

by

by what they have attained. Disappointed ihope is
misery ; and yet successful hope is only imperfe&
bliss, Look through all the ranks of mankind. Exa-
mine the condition of thole whoappear most profpe-
rous; and you will find that they are never jufi whtr
they desire to be. If retired, they langutifh for aai-
non; if busy, they complain of fatigue. if ihi'ridd[e
life, they are impatient for diftinaion; if in high fa-
tions, they sigh after freedom and ease. Something is
still wanting to that plentitude of fatitfation which
they expected to acquire. Together wiih every wiss
that is gratified, a new demand arises. -One void
opens in the heart is another is filled. . On wishes;
wishes grow; and to the end, it israthe the .expe&ta
tion of what they have not, than the: erjoyient of
what they have, which occupies and interests the
most successful.

This diffatisfaaion in the midfl of humain pleafiure

springs partly from the natiue .of our enjoyments
themselves, and partly from circurhftances whieh'-cbr-
rupt them. No worldly enjoyments are adequate to
the high desires and powers of an hirdti'al sp-irit.
Fancys paint them at a ditahce.tithi fplenfdidcoloiurs;
but poffellion unveils the falacy. The eagerness ot
paflion bestows upon them at firfi a'brifk and lively
relish. But it is their fate always to pall by familia-
rity, and sometimes to pals from satiety into disgust.
Happy would the poor rian think himself if he could
en'ter on all the treasures of the rich ; arid happy for
a short while he might be. But: before he had long
contemplated and admired his state, his 'peffeions
would seem toleffen, and his cares would grtow. '

Add to the unsatisfying nature of our pleasures the

attending circumfiances which never fail to corrupt
them. For, filch as they are, they are at no time
possessed unmiaed. To human lipait'is not given to
rafte the cup of pure joy. - -When extrerril ,circum-
Fances -show faired to. the world, the:envied man

groanl

roails.in ,private under his own burthen. Some vexa-
tion difqniets, some palfion corrodes him; some distress
either felt or feared, gnaws, like a worm, the root
.of his felicity. When there'is nothing from without
to 'dflturb the prosperous, a secret poison operates
·within. · For wbolidly happiness ever tends to destroy
irfelf, by corropting the heart. It fofterr the loose
aad-lthle violent paflions. It engenders noxious ha-
bits; and taints the mind with a false deicracy, which
aztakes it feel a 'thoiurand unreal evils.'

BwTa pti th'-cafe in the mroftE favourabt light.

Lay afidefron. human pleafares both difappbiritment
,in-purfuit, and' deceitfulrnfs .in enjoymnent ; suppose
.thetn to' be folly attainable, arid completely fatisfac-
tory; fill there remains to be confidered the vanity
of uncertain pofleffionand-fIort duration. Wefe there
.in worldly things any fixed point of security which
.weecduld gain, the mrind. would then - hae forme
'basis on which to reft. luot our condition is such,
that ecry thirig waVers and totters around us:. oa f
ngt.tyfelf of.it-mrt ow ; far thou knoweft nof vtrbdXai
,ay miay bi'rngforh. It is mach if, during its-otirfe,
thou hearest not ,of some what,to disquiet r alarm
.thee. For life never proceeds long in an uniform
train. It is continually varied by unexpe&ed events.
The Ieeds of alteration are every where sown; and
*the funthine ofprofperity cbmnonly accelerates their
gtrwth. If yoiir enjoyments-be numerous, you lie nmbre
.open on different fides ,to be wounded. If you have
-possesed them long, you have gteater cause to dread
an approaclhng-change. By flow degrees prosperity
riles; but rapid is the progress of evil. It requires
no preperation to bring it forward. The edifice which
.it col much time andJlabour to erec, one irnaufpici-
o'us evenr, one fuddcn -blow, can levil with the dut,
Even Liippofing thi' accidents of life to leave us un-
.touched, human bliss mufl still be.tranfitory; for ima
changes of himfe ls No courft .ofinjoynrent can de-

ight

light us long. What amused our youth .lofe&its chum
in maturer age. As years advance, our powers are
blunted, and our plealfrable feelings declire. The
silent lapse of time is eser carrying somewhat from
us, till at length the period comes when all mutl be
swept away. The profpe& of this termination of'
our labours and pursuits is sufficient to mark our state
with vanity. Our days are a hand-breadth, and our
aget is as nothing. Within that little Ipace is all our.
enterprise bounded. We crowd it with toils and
cares, with contention and flrife. We projec great
designs, entertain high hopes, and then leave our.
plans unfinished, and fink into oblivion_

This much let it ftffice to have said concerning

the vanity of the world. That too much has not
been laid, muff appear.,toevery. qne who confiders
how generally mankind lean to the opposite fde; and
hlow often by undue attachment to the present state;
they both feed the mod sinful pafions and pierce Rht.r
selves through with manyforrosuj. Let us proceed to
4nquire,

11. How this vanity of the world can be reconciled

with the perfecions of its divine Author. This en-
quiry involves that'great difficulty which has perplex-
ed the thoughtful and serious in -every age; If God
be good, whence the evil that fills the earth ? In an-
fwer to this interetting queflion, let us observe,

In the firRf place, that the present condition of man

was not his original or primary date. We are intorm-
ed by divine revelation, that it is theconfequence of his
voluntary apoftacy from God and a date of innocence,
By this, his nature was corrupted; his powers,were
enfeebled; and vanity and vexation introduced into
his life. All nature became involved in the condem-
nation of man. The earth was cursed upon his ae-
count, and the whole creation made to groan and
travsail in pain.

How mysterious soever the account of this fall

may

mary -appear to us. many circumfiances concur to
authenticate the fact, and to fhew.that human na-
ture and the human date have undergone an unhappy
change. The belief of this has obtained in aInta l all
nations and religions. It can be traced tlrouio all
the fables of antiquity. An abfcure tradf appears
to have pervaded the whole earth, that man is not
now what he was at firtil; but that, in consequence
ot rome tranfgreflion against his great Lord a Rate of
degradation and exile fuccecded to a condition that
was more flourilhiig and happy. As our nature car-
ries plain marks of perversion and disorder, so the
weordwhich we inhabit bears -the fymptorns of having
been convulsed in all its frame. Naturalists point
out to us every where the traces of some violent
change which it has suffered. Islands torn from the
continent, birning mountains, ihattered precipices,
uninhabitable waltes, give it all the appearance of a
mighty ruin. The physical and moral Ilate-of man
in this world mutually sympathize and correspond.
They indicate not a regular and orderly fruture ei-
ther of matter or of mind, but the remains of some-
what' that once was more fair and magnificent. Let
-s observe, -,

1IN the second place, that at this was not the ori-

ginal, so it.is not intended to be the final flatcof man.
Though in consequence of the abuse of the human
powers, fin and vanity were intrcduced into this re-
gion of the universe, it was not the purpose of the
Creator that the Thould be permitted to reign for ever.
He hath made ample provision for the recovery of
the penitent and faithful part of his fubjeas, by the
merciful undertaking of that great restorer of the
world,, our Lord Jesus Christ. By him life and im-
mortality were both purchased and brought to light.
The new heavens and the new earth are discovered,
wverein dwelletb righteoufneft ; where, through the
divine grace, human nature £hall regain its original

P _ honourt,.

fobnours, and man shall return to be what once he
.Vas in Papadife. Through those high discoveries of
theGofpel, this life appears to good men only in the
light of an intermediate and preparatory slate. Its
.vanity and misery, in a mariner, dilappear. They
have every-reafon to submit without complaint to its
laws, and to wait in patience till the appointed time
.come for the relitutlion of all things. Let us take
.notice.

IN the third place, that, a future slate being mnade

.known, we can account in a satisfying manner for the
present diftefs of human life, without the smallest
impeachment of divine goodness. The sufferings
we here undergo, are converted into dieciplini and
improvement. Thorough the blessing of Heaven,
good is extra&ed from apparent evil; and the very
misery which originated from fin is rendered the means
of correcting sinful paffons, and preparing us for fe-
licity. There is much reason to believe that crea-
tures as imperfet as we are, require some such pre-
ilminary slate of experience before they can recover
iheperfeEtion of their nature. It is in the midit of dif-
appointments and trials that we Learn the insufficiency
of temporal things to happiness, and are thought to
seek it from God and Virtue. By these the violence
of our passions is tamed, and our minds are formed
_to sobriety and refleion. In the varieties of life,
occasioned by the vicilitude of worldly fortune,
we are inured to habits both. of the active and
¢he suffering virtues. I-ow much soever we com-
.ilain of the vanity of the world, sass plainly show,
.that if its vanity were less, it coull not answer the
.purpotc of illutary discipline. Unii)ltisti'rory as it is,
its pleasures arc Iill too apt to corrupt our hearti;.
itlow fatal then mu l the consequences have been, had
ityielded usmore complete enjoyment? If, with all its
troubles, we are in danger of being too much attached
to it, how entirely would it have seduced our affec&ions,
if no troubles had been mingled with its pleasures ?

Thcfe

: These abfervations ferve'in a-great meafire:toob.
·viate the difficulties which arise fromr -the apparent
-vnity of the human state, by fiowing how, -upon the
Christian fvftem, that vanity may be reconciled-with
-the infinite goodness of the Sovereign of the Universe.
The prerent condition of man.is.not that for which-he
,was originally designtd-; it is'not to be his - fidil state;
and during h;s paflage tiirouh fhe'wdrld, the distresses
which he undergoes-are. rendered-m 'dieinal and im-
proving. After having taken. this view of things,
the cloud which, in the preceding part- of the dif-
course, appeared to fit to. thick upon· human life be-
gins to be difipated. -' We now perceive that-man is
not abandoned by his Creator. We disc'ern great
and good designs going on in his behalf. We are al-
lowed to entertain better hopes; and are encouraged
-to enquire, as was proposed for the- . - -

III. HEAD of discourse, Whether there be not in

(he present condition of human life some -real and solid
enjoyments which come not.under: the general charge
of vanity of vanities. The dotArine odfthe text is to
,be confidered as chiefly'addrefled to worldly men.
Them Solomon means to teach that alS expectations
.ofblifs which reft solely on earthly possessions and ple-
fures, shall end in cdiappointmcnt. But surely he did
,iot intend to affeit'tthat there is n'r matfrial -differeiice
-in the pursuits of men, or that no real happiness of
any kind could-now be attained by the virtuous. For
besides the unanswerable objeaioi which this would
form against the divine adminiffration, it would di-
rectly contradict what he elsewhere afrcrts, that while
God giuevti fore travail to the finncr, he giveth to the
maul that i. goad lin his fib't 'turfdomr, and knuwiledgr,
and jsy. t may, it mull indeed be admitted, that
unmixed and complete happiness is unknown on earth.
No regulation ofcondu&tcan altogether prevent pas-
fiond from'difturbing our pea;ce and misfortunes from.
wounding onr heart.- But after this conccflon it.

P z made,

.made, will it follows that there is no object on earth
.which delerves our pursuit, or that all enjoyment be-
.comes contemptible which is not perfect ? Let us
survey our state with an impartial eye, and bejufi
to the various gifts of Heaven. How vain soever this
life, confidered in .ittelf, may be, the comforts, and
hopes of religion are flfficient to give solidity to the
enjoyments of the righteous. In the exercile of good
affecions, and the tcftimopy, of an upright confci,
ence; in the sense of peace and reconciliation with
Cod through the great Redeemer.of Mankind; .in
the.firmconfidence of being ccnduaed throughall
the trials of life by infinite wisdom and goodness;
and in the joyful prpfpec of arriving in the end at
immortal felicity, they possess a happiness which,
descending from a purer and nmoe perfe~t region than
this world, partakes not of its vanity. .

Qefides therenjoyments peculiar to religion, thel are

other pleasures of our present slate which, Thougl of
an inferiour order, must not be overlooked in the eRi-
-mate of human.life. It is necessary to callattention
to these, in order to check.that repiling and untlank-
full spirit to which rnn is ,lwiays too prone, Some
degree of importance muP.be allowed to the comforts
of health, to the inntcqpt ,gratifications of sense, and
to the entertainment affQoded us.by all the beautiful
scenes of nature; omie to the pursuits and amuse-
inents of social life ; .and more to the internal enjoy-
mnents of thought and refleaion, and to the pleafires
.ofaffe jqnate intercourse with those w.hpm we love.
'whfe comforts are often held in too low eflimation,
.merely bacaufe they are ordinary and common; al-
ahough that be the circumftance.which ought, in rea,
ion, to enchance their value. They lie open, inl
some degree, to all; extend through every rat k of
life, and fill up agreeably inany of thote spaces in
our present exiflence, which are not occupied with
Jhigher objecs, or with serious cares

We

* 'earte in- several refpe&s unjtft to Providence in
the computation of our pleasures and our pains. We
number the hours which are spent in diftre(s or sorrow'
but we forget those which have paired away, it not
in high enjoyment, yet in the midR of those gentle
faisfa&ions, and placed emotions, which make life
glidefmoothly along. We complain of the frequent diS-
appointments which we susser in our pursuits. But wO?
recolle& not that it is in'pura'it, mote than in attairi-
ment, that our pleasure now consists. In the prefenti
fate of human nature, man derives more enjoyment
from the exertion of his a&ive powers in the midst
of toils and efforts, than he could receive from a ftRt.
and uniform poffslion of'the obje& which he frives
to gain. The solace of the mind underall its labours,-
is hope; and there are few situations which entirely
exclude it. Forms of expeced blips are often gleam-
ing upon UP through a cloud, to revive and exhilarate
the fioft distressed. If pains be scattered through.
all the conditions of life, so also are pleasures. Hip--
piness; as fir as life affords it, can be engroffed'be
no rank of men to the exclusion of the reft ; on'the
contrary, it is of en found where, at firfl view, it'
would have been least expeaed. When the human
condition appears mofa depressed, the feelirrgs ofmen,
through the gracious appointment of Providence, *d-
jinft themfnelves wnderfully to their state, and ent-
ble them to extraa fatisfadion from sources that are
totally unknow to others. Were the great body 6f
men fairly to compute the hours which they'pafs in
care, and even with Come degree of pleafure,-ihey
wcuif be found far to exceed the number'of those
which are spent. in absolute pain either of body or
.mind.-But in order to make alstill more acctiate
estimation of the degree of fatisfacion which, in the
midst of earthly vanity, man is permitted to enjoy,
the three following observations claim our attention.

TnH first is, that many of the evils which occasion

P 3 oar

our complaints of the world, are wlhojly- imagnary.
They derive their exiftance from fancy an4d.;hour,
and childish fubjeaion .t', he opinions. of others.
The distress vhich they produce, I admit, is real .
but its re)lity arises not.tromrn the nature of things.
but from that disorder of imagination. which-a small
measure of. refle'ion might reaify. n' proof of
this we may observe, that the perfrops wha live moss
simply, and follobwthe d;Eates of plain una4uleterat
nattre, are mofl exempted from tbis cears of evjl,-
It is among the higherranks of mankind that theylhief-
ly abound; where fantaaic refinements, fickly:delicacy,
and eager.emulation, opena.tlhofand sources 9f .vexti
or peculiar to themselves. Life.cannot but prove vain
to them who assec a dilrelifh of every pleasure that is
not both exquisite and new; who miafure enjoyment,
not by their own felingn,.but bythe flandard of,fathion.
who think themfeh'es miferabhe if others do not admire
their state. It is not from wants or sorrows that their
complaints arie . but, though it may appeara paradox,
from too much freedom from sorrow and want; from-
the languor of vacant life, and the irritation occasioned
by thoe ftagnatinghumours which eafeand indulgence
.have bred within them. In their cafe,. therefore, it is
not.their-minds, which is to be accused.: Fancy has
raifed.up the fpetrefs which bauot-them.!.Fancy
has fprmed the-cloud-wh:'ch hangs over their. life. Did-
they allow the light of reafob to break-forth, the
fpeclres would vanifb, and the .loud be difpelHed.

Tah , second obferVytion on this head is, that of

tbhfe .evi!s which may be called' real, because. they
owe not their exifenc.-to fancy, nor can be removed
by,re&ifying opinion, a great.Froportion is brought
. upon ,us by. our own mifcondu&. -cDifeafi,-poverty,
disappointment and shame. are. far' fromnacie, in
every instance the unavoidablc-d4oont Cf men. They
are much more frequently the offsprirn'of their own
njfgitided choice. Intcmperan~e jengerndeft disease,

foth

sloth produces poverty, pride creates disappointments,
and dishonesty exposes to shame. The ungoverned
pafflons of men betray them into a thoufand:follies;
their follies into crimes 1 and their crimes intoimif-
fortunes. Yet nothing is more common than ser
fnch as have been the authors of their own omiery,
to make loud complaints of the hard fate of man,
*and to take revenge upon the human condition by
arraigning its supposed vanity. Tke foolifntf/ of
* an firfl percrtttb b is way, and then bit heart fretteth
Fsainfti the Lord.
'-I do not, however maintain that it is within our
power to be altogether free of those felf-procured
evils. For perfeCtion of any kind is beyond the reaeh
of man. Whee is the wisdom that never errs-?
\' here the ju ( man that offendeth not ? Neverthe-
lcts, much is here left to ourselves; and, imperfct
as we are, the consequences of right or'of'wrong con-
duct make a wide difference in the happinels of men.
Experience every dAy shows that a found, a well-
governed, and virtuous mind contributes greatly to
finooth the path ot life; and that %wisdom xcelletk
folly a far as light excelletb darkerefs. Thbe way of
the wicked is as darkness ; they know not at what they
flumble. But -the righteoutnef of the perfet hall di-
re f his ;woay ; and be that walketb uprightly waJlk}lA
-surely. The tendency of the one is towards a plain
and safe reg'on. The course of the other leads him
amidst snares and precipices. The one occafionaly
may, the other rnavoidably mull, incur much trou-
ble. Let us not then confound, under one general
charge, those evils of the world which belonig to the
lot of humanity, and'thofe which, through divine
affitance, a wife and good man may, in a great mea-
sure, escape.

THE third observation which I make refpe&s those

evils which are both real and unavoidable; from
which nekher wisdom nor qoodnef4 can procure our -

P 4 exemptiom.

.exemption. Under thee thiscomfert remnains, thit
if they cannot be prevented, there are means, howl
ever, by which they may be much allt viated. Reli-
gion is the great principle which acs, under such
circumfiances, as the correcive of human vanity.
It inspires fortitude, supports patience, and by its
profpets and promises darts a cheering ray into the
darkest shade of human life.- If it cannot lecure the
virtuous from difsppointment in their pursuits, it
forms them to such a temper as renders their difap-
poiniments more light and easy than those of other
men. If it does not banish difatisfaiion from their
worldly plealures, it confers spiritual pleafurts in their
fead, If it ensures them not the poffeflion, of
what they love, it furnifbes comfort under the lbss.
As far as it eftahifhes a contented frame of mind,
it supplies the want of all that worldly men covet to
poffers. Compare the behavour of the sensual ands
corrupted with that of the upright and holy, when
both are feeling the effeOcs of human vanity, and:
the difference of their situation will be manifest.
Among the former you are like to find a qtrereloas
and dejeaed, among the latter, a co.mpoled and man-
ly spirit. The lamentations of the one excite a mix-
ture of piety and contempt; while the dignity which
the other maintain in difirefs command repe&.- The
sufferings of the former fettle into a pevifh and fret-
ful difpofitien; tbofe of the latter soften the temper
and improve the heart. These consequences, extend
so far as to give ground for affrting, -that a good
man enjoys more happiness in the course of a seem-
ingly unprofperious life, than a bad man does in the
midst of afluence and luxury. What a conspicuous
proof of this is afforded by the-Apoftle Paul', who-
from the very dept of affliion could fend forth fush a
triumphant voice as proclaims- the complete vicory
which he- had gained over the evils of life ? Troubled
en very Jfde, Jet not dilireed ;. perplxed, but not in

defparb;

dk/pair; persecuted, but not jsrfaken; caf doVwn, but
not deJ/oyend. For though our,ovtward man perib, oar
inward man is renewed, day by day. Such, though
perhaps in an interiuuo degree, will be the influence
of a genuine religious principle upon all true Chris-
tians. It begins to perform that office to them here,
which hereafter it will more completely aifcharge,
of wiping a-wua th e tears from their eyts.

Su CH, upon the whole, is the etlimate which we

are to form of human life. Much vanity will always
belong to it, though the degree of its vanity will
depend, in a great mealure, on our own charac-
ter and condut. To the .vicious, it presents nothing
but a continued scene of difappointmcnt and diffatil-
faction. To the good, it is a mixed ltate of things;
where many real comforts may be enjoyed ; where
many resources under trouble may be obtained; but
where trouble, in one form or other,. is to be expeaed
as the'lot of man. From this view of human life,

THE first practical conclusion which we are to

draw is, that it highly concerns us not to be unreason-
able in our expe&ations of worldly felicity. Let us
always remember where- we are; from what cafues
the human Hlate has bccomte subjea to depreflion;
and u"on what accounts it mutt remain under its pre-
ient law. Suchi is the infatuation of felf-love, that
though in the general docrine of the vanity of th'
world all men agree, yet almost every one flatters
himenilfthat his own cafe is to be an exception from
the common lure. He refts on expecations which
he thinks cannot fail him ; and though the preftnt be
n or altogethl r-according to his wish, yet with the'con-
fidence of certain hope he anticipates fulurity. Hence
the anguish of disappointment fills the wcild ; and
evils, which are of themfilves luffiicently severe,
cpprefs with double force the unprepared' and,
unfufpetirg mind. Nothing therefore is of greater
copfequence to our prace, than to have alxwavheFeire
our eyes furh views of the world as shall prevent our

P 5 expecing

-expe'ting more from it than it is deflined to afford:
We dellroy our joys by devouring them before-hand'
with too eager expeaations. We ruin'the harpinefws
of life when we attempt to raise it too high, 'A tole-
rable and conifortable state is all that we can propose'
to ourselves on earth. Peace and contentnent, rot'
bliss nor transport, is ihe full Fortion of ioan. Perfet'
joy is reserved for heavern.'

Bt-T while we repress too sanguine hopes formed

upon human life, let us, in the lecond'place, guard
against the other extreme of repining and d.icontent.'
Enough has been already said to shew, that notwith-
standing the vanity of-the world, a cotfiderabje de-
gree of comfort is attainabte in the present. slate.
Let the recollckion of this serve to reconcile us to
our condition, and to check the arrogance of com-
plaints and murmcrs -What art thou, O son of man I
who having sprung' but yetlerday out of the dufti,
dareft to lift up thy voice againfl thy Makcr, and to
araign his providence, becaure all things are not order-
ed according to thy with? -What title haft thou to
find fault with the older of the universe, whoee lot is'
so much beyond what thy virtue or merit gave thee
ground to claim ? Is it nothing to thee tor have been
introduced into this magnificent worl ; to have' been
adrnitted as a fpe&ator of the divine wisdom and
w(rks; and to have had access to al the comforts
which nature, with a bountiful hand,- has toured
forth arcund thee ? Are all the hours foigotten which
thcu .hat passed in cafe, in complacency, or joy ? Is
it a fiall favour in thy eyes, that the hand of di-
vine mercy has been stretched forth to aid thee, and,
if thou rejft not its proffered afiftance, is ready to
cordiut thee into a happier state of exifence ?
W-hen thou comparedl thy condition with thy desert,
blush,-2nd be aflhared bs thy omrplaints. Be silent,
be grateful, and adore Receive with th'ankfdifnieff
the blefllngs which are afioved thee:. ' Revere that

goverrnmeit

"~~ ~ :,
-!~

government which at present refeues thee more. Reft
in this concluiion, that though there be evils in the
world,y its Creator is wife and good, and has been
bountiful to thee.

IN the the third place, the view which we have

taken of human life should naturally dire& us to such
purfiits as may have modl influence for correcing
its vanity. There are two great lines of condu&c
which offer themselves toour choice. The one leads
towards the goods of the mind; the other towards
those of fortune. The former, which is adopted
only by the few, engages us chiefly in forming our
principles regulating our dispositions, improveiug all
our inward powers. The latter, which in everyage
has been followed by the-multitude, points at no other
end but attaining theconveniencies and pleasures ofex-
ternal life. It is obvious that, in this last pursuit,
the vanity. of the wcrld will encounter us at every
flep. For this is the region in which it reigns, and
where it chiefly cifplays its power. At the fame
time, to lay the world totally out of view is a vain
attempt. The numberless ties by which we are con-
neted with external things, put it out of our power
to behold them with indifference. But though we
cannot wrap ourselves up entirely iu the care of the
mind, yet the, more we make its welfare our chief.
objec, the nearer Fiall we approach to that happy
independence on the world which places us beyond,
the reach of fufferirrg from its vanity,

That dicipline,. therefore, which cctreas the Va-

gernefs of worldly pafions which fortifies the heart
with virtuous principles, which enlightens the mind
with useful knowledge, and furnishes to it matter of-
enjoyment from within itself, is of more consequence
to real fe!city, than all the provision which we can
make of the goods of fortune. To this let us bend.
our chief attention. Let us kelp the heart with. all'
diligance, jeeing out of it are tbr itfues of life. Let

us

us account our mind the most important provirice
which is committed to our care; and if we cannot
rule fortune, study at lealt to rule oursel'ves. Let us
purpose for our objet, not worldly fui'ccefs, whicli
it depends no! on us to obtain , but tfat upright and
hoctrurable difcharee of our duty in every conjun&ture,
which through thedivine afiflarrce% is always withirt
our power, Let our happincfe be fought where
etr proper prase is foind ; and that be accounted
our only real evil, which is the evil of our nature;
not that, which is either the appointment of Provi-
dence, or which arises from the evil es otlers.

BuOT in order to carry on wilb frccefs this.tationat

and manly phn of condu&, it is neceltaty in the [aft
place, that to moral, we join religions discipline,
Under the prerent imperfetcon of our minds, ard
amidst the frequent shocks which we receive from
human evils, much do we Rland in need of every afi
fiftance for furporting our constancy. Of all aififtance
to wh:ch we can have recourse, noire is so powerful as
what may be derived from the principles of the
ChrifRian faith. He who builds on ary other foun-
dation will find, in the day of trial, that he had built
his house on the sand. Man is formed by his nature
to look up to a ftperiour Being, and to lean upon a
ftrength'that is greaterthan his own. All the confi-
derations which we can offer for conferming his mind,
presuppose this resource, and drive from it their
principle efficacy.

Never then let us !oose fight of thoee great obje&s

which religion brings. under our view, if we' hope to
Iftand firm and ere& amidst the dangers and'dififrefles
of our present fRate L,?t us cultivate all that conneti-
on with the great Father of Spirits which'6ur con-
dition admits ; by biety and prayer; by dependence
on his aid, and truss in his promises; by a devout
fence of his pre'ence, and i continual endeavour to ac-
quire his grace and favour. Let us, with hnmnle

faith

# SERMON XXIII. PSALM xxiii. 4. Yea thought I walked through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

faith ind reverence, commit ourfelvet to the blessed
Redeemer of the world ; encouraged by the difcove-
ries which he has made to us of the divine mercy,
and by the hopes which ie has afforded us of being
raised to a nob:er and happier Ration in the kingdorm
'of God. So hall virtue grounded upon piety, attaia
its full ffrength. Inspired with a religiousfpirit, aia
guided by ratiorrml principles, we shall be enabled
to hold a steady course through this mixed region of
pleasure and p.in, of hopes and fears; until the pe-
riod arive when that cloud which the present vanity
of the world throws over human affairs shall entirely
disappear, and eternal light be diffused over all the
works and ways of God.
S E R M 0 N XXIII

PSALM xxiii. 4.
rea thought I wviked through the valley of the .badgwv

of' leath, I willfear no evil; for thou art with me
thy rod and thy flaff they comfort me.
T HIS Palm exhibits the pleasing piture of a

pious man rejoicing in the goodness of Heaven.

He looks around him on his estate, and his heart
overflows with gratitude. When he reviews the pas
part of his life, he crltemplates God as bisfbepherd
woha hath made him lie dwivan. gfeen pafluret, and led
him hejide the Afill waters. When he confiders the
present, he heholds his divine benefactor preparing a
table /or bim in the presence of his enemies, anlm making
his cup run over. When he looks forward to the fu-
ture, he confides in the fame goodeft, as continuing to
fllcw; him all the days of hit life, and bringing bim t,

djuel

dwellin the house of the Lord for ever ,-_ Anid;l theme
images of tranquillity and happiness, one objec pre-
sents itsel, which is sufficient co overcall the minds
and- to damp the joy of the greatef part of men;
that is, the approach of death. But on the Psalmist
it produced nd such effet. With perfect composure
and serenity he looks forward to the time when he is
to pass through the valley of theJhudow of death.
The profpec:, instead of dejeting hml, appears to
heighten his triumph, by that fccarity which the pre-
fence of his almighty guardian afforded him. Iwill
fear no evil, for thou art <with me: and pursuing the
allulion with;which he had begun, exults its the hope
that the shepherd who had hitherto conduted him
would fuppcrt him with his J/af6 while he passed
thrcugh that dark and perilous region, and with his
rod, or pafloral crook, would guard him from every
danger.

Such is the happy diflintion which good men en-

joy, in a situation the most formidable to human na-
ture. That threatening fpeare which appalls others,
carries no terrour to them. While worldly men are
justly said througb fear of deat/ to be air thbir life-time
/ubfje7 to bondage, to the righteous only it belongs to
look on daeth, and Imile. Since then it is in the
power of religion to confer upon us so high a privi-
ledge, let us adventure to contemplate iteadily this
late foe whom we must all encounter. Let u& con-
fider what death is in itself and by what means good
men are enabled to meet it with fortitude. Though
the-fiubje& may be reckoned gloomy, it must be ad-
mitted to be interelling. The close of life is a solemn
and important event, to which every wife man will
have regard in the general tenour of his condu&.
No one can a& his part with propriety, v ho confiders
not how it is to terminate ; and to exclude.from our
thoughts what we cannot prevent from aaually ta-
king place, is the refuge of none but the. timorous

and

and-weak. We are more encouraged to enter on this
meditation by reflecting on the Ifuprriour advantages
which, as Christians, we enjoy for, overcoming the
fear of death, beyond that holy man whose senti-
ment is new before us. Those great objets, which
he beheld through the medium of types and figures,
are clearly revealed to us. That dispensation of grace,
which in his days began to open, is, now completed.
That life add immorality, which then only dawned
on the world, have now shone forth. with full light
and splendour,

DEATH may be confideredin three views; as the'

separation of the four from the body; as the couclu-
sion of the present life; as the entrance into a new
state of exiflcrice. In the first view, it is regarded:
as painful and agonizi g. In the second, it is melan-
choly and deje&ing In the third: t is awful and'alar-
mning. One of the first enquiries which occursconcer-
ning it is, for what it was clothed with all. there ter-
rours'.? Why under the governmen of a gracious. Be-
ig, 'the termination of life was loaded' with so much
sorrow and difltefs ? Wye kNw that, in confequtice
of tHe fall, death. was infliaed as punishment upop
the huinan race. But no urntceffary severities are
ever exercised by God; and the wisdom and good-
ness of the divine planr will be much illu'frated, by
observing th't all the formidable circumflances-which
attend death are, in the present situation of mankind4
abiolutely requisite to the proper government of tha.
world. The terrours- of death are, in fat, the
great guardians of, life. , They excite in every indi-
vidual that difire of felf-prefervation, which. is na-
tures fiTfl law. .They reconcile him to bearing thk
diflrefTes of life with patience. They prompt himn
to undergo its useful and ;necessary labours with ala-
crity ; and they restrain him from many of those evil
courses by which hisfafety would beendangered. While
they are i so man. refpeis, beneficial to the indivi-

dual,

dual, they are at the fame time, the safeguard of lo-
ciety. If death werenot- dreaded and abhorred as
it is by men, no public order could bepretlerved in
the world. The sword of authority were lifted up
in vain. The fanEions of law'weuld lose their cf-
set. The fcaffeld and the executioner would be de-
rided; and the violent left to trample unrestrained
on the rights of the peaceful. If,notwithflanding the
-refiaints which felt-prefervation irnpofes, society is
lo often difturbedby the crimes of the a icked, whar'a
sc'ene of coi;fulion would it become, if capital pu-
nifhments, u hich are the last resource of government,
were of no influence to deter offenders ?

For such importance ends the conclurfon of life

has, by the appointment of Providence, been made
an awtul object. The valley ofdeath has been plant-
ed with terrours to the apprehension of men. Here,
as in many other instances, what seemed at first to
arraign the goodners of the Deity, is upon enquiry
foundto confirm it. But though, for the moit fiautary
purpofer, it was requifitethat the fear of death should
be a powerful prii:ciple in human nature, yet, like
our other fropenfities, it is apt, when left to itself,
to run into excels. Over many it ulurps such an
ascendant as to debase their charaaer, andto defend
the chief ends of living. - To preserve it within such
bounds that it shall not internpt us in performing the
proper offices and duties of life, is the diftin&ion of
the brave man above the coward; and to surmount
it in such a degree that is lhall not, even in near
profpet, dejec our spirit, cr trouble our peace, is
the great preference which virtue enjoys above guilt.
It has been the itudy of the wife and reflecing, in
every age, to attain this tleadinefs of mind. Philo-
sophy pursued it as its chief object and profetfed
that the great end of its discipline was, to enable its
votaries to conquer the fear of death. Let us then,
belore M e have recourse to the more powerful aid of

religion,

getSed on this obje&. Her afilance may, perhaps,
be not entirely despicable; and though the armour
which she offers be not completely of proof, it mnay
serve, however, to turn aside, or to blunt lome of
the ihafts which are aimed againtl us by thelaft
foe.

AFTER. this manner she may be supposed to ad-

dress mankind, in order to reconfile them to their
fate.-Children of men ! it is well known to you
that you are a mortal race. Death is the law of your
nature, the tribute of your being, the debt which
all are bound to pay. On there terms you re-
ceived life, that you should be ready to'give it up
when Proviedence. calls you-to make room for others,
who in like manner, when their time is come, lhall
fol[ow. you. He who is unwilling to submit to death
when heaven decrees it, deserves not to have lived.
You might as reasonably complain that you did not
live before the time appointed for your. ooming into
the world, as lament that you are not to live longer
when the period of your quitting itis arived, What
divine Providence hath made necessary, human pru-
dence ought to comply.with chearfally: Submit at
any rate you muf ; and is it not much better to fol-
low of your own accord, than to be dragged relu&-
antly, and by force ? What privilege have you to
plead, or what reason to urge, why you should pof-
fess an exemption from the common doom ? All things
aToundyou are mortal and peifhiing. Cities, flates,
and empires have their periods set. - The proudell
monuments of human art moulder into dulf. Even
the works of nature wax old and decay. In the
midif of this nniverfal tendency to change, could you
expet that to your frame alone a permanent duration
should be given ?All who have gone bfore you have
lubmitted to the ifrokeof death. All who are to
come aoter you ihall undergo the fame fate. The

great

great and the good, the prince and the pea'ant, tne
renowned and the obscure, travel -alike the road
which leads to the grave. At the moment when yotr
expire, thousands throughout the world thall, together
with you, be yielding up their breath. Can that be
held a great calamity which is common to you with
every thing that lives on earth ; which is an event as
'much'according to the coo fe of nature as it is that
leaves should fall in autumn, or the fruit fhoule drop
from the tree when it is fully ripe ?

The pain of death cannot be very long, and is pro-

bably less revere than what you have at other times
experienced. The pomp of death is more terrifying
than death itself. It is to the weakness ot imagina-
tion that it owes itschief power of dejecing your fpi-
rits; for when the force of the mind is rouzed, there
is almost no passion in tur nature but what has
thowed itself able to overcome the -fear of death.
Honour has defied death ; o6ve has dfpifed it ; fiam
has rufbad upon it ; revenge has disregarded it ; grief
a thousand times has wished for it. Is it not strange
that reaforn and virtue connot give yean trength to
surmount that fear, which, evin in feeble minds, so
manny paflionshave conquered ? What inconfifercy
is theze in complaining fe much of the evils of life,
and being at the lame time To afraid of what is to
terminate them all ? Who can tell whether his future
life might not teem with disasters and miseries, as&
yet unknown, were it to be prelonged accordingto his
wish ? At any rate, is it desirable. to draw life out to
the last dregs, and to wait till old age pour upon
you its whol tore 'of diseases and sorrows ? You la-
ment that you are to de ; but did you view your si-
tuation properly, you would have much greater cause
to lament if you were chained to this life for two or
threehundred years,'without polTibility ot release.
Expe& therefore calmly that which is natural in It-
self, and which must be fit, bccaufe it is the appoirnt-

ment

ment of--hgavet '- Perform your duty as a good sub-
je.*of thef'ieity, duringrhe tine alotted you; and
rejoice that a period is fixed for your dismission froirn
the present warfare. Remember that the flavifli dread
of death-deftroys all the comfort of that life which
you seek to preserve. Better to undergo the flirke
of death at once, than to live in perpetual misery
from the.fear of dying. ';' -

-SUCH difcourfesas there are fpecons at leafl, and
plaufibte. The arguments ard not without strength,
and ought to produce some effe& on a confideFate re-
flecing mind. 'But it is to be ftifpe&ed that their
effe& will be chiefly feltwhen the mrndqis cahrm and at
ease ; rather when speculating upon death at a distance,
than when beholding it at hand. When the critical mo-
ment arives which places the anxio'us, trembling foul:
on 'the.borders of an unknown world, reasonings
drawn- from neceffity-and propriety 'will be of 'small
avail to quiet its alarms. I n order to afford relief,
.you muRt.give it hope ; you muff promise it proteai-
on; you mufl offer somewhat on which it can lay
hold for support, amidst the.ftruggles of labouring na-
tare; Hence the great importance of those difcove-
-Fies which revelation has made, and of those princi-
.ples withr which it fotifies the heart. -To the confi-
.eration of these leta-s next proceed, and obferwe
their fupetiour efficaty; for surmounting the fear of
death. In order to jdge of their importance, it will be
.proper to take a view of death in each of those lights
in which it appears mnf- so midable to mankind.

IT dia3t be cofidered, first, as the termination of

.our,~eient existence ; the final period of all its joys
Md hopes, The concluding scene of any course of
aaion in: which, we have been engaged with pleasure.
- eventhe last fightof obje&s uhich we have beenm
longaccuflomed to behold, seldom fails of friking
the mind with painful regret. How many circum-

~,.-
. . . t~ances.

fiances will concur to heighten that regret, wIst tri.-
time comes of our bidding an eternal idieu to the
light of day; to every puriuit which had- occupied.
our attention as citizens of the world ; and to every
friend and relation who had attrched orrhearts?'
How dejecing is the thought to. the greatet part of:
rmen, that the fun ihall rife, and the seasons- fhalli
return to others, but no more to them; and that
while their neighbourn are engaged in the ufual'affairs
of life, they flall be Ihut up in & dark and lonetome
mansion, forgotten, and clt- off' from among' men,
as though they had never been I .I/faid, in the eating
off of my day, I /ball go to tbegater c es. ie. grave. I
am deprived of the refidu of my yarr. I /ball not f/
the Lard again in the-land as t. living.. IJfall blkld
man no more with the inhabit;ma of tbw woar/l

Let us now obfervthat the dejtaionintwvh'ich we

are apt to frnk at such aj.wure, will'bear proportioa
to the degree of our attachment-to the objets whichlwe
.leave, and to the importance ot thofefirteurces which
remain with us when they are gone. He wlio.is taking.
farewel of a country through which he had travelled
.with fatisfa&ion, and he who is driventrom his native
.land,with which he RadcormeEed every idea of fettle-
ment and comfort will lave very differentfeelings at
the time of departure.. Such is the difference which, at
the hour of dleath, takes place between the- riahtcous
and the ungodly. The latrer knows nothingL higher or
better than the prefen. slate ofexiftence. His interefis,
his pleasures, his expecations, all centered here. He
lived rolely for the enjoyments of this world. Dreadful,
therefore, and infuppoltable must be that event winch
separates him from there for ever. Whereas the
culture of religion had previornfly formed the mind of
a Chril}ian for a calm and cafy transition from this
life. It had inftruEted him in the proper. efitimate
of sublunary happiness. It had let higher profpesa.
before i.n. It had formed him io a more refined

talte

talte of enjoyment than what the co.nmon round of
worldly amusements could gratify. It gave him con-
ne&ions and alliances with spiritual objt cs, which
are unknown to the men of the world. Hence,
though he be attached to life by the natural feelings
of humanity, he is railed above the weak and unman-
ly reg:et of parting with it, He knew- that is was
intended as proparatory only to a succeeding slate.
As Jon as the season of preparation should be finish-
adi, 'he epeaed a removal; and when Providence
gives the signal, he bids adieu to the world with cbm-
~ofld resolution, and undiflurbed heart. Whatthough
death interrupt him in the middle of his designs,
and break off the plansw.hich he had formed of be-
ing ufef(u to his family and the world ? Ail these he
leaves with tranquility in the hands of that Providence
to which he has ever been accustomed to look up with
resignation; which governed the world wifely and
graciously before he exifled; 'and which he knows
will continue to govern it with equal wisdom -and
benignity. wheoi he fialL be in it no more. The time
of his departure was not left to hlsown choice; but
lbe believesit to be-the mo~ll ropet, bedufe it is the
time chosen by Him who cannot er.' Honourable age
is npt -that whi¢h Jiandtb. in tengih of trme, nsr
that 'uhich irmnafitred by' nutnter ofytar. Biut wis-
dom is the grey hair lo Jan ;. and- an unspotted life is
sid age. When .he beholds his friends and relations
mourning .around him,-his:hea~ nay melt, but will.
not be overpowered; for it is relieved by the- thought
that- he is'-bidding'them 'only a re-nporary, not an
eternal farewel. He commends them, in the mean
time, to the blefling of that God whom hehas served;
«!ad while he is parting from them, he hears a voice
which sooths his spirit with thofl comforting words,
Leave thy fatherlefi children; I will prejrrve tfem
liae ;. and lek try sidoza trjij in me.

IVT d¢*th is more than the conclusion of human
-. '. I;fe.

life. It is the gate which, at the fame time
that is cholen on this world, opens:-into etetni'
*ty. Under this view, it .has .often . been the
subjea of terrour to the lerious and reflecting. The
*transition they were about to make was awful. Be-
fore them lay a val undiscovered region, from whose
bounds no traveller ever.returned tc, bring informali-
,on of the reception which he found, or of the obje._
which he met, with there. The fils -conception
Wvhich suggests itself is, that the disembodied Ipivrt
is to appear before its Creator, who is then to aci
as its judge. The :triC inquisition which it-muf:
undergo, the impartial doom.which it muRf hear pro.
nounccd, and the un-alterable slate to which it shall
be assigned, are awful forms.rifing:bef6re the-imagi-
nation. They are ideas which confoience forces upon
all. Mankind can neither avoid coafidering them-
ielves as' accountable creatures, -nio avoid viewing
..eath as the season when.their.aecountis to be given.
Such a fentimenr is .with noft-'men:the fitrce Of
dread; with all men, of.anxiety... Toia cerftin de-
.gree a good conscience will convey ' comfort. The
rele&ion on a ,w.ell-@ent life, makes a ,wide difference
between the laftfmoments of the rightdous and the
,inner. But- wlfe confchemce is so clear asato strike
him with no remorse:?' Whofe'.righteunfnefs' i'fo'tii-
-blemifled as to abide the scrutiny of the great' searcher
of hearts ? Who dares reit. his.everlafting fate upon
his perse& confornity.to the.rule of duty throughout
the whole of his life.. . . . ;:

WVe mufl not judge ofthe sentiments ofmeniat'the

approach of death by their ordinary train of thought
in the days of health and ease. .Their views of moa
ral condu& are then, soo generally, superficial; Ifight
.excuses satisfy their minds, and the avocations of life
prevent their attention from dwelling long on disagree;-
able fubjeas. But when altogether withdraw from
.the affairs of 4he world, they arelcft to- their reflec-

tion.

.tions on paft.eondu&c; with their spirits enfeebled by
diLfafe, and their minds impressed with the terrqurs
of an invisible region; the mofl resolute are apt to
despond, and even the virtuous are in danger of fink-
ing under the remembrance of their errours and frail-
ties. The trembling mind carts every where around
an anxious exploring eye after.any power that can
.uphold, any mercy, that will fiiek and save it. And:
accordingly we fee how eagetly every device has
been embraced which fupesftitioncould invent in vari-
ous countries, for quieting the alarms of the depart-
ing spirit.

Hiere appears the great importance of those disco-

veries which Christianity .has made concerning the
government of the nniverfe; It dilplays the enfignr
of grace and clemency;: t reveals the Almighty not
as a creator only.and a judge but as a compaflionate
parent, who known eurfra~, who remember ~se are
dufi, w}ho pities us as a. father pisieth his ebiliren ; and
swith whom there is Jorgi-ene/r, that he may be loved
as well as feared. There general views, low-
ever, of the divine administration,. would not have
been fuflicient to give. full relief, if they had not been
confirmed by certain decisive faats, to which' the
mind can appeal amid(l all its doubts and fears. To
such faas the Gospel holds forth to us, particularly
adapted .to the fiuation of human nature in its grea-
test extremity; the atonement,.and the interceffiow
of Christ. There! is no centinment mpre' natural 'to
men than this, that guilt muff be expiatedby fuafer.
ing. All government is founded on the principle,
that public juilice requires compensation for crimes; .
and all religions proceed upon the belief, that, in order
to the pardon of the finner, atonement mud be made
to thejultice of heaven. Hence the endless variety of
facraficcs, viaims, and expiations which have filled
the earth. The great sacrifice which our Redeemer
offered for guilt, coincides with these natural senti-
ments of mankind in giving cafe to .he heart. It

i:ow8

shows us the forfeitof guilt paid by a divine perfoa-
agein our behalf; and allows us to look up to the!
Governour of the world, as mercyful to the guilty in
consistency with jutiice and order. But till some
anxiety might remain concerning the extension of
that mercy to our own cafe in particular. An invifa-
ble sovereign is an awful idea; almighty, unkown
power is always formidable, and would be ready to
overwhelm the spirit of the feeble, were not an inter-
ceffor with that sovcreign revealed. This intercessor'
is one who lived and aaed in our own nature; who
not only knows but who experienced our frailty;
who has all the feelings of a brother for human intir-
mity and distress ; who himfelt passed through that'
valiy of the jbadsw of death which is now opening .on
us; to whose powerful mediation with hit fathermwe
have every encouragement to commit the cha~ge of
our departing fpirit.-Such is t-he provision which
Clrifianity has made for comforting the lat hours
of man. The atonement, and the iritercefllion of
ChrifL, are the refuse of the penitent finner, and the
consolation of the faint. By their means the throne
of the universe is encircled with -mercy. The cloud'
which hung over the invifitte world begins to be dif--
perfed; and hope brightens through the gloom.-

BuT what completes the triumph of good men.

over death is, the profpee ofeternal felicity. This
was the great objec after which all nations have
sighed, as the only complete remedy both of the mi-
series of life and the fears of death. On this, the
learned and the ignorant, the civilized and the savage
tribes of mankind bent their longing eyes; eagerly'
grasping at every argument, and fondly indulging
every hope, that could promnfe them a propituous
Deity, and the prolongation of existence in a-happier
tate. But beyond wishes and feeble expe&ations,the
light of natue could hardly-reach. Even the moRt
cultivated, philosophical mind was, at the our of

dissolution,

di'ssolution, left in painful suspense. Chriftanity has
put an end to all hesitation and doubt on this impor-
tant subjet. It has drawn aside the veil through
which reason essayed to penetrate; and has displayed
to full view the future dwellings of the spirits of the
jufR, the mansions of everlasting reft, tAe city es the
living God. Not only has it informed us that a date
of perse& felicity is prepared for the righteous, but
it has added to this information a variety of circum-
flances which render that slate lenfible to our imagi-
nation, and encouraging to our hopes. It represents
it as fully secured by the gracious undertaking of the
Saviour of the world. It describes it as an inheritance,
to which he has given nis followers a right and title.
He is said to have taken pofreflion of it in their name.
He rose from the grave as the firl-fruits of them tbat
sleep and under the charaaerof their fore-runner, enter-
ed into the heavenly regions. lam the refurrcfion and
the life. He that believeth on me, tbough he were
dead, yet shall he live. I give unto my /beeO eternal life.
I aJcend to my Father andyour Father, to my Gsd and
your God.

Hence, to those who have lived, a virtuous life,

and who die in the faith of Chrit, the whole aspec
of death is changed. Death is to them no longer
the tyrant who approaches with his iron rod, but the
merfenger who brings the tidings of life and liberty.
The profpeEts which open to them cheer their minds.
Even in the vally of death's hade, .green pafjurer ap-
pear to rife. They view themselves as going forth,
not toliefilent and solitary inthe darknefsof thegrave,
not to wander foriaken in the wide deserts of the
universe, not even to pass into a region where they
are altogether firangers and unknown; but to enter
on a land, new indeed to fight, but by faith and hope
frequented long before; where they shall continue
to be under the charge of him who hath hitherto
been their guardian, be re-united to many of their

Q_ ancient

ancient and beloved friends, and admitted to join the
innumerable multitude, gathered out of all nations and
tongues and people, who fland before the throne of God.
They leave behind the dregs of their nature; and
exchnge this confined and gloomy apartment of the
univerfi, for the glorious mansions of their Father's
house. Blessed surely are they dying in this hope, and
blessod the dead in this fruition, refiingfrom their la-
bours and followed by their works. Good men are
detained at present in the outer court of the temple:
Deathadmits them into the holy place. As yet they so-
journ in the territories of pilgrimage and exile: Death
brings them home to the native land of Spirits. In
this world they are divides from one another, and
minigledwith the worthless and thevile: Death united
in one assembly all the pure and the just. In the
Jight of the unierfe they fmed to die, and their de-
parture -wai taken for utter de/frunion. But they are
in peace. Their reward also is with the Lord, and the
care of them with the mofi High.-- Death! where
is tnow thy fling P O Grave! where is thy vit7ory
Where are the terrours with which thou haft so
long aflrighted the nations ? Where are the dreary
and the desolate domains, the haunts of lpeares and
shades, the abhorred dwellings of darkness and cur-
ruption ? At the touch of the divine rod, thy vifio-
nary horrours have fled. The spell ii broken. The
dawn of the celeflial morning has dispelled thy dif-
nal gloom; and intfead of the habitation of dragons,
appears the paradise of God.

Bu r supposing both the regret of quitting life, and

the dread ot entering into a future state to be overcome,
there is still one circumflance which renders death
formidable to many, that is, the shock which nature
is apprehended to fuflain at the separation of the foul
from the body. Formidable, I admit, this may just-
ly render it to them whore languishing spirits have no
inward fundlwhence they can then draw relief. Firm-

ness

es«s and strength of mind is peculiarly requisite for
the support of nature in its last extremity; and that
strength is supplied by religion. The testimony of
a good cofscience, and the remembrance of a virtu-
ous life, a well-grounded trust in the divine accept.
ance, and a firm hope of future felicity, are princi-
ples sufficient to give compofare and fortitude to the
heart, even in the midst of agony. In what a high
degree they can suspend or alleviate the feelings of
pain, has been fully demonstrated by the magnani-
mous behaviour of such as have suffered death in the
cause of conscience and religion. How often has the
world beheld them advancing to meet that supposed
king of terrours, not with calmness only, but with
joy; railed by divine profpe&s and hopes into an en-
tire neglec and contempt of bodily suffering ?

It is not without reason that a peculiar affilftance

from heaven is looked for by good men, at the hour
of death. As they are taught to believe, that in all
the emergencies of their life divine goodness ha-;
watched over them, they have ground to conclude,
that at the last it will not forsake them; but that At
the season when its aid is mnof needed, it shall be
moit liberally communicated. Accordingly, a per-
suasion so congruous to the benignity and compafnion
of the Father of mercies has been the comfort of pi-
ous men in every age. MyJY fb andmy heartfaith;
Put God it the frength of my heart. In the vally of
bte fJadow of death I will fear no evil, for thou art
with me. When the rod andfaf of this shepherd of
Israel are held forth to his expiring servants, declining
nature needs no other support. The secret influence
of his reviving spirit is falficient for their confolatiou
and flrength, while the painful ttruggle with mortali-
ty lafls; til at length, when the moments arrives
that thefi er cord muf/ be loosed, and the golden bowl
be broken, their Almighty Protietor carries off the im.
mortal spirit unhurt by the fall of its earthly t~rnacle,

Qa and

and places it in a better ranfion.-How refpetable
and happy is such a conclusion of human life, when
one if this manner quits the stage of time, honour-
ed and supported with the presence of his Creator,
and enjoying, till the las moment of reflecion, the
pleasing thought, that he has not lived in vain ! I
have fought a good fight; have finiJbed my caurfe; 1
have kept the faith. HenceJorth there is laid up for
me a crown of rigbteoufnfi, which the L, d the righ-
teous judge Jhall give me at that day.

AyT ER the view which we have taken of the ad-

vantages pofefied by good men for overcoming the
fears of death, the firfi sentiment which should arise
in our minds is gratitude to Heaven for the hopes
which we enjoy by means of the Christian religion.
How deprelfed and calamitous was the human con-
dition, as long as the terrour of death hung, like a
dark cloud, over the inhabitants of the earth; when,
after all the toils of life, the melancholv silence of
the grave appeared finally to dole the scene of exif-
tence; or, if a future slate opened behind it, that
slate teemed with all those forms of horrour which
conscious guilt could suggest to a terrified imaginati-
on ! The happielt change which ever took place in
the circumstances of the human race, is that produ-
ted by the discoveries with which we are blessed con-
cerning the government of the univerle, the redemp-
tion of the world, and the future destination of man.
-low much dignity is thereby added to the human
charaaer and state-? What light and cheartulnefs is
introduced into our abode? What eternal praile is
,due to him who, according to his abundant mercy,
hbath h:.gotten us again int a lively hope, by the refurec-
tion of yIefus Chrifi ]rom the dead, to an inheritance in-
corruptible, undefiled, and that faded not away, re-
jerred in Heaven s

THE next effea which the subjeE we have con-
-idered should produce, is an earnest desire to acquire

those

those advantages which good men enjoy at their
death. The read which leads to them is plain and
obvious. A peaceful and happy death is, by the ap-
pointment of Heaven, conneced with a holy and vir-
tuous life. Let us renounce criminal pursuits and
pleasures; let us fear God and keep his command-
ments; let us bold faith and good conscience, if we hope
for comfort at our last hour. To prepare for this
lafl hour, every wife man ihould confider as his mos
important concern. Death may justly be held the
teR of life. Let a man have lupported his charafter
with efleem and applause, as long as he aaed on the
busy stage of the woild, if at the end he finks into
dejecion and terroursall his former honour is effaced ;
he departs under the imputation of either a guilty
conscience, or a pusillanimous mind. In the other
parts of human conduEt, disguise and subtlety m#
impore on the world ; but seldom can artifice be fttp-
ported in the hour of death. The maik most com-
monly falls off, and the genuine characer appears.
Whcn we behold the (cene of life closed with prorer
comporiure and dignity, we naturally infer integrity
an fortitude. We are led to believe that divine as-
fitlance supports the foul, and we prefage'its tranfiti-
on into a happier mansion. Mark the perfetl man
and behold the upright ; Jor the end of that man is peace.

THE last iftl-uction which our fubje& points out,

rcfpeCts the manner in which a,wi'e and good man
ought to stand affected towards life and death. He
ought not to be servilely attached to the one.- He
has no reason abjealy to dread the other. Lie is the
gift of God, which he may jufily cherish and hold
'dear. Nay, he is bound by all fair means to guard
and preserve it, that he may continue to be useful in
that post of duty where Providence has placed him.
But there are higher principles to which the love of
life should remain lubordinate. Wherever religion,
vi.tle, or true honour, call him forth to danger, life

CQ3 ought

# SERMON XXIV. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. REVELAT. vii. 9. After this I behold, and, lo … a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and ...

ought to be hazarded withour fear. There is a ge-
nerous contempt of death which should distinguish
those who live and walk by the faith of immorality.
This is the source of courage in a Christian. His be-
haviour ought to shew the elevation of his foul above
the present x orld; ought to discover the liberty
which he poflefTes of following the native sentiments
of his mind, without any of those refltaints and set-
ters which the fear of death imposes on vicious men.

At the fame time, this rational contempt of death

must carefully be diflinguified from that inconsiderate
and thoughtless indifference, with-which some have
affe&ed to treat it. This is what cannot be juflified
on any principle of reason. Human life is no trifle,
.hich men may play away at their pleafrue. Death,
in every view, is an important event. It is the mofl
S lemn crisis of the human exiflence. A good man
has reason to meet it with a calm and firm mind But
no man is entitled to treat it with oftenatitous levity.
It calls for manly ferioufnels of thought. It requites all
the recollection of which we are capable ; that with
ihe proper disposition of dependent beings, when
the duf is about to return to its duJf, we may delivcr
up tle pirit to Him who gave it.

S E R M 0 N XXIV.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.
REVELAT. vii. 9.
After this I bcbeld, and, lo I a great multitude, whicb no

man could number, of all n jticnJ, and kindreds,
and pecrle, and tongues flood before the throne, and
bIj&re the Lamb;;ci/lced w''tb white robet, and palm:
in their hands.
N this mysterious bcok of Scripture many revolu-
tions are forctold which were to take place in the

church

church of God. They are not indeed so foretbld " to
affordclearand precifeinformation concerning the time
of their coming to pass. It would have been, on many
accounts, improper tohave lifted up too far that awful
veil which covers futurity. The intention of the Spirit
of God was not to gratify the curiosity of the learned4
by dlfclofing to them the fate of monarchiesand nations,
but to satisfy the serious concerning the geheral plan,
and final iffiie, of the divinegovernment. Amidst those
di treffeswhich besel Chriflians during the sirs ages, the
discoveries made in this book were peculiarly seasonable
as they shewed that there was an Almighty Guardian,
who watched with particular attention over the in-
teretls of the church which he had formed; who
fdrefaw all the commotions which were to happen
among the kingdoms of the earth, and would so over-
rule them as to promote in the end the caule of truth.
This is the chief scope of those mystic visions with
which the Apostle John was favoured ; of feals open-
ed in Heaven; of trumpets founding; and vials
poured forth. The kingdom of darkness was tO
maintain for a while a violent firuggle against the
kingdom of light. But at the conclusion, a voice was
to be heard, as the voice of manj waters and of mighty
tbunderings, fayingAlleluiab, for the Lord God omni-
potent reigneth. The kinidoms of this vwrld arebecorttm
the king~ om of r Lord, and of his CbriJf, and ht
jlfall reign for erver. Such is the profpet with which
the divine Spirit at intervals enlightens, and with
which he finally terminates, the many dark and
direful scenes that are exhibited in this book. In
closing the canon of Scripture, he, with great pro-
priety, leaves upon our mind deep impreflions of the
ti iumphs of righteousness, and of the blefftdnefs of the
redeemer. Ajter tbis Ibeheld, and, lo ! agreatmultitudec
qwhichno man could number, of all nation. and kindreds, and
peofple, and tongues, flood before the throne and, before tbr
Lamb, clothed z.itb wbite robes, and palms in their hands.

-Q4 These

Thefe-words present a beautiful description of the

happiness of faints in heaven; a fubje& on which is
is, at all times, both comfortable and improving to
meditate. On this day, in particular, when-we are
to commemorate the dying love of our Saviour, we
cannot be better employed than in contemplating
.what his love hath purchased; in order both to awa-
ken our gratitude, and to confirm our atachment to
him. The lacrament of the supper isthe oath of our
fidelity. Let us dispose ourselves for celebrating it,
by taking a view of the rewards which await the
faithful. I shall, for this end, in several observations
from the words of the text, taken in conne&ionr
with the context, endeavour to illuitrate, in feme
imperfec degree, the profpe& which is here afforded
us of a flute of future felicity ; and then fuall make
pra&ical improvement of the subjet.

I. WHAT the words of the text moss obvioulfy

fuggeff is, that heaven is to be confidered as a state
of blefled society. A multitude, a numerous afferm-
bly, are here represented as staring together the farn
felicity and honour. Without society, it is impof-
fible for a man to be happy. Place him in a region
where he was surrounded with every pleasure; yet
there, if he found himself a solitary individual, he
would pine and languish- They are not merely our
wants, and our mutual dependence, but our native
inflinas also, which impel us to affciate together.
The intercourse which we herel maintain with our
fellows, is a source of our chief enjoyments. But,
alas! how much are these allayed by a variety of dif-
agreeable circumstances that enter into all our con-
nexiors ! Sometimes we susser from the diltreffes of
those whom we love; and sometimes from their vices
or frailties. Where friendship is cordial, it is exposed,
to the wounds of paiiiful sympathy, and to the aa-
guifih of violent separation. Where it is fe cool as
not to ccafion sympathetic pains, it is never pro-

daaicte

duQive of much pleasure. They ordinary commerce
of the world cor.fifts in a circulation of frivolous inter-
course, in which the heart has no concern. It is ge-
nerally insipid, and often foured by the slightest dif4
ference in humour, or oppofiion of interest. We
fly to company in"order to be relieved from wearisome
correrpondence with ourselves; and the vexations
which we meet with in society, drive us back again
into solitude. Even among the virtuou%, dissentions
arise; and disagreement in opinion too often produces
alienation of heart. We form few connexionswhere
somewhat dces not occur to disappoint ogr hopes.
The beginnings are often pleasing, We flatter our-
selves with having found those who will never give us
any disgust. But weaknefTes are too fcon discovered.
bufpicions arise , and love waxes cold. We are jea-
lous of one another, and accufiomed to live in dif-
guise. A studied civility assumes the name without
the.pleafure of friendship ; and secret animosity and
envy are often concealed under the caresses of diffem-
bled affe&ion.

Hence the pleasure of earthly fcciety, like all our

other pleasures, is extremely imperfec&; and can
give us a very faint conception of the joy that mull
arise from the society of perfect spirits in a happier
world. Here, it is with difficulty that we can fele&
from the corrupted crou d a few with whom we wish
to aflociate in ftii union. There are assembled all
the wife, the holy, and the just who ever existed in
the universe of God; without any difirefs to trouble
their mutual blils, or any source of disagreement to
interrupt their perpetual harmony. Artifice and con-
cealment are unknown there. There, -no competi-
tors firuggle; no fadions contend; no rivals sup-
plant each other. The voict of discord never rifes,
the whisper of suspicion never circulates, among those
innocent and benevolent fpiris. Each happy, in him-
felt, participates inthe l-appinefs of all the reft ; and

Q0S by

by reciprocal communications of love and friendlhipr
at crce receives trom, ard alids to the fum of gene'
ral felicity. Renew the memory of the most assec-
tionate friends with whom )ou were blest in any pe-
iodI of your life. Diveti them of all those infirmi-
ties which adhere to hle human character. Recal
the mcft pleasing and terdtr moments which
you ever enjoyed in the fcciety ; ard the remem-
branceof thole lerfations mav aflitl )ou ia conceiv-
ingthat felicity which is pofrft fed by the faints above.
The happrnefs of brethren ldwelling together in unity,
is, with great juit;ce and beau y, compared by the
Pla!rniilt to iuch things as are mnof refreshing to the
heart of man ; to the fragrancy of the richest odours,
and to the reviving irfluence cif lolt wtherial dews.
It is like the precious ointment pomirrd- on the head of
AJron ; and like the deua of Hern:.n, even the dew tbat
dpjcendcth on the invuntains of Z.n, wahere !he Lord
oemnmandeth the /Iefing, evrn liti tor evermore.

Betides the felicity which fplin ES from perfet love,

there are two circumstances which particulary en-
hance the bleffedners of that multil :de whb fland be-
fore the thrl-ne; these are, access to the most exal-
ted foclety ; and renewal of the molt tender connexi-
ons. The former is pointed out in the Scriptture by
joinintn the innumerable company of angels, and the ge-
neral afmrnLly and church ojf the firfl-born; Iy itting
dou-n wvith Aflrirahan, and Isaac, and Yacob, in the king-
aom of heaven ; a promise which opens the fublimeft
prolpeCs to the human mind. It allows good men to
entertain the hope, that, separated frem all the dregs
of the human mass, from that mixed and prlluted
crowd in midst of ih.ich they now dwell, they shall
be permitted to minole with prophets, patriarchs
ard apofiles, with li;flators and heroes, with all
thole areat and illtufltius spirits, who have (hone in
furmer ages as the fcrvants of God. ot the benetac-
tors of men; whore deeds. we are ac'iftcrned to ce-

lebrate ;

lebrate ; whose steps we now follow at a diflance;
and whose names we prorounce with veneration.

United to this high assembly, the blessed at the

fame time renew those ancient connexions and virtu-
ous friends which had been dissolved by death. The
profpc of this a.wakens in the heart the most plea-
lihg and tender sentiment which perhaps can fill it,
in this mortal iltae. For of all the sorrows which
we are here doomed to endure, none is so bitter as
that occasioned by the fatal firoke which separates
us, in appearance, for ever, from those to whom ei-
ther nature or friendship had intimately joined our
hearts. Memory, from time to time, renews the
anguifl ; opens the wound which seemed orce to have
been closed ; and by recalling joys that are padl and
gone, touches every spring of painful sensibility. In
these agonizing moments, how relieving the thought,
that the separation is only temporary, not eternal;
that there is a time to come of re-union with those
with whom our happiest days are spent; whose joys
and sorrows once were ours; and from whom, after
we shall have landed on the peaceful shore where
they dwell, no revolutions of nature fhail ever be
able to part us more!-Such is the society of the
bleffled above. Of such are themultitudecompofed
who fland befCre the throne. Let us nowobferve,

II. THAT this is not only a blefled but a numer-

ous society. It is called a multitude, a great multi-
tude, a great multitude zwhich no man could number.
These expreflions convey the molt enlarged views of
the kingdom of glory. Dismay not yourlelves
with the apprehension of heaven being a confined
and almost inacceflible region, into whi.h it is barely
poflible for a frnall handful to gain admiflion, after
making their escape from he general wreck of the hu-
nian race. In my Father's hose, said our Saviour there
are many man/ifr. That cit of the living God to-
wards i hich you profess to bend your court'e, is pre-

parcd

pored for the reception of citizens innumerable. It
already abounds withinhabitants i and more and more
shall be added to it, until tIne end of rime.. What-
ever difficulties there are in the way which leads to
it, they have been often surmounted. The path,
though narrow, is neither impassIble, nor mntroden.
Though the cate flands not so wide as that which
opens into hell, yet through the narrow gate multi-
tudes have entered,,and heen crowned.

It is much to be lamented that among all denomi-

nations of Chriflians, the uncharitable Ipirit'has pre-
vailed of unwarrantably circumscribing the terms of
divine grace within a narrow circle of their owrr draw-
ing. I he one half of a Chriffian world has often
doomed the other, without mercy, to eternal perdi-
tion. Without the pale of that church to which
each fe& belongs, they seem to hold it impossible for
Salvation to he attained. But is this the genuine spirit
of theGofpel? Can a Chriflian believe the effeas of
the sufferings of Chsift, to be nogreater than there ?
For this did the Son of God descend from the highefl
heavens, and power out his foulunto the death, that
only a few who adopt the fame modes of expreflion,
and join in the fame forms of worfh p with us, might
be brought to the kingdom of heaven ? Is this all the
deliverance he has wrougtt vpon the eao th P He f aj
v:th child ; he was in pain; and flall he not fee of
the travail of bis foul, and be fatihled ? Surely, the
Scripture has given us full ground to conclude that Ihe
trophies of our Redeemer's grace shall correspond to
the greatness of his power. The captain ofour alva-
Jisn ball bring many fins wtith himself to glory. The
pleasures of the Lord /hall pro/per ,n hit hand. HeJbasl
fee his feed: He /ball justify many. Men hall be
klered in him, and all nations /ball call him blejfed.
For our farther encouragement, let us observe,

II-. THAT the heatenly fcciety is represented in

the text, as gathered out of all the varieties of the
human race. Thi is intimatcd by the remarkable

es ;:tfliuns

exprefflons of a multitude which no man could number,
of all nations and kindredl and people and tongues ; as if
designed on purpose to corre& our narrow notions of
the extent, and power of divine grace. They whom
distant sea and regions now divide, whose languages
and manners are at present firange to one another,
ffall then mingle in the fame assembly. No situation
is so remote, and no Ration so unfavourable as to
preclude access to the heavenly felicity. A road is
opened by the divine spirit to those blififul habitations,
from all corners of the earth, and from all condtions
of human life; from the peopled city, and from the
solitary desert ; from the cottages of the poor, and
from the palaces of kings ; from thedwellings of ig-
norance and simplicity, and from the regions of fci-
ence and improvement, they bhall come, fays our blef-
fed Lord himself, from the ea/f andfrom the wvef, from
the nortb and from thelouth, and /it down in the kingdom
of God.

Such discoveries serve both to enlarge our concep-

tions of the extent of divine goodness, and to remove
those fears which are ready to raise from particular
situations in life. Were you permitted to draw aside
the veil, and to view that diversified assembly of the
blessed who surrounded the throne, you would behold
among them numbers who have overcome the fame
difficulties which encounter you, and which you dread
as insuperable. You would behold there, the unit.-
flruaed, with whom an upright intention supplied
the place of knowledge; the feeble, whom divir.c
grace hath strengthened; and the misled, whom it
had brought back into the right path. You would be-
hold the young who had surmounted the allurements
of youthful pleasure, and the old who had born tFe
4di(reffes of age with undecayed constancy ; mary
whom want could not tempt to dith )iefty ; many
whom riches did nor reduce into pride or impiety;
many who in the mofL difficult and ensnaring circum-

fltaies,

fiances, in the midst of camps and armies and cor-
rurted courts, had preserved ur.fullied integrity. In
a word from all kindredst and people, that is, from
all ranks of life, aud all tribes of mtn, even from
among publicans and finners, you would behold those
whom divine aflilfance had conduaced to future glory.
And is not the fame affiflance, hi its full extent,
offered also to us ? Encompatfed, while we run the
Christian race with this cloud of wiitnies who have
finished their course with success; arimated, while
me fight the gGedfight, sith the Ihouts of those who
have overcome and are crowned, hall despair ener-
vate or deje& our mind:: ? From the happy multitude
above, there iflues a voice which cught to found
perpetually in the ear of faith, Be ye faithful unto
the death, and ye fbail receive the crown of life; Be
firng in the Lord an. in the power of his might ; Be
followers of us who thro!gh faith and patience are now
inheriting the promifis. Corfider,

IV. THE description given in the text of the hap-

piness and glory of the heavenly society. They were
beheld by the apofile flanding before the throne, and
before the lamb, cloathed with white rcbes and palms in
their hands. All that there palms and white robeJ
import, it is not given us now to understand. We
know that among all nations they have been used as
ensigns of joy and vi&oly; and are undoubtedly em-
ployed here to represent that distinguished felicity
and honour, to which human nature shall be then ad-
vanced. But we mufi be endowed with the faculties
of the blessed, in order to comprehend their employ-
ments and pleasures; and therefore on this part of the
fubje& I shall not attempt to enlarge. The silence
of humble and refpeaful hope, better becomes us
than the indulgence of those excursions of fancy,
which degrade the fubje& they endeavour to exalt.

One circurnfiance only cannot fail to attrac par-

ticular attention; that the blessed are here described,
as /landing before the ethrne and beftre the lamb ( that

is,

Is, enjoying the immediate presence of the great Cre-
ator, and oFthe merciful Redeemer of the world.
The unhappy diflance at which we are now removed
from God, is the source of all our woes. Those
territories which we inhabit, are not his abode. They
are regions of exile. They are the dwellings of a
fallen race; and are condemned to be invefled with
clouds and darkneis:. Here, God flandeth afar off.
In vain we often pursue his presence through his
works, his ways, and his religious institutions. H-
is said to be a God that hideth bimelf. He dwdlleth,
as to us, in the cfcret place of thunder. He boldeth
back the face of his throne, andfpreadeth a thick cloud
upon it. The manifeltation of his presence shall be the
signal for the renovation of all things. When that
Sun of righteou/nejs breaks forth from the cloud which
now conceals him, sorrow and fin, and every eAil
thing shall fly away before the brightness of his face.
For neither guilt nor misery can remain where God
dwells. As the rising of the fun transforms at once
the face of nature, and converts the whole extent
of space over which his beams are spread, into a re-
gion of light, so (hall the divine presence, as soon as
it is revealed, diffuse universal bliss over all who be-
hold it. It in)portsfullnefi of joy, and plea/ure for
evermore. The inspired writer of this book thus de-
scribes its effeAs : There iall be no more death, neither
jorrow, nor crying nor pain; for the former things are
pjed avay. He that fat upin the tbrsne,faid, Bebold
I make all things new. fhey Jlball hunger no more, nei-
ther tbir/f any more. But the Lamb which is in the
midlJ of the throne fhallfeed them, and fial! lead them
unto living fountains of water. God Jbhal wipe a:uay all
tears from their eyes. But, descending from this too
sublime theme, let us

V. 'u R Nt our attention to a circumstance in the

state of future happiness, mo:'e commensurate to our
present conceptions, which is fuggeiaed by the com-
mentary upon the words of the text given in the fe-

quel

quel of the chapter. And .ne of the el.er an/wered,
fayin£ unto me, Pi hat are tbefe whicb are arrayed in
white robes; and whence came they ? And I laid unto
him, Sir, thcu knowe/f. Alnd her id unto me, Thefj
are they whicb came out of the great tribulation. This
explanatory circumstance may relate particularly to
the cafe of thore primitive sufferers, who endured
severe persecution in the cause of the gospel. BJt,
in general, it presents this natural and beautiful view
of the future felicity of good men, that it is their reft
from the troubles and toils of life. For, to all, even
to the happiest, human life is tribulation and conflit.
No man is thoroughly at ease in his condition. Pur-
suits succeeding to pursuits I eep us inconstant agitation,
while frequent returns of disappointment break our
plans, and oppress our spirits. Fatigued by such a
variety of toils, mankind have ever looked forward
to reft as their favourite obje&. Throughout all
their ranks, from the highelt to the lowest, they
are in perpetual chace of it; and it perpetually flies
before them. It is an objec which here they are
doomed always to seek, and never to enjoy.

The nature and laws of our present state admit not

the gratification of this favourite wish. For, betides
the necessity of trouble in order to fulfil the purposes
of discipline and improvement, out very happiness,
such as it is in this world, requires a circulation of
labours. Our enjoyment consists in pursuit, not in
attainment. Attainment is with us, for most part,
the grave of pleasure: Had we no objeEt to excite
frcfh aaivity, and to impel us to new toils, human
life would quickly stagnate in melancholy indolence.
At the lame time, the current of all our wifhcs tend
to repose. Imaginary forms float incessantly before
our view, of the happiness a hich is to be enjoyed in
ltft: And from this confli& between our wishes on
the one hi nd, and our aaual situation on the other,
arile much of the difqui-t, ard much of the infclici-

typ

ty, of humanlife. It is only inheaven that the tranquil
repose, which on earth is no more than a pleasing
phantom, shall be fully realized. There. remaineth
at last a reft for the people of God ; rit from the dif-
turbance of passion, the vanity of pursuit, and the
· vexation of difappointnment; reft from all the fins
and the fierrows of this miserable world; reft which
Shall not be merely an indolent cessation from la-
bour, but a full and satisfying enjoyment. Good
men ihall reft from their labour s, and their wdrks /ball
follow them. They have come out of great tribulation.
They have fulfilled, with honour, their appointed
courfeof trial. They have fat down on the feat of the
conquerour; and ot patl labours nothing remains but
the pleasing review, and the happy fruits. There is
still to be confidered.

VI. ONE very material circumstance, descriptive

both of the characer, and of the happiness, of thote
who enjoy the heavenly bliss. Not only have they
come out of great tribulation, but, as the spirit of God
adds in explaining the text, they have waJbhd their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
Two things are here suggested; the fantity of the
bitfled, and the means by which it is attained.

First, their fantity or purity is emblematically

described, by their beInz clothed in robes which are
'wa/bed and made wbite. In order to qualify human
nature for the enjoyment of such happiness as I have
endeavoufed to describe, it must undergo a change
so great as to receive in Scripture the appellation of a
new birth; a change to which all the institutions of
religion ; and all the operations of grace, contribute
in this life, gut which is not completed.till the next.
In this fanaity, or regeneration, confifls not only
the necessary preparation for the future felicity, but,
which is not so commonly attended to, confills an es-
fential part of that felicity itself. For, whenceariles
the milery ot the present world ? It is not owing to

our

our cloudy atmofpher-, ouM changing feabons, and
our inclement skies. It is not owing to the debility
of our bodies, or to the unequal difiribution of the
goods of so tune. Amidst all disadvantages of this
kind, a pure, a. stedfast, and enlightened mind, pof-
fcfed of exalted virtue, could enjoy ittelfin peace,
and fmiHe at the impotent assaults of fortune and the
elements. It is within curfetves, that nmiery has fix-
ed its feat. Our disordered hearts, our gmihy pariorm,
our violent prejudices and misplaced desires are the
infiruments of the torments which we endure. These
sharpen the darts which adversity would otherwise
point in vain againit us. These are the uvial' of wrath
which pour forth plagues on the inhabitants cf the
earth; and make the dwellings of nations become
the abodes of woe. Thence discontent, and remorse,
gnaw the hearts of individuals. Thence fociefy is
torn by open violence, or undermined by seeret trea-
chery; and man is transformed into a savage from
man.

But suppose fin to be banished from the world;

suppose perfecl purity and charity todefeend from
heaven, and to animate every human breafi ; and
you would behold the present habitation of men chan-
ged into the paradise of God. The undisturbed en-
joyment of a holy mind, and of a blissful unicon with
one another, would scarcely allow us to feel those ex-
ternal evils, of which we now so loudly complain.
All nature would assume a different appearance around
us That golden age which was so long the lubjea
of the philosopher's dream, and of the poet's song,
would in fa& take place. Accurding to the beautiful
langpage of an antient prophecy, springs wGould then
ri/e in the de/me, and rivers he opened in the thirjly
land. 7The wviidernes and bte flitary tlare rw.uld he
glad. i'se -'.cf would d-wll vwitb the lamb, atidthe
leopard lie J..,: ; -, t:.r f kid. Judgment would dwcvil in
tbe wilderneJr, and rihiehoufne/s remain in the ruitful

field.

ield. Tbe desert would rejoi~e and blof'am as the
rofe.-If such, even in this world, would be theeffees
otf innocence and virtue completely reflored, how much
greater mutt they be in that new earth and tho/e neuw
heavens, where recitude of nature shall be combined
with every circumstance of external felicity ? It is
the present imperfect date of human virtue that hin-
ders us from conceiving fully the influence of righte.
oufnefs upon happinels The robes in which the
belt men are now clothed, to use the language cf
the text, are sullied with so many lrains, as to convey
no adequate ideaof the original beauty which belongs
to the garb of righteousness. But when there stains
shall be wafixed away, then there robes shall be made
perfecEly white and pure, a lustre will flow frotn
them of which we can,,as yet form no conception.

But how are the robes of the blessed thus washed?

Whence is derived that spotless purity in which they
are arrayed ? The Spirit of God hath answered us,
from the blood of the Lamb ; leading our thoughts ro
that high dispensation of mercy, to which the faints
above owe their eftablithment, first in grace, and
then in glory. From that blood which was/sed for
tbe remilion offins, flow both the atonement of hu-
maht uilt, and regeneration of human nature. Hu-
man nature had fallen too low to be capable of re-
trieving itself. Itcouldnot regain its primitive inno-
cence, and lill less was capable of raising itself so
high in the scale of existence as to mingle with angels.
We had neither lufficient knowledge to discover, nor
virtue to merit, nor ability to quallify ourrelves for
enjoying celestial glory. Heaven mutt have been ei-
ther covered from our view by perpetual darknels, or
only beheld from afar as an inacceflible region, if
Christ had not interposed to open for us a new ann liv-
ing way within the veil. The obligations which
hiagenerous undertaking has conferred tpon the hu-
man race will tend highly to increase the felicity of

the

the blessed. The sense of being distinguished by so
illuflrious a benefa&or, and the corresponding re-
turns of gratitude and love tb him, form some of
the most pleasing of those emotions which shall con-
tinue to delight them through all eternity.
i FROM tho:e views of a slate of future happiners
which the text has luggefted, various inftru6tions
relating to life and pracice naturally arise. We are
tau:ht to rectify our notions of felicity ; to look for it,
not in what is external, but in what relates to the
mind and heart ; in good dispositions and a purified
foul; in unity and friendship with one another, and
in the divine presence and favour. If such things
form the principle articles of future bliss, they cannot
but be essential to our happinels in the more early
periods of exidtence ? and he who seeks his chief en-
joyments from the opposite quarter, is erring widely
from the path which conduas to felicity.

We are farther taught whence to derive conftaney

and perseverance, amidit the present discouragements
of a virtuous life. In this world, we often behold
good men deprefTed, and the wicked prospering around
us. Our best deeds meet with the unjust returns
from an ungrateful world. Sincerity isover-reached
by craft, and innocence falls a vicilm to power. But
let us not on such occasions fay within ourselves,
that in vain we bave clearjed cur hearts, and aw/bed
our hands in innocence. Let us retl on the airurance,
that there dilorders extend rot tarin the kingdom of
God. They asset only the first llage of exiflence.
I'hey relate to diciplene and tr al, which will soon
be finished. In that permanent state which is about
to open, a new and better order of things shall arise.
When dejeted with the evils of life, let us look up-
ward to that happy multitude wbo bave come out of
grate tribulation, and now jland before the tbrone. Until
the day arrive which fhalljoin us to that'blelfed alTem-
bly, let us show ourselves worthy of the hope that is

before

before us, by supporting with a constant mind the
trials of our fidelity. Be patient; jfabli/b your heartj.

bTe ceming of the Lord draweth nigh.
From the profpe&s which the text has afforded,

we may likewise learn what the spirit is which ihould
regulate our life. San&ity of condut, dignity of
characer, elevation of affeaions, become thole who
expe& to mingle with angels, and ]pirits o'fjufi men
made perilwc. 'I mean not that such profpe&s ihould
carry a* . our whole attention from the present
world, where undoubtedly lies the chief scene of hu-
man action, and human duty. But while weed as
inhabitants on earth, we ought at the fame time so
to remember our conneaion with a better world, as
not to debate ourselves with what is mean, not to de-
file ourftlves with what is impure, not to entangle
ourtelves among what is ensnaring, in the present
late. Let neither its advantages elate, nor its difap-
pointments-deje& us; but with an equal ipirit, with
a mind full of immortality, let us pass through all
the changes of this mortal life.

Finally, let the discoveries of future happiness in-

spire us with suitable gratitude to God and Christ;
to the eternal Father, who originally decreed such
rewards for the righteous; and to the Son, who aat
in the high charater of the dispenser of the divine
mercies, and the great restorer of the fallen race of
men. Particularly, when approaching to God in
solemn a&s of devotion, such as we are this day to
perform, let gratitude be al;ve and ardent in our heart.
The commemoration of our Saviour's death is in a
high degree suited to awaken avery emotion of ten-
dcrnefs and love. It brings before its, under one
view, all the obligations which we I e under to this
great benefacor of mankind When just ready to
susser for our fake, he inftituted'this holy sacrament,
and said, Dp this 'in remembrance of me.-Whom,
0 blessed Jcfus-! ihall we ever remember, if we are

capable

# SERMON XXV. 1 CORINTH. xiii. 5. Charity thinketh no evil.

capable of forgetting Thee? Thee, to whom we
owe the forgiveness.-s fin, and the restoration of di-
vine favour; our viEtory over death, and our hope
of life eternal! Thou haft enlarged our views beyond
these territories of disorder and darkness. Thou halt
discovered to us the city of the livingGod. Thou fit-
test open the gates of that nemw Jerusalem; and lead-
eft us into the patb of life. Thou from age to age
gathereft out of every nation, snd kindred, and peeplr,
that multitude whicb fland before the throne. Thou
bringeft them out ofgreat tribulation. Thine are the
uwhite robes with which they are inveited; thine, tt
palmi which they bear; and by Thee they are placed'
under the light of the divine countenance for ever.

-~~
SER MON XXV.

I CORINTH. xiii. 5.

Charity thinkethne eoil.

ELIGION and Government are the two great
foundations of order and comfort among man-

kind. Government restrains the outrages and crimes
which would be subversive of society, secures the
property, and defends the lives of its subje&s. But
the defeat of government is, that human laws can
extend no farther than to the acions of men. Though
they protea us from external violence, they leave us
open on different fides to be wounded. By the voices
which prevail in society, our tranquility may be dif-
turbed, andour livesin various ways embittered, wile
go~er.ment can give us no redress. Religion supplies
the insufficiency of law, by itriking at the root of

o(e diforers whioh occasion So much misery in the

world4

world. Its professed fope is to regulate, not a&ions
alone, but the temper and inclinations. By this means
it ascends to the sources of conduct, and very inef-
tecaual would the wisest fyem of legislation prove for
the happiness of mankind, if it dd not derive aidfrom
religion, in softening the. dispositions of men, and
dhecding many of thore evil palions to which the in-
fluence of law cannot poflibly reach.

We are led to this reflection by the description

given in the context of charity, that great principle in
the Christian system. The Apostle places it in a
variety of lights, and under each of thedl, explains
its operation by its internal effecs; not by the actions
to which is gives rife, but by the dilpofitions which
it produces in the heart. He justly supposes, that if
the temper be duly regulated, propriety of a&ion
will follow, and good order take place in external
behaviour. Of those characters of charity I have
chosen one for the subjed of this discourse, which
leads to theconfideration of a virtue highly important
to us, both as Christians, and as me mbers of so-
ciety. I fhallendeavour, first, to explain the tem-
per here pointed out, by {hewing what this defcripti-
on of charity imports, that it thinketh no evil; and
then to recommend such a dilpofition, and to'difplay
the bad effects of an opposite turn of mind.

I. LET us cenfiderwhat this description of charity

imports. You will easily perceive that the expreflion
n the text is pot to be understood in sense altogether
Unlimited ; as if there were no occasion on which we
are to think unfavourably of others. To view all the
aaions of men with the fame degree of compla - :ncy,
would be contrary both to common underitandir.e, and
to many express precepts of religion. In a word,
where so muchdepravity abounds, were we to think
and speak equally wellof all, we mufl either be insen-
Ible of the diftin&ion between right and wrong, or
be iodiffcrert tothat ditin&ion when we perceived it

Religicd

Religion renders it our duty to abhor that wvhic its
evil; and, on many occasionS, to express our indig-
nation openly against it. But the ApoSlle, with great
propriety, describes the temper which he is recom-
mending in luch strong and general terms, as
might guard u, against that extreme to which we are
naturally molt prone; of rash and unjust suspicion.
The virtue which he means to inculcate is that which
is known by the name of Candour; a virtue, which,
as soon as it is mentioned, every one will acknow-
ledge to be essential to the characer of a worthy man;
a virtue which we seldom fail of ascribing to any per-
son whom we seek to recommend to the elieem of
others; but which, I am afraid, when we examine
our own condu& in a religious view, is seldom the
fubje& of inquiry.

It is neceflary to observe, that true candour is alto-

gether different from that guarded, inoffensive lan-
guage, and that fludied openness of behaviour, which
we so frequently meet with among men of the world.
Smiling very often, is the aspec, and smooth are the
words of those who inwardly are the mod ready to
think evil of others. That candour which is a Chrifti-
an virtue consists, not in fairness of speech, but in
fairness of heart. It may want the blandishment of
externalcourtefy, but supplies its place with humane
and generousliberality of sentiment. Its manners are
unaffeeed, and its profeflions cordial. Exempt, on
one hand, from the dark jealousy of a suspicious
mind ; it is no less removed, on the other, from that
early credulity which is imposed on every fpeciouslpre-
tence. It is perfealy confident with extensive know-
ledge of the world, and with due attention to our own
safety. In that various intercourse which we are ob-
liged to carry on with persons of every different cha-
ra&er, suspicion, to a certain degree, is a necessary
guard. It is only when it exceeds the bounds of
prudent caution, that is degenerates into vice. There

is

is a proper mean between undiflinguifhi-ng credulity,
and univcrfal jealousy, which a found underfianding
discerns, and, which the man of candour studies to
preserve.

He makes allowance for the mixture of evil with

good, which is to be found in every human character.
-He expeas none to be faultless; and he is unwilling
to believe that there is any without some commend-
able quality. In the midtf of many defecs, he can
.discover a virtue. In the midlf of personal resent-
.ment, he can be jult to the merit of an enemy. He
,never lends an open ear to those defamatory reports
and dark fuggeitions, which, among the tribes of the
,censorious, circulate with so much rapidity, and meet
with such ready acceptance. He is not haly to judge;
·and he requi:es full evidence before he will condemn.
As long asan a&ion can be ascribed to different motives,
.he-holds it as no mark of sagacity to impute it always
to the worf. Where there isjult ground for doubt,
he keeps his judgment undecided; andduring the pe-
siod of ufpence, leans to the molt charitable conftruc-
tion which ana&ioncanbear. When he mruf condemn
he condemns with regret; and without thoe aggravati-
ons which the severity of others adds to the crime. He
:ifiens calmly to the apology of the offender, and rea-
.dly 'admits every extenuating circumflance which
equity can fuggefl. How much soever he may blame
the principles of any feed or party, he never confounds
.under one general censure all who belongs to that
Fpartyor -Te. He charges them not with such con-
*sequences of their tenets, as they refuse and disavow.
From one wrong opinion, he does not infer the sub-
version of al found principles; nor from one bad
.acion, conclude that all regard to conscience is over-
thrown. When he bkhdds. the mate in uhis rother'j eye,
he remembers the beam in bia own. He commiserates
human frailty; and judges of others according to
.the principles by which he would think it reasonable

R that

that they should judge of him. In a word, he views
and aations in the clear sunshine of charity and good-
nature; and not in that dark and fullen shade which
jealousy and party spirit throw over all characers.-
Such being in general the spirit of that charity which
tbinketh no evil, I proceed,

II. To recommend, by various arguments, this im-
portant branch of Chriitian virtue.

Let us begin with observing what a necelfary re-

quifite it is to the proper di charge of all the social du-
ties. I need not spend time in showing that these
hold a very high rank in the Christian fyltem. The
encomium which the Apostle in this chapter bestows
upon charity, is alone sufficient to prove it. He pla-
ces this grace at the head of all the gifts, and endow-
ments, which can be poffelfed by man; and assures
us that though we had all Jaithfo that wre could re-
move mountains, yet if we be destitute of charity, it
ivill profit us nothing. Accordingly, love, gentlenefi,
meekneJf and long fJffering, are enumerated as diftin-
guifhingfruits of the spirit of ChriJ/. But it is impof-
fible for fich virtues as there to find place in a breafd,
-where the propensity to think evil of others is predo-
mninant. Charitable.and candid thoughts of men are
the necessary introducion to all good-will and kind-
ness. They form, if we may speak so, theonly climate
in which love can grow up, and flourish. A fufpi-
cious temper checks in the bud every kind affecion.
It hardens the heart, and estranges man from man.
vVhat friendship or gratitude can you expeS from
him, who views all your conduc with diftrritful eyes,
and ascribes every benefit you confer to artifice and
itratagem ? The utmofi which you can hope from one
,of this churacer, isjuftice in his dealings ; noreven
that can you be assured of; as the suspicions to which
the is a prey will afford him frequent pretexts for de-
ipaitina from truth, and for defendidg himself with

the

the fame arms wfich he conceives to be employed
against him. Unhappy will they be who are joined
with him by any close connexion; exposed to every
malignant suspicion which arises in his own mind,
and to every unjust fuggefion which the maliceof
others may infinnate against them. That store of
poison which is collected within him frequently throws
out its venom on all who are within its reach. As a
companion, he will be levere and satirical; as a friend,
captious and dangerous; in his domeflic sphere, harsh,
jealous and irascible ; in his civil capacity, seditious
and turbulent, prone to impute the conduct of his
superiors to improper motives, and upon loose infor-
mation to condemn their condut.

The contrary of all this may be expeced from a

candid temper. Whatever is amiable in manners,
or useful in society, naturally and easily ingrafts itself
upon it. Gentleness, humanity and compaflion flow
from it, as their native spring. Open and cheerful
in itself, it diffuses cheerfulness and good-humour
over all who are under its influence. It is the chief
ground of mutual confidence and union among men.
It prevents those animofities from arising which are
the offspring of groundless prejudice; or, by its be-
nign interposition, allays them when arisen. In the
magifirate, in tempers justice with lenity. Among
fubjeas it promotes good order and fubmiflion. It
connets humanity with piety. For he who is not
given to think evil of his fellow-creatures, will not
be ready to censure the dispensations of his Creator.
Whereas the fame turn of mind which renders one
jealous and unjust towards men, will incline him to
be querulous and impious towords God.

IN the second place, as a suspicious, uncharitable

spirit is inconfiltent with all social virtue and happi-
ness, so, in itself, it is unreasonable and unjust. In
order to form found opinions concerning characera
and aaions, two things are especially requisite, in-

R a formation

formation and impartiality. But such as are modt
forward to decide unfavourably, are commonly def-
titute of both. Instead of poffefirg, or even re-
quiring full information, the grounds on which they
proceed are frequently the most flight and frivolous.
A tale, perhaps, which the idle have invented, the
inquisitive have listened to, and the credulous have
.propagated; or a real incident which rumour, in
carrying it along, has exaggerated and disguised, sup-
plies them with materials of confident assertion, and
decisive jndgement. From an aaion they presently
look into the heart, and infer the motive. This lup-
posed motive, they conclude to be the ruling princi-
ple; and pronounce at once concerning the whole cha-
iacer.

Nothing can be more contrary both to equity and

tofoundreafon,than such precipitate judgments. Any
man v ho attends to what pales within himself, may
easily discern what a complicated fyflem the human
characer is, and what a vatiety of circumstances
mull be taken into the account, in order to estimate
it truly. No single inflance of conduft whatever, is
sufficient to determine it. As from one worthy acion,
it were credulity, not charity, to conclude a person
to be free from all vice; so from one which is cenfur-
able, it is perfecly unjust to infer that the author
of it is without corfcience, and without merit. Did
you know all the attending circumstances, it might
appear in an excusable light; nay, perhaps, under a
commendable form. The motivesof the aEormay
have been entirely different from those which you
.alfribed to him; impelled by bad design, he may have
:been prompted by conscience and miflaken principle.
Admitting the a&ion to-have been in every view cri-
miral, he may have been hurried into it through in-
advertencv and furprile. He may have fincetely re-
Tented; and tlie virtuous principle may have now
-Iegained its full vigour. Peihaps this was the come

of

of frailty , the quarter on which he lay open to the
incursions ot temptation; while the other avenues
of his heart were firmly guarded by conscience.

No erroris more palpable than to look for uniformi-

ty from human nature; though it is commonly on
this supposition that our general conclusions concern-
ing charaaer are formed. Mankind are confidfent
neither in good, nor in evil. - the present slate of
frailty, all is mixed and blended. The firongeft con-
tlarities of piety andhypocrily, of generosity and ava-
lice, of truth and duplicity, often meet'in one cha-
ratler. The purest human virtue is confident with
some vice; and in the midlt of much vice and difor-
der, amiable, nay refpeCable, qualities may be found,
There are few cafes in which we have ground to con-
clude that all goodness is loft. At the bottom of the
character there may lie some iparks of piety and vir-
tue, fuppleffed, but not extinguished ; which kept
alive by the breath of heaven, and gathering strength
in sacred from reflecion, may, on the first favoura-
ble opening which is afforded them, be ready to break
forth with splendour and force.-Placed, then, in a
situation of so much uncertainty and darkness, were
our knowledge of the hearts and chara&ersofmen is so
limitted, and our judgment to concerning them are si
apt to err, what a continual call d5 we receive ei-
ther to furpend our judgment, or to give it on the fa-
vourable fide ? especially when we confider that, as
through imperfic. information we are unqualified for
deciding soundly, so through want of impartiality we
are often tempted to decide wrong. How [much this irn
forces the argument for candour,appear by confidering,

Iw the third place, what the sources are of thofi

severe and uncharitable opinions which we are so rea-
dy to form. Were the mind -altogether free from
prepofltffion and bias, it might avail itself to more
advantage of the scanty knowledge which it possesseE.
But this is so far from being the cafe, that on every

R 3 fidc

fide we are encumbered with prejudices, and warfted
by paflions, which exert their influence in nothing
more than in leading us to think evil of others. At all
times we are justly said to fee tbrougb a glass, darkly;
but paifion and prejudice, looking through a glats
which diflorts the form of the objects, make us also
fee falsely.

It is one of the misfortunes of our present situation,

that some of the good dispositions of human rmture are
apt to betray us into frailties and vices. Thus, it often
happens that the laudable attachment which we con-
tra& for the country, or the church, to which we be-
long, or for some political denomination under which
we class ourselves, both confines our affections within
too narrow a'fth;ure, and gives r.fe to violent prejudices
againtl such as come under an opposite description..
-Not contented with being in the right ourselves wp
mult find all others in the wrong. We claim an exclusive
possession of goodrefs and wildom ; and f.om appro-
ving warmly of those who join us, we proceed to con-
demn, with muuh acrimony, not the principles orly,
but the eharacters of those from whom we differ.
Hence persons of well-difpofed minds are too often,
through the 1frength of partial gcod affeaion, involv-
ed in the crime of uncharitable judgment. They
rashly extend tq every individual the severe opinion
which they have unwarrantably conceived of the
whole bidy.-This man is of a party whose princi-
ples we reckon slavish; and therefore his whole fen-
timents are corrupted. That man belongs to a reli-
gious fee, which we are accuflomed to deem bigot-
ted; and therefore he is incapable of any gene-
rous or liberal thought. Another it conne&ed with a
feet, which we have been taught to account relaxed;
and therefore he can have no fancity.-Are there
the judgments of candour and charity ? Is true piety
tr virtue lb very limitted in its natuie, as to be con-
fined to such alone as fee every thing with our eyes,

and

and follow exacly the train of our ideas ? Was there
- ever any great community so corrupt as not to in-

lude within it individuals of real worth ?

Besides prepol'eflions of this nature, which some-

times minead the honest mind, there are other, and
much more culpable causes. of uncharitable judgment.
li ide is hurt and wounded by every excellence in which
it can claim no fiore ; and from eagerness to discover
a blemish, reft, upon the slightest appearance of one,
as a fatistying proof. When rivalry and competion
concur with pride, our desire to espy defets increa-
Ics, and, by consequence, the grounds of cenlure
multiply. Where no opposition of interests takes.
place, envy has too much influence in warping the
judgment of many. Even when none of these cau-
les operate, the inward consciousness of depravity is
sufficient to fill the mind with evil thoughts of others.
Whence should a man so readily draw his opinions of
men a, from that chara. er with which he is belt ac-
quainted, because it is his own ? A person of low and
base mind naturally imputes to others the sentiments
which he finds congenial to himself; and is incredu-
lous of every excellency which' to him is totally un-
known. He enjoys, besides, consolation in the thought
that others are no better than himself; that his weak-
neffes and crimes are those of all men; and that
luch as appear-moft distinguished for virtue possess
no real superiority, except greater dexterity in con-
cealing theirsvices. Soothing themselves with this
doctrine in secret, too many folfer and firengthen the
had opinion which they entertain of all mankind.
Rarely, if ever, have you ground to think well of
that man's heart who is on every occasion given to
think the word of others. Let us observe,

IN the foruth place, that suitable to the sources

w hence a jealous and suspicious temper proceeds, are
the effeits which it produces in the world, the crimes
and mischiefs with which it fills society. It possesses

R 4 this

this unhappy difliraion beyond the other fallings of
the human heart, that while it impels men to violent
deeds, it justifies to their own apprehension the ex-
cefles which they commit. Amidfl the uproar of
other bad palicons, conscience acts as a retiraining
power. As soon as the tumult subsides, remorse ex-
erts its influence, and renders the finner sensible of
the evil which he has done. But the uncharitable
man is unfortunately set loose from any fich check
or controul. Through the infatuation of prejudice,
his judgment is perverted ; conscience is misled; the
light 'within him his iurrnedinto darkneir. Viewing the
obje&s of his displeasure as evil men, he thinks him-
self entitled to give that dilpleafure full vent; and
in committing the most inhuman ations, may some-
times imagine that he is doing good service to God.

The firit fruits ot an evil-thinking spirit are calum-

ny and detraction, by which society is to often em-
broiled, and men are set at variance with one ano-
ther. But did it proceed no further than censorious
speech, the mischief would be less. Much greater
and more serious evils frequently ensue. What dire-
ful effets, for inflance, have often flowed from rafn
and ill-founded jealousy in private life ? No sooner
has one allowed that d emon to take pofieflion of his
mind, than it perverts his understanding, and taints all
his faculties. Haunting him by night and by day,
bringing perpetually before him thl odious and dif-
quieting forms which it has raised up, it blackens
every appearance to his view ; gives to trifles which
are in themselves light as air, the weight of full con-
firmation; till what was at first a dubious farmife, or
a flight displeasure, rites at lenght into full bt lief and
implacab!e fury. Henc e, families torn with the molt
violent convulsions; the hufl'and armed against the
m ife, the father against the son, the friend against
the friend; the plan c f treachely and affaffinatiort
contrived, and the dagger plunged into the,bofom of

the

the innocent.-In public life, how often have king-
doms been shaken with all the violence of war and
rebellion, from the unjust suspicions which fubjeas
had conceived of their rulers; or the raih jealousy
which princes had entertained of their people ?-
But it is in religious diffeitions chiefly, that the mif-
chivous power of uncharitable prejudice has displayed
its full atrocity. Religion is always found to height-
en every passion on which it ads, and to render every
contest into which it enters, uncommonly ardent;
because the objecs which it presents are of such a
nature as firongly to Seize and engage the human
mind. When zeal for their own principles has promp-
ted men to view those of a different persuasion in
the odious lghts which bigotry fuggefis, every senti-
ment of humanity has too often been extinguished.
The mild influence of that religion which breathes
nothing but gentleness, has proved too feeble to re-
flrain the violent and bloody hand of persecution;
and the uncharitable spirit, raging among contending
parties, has filled the worrd with such calamities and
crimes as have brought difgraceon the Christian name.

Let us attend particultary te one awful instance of

the guilt which men may contract and of the ruin
which they may bring upon thernlelves, through the
want of fairness and candouF. The nation of the
Jews were always noted for a narrow and uncharita-
ble spirit. When John the Baptist, and our blessed
Lord, appeared among them, because the former was
ault-re in his temper and retired in his lift, they pro-
nounced of hfim' that he had an evil spirit: And be-
cause the latter was open and sociable in his manners,
they hlid him to be deflitute of that fanaity whichl
becarmd a prophet.- Their prejudiceagainrl our l.ord
to.k its first rife from a moll frivolous and contemp-
tible caule : Is not this the son of the carpenter ? Can
any good thing csme out of Nazareth ? When his mira-
cles repelkd this reproach, and sufficiently proved'

R 5 the

the eminence of his character, still they sorered their
prejudices by this most futile refo"ing, Have any of
the rulers belie-ed rn him ? Obstinate in their attach-
ment to a temporal Messiah, and continuing to view
all our Saviour's condu& with an evil eye, when he
converted wi'h bad men in order to reclaim them,
they treated bim as a companion of publicans and /in-
1!Frs. Because he difqllowed their gruundlefs traditi-
ons, they held him to be a breaker of the Sabbath,
and a contemner of religion. B:caure he prophefed
the deflru&ion of their temple, they accused him of
beingan enemy to his own nation. Till at taft, through
their perpetual mifconftrution of his a&ions, their
palions became so inflamed as to make them cry out
with one voice, Auay with thhi man to death, andgive
us Barabbas tbe robber.-Viewing in this dreadful event
the consequences of want of candour, let every man
tremble to think evil rashly of his brother. No one
can tell how far uncharitable prejudices may carry
him in guilt, if he allows them to harbour and gather
flrenfirh within his breafl. The cloud which rJef rom
the Jea, no bisgcr tban a mao,' band, may soon swell
and spread, till it cover the whole horizon, and dif-
charge with most deflruaive violence the gathered
form.

IN the fifth place, as a suspicious spirit is the source

of so many crimes and calamities in the. worll , so it
is the spring of certain misery to the person who in-
lulges it. His friends will be few; and small will be
his comfort in those whom he possesses. Believing
others to be his eni-nies, he will of course make them
such. ' Let his caution be ever so great, the alperity
oe his thoughts will often break out in his behaviour;
and in return for fufpeEting and hating, he will incur
suspicion and hatred. Besides the external evils which
he draws upon himself, arising from alienated friend-
fliip, brokenc onfidence, and open enmity ; the fufpi-
cicu temperitfelf is one of the worst evils which any

man

man can susser. If in allfear there be ferment, how mi-
lerable muff be his (late who, by living in perpetual
jealousy, lives in perpetual dread ? Looking upon him'
self to be surrounded with spies, enemies, and designing
men, he is a stranger to reliance and truth. He knows
Pot to whom to open himself. He dresses his counte-
nance in forced smiles, while his heart throbs within
from apprehenfionsof secret treachery. Hence fret-
fulness and illhumour, disgust at the world and all the
painful fenfatiors of an irritated and emitted mind.

So numerikus and great are the evils arising from

a furpicious disposition, that of the two extremes it
is more eligible to expose ourselves to occasional dif-
advantage from thinking too well of others, than to
fufier continual misery by thinking always ill of them.
It is better to be fomeitmes irapofed- upon, than never
to trust. Safety is purchased at too dear a rate, when,
in order to secure it, we are obliged to be always clad
in armour, and to live in perpetual hoflility with our
fellow s. This is, for the fake of living, to depr.ve
ourselves of the comfort of life. The man of can-
dour enjoys his situation, whatever it is, with cheer-
fulness and peace. Prudence direas his intercourse
with the world; but no black suspicions haunt hia
hours of reft. Accustomed to view the characters
of his neighbours in the most favourable light, he is
like one who dwells amidf those beautiful scenes of
'nature, on which the eye refts with pleasure. Where-
as the suspicious man, having his imagination filled
with all the shocking forms of human falsehood, de-
ceit, and treachery, resembles the traveller in the
wilderness, who discerns no objeas around him but
what are either dreary or terrible; caverns that open,
serpents that hiss, and beaftsof prey that howl. fHence
in him are verified those descriptions which the Spi-
rit of God has given us of the misery of the wicked,
They fhIal have nc peace, TTheyvflall be like the tr6ii-
.bicdfca -Wben it carnt re/f. The Lord flall give them a

trembling

tenembling heart, ard failing of eyes, and frrrw f mi'nd:
And tbhy /ball /ear day and night, and have none afi-u-
rance of heart. I add,

IN the sixth and lad place, that there is nothing

which exposes men in a more marked and direc man--
ner to the displeasure ot the Almighty,than a malig-
nant and censorious spirit. I infilt not now on'the ge.e-
ral denunciations of divirle wia h againfl malice andt
hatred. Let us only confider under what particular
deicription the Spirit of God brings this crime of un-
charitable judgement. It is declared to be an impious
invasion of the preregative of God, to-whom alone
it belongs to search all hearts, and to determine con-
cerning all chara&ers. This privilege He often appro-
priates expressly to himself, on purpose to restrain the
rashness ot cerfule among men; requiring us toleavc
the judging of others on Him, and to attend, each'
of us, to cur own business and duty. Who art thec
that jrudgeli another man' servant ? To his own majfcr,
he /landt th or-alleth. Yud oenotting before the time; un-
til the Lord come, who jhall make manife/f tbe counsels
of the heart.

It deserves our most serious attention, that, in fe-

veral passages of Scripture, the great Judge of the
world is represented, at the day of final rctributions
as proceeding upon this principle, of rendering to
men according to the manner in which they have
aEed towalrdstheir brether ren. Wi'th the merciful, tb
'wilt bhow tbfliff n'erci;ul; and ioitb the Iroward,
thou wilt p/ho- thyself frowar. With obat judgmrnt
ye judge; ye flall bejudged ; and witb wyhat measure
ye mete, itjhall be neaf/ure to you again. It is Lmpof-
'ible to fornm an argument of more force than this,
to restrain all severity of judgment among 'uch as
look forward to the tribunal of God. The argument
extends not indeed so far, as to represent our accep-
tance with t-,e Deity as entirely suspended upon the
eandour whiih we thow in fctming our sentiments

of

of others. We know that other graces beside, this
are requisite in order to fit us for heaven; and that
without piety towards God, and faith in the Lord
Jesus Chrifl, all our charity to men will bz found de-
fe&ive and vain. But this we know also, that in the
heart which is destitute of fairness and candour, the
Spirit of God certainly dwells not ; and that whatever
appearances of religion the uncharitable man may
alTume, on him the Sovereign of the universe looks
with no favour-Trhou who art a man full of frali-
ties, who flandeft in need, not merely of impartiality
in thy divine Judge, but of indulgence and mercy;
Thou who imploreft daily his mercy from him, and
prayefd that he would remember tbouart duf, and not be
itril to mark iniquity againJ/ thee; dartil thou, with
those very prayers in thy moutr, proceed to judge
without candour of thy brethren, and upon the
slightest grounds to reprobate and condemn them ?
O thou hypocrite ? (for by what other namecan
we call thee?) vain are all thy pretentionu to piety.
Ineffectual is every plea which thou canst form for
mercy from heaven. The precedent which thou haft
eflabliihed against thvfelf is decisive. Thou haft dic-
tated the sentence of thine own condemnation.

On the whole, it clearly appears that no part of the

government of temper deserves attention more, than
to keep our minds pure from uncharitable prejudices,
and open to candour and humanity in judging of
others. The worst consequences, both to ourselves
and to society, follow from the opposite spirit, -Let
us beware of encouraging a habit of fulpicion, by
forming too revere and harsh opinions concerning hu-
man nature in general. A great proportion of infirmity
and curruption, doubtless, adheres to it; yet tempt-
ed also it is with various mixtures of virtue and good
a.Te&ion. Darkned as the divine image now i; among
mankind, it is not wholly effaced. Much piety and
goodntef may lie hidden in hearts that are unknowni
to us. Vice is glaring and loud. The crimes of the

wicked

wicked make a noise in tile world, and alarmed bo-
ciety. True worth is retired and modelt, and requires
particular situations to bring it forth to public notice.
The prophet Elijah, in a time of prevailing corrupti-
on, imagined that all true religion had forsaken the
land. I, even I only, faith he to'the Lord, am left to
serve thee. But the Almighty, who discerned what
was concealed from his imperfect view, replied, ret
huve J l'ft mnefeven tboufand men in IJrael voho bave
not bo -cdl the knee to Baal.

The aged, and the unfortune, who have toiled

through and unsuccessful life with long experience of
the falsehood and fraud of evil men, are apt to be
the more levere in the opinions which they entertain
of others, For such, their circumflances may be al-
lowed to form some degree of apology. But if, in
y::u, h and prosperity, the fame hard lulpicious spirit
p 'evail ; if they who are beginning the career of life
f:t out with all the scruples of diftruit ; If, before
they have had reason to complain of the world, they
betray the diffidence of a jealous, and the malignity
of a cenolrious mind, fad is the prelage which may
tklerce he drawn of their future dishonour. From
such, you have nothirg to look for that shall be either
engaging in private life, or refpeaable in public cha-
raher. To youth it particulary belongs to be gene-
rous in sentiment, candid in opinion, undesigning in
behaviour, open to the mot favourable conftru&ion
cf actions and condu&. Throughout all the stages
of life, candour and fairness is one of the most ho-
nourable diftinaions of the human characer. It is
connected with magnanimity ; it is juotified by wil-
iom ; it is suitable to the relation in which we stand
to one another. But if reason and humanity be in-
ftifficient to re-frain us from rafli and uncharitable
jugnments, let that awful denunciation frequently re-
found in our ears, He /1ball have judgment wuithcut
mercy who haib [bewed
no mercy.

SERMON

# SERMON XXVI. GENESIS xlv. 5. 8. Now therefore be not grieved nor angry with yourselves that ye sold me hither; for God did send me before you to preserve life. — So now it was not you that sent me ...

S E R M O N XXVI.

GENESIS xlv. 5. 8.
AN-uo therefore be nmt grievei nor angry with yourselves

that ye fold me hitber ; Jor God did fetid me betore
you to preserve life.-So now it was not you thatJent
me bitter, but God.
IN his generous manner, Josep' frames an apology

for the unnatural behaviour of his brethren. He

extenuates the atrocity of their crime, by represent-
ing the happy effeas which it had produced. Hi
looks beyond all second causes; and recognizes, in
the wond.rful events of his life, the hand of the Al-
mighty.-No human charater exhibited in the re-
cords of Scripture is more remarkable or inftruaive,
than that of this patriarch. He is one whom we be-
hold tried in all the uiciffitudes of fortune; from the
condition of a slave, riling to be ruler of the land of
Egypt and in every station acquiring, by his virtue
and wisdom, favour with God and man. When
overleer of Potiphar's house , his fidility was proved
by firong temptations, which he honourably resifted.
When thrown into prison by the artifice of a faife
woman, his integrity and prudence soon rendered him
conlpicuous, even in that dark manlion. When called
into the presence of Pharoah, the wife and extensive
plan which he formed for saving the kingdom from
the miseries of impending famine, justly raised him to
a high station, wherein h;s abilities were eminently
dirplayed in the public service. But in his whole hi.s
tory there is no circumnfance so firiking and interest-
ing, as his behaviour to his brethren who had fold

him

him into slavery. The moment in which he made
himfetf known to them, that moment at which we
are now to contemplate him, was the most critical
one of his life, and the most dicifive of his characer;
It is such as rearly occurs in the course of human
events; and is calculated to draw the highest atten-
tion of all who are endowed with any degree of len-
fibility of heart. Let us confider the sentiments
which Joseph utters in the text under two views, each
f which is very inltructive to all Chriflians. I. As
a ddcovery of his cordial forgiveness of his brethren ;
and, II. as an inltance of his dutiful attention to the
Providence of God.

I. TH E most cordial forgiveness is here displayed.

I shall not capitulate all the preceding hiflory refpea-
ing Joseph and his brethren; as it is well known by
every one who has the leat acquaintarce with the fa-
cred writings. From the whole tenour of the narati-
on it appears, that though Joseph, upon the arrival
of his brethren in Egypt, m.-de himself ( range to them,
yet from the beginging he intended to discover him-
self; and fludied so to condu& the discovery as
might render the surprise of joy complete. For this
end, byaffeted severity, he took measures for bring-
ingdown into Fgypt all his father's children. They
were now arived there; and benjamin among the reft,

ho was his younger brother by the fame mother,
and was particularly beloved by Joseph. Him he
threatned to detain; arrd seemed willing to allow
the rell to depart. This incident renewed theirdif-
ttel'. They all knew their fathers extreme anxiety
about the safety of Berjamin, and with what diffi-
culty he had yielded to his undertaking ihis journey.
Should hebe prevented from returning, they dreaded
that grief would overpower the old man's fpilits,^ ad.
prove fatal to his life. Judah, therefore, who had
particularly urged the necessity of Benjamin's accom-
panying his brothers, and had folemrly pledged him-

ft f

seif to their father for his safe return, craved, upon
this occasion, an audience of the governolJr; and
gave him a full account of the circumstances of Jacob's
family.

Nothing can be more interesting and pathetic than

this discourse of Judah, as it is recorded in the pre-
ceding chapter. Little knowing to whom he spoke,
.he paints, in all the colonus of simple and natural elo-
quence, the diltreffed situation of the aged patriarch,
hastening to the clove of life; long affliled for the
loss of a favourite son, whom he supposed to have
been torn in pieces by a beart of prey; labouring now
under anxious concern about his youngefl son, the
child of his old age, who alone was litr alive of his
mother, and whom nothing but the calamities of fe-
sere famine could have moved a tender father to
fend from home, and expose to the dangers of a so-
reign land. If we bring him not back with us, we
fball bring down the grey hairs, of thy fervart our father,
with sorrow, to the grave. I ray btee therefore let
thy servant abide inflead of the young mou, a bondman
to our lord. For how jball I go uap to my father, and
Benjamin not with me P left I fee the evil that fbalt
come on vmy fatker.

Upon this relation, Joseph could no longer restrain

himself. The tender ideasof his father and his father's
house, of his ancient home, his country and his kin-
dred, of the distress of his family, and his o n cxa!-
tation, all rushed too ilrongly upon his mind to bear
any fartherconcealment. He cried, cauje every man to go
out from ne ; and he wept aloud. The tears whiclr he
shed were not the tears of grief. They were the borrtlof
affection. They were the tender fenfiblities of nature.
Formerly he had been moved in the fame manner,
when he first saw his brethren before irri His bow-
els yarned upon them ; he [aught for a flace Where to
.ueep. He went into Lis chamber; and then waflsed
hisface, and ret.rned to them. At that period his ge-

neFrotl

nerous plans were not completed. But now, when
there was no farther occasion for conflraining him-
self, he g'ves free vent to the firong emotions of his
heart. The first minister to the king of Egypt was
not aflamed to shew, that he felt as a mnan, and a
brother. He wept aloud; and the Egyptians, and the
houje of the Pharaoh beard him.

The first words, which his swelling heart allowed

h;Il to pronounce, are the mofi suitable to such an
affating situation which were ever uttered.- Ilam yo-
Jchb; dotb my father yet live ?-What could he,
what ought he, in that impassioned moment, to have
said more ? This is the voice of nature herself, speak-
ing her own language; and it penetrates the heart:
No pomp of expreflon ; no parade of kindness; but
firong affecion hastening to utter what it firongly felt.
lis brethren could not an/wer him ;]or they were trou-
bled at bis prejence. Their silence is a expieffive cf
those emotions of repentance, and (hame, which, on
this amazing discovery, filled their breafds, and flop-
ped their utterance, as the few words which Joseph
fieaks are expreflive of the generous agitations which
fruggled for vent within him. No painter conid seize a
more firikingmoment for difplayingthe charderiftical
features of the human heart, than what is here pre-
sented. Never was there a situation of more tender
and virtuous joy, on the one hand; nor, on the other,
of more overwhelming confusion and confciops guilt.
In the simple narration of the sacred historian, it is
set before us with greater iergy and higher effet,
than if it hsd been wrought up with all the colour-
ing of the molt admired modern eloquence.

When Joseph had a little recovered himself fiom

the firit transports of emotion, he proceeds to ex-
plain his situation to his brethren, and to (how them
the beneficent purposes for which he conceived him-
fclf to be railed by Providence into power. The
apology which he makes in the text for! their former

cruelty

cruelty is uncommon and remarkable. Now tberefore
be not grieved nor angry with yourselves that ye fold me
hither ; fir God did sena me before you to preserve you
a posterity in the earth, and tojave your lives by a great
deliverance. So now it was not you that sent me hither
but God; and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh,
and Lord of all bis house, and a ruler throughout all
the land of Egypt. This apology was, in truth, ni
fatisfaaory excuse for their crime. For though the
over-ruling providence of Heaven has so directed the
course of events, as to render their bad intentions sub-
servient to a happy iTuie; yet the badness of the in-
tention originated ent rely from themselves. The en-
vy and jealousy which they entertained against their
brother, led them to the commiflion of an atrocious
deed. 'The deed was voluntary; the crime was all
their own; and the interposition of Providence in
making unforeseen consequence follow from that
crime, did not, exculpate them from guilt. It were
an impiousconclufion, that because God extrats good
from our evil, we are not answerable for the evil
which we perpetrate. God cannot be tempted wit evil,
neither tempted he any man. But the sentiment in the
text is to be confidered, as a colour which the gene-
rous humanity of Joseph prompted him to throw on
the conduc of his brethren. He saw the confusion
with Which they were overwhelmed in his prelence
He diverts their attention from the remembrance of
a crime which was now wringing their hearts with
anguish, by representing to them the happy effeas
wHich that crime had produced. He sets them free
from all uneasiness on his account. He calls upon
them to rejoice in his prosperity; and instead of dwel-
ling on a painful recolleaion of their own condua,
to join with h;m in acknowledging and adoring the
hand of the Almighty.

How different is tihis amiable spirit which Joseph
discovers, from that haifli and oftertatious fuptriorily

which

which too often accompanies the pretended forgive'-
ness of injuries, among those who call themselves
Christians ! They are ready to fay that, for their
part, they pardon the wrongs which have been done
them; they wish that the persons who have com-
mitted them may be able to forgive thenmfelves ; they
leave them to God and to their own conscience. By
the severe suggestions which they throw cut, they
dilcover the inward bitterness oftheir spirit; and art-
fully gratify resentment, at the time when they pro-
fess to exercise forgiveness. Whereas the great ant'
good man whole charader we now confider, effaces
all memory of the crimes which he pardons. He seeks
to alleviate the remorse of his brethren by an extenu- '
ation of their guilt; and while he is preparing to
make their circumltances comtfrtable, fludies at the
fame time to render their minds easy and tranquil.

This was not merely a transient emotion with Jo-

feph, owing to the first burst of affection on discover-
ing himfelt to hisbrethren. We have a clear proof,
sio.n a remarkable tranfaCion which passed many
years after this peiiod, of his disposition continueing
the fame to the end of life. It is recorded in the lalt
chapter of this book, that when Jacob died, his sons
began to be leized with fear concerning the treatment
which they might receive from their brother. The
guilty are always suspicious. Conscious of their own
baseness, they are incapable of conceivcing their mag-
nanimity of others. 1 hey saw the bond which held
the family together, now broken by their father's
death. They dread( d that the resentment of Joseph
against them had hitherno been only fupprefted, or
concealed. They said among tbemfelves, peradventure
be wtill now bate us, and requite all the evil whicb we
did unto him. Under this apprehension, they first
sent an humble message to deprecate his difplcafure
by the memory of their common father.; and then ap-
pearing in his pretence, they ell down before his fwe,

professing

_professing themselves to be his servants, and praying
him to forgive the trespass which they had commit-
ted against him. But no such hidden resentment as
they dreaded- had ever lurked in the foul of Joseph.
On the contrary, when he beheld his brethren in this
affecing situation, bereaved of theirancient protecor,
and reduced, as they imagined, to the neceflity of
holding up their hands to him for mercy, he was
overpowered by a tide of tender emotions. JoJeph
.wept, while his brethern spake unto him. These assec-
tionate tears alone were sufficient to have ensured
their forgiveness. But hastening also by words to dif-
pel their alarms, he presently added, Fear not ; for
tbough ye thought evil again/f me, Godment it unto good.
Now tkerejore fear ye not ; I will nourijb yea and your
little ones. And he comforted them, and spake kindly
unto them.

Such was the lait incident that is recorded in the

life of this eminent personage, than whom you will
find few more distinguished by an assemblage ofilluf-
trious virtues; in the lowell adversity, patient and
faithful; in the higheR prosperity, beneficent and
geneorus; dutiful and affecionate, as a son; kind
forgiving, as a brother; accomplished, as a flatefman;
wife and provident, as arulqr of the land. In such
a characer you behold human nature poffelling its
highest honours. The sentiments which it inspires,
tend to enoble our minds; and to prevent their imbi-
bing the spirit of those hard, interested, and felf-leek-
ing men with whom the world abounds.

THE firiking example of forgiveness, which the

text displays, ought frequently to occur to our
thoughts, amidit the various occasions of provocation
and offence which arise in our intercourse with the
world. If one so worthy and amiable, in the days too
of his youth and innccence, suffered fuce crueltreat-
ment from his brothers, ought we to be surprised if,
even from our nearest relations, we meet with un-

jufice

justice or ingratitude ? Wrongs and injuries are,
moreor less, the portion of all. Like Death, they
are an evil unavoidable. No flation is so high, no
power so great, no character so unblemished, as to
exempt us from them. In the world, ungreatful
men, false friends, and violent enamies abound.
Every wife man ought to prepare himself for what
he is to encounter, in passing through this thorny re-
gion. He is not to expec that he can gather grapes
from thi/tles; nor to lose the government of his mind,
because, in the midst of evil men, he is not allowed
to remain, like a sacred and inviolable person, un-
touched and uninjured.

As this view of our situation ought to blunt the

edge of passion and impatience, so the alleviating
circumstances which reason will suggest, ought to
mollify resentment. Think of the various conftruc-
tions which the ations of men will bear. Confider
how different the motives of him who hath given us
offence, may have been from those which in the
heat of passion we ascribe to him; how apt all men
are to be reduced, by mistaken views of interest; and
how little ground we have to complain if, upon a
supposed interfering of interests, we susser by others
preferring their own to ours. Remember that no
opinions which you form under the power of resent-
ment can be depended upon as just; and that every
one loads the intentions of his enemy with imaginary
degrees of malice.

But admitting the injury you have received to be

ever so atrocious in its nature, and aggravated in its
circumiftnces; supposing it to be even parallel to that
whieh Joseph suffered; look up, like him, to that
divine government under ~which we are all placed.
If forgiveness be a duty which we know God to have
required under the moll awful fan&ions, dare we
draw upon ourselves the merited vengance of that
fuperiour, to whose clemency we are obliged daily to

fly ?

fly ? When, with hard and unrelenting dispositions
towards our brethren, we fend up to Heaven prayers
for mercy to ourselves, those prayers return like im-
precations upon our heads ; and our very devotions
feal our condemnation.

Themoff plainand natural lentimentsof equitycon-

cur with divine authority to enforce the duty which
I now recommend. Let him who has never in his
life done wrong, be allowed the privilege of remain-
ing inexorable. But let (uch as are conscious of frail-
ties and crimes, confider forgiveness as a dept which
they owe to others. Common failings are the firong-
eft lesson of mutual forbearance. Were this virtue
unknown among men, order and comfort, peace and
repose would be (frangers to human life. Injuries
retaliated according1to the exorbitant measure which
paflion prescribes, would justify resentment in return.
The injured person would be comethe injurer; and thus
wrongs, retaliations, and fresh injuries, would circu-
late in endless fucceflion, till the world was rendered
a field of blood. Of all the passions which invade
the human breef, revenge is the molt direful. When
allowed to reign with full dominion, it is more than
sufficient to poison the few pleasures which remainto
man in his present late. 'How much foevera person
may susser from injultice, he is always in hazard of
suffering more from the prosecution of revenge. The
violcnce of an enemy cannot inflict what is equal to
the torment he creates to himself, by means of the
fierce and desperate pafions which he allows to rage
in his foul.

Those evil spirits who inhabit the regions of misery.

are represented as delighting in revenge and cruelty,
But all that is great and good in the universe, is on
the fide of clemency and mercy. The almighty Ru-
ler of the world, though for ages offended by the
unrighteournefs, and insulted by the impiety of men,
is long inffrings andflow to anger. His Son, v'hen

he
t

he appeared in our nature, exhibited both in his life
and his death, the molt illustrious example of for-
givenefs which the world ever bthzld. If you look
into the history of mankind, you will find that in
every age, thole who have been refpe&ed 'as wor-
thy, or admired as great have been dllfingutfhed for
this virtue. Revenge dwells in little minds. A noble
and magnanimous Ipirit is always fuperiour to.it. It
suffers not from the injuries of men those revere
(hocks which others feel. Colle&ed within itself, it
{lands unmoved by their impotent assaults; and with
generous pity, rather than with anger, looks down
on theirunworthy condut. It has been truly said,
that the greatest man on earth can no sooner commit
an injury, than a good man can make himself greater,
by forgiving it. Joseph, at the moment when we
now contemplate him, had entirely under his power
all those unnatural brethren who had been guilty to-
wards him of the mot.cruel outrage which man could
perpetrate. He ;could have retained them for ever
in that Egyptian bondage to which they had once
consigned him, and have gratified revenge by every
accumulation of.difgrace which despotic power ena-
bled him to inflic. .Had he a&ed this part, he
might for a while have been foothed-by the pleasures
of his high. tation. But remorse, in the end, would
have stung his foul. Cruelty would have rendered
him,unhappy within himself, as well as odious to
others-: And his name would have perished among
the.crowd of those contemptible statesmen, whose ac-
tions firain the annals of history. Whereas now,
his charaaer {lands among.the foremeft in the ranks
of spotless fame. His memory is blefled to all gene-
rations. His example continues toedify the world;
and he himfelt fhings in the celestial regions as the
krightnef/ of the firmament, and as Ihe stara fir evrr
and ever. Let us now,

IL Co NSID ER the sentiment contained -in the

teats

text, not only as a discovery or cordial forgiveness,
but as an expreflion of devout attention to the con-
duEt of Providence. So now it was not you that font
me hither, but God. Remark how beautifully piety and
humanity are, in this inflance, connected together.
As we are told of Cornelius, and good Centurion,
that his prayers and bis almr, his devotion and his
good works, came up together in memorialbefore God,
so here we perceive fraternal affecion and religious
reverence, mingling in one emotion within the patri-
arch's heart. In a person of low and vulgar mind,
the sensations on such an occasion would have been
extremely defferent. Looking back on the padl events
of his life, he would have ascribed all the adversity
which he had suffered, to the preverfe treatment of
his brothers; and all the prosperity which he after-
wards attained to his own good conduc an.l wisdom ;
and by consequence would have remained embittered
against the instruments of the one, and filled with
pride and felf-fufficiency on account of the other.
But the elevated and noble mind of Joseph rejected
such unworthy fentimente. Contemplating the hand
of God in all that had befallen him, he effaced the'
remembrance of those evil deeds which had produced
his adversity ; and for his prosperity he affe&ed no
praise to himself, but ascribed it entirely to the will
of Heaven. L-t us take notice that thisis not the
reflecion of a private, retired man; whose situation
might be supposed to favour such devout meditations.
It is the reflection of one, who was leading a busy
and a reducing life, in the midfl of a court; the fa-
va.irite of the greatest monarch who was ;ben known
in the world. Yet him you behold, amidIt the sub.
miflion and adulation which was paid to him, perferv-
ing the moderation and finplicity o a virtuous mind;
and amidst the idolatry and faire philosophy of the
Eigyptians, maintaining the principles of true religion,
and giving glory to the God of Israel.

S From

From this union of piety with humanity, which

is so confpiciouotis in the sentiments of Jofpeh, there
arises one very important inftru&ion; That a devout
regard to the hand of God in the various evnts of
life tends to promote good dispositions and affe&ions
towards men. It will be found by those who attend
to the workings of human nature, that a great pro-
portion of those malignant paflions which break out
in the intercourse of men, arises from confining.their
attention wholly to second causes, and over-looking
the first cause of all. Hence, they are insolent in
prosperity, because they discern nothing higher than
thier own abilities; and in adversity they are peevish
and unforgiving, because they have no objea on
which to fix their view, but the condu&t of men who
have aCed as their enemies. They behold no plan
of wisdom or goodness carried on throughout nature,
-which can allay the discomposure of their mind. As
soon as their temper is ruffled, the world appears to
themeto be a continued fcen of difaftie-s and injuries, of
confused events and of unreasonable men. Whereasto
the pious man, the contemplation of the universe ex-
hibits a very different fpecacle. In the milt of seem-
ing confusion he traces a ,principle of .order; and by
attention to that older, his mind is harmonized and
calmed. 'Hebeholds a wife and rigeteous Governour
prefidir!g over all the commotions which are raised
by the tumult of conflicing pafions and interests;
guiding, with imperceptible influence, the hand of
the violent to beneficient purposes; accomplifhirg
uiuexpc&cd ends by the most improbable means; ob-
liging the mwratb of men to praise bim; some-
times humtling the mighty, sometimes exalting
the low; often snaring the wicked in the de-
vires which their hands have wroughLt Refpeaful
acknowledgement of this divine government; con-
irouls the disorders of inferiour pafilons. Reverence
fir the decrec. of Heavcni infpiics p: tience am d rrt.

de'atlioa.

deration. Trust in that perse& witdom and goodness
which dire&s all for the bes, diminishes the shock
which worldly difaticrs occasion. The irritation of
pa:iion and resentment, will always bear proportion
to the agitation which we rtiffer from the changes of
fortune. One who -conrne&s himself with nothing
but second caures, partakes of the violence and irre-
gularity of all the inferiour movements belonging to
this great machine. IHe who refers all to God, dwells,
if we may speak so in that higher sphere where mo-
tion begins; he is fubje& to fewer shocks and con-
cufflions, and is only carried along by the motion of
the universe.

How can mildness or forgiveness gain place in the

temper of thatman who, on occasion of every cala-
mity which he suffers from the ill usage of others,
has no fan.uary within his own breast to which he
can make retreat from their vexations; who is pof-
sessed of no principle which is of sufficient power to
heardown the rifmgtide of peeviih andangry palirons ?
The violence of an enemy, or the ingratitude of.a
friend, the injultice of one man, and the treachery
ofanother, perpetually dwelland rankle inhis thoughts.
The part which they have a&ed in bringing on his
diftrefi, is frequently more grating to him than the
dliftrefs itself. Whereas he who in every event looks
up to God, has always in his view a great and eleva-
ting obje&, which inspires him with magnanimity.
His mind lies open to every relieving thought, and
is inc!inen to every fuggetRion of generosity. He is
difpofed:to fay with Joseph, it was na you tbatjent me
Aitber, but God; with David, it is the. Lord ; let bim
Wo whatfemeth good in his eyes ; and with a greater
personage than either of these, the cap whicb my Fa-
¢her bath given me to drink, fball I not dinkb its Hence
saifes fuporiority to many of the ordinary provoca-
tions of the world. For he looks upon the whole of
his present life as part of a great plan, which is car-

S 2 ricd

# SERMON XXVII. 2 KINGS viii. 12, 13. And Hazael said, Why weepeth my Lord? And he answered, Because I know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of Israel. Their strong bolds wilt thou set on ...

ried.on under the diretion of Heaven. In this plan,
he views men as aAing their several parts, and con-
tributing to his good or evil. But their parts he con-
fiders as Subordinate ones; which, though they may
justly merit his affe&ion, and may occasionally call
fourth his resentment, yet afford no proper foundation
to violent or malignant passion. He looks upon bad
men as only the rod with which the Almighty char-
tens; like the paflilence, the earthquake, or the torm.
In the midst of their injustice and violence he can
pity their blindness; and imitate our blefled Lord
praying, Fatber, forgive them; for they no not what'
they do.
S E R M 0 N XXVI.

.2KINGS viii. 12, 13.
.nd Hazael aid, Why weepeth my Lord P And he an-

fvered, Because I know the evil that thou wilt do
uuto the children of Israel. Tbeir firong bold; wilt
thou jet onfire, and their young men wilt thou flay
.witb the fwrd, and will daft their children, and rip
*p their women with child. And Hazaelfaid, But
·whhat, is thy servant a dog, that he fboulddothiscgreai
thixg ? And Elijha answered, The-Lord hath fbewad
me that thou jbalt be king over Syra.

N the days of Joram king oflfrael flourished the

I prophet Elisha. His characer was so eminent,
and his fame so widely spread, that Benhadad the
king of-Syria though an idolater, Cent to consult him
.concerning the issue of i distemper which threatened
his life. The messenger employed on this occasion
was Hazael, who aplears to have been one of the

princes,

princes, or chief men, of he Syrian court. Charged
with rich gifts from the king, he presents himself be-
fore the prophet; and accofis him in terms of the
highest rej'pe&. During the conference which they
held together, E'llia fixed his eye ftedfaftly on the
ct;untenance of Hazael; and difeerning, by a pro-
phetic spirit, his future tyranny and cruelty, he could
not contain himself from bursting into a flood of
tears. When Hazael, in fulprife, inquired into the
cause of thi fIidden emotion, the prophet plainly in-
forms him of the crimes and barbarities which he fore-
saw that hereafter he should commit. Tlhe foul of
Hazael abhorred, at this time, the thoughts of cru-
elty. Uncorrupted, as yet, by ambition of great-
r.efs, his irdign.tion arose at being thought capable
of Iuch savage a&ions as the prophet had mentioned;
and, with much warmth, hereplies, But wuhat? is
Iby Jervant a dog, that be fould do this great toiig ?
I.lilha makes no return but to point out a remarkable
chance which was to take place in his condition ; Tk-
l.crd hatb hezued me that tbou Jbalt be king over Syria.
In course of time, all that had been predicted came
to pass. Hazael ascended the throne; and ambition
tock roTcffi n of his heart. He Imote the child-en ej
Ijracl in all their coafs. He opprefed them during all
the .aysoj King 7ehoahazz ; and, from what is left on
record ot his actions, plainly appears to have proved

hat the prophet foresaw him to be, aman ofviolence,
cruelty, ard blood.

In this passage of 'hificry, an object is presented

which deserves our serious attention. We behold a
man who, in one ltate of life, could not Icok upon
certain crimes without furpriCe and horrour; who knew
lo little of himflf as to believe it impossible for him
ever to be concerned in committing them ; that fame
man, by a change of condition, transformed in all his
sentiments, and as he rose in greatnels, rising also in
guilt; till at lal he completed that whole characer

S 3 of

of iniquity which he once det¢cfed. H:nce she fol-
lowingobfervations naturally arise. I. That to a mind
not entirely corrupted, sentiments of abhorrebce at
guilt are natural. 1. That notwithltanding those
sentiments, the mind may be brcught under the do-
rrinion of the vices which it had mofl abhorred. Ill.
That this unhappy revolution is frequently owing to
a change of men's external circumstances and condi-
tionin the world. These observations are to make
the subjeC of the present difcouife ; and will lead us
to such a view of human nature as, it is hoped, may
be of general use.

I. SENT 1MEN T S of abhorrence at guilt are natu-

ral to the human mind. Hazael's reply to the pro-
phet shews how ftliongly he felt them. Is ihy fervanr
a dog, that he J}ovtd do this great thing ? Is he, or
can he ever be, so bace and wretched as to perpetrate
climes, which would render him unworthy of bear-
ing the name of a man ? This is the voice of human
nature, while it is not as yet hardened in iniquity,
Some vices are indeed more odious to the mind than
others. Providence has wifely pointed the sharpef edge
of this natural aveifion against the crimes which are
of mofi pernicious ond defruiive nature; fnch as
treachery, oppreflion and cruelty. But, in general,
the diltinction between moral good and evil is so
firongly marked, as to accompany almirt every vice
with fenfib!e disapprobation. Present to any man,
even the molt ignorant and untutored, an cbvious in,
fiance of injutlice, falrehood, or impiety; let him
view it in a ccol moment, when no passion blinds,
and no interest warps him,; and you will find that his
mind immediately revolts against it, as shameful and
base, nay as dektrving punis:mtnt. I-ence, in rea-
toning on the characd rs of others, however men may
miflake as to tat'5, yet they gener.aly praise arid blame
3acc0rling to the prin3ciples of iound morality.

M Ith reypcet to their own charader a rotorions

partial.ty

partiality to generally misleads their judgement. But
it is remarkable, that no finner ever avows direal- to
himself that he has been guilty of gross and down-
right iniquity. Even when engaged by his paflions
in the conlmiflion of the greatest crimes, he always
palliates them to his own mind by some extenuation
or apology, some pretended neceflty, or some bor-
rowed colour of innocence. Such power the unde-
nlable dignity of virtue, and the acknowledged turpi-
tude of vice, poffeis over every hurnanheart. These'
lentiments are the remaining impressions of that law,
which was originally written on the mind' of mar.
They are gleams of that light which once shone clear
and firong within us, and which, though it be now
greatly obscured, yet continues to shoot a feeble ray
athwart the da knefs of human nature.- But what-
ever sentiments tf abhorrence at vice we may at any
time entertain, we have no reason to build upon the(e
a presumptuous confidence of cur continuance in vir-
rue. For the rext infiruCion which the text suggests is,

fl. TH AT such is mans' ingnorance of his own

characer, such the frailty of his nature, that hemay
one day become infamcus for those very crimes which
at present he holds in detestation. This observation
is to well verified by the hitfory of Hazael ; and.a
thoufard other inflances might be brought to confirm
it. Thcngh there is ncthing which every person
ought to know so thoroughly as his own heart, yet
from the condua of men it appears, that there is
nothing with which ihey are less acquainted. Always
more prone to flatter themselves than desirous to dif-
cove r the truth, they trust to their being poffefled of
every virtue which has not been put to the trial; and
rcckon themselves secure against every vice to which
they have not hitherto been tempted. As long as
their duty hangs in speculation, it appears so plain,
and lo eligible, that they cannot doubt of performing
it. The fufpicicn never enters their mind, that in

S 4 the

the hour of fpcculation, and in the hour of pracice,
their sentiments may differ widely. Their present
disposition they easily persuade themselves will ever
continue the fame ; and yet that dilpofitior. is chang-
ing with circumstances every moment.

The man who glows with the warm feelings of de-

votion, imagines it impofible for him to lose that
sense of the divine gcodnefs which at present melts
his hcarr. He whom his friend has lately laved from
ruin is confident that, if some trying emergency shall
put his gratitude to proof, he will rather die than
abandon his benefacor. He who lives happy and
contented in frugal industry, wonders how any man
can give himself up to dilfolute ple.ifure. Were any
of those persons informed by a luperiour spirit, that
the time was (hortly to come when the one should
prove an aximple offcandalous impe'y, the other of
treachery to his, friend, and the third of all that ex-
travagant luxury which disgraces a growing fortune;
each of them would teflify as much surprise and ab-
horrence as Hazael did upon hearing the predicions
of the prophet. Sincere they might very
possibly be in their expreftions of indignation;
for hypocrisy is not always to be charged on men
whose conduct is inconsistent. Hazael was in earnefd,
when he resented with such ardour the imputation of
cruelty. The Apotle Peter was sincere when he
made the zealous profeflion, that though he should go
to prison and to death withhis mafler, he would never
deny him. They were sincere i that is, they spoke
from the fulness of their hearts, and from the warmth
of the present moment; but they did not know them-
selves, as the events which followed plainly showed'
So false to its principles, too frequently, is the heart
of man ; To weak is the foundation of human virtue;
so much reason there is for what the gospel perpetu-
ally inculcates concerning the necelityof dillrufting
ourltlves, and depending on divine aid. Mortifying, I

.onrefs,

corfefs, is this view of human nature; yet proper
to be atterdcd to by all, in order to escape the most
fatal dangers. For, merely through unguarded con-
dud, and from the want of this prudent suspicion of
their own weakness, how mapy, after the motl pro-
mifing beginnings, have gradually apoflatized from
every principle of virtue, until, at last, it has become
as difficult for one to believe that they ever had any
love of goodrefr, as it would have been once to have
perluaded therrnfclves that they were to advance to
fuh a height in wickednels ?

IN such cafes as I have described, what has be-

come, it may be enquired, of there sentiments of
abhorrence a' guilt which wtere cnce felt so fIrongly ?
Are they totally etased ? or, if in any degree they
remain, how do such persons contrive to latisfy them-
selves in acing a part which their minds condemn ?
IHre, there is a myflcry of iniquity which requires
tohbe unfolded I.aent and secret is theprogrefs or cor-
ruption within the foul, the more latent the more dan-
gerous is its growth. No man becomes of a sudden cor.-
pleatly wicked. ('uilt never shows its whole dcfor-
rnity at once; but by gradual acquaintance reconciles
us to its appeararce, and imperceptibly diffuses its
poilen thro' all the powers of the mind. Every man
has si me darling patlion which generally affords the
first introduCion to vice. The irregular gratificati-
ons into which it occasionally reduces him, appear
undler the form of venial weaknetTes; and are induilgcd,
in the beginning, with scrupulousness and leferve.
But by longcr pratice thele reft'.in, weaken, and
the power of hahit grows. One vic e brings in ano-
ther to its aid. By a fort of natural affinitv they
connec and entwine themselves togethere; till their
roots come to be spread wide and deep over all the
foul. When guilt riles to be glaring, conscience er-
deavours to remontfrate. But conlcience is a calm
piinciple. Pafion is loud and impetuous; and cre-

S ates

ates a tumult which drowns the voice of ieafun. ft
joins, besides, artifice to iolerce ; and seduces at
the fame t;me that it impels. FJr it employs the
underftandirg to impose upon the conscience. It
t!evifes reafrn and arguncnts to jufify the corruptions
tf the h, art. 'Ihe common pracice of the world
is apre.led to. Nice dillinAions are made. Men are
tound to he circumstanced in lo peculiar a manner,
as to render certain anliors excufab!e, if not blame--
less, which in a nother fituaticn, it is confeffed-would
have been criminal. By such aprocels as this, there
is reason to beleve that a great part of mankind
advance from ftep to ftep in fin, partly hurried by
pailion, and partly blinded by felf-deceit. without and
jift sense of the degree of gutil which they contract
By in eterate habits their judgment is, at length,
perverted, and their moral feelings are deadened.
They fee now with other eyes; and can Icok without
pain on evil actions which they formerly abhorred.

It is proper, however, to ob erve, that though our

native sentiments of abhorrence at guilt may be so
borne down, ci so elu.'eA as to Icr their influence
en ccndi't, yet thole sentiments belonging originally
s-ou-r frame,.and being never totally eiralicated from
the foul, will fiill retain To much authority, as if
not to reform, at least on rome oecafions, to chaflern
the finner. It is only during a conirfe of prosperity,
that vice is able o carry on its delusions without dif-
tirbhance. Blt, amidst the dark and thoughtful situ-
. tions of life, conscience regains its rights ; and pours
·the whole bitter,:efs of remorle on his heart who has
apollatized from his or:ginal principles. We may
w. II believe that, before the end of his days, Hazael's
first impreflions wonud be made to return. In the
Lour of adverity, the remembrance of his conference
with the venerable Prophet would fling his heart.
Comi.paring the sentiments which, in thole his better
days, he felt, with the atrocious cruelties which he

had

had afterwards committed, all the honoursof royalty
wculd be unable to save him from the inward sense
of baseness and infamy.

FR O M this view which has been exhibited of the

progress of corruption, and of the danger to which
we are exposed of falling from princ:ples which once
appeared firmly eflablifhed. let us receive useful ad-
nionition for our own condut. Let not him that
girdetb en his harnefi, loafn like him that putteth it es.
Let no man place a rash and dangerous confidence in
his virtue. But let him th.t think, th he ffandeth, take
Aeedlefl he fall. Never adventure on too near an ap-
proach to what is evil. Familiarize not youfelves
with it, in the flighted infances, without fear. Lif-
ten with reverence to every reprehensions of con-
science ; and preserve the mofl quick and accurate
sensibility to right and wrong. If ever you morl
impreflions begin to decay, and your natural abhor-
rence of guilt to lessen, you have ground to dread
that the ruin of virtue is fast approaching. While
you employ all the circumfpeaion and vigilance
which reason can suggest, let your prayers, at the fame
time, continually ascend to God for fuFpolt and aid.
Remember that from him dejcended every good and-
perseea gift; and that to him only it belongs to keep
you from falling, and to prejent you faultless before tie
presence of hbi glory with exceeding joy. I proceed
now to the

III. OBSERVATrON from the text, That the

power which corrup ion acquires to pervert the origi-
nal pi indiples of nmen, is frequently owing to a change
of their circumstances and cordition in the world
How different was Ha.zael the rmeffcnger of Benhad-
ed, from Hazael the king; he who flarted at the
inertion of cruelty, from him who waded in blood I
Of this fad and surprising revolution, the Porphet em-
phatically .Jfigns the cause in there few words. The
L:rd hatb ficwed me that thou /bat be Aing over Syra.

That

That crown, t':at fatal crown, wh'ch is to be set up-
on thy head, shall shed a malignant influence over
thy nature: and flall produce that change in'thy cha-
rater which now thou cans not believe. Whose
experience of the world is To narrow, as not to fur-
rifh him with inflances fimilarto this, in much hum-
bler conditions of life ? So great is the influence of a
new situation of external fortune; such a different
turn it gives to our temper and affecaions, to our
views and desires, that no man can foretel what his
character would prove, should Providence either raise
or depress his circumfrances in a remarkable degree,
or throw him into tome sphere of a&ion widely dif-
ferent from that to which he has been accuflomed
in former ife.

The feeds of various qualities, good and bad, lie

in all our hearts. But until proper occasions ripen,
and brine thlem forward, they lie there inactive and
dead. They are c vered up and concealed within
the recesses of our nature: or, if they spring up at
all, it is under touch an appearance as is frequently
mistaken, even by ourselves. Pride, for intfance, in
certain situations, has no opportunity of displaying it-
self, but as magranimity, or sense of honour. Ava-
rice appears as necessary and laudable ceconomv.
What in one fation of life would discover itself to be
cowardice and bafeners of mind, pafies in another for
prudent circumfpeaion. What in the fulness of pow-
er w ould prove to be cruelty and oppression, is repu-
ted, in a lohordinate rank, no more than the exercise
of proper discipline. For a while, the man is known
neither by the world, nor by himself, to he what he
truly is. Buit bring him into a new (fiuation of life,
which accords with his predominant difpofion ; which
flrikes on certain latent qualities of his foul, and awa-
kens them into action; and, as the leaves of a flow-
er gradually unfold to the fun, so shall all his true
character oFen full to v:cw.

This

This may, in one light, be accounted not so much

an alteration of charaeer produced by a charge of
circumftanoes, as a discovery brought forth of the
real charaeter which formerly lay concealed. Yet,
at the fame time, it is true that the man himself un-
dergoes a change. For opportunity being given for
certain difpofiiors. which had been dormant, to ex-
ert themselves without reflraint, they of course ather
strength. By means of the ascendency which they
gain, other parts of the temper are borne do'wn;
aad thus an alteration is m de in the whole liruc-
ture and system of the foul. He ib a truly wile and
good man who, through divine assistance, remains
fuperiour to this influence of fortune on his characer;
who having once imbibed worthy sentiments, and
e(lablifhed proper principles of atiol, continues con-
slant to these, whatever his circumstances be; main-
tains, throughout all the changes of his life, one
uniform and supported tenour of conduct; and what
he abhored as evil and wicked in the beginning of
his days, continues to abhor to the end. But how
rare is it to meet with this honourable consistency
among men, while they are pasing through the dif-
ferent flations and periods of life! When they 'ar.
setting out in the world, before their minds have been
greatly miffed or debased, they glow with generous
emotions, and look with contempt on what is fordid and
guilty. But advancing farther in life, and inured by
degrees to the crooked ways of men , pressing through
the crowd, and the bustle of the world; obliged to
contend with this man's craft, and that man's scorn;
accuftoened, sometimes, to conceal their sentiments,
and often to stifle their feelings, they became at 1lt
hardended in heart, and familiar with corruption.
Who would not dropa tear over this fad, bu: frequent
fall of human probity and honour ! Who is not hum-
bled, when he behol 's the refin-d sentiments andl
high principles on w i:h we are fa ready to v hie

ourfe! es,

That crown, t'- t fatal crown, 'hh is to be set up-
on thy head, ltall shed a malignant influence over
thy nature: and fliall produce that change in'thy cha-
rad&er which now thou canst not believe.- Whole
experience of the world is so narrow, as not to fur-
rifh him with instances fimilarto this, in much hum-
bler conditions of life ? So great is the influence of a
new situation of external fortune; such a different
turn it gives to our temper and affeaions, to our
views and desires, that no man can foret(l what his
character would prove, should Providence either raise
or depress his circumfiances in a remarkable degree,
or throw him into some sphere of a&ion widely dif-
ferent from that to which he has been accuflomed
in former tife.

The feeds of various qualities, good and bad, lie

in all our hearts. But until proper occasions ripen,
and brine them forward, they lie there inacEive and
dead. They are c vered up and concealed witsiin
the recesses of our nature: or, if they spring up at
all, it is under touch an appearance as is frequently
mistaken, even by ourselves. Pride, for instance, in
certain situations, has no opportunity of displaying it-
self, but as magranimity, or sense of honour. Ava-
rice appears as neceftary and laudable oeconomv.
WVhat in one fiation of life would discover itself to he
cowardice and baseness of mind, pastes in another for
prudent circurfpeaion. rWhat in the fulness of pow-
er would prove to be cruelly and oppression, is repu-
ted, in a lohordinate rank, no more than the exercise
of proper discipline. For a while, the man is known
neither by the world, nor by hirnfelf, to he what he
truly is. Blut bring him into a new situation of life,
which accords with his predominant difpofion ; which
firikes on certain latent qualities of his foul, and awa-
kens them into at;on ; and, as the leaves of a flow-
er gradually unfold to the fun, so shall all his true
chalaaer oren full to view.

This

This may, in one light, be accounted not lomuch

an alteration of characer produced by a charge of
circumftanoes, as a discovery brought forth of the
real character which formerly lay concealed. Yet,
at the fame time, it is true that the man himself un-
dergoes a change. For opportunity being given for
certain difpofitiors. which had been dormant, to ex-
ert themselves without restraint, they of course ather
strength. By means of the ascendency which they
gain, other parts of the temper are borne down ;
and thus an alteration is m de in the whole ltruc-
ture and fyflem of the foul. He ib a truly wile and
good man who, through divine affiltance, remains
fuperiour to this influence of fortune on his characer;
who having once imbibed worthy sentiments, and
etlablifhed proper principles of aaion, continues con-
slant to these, whatever his circumstances be; main-
tains, throughout all the changes of his life, one
uniform and supported tenour ofcondu ; and what
he abhored as evil and wicked in the beginning of
his days, continues to abhor to the end. But howr
rare is it to meet with this honourable consistency
among men, while they are palirng through the dif-
ferent flations and periods of life! When they'are
setting out in the world, before their minds have been
greatly misled or debated, they glow with generous
emotions, and 'ook with contempt on what is fordidand
guilty. But advancing farther in life, and inured by
degrees to the crooked ways of men , prefing through
the crowd, and the bustle of the world; obliged to
contend with this man's craft, and that man's scorn;
accuflorned, sometimes, .to conceal their sentiments,
and often to flifle their feelings, they became at llft
hardended in heart, and familiar with corruption,
Who would not dropa tear over this fad, bu: frequent
fall of human probity and honour ! Who is not hum-
bled, when he behol s the refined fentimants and
high principles on w. i:h we are so ready to v lere

ourfe! es,

ourselves, brought to such a shameful issue; and
man, with all his boafled attainments of reason; dif-
covered so often to be the creature of his external for-
tune, moulded and formed by the incidents of his life !

THE infitnce of Hazael's degeneracy leads us to

reflet, in particula:, en the dangels which arise from
fiations of power and greatnes ; especially, when
the elevation of nren to theie has been rapid and fud-
den. Few have the firength of mird which is requi-
site for bearing such a cTaange with temperance, and
felf-command. The refpea which is paid to the
great, and the scope which their condition affords for
the Irdulgence of plearure, are perilous circuftances
to virtue. When men live among their equals, and
are accustomed toencounter the hardships of life, they
are of course reminded of their mutual dependence
on each other, and ofthe dependence of all upon God.
But vwhen they are highly exalted above their fellowv,
they meet with few objecs to awaken serious reflec-
tion, but with many to feed and inflame their pafri-
ons. They are apt to separate their interest from
that of all around them ; to wrap themselves up in
their vain grandeur ; and in the lap of indolence and
felfilh plealure, to acquire a cold indfference to the
cnncerns even of those whom they call their friends.
The fancied independence into hich they are lifted
up, is adverse to sentiments of piety, as well as of
humanity, in their heart. Tali:g the timbrel and
the harp, and rejoicing at the sur.d of tbe organ, they
jay unto God, Depart fron: us, or we dl/ire not the
knowledge of thy uays. H/hat is thA Almighty that we
J7hould serve him P or wabat profit Jbulld we have, if
we pray unto him ?

But we are not to imagine, that elevated stations

in the world furnish the only formidable trials
to which our virtue is xpofed. It will be found,
that we are liable to no feu er nor less dangeroustemp-
tatit s, from the oprof e extreme of poverty and

depression

deprefflon. When men who have known better days
are throne-down into abjeC situations of fortune,
their spirits are broken and their tempers foured. En-
vy rankles in their breast at such as are more success-
fyu. The providence of Heaven is accused in fecrer
murmurs; and the sense of misery is ready to punish
then into atrocious crimes, in order to better their
tfate. Among the inferiour cla(Tes of mankind, craft
and difhonefly are too often found to prevail. Low
and penurrious circumllances depress the human pow-
ers. They deprive men of the proper means of know-
ledge and improvement; and where ignorance is gross,
it is always in hazard of engendering profligacy.

Hence is has been, generally, the pinion of wife

men in all ages, that there is a certain middle con-
dition of life, equally remote from either of those
extremes of fortune, which though it want not also
its own dangers, yet is, on the whold, the (late most
favourable bothto virtue and to happincfs, For there,
luxury and pride on the one hand, have not opportu-
n;ty to enervate or intoxicate the mind, nor want and
dependence on the other, to fink and debase it; there,
all the native affe&ions of the foul have the freelf
and fairest exercise, the equality of men is felt,
friendships are formed, and improvements of eve-y
fort are pursued with molt ficcels; there, men are
prompted to induflry without being overcome by toil,
and their powers callen forth into exertion, with-
out being either superseded by too ml'ch abundance,
or baffled by infuperab'e difficulties; there, a mixture
of comforts and of wants, at once awakens their gra-
titude to God, and reminds them of their dependence
on his aid; and therefore, in this (late, men seem to
enjoy life to molt advantage, and to be leaflexpofcd to
the fnaresof vice. Such aconditicn is recoreded, in the
book of Proverbs, to have been the wish and choice of
one who was eminent for wisdom, Remove far from
me vaz.fy and lies. Give me neither- overty nor rieh-

'I.

e. Feed mne with food convenienzt sot me. Left I b
fi/ll and lny thee, and fay, I4 bo iJ the Lard? or lejf
1 b pcar andlieal, and lake the name of my God in vain.

FR O M the whole view hiich we have now taken

.f the tubject, we may, in the first place, learn the
realons For which a variety of conditions and ranks
was established by Providence among mankind. This
lile is olvioufly intended to be a state of probation and
trial No trial of charaters is requisite with refpe&t
to God, Aho fes what is in every heart, and per-
fcEtly knows what part each man would aA, in all
the poAible situations of fortune. But on account of
men thel.felves, and cf the world around them, it
was necefVarv that trial fihuld take place, aud a dif-
crimination of characters be made; in order that
true virtue might be feperated from faife appearances
ot it, ard the juflice or -Heaven bedifplayed in its si-
nal retributiuns; in order that the failings of men
nmight be so -discovered to themfelvCs, as to afford
them proper ir.ftruaion, and promote their amend-
n nt ; and in order that their cfiaraaers might be
fl-own to the world in every, point of view, which
cc u'd fuir nih either examples for imitation, or admo-
nitions of danger. '1 he acce * plifhment of there im-
portart yurpoles required, that human life should not
always proceed in one terour ; but that it fhculd both
be chequered with many revolutions, and deveriflcd
by a variety of employments and ranks; in palling
throrgh which, the rouchilone might be applied to.
the characers of men, and - their hidden virtues or
vices cxploied. Hazael might have appeared in hiflc-
r w-ith a degree of reputation to which he was not
entitled, had he continued to aEt in a subordinate fla-
tion. At bottom, he was falfe:and unsound. When
raised higher in life, the ceirupticn of his heart dif-.
covered itself, and he is now held forth with deserved
infamy, as a warning to succeeding ages.

IN the ftcond plade we learn, from what 1 ? been

fid,

said, in the importance of attending with the utmost
care to the choice which we make of our employment
and condition in life. It has been. shown, that our
external situation frequently operates powertully on
our moral charaaer; and by consequence that it is
ftri&lyconneaed, not only with our temporal welfare,
but with our everlasting happiness or misery. He who
might have passed unblamed and upright, thro' cer-
tain walks of life, by unhappily chufing a road where
he meets with temptations too ltrong for his virtue,
preciFitates himself into lhame here, and intb endless
ruin hereafter. Yet how often is the, determination
of,this most important article left to the chance of acci-
dental connections, or submitted to the option of
youthful fancy and humour ? When it is made the
fuibjel of serious deliberation, how seldom have they,
on whom the decision of it depends, any further view
-than to dispose of one who is coming out into life, as
that he may the soonest become rich, or, as it-is ex.
pressed, make his .v'ayto most advantage in the world ?
Are there no other obje&s than this to be attended to,
in fixing the plan of life ? Are there no more sacred and
important interests whichdeferve to be consulted?-
You would not willingly place one for whose welfare
you was interested, in a situation for-which you were
convinced that his abilities were unequal. These,
therefore, you examine with care ; and on them
you reft the ground of your dicifion. Be persuaded
that no alilites merely, but the turn of the temper
and the heart, require to be examined with equal at-
tention, in forming the plan of future establishment.
Every one has some peculiar weaknefl, fcme predo-
minant passion, which cxpofes him to temptaticns
of one kind more than of another. Early this may
.be defcerned to ffoot; and from its first rifigns its
future groth may beinfetred. Anticipate its progress.
Cor rider how it is likely to be affected, by succeeding
occurrences in life. If you blirg one whom you ale

:... ~rearing

reading ap into a fituazicn, where all the furrottding
circumftanees flall cherish and mature this stal
principle in his nature, you become, in a great mia-
sure, answerable for the consequences that-follow.' In-
vain you trust to his abilities and powers. Vice and
corruption, when they have tainted the heart, are sus-
ficient to overset the greatef abilities. Nay, too
frequently they turn them against the pefcflfr ; and-
render them the instruments of his more fpeedyruin.

TN the third place, we lean from the history whilch

has been illuflrated, never to judge of true happi-
ines, merely from the degree of mens' advancement
in the world Alway betrayed by appearances, the
multitude are caught by nothing so much as by the
ihow and pomp of life. They think every one blef
who is raised fla above others in rank. Fiom their
earlyift years they are taught to fix their views upon.
worldly elevation, as the ultimate objea of their aims
and of all the sources of error in condua, this is the
most ger.eral.-E-azae! on the thione of Syria would,-.
doubtless, be more envied, and esteemed by the mul-
titude a far happier man than, when yet a subjet,
he was enplos-ed by Benhadad to carry his mefTfge
to Elifl a. Yet, 0 Hazael I hew ruch better had
it been for thee never to h.tve known the name or ho-
nour of a king, than to have purchased it at the ex-
pence e f so mrch guilt; forfeiting thy fiirft and bell
charaCer; rtiflning into climes which were once thine
abhorrence and becoming a traitor to th'e native fen-
tir.ents and dicates of thy heart ! low faial to thy
repose proved that coveted purple, which was dren-
ched by thee in lo much innocent blood ! Haqw much
more cheerful were thy days, and how much calmer
tly nights, in the former periods of thy life, than,
v hen placed on a throne, thy ears were invaded by
day with the cries of the milerable whom thou haft
ruined; an,' thy slumbers broken by night with the
lhcekinig remembrance of thy cruelties and crimes t-

Never

Never let us judge by the outside of things; nor
conclude a man to be happy, solely because he is en'
compafled with wealth or grandeur. Much misery
often lurkeswhere it is little fufpeEed by the world.
The material enquiries rel'pecing felicity are, not
what a man's external condition is, but with what
dirpofition of mind he bears it; whether he be cor-
rupted or improved by it ; whether he conducs him-
self so as to be acceptable to God, and approved of
by good men. For thefeare the circumstances which
make the real and important diflrnrtions among the
conditions of men. The effe&s of these are to last
for eves, when all worldly dillinaions (hall be for-
gotten,

IN the fourth place, from all that has been said,

we should learn never to be rmmoderately anxious
about our external situation, but to submit our lot
with cheerfulnels to the disposal of'Heaven. To
make the bell and moil prudent arrangements which
we can, refpeting cur condition in life, is matter
of high duty. But let us remember, that all the
plans which we form are precarious ard uncertain.
After the utmost precautions taken by human wi!dom,
no man can foresee the hidden dangers which may
await him in that path of life on which he has pitched.
Providence chnfes for us much more wifely than we
can chute fcr ourselves ; and, from circuinftances that
appeared at firRfmoft unpromifiog andadv rfe, often
brings forth in the ifftie both temporal and spiritual
felicity. Wbo knoweth what ii good for man in this
life, all the dav' of his vaain lift, which be Jpendeth as
a [hadrwv P When we conrfier the darkness of our
present stare, the embecility of human na.ure, and
the doubtful and ambiguous value of all that we call
profperitv, the exhortation of the Ifal'rift comes
homewiih great Forceoneveiy reflcaing mind. Cim-
mir thy way unti the Lqrd.-Form the measures with
procuce ; but divedt thyself of anxiety about theiflue.

lnftcad

# SERMON XXVIII. ECCLESIASTES vii. 2, 3, 4. It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting; for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his heart. ...

Inilead of reeking to order thine own lot, acquiesce
in the appointment of Heaven, and follow without
hcfitation the call of Providence, and of duty. In
whatever situation of life God shall place thee, look
up devoutly to Him for grace and affilance ;and fludy
to a& the part assigned thee with a faithful and up-
r:ght heart. Thus shalt thou have peace within thy-
seif, while thy course is going on; and when it
draws towards a close, with fatisfacion thou shalt
review thy condu&. For, after all the toils and la-
bours of life, and all the vain ftluggles which we
maintain for pre-eminence and diflin&ion, we shall
find at the conclusion of the whole scene, that to fear
God and keep his cmmanndments is the whole of man.
S ER M O N XXVIII.

Ecc.ESIASTES vii. 2, 3, 4.
It is better to go to the house of mourning, than toga to the

bouse of feafling; for that is the end of all men, and
the living will lay it to his heart. Sorrow is better
than laughter; for by the sadness of the countenance
the heart is made better. Tbe heart of the wife is
in the house of mourning i but the heart of jools is in
the house of mirth.
M /rANY of the raxims contained in this book of

Ec-clesiastes will appear firange sayings to the

men of the world. But when they refle& on the
chara&er of him who delivers them, they cannot but
admit that his tenets deserve a serious and attentive
examination. For they are not the do&rines of a
pedant, who, from an obscure retirement, declaims
against pleasures which. he never knew. They are

not

not the invetives of a disappointed man, who takes
revenge upon the world, by satirizing those enjoy-
ments, which he faught in vain to obtain. 1 hey
are the conclufiens of a great and profperious prince,
who had once given full scope to his desires; who
was thoroughly acquainted with life in its most flat-
tering scenes; and who now, reviewing all that he
had enjoyed, delivers to us the result of long expe-
rience, and tried wisdom. None of his principles
seem, at first view, more dubious and exceptionable
than those which the text presents. To aflert that
sorrow is preferable to mirth, and the house of mour-
ning to the house of /ea/ling to advise men to chufe
mortification and sadness when it is in their power to
indulge in joy, may appear harsh and unreasonable
do&rines. They may, perhaps, be accounted ene-
mies to the innocent enjoyment of life who give coun-
tenance to so severe a system, and thereby increase
the gloom which already fits sufficiently heavy on the
condition of man. But let this censure be Iufpended,
until we examine with care into the spirit and mean-
ing of the fentimets here delivered.

It is evident that the wife man does not prefer for-

row, opon its own account, to mirth; or represent
sadness as a fRate more eligible than joy. He confi-
deres it in the light of discipline only. He views it
with reference to an end. He compares it with cer-
tain improvements which he supposes it to produce;
when the heart is made better by the fadne/f of the coun-
tenance, and the living to lay to heart what is the end
of all men. Now, if great and latding benefits are
found to result from occasional sadness, there, sure,
may be capable of giving it the preference to some
fleeting sensations of joy, The means which he re-
commends in order to our'obtainirg those benefits
are to be explained according to the principles of
found reason; and to be underltood wth those limita-
tions which the eaflern style, in delivering moral

rrecepts

precepts, frequently requires. He bids us-go t t he
house of mourning;. but he does not command us to'
dwell there. When he prefers sorrow to laughter,
he is not to be understood as prohibiting all mirth;
as requiring us to weara perpetual cloud on our brow,
and to sequestrate ourselves from every cheerful en-.
tertainment of social life. Such an interpretation
would be inconsistent with many other exhortations
in his own writings, which recommend temperate
and innocent joy. It would not suit with the proper
discharge of the duties which belong to us as mem-
bers of society; and would be moil opposite to the
goodness and benignity of our Creator. The true
scope of his dotrine in this passage is, that there is
a certain temper and irate of' heart, which is of far
greater consequence to real happiness, than the
habitual indulgence of giddy and thoughtless mirth;
that for the attainment and cultivation of this temper,
frequent returns of grave refle&ion are necessary;
that, upon this account, it is profitable to give adrnif-
sion to those views of human difirefs which tend to
awaken !'uch reflecion in the mind; and that thus,
from the viciflitudes of sorrow, which we either ex-
poeience in our own lot, or sympathize with in the
ot ot others, much w.isdom and improvement nay
be derived. These are the sentiments which I pro-
pose at present to justify and recommend, as mo(l
suitable to the charaaer. of men and of Chritians;
and not in the least inconfirfent with pleasure, right-
ly undertfood.

Among the variety of difpofitioos which are to be

found in the world, bome indeed requires less of this
dilcipline than others. There are persons whose ten-
der and delicate sensibility, either derived from nature.
or brought on by repeated afllitions renders them too
deeply iufceptible of every mournful imprefflon;
whose spir-ts fiand more in need of being flpported
and cheered, than of being faddened by the dark

views

'views of human life. In such cales, we are com-
manded to lift up the hands which bang down, and to
.confirm the feeble kneer. But this is far from being
the comon disposition of men. Their aiinds are in
general inclined to levity, much more than to :hought-
ful melancholy; and their hearts more apt to be con-
tra&ed and hardehed, than to relate with too much
felicity: I shall therefore endeavo'ur to shew them,
what bad,inclinations their compliance with Solomon's
advice would corret; what good dispositions with
*refpea to God, their neighbours, and themselves, it
-would improve; and how, upon the whole, his doc-
:trine is verified, that by the Jadnejs of the countenance
the heart is made better.

I B EGIN by observing, that the temper recom-

mended in the text fiits the pre!ent confitution of
,things in this world. Had man been defiined for a
.course of undisturbed enjoyment, perpetual ga:ety
would then have corresponded to his slate; and pen-
*five though have been an unnatural intrusion. But
in a Rtate where all is chequered and mixed, where
.there is no prosperity without a reverse, and no joy
without its attending griefs; where from the house of
seasing all must, at one time or other, pars into the
.house of mourning, it were equally unnatural if no
.admiftion was given to grave reflecion. The mind of
man iruf he attempered to his condition. Providence,
whofe'wifdom is conspicuous in alLits works, has ad-
justed with exa& proportion the inward powers to the
outward Rlate of every rational being. It has for th's
purpose implanted the serious and sympathetic fee'-
.ings in our nature, that they might correspond with
·the viciflitudes of sorrow in our lot. He who endea-
vours to repel their influence, or to fiifle tlem in un-
seasonable mirth. a&s a violent and unnatural part.
Hle frives with vain efforts againi' the current of
tilings; contradi&s the intention of .his Maker, and

wouateraas the original impuls of
o hown heart, I

It is proper also to observe, that as the sadness of

the colntenance has, in our prelent situation, a proper
and natural place; so it is requisite to the true en-
joyment of pleasure. Worldly and sensual men often
remark not, till it be too late, that by the fludied es-
forts of constant repetition, all their pleasures fail.
Thicy draw them off so close to the dregs, that they
become insipid and nauseous. Hence even in tlalhter
their heart is forrourfjil, anl the end of their mirth is
icavinefs. It is only the interpofal of serious and
thoughtful hours, that can give any lively sensations
to the retu!ns ofjoy. I speak not of those thought-
ful hours, too well known to finners which proceed
from guilty'remorfe ; and which, instead of preparing
for future pleasure, damp and sicken the moment of
enjoyment; but of those which take rife from the mind
rretating into itself, and opening to the ientiments
of religion and hnmanity. Such hours of virtuous
sadness brighten the gleams of fucceedingjoy. They
give to the temperate enjoyments of the pious and
humane a refined and delicate relish, to which the
hardened and insensible are entire ftrangerc. For it
will be found, that in proportion as the tender affecEi-
ons of the foul are kept awake, howmuch soever they
may fornclines diflrels the heart, the preserve it open
likewise to the moss agreeable sensations. He who
never knew the sorrows of fiiendfhip, never also
knew its joys. He whose heart cannot relent in the
houfs of mourning, will, in the moil social hour of
the house of fcafting. partake of no more than the
lowefl part of animal plcafure.-I-lavinl prcmifcd
tilte ohft-vations;, I proceed to point out the (dirc<5
efi'cl t of a prroper attention to the dillrrcl-cs of life
upon our moral and religions charxaier.

i[ the firtl place, the hiife of mourning i:; cahli-

I ited to give a proper check to our natural though -
I(lVcef an tid'lvity. 'l'lie indolence of mankind, and
theirlove ot pleafuire, fipread through all clhar:aat.ir'

and

and ranks rome degree, ss avenrfio0 to; what. s;.grave,
and terious, . They. grgfp gt any !oje., :either of
hufinefs.or aiuferment,, vlich.'k:kes irie

:prfeffitmo -i

mnert p.ls fisipothly a way ; ,viiqb'c. rries heir thoughts.
abroad, and faes them' fronm thetrubjle-'of refleing,
ihemfelves. With. too many, ithis pafles:into a ha-
bit of conflant difipation. If their fortune andrank
aljpvw tlhem r to. indulge itheir.irclinations, they devote.
thernlelves to the purfruit of amuf4me.nt thro':all its
different forms, The ,ftilful arrangefmfitoffits:fucf
ceflive fcenesa' and; .fp preparatory .tydy.,for,fiining
i.n each, are the ofly, :exs ertiionl; in; which.tieir,ttnier-
sanding is employed,. ^uch. a; nroo of life.y. kefep
alive, for .a ,wheile:-

a. fiiviFlp:s.vijaeity., ! IL .aiy- im

prove men . in- some of' tiofe. exteriour occorpplifh-
ments, which. sparkle in:.the. eyes of the. giddy and
the vain; but it muf: fink,them in theseftpem of all
the wife. It rQtndcrs them iftrtigerst0 th.erifeIves P
and useless, if-notlperipiciou?, ;tothe world. They
Ipfe every manly priiciple. r:Their,minds.betomes re-
],lieed and effeminate. All that is,great.or refpeaable
in ithe humqn cliaraEer.,ij buried under, a mafó.of tri-
flcs and follies. . . :

If some measures ought to be, taken for rescuing

the 'mind fromitJlis:difgraceful .levit. ; if fonoe prjn-
ciples mnuft be acquicsd vllicl;l..naiy -give more digsity
and teadine fs ,to cndQ;.whiere,' I: pray you,:ay e hlefe
to be lookedifor:? .Not fvrCly in; the houf offeAfting
where,ev.ry ebjeCtl fl.atters thc. fenfcg, and ftengthena
tlie,feduaions to' Whileh: *l are already pro.ne tb here
the fpiritof. pimfpation -ir'culates from .heart to heart .
and tie childrcn ot iolly mutually admire, and.are:
ndnmirlcli It, is in tle ,Ibbcr, and. fcrious house of mour-
ning that the tide of vanity is made to turn,. and a
ntw .dli.cQicln givcr.t t ihl .curcrntof, thoughlt .Vhenll
fobre itffciging, inqideit prficts, a., frong di fcovcry of
tlh de cit fulnef: of ,nal vdrldly joy, andr rousea our
fenfibility-J t.1 lutmuna woe,; .ilcn,. we behold.tbofr

: with

with whom 'we had lately mingled in the house of
-feasting, funk by forre of the sudden vicissitudes of
life into the.vale of misery ; or when; in'lad silence,
we stand by the friend whorn we had loved as our
own foul, fIretched on he bed: of death ; then is the
leafon when the world begins 'to appear in a new
light; when the heart opens to virtuous sentiments,'
and is led into that.t'rain :of !reflealion.which ought.
to direc 'life. He who before- knew not -what'
it was to commune-with his -hear ion any serious- sub-
jet, now puts thie quef-iori- t hiitlelf, for what pur-
pose he -was sent: forth into this "irnt.alt transitory
late ;,what -his fate isilikely.to be.whtrn it concludes;
and what judgmerit h o-ight to. form of those pleasures
whichamufetor a-little, tutwhich, he now fees, can-
not save the 'heart from hnguilh in the evil- day.
Touched by the hand-of thoughtful melancholy, that
airy.edtfice of'blifs which fanc-y had raised up for him,
vanifhies away 'He beholds in she place of it; the-
loiely and baron:defert, in. atich,- surrounded with
many a disagreeable obljeQ,. he is left: musing upon
himself,. Tl'he time-which hih has mnif-lpent, and the
faculties which he hasmifemployed, his toolifh levity
and his criminal pursuits,' all rile: in painful prospect
before him. 'That 'uuknowrn Iate ;oft existence into-
xvhich, race after race, -the children: es men pass,
Iirikes his mind with! folenn' ae'.--I there no couric
by which he can rctrivel is pat errours ? Is there no
iuperiour power to; which h'ct:ar look upfor aid ? Is
there no plan of condnu& . wlichi i if it exenmpt him
slotfrom folrow, can at least procure, him coricolation
anmidfl the dificfsfill exigencics of life ?-Such nm;-
dlitations n there, figgeftcd by the ioutl' of mourniing,
frequently produce a chtlaigc on r he w hc.- ch:lra:tclr.
They revive thole sparks ofgoodncls lwhit:h were nighl
being quite extinguilhediin the difipatcd milnd; and
givc ile to principles of condua more rational-in them-
.fclves, and more suitable to the human ftie. - ..

. . 1I

:IN the second place, impreflirns of this nature not

.only produce moral terioufnefs but awaken sentiments
of piety, and bring men into the fancuary of religi-
.on. One might, indeed, imagine that the bleflings
of a prosperous condition would prove the most natu-
.al inciterents to devotion; and that when men were
happy in thernfelves, and saw nothing but happiness
around them, they could not fail greatfully to ac-
iknowledge that God who giveh/ them all tbings
richly to enjoy: Yet such is their corruption, that
they are never more ready to forget their benefator,
than when loaded with his benefits. The giver is
concealed from their careless and inattentive view,
:by the cloud of his own gifts. WVhen their life con-
tinues to flow in one-fmooth current,.unrufled by any
griefs; when they neither receive in their own cir-
cumflances, -nor allow themselves to Teceive from the-
.eircumftance of others, any admonitions.of human
.inftabilit-, they not only become regardless of Provi-
dence, but are in hazard ofcontemning it. Glorying'
.in their fcrength, and lifted up by .the pride.of life
*into supposed independence, that impious sentiment,
.if not uttered by .the mouth, yet too often lurks in
the hearts of many, durning their flourifhingperiods,
:.'La is the rAlmigh/iy .tbat 'we.jl7zouldjerve' him, and

uhast profit bould- we have *ij 'we pray unto bin ?

If such be the tendency of the houl'e of feafling,

how nectffary.is it that, by some change in.their fitt-
ation,. men (hould be obliged to enter into the house
.of .tnourning, in order to recover a proper
sense of their .dependent state ? It is there,
.vhel forsaken by the gnittics of the world,
:iid left alone with .GSod, that we are maCde to per-
.ccive now awful [i-s governmentl is;; how cafly hu-
,m-a:n greatnelas ,end-., efore him ; and how quickily
all our defignis and lceafires, at his intcrpofal, vaniflt
.into nothing. There; wihen the countenance is fad,
and thd .afletions 'a'e softened by gricf; when .wc

T z fit

fit apart, involved in serious thought, looking dow.a
as from some eminence on those dark clouds that hang
over the life of man, the arrogance of prosperity is
humbled, and the heart melts under the impressions
of religion. Formerly we were taught. but now we
fee, we eel, how much we stand in need of an Almig-
ty proteaor, amidst the changes of this vain world.
Our foul cleaves to him-who .d/piles not, ngr abhors
Me affliitiorn o the afflified. Prayer flows forth of
its own':accord from the relating heart, that he may
be our Goad, ,and the God of our friends in distress;
that he may never forsake us while we are Cojourning
in this Land.of .pilgrimage; may ftrengtben us under
its calamities, and bring us hereafter to thole habi-
tations.of.reft, where we, and they whom we love,
may be delivered from the trials which all are now
doomed toendure. The difcoveriesof his mercy which
be.has made in the gospel of Christ, are viewed
with joy, as so many rays of light lent down from
aboveto. defpel, in fometdegree,the surrounding gl.om.
A mediator and intercessor with the.Sovereign:of, the
LUniverfe, appear comfortable names; and the refur-
re&ion.of the just becomes the powerful cordial of
.;rief. In such moments as these, which -we may
:ftfly call happy moments, the foul participates.of
:11 the pleasures of devotion. It feels the power-of
tligion to support and relieve. , It is loftanedi. with-
.ut being broken. It is full, and it pours itself forth.;
oonrs ittelf_ forth, if we may be. allowed to.use the
,-prefionr: into the ibofom fs its merciful Creator.

-. i.. the third place, such: fetious feitimrnts pro.
· uce the happiest effea upon our disposition towards
our fellow-creatora, as wll;as tDwards 431;I f It is a
cnninon and just observation, that they. who have
ived., aways, in Seuence andi ease, lrangers to,,the
miseries ot life, t..liablectcxortraa bardnefs of
hea t with refpettio all the concerns of others.
NYrapped up.in themselves, 'indtheir pw.a plefures,

*';~:~~
"~' ~they

they behold with indifference the molt affe&ing
scenes of dittrefs. Habituated to indulge all their de-
fires without controul, they become impatient of the
leaR provocation or offence ; ard are ready totravn-
pie on their inferiours, as if they Were creatuersof a
different species from themselves. Is this an amiable
temper, or such as becomes a man? When appear-
ing in others, do we not view it with miich difplkai-
fhre ? When imputed to ourselves, can we avoid
accounting it a severe reproach ?

By the experience of distress, this arrogant:infenfi-

bility of temper is moR effeteually correted ; asthe
remembrance of our own sufferings naturally prompts
us to feel for others when they susser. Bat if provi-
dence has been so kind ab not to subjet us to much
of this discipline in our own lot, let us draw improved.
mnent from the harden lot of others. Let us some-
times ftep aside from the smooth and flowery paths in
vhibch we are permitted to walk, in order to view
the toilsome march of our fellows through the thorny
desert. By vol ntarily going into the hbufe of
mourning; by yielding to the sentiments which it
'excites, and mingling our tears with those of the as-
fliEed, we fhaat acquire that humane sensibility,
which is one of the highest ornaments of the nature
of man. Perceiving how mzch the common difireffes
of li'e place us all on a level, and render the high
and tl:elcw, the rich and the poor, companions in
misfortune and mortality, we fliall learn to set no
man at nougl.r, and, leaf of any, our afflited bro-
ther. Prejudices will be extinguiflied, and benevo-
lence opened and enlarged, when looking around on
the multitude of men, we confider them as a band of
fellow-travellers in the valley of woe, where itought
to be the office of every one to alleviate, as much as
poflible, the common burden.-While the v/ain and
the licentious are revelling in the midst of extrava-
gance and riot, how little do they think 'of tlo e

T 3 fcenen

fcenesoffore diflrefs which are going on at that to"
ment thrcughout the world; multitudes flruggling
for a poor subsistence to support the wife and the
children whom they love, and who look. up to theni
with eager eyes for that bread which they can hardly
procure ; multitudes groaning under fickncfs Lin de.o-
late cottages, untended and untnourned;, many ap-
parently in a better situation of life, pining away in
secret with concealed griefs; families weeping over
the beloved friends whom they have loft, or, in all'
the bitternels ofanguifh, bidding those who are just
expiring the last adieu !

May we not appeal to theheart of every good man,

nay almost to the heart of every man who has
not devefled himself of his natural feelings, whether
the admifion of such views of human life might not,
sometimes at least, furnish a more worthy employ-
ment to the mind than that mirt cf fools, which So-
lomon compares to tbe cradling of tbornr under a pott
the transient burst of'unmeaningjoy; the empty ex-
plosion of giddiness and levity ? Those sallies of jol-
lity in the house of fearsing are often forced from a
troubled mind; like flashes from the black cloud,
which, after a momentary cffulgence. are tucceeded
by thicker darkness. Whereas compaffiornte affc-
tions, even at the time when they draw teals frcm.
our eyes for human misery, convey fatisfa&ion-to the
heaxt. The gracious aprontrrent of H-aven has or-
dained that sympathetic pains fhiuld always be ac-
companied with a certain degree of plealue ; on
Vurpofe that -ie might be more interefled in the cafe
of the distressed, and that by this myfterous bond.,
man might be linked closer to man. The inward fa-
tisfaCion which belongs to the compassionate affecti-
ons is, at tl;e lame ti.ne, heightened by the appro-
bation which they receive from ccr reaon ; ard by
the confciouinefs which they affcrd us of feeling
xxh.it men and Chr fiians ouhlit to teel.

i%,

1': the fourth place, the-difpofition recommended

in the text, not only improves us in piety and huma-
nity, but likewise affiits us in felf-government, and
the'due moderation of our desires, The house of
mourning is the -&chool of temperance and.fobriety.
Every wife man will find it for his interest to enter
into it. ometimes of his own accord, left otherwise
he be compelled to take up his dwelling there-. Sea-'
enable interruptions of our pleaful es are necessary to
their prolongation. For, continued scenes of luxury
and indulgence. hasen to a melancholy issue.. The
house of feasting too often'becomes an avenue to the
houle of mourning. Short, to the licentious, is thb
interval between them ; and-fpeedy the tranfitioa
from the one to'the other.

But supposing that,.by prudent management, the

man of pleasure could avoid the pernicious effeasc
which intemperance and diffolutenefsare likely to pro-
duce on their health, or.their fortune, can they also
preventthole dliforders which ftch habits will intro-
duce into their. minds ? Can they escape that wrath
of the Almighty,. which will. infallibly pursue them
for their fins both here and hereafter ? For whence,
bo much as from the unchecked pursuit of pleasure.
do all those crimes ari'e which slain the charaCers
of men with the deepest guilt, and expose them to
the levereft judgementsof Heaven ? Whence, then,
is the correcive of those. mischiefs to be fought, but
trom fMch a difciplineashiall moderate that intemperate
admiration of'the-wolld which gave raise to theevil?
By repairing fometitimes to the house of mourning,
you would chasten the looseners of fancy, abate the
eagernes of paflion, and afford scope to reason for
.exert.ng her refraining powers. You would behold
this.woild flripped of its faife colours, and reduce to
its proper levil. Many an important inltrution you
wouJd racive from the humliation of the proud,
the mortification of the vain; and the sufferings of

T 4 the

the vol6ptuetls, which you wouid fee excmplified
hefore you, in thie chambers of sorrow, of sickness,
and of death.' 'You wouldltih'en be tatight to'rejoice
as thougt you - rcjoeied nOt,' an lo to weepl 'ar tfihug ft
'weeped nbt;- that is, neither in ~jy, nor :ir grlif, 'tb
run to excess; but to uJf t'Aif world so as ri t to abu/f
ii; contemplating the f/ajion thereof as pafjinglaway.

Moreover, you yould there learn the imrrttaht

lesson of fuitingyour mind, before-hand, to what ycu
had reason to expe& flori- the world; a t ffon too eleP
dom fludied by madkind, and to the neglef'of which,
much of theirmifery, and much of their. guilt is tbr
be:charged. By turning away their eyes from the dark
fide of life; by looking at the world only in one light,
and that a flattering one, they form their measures on
a false plan, and are necessarily deceived and betray-
ed. Hence, the vexation of succeeding difappoinf-
ment and blafed hope. Hence the criminal. impa-
tience cf life, and: their bitter accusations of God
and man ; when, in truth, they have reason to accuse
only their own folly.-Thou who wouldfi ac likea
wise'man, and build thy house op a, rock, and hot on
the sand, contemplate human life-not only in the ftn-
shine, but in the shade. Frequent the hcufe of mour-
ning, as well as the house of mirth. Study the na-
ture of that slate in which thou art placed ; and ba:
lance its joys vwith its forrw-s. Thou feert that the
cup which is held forth to the whole human race, is
mixed. 'Of its bitter-ingredients,-expe a that'thou
artto drink thy 'Fortion. Thou feefl the florrfi ho
vering every where' in the clouds around thee; 'Be
not surprised if on thy head it flhall break. Lower
therefore, thy fails. Dismiss thy florid hops ; and
come forth prepared either to aft or to susser, accor-
ding as Fleaven fliall dctree. Thus shalt thou be ex-
cited to take tihepropereft meafurws for defence; by
edeavourinlto fecu e an ilt( refl i Hls fahvour, whoI,
in the t.me of trouble, can bide thee in his pavillioifr

Thy

Thy mind shall adjult itself to follow the order of his
providence. Thou (halt be enabled, with equanri-
mity and fleadinefs, to hold thy course through life.
Finally,

IN the fifth place, by accufloming ourselves to'

such serious views of life, our exceflive fondness for
life itself will be moderate, and our minds gradually
formed to wish and to long for a better world. If
we know that our continuance here is to be short, and
that we are intended by our Maker for a more latling
state, and for employments of a nature altogether
different from those which now occupy the busy, or
amuse the vain, we mull surely be convinced, that
it is of the highest consequence to prepareourfelves
for so important a change. This view of our duty is
frequently held up to us in the sacred writings- and
hence religion becomes, though not a morose, yet
a grave and folcmn principle, calli g off the attention
of men from light pursuits, to those which are of
eternal moment. HF-bat is a man prcfited if be /ball
gain the whcle world and lo/e his own foul; if he shall
lead a life ofthoughtless mirth on earth, ane exclude
himself fiom eternal felicity in Heaven? Worldly
affec'ion, and sensual pleafine, depress all our higher
powers. They form an unnatural union between the
human foul and this earth, which was only designed
for its temporary abode. They attachitfelf toJ flrong-
ly to objecs from which it must ho tly part. They
alienate its desires from God and heaven, and dc;ect
it with flavilh and unmlanly fears of death. \Vhercas,
by the di ipl ne otf religious ferioufn ifs, it is -radii:lly
loosened from the fetters of sense. Afliled to d;fcc-
ver the vanity of this world, it rifes above it; and
in the hours of fober thought, cultivates co neacion
with thor. divine and immortal objeds, among which
it is l-figr.ed tO dc1vcl.

I' N o G has now b-cn i'd t o convince any
tIiit.kir;g pcr/on ,5f the jstlice, anid rtlainablencis,-cf

' 5 tlhe

the maximesin, the text ; and to show, that, on va-
rious occasions, farrow may be better than laughter.
Wouldll thou acquire t!e habit of recollecion, a:nd
fix the prirciples of thy condut ; woutdfl thou be
led up to thy Creator and Rcdemrner, and be formed
to sent ments of piety and devotion ; wouldst thou be
acquainted with thole mild and tender affetions which'
delight the compaflionate and humane; w-ouldit thoir
have the power of sensual appetites tamed and cor-
re6ted, and thy foul raised a bove the ignoble love of
life, and fear of death ? Go, my brother, go-nor
to (cerce of pleaftre and riot, not to the house of'
featling and milth-but tn the silent house of mourn-
ing; ard adventure to dwell for a while among objeats
tlat will soften thy heart. Contemplate the lifeless
remains of what once was fair and ffourifhing. Bring
home to thyself the viciflitudes of life. Recal the
remembrance of the friend, the parent, or the child,
v hom thou tenderly lovefi. Look back on the days
of former years; and think on the companions of
thy youth, who now seep in the dulf. Let the vani-
ty, the mutability, and the for;ows of the human
ftlate, rife in full prcCpec before thee; and though
thy countenance may be made fad, ty beart fhlall' t
rade tttter. This fadneDR, though for the present it
dejects, yet shall in the end fortify thy spirit ; in-
spiring thee with such sentiments, and promptings
fixch resolutions, as shall enable thee to enjoy, ith.
more real advantage, the ress of ife. D fpoftions
of .this nature for m one part of the characer of those
n:ourners whom our Saviour hath pronourced blefed;.
and of those to whom it is promised, thatJowing irr
t6ars they fi17h reap in joy. A great difference t here
is betwen being serious and melancholy; and a me-
1 lncholy too there is of that kind which deserves to
Le sometimes indulged.

Religion h.:th, on the whole, provided for every
good man abunda nt inmtcerals f confrcltion and relief-

Tcaw

How dark toevtr the present face of nature may
appear, it difp.elst.ie darkness, when it brings into
view the entire fyitem of things, and exttnds our fur-
vcyto the wh9le kingdom ot God. It represents what
we. now behol as only a part, and. a small part, of
the general order. It allures us, that though here,
for wife ends, misery and lorrow are permitted to
have place, there temporary evils shall, in the end,
advance the happinels of all who love God, and are
f.itlhul to their duty. It shows them this mixed
ard confufed.fcene vanishing by degrees away, and
preparing the introdu&tion of that slate, where the
ht ute ofmourning shall be (hut up for ever; where no
tears are seen, ard no groans heard; where no hopes
are frustrated, and no virtuous connections dissolved;
but where, under the light of the divine countenance,
goodness Ihall sourish in perpetual felicity. Thus,
though relrgion may occasionally chasten our mirth
with fadnels of countenance, yet under that- fadnfs
it allows not the hearts of good men to fink. It
calls upon them to rejoice, because the Lord
reignetb whro is their rock and the moji bigb God Awba
is their Redeemer. Reason likewise joins her voice
with that es religion; forbiddingus to make peevifi
and unreasonable complaints oF humarrlife, or injuri-
,ufly to ascribe to it rore evil than it contains.
Mixed as theprefenit fate is, the pronounces, that
generally, if not aiways, there is moe. happiness
than rnifery, more pleaftre than pain, in the condi-
tioaof man.

SERMON

# SERMON XXIX. PSALM lxxvi. 10. Surely, the wrath of man shall praise thee; the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain.

SER MON XXIX.

PSALMI Ixxvi. 1o.
Surely, ibe ceirath of man iall praise tbee.; the re-;

mainder of swrath Jhait thou refJrain.

TPHFIS Psalm appears to have been cornpofed on o¢-

jcafion of some remarkable deliverance obtain ed
by theJs wish rr.tion. It is generally underwood to have
been written in the'reign of Hezekiah, and to refer
to the formidable invasion of Judaea by Sennacherib;
when the anagel of the Lord, in one night, dircomfited
:he whole Aflyrian holt, and frnote them with fud-
den dellrtiniori. To this interpoftion of the divine
arm, those expression in the context may naturally be
applied; TheIn brake be the arrows of the low, t7
l7;'eld, the frwrd, and the battle. The flout-hearted
arejpciled ; they hvaeJlept tbeir flep ; and none of the
men of might /uoZe found their bands. ft thy rebuke,
0 God of .7aco, Icfb the chariot and the horse are ca/f
into a deadfleep. In the text, we have the wife and
religions rcfletion of the Psalmist upon the violent
designs which had bete carried on by the enimi(s of
his country, and upon the issue to which Providence
Ladi brcught them. Surely the wrath of man fialt
prai/f tbec. By the vwrath of man, we ate to under-
larnd all that the impetuosity oT human passions
tan devise or execute; the projects of ambiii-
cn ard re!cntrrel t, tl'e rage of pcrfrcitticn,
the fury of war; the difrtcers wvhich vi)lecnce
prcduces in private 1 fe, and the Puhlic cornrotiors.
which it cxcites in the world.. All these flhall /rai/e
God, net with theit itntntioa and design;, rcr by their

native

native tendency but by those wife and gcod purpo-
fes, which his providence makes them accomplish;
from their poison extra&ing health, and converting
things vhich in themselves are pernicious, into inftru-
ments of his glory, and of public benefit: So that,
though th wrath of man worketh not the righteoujnef/
of God, it is'neverthelefs forced and compelled to mi-
nider to his praile. The Pfalmilt adds, the remainder
* c/' rath fl all thou rerrain-; that .i, God will allow
scope to the wrath of man as far as it anftvers his
good purpoles, and is fubfervent to his praise; the
rell of' it (hall be cltred and bound up. When it
would attempt to go beyond its prescribed limit, he
fays to it, as to the waters of the ocean, Hitherto
jbfit thou come, but no further; and here /all thy
proud 'wa res be saved.

All this (hall be fully verified and declared by the

lail issue of things; when we shall be able more
cledily to trace the divine adminifiration through its
Several feps, by teeing the consummation of the whole.
In Come cafes, it may be reserved for this period, to
unfold the mysterious wifdemr of Heaven. B'it in
general, as much of the divine condu& is at present
manifest, as gives just ground for the assertion in the
text. In the feqnel of this discourse, I Shall endeavour
to iiluftrate and confirm it. I (hall (how in what
marner the wrath of man is made to praise the pow-
er, the wisdom, the juflice, and the goodness ofGod.

I Eac. t with this observation, That in order to

accomplilh the great purposes carried on by the
Government of the Universe, it is necessary that the
divine'perfeeions bc d.fplayed bafore.mankind, in a
sensible and firiking manner. We are not to con-
ceive the Supreme Being as hereby leeking praise to
himself, frorh a principle of oftentationor vain glory.
Independent and felf-fufficient, he reffs in the enjoy-
ment of his own beatitude. His praise Cjnfiits in hce
general order and welfare of his creation. This end

, Ca;:l; t
\

Cannot be attained, unlef- mankind'be made to feel
!)e fubjeaion under which they are pleaced. T'hey
mut be taught to admire and adore their. overeign.
1 hey mull be overawed by the view of a high hand,
u hich can at plealure controul theiraft ons, and ren-
der them subservient to rurpoees which they neither
·fcrefaw nor intended. Hence thepropriety of God's
making tIe wrabt of man to praise him. We easily
conceive in what manner the heavens and the earth
ale laid to praise God ; as they are (landing monu-
ments of that supreme pt rfeaion which is pifplayed
in their creation. The virtues of good men obvioul-
ly praise him, by exhibiting his image, and reflecing
back h:s glory. But when even the vices and inordi-
nite passions of bad men are made to praise him, in
consequence of the us ful purposes which they are
compelled toaccomplifh, this, in a particular manner,
diiftiiguifhes and signalizes a divine hand ; this opens
a more wonderful profpeft of the adminitration of
Heaven, that if all its subje&s had been loyal and
willingly obedient, and the course of human affairs
had i'roceeded in a quiet ard regular tenour.

I. THE wrath of man redounds to the praise of di-

vine power. It brings it forth with full and awful
lufire, to the view of mankind. To reign with so-
vereign command amidst the melt. turba!ent and difor-
dered slate of things, both in the natural and moral
world, is the pecular elery of omnipotence. Hence
God is described in Scripture as fitting on the flood,
riding on the wings rs the wind, d welting in the dark-
nels and the tempef ; that is, making the molt violent
powers in the universe minister to his will, giv-
ing them fcppe or refraining them, according as
suits the purposes of ilis dominion .As hefliUll, at his
p!eafure, the raging of the seas, and the noise of tieir
waves, inlike manner, he flilh the tumults /f the pea-
ple. When the pafions of men are moil inflamed,
and their defiEns jufl ripe for burfing into execution,

often,

roten, by some unexpeced interposition, le calls up-
on the world to oblerve that there is one higher thanr
the highest on earth, who can fruCrate theirdevicesin
a moment, and command the earli to beAil before him
P o',d Oeets,deflined tocarry deflraion to ndighbour-
ing kingdoms, inav cover the ocean. He blows with
his wind ,and they are cattt red. Mighty armies may
go forth to the field inail the glory of human strength;
but the iflues of battle are with' him He suspends
on high the invisible balence which' weighs the fate
of nations. According as the c.ale inclines, he gives
to some flight event the power of deciding the con-
tea. He cloud; the sky w'th darkness, or opens the
windows of heaven to let forth their flood. HI.de-
je&s the hearts of the hrave with sudden terrour, and
renders the hands of the strong weak and unperform-
ing, at the critical moment. A thousand unseen mi-
n;fers ltand ready to be the inflruments of his power,
In humbling the pride, and checking the efforts of
the wrath of man. Thus, in the inla ice of haugh-
ty Sennacierib, and that boafled tempest of wrath
which he threatened to pour upon all the Jewish na-
tion; I will put my book, fays the Almighty, in thy
zfe, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee
back by the -vayby whiLch thou camefl. In that night the
deflroying angel smote the hoff, and he departed -with
jhame /f face to his own land. IVhfn. the heaten rage,
and the people imagine a vian thing; , ten thr kings of
the earth Jfe.them/elves, and its rul rs take counsel tc-
gether ; He tlt fittelh in the Heaveni /hall laugh; the
Lord Jhall hold tem in deri,%n.

II. TiE 'wrath f] man is matde to praise the wis-

dom as well as the power of God. Nothing displays
more remarkably the admirable counsel of heaven,
than its arranging the train of events in fuich a man-
ner, that the unruly paliors cfthe wicked fiall c.mn-
trihute to overthrow their own deiigns. H:I:rry
abounds with ezamples of their being renderti

rF;'e

the unconscious ministers of Providence, to accont-
plifh purpofcs cirectly opposite to there which'they
had in view. Thus the cruelty of the sons of Jacob,
in pursuing the diftruaion of their brother Joseph,
became the means of effecing his l igh advancement.
Thus the wrath of Pharaoh againfl the Israelites, and
his unjust attempts to detain them in bondage, proved
the occasion of bringing them forth from the land
of slavery, with signal marks of the favour' of Hea-
ven. ' hus the inhuman plan which Haman had
formed for ruining A-lordecai, and extirpating the
whole Jewiih nation, paved the way for Mordecai's
high promotion, ard for the triumph of the Jceas
over all theirenemies.

After this manner the Almighty fnareth the wirckcd

i't the rerks of their hands; and eleats his own coun-
Iel upcn rhe ruin of theirs, Those events which,
viewed apart, appear as spots in the divine admini-
firation, when confidered in conneaion withall their
consequences, are often found to give it additi-
;n.al lustre. The beauty and magnificence of the
universe are much heightened, by its being art
extelfive and complicated f-flem; in which a vari-
ety of fpiings are made to play, and e multitude of
different rrovements are, with mofi admirable ait,
regulated and kept in order. Interfering interest, and
jaring passions, are in such a manner ballanced against
one another ; filch proper checks are placed on the
violence of human purIuits ; and the wrath of man is
inade so to hold its course, that how opposite soever
the several nmtions seem to be, yet they concur and
meet at last in one direcion. While, among the
n-ultitudes that dwell on the face of the earth, ofme
are tubmifiive to the dI\ine authority; some rife up
in rcbellicn againrf it ; ethers, absorbed in their plea-
fures ard purluits, are totally inattentive to it ; they
arc all so moved hy an inperceptible influence from
atcve, that the .eal of the dutiful, the wrath of ie

rebillious
.a

' rebillous, and the indifference of the caretefs, con-
:tribute finally to the:lory of God; AIll aegovern-
ed in iuch'a way aa-fufts their powers alnd'is 'dotfift-
ent with' National ffeedom, yet all aye 'ftbljeted'to
the necefflty of fulfitliing tf eternal purpofis of Hea-
ven. This depth of divine wisdom in the ad'nticiftra-
tion of the universe, exceeds all human comprehen-
sion, and affords everlafRing subje&t of adoration and
praile.

Ill. THE Ewrath of men praises the juffice of God;

by being employed-as the inflrunment of inflecing pu-
nifhment upon fmners. Did bad ten trace the courle
of events in their life with attentive eye, they might
easily discover the greatest part of the difafers which
they fufferto be brought upon them by their ungovern.
ed paflions. The fucceflion of canses and effe&s is Co
contrived by. Providence, that the wrath which they
meant to power forth on others, frequently recoils
by its effects, upon themselves. But fuppofimg them
to escape theoe external mischiefs which violent pas-
sions naturally occasion, they cannot evade the inter-
nal misery which they produce. The constitution of
things is frafled with such profound wisdom, that the
divine law, is in every event, executed themselves
againftthe finner, and carry their faniobn in their own
bosom. -The supreme Being has no occasion to un-
lock the prisons of'the deep, or to call down the thun-
der from heaven, in order to punish the wrath ofm n.
He carrys on the adminiflration of juflice with more
simplicity, and dignity. It is -ufficient that he allow
those fierce passions which render bad men the diflur-
bers'of others, to operate on their own hearts. He
delivers them up to themselves, and they become
their own tormentors. Before the world they may,
disguise their ffferings; -but it is well known, that
io be inwardly t:orr with difpite, revenge and wrath-
ful paflions, is'ihe most intenle of all mifcry. In
thus coanetirg-the. puiiihment with the cimem, ma-

king

king their own wickedness to reprove them, and .thei
backflidings to correti them,. the avenging hand of a
righteous Governour is conspicuous; and thus the
observation of the Psalmist is, fully verified ;-.te
wicked have drawn out teir sword and bent their bow,
to cajf down the poor and niedy ; but their ]wdrd Iball'
enter into their own heart.

The wrath of man also praifesllhe jurftice of God:

in the l unifhment of other criminals, as well as of the
wrathful themselves. Ambitious and lawles men are
let loose upon each other, that without any fupernatu-'
ral interposition, they may fulfil the jufl vengance of
heaven in their mutual defiruQion. They may oc--
cafionally be cemented together by conspiracy againfl
the jufi; but as no firm nor lasing bond, can unite
them, they become'at lafl the prey of mutual jealou-
fy, si ife and fraud. For a time they may goon, and
teem to prosper. Thejultice of Heaven may appear
to slumber; but it is awak4; and only waits till the
measure of their iniquity be full. God represents
himlelf in Scripture as sometimes permitting wicked-
ness to arise to an overgrown height, on purpose that
its ruin may be greater, and more exemplary. He
fa) s to the tyrant ot Egypt, that for this cauue Xe had
railed him ups that is, had allowed him to protper
ai:d be exalted, that he might /how in him.'is power;
and that his name might be declared tbroughout all the
earth. I he divine administration is glorified in the
punishment contrived for the workers of iniquity, as
well as in the reward prepared for the righteous.
This is the p. rpoje whi h the .Lord hath purposed upon
all the eartb ; and this is ,be band that is l/reCtced
so, th over all the nations.

IV. ': HE wrath'of man is made to praise thp

gcodnels of God. This is the mofl unexp&eed of its
effe'ts; and therefore requires to be the most fully
iilultrated. All the operatios of the government of
tisk Deity may be u'timately reiclved io9 g9oodneti.

ilis

·:s power, and wisdom, and juflice, all conduce to
general happiness and order. Among the means which
he uses for accomplishing this end, it will be found
that the wrath of man, through his over-ruling di-
realion, polrelles a considerable place,

Firft,.t is employed by God as an useful infrument

of dicipline and correcion-to the virtuous. The
forms which ambition and pride raise among man-
kind, he permits withthe fame intention that he fends
forth tempests among the elements; to clear the at-
mofphere of noxious vapourss and to purify it from
that corruption which all things contracl by too
much reft. When wicked men prevail in their de-
signs, and exercise the power which they have gairied
with a heavy and opprefiive hand, the virtuous are
apt to exclaim, in bitternes of foul, Where is the
Lord ? and where the feeptre of righteeufnefs and
truth ? Hath God fergotten to be gracious or doth he
indeed fee, and i, tbere knowlcdgg in the mofl bigb P
Their oppreffliorare, in truth, no more than the mi-
nifteis of God to them for good. Ie fees that they
sand in need of corfe&ion, and therefore rzafes up
enemies agailnf them, in order to cure the intempe-
rance of profperty ; and to produce, in the leriqus
hours of aftic&ion, proper refle&ions upon their duty,
and their patl errours.

In this light the disturbers of the ea;th are often

represented in Scripture ; as icourges in the hand of
-God, employed to inflit chastisement upon a dege-
nerating people. They are commiflioped for the ex-
ecution of righteous and wife purfolts, concealed
from themlelves and when their comniilfion is ful-
filled, they are recalled, and destroyed. Of this'we
have a remarkable example in the use which God
made of the king of Afiyria, with refplct to the peo-
ple of Ifracl. I will jend him againj/ an hypocritical
Itation, and again/ the people of my wrath .will I giye
him a cbarge, to take the jptil, and to totc.ihe prey.

Hevrict

HIlowbeit; le meanetb nmt f7; neither dotfk hir Jeaef
think so ; but i is in hir heart to- d.rroy, and cut off
nations nct a few. W'hereore it f/ball come to pals, that
when the Lsrd hath performed his whole work uport
MIount Zion and on 7erujalen:, I iwil puniJ7f the fruit
of tbe floirt heart of the king of Sajria, and -the glory
of his hlighloks. In vain, then, doth the wrath of
man lift itself up againit God. He jaith, by the
flr ntfh As my hand i A.:v-e done it, a:d by my ,ifdorm,
for I am pr-n'1.nt. Shall the ax boa/l itself agaiit/ him
that he=-eth thereswitb ? or /hiall the /aw magnify ifelff
againfl him than fl7aketh it ? All things, whether they
will it, or not, niufi work toefLtbr for good to tbetl
that A ae God. The wrath of man, among the ref,.
fills u'. the place afligned to it by the ordination of
HelveTi. The vioier;t enemy, the proud conquer-
or, an'':.the opprefive tyrant posie's only the fame
station twith the famine, the peflilence, and the flood.
Their tr'[iT-phtsare on more than the accomplifrirhent
of God's corre:ion ; and the retmainder o/ their zwratr
7all he refirain.

SEco'Dt z-Y, God- mak3es teic wravt of .man con-

tribute to the: benefit of the virtucu-, by rendering it
the rleans of irnproving and signalizing their graces ;
dnd of raising them, thereby, to higher honour nnd
qlory. -lid hun-man affairs prccecc'ed in an ordeily
tri:n, aril no opposition been made to relirion lnd
virtue ty the violcnce of the wicked, what room
would I ave been left for some of the hig'eft: and moil
gen;erous exct.ions of tle bCul of man ? I-low many
lhining e:amplcs of fortitude, conft'ncy, alid patl-
cl1c(, ux oim}I li:ive ;c' t 11 lot to tie wolId ? \\ hat a;

i.ldt of V:rl: Ic; peC(iTliar Ito a. ltilT of (di:c',inc hLad

laiin uncultiv:ttc.i ? Spirlt of a higher Ontd(r 1)ollcis i
late of <elliabllifed viltuc, Ihalt flards in ne-cd of no
llmch trials and imriroveOmcllnt:. iBut to us, wlio are
('lily ulndir eldic.:tiion for lich a slate, it belongs 1o
p'.mis through the fti mceC, thatt our foul: may be tri-

ed,

ed, refined, and brightened. We muf fhand the
conflit, that we may be graced and crowned, as con-
querors. The wurath of man opens the field to glory ;
call us forth to the most diftingnifled exercise of ac
tive virtue, and forms us to all those suffering graces
which are among the highest ornaments of tlhe
human foul. It is thus, that the illustrious band of
true patriots and heroes, of confeflors and amartyrs,
have been set forth to the admiration bs all ages, as.
lights of theworld; while the rage and fury of enemies,
instead of bearing them down, hale only served to
exalt and dignify them more.

TH3IRDLY., the 'wrath of man is often made to

advance the temporal prosperity of the righteous.
The occasional difireffes which it brings upon them
frequently lay the foundation of their future fiuccefs.
The violence with which wicked men purlue their
resentment, defeats its own purpose; and engages
the world on the fide of the virtuous, whom they
persecute. The attempts of malice to blacken and
defame them, bring forth their characters.with more
advantage, to the view of impartial beholders. The
extremities to which they are reduced by injulice and
opprefion, rouze. their courage, and aEtivity; and
often givc.occafionto fTlchvigorous efforts in their just
defence, as overcome all opposition, and terminate
in prosperity and success. Even in cafes where the
.wrath of matn appears to prevail over the. peaceable
and;:hejult, it is frequently, in its issue, converted
into a blefing,. How many have had reason to be
thankful, for being disappointed by their enemies in
:clcfisns wvhic:h they carnelily pursued, but which, if
fuccc£ fully accomplifllcd, t.hly lave af.el.crv'afds rfcn.,
wouldl have occasioncd their ruin ? f/aoJb is wzifc and
'will chjbrve thlfri thinies, even he Ihall utdulrflandi the
Jcving-krndneJs ontathe Lord. ' !

While the wralt of. nan thus praifes-God. by the
advantages which it is made to bring to gobd men, as

Jindivid ials

individuals, the divine hand is equally apparent i
the similar effe&s which it is appointed to produce
to nations and societies. When wars 'and commoti-
ons fllake the earth, when facions rage, and intestine
divisions embroil kingdoms that before were flou-
rifhing, Providence seems, at first view, to have
abandoned public affairs to.the misrule of human pas-
sions. .Yet from the midst of this confufionorder is
often made to spring ; and from there mischiefs la.t-
ing advantages to arise. By ifch convulsions, -nati-
ons.are rouzed from that dangerous lethargy into
which flowing wealth, long peace, :and growing
effeininancy of manners had funk them. They are
awakned te discern their true interests ; and thoght
to take proper measures for ecurity 'and defence
against all their foes. Inveterate :prejudices are cor-
reated and latent sources of danger are discovered.
Public spirit is called forth ; and larger views of nati-
onal happiness are formed. The corruptions tb which
every government is 'liable, are often retified by a
ferment in the political body, as noxious -humours
in the-animal frame are carried off by the-lhock of a
disease. Attempts made againfi a wife and well efa-
blifhed.ci il constitution, tends in the issue to firength-
en it ; and the disorders of licentiousness and fation,
teach men more highly to prize the bleffingsof tran-
quillity and legal protecion.

FOUrTHLT, the wratb of man, when it brakes

forth inthe .persecution of teligion, priaifes the divine
-goodness *by -being rendered conducive to'(he ad-
vancement of truth and propagation of religion in the
world. The church of God, since the days of its
infancy, hath never been.entirely exempted from the
iwrath of the world ; and in those agesy during which
it- was most exposed to that wrath, it -ath always
flourished the most. In vain I the policy and the rage
,of men united their efforts to extinguish this divine
:light. Though all the four winds blew against it, At

only

only shown brighter; and flamed higher. Many wa-
ter rcould not: quench it, nor ail the flodsi drown ii.
The constancy aid tortituderof rhofe who suffered for'
the truth, had a much greater efffei in incteafing the
number of converts; than all the terror and cruelty
of persecutors, in diminilhing it. By this tneans,
the wrath of man was .rmde to turn against itself, to
the diftrnuton of its own purpole; like waves, which
assaulting a rock with impotent fury, dilcover its im-
moveable flability, while they dash themselves in
pieces at their steed i-; . : ·' '
; ' si A t. L- only ado one' other instance of the urath
of manfpraifing God, by accomplishing ends of most
enefive. tbenefit to'mankind. Never did' the rage
and malice of the wictfed imagine that they had ob-
tained a more complete triumph, than in the death of
Jefus'Chrift. When they had executed their purpose
of making him fiuffer asa maalfator, they were conE-
dent that they had extinguished hisname, aild dilcom-
fitted his followers fob ever. Behold how feeble are the
efforts:of tsle wraih of man again t thle decree of Hea-
Yen !' All that they intended to overthrow, they moll
ecffeuitly efitblifhed. The deah of Christ was, in the
counsels of Heaven, the spring of everlasting lfe to the
faithful. - The crol'son which he feffered:with appa-
renm ignominy, became the Rtandard of eternal:honour-
to him ;thc :ensign under which his fotlowersaffer.n
bled, and triumphed. He who, at his peafu're,: '
ftbsinart&' reaieriner.::' rath, suffered the rage!of
omSavoaus enemies, to;fiuggeft.no other things -tr
trhlnthas wfrit,: long before, He had determinnde,
ad! his prophets had fortiold.- They all conspired to
ender'the' whole scene of Christ's fufferingsh exa*tly
eonformable to the original, predicted plan of divine
mercy-ard goodness; and each of them coutributed
his fharewo accomplili.that ;gteat undertaking, whichl
bne iof them Tin the LJat urlderftood, -nor meant to
jromiote.4-So iemarkable an ,inflalce .as -ths, fully

.alcertained

ascertained in. Srcripture, of the wrath of man mirti-
tfering to the .designs of.Heaven, ought to be-frequent-
ly in our eye; as an. exenmplification of the coudu&'
of Providence in many other calfcs .where wae have i
not so much light afforded us for.tracing its ways.

BY this inducion of particulars, the docrine c9on-

tained in:the text is plainly and fully verified. TWe;
have seen, that the disorders which the. pride and pas -
sions of men occasion in the. world, though they
take.rife from the corruption of.human nature in;
this fallen state, yet are so over-ruled by Providence,:
as to redound to his honour. and glory who governs
al. They illuflrate before the world the divine per-
feaions in the admiration of.the universe,,. They.
serve the purpofts of nioraland religious improvement
to the fouls of men. By a. secret tendency, they
advance the welfare of those whonm they appear to
threaten with evil. Surely, 0 Gad! .the .,urath.of
nmnniJbal pr;i e thrce- the retirainder of -wrathjfaltl thou.
rcJlrain.-In thy hand itis; .-ad diou never letteft it
forth hut in weight and.meafure. It is wild and in-,
traCable in its nature; but Thou tamest it, , It: is'
blind and h-eadlong in its impulse ; bt .Thou direadfr
it. It firuggles continually to break its chain; but
Thou confineft it; Thou retrencheA all the ifuper:;
liuity of its fury.--Let us now confiler, what imt ,
*provement.is'to be made of this meditatior on the,
ways of Providence. : I

In the firft'place, let it lead us to a religions.con-

templation of the hand of God in all the tranfaaiians
of the world. In the ordinnay courfe.of liuman as-
fairs, we bohold a very mixed and urfy fcenc ; t3he
Iaflions of nmen varioully agitated, and new changcs
daily taking place upun this l}.Ige of time. We b:-
hold peace and war alternately returning ; the for-
tunes, of prw;te. men riing and falling; and fiattc
and nations portaking of thliL fame viciflitude. .In all
this, if we attend only to the operation. of extereat

cau.es,

taufes, and to the mere rotation ofevents, we view no
more than the inanimate part of nature; we flop.
at the surface of things ; we contemplate the great
fpeaacle which is preinted to us, not with the eyes
of rational and intelligent beings. The life and beau-
ty of the universe arises from the view of that wis-
dom and goodness which animates and conducs, the
whole, and unites all-the parts in one great design.
There is-an eternal mind who puts all those wheels in
motion; himselF remaining for ever at reft. Nothing
is void of God. Even in the pafiions and ragings of
men, He is to be found; and where they imagine
they guide thenfelves they are guidedandcontrouled
by his hand. What solemn thoughts and devout assec-
tions ought this meditation to inspire; when in view-
ing the affairs of the world, we attend not merely
to the aaings of men, but to the ways of God; and
confider ourselves, and all our concerns,as included
in his high adminiftraiton !

IN the second place, the doQrine which has been

illuRrated should prevent us from cenCuring Provi-
dence, on account of any seeming difordeis and evils
which at present take place in the world. The v:iri-
ous instances which have been pointed out in this dif-
courfc, of human pasSion and wickedners rendered
fubfcrvicnt to wife and u'eful ends, give us the highl-
eft reason to conclude that, in all other calrs of Seem-
ing evil, the lilke ends arc carried on. This ought
to satisfy our rnnd, even when the prospect is mrio
dark and difconraging. The plans of divine wifitoin
arc too large and comprchenfive .to be discerncd by
us in all their extent.; and where we fee only by parts,'
we mInu frequently be at a lols in judging of the
whole. '/ir tlay o/' God is iz thie fia, anitl /'is patb ip ;
JiTc girat *.Watoes; bis foot/ipcs are not knowni. 1i.it al-
tbclzugh tlhou fayrt tl.,,i canlot jee

hio , yJt

j/l, :.: ;.

is ejbre him; tlhre/ore trfll tiou in him;. A. i:. ,
natur.al world, no real deformitv is tl: i.

11f ';

but what has cither fomne o ,' , -
.

U

in the moral world, the most irregular and deform-
ed appearances contribute in one way or other to the
orderkof the whole. The Supreme Being, from the
rr.o opposite and difigreeing principles, forms uni-
virlal concord, and adapts even the molt harsh and
dissonant notes to the harmony of his praise. As he
hath reared the goodly frame of nature from various
and jarring elements, and hath fettled it in peace , so
he hath formed such an union by his providence of the
more various interests, and more jarring passions of
men, that they all conspire to his glory,and co-operate
for general good.-How amazing is that wisdom,
which comprehends such infinite diversities, and con-
trarieties, within its scheme! How powerful that
hand, which bends to its own purpose the good and
the bad, the busy and the idle, the friends and the
foes of truth ; which obliges them all to hold on their
course to his glory, though divided from one another
by a multiplicity of purfutis, and differing often from
themselves; and while they all move at their own
freedom, yet by a secret influence, winds and tutns
them at his will ! 0 the depth of the riches, both of the
- cifdom and knowledge of God ! How unfearcbable are
hiJi judgments and his ways pafl finding out /

IN the third place, we fee, from what has been

laid, how much reason there is for fubmiflion to the
decrees of Heaven. Whatever difireffes we susser
from the wrath of man, we have ground to believe
that they befal not in vain. In the midftof human-
violence, or oppreflion, we are not left to be the sport
of fortune. Higher counsels are concerned. Wife
and good designs are going on. God is always car-
rying forward his own purposes; and if these termi-
nate in his glory, which is ever the fame with the
felicity of the righteous, is not this a fufficiest rea-
lon for our calm and chearful acquiescence ?

Hence also, to conclude, arises the moR powerful
argument for fudying, with zealous assiduity, to gain

# SERMON XXX. Preached before the Society in Scotland for progagating Christian Knowledge. ISAIAH xi. 9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountains; for the earth shall be full of the ...

the favour and protection of the Almighty. If his
displeasure hang over our heads, all things around us
may be just objeas of terrour. For against him,
-there is no defence, The mod violent powers in na-
ture are ministers to him. Formidable, indeed, may
prove the wrath of man, if he be pleased to let it forth
against us. To him, but not to us, it belongs to
refirain it at pleasure. Whereas, when we are placed
-under his protesion, all human wrath is divested of
its terrours. If he be for us, who or what can be
againjI us ? Let us pursue the measures which he
hath appointed for obtaining his grace by faith, re-
pentance and a holy life, and we shall have no rea-
son tb be afraid of evil tidings ; our bearts will befix-
ed trufling in the Lord. When the religious fear of
.Cod polfeffes the heart, it expels the ignoble fear of
men ; and becomes the principle of courage and mag-
nanimy. The Lord is a buckler and a /bieldto them
that serve him. When he arijeth, his enemies/ball be
Jcattered as Imoke is driven away, and ar chaf before
tbe xwind. He givethjtrenth and vic.ary to bit people; he
,cloathetb them ith /alvatiou. The wratb of man /ball
praifehim.; and the remainderof wratb /ballhe reflrain.

S EE RM0 N XXX,
Preached before the Society in Scotlandfor progagating

Chrifian Knowledge.

ISAIAH si. 9.
They fballnot hurt nor def/roy in all my holy mountains;

for the earth /hall be full of the knowledge of the Lord,
as the watel s cover the sea.

P[- HIS passage of Scripture is understood, by all
j. TChriitian interpreters, to refer.to the days of the

U a Gospel.

Cofpel. The Prophet describes, in the Me!irah';
reign, as extending over -all nature, and producing
universal felicity. The full accomplishment of this
predicion is yet future, and.refpe6ts some more ad,
vanced periods of the kingdom of God, when true re-
ligion shall universally prevail, and the native tenden-
.cy of the Gospel attain its entire effe&. jn the pro-
fpecE of this event, the Prophet seems to rife above
himself, and celebrates that happy age in the moR
sublime train 'of eastern poetry. He opens a beau-
tiful view of the fiate of the world, as a state of re-
turning innocence. -He represents all nature flourish-
ing in peace.; discord and guile abolished; the moRs
hostile natures reconciled, and the most, savage re-
formed and tamed. The wlf /baUldwell with the lamb,
and the leopard lie down with the kid; and thecalf, and
the young lion, and thefatling together, and a little child
shall lead them. Tbe lionjhall eat flraw iike the x ;
and the suckling childfball play on the whole of the asp,
and the weaned.cbild ball put his hand on .the.cockatrice
den They jhall not hurt nor de/lroy in ail my holy
nountain ; fJr the earth bal ll beu of the knwuledge of
tbe Lord, as the waters cvger the/ea.

Upon reading these words, we must immediately

perceive the great encquragerslent which they give to
all good designs for promoting religion in the
world. When we engage in thefre we have the conm-
fort of being engaged, not only in a good cause,
*but also in one that shall undoubtely :be fuccefsfut.
For we are here aflured by the di'vine promise, th;t
.truth and righteournefs shall at length prevail and that
the incrcafing influence of religion ihall introduce ge-
neral happiness. It is a pleasing and animating reflec-
tion, that in .carrying on such designs, we aa.upon
the divine plan ; and co-operale with Gcd for advanc-
ing the kingdom of the Messiah. We have no rea-
son to be discouraged by any unfavourable circua-,
4tances which at preafeat oppoe .our picus endea-

voirs,

vours. Though the ignorance, fuperfititn, and cor-
'uption, which now fill so great a part of the world,
have a dark and myfterous aspeE, it is not beyond the
power of that Supreme Being who brings light out of
darkness, to clear up those perplexing appearances,
and gradually to extricate mankind from the labyrinth
of igrorance and errour. Let us confider how im-
probable it seemed, when the gospel was first pub-
lilhed, that it should extend so far, and overthrow so
much eflablifhed fuperflition, as it has already done.
There is nothing, in the present itate of the world,
to rerder it more unlikely that it shall one day be uni-
Verfally received, and prevail in its full influence.o
At the raise of Christianity, the disproportion' was,-
at leaf,- as great, between the apparent'humah causes,
and the effet which has actually been produced, as
there is, in our age, between the circumfiances of
religion in the world, and the effeEt which we farther
expect. she Son of righteoujitefs having arieady ex-
erted its influence in breaking through the thickest
darkness, we may justly hope, that it is powerful
enough to dispel all remaining obfcdrity; and that
it will ascend by' degrees ta that perfea day, when
healing Jball be under its rwings to all the nations. A
little one f/all become a thousand; and a /mall one, a'
strong nation. I. the ord will haflten it ih its time.

BESIDES the predi&cion which the text contains

of the future fuccels of religion, it points out also a:
precise cornexion between the increase of religious
knowledge, and the happiness of mankind. The know-
,edge oJ the Lcrd filling the earth, is afigned as the
cause why they Jball not hurt nor defJroy in all the
holy mountain of God. To this I am now to lead
- your thoughts; as a obje& both suited to the occafi-

on of the present meet.ng, and proper to be illufita-
ted in times, where total indifference to religious
principles appear to gain ground, Whether Chriftia-
nity ihall be propagated farther or not, is treated as

U 3 a

a matter of no great concern to manki4n. The opi-
nion prevails among many, that moral virtue may
fubift, with equal advantage, independent of religi-
on. For moral principles, great regard is professed;
but articles of religious belief are held to be abftrac
tenets, remote from life; points of mere speculation
and debate, the influence of which is very inconfi--
derable on the a&ions of men. Their general con-
ducE, it is contended, will always proceed upon views
and principles which have more relation to the pre-
sent slate of things; and religious knowledge can
therefore fland in no necessary conneslion with their
happiness and profperity.-How adverse such opini-
ons are both to the prefeffion and pracice of religion,
is abundantly evident, How adverse they are to the
general welfare and real interefis cf mankind, I hope
to make appear to candid minds.

By the knowledge of the Lord in the text, is not to

be understood the natural knowledge of God only.
It is plain, that the Prophet fpakesof the age of the
Messiah, when more enlarged discoveries should be
made to markind of the divine perfecions and go-
vernment, than unafflited reason could attain, 7be
Inowledge of the Lord, therefore, comprehends tshe
principles of Christianity, as well of natural religion.
In order to discern the importance of such knowledge
to general happiness, we shall confider man, I. as
an individual; II. as a member of society.

I. CONSIDERING man as an individual, let us

inquire, how far the knowledge of true religion is
important, first, to his improvement; next, to his
consolation.

FIRST, wish refpe& to the improvement of man;

the advancement of his nature in what is 'valuable
and ifeful, the acquisition of filch dilpcfitions and
habits as fit him for a&iing his patt wi h propriety
cn this stage, and prepare him lor a liigh r slate of
a&ion htreafter; what benefit does lh receive, in

these

.fhefe'refpeas, from religious knowledge and belief?
Itis obvious, that all increases of knowledge is im-
provement to the understanding. The more that its
sphere is enlarged, the greater number of obje&s that
are submitted to its view, especially when there ob-
je&s are.of intrinsic excellence, the more must those
rational powers, which are the glory osman, be in
the cource of attaining their proper strength and mi-
turity. But where the knowledge of religion mere-
ly speculative, though the fpeculatioin muTt'be ad-
mitted to be noble, _yet less could be said bf'its im-
portance. We recommend it to mankind, as forming
the heart, and direting the life. Those pure and
exalted conceptions which the Chriflian religion has
taught us to entertairr of the Deity, as the univer-
fal Father and righteous Governour of 'the universe,
the standard of unspotted perfection, and the autlor
of every good and perfet gils; conduainglhil whole
adminitliatibn with an eternal reTard'to'rde'ri,,
and truth ; ever favouring tfheca'ffiEand-fupporting
the interefi of righteous men ; and applying, in-tKi3
dire&ion, the whole might of omnipoterice; and the
whole councel of unerring wisdom, from the begin-
ning to the end of things; fich conceptions both kin-
d!e devctior, and strengthen virtue. They give for-
titude to the mind in the pra&ice of righteousness, and
eltabliflied the persuasion of its being our highest in-
terefl.

All the dh&rines peculiar to the Gospel are great

improvements on what the light of nature had im-
perfe&ly suggested. A high difpenlation of Provi-
dence is mad. knowri particulaily suited to the exi-
gences of man; calculated for recovering him from
that corrupted state i:to which expt rience bears witness
that he is fallen, and' for restoring him to inte-
grity, and favour with his Creator. The method of
carrying on this great plan is such as gives us the moR
firiking views of the importance of righteousness or

virtue

virtue, atjd of the high account in which it flands
with God. The Sonof God appearedon the earth,
and faffered as a propitiation for the finsof the world,
with this exprers intention, that he might bring in
vesrlq/ling rihteroufneJf; that he might purge our
'onnfience Jrom dead works to serve the living God;
that he might red4em s from ell iniquity, and puri-
fy unto himelf a peculiar people, zealous of good workt,.
such a -merciful interposition of the Creator of the
world, while it illultrioufly displays his goodness, and
signalizes his concern for the moral interests of man-
kind, affords us, at the fame time, the moil satisfy-
ing ground of confidence and trust. It offers an ob-
je& to the mind, on which it can lay hold for the
security of its future hopes; when, with a certainty
far beyond what any abflraEt argument could yield,
it appeals to a distinguished fa&t; and is enabled to
fay, He that speared not his own Son, but deliverrd
bim up for us all, ow jball he not witb bim al/o frfc-
If giwe ut all things P

While the divine Government is thus placed in a

light the most amiable, and mofi encouraging to
every virtuous mind, there is, at the fame time,
lomething extremely awful and solemn in the whole
do&rine of redemption. It is calculated to strike the
mind with reverence for the divine administration.
It points at some deep malignity in fin, at some dread-
ful consequences flowing from guilt, unknown in
their cruses and in the whole effecs to us, which
moved the Sovereign of the World to depart from
the ordinary course of Providence, and to bring
about the reltoration of his fallen creatures by a me-
thod £o astonishing. Mankind are hereby awakened
to the molt serious rcfletions. Such views are open-
ed of the san&ity of the divine laws, of the itrianefs
of the divine justices of the importance of the part
which is afligned them to at, as serve to prevent
their trifling with human life, and add dignity and

folemiity

fotemnity to virtue. These great purpoles are farther
carried on, by the discovery which is made of the
fixed connection in which this life flands with a future
eternal state. We are represented aslowing now,
whzat we are to reap hereafter; undergoing a course
of probation and trial, which, according as it ter-
minates in our improvement, or leaves us unreformed
and corrupted, will dismiss us to ladsing abodes, ei-
ther of punishment or reward. Such a discovery
rifes far above the dubious conjetures, and uncer-
tain reasonings, which mere natural light suggests
concerning the future condition of mankind. Here
we find, what alone can produce any considerable in-
fluence on praEtice, explicit promise and threatning ;
an u:nhoritative fanCEion given to a law ; the Gover-
nour and Judge revealed; and all the motives which
can operate on hope and fear, brought home to the
heart, with Ibusfaih tbe Lord of HofIs. In a word,
a preat and magnificent plan of divine administration
is opened to us, in the Golpel of Christ; and no-
thing is omitted that can impress mankind with the
per(uafion of their being all, in the ftri6eft sense,
fubjets of the moral government of God.

'-HouGH the bounds of this Discourse allow ua

to take only an imperfect view of the principles of
Chritlian doctrine, yet the hints which have been
given lay a sufficient foundation for appealing to eve-
ry impartial mind, whether the knowledge and be-
lief cf such principles be rot intimately connected
with the improvement, and, by consequence, with the
happiness ot man. I leafon now with fitch as admit,
that virtue is the great source both of improvement
and happiness. Let them lay what firess they please
uron the autho. ity ofconfienice,and upon the force and
eviderce of its dictates; can they refuse to allow that,
the natural tendency of the principles which I have
mentioned, is to support thcfe ditates, and to con-

U 5 firm

firm that anthoriy ; to excite, on various occasions,
the molt uleful sentiments; to provide additional
relirairts from vice, and additional motives to every
virtue ? \Vho dares pronounce, that there is no cafe
in which conscience lards in need of ouch affiflance,
to direc, wherethereis so much unce tainty and daik-
-.ess; and to prompt, at here there is so much feebleness
ard irresolution, and such a fatal proneness to vice
and folly ?

But how grol soever the tendency of riligious

principles may be, some will flill call in question their
actual significancy, and inflnence on life. This ten-
dencv is by various causes defeated. Between the
beliei of religious principles and acoefrrpondent prac-
tice, it will be alledged that frequent experience
ihews there is no necessary connet on ; and that
therefore the propagation of the one, cannot give us
anv assurance of proportionab'e improvements fol-
lowing in the other.-Tlhis, in part, is granted to
be true; as we admit that religious knowledge and
belief are susceptible of various degrees, before they
arrive at that real Chriflian Faith which the Scrip-
ture represents as turifying the heart. But though
the connection between principle and pra&ice be not
s;eceffary and invariable, it will not, I suppose, be
denied that there is some connefionn. Here then one
-nverue to the heart is opened. If the tendency of
religious knowledge be good, wisdom must direc,
and duty oblige us to cultivate it. For tendency
will, at leaP in some cafes, rife into effec ; and,
pro'b hiy, in more cafes than are known and observed
by the v.orld. Besides the diflinguifhed examples of
true rlel':on and virtue which ha.e, more or less,
adored every age of the Christian :i*a, what nun-
bers may there be, in the more silent and private
fccnes of life, overlookedl by superficial oblervers of
mankind, on whore hearts and lives religious rrinci-
ples h^ve the m cit happy intfuence Even on loI fe

and

and giddy minds, where they are far from operating
their full effet, their influence is, frequently, not'
altogether loft. Impreflions of religion often check
vice in its career. They prevent it from proceeding
its utmost length; and though they do not entirely
reform the offender, they serve to maintain order in
society. Persons who are now bad, might probably
have been worse without them, and the world have
suffered mrere from unreltraintd licentiousness. They
often low latent feeds of goodnels in the heart, which
proper c:rcumltarces and occasions aftervwards ripen;
though the reformation of the offender many not be
so conspicuous, as h's former enormities have been.
F.om the native tendency of religious belief, there
is reason to conclude, that those good effecs of it are
not so rare as some would repr=t!ent them. By its
nature and tendency, we can better judge of its es-
feets, than by observations drawn from a supposed
experience, which often is narrow in its comrafs, and
fallacious in its conclusions.

The actual influence of principle and belief' on

mankind, admits of clear illuflration from unconteft-
ed matter of fat. They who hold the gocd effcas
of Christian principles to be fo'inconfiderable, as to
render'the propagation of them of small importance,
will be at no loss to give us instances of corrupt prin-
ciples of belief, having had the modl powerful influ-
ence on the world. Loud complaints we hear from
this quarter, of the direful effects which superstition-
and enthusiasm have produced; of their having poi-
soned the tempers, and transformed the manners of
mnn ; of their having overcome the itrongeft re-
ftraints of law, of reason, and huma.ity. Is this
then the cafe that all piinc:pies, except good ones,
are of such rrirhty energy ?-Strange! that filfe reli-
gion should be 2ble to do so mucli, and ti ue religion
so little ; that belief, so powerful in the one cate,
fliould be so impctent in the other.-No impartial

enquirer,

enquirer, surely, can entertain this opinion. The
whole hiftoly of mankind shows that their religious
tenets and principles, of whatever nature they be,
are of great influence in forming their characer,
and directing their condu&. The mischief which
false principles have done, affords a good argument
to guard carefully against errour; but as it is a proof
of what belief can do, it gives ground to hope the
more krom it, when rightly direaed. The fame tor-
rent which, when it is put out of its natutal course
overflows and lays waste a country, adorns and en-
riches it, when running in its proper channel. If it
be alledged that superstition is likely to be more pow-
erful in its effects than truth, becaule it agrees better
*with the follies and corruptions of the world, we may
oppose to this on the other hand, that truth has the
di-ided blessing and the countenance of Heaven on its
fide. Let us always hope well of a cause that is good
in itself, and beneficial to mankind. Truth is mighty,
and will prevail. Let us spread the incarruptablefeei
as widely as we can, and trust in God that he will.
give the incrafe. Having thus shown the importance
of religious knowledge to mankind in the way of
improvement, let us,

IN the second place, confider it in the light of con-

frlation; as bringing aid and relief to us amidst the
distresses of life. Here religion conteftably triumphs;
nnd its happy effects in this rcfpea, furnish a strong
argument to every benevolent mird for wishing them
to be farther diffuf d throughout the world. For
w-ihorut tlie belief and hope afforded by divine Reva-
lation, the cicullntances of man are extremely for-
lorn. He finds himself placed here as a firanger in
a vast unievrfe, where the powers and operations of
r.nture are very imperfecly known ; where both the
beginnings and the issues of things are involved in
mvfterious darkness ; where he is unable to discover,
WviLh any certainty, whence he sprung; or for what

pucpofe

purpose he was brought into this slate of existence;
whether he be fubje&ed to the government of a
mild, or of a wrathful ruler; what conflruction he
is to put on marhy of the dispensations of his provi-
dence; and \ hat his fate is to be when he departs
hence. What a disconsolate situation, to a serious
enquiring mind ! The greater degree of virtue it pof-
fefies, its sensibility is likely tobe the more oppressed
by this burden of labouring thought. Even though
it were in one's power to banish all uneasy thought,
and to fill up the hours of life with perpetual amuse-
ment, life so filled up would, upon reflecion, appear
poor and trivial. But there are far from being the
terms upon which man is brought into this world.
He is conscious that his being is fiail and feeble ; he
fees himlelf beset with various dangers; and is expo-
fed to many a melancholy apprehension, from the
evils which he may have to encounter, before he
arrives at the clofeof life In this distressed condition
to raveal to him such discoveries of the Supreme Be-
ing as the Christian religion affords, is to teveal to
him a Father and a Friend ; is to let in a ray of
the mos cheering light opon-the darkness of the hu-
man eflate. He who was before a deltitute orphan,
wondering in the inhospitable deferr, has now gained
a helter from the bitter and inclement blast. He
alow knows to whom to pray, and in whom to truf ;
where to unbosom his sorrows; and from what hand
to look for relief.

It is certain, that when the heart bleeds from some

wound of recent misoortune, nothing is of equal
efficacy with religious comfort. It is of power to
enlighten the darkest hour, and to affwage the feve-
ref woe, by the belief of divine favour, and the prol-
pea of a blelfed immortality. In such hopes, the
mind expiates with joy; and when beraved of its
earthly friends, solaces itfeltfwith the thoughts of one
friend who will never forsake it. Refined realbnin-s

concernting

concerning the nature of the human condition, and
the improvement which philosophy teaches us to meak
of every event, may entertain the mind when it is. at
enfe; may perhaps contribute to tooth it, when-
slightly touched with sorrow. But when it is torn
with any fore diflrefs, they are cold and feeble, com-
pared with a direac promise from the word of God:
This is an ancbor to the /oul both Jure and IfedfajF.
This has given consolation and refuge to many a vir-
tuous heart, at a time when the molt cogent reasonings
would have proved utterly unavailing.

Upon the approach of death, especially, when if

a man thinks at all, his anxiety abcut his future in-
terefls munt naturally increase, the powerof religious
consolation is fcnfibly felt. Then appears, in the
most flriking light, the high value of the discoveries
made by the Gospel ; not only life and immortality
revealed, but a mediator with God discovered; mercy
proclaimed, through him, to the frailties of the peni-
tent and the humble ; and his presence .pronli'ed to
be with them when they are pafling through the vally
es the f/hadoo of death, in order to bring themr safe
into unseen habitations of reft and joy. Here is
ground for their leaving the world with comfort and
peace. But in this severe and trying period, this
labouring hour of nature, how flall the unhappy man
support himself, who knows not, or believes not,
the hope of religion ? Secretly coiifcious to hir,felf
that hehasr.t.t aoed his part as he ought to have done,
the fins es his past life arise before him in fad r mem-
brance. IHe wiffes to cxift after death, and yet
dreads that exifience. The Governor of the world
is unknown. He cannot tell whetherevery endeavour
to obtain his mercy may not be in vain. All is awful
obscurity around him; and in the midni of endless
doubts ard perplexities, the trembling, reluctant foul,
is forced awa) from the bcdy. As the misfortunes
of life mLft, to such ania, I.avebeen mcft oppicffive,

. sL-_~ ~
~ ~ ~o

so its end is bitter. His fun sets in a dark cloud ; and
the night of death clores over his head, full of misery.
Having now shown how important the knowledge of
the Lord is, both to the improvement and the confo-
lation of man, confider as an individual, I am next to
shew,

II. How important this knowledge as to him as a

member of society.· This branch of the fubjeft is in
part anticipated by what has been said. For all-the
improvement which man receives as an individual,
ledounds of the benefit of the public. Society reaps
the fruit of the virtues of all the members who cornm-
pole it; and in proportion as each, apart, is made
better, the whole must flourish.

But betides this effeEt, religious knowledge has a

direct tendency to improve the social intercourse of
men, and to assist them in cc-operating for common
good. It is the great instrument of civilizing the
multitude, andforming them to u-ion. It tames the
fierceness of their paflions, and softens the rudeness
of their manners. There is much reason to doubt
whether any regular society ever fubfifed, or could
subsist, in the world, deflitute of all religious ideas
and piinciples. They who, in early times, attempt-
ed to bring the wandering and scattered tribes of men
from the woods, and to unite them in citiesand com-
munities, always found it necessary to begin with
some inflitution of religion. The wireft legislators
of old, through the whole progress of their fyftemns
of government, confidered religion as eliential to ci-
vil polity. If even hose i nperfet forms of it, load-
ed with so much (uperftition and errour, were im-
portant to the welfare of society, how much more
that rcafonable worship of the true God, which is
taught by l he Golpel ? True religion introduces the
idea of regular filbjceion, by accufto:ii;ng mankini
to the awe of fupericur pouer in the Deity, joinIil
with the vcneration of fupcriour wildo.n and goodne'.-

It

It is by its nature an associating principle ; and creates
new and sacred bonds of union among men. Com-
mon assemblies for religious worship, and joint ho-
mage offered up to one God ; the Iehfe of being all
dependent on the fame protetion, and bound to duty
by the fame ties, tharers in the fame benefits of hea-
ven, and expe&ants of the fame reward, tend to
av 2ken the sentiments of friendly relation, and to
confirm and flrengthen our mutual connexion. The
doa rine of Christianity is most adver e to all tyranny
'and opprefflon, but highly favourable to the interefls
of good government among men. It represses the
spirit of licertioulnefs and fediticn. It inculcates the
duty of subordination to lawful fuperictr-s. It requires
us to fear Gcd, to honlur the king, and not tc meddle
wvith them that are given to change. '

Religious knowledge forwards all useful and orna-

mental inmprovements iin society. Experience shows,
that in proportion as it diffufes'its light, learning
flourishes, and liberal a ts ate culti ated and advanced.
Just conceptiors of religion promote a free and man-
ly spirit. 1 hey lead men to think for thenfelves ; to
form their principles upon fair inquiry, and not to
resign their ccnfcienie to the diEtates of men. Hence
they naturally inspire sverfion to slavery of every kind;
and Frcmore a tafle for liberty and laws. Despotic
gcvernmei ts have gererallv taken the firmeil root
amcng rations that were blinded by Mahometan or
Pagan darknes ; where tie throne of violence has
been luppo:ted by ignorance and false religion. In
the Chritlian v.or!d, during t!-ofe enturies in which
gross fupierliitirn held its reiEn undifiurhcd, oppref-
ficn and slavery were in its train. ' he cloud of
ignorance fat thick and deep over tlie nations;
and tle xxorld was threatcred with a relapse into.
arcient b:lliaiiy- As fccn as tle true inoto.lcdge 4'
t/c Lordl ievixJd, at the auspicious atra of the Re-
formaticn, learning, libeity, ar:d arts, bcrnn to
flhi.e forth with it, and to resume thtir lufi.e.

But

But the happy influence which religion exerts on

society, extends much farther than to effecOs -f this
kind. It is not only fubfidary to the improvement,.but
necefiary to the preservation of society. It is the very
basis on which it refts. Religious principle is wfe
gives men the surest hold of one another.The last and
greatest pledgeof veracity, an oath, without which ni-.
society could subsist, derives it whole authority front-
an eftabliihed reverence of God, to whomit is a solemn
appeal. Banish religious principle, and you loosen all
the bondswhich connet mankind together; you shake
the fundamental pillar of mutual confidence and trust;
you render the security arising from laws, in a great
measure, void and ineffe&ual. For human laws, and
human fanaions, cannot extend to numberless cafes,
in which the safety of mankind is deeply concerned.
they would prove very feeble infiruments of order
and peace, if there were no checks upon the condu&
of men from the sense of divine legislation; if
no belief of future rewards and punishments were to
overawe conscience, and to supply the defeas ofhu-
man government.

Indeed the belief of religion is of such importance

to public welfare, that the molt expreflive difcription
we could give of a focfety of men in the utmost dif-
order, would be to fay, that there was no fear of
God left among them. Imagination would imme-
diately conceive of them as abandoned to rapine and
violence, to perfidy and treachery ; as deceiveing
and deceived, opprefling and opprefled ; consumed
by intestine broils, and ripe for becomeing a prey to
the firlt invader. On the other hand, in order to
form the idea of a society flourishing in its higelf
glory, we need only conceive the belief of Chrifian
principles exerting its full influence on the hearts and
lives of all the members. Inflantly, the molf amia-
ble scene would open to our view. We shold fee the
caurfes of public disunion removed, when rnen were

animated

animated with that noble spirit of love and crarify
which our religion breaths; and formed to the pur-e
suit ofthofe higher interests, which give no occaifon
to the competition and jealousy. We should fee fami-
lies, neighbourhoods, and communities, living in nn-
brckn amity, and pursuing, with one heart and mind,
the common interests; sobriety of manners, and fim-
plicity of life, restored; virtuous industry carrying
on its usual labours, and cheerful contentment every
where reigning. Politicians may lay down what
plans they please for advancing public prosperity, but,.
in truth, it is the prevalency of such principles of re-
ligion and virtue, which forms the strength- and glory
of a nation. When there are totally wanting, no
measures contrived by human wisdom cars supply
the defet. In proportion as they prevail, they raise
the slate of society from that fad degeneracy into-
which it is at present funk; and-carry it forward,
under the blessing of Heaven, towards that happy-
period, when nations fJall. not lift up t/hir jsword
againjf nation, e:sr learn war any orre.

In order to prove the importance- of religiots.

knowledge to the interest of society, one coufideration
r.ore, delerving particular attention, remains to be
mentioned. It is, that if goodfeed be not lown in tile-
field, tares will not infallibly spring up. The pro-
pension towards religion is firong in the human heart.
'Ihere is a natural preparation in our minds, for re-
ccirin7 foame inmpreffin of supernatural belief. Up-
en thele among iegncra: t and uncultivated men, fu-
rerftition cr enthifia'm never fail to graft themselves.
Into what monftrons sorn:s there have frot forth, and
what various mifchie!s they have produced to focie-
ty, is too well known. Noris this the wholeof the
darger. Definir men are al\vavs ready to take ad-
van a-e cf tl'is pot-ular weakness, and to diree the
supei 1itiious bias of the multitude to their own ambi-
lcOus and intereflcd ends. Superflition, in itself a for-

midable

/midable evil, threatens consequences still more
formidable, when it is rendered the tool of design and
craft. Hence arises one of the most powerful argt-
ments for propagating with zeal, as'far as our influ-
ence can extend, the pure and undefiled docrines of
the Gospel of Christ; in order that just and rational
principles of religion may fill up that room in the
minds of men, which dangerous fanaticism will other-
wife usurp.

This confideratian alone is fuflicient to fsew the

high utility of the design undertaken by the Society
for propagating Christian Knowledge. With great
propriety, they have bellowed their chief attention
on a remote quarter of our own country, where,
from a variety of causes, ignorance and superstition
had gained more ground, than in any other corner of
the land; where the inhabitants, by their local fitua-
tion, weie more perfectly supplied with the means
of proper education and inftruaion: and at the fame
timeexpofed tb the feduaions of tucit as fought to
prevent them from the truth. The laudable endea-
vours of the Society in diffusing religious and useful
knowledge through this part of the country, have
already been crowded with much luccefs ; and more
is flill to be expeced from the continuance of their
pious and well-direaed attention,

With such good designs, it becomes all to co-operate,

who are lovers of mankind. Thus shall the fhoow
theirjuft sense of the value of that blessing which
they enjoy, in the knowledge of the Gospel of Chrifi;
and their gratitude to Heaveh for conferring it upon
them. Thus shall they make the blefings of
thoee who are iow ready to perifb through the
lack of knowledge, defceid upon their heads.
Thus (hall they cortribute their endeavours for
blriging fciward that l-apry- reriod foretold by
rncitnt prophecy ; w hen there l7vli be one Lard over

all

7ll tbe earth, and 'i, name one; when thst tsar
[ball begreat from the rsing to the ftting fun ; when
there shall be nothing to hurt nor defroy in all the holy
mountain ofGod; but jidgment fall dzoell'inthe wilder-
refi and rigbteeufne/l remain in the fruitfulfield; the
desert Iball rejice, and bloom as the rose ; and the
earth fball be ull of the inowledge of the Lord as the
wqaters cover Jhe ea*.

* Zechar. xiv. 9. Malachi i, .I. Isaiah xx-xiii
16. xxxv., r,

SI N Si

all the earth, and 'Ali name one; when that nam'-
Iball btgreat from the ring to the setting fun ; when
there fia/l be nothing to hurt nor deroy in all the hoiy
mountain ofGod; but judgmer t J*all dwell in the wilder-
nef/ and rigbteoufnefs remain in the fruitfulfeld; the
dtfert /hall rejoice, and bloom as the rose ; and the
earth /ball be full of the knowledge of the Lord as tbe
waters owver the sea*.

*Zechar. xiv. 9. Malachi i. II. Isaiah xx-xii-
x6. xxxv. Z

SI N I S
