/ó2/ e. /ó.

0.

'I

' C

4
a

/4

IA_
S E R M O N S,

B
HUGH BLAIR, D. D. F. R. S. ED.

One of the MINISTERS of the HIGH CHURCH,

AnD
PROFESSOR of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTRES

in the UNIvERSITY, of EDINBURGH.
VOLUME THE FOURTH.

LONDO N:
Printed for A. STirrHA; and T. CADILL in the Strad;

and W. CatECH, Edinburgh.

M DCCXCIV.

ó-

/s `

iDI £ Ib

IlRITA N
1\ ICY k~

# THE CONTENTS.

THt
CON T E N T S.

SERMON I.
On the Causes of Men's being weary

of Life.
JOB x. I. MyJoul is weary of my life Page I

SERMON II.
On Charity as the End of the Com-

mandment.
I TIMOTHY i. 5. Now the end of the

commandment is charity out of a pure
heart, and of a good con/cience, and of
faith unfeigned. 21

SERMON III.
On our Lives being in the Hand of God.

Preached at the beginning of a New Year.
PSALM. xxxi. 15. My times are in thy

hand.- 43

1~~~~~4

SERMON 1V.
On the Mixture of Bad Men with the

Good in human Society.
MATTHEW xiii. 30. Let both grow to-

gether until the harvefl.- Page 66

SERMON V.
On the Relief which the Gospel as-

fords to the Distressed.
Preached at the celebration of the sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.
MATTHEW xi. 28. Come unto me all

ye that labour and are heavy laden,
and I will give you reft. 88

SERMON VI.

On Luxury and Licentiousness.
ISAIAH v. 12. The harpand the viol,

the tabret and tle pipe and wiii. are
in theirfeajl ; but they regard not the
wo, k of the Lord, neither confler the
operation of his hand. 1 13

*

SERMON VII.
On the Presence of God in a Future

State.
PSALM xvi. iI. Thou wilt 1fCew me

the path of life; in thy presence is
fulnefi of joy; at thy right hand there
are pleafuresfor evermore Page 13;

SERMON VIII.
On Curiosity concerning the Affairs of

others.

JOHN XXi. 21, 22. 'Peter rfeing him

faith to Jesus, Lord, and what flall
this man do? Je/Js faith to him, If
1 will that he tarry till I come, wbat
is that to thee ? Follow thou me. 157

SER M O N IX.
On our,.prefent Ignorance of the Ways

J* (if God.
JOHN xiii. 7. Jesus an/wered and /aid

unto him, What I do thou knowe/l nst
now; but thoujlhalt know hereafter. 17S

SERMON X.

On the Slavery of Vice.
2 PETER ii. 19. While they promif them

liberty, they themselves are the fcr-
vants of corruption; or of whom a man
is overcome, of the fame is he brought
in bondage. Page 201

SERMON XI.

On the Importance of Public Worship.
PSALM xxvi. 8. Lord, I have loved the

habitation of thy house, and the place
.where thine honour dwelleth. 224

SERMON XII.
On the Faflion of the World pafling

away.
1 CORINTH. vii. 31.-Th faJhion of

tBis world passeh away. 250

SERMON XIII.

On Tranquillity of Mind.
PSALM xv . . He that doth these

things Jhall never be moved. 272

SERMON XIV.
On the Misfortunes of Men being

chargeable on themselves.
PROVERBS x.X. 5 The fooli/hnefs of

man perverteth his way, and his heart
fretteth againfl the Lord. Page 293

SERMON XV.

On Integrity as the Guide of Life.
PROV. Xi. 1. The integrity of the up

right stall guide them.- 313

SERMON XVI.

On Submiflion to the Divine Will.
JoB ii. i o. -Shall we receive good at

the hand of God, andJlhall we not re-
ceive evil? 335

SERMON XVII.

On Friendship.
PROV. xxvii. 10. Thint own friend, and

thy father'sfriend,forfake not. 358

S E R M ON XVIII.
On the Condut to be held with regard

to Future Events.
PROV. xxvii. i. Boast not thyfelfof to-

morrow; for thou knowef not what
a day may bring forth. Page 379

SERMON XIX.

On following the Multitude to do Evil.
ExoDUS xxiii. 2. Thou Jhalt not Jollow

a Multitude to do evil.- 400

SERMON XX.

On the Wisdom of God.
I TIMOTHY i. 17. Now unto the King

Eternal, immortal, invisible, the only
wiJe God, be honour and glory for
ever and ever. Amen. 422

# SERMON I. On the CAUSES of MEN's being weary of LIFE. JOB x. 1. My soul is weary of my life. —

S E R M ON I.
On the CAUSES of MEN'S being weary

of JLIPE.

JOB X. I.

My foul iit weary of my f .---
JOB, in the firt part of his days, was SE R M.

thegreatefi of all the men of the Eaf. 1j

His poffefliens were large; his family
was numerous and flourishing; his own
charafter was fair and blameless. Yet
this man it pleated God to visit with
extraordinary reverses of fortune. He
was robbed of his whole substance. His
sons and daughters all perilhed; and he

VOL. IV. A himself,

E R M. himself, fallen from his high eltate, child-
^. less and reduced to poverty, was smitten

with fore disease. His friends came a-
bout him, seemingly with the purpose of
adminillelring comfort. But from a harfli
and ill-founded conftrudion of the in-
tention of Providence in his disasters,
they only added to his sorrows by un-
just upbraiding. Hence those many pa-
thetic lamentations with which this book
abounds, poured forth in the most beau-
tiful and touching strain of Oriental poe-
try. In one of those hours of lamenta-
tion, the sentiment in the text was utter-
ed; ally foul is 'weary of ny life; a fen-
timent, which surely, if any situation
can justify it, was allowable in the cafe
of Job.

In situations very different from that

of Job, under calamities far less severe,
it is not uncommon to find such a fen-
timent working in the heart, and some-
times breaking forth from the lips of
men. Many, very many there are, who
on one occasion or other, have experien-

ced

Ced this weariness of life, and been tempt- SERM.
ed to wish that it would come to a close. -v-.
Let us now examine in what circumftan-
ces this feeling may be deemed excuse-
able; in what it is to be held sinful;
and under what reftricions we may, on
any occasion, be permitted to fay, My
feul it weary of my lt.

I SHALL confider the words of the text

in three lights; as expressing, FirJI, The
sentiment of a discontented man; Second-
ly, The sentiment of an afflited man;
Thirdly, The sentiment of a devout man.

. I. LET us confider the text as expressing
the sentiment of a discontented man;
with whom it is the effusion of spleen,
vexation, and diffatisfaclion with life, a-
rising from causes neither laudable nor
jultifiable. There are chiefly three claf-
fes of men who are liable to this disease
of the mind: the idle; the luxurious; the
criminal.

Aa Firi,

SERIM FirJ, Tins weariness of life is often

found among the idle; persons common-
ly in easy circumstances of fortune, who
are not engaged in any of the laborious
occupations of the world, and who are,
at the fame time, without energy of mind
to call them forth into any other line of
active exertion. In this languid, or ra-
ther torpid state, they have lo many va-
cant hours, and are so much at a loss
how to fill up their time, that their fpi-
rits utterly fink; they become burden-
some to themselves, and to every one a-
round them; and drag with pain the
load of existence. What a convincing
proof is hereby afforded, that man was
designed by his Creator to be an active
being, whose happiness is to be found
not merely in reft, but in occupation
and pursuit? The idle are doomed to
susser the natural puniihment of their
inactivity and folly; and for their com-
plaints of the tiresomeness of life there
is no remedy but to awake from the
dream of sloth, and to fill up with pro-

per

per employment the miferablc vacancies SEERM.
of their days. Let them fludy to be-
come useful to the world, and they shall
soon become less burdensome to them-
selves. They shall begin to enjoy exist-
ence; they ahall reap the rewards which
Providence has annexed to virtuous ac-
tivity; and have no more cause to fay,
Myfoul is weary of my lis.

Next, TIE luxurious and the dissipated

form another class of men, among whom
such complaints are fill more frequent.
With them they are not the fruit of idle-
ness. These are men who have been
buried enough; they have run the whole
race of pleasure; but they have run it
with such inconsiderate speed, that it ter-
minates in weariness and vexation of fpi-
rit. By the perpetual course of diffipa-
tion in which they are engaged; by the
excesses which they indulge; by the rio-
tous revel, and the midnight or rather
morning hours to which they prolong
their festivity; they have debilitated their

A 3 bodies,

SERM. bodies, and worn out their spirits. Sa.

tiated with the repetition of their ac-
customed pleasures, and yet unable to
find any new ones in their place; wan-
dering round and round their former
haunts of joy, and ever returning dif-
appointed; weary of themselves, and of
all things about them, their spirits are
oppressed with a deadly gloom, and the
complaint burits forth of odious life and
a miserable world. Never are these com-
plaints more frequent than at the close
of rounds of amusement, and after a long
repetition of festal pleasures; when the
spirits which had been forced up, as by
some intoxicating drug, to an unnatural
height, subside into profound dejetion.
What increases the evil is, that it is not
among the infirm and the aged, but a-
mong the young, the gay, and the prof-
perous, who ought to be reputed the hap-
pieft men, that this distaste of life molt
frequently prevails.

When persons of this description, in
their peeviih and splenetic hours, exclaim,

lMy

My fSol is weary of my life, let them SERM.
know, let them be aflured, that this is
no other than the judgement of God o-
vertaking them for their vices and fol-
lies. Their complaints of misery are e-
titled to no companion; nay, they are
sinful, because they arise from a sinful
cause; from a mind broken and debased
by luxury and corruption. They are the
authors of their own misery, by having
thrown away on the follies of the world
those powers which God had bellowed
on them for nobler ends.-Let them re-
turn to the duties of men and Christians.
Let them retreat from frivolity, and ab-
stain from excess. Let them study tem-
perance, moderation, and felf-command.
By entering on a virtuous and manly
course of afcion, and applying to the ho-
nourable discharge of the functions of
their station, they will acquire different
views. They will obtain more real enjoy-
ment of life, and become more willing to
prolong it.- But, after the warnings
which God has given them of their mif-

A 4 behaviour

SERM. behaviour by the inward misery they

IJ j susser, if they fill continue to run the

fame intemperate round, and to drain
pleasure to the last dregs, it ihall come
to pass, that they who now contemn life,
and are impatient of its continuance,
shall be the persons most eager to pro-
long it. When they behold it in reality
drawing towards a close, and are obliged
to look forward to what is to come after
it, they shall be rendered awfully fenfi-
ble of its value. They will then grasp
eagerly at the flying hours; anxious to
tfop them if they could, and to employ
every moment that remains in repairing
their past errors, and in making their
peace, if pofflible, with God and heaven.
According as they have Jouvn, they now
reap. They are reduced to eat the fruit
of their own wayr, and to be filed with
their own devices.

THERE remains fiill a thirdclafs of thofi

who from dilcontent arc become weary
of life; iuch as have embittered it to

themselves

thernfdves by the confcioufilcis of cri- SERIL
niinal deeds. They have been, perhaps, L.
unnatural to their parents, or treache-
rous to their fiiends; they have viola-
ted their fidelity; have cntiared and
ruined the innocent; or have occalionedl
the death of others. There is no won-
der that such persons flould lole their
relilh for life. To whatever arts they
may have recourse for procuring a de-
ceitful peace, conscience will at times ex.
ert its native power, and lhake over them
its terrific scourge. The internal milery
they endure has fbmetimes ariltn to such
a height, as has made them terminate,
with their own hands, an existence which
they felt to be infupportable.-To the
complaints of such persons no remedy
can be furnished, except what arises from
the bitternels of sincere and deep repen-
tance. We can do no more than exhort
them to atone as much as is in their power
for the evils they have committed ; and
to fly to the divine mercy through Jelus

Christ

SERM. Chrifl for pardon and forgiveness. Let
v_ us now,

II. TURN to persons of another defcrip-

tion, and confider the sentiment in the
text as extorted by situations of dlftreis.
These are si) variously multiplied in the
world, and often si oppressive and heavy,
that assuredly it is not uncommon to hear
the aflliced complain that they are weary
of life. Their complaints, if not always
allowable, yet certainly are more excusable
than those which flow from the sources
of diffatisfacion already mentioned. They
are fuffercrs, not so much through their
own mifcondud, as through the appoint-
ment of Providence; and therefore to
persons in this situation it may seem more
needful to offer consolation, than to give
admonition. However, as the evils which
produce this impatience of life are of
different forts, a diflindion muff be made
as to the situations which can most ex-
cufc it.

SOMETIMES,

SOMETIMES, the exclamation in the SERM.

text may be occasioned by deep and over-
whelming grief. When they whom we
had molt affeCtionatcly loved, and in
whom we had placed the felicity of our
days, are taken away, our connection
with life appears to be diftolvel. " Why
"fliould we survive those to whom our
" bfuls were tied? Would to God we
" had died before them ! Now when they
" arc gone, all pleasure and hope is gone
"as to us. To us the fun no longer ihines
"with his usual brightness. No longer
" cheerfulness invelts the face of nature.
" On every objeCt a lad gloom appears
" to reft; and every employment of life
" is become an opprellive burden." With
the feelings of those who are thus dif-
trelled we naturally fympathile. They
are frequently the feelings of the moll
virtuous and amiable minds: And yet
such persons must be told, that grief may
be indulged so far as to become immo.
derate and improper. There are bounds
which are pretcribed to it both by reason

and

SERM. and by religion. A Chriflian ought not

to mourn like thobe who have no hope.
While he feels his sorrows as a man, he
should also lludy to bear them like a
man, with fortitude; and not abandon
himself to feeble and fruitless melancho-
ly. Let him have recourse to a ftre-
nuous discharge of the duties of hA {ta-
tion, and confider it as incumbent on
him to make the best improvement that
he can of those comforts which Provi.
dence has still left in his possession.

AGAIN; it sometimes happens that, a-

part from grief, great reverses of world-
ly fortune give rife to the lamentation
in the text. Thi3 was the cafe with Job
himself. A sudden fall from opulence
into indigence and want; some undefer-
ved disgrace incurred, or some unexped,
ed cloud thrown over former reputation
and fame; the unkindnefi and desertion
of friends, or the infblent triumph of e-
nemies, arc apt to overwhelm the minds
of men with gloom, and to reduce them

to

to be weary of life. To persons under SERM.
such calamities, sympathy is due. That
sympathy, however, will be proportion-
ed to the degree in which we confider
them as free from blame in the misfor-
tunes which they susser. As far as,
through their own mifconduC and vice,
they have been the authors to themselves
of those misfortunes, we withdraw our
pity. The burthen which they have
brought on themselves we leave them
to bear as they can; and with little con-
cern we hear them exclaim that their
fouls are weary of lfe,--Not only so, but
even in cafes where calamities have fallen
on the innocent, to the pity which we
feel for them will be joined a secret con-
tempt, if we perceive that together with
their prosperity, their courage and for-
titude have also forsaken them. To a-
bandon themselves to dcj(dion carries
no mark of a great or a wolthy mind.
Inflead of declaring that his firl is weary
of his lije, it becomes a brave and a good
man, in the evil day, with firmness to

maintain

SER M. maintain his poll; to bear up againfl thd
J fform ; to have recourse to thole advan-

tages which, in the worfi of times, are
always left to integrity and virtue; and
never to give up the hope that better
days may yet arise.

It is good for persons in such situations

to remark that, though Job was for a
long while fcvcrcly tried by a variety of
diflrclcs, yet his condition was not left
finally unhappy. On the contrary, the
goodness of that God whom he had ferv-
ed returned at lads, to shine upon him
with greater brighnefs than ever. His
riches were restored to him twofold. The
lolfes in his family were repaired by a
new offspring. His name became again
renowned in the Eafi; and the latter
end of Yob, we are told, was more blej-
Jcd than the teginning.

BUT frill, it may be askcd, will not

the continuance of long and severe dif-
ease jultify the exclamation in the text,
A;y Jouil is weary of my 1i: ? To persons

who

who are forsaken by all the blessings of S ER M.
health, and who have no profpea left,
but that of lingering under sickness or
pain, Job's complaint may assuredly be
forgiven more than to any others. Though
it might be suggested to them, that even
in old age and sickness, except in very
extreme cafes, some resources are alwaay
left, of which they may avail themselves
for relief; vet it must be admitted, that
lawfully they may with their sufferings
to be brought to an end. Still, however,
they must remember, that resignation to
the pleasure of heaven continues to be
their duty to the last. As long as any
part remains to be acted, as long as their
continuance in the world can serve any
valuable purpose, it is more honourable
to bear the load with magnanimity, than
to give way to a querulous and dejeCted
spirit. It remains,

III. To address myself to another or-

der of men, among whom, though more
rarely than among those whom I have

described,

SERR. dcfcribcd,' the fcntiment of the text is to

be found. They are persons who have
no particular complaint to make of the
injultice of the world, or the afflictions
of their slate. But they are tired of the
vanity of the world, of its insipid enjoy-
ments, and its perpetually revolving cir-
cle of trillcs and follies. They feel
tlcmfclvcs made for something greater
and nobler. They are disgusted and hurt
with the fccnes of wickedness that are
often pafling before their eyes. Their
hearts arc warmed with the thoughts of
a purer and more perfeCt existence de.
signed for man; and in the moments of
aspiration after it, the exclamation breaks
forth, Aly /oul it weary of my li/.-0O that
I had u:ings like a dove! for then I would
fly av'ayv and be at rej. Lo then I would
uander far cf, and remain in the wilder-
nics. I i'tuld ha/len my efape from the
uindy jiormi and tempI. For I have fen
violence andl Jiife in the city. lkickedne/l
is in the miuli thereof; deceit and guile de-

part

part not from htr /reets *.-In this view S ERM.
the sentiment in the text may sometimes
be that of a devout man. But such per.
sons I must admonifl, that their devo-
tion, how sincere however, is not alto-
gether of a rational and chastened kind.
It was from this temper that, in former
ages of the church, the numerous race
sprung of anchorets, hermits, and all the
various orders who voluntarily abandon-
ed the world, to people the lonely defarts
and the monastic retreat. The ordinary
course of things seemed below them as
candidates for heaven. The concerns of
the world appeared unworthy of their
attention, and dangerous to their virtue.
Breathing after a higher state, they ima-
gined that they could not abstract them-
felve3 too much from every earthly a-
mufement, as long as they were forced
to remain in this place of exile.
VOL. 1V. B Let

* Pi-i. . ó.-----

SERMI. Let us beware of all such imaginary

I.

J refinements as produce a total difrelili

of our present condition. They are, for
the most part, grafted either on difap-
pointed pursuits, or on a melancholy and
splenetic cast of mind. They are far
from contributing to happiness, and are
inconsistent with all the acive virtues of
man. This life deserves not indeed to
be put in competition with that blessed
immortality to which God has raised our
hopes. But such as it is, it is the gift
of God. It is the fihere in which his
wildom has placed us, and appointed us
to ad our parts. As long as it lasts, we
must neither flight the duties which it
requires, nor undervalue the innocent
enjoyments which it offers. It belongs
to a man to live among men as his bre-
thren; which he who declares himself
weary of life is not qualified to do with
propriety.

Tlus I have placed before you, in
various views, the sentiment in the text;

and

and have shewn in what circunftances, S E l.
and from what causes, that difrilil of r
life arises which is often found among
mankind. On a review of the whole,
we cannot but acknowledge, that it is
oftener to be ascribed to our own vices
and follies, than to any other cause. A-
mong the multitudes in the world, to
whom at this day life is burdensome, the
far greater number is of those who have
rendered it so to themlelves. Their idle-
ness, their luxury and pleasures, their
criminal deeds, their immoderate pafflions,
their timidity and baseness of mind, have
dejecled them in such a degree, as to
make them weary of their existence.
Preyed upon by dilcontent of their own
creating, they complain of life when they
ought to reprehend themfclves.

Various aflllicions there doubtless are

in the world; many persons with whom
we have cause to sympathise, and whom
we might reasonably forgive for wish-
ing death to close their sorrows. But of
the evils which embitter life, it must be

B 2 admitted,

SERM. admitted, that the greater part is such as

we have brought on ourielves; or at least
such as, if we were not wanting to our-
lelves, might be tolerably supported.
When we compute the numbers of those
who are dilfolcd to fay, My foul is weary
of my lie, some there are to whom this
sentiment is excusable; but many more
among whom it is in no way jullifiable.
1 admit that, among the worthiest and
the best, there may be dark moments
in which some feeling of this nature may
be apt to intrude upon their minds. But
with them they are only moments of
occasional and passing gloom. They soon
recall the vigour of their minds; and re-
turn with fatisfacion to the discharge
of the duties, and to a participation of
the enjoyments, of life.

One great cause of men's becoming

weary of life is grounded on the mifta-
ken views of it which they have formed,
and the false hopes which they have en-
tertained from it. They have expected a
icene of enjoyment; and when they meet

with

with difappointmcnts and (lifreffes, they SE RM.

I.

complain of life, as if it had cheated and j
betrayed them. G(od ordained no such
poffeflion for man on earth as continued
pleafiure. For the wisest purposes he de-
signed our slate to be checquered with
pleasure and pain. As such let us receive
it, and make the best of what is doomed
to be our lot. Let us remain persuaded,
that simple and moderate pleasures are
always the bell; that virtue and a good
conscience are the surest foundations of
enjoyment; that he who serves his God
and his Saviour with the purest inten-
tions, and governs his pafions with the
greatest care, is likely to lead the happiest
life. Following these principles, we shall
meet with fewer occasions of being wea-
ry of life; we lhall always find some \a-
tisfastions mixed with its crosses; and
flall be enabled to wait with a humble
and contented mind till the Almighty,
in his appointed time, finish our state of
trial, and remove us to a more blessed
abode.

B 3 SERMON

# SERMON II. On CHARITY as the End of the COMMANDMENT. 1 TIMOTHY i. 5. Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unseigned.

S E R M O N II.
On CHARITY as the End of the COM-

MANDMENT.

i TIMOTIIY i. 5.
Now the end of the commandment is cha,

rity out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

T appears from this chapter, that one

S ERM.

R design of the Apoflle, in writing to
_J. Timothy, was to guard him against cer-

tain corrupters of Christian docrine, who
had already arisen in the church. To
their false representations of religion he
opposes that general view of it which is
given in the text. Such summaries of

religion

religion frequently occur in the sacred SERM.
writings; and arc extremely ufcful. By . a
the comprehensive energy with which they
express the great lines of our duty, they
both imprint them on our memory, and
bring them home to our conscience with
force. In the progress of this discourse,
I hope to make it appear, that the words
of the text afford a most enlarged and
inftrudive view of religion in all its
chief parts.

The Apoltle pronounces charity to be

the end or scope of the commandment, that
is, of the law of God. At the fame time,
in order to prevent mistakes on this most
important subject, he subjoins to charity
certain adjunds, as neceflary to qualify
it, and to render the Christian character
complete. These are the pure heart, the
good conscience, and faith unfeigned. In
treating of these, I shall flew the nature
of their connexion with charity, and the
importance of their being always united
with it.

B 4 The

SERM. The end of the commandment is charily.

II. Charity is the Iame with benevolence or

love; and is the term uniformly em-
ployed, in the New Tellament, to denote
all the good affections which we ought
to bear towards one another. It consists
not in speculative ideas of general bene-
volence floating in the head, and leaving
the heart, as speculations too often do,
untouched and cold. Neither is it con-
fined to thl:t indolent good nature, which
makes us zlet satisfied with being frec
from inveterate malice, or ill-will to our
fellow-creatures, without prompting us
to be of iervice to any. True charity
is an active principle. It is not proper-
ly a single virtue; but a disposition re-
fiding in the heart, as a fountain whence
all the virtues of benignity, candour, for-
bearance, generosity, compalion, and li-
berality, flow, as lb many native fireans.
From general good-will to all, it extends
its influence particularly to those with
whom we Rand in nearest connecion,
nd who are directly within the sphere

o'

of our good offices. From the country SE RM.
or community to which we belong, it j
descends to the finaller afiociations of
neighbourhood, relations, and friends;
and fprcads itself over the whole circle
of social and domeltic life. I mean not
that it imports a promiscuous undiflin-
guifling affecion, which gives every
man an equal title to our love. Cha-
rity, if we should endeavour to carry it
so far, would be rendered an impraCti-
cable virtue, and would resolve itself
into mere words, without affeeting the
heart. True charity attempts not to shut
our eyes to the diflincion between good
and bad men; nor to warm our hearts
equally to those who befriend and tho:e
who injure us. It reserves our efteetn
for good men, and our complacency for
our friends. Towards our enemies it
inspires forgiveness and humanity. It
breathes univerfil candour, and liberality
of sentiment. It forms gentleness of
temper, and dictates affability of man-
ners. It prompts corresponding fympa-

thies

SERM. thies with them who rejoice and them
,r, who weep. It teaches us to flight and

despise no man. (:harity is the comfort-
er of the affliced, the protetor of the
oppressed, the reconciler of differences,
the intercessor for offenders. It is faith-
fulness in the friend, public spirit in the
magitrate, equity and patience in the
judge, moderation in the fovcreign, and
loyalty in the subjed. In parents it is
care and attention; in children it is re-
verence and fubmiflion. In a word, it
is the foul of social life. It is the fun
that enlivens and cheers the abodes of
nlen. It is like the dew of Hermon, fays
the Pfalmilt, and the dew that defcendetk
m the imountains of Zion, where the Lord
commanded the blefing, even lije for ever-
more *.

SucHl charity, fays the text, is the end
of the commandment. This affierion of the

Apoftit
Pfal. cxxxiii. 3.

Apoflle is undoubtedly confiinant to all SERM.
that realon can filtggett on the subject of _
religion. For, on confidering the nature
of the Supreme Being, rcalin gives us
much ground to believe, that the chief
ddign of all the commandments which
he has given to men, is to promote their
happiness. Independent and fclf-fulffcienr,
that Supreme Being has nothing to exact
from us for his own interelt or felicity.
By our services he cannot be benefited,
nor by our offences injured. When he
created the world, it was benevolence that
moved him to confer existence. When
he made hinmfelf known to his creatures,
benevolence in like manner moved him
to give them laws for thcir conduct.
Benevolence is the fpiing of legillation
in the Deity, as much as it was the mo-
tive of creation. He issued his com-
mands on earth on purpose that by o-
bedience to them, his creatures might be
rendered happy among themselves in this
life, and be prepared for greater happineli
hn another. 'Charity, cfpecially when

joined

S E R M. joined with purity, good conscience, and
»-W, faith, is obvioully the great infirument

for this purpose; and therefore muff needs
possess the chief and primary place in the
laws of God.

Accordingly, throughout the New Tef-

tament, it is uniformly prelented to us
in the fame light in which it is placed by
the test. This is known to all who have
any acquaintance with the sacred books.
Charity is termed the fufilling of the law,
and the bond of perfedtnei. It was affum-
ed by our blessed Lord as the characde
riftical ditlindion of his disciples; and
in that magnificent eulogium which the
Apofile Paul pronounces upon it, in the
thirteenth chapter of the first epistle to the
Corinthians, it is expressly preferred by
him to faith and hopt. This deserves to
be seriously confidered by those who are
apt to undervalue charity, as an appen-
dage of what they contemptuously call
Morality; while they confine true reli-
gion to some favourite tenets and obfer-
vances of their own, whith they confi-

dler

der as comprehending the fum of what SERM.
is acceptable to God. Such persons show
themselves profoundly ignorant of the
nature of religion, and may too often be
fufpeaed of being itrangers to its influ-
ence. For, as the apostle John reasons,
He that loveth not his brother, whom he
hath fccn, how can he love that God whom
he hath not fen * ?

AT the fame time, while I ascribe to

charity that high place in the system of re-
ligion, which justly belongs to it, I am not
to be understood as confining all religion
to this disposition alone. With much
wisdom and propriety, the text hath an-
nexed to it certain adjuncts, without
which neither the character of a good
man can be completed, nor charity it-
ielf exercised to advantage. To the con-
fideration of these I now proceed; and
I enter the more readily on this branch

A John iv. 2s.

SERM. of the iubject, as there is ground to be-
,Y lieve, that many pretend to possess clha

rity, without properly underflanding its
nature and efficacy. There has been al-
ways an unhappy tendency among men
to run to extremes, on one fide or other,
in matters of' religion, As one iet of
men, who employ all their zeal on right
belief, are prone to undervalue good prac-
tice; so another . t, who wilh to be e-
ilecmced rational Chriflians, are inclined
to rect the whole of their duty on chari-
table deeds, while they overlook cer-
tain diliofitions and habits which ought
always to accompany them. It is there-
fore of importance, that the mistakes of
both thele claflles of men fllould be reAi-
sied, in order that religion may be held
forth to the world in its complete form,
and in its full and undimini'lhcd lullre.

Tnl firfl qualification of charity point-

ed out in the tcxt is purity; charity out
of' a pure heart. Purity includes the vir-
tues which beloing to the individual,

confidered

eonfidcred in himself, and with refpe&t SERM.
to the government of his desires and j
pleasures. It hath its feat in the heart;
but extends its influence over so much
of the outward conduct, as to form a
great and material part of the character.
They are only the pure in heart, we are
told by our Saviour, twho can fee God %.
It is albf true, that they are only the pura
in heart who can properly difclaarge their
duties towards mankind. Inordinate love
of pleasure, intemperance, fenftality, and
a course of irregular life, are inconfiltent,
not only with the general character of a
good man, but also with the peculiar
exercises of charity and benevolence. For
nothing is more certain, than that habits
of licentious indulgence contribute to
ftiffle ill the good afledions; to harden
the heart; to nourish that telfifl attach-
ment to our own vitious pleafires which
renders us insensible to the circumfian-

cec
, Mtthi. v. .

SER M. ces and wants of others. A profligate

J man is seldom found to be a good hus-

band, a good father, or a beneficent
neighbour. How many young persons
have at first set out in the wdrld with
excellent dispositions of heart; generous,
charitable, and humane; kind to their
friends, and amiable among all with
whom they had intercourse? And yet
how often have we seen all tlofe fair
appearances unhappily blasted in the pro-
grefs of life, merely through the influ-
ence of loose and corrupting pleasures
and those very persons who promised
once to be bleflings to the world, funk
down, in the end, to be the burthen and
nuisance of society? The profusion of
expence which their pleasures occasion,
accounts in a great measure for the fatal
reverse that takes place in their charac-
ter. It not only drains the sources
whence the streams of beneficence ihould
flow, but often obliges them to become
oppreflive and cruel to those whom it was

3 their

their duty to have patronised and sup- SE R M.
ported.

Purity of heart and conduct mufR there-

fore be held fundamental to charity and
love, as well as to general piety and vir-
tue. The licentious, I know, are ready
to imagine, that their occasional deeds
of bounty and liberality will atone for
many of their private disorders. But,
besides that such plans of compensation
for vices, by some supposed virtues, are
always fallacious, the licentious may be
afiured, that it is an appearance only of
charity, not the reality of it, to which
they can lay claim. For that great vir-
tue consists not in occasional actions of
humanity, in fits of kindnels or compaf-
sion, to which bad men may be prompted
by natural inftind; but in the fleady and
regular exercise of those good affections,
and the difchargc of those important du-
ties towards others, for which the licen-
tious are in a great measure disqualified.
Their criminal propensities direc their
inclinations to very different objets and

VOL. IV. C pursuits;

GERM. pursuits; and often determine them to
vsj sacrifice the just rights of others, some-

times to sacrifice the peace and the re-
putation of the innocent, to the gratifi-
cation of their passions. Such is the per-
nicious influence which the love of plea-
sure has on the good qualities of its de-
voted votaries. The impure heart is like
the stagnant and put-ifying lake, which
fends forth its poisonous exhalations to
corrupt and wither every plant that grows
on its banks.

THE second qualification annexed to

Charity, in the text, is, that it be of a
good conficence. By this I understand the
Apoflle to mean, that charity be in full
confifency with justice and integrity;
that the cotecience of the man who pur-
poses to perform actions of benevolence,
be free from the reproach of having ne-
gleced the primary duties of equity.
For, undoubtedly, juflice is a virtue pri-
mary to charity; that is, it must go be-
fore it in all its exertions. One must first

do

do ju/lly before he can pretend that he S E R M.
lovet mercy.-Religion, my friends, in or-
der to render it useful to mankind, must
be brought down by its teachers from the
sublimity of speculation to the funcions
and occupations of ordinary life. It is
my duty to admonifs you, that you must,
in the firll place, be fair in all your deal-
ings with others; you must discharge the
debts you owe; you muff pay the wages
due to your servants and dependents;
you muff provide for your own family,
and be just to the claims of relations;
then, and then only, you can, Jrom a good
conJiience, as the text enjoins, perform
ads of generosity and mercy.

This leads to a reflection which here

deserves our attention; that, in order to
fulfil that charity which is the end of the
commandment, oeconomy, and good order
in private life, ought to be carefully ftu-
died by all Chrillians. This is more
closely connected with a good confcicnce,
than many seem inclined to admit. Oe-
conomy, when prudently and temperate-

C 2 ly

SERM. ly conducted, is the safeguard of many

j virtues; and is in a particular manner

favourable to the exertions of benevo-
lence. He who by inconsiderate con-
duA it iljuring his circumitances, will
probably in time lose the inclination, and
certainly is depriving himself of the means,
of being feirviceable to lis brethren. Some
important exertions, indeed, there are
of charity, Which have no connection
with g'iving or bestowing. Candour, for-
givenefs, gentlencfs, and sympathy, are
due to our brethren at all times, and in
every situation of our own fortune. The
poor have opportunities for displaying
these virtues, as well as the rich. They
who have nothing to give, can often afford
relief to others, by imparting what they
feel. But, as far as beneficence is in-
cluded in charity, we ought always to
remember, that juflice must, in the first
place, be held inviolably sacred.

The wisdom of scripture remarkably

appears, in the connexion pointed out
by the text between cbarnty and good con-

Jcin¢c

science or integrity; a connexion which I SERM.
apprehend is often not attended to so much J
as it defcrves. Among the frugal and in-
duflrious, great regard is commonly paid
tojuflice. They will not defiaud. They
will not take any unlawful advantage
in their dealings: And satisfied with this
degree of good confi:cnce, they are ftran-
gers to that charity, which is the end
of the commandmeint. They are hard and
unfeeling. They are rigid and fcvcre in
their demapds. They know nothing of
humanity, forgiveness, or companion.-
Among another class of men, who have
been more liberally educated, and who
are generally of a higher rank in life, jus-
tice is apt to be confidered as a virtue less
noble than charity; and which may, on
some occasions be dispensed with. They
are humane perhaps, and tender in their
feelings. They are easy to their depend-
ents. They can be liberal, even to profu-
sion. While, at the fame time, they are
accumulating debts, which they know
themselves unable to discharge. Their

C 3 affairs

E R M. affairs are allowed to run into confusion.

Oeconomy and good order are negleled.
The innocent, in great numbers, susser
materially through their mifinanagement:
And all the while they assume to them-
selves the praifl of being generous and
good-hearted men. This surely is not that
charity which the Gospel enjoins; and
which, in its very essence, involves good
conficence and integrity. He who pre-
tends to do good to his brethren, without
first doing them jutfice, cannot be acount-
ed their real friend. True charity is not
a meteor, which occasionally glares; but a
luminary, which, in its orderly and re-
gular course, dispenses a benignant influ-
ence.

THE third and lat adjunct connected in

the text with charity is, that it be of faith
unfeigned. Faith, in the scripture fcnfe of
it, includes the whole of religious princi-
ples refpeding God, and refpeding Chrilt.
Good principles, without good practice, I
confecs, are nothing; they are of no avail

in

in the fight of God, nor in the efimation SERM.
of wife men. But practice not founded
on principle is likely to be always unfta-
ble and wavering; and, therefore, the
faith of religious principles enters, for a
very considerable Ihare, into the proper
discharge of the duties of charity.

It will be admited that, without faith,

our duties towards God cannot be pro-
perly performed. You may be assured
that your duties towards men will al-
ways greatly fuffcr from the want of it.
Faith, when pure and genuine, supplies
to every part of virtue, and in particular
to the virtue of charity, many motives
and affifiances, of which the unbelie-
ver is destitute. He who ads from
faith ads upon the high principle of re-
gard to the God who hath made him,
and to the Saviour who redeems him;
which will often flimulate him to his
duty when other principles of benevo-
lence become faint and languid, or are
crossed by opposite intercfls. When he
confiders hinfelf as pursuing the appro-

C 4 bation

SERM. bation of that divine Being, from whom

love descends, a Sacred cnthufiafin both
prompts, and consecrates, his charitable
dispositions. Regardless of men, or of
human recompence, he is carried along
by a higher impulse. He ads with the
spirit of a follower of the Son of God,
who not only has enjoined love, but has
enforced it by the example of laying
down his life for mankind. Whatever
he does in behalf of his fellow-creatures,
he confiders himself as doing, in some de-
gree, to that divine Person, who hath
said, Inainuch al ye have done it unto one
of the leaJI of thej my brethren, ye have
done it unto me *. Hence charity is with
him not only a moral virtue, but a Chris-
tian grace. It acquires additional dignity
and energy from being conneded with
the heavenly slate and the heavenly in-
habitants. He mingles with beings of a
higher order, while he is discharging his

duty
Matth. xxv. 4s.

duty to his fellow-creatures on earth ; and S ER H.
by joining faith and piety to good works,
he completes the character of a Chril-
tian.

THus I have endeavoured to explain

the full sense of that comprehensive view
of religion which is given in the text.
I have ihown in what rcfpecls charity
joined with the pure heart, the good con-
Jience, and faith unfeigned, forms the end
of the commandment. Let us ever keep
in view those essential parts of a virtuous
charader, and preserve them in their
proper union. Thus flall our religion
rife into a regular and well-proportioned
cdifice, where each part gives firmness
and support to another. If any one of
those material parts be wanting in the
firucure; if, out of our t'ftem of cha-
rity, either purity, or justice, or faith,
be left, there will be cracks and flaws
in the building which prepare its ruin.

This is indeed one of the greatest and
ipoft frequent errors of men, in their

moral

SERM. moral conduct. They take hold of vir-

tue by pieces and corners only. Few
are so depraved as to be without all sense
of duty, and all regard to it. To some
moral qualities, which appear to them
amiable or estimable, almost all men lay
claim; and on these they reft their worth,
in their own elimation. But these scat-
tered pieces of virtue, not uniting into
one whole, nor forming a confiltent cha-
racter, have no powerful influence on
their general habits of life. From various
unguarded quarters they lie open to
temptation. Their lives are full of con-
tradiction, and perpetually fludtuate be-
tween good and evil. Virtue can nei-
ther rife to its native dignity, nor attain
its proper rewards, until all its chief parts
be joined together in our character, and
exert an equal authority in regulating ou
conduct.

S E R M 0 N

# SERMON III. On our LIVES being in the Hand of GOD. [Preached at the beginning of a New Year *.] PSALM xxxi. 15. My times are in thy hand. —

S E R M O N 11.
On our LIVES being in the Hand of

GOD.
[Preached at the beginning of a New Year .]

PSALM xxLi 15.

ly times are in thy band.-
T HE fun that rolls over our heads, SERM.

the food that we receive, the reft

that we enjoy, daily admonish us of a
superior power, on whom the inhabitants
of the earth depend for light, life, and
fdbfiftence. But as long as all things

proceed
January 6tl, 1793.

SERM. proceed in their ordinary course; when
It.

(lay returns after (lay with pcrfect fimi-
larity; when our life fitms ftiiionary,
and nothing occurs to warn us of any ap-
proaching change, the religious senti-
nents of dependence arc apt to be for-
gotten. The great revolutions of time,
when they come round in their fated
order, have a tendency to force some im-
preflions of piety even on the most un-
thinking minds. They both mark our
exifience on earth to be advancing to-
wards its close, and exhibit our condition
as continually changing; while each re-
turning year brings along with it new e-
vents, and at the fame time carries us
forwards to the conclusion of all. We
cannot, on such occasions avoid perceiv-
ing, that there is a Supreme Being who
holds in his hands the line of our exitence,
and measures out to each of us our allot-
ted portion of that line. Beyond a certain
hmnit, we know that it cannot be extend-
ed ; and long before it reach that limit it
may be cut asunder by an invisible hand,

which

which is stretched forth over all the inha- SERM.

lI!.

bi:ants of the world. Then naturally a-
rifes the ejaculation of the text, My timer,
0 God, are in tiOy ,rind. " My fate de-
"pends on thee. The duration of my
"life, and all the events which in fu-
"ture days are to fill it, are entirely at
" thy difpofal."-Let us now, when we
have just seen one year close, and another
begin, meditate seriously on this senti-
ment. Let us confider what is implied
in our times being in the hand of God; and
to what improvement this meditation
leads.

Tur text evidently implies, first, that

our times are not in our own hand; that,
as our continuance in life depends not
on ourselves, so the events which are
to happen, while life remains, are un-
known to us, and not under our own
direction. Of this we may behold ma-
ny a proof, when we look back on the
tranfations of the year which is just si-
nifhed. Recollection will readily present

to

SERM. to us a busy period, filled up with a
\^^ mixture of business and amusement, of

anxieties and cares, of joys and sorrows.
We have talked, perhaps, and aaed much.
We have formed many a plan; in pub-
lic or in private life, we have been en-
gaged in a variety of pursuits. Let me
now ask, how small a proportion of all
that has happened could have been fore-
seen, or foretold by us? How many
things have occured, of which we had
no expectation; some, perhaps, that have
succeeded beyond our hopes; many,
also, that have befallen us contrary to
our wish ? How often were each of us ad-
monished that there are secret wheels,
which, unseen by us, bring about the
revolutions of human affairs; and that,
while man was devising his way, Provi-
dence was directing the event ?

That fccne is now closed. The tale of

that year has been told. We look for-
ward to the year which is beginning;
and what do we behold there?-All, my
brethren, is a blank to our view: A dark

unknown

unknown presents itftlf. We are enter- SERM.
ing on an untried, undilcovered coun-
try, where, as each succeeding month
comes forward, new scenes may open;
new objeCts may engage our attention;
changes at home or abroad, in public or
in private affairs, may alter the whole
fiate of our fortune. New conne6tions
may be at hand to be formed, or old
ones just about to be dissolved; perhaps,
we may have little more to do with this
world, or with any of its connections;
we may be (landing on the verge of time
and life, and on the point of pafling
into a new region ofexiltence. In lhort,
the profpecd before us is full of awful
uncertainty. Life and death, prosperity
and adversity, health and fickncfs, joy
and trouble, lie in one undiftinguifllable
mass, where our eye can ldeIcry nothing
through the obscurity that wraps them
up.

While it is thus certain that our times

are not at our own difpolal, we are
taught, by the text, that they are in the

3 bhnd

SE R M. hand of God. This may be confidercd

in two views. Our times are in the hand
of God, as a supreme Disposer of events.
They are in the hand of God as a Guar-
dian and a Father.

Our times, I fay, are in the hand of

God as a supreme irrefiflible Ruler. All
that is to happen to us in this and the
succeeding years of our life,-if any fuc-
ceedlig years we shall be allowed to fee,-
has been foreknown and arranged by
(Gol. The first view, under which hu-
man affairs prefcnt thcmfelves to us, is
that of confused and irregular fucceflion.
The events of the world seem thrown
together by chance, like the billows of
the sea, tumbling and tolling over each
other, without rule or order. All that
is apparent to us is the fluctuation of hu-
man caprice, and the operation of hu-
man paflions. We fee the strife of am-
bition, and the efforts of firatagem, la-
bouring to accomplih their several pur-
poses among the societics of men. But

2 it

it is no more than the surface, the out- SERM.
fide of things, that we behold. Higher .
counsels, than it is in our power to trace,
are concerned in the tranfacions of the
world. If we believe in God at all, as
the Governor of the universe, we must
believe that, without his providence, no-
thig happens on earth. He over-rules,
at his pleasure, the passions of men. He
bends all their designs into subserviency
to his decree. He makes the wrath of man
toprajie him; and reflrains, in what mea-
sure he thinks fit, the remainder of wrath *.
He brings forth in their course all the
generations of men. When the time is
come for their entering into light, they
appear on the stage; and when the time
fixed for their dismission arrives, he chan-
ges their countenance, and fends them a-
way. The time of our appearing is now
come, after our ancestors had left their
place, and gone down to the dust. We

Vor.. IV. D arc

' Palm. ]xxvi. i^.

SE R M. are at present permitted to act our part
IH freely, and without constraint. No vio-

lence is done to our inclination or choice.
But assuredly there is lot a day of our life,
nor an event in that day, but was foreseen
by Cod. That fuccellion of occurrences,
which to us is full of obscurity and dark-
ness, is all light and order in his view. He
fees from the beginning to the end; and
brings forward every thing that happens,
in its due time and place.

Our tines are altogether in his band.

Let us take notice, that they are not in
the hands either of our enemies, or of
our friends. It is not in the power of
man to {horten or to prolong our life,
more or less than God has decreed.
Enemies may employ craft or violence
in their attacks; friends may employ
Ikill and vigilance for the preferva-
tion of our health and safety; but
both the one and the other can have
effect only as far as God permits. They
work in fubf-iviency to his purpose. By
him they are held in invisible bonds.

~1 ~To

To the exertions of all human agents SERM.

lII.

he fays, Hitherto ftalt thou come, and no ,j ,
farther.

WE are to observe next, that our times

are in the hand of God, not only as an
almighty Disposer, but as a merciful
Guardian and Father. We are by no
means to imagine, that from race to race,
and from year to year, God sports with
the lives of succeeding generations of
men, or, in the mere wantonness of ar-
bitrary power, brings them forth, and
fends them away. No; if we have any
confidence in what either the light of na-
ture suggests to all men, or what the
revelation of the gospel has confirmed to
Christians, we have full ground to be-
lieve,.that the administration of human
affairs is conducted with infinite wisdom
and goodness. The counsels of the Al-
mighty are indeed too deep for out limit-
ed understandings to trace. His path
may often, as to us, be in thefea, and his
footflep in the mighty waters; while, ne-

D 2 verthelefi,

E R NM. verthelefs, all his paths are mercy anJ
III.
,vJ Itruth. He who, from the benignity of

his nature, creaded this world for the a-
bodc of men; FIe who furnillhd it so
richly for our accommodation, and fto-
red it with so much beauty for our en-
tertainment ; IHe who, fincc firfP we en-
.tcrcd into life, hath followed us with luch
a variety of mercies, surely can have no
pleaftlre in our disappointment and dif-
trefs. He knows our frame; he remem-
bers we are dufi; and looks to frail man,
we are assured, with such pity as a father
beareth to his children *. To him we may
safely commit ourselves, and all our con-
cerns; as to one who is belt qualified,
both to diret the incidents proper to
happen to us in this world, and to judge
of the time when it is fit for us to be re-
moved from it.

Even that ignorance of our future def-
tiny in life, of which we sometimes

complain,
* Pflm cui. 13, 14,

complain, is a signal proof of his good- SERM.
ness. He hides from us the view of fu- ,
turity, because tlie view would be dan-
gerous and overpowering. I: would ei-
ther dispirit us with visions of terror, or
intoxicate us by the disclosure of success.
The veil which covers from our fight
the events of this and of fuccecding years,
is a veil woven by the hand of mercy.
Our times are in his hand; and we have
reason to be glad that in his hand they
are kept, hfut out from our view. Sub-
mit to his pleasure as an almighty Ruler
we must, because we cannot resist him.
Equal reason there is for trusting in him
as a Guardian, under whose disposal we
are safe.

SUCH is the import of the text, that

our times are in the hand of God. Our
times are unknown to us, and not under
our own dircion. They are in the
hands of God as a Governor and Ruler;
in the hands of God as a Guardian and
Father. These separate views of the text

D 3 require,

SERM. require, on our part, separate improve-
v- ments.

SEEING our times are not in our own

hand, feeing futurity is unknown to us,
let us, first, check the vain curiosity of pc-
netrating into what is to come. Conjec-
ture about futurity we often must; but
upon all conjectures of what this year is
to produce, let us lay a proper reflraint.
Let us wait till God Ihall bring forward
events in their proper course, without
wishing to difcovcr what he has conceal-
ed; Iclt, if the discovery were granted,
we should fee many things, which we
would wifl not to have seen.

The most common propensity of man-

kind is to tlore futurity with whate-
ver is agreeable to them ; es'pecially in
those periods of life when imagination is
lively, and.hope is ardent. Looking for-
ward to the year now beginning, they
are ready to promise themfilves much
from the foundations of prosperity which
they have laid; from the friendships and

connecfious

conncclions which they have secured; SERM.
from the plans of conduct which they have j
formed. Alas ! how deceitful do all these
dreams of happinels often prove ! While
many are faying in lecret to their hearts,
To-morrowt /fall e ar this day and more a-
bundanti', we arc obliged in return to fay
to them, Boafi not thyfef of to-morrow, for
thou knowet/ not what a day may bring
forth. I do not mean, that in the un-
known profpeft which lies before us, we
{hould forebode to ourselves nothing but
misfortunes.-May it be the pleasure of
Heaven that this year run on in a placid
and tranquil tenor to us all!-But this
1 fay, that in such foresight of futurity
as we are allowed to take, we may rec-
kon upon it as certain, that this year
shall prove to us, as many past have pro-
ved, a chccquered scene of some com-
forts and some troubles. In what pro-
portion one or other of these hlall prevail
in it; whether, when it ends, it shall
leave with us the memory of joys or of
sorrows, is to be determined by him in

D 4 w'hose

SFERM. whose hands cur tin:e ate. Our wis-
'rr' dom is, to be prepared for whatever the

year is to bling; prepared to receive
comforts with thankfulness, troubles with
fortitude; and to improve both for the
great purpoles of virtue and ctcrnal life.

ANOTHIER important inftruAion which

naturally arifls from our times not be-
ing in our own hands is, that we ought
no longer to trifle with what it is not in
our power to prolong; but that we should
make hatle to live as wife men; not de-
laying till to-morrow what may be done
to day; doing now with all our might
whatever our hand Jindeth to do; before
that night cometh wherein no man can work.

Amidst the uncertainty of the events

which are before us, there is one thing
we have too much rcafon to believe
namely, that of us who are now assem-
blcd in this congregation, and 'who have
seen the year begin, there are some who
shall not survive to fee it clole. Whe-
ther it fliall be you, or you, or I, who

2 fllall

fihal be gathered to our fathers before SERM.
the revolving year has finified its round, J
God alone knows. Our times are in his
hand? But to our place, it is more than
probable that some of us lhall have gone.
Could we foretel the month, or the day,
on which our change was to happen,
how diligent would we be in setting our
house in order, and preparing ourselves
to appear before our Maker? Surely,
that ought to be preparcd for with most
care, concerning which we are ignorant
how soon it is to take place. Let us
therefore wtalk circutjpeltly, and t edeen
the ime. I.et us dismiss those trivial and
superfluous cares which burden or cor-
rupt our life, in order to attend to what
is of highest importance to us as men and
Christians. The beginning of each year
should carry to us all a solemn admoni-
tion of our folly, in negledting to im-
prove suitably the years that are paLt
It should call up milpent time into our
view; and be like the hand coming forth
upon the wall, in the days of Bellllaz-

zar,

SEF M. zar, and writing in legible characters o-

vcr against us, "0 man! thy days arc num-
" bcred; thou art weighed in the balance,
"and found wanting; take care left thy
"kingdom be on the point of departing
"from thee."

WVIEN we confider, in the next place,

that our times, as I before illustrated,
are in the hand of God as a sovereign
Dlifpofer, it is an obvious inference from
this truth, that we should prepare our-
selves to submit patiently to his pleasure,
both as to the events which are to fill up
our days, and as to the time of our con-
tinuing in this world. To contend with
him we know to be fruitless. The word
that is gone out of his mouth must fland.
In the path which he has marked out
for us, whether it be short or long, rug-
ged or smooth, we must walk. Is it not
then the dictate of wisdom, that we Ihould
previously reconcile ourselves to this so-
vereign ordination, and bring our minds
to harmonize with what is appointed to
be our dcfliny? Let us fortify this tem-

per

per, by recalling that reflexion of the S RM.
wife man; IWho nowvcth what is good jcr j
mlan in this lie; all the days of hit vain
life which he fpendeth as a Jladow ? *

To enjoy long life, and fee many days,

is the universal wiflh; and, as the wifll
is prompted by nature, it cannot be in
itself unlawful. At the fame time, fe-
veral circumflances concur to temper
the eagerncfs of this wis; and to flhow
us that it ihould always be formed un-
der due filblniiion to the wiser judge.
ment of Heaven. Who among us can
tell, wvhzthcr, in wiflhing for the conti-
nuance of many years on earth, we may
not be only wifling for a prolongation
of distress and mifcry ?-You might live,
my friends, till you had undergone lin-
gering rounds of severe pain, firom which
death would have proved a seasonable
deliverance. You might live till your
breasts were pierced with many a wound
from public calamities or private sorrows.

You
Ecclcf. vi. 12.

SF.RM. You might live till you beheld the death

_^rV of all whom you had loved; till you fur.

vived all those who love you; till you
were left as desolate strangers on earth,
in the midst of a new race, who neither
knew you, nor cared for you, but who
wished you off the flage.-Of a nature so
ambiguous are all the profpeds which life
sets before us, that in every wish we form,
relating to them, much reason we have
to be satisfied that our times are in the
hands of God, rather than our own.

Turs consideration is greatly strength-

ened when, in the last place, we think of
God acing, not as a Sovereign only, but
as a Guardian, in the disposal of our
times. This is our great consolation in
looking forward to futurity. To God
as a wife Ruler, calm fubmillion is due;
but it is mnore than fubmilfion that be-
longs to him as a merciful Father; it is
the spirit of cordial and affectionate consent
to his will. Unknown to us as the times
to come are, it ihould be fuiTicient to our

full

full repose that they are known to God. SERM.
The day and the hour which are fixed
in his coruffels for our difiniflion from
life, we ought to be persuaded are fixed
for the belt; and that any longer we
flould not with to remain.

When we fee that last hour drawing

nigh, though our spirits may be com-
posed on our own account, yet, on ac-
count of our friends and families, no
little anxiety and sorrow may be some-
times apt to take pofleffion of the mindk
Long we have enjoyed the comfort of
their society, and been accustomed to con-
fider them as parts of ourselves. To be
parted from them forever is, at any rate,
a bitter thought; but to the bittcrnefs of
this, is over and above added the apprehen-
sion of their suffering much by our death.
We leave many a relation, perhaps may
leave young children, and a helpless family,
behind us, to be exposed to various dan-
gers, and thrown forth on in unfriendly
world. Such virtuous anxieties often
oppress the tender and feeling hcart at

the

SE RM. the cloing periods of life.-My brcthren,
11J look up to that God, in whose hands the

times of your fathers were; in whose
hand the times of your polterity ihall
be. Rccollect, for your comfort, the ex-
perience of ages. When were the righ-
tcous utterly forsaken by God in times
pall? Why should they be forsaken by
him in times to come ? Well did he govern
the world before you had a being in.it:
\Vcll thall he continue to govern it after
you are no more. No cause have you, there-
fore, to oppress your minds with the load
of unknown futurity. Commit your
cares to a Father in heaven. Surrender
your life, vour friends, and your family,
to that God, who hath said, 'he children
o/ his /ervants /hall continue, and their feed
Jhall be eJlablifhed before him *.-Leave
thy fatherlcfi children, I will prefirve them
alive; and let thy widows trujl in me t.

I Hitv thus fiown what the import
is, and what the improvement should be,

of
PlAlM Cii. IS. +Irmaixn 1

of the doctrine of the text, that our ttimes SE RM
are in the hand of GoJ. It al~:rts a fad,
the truth of which can be called in quef-
tion by none; a sac which, whether
persons have any fentin)ents of religion
or not, is calculated to make a serious im-
pression on every mind ; especially at sea-
sons when the revolution of years gives
us warning that our duration on earth
is measured, and advances towards its
period. To persons who arc religiouly
disposed, who fttdy to improve life to
its proper purposes, to do their duty to-
wards God and man, and through the
merits of their Redeemer to obtain grace
and favour from Heaven, the doctrine
of the text is till more important. A-
mong them it tends to awaken impres-
sions which are not only serious, but, as
I have flown, salutary and comforting
to the heart.-Thankful that our times
are in the hand of a Sovereign, who is
both wife and gracious, let us prepare
ourselves to meet the approaching events
of life with becoming resignation, and

at

SERM. at the fame time with manly conflancy

-u 1 and firm trust in God. As long as it

{hall plcafe him to continue our abode
in the world, let us remain faithful to
our duty; and when it fliall please him
to give the command for our removal
hence, let us utter only this voice: " In
' thy hand, ( my God, my times are.
"Thou art calling me away. Here I
"am, ready to obey thy call, and at thy
" fgnal to go forth. 1 thank thee that

1 have been admitted to partake so

" long of the comforts of life, and to
" be a fpedator of the wisdom and good-
" ness displayed in thy works. I thank
" thee that thou haft borne so long with
" my infirmities and provocations; haft
" allowed me to look up to thy promises
" in the gospel, and to hear the words
" of eternal life uttered by my great Re-
"deemer. With gratitude, faith, and
"hope,l commit my foul to thee. Lord,
"now letteft thou thy servant depart in
" peace; for mine eyes have seen thy fall-
" vation."-Such are the sentiments with

which

which every pious and good man should SE R I.
conclude his life. Such indeed are the -vj
sentiments which he ought to carry.
through every part of life. With there
may we begin, and with there conclude,
every succeeding year which God thall
think fit to add to our earthly existence!
VOL. IV. E SERM ON

# SERMON IV. ON the Mixture of BAD MEN with the GOOD in HUMAN SOCIETY. MATTH. xiii. 30. Let both grow together until the harvest. —

SERMON IV.
ON the Mixture of BAD MEN with the

GOOD in HUMAN SOCIETY.

MATTH. xiii. 30.

Let both grow together until the harveJl.-

SERM. HE parable, of which these words
IV. are a part, contains a prophetical

description of the slate of the church.
Our Lord predidcs that the societies of
Christians were to be infested with per-
sons of loose principles and bad difpofi-
tions, whom he likens to tares springing
up among wheat. He intimates that
there hould arise some whose officious

zeal

teal would prompt the desire of extermi- s E R M.
nating immediately all such evil men; lv
but that this were contrary to the de-
signs of providence, and to the spirit of
Christianity; that a complete separation
was indeed to be made at iaft between
the good and the bad; but that this fe-
paration was to be delayed till the end
of the world, when, in the file of the
parable, the tares fliould be entirely ga.
thered out from among bte whcat. Let
both grow together until the barviji.

When we look around us, nothing is

more conspicuous in the state of the
world, than that broad mixture ot the
religious and the impious, the virtuous
and the wicked, which we find taking
place in every society. Strong objec-
tions seem hence to arise against either
the wisdom or goodness of divine Pro-
vidence; especially when we behold bad
men not only tolerated in the world, but
occasionally exalted in their circumftan-
ces, to the depression of the just. Why,
it will be said, if a Supreme Being exist,

E a and

SERnM. and if his justice rule the universe, does
tJv he allow such infamous persons as the

records of history often present, to have
a place, and even to make a figure in
his world? Why sleeps the thunder idle
in his hand, when it could so easily blast
them ? What fliall we think of one who,
having the power of exterminating them
always at his command, permits them
to proceed without disturbance; nay,
ibmetimes appears to look on them with
complacency ?-It becomes highly wor-
thy of out attention to confider what an-
fwer can be made to these objecions;
to inquire whether any reasons can be
given that serve to justify this difpenfa-
tion of Providence, in allowing a mix-
ture of bad men to continue on the face
of the earth until the end of time. This
inquiry ihall mak'e the subjec of the
present discourse, together with such re-
fleAions as naturally arise from lurvey-
ing the fiate of human affairs.

BUT, before entering directly on such

inquiry,

inquiry, it may be proper to take no- SERM.

IV.

tice, that, in our estimation of who are _
the good, who are the bad, we are often
in hazard of committing mistakes. The
real characters of men are known only
to God. They frequently depend on the
secret and unseen pnrts of life. As in
judging of themselves men are always
partial, so in judging of others they of-
ten err, through the imperfet informa-
tion which they have gathered, or the
rash prejudices which they have formed.
They are too apt to limit the character
of virtue to those who agree with them
in sentiment and belief; and to exagge-
rate the failings of those against whom they
have conceived dislike, into great and
unpardonable crimes. Were it left to
the indiscreet zeal of Come to extirpate
from the earth all those whom they con-
fider as bad men, there is ground to ap-
prehend that, instead of tares the wheat
would often be rooted out.-At the fame
time, we readily admit the saC, as too
ianifeft.to be denied, that a multitude

E, of

SERM. of gross and notorious finners are now
'Vj mixed with the followers of God and

virtue. Let us proceed then to confider
how far this is consistent with the jus-
tice and wisdom of the Governor of the
world.

IT is a principle in which all serious

and reflecting persons have agreed, and
which by many arguments is confirmed,
that our present state on earth is designed
to be a state of discipline and improvement,
in order to fit human nature for a higher
and better fate which it is to attain here-
after. Now, this principle being once
admitted, we fay, that the mixture of vir-
tue and vice which here prevails, is cal-
culated to answer this purpose better
than a more unmixed and perfect state
of society would have done.

FOR, in the first place, the crimes of

the wicked give occasion to the exercise
of many excellent dispositions of heart
among the righteous. They bring forth

all

all the suffering virtues, which otherwise SERM.

IV.

would have had no field; and by the aj
exercise of which the human character is
tried, and acquires some of its chief
honours. Were there no bad men in the
world to vex and distress the good, the
good might appear in the light of harm-
less innocence; but could have no op-
portunity of displaying fidelity, magna-
nimity, patience, and fortitude. One half
of virtue, and not the lealt important
half, would be loft to the world. In
our present imperfect slate, any virtue
which is never exercised is in hazard of
becoming extinct in the human breast.
If goodness constantly proceeded in a
smooth and flowery path; if, meeting
with no adversary to oppose it, it were
surrounded on every hand with acclama-
tion and praise, is there no ground to
dread that it might be corrupted by va-
nity, or might fink into indolence? This
dangerous calm must therefore be inter-
rupted. The waters must be troubled,
left they fliould stagnate and putrify.

E 4 When

SERM. When you behold wicked men multiply.

IV.
~-vs ing in number, and increasing in power,

imagine not that Providence particularly
favours them. No; they are suffered for
a time to prosper, that they may fulfil
the high designs of heaven. They are
employed as infiruments in the hand of
God for the improvement of his servants.
They are the rods with which he chaf-
tens the virtuous, in order to rouse them
from a dangerous slumber; to form them
for the day of adversity, and to teach
them how to susser honourably.

IN the next place, the mixture of the

bad among the good serves not only to
give exercise to the passive graces, but al-
so to improve the active powers and vir-
tues of man. It inures the righteous to
vigilance and exertion. It obliges them
to fland forth, and' at their part with
firmness and constancy in evil times. It
gives occasion for their virtues to shine
with conspicuous lustre; and makes them
appear as the lights of thie worid amidst

X\~ fiteurroundilng

surrounding darkneft. Were it not for SERKM
the dangers that arise from abounding Iv.
iniquity, there would be no opportunity
for courage to ad, for wisdom to admo-
nilh, for caution to watch, nor for faith
to exert itself in overcoming the world. It
is that mixture of dispositions which now
takes place, that renders the theatre on
which we ad so busy and stirring, and
so much fitted for giving employment to
every part of man's intelligent and moral
nature. It affords a complete field for the
genuine display of characqcrs; and gives e-
very man the opportunily to come forth
and fliow what he is. W'ere the tenor of
human conduct altogether regular and uni-
form, interrupted by no follies and vices,
no cross dispositions and irregular pas-
sions, many of our aCtive powers would
find no exercise. Perhaps even our life
would languilh, and become too fill and
insipid. MIan is not yet. ripe for a para-
dife of innocence, and for the enjoyment
of a perfect and faultless society. As in

the

SERM. the natural world, he is not made for
v_>}j perpetual spring and cloudless ikies, but

by the wintry storm must be called to ex-
ert his abilities for procuring shelter and
defence; so in the moral world, the inter-
mixture of bad men renders many an ex-
ertion necellary, which in a more perfect
tfate of the world would find no place,
but which in the present state of trial is
proper and useful.- The existence of
vice in the world assuredly testifies our pre-
sent corruption; and according to the de-
gree of its prevalence, is always, more or
less, the source of miiery. It is a stand-
ing proof of the fall and degeneracy of
man. But as long as that fallen slate
continues, the wisdom of Providence e-
minently appears in making the errors
and frailties of the wicked subservient
to the improvement of the jufi. Tares
are for that reason suffered at present to
grow up ammog the wheat.

Tir.s . observations on the wifdem of
Providencc in this dispensation will be

3 farther

farther illustrated, by confidering the use- SER M.
ful inftrutions which we receive, or
which at least every wile man may re-
ceive, from the follies and vices of those
among whom we are obliged to live.

Firfl, They furniflh initruclioh con-

cerning the snares and dangers against
which we ought to be molf on our guard.
They put it thereby in our power to pro-
fit by the errors and mifcondud of o-
thers. By observing from what small
beginnings the greatest crimes have a-
risen; observing how bad company has
seduced this man from his original prin-
ciples and habits; how a careless indul-
gence of pleasure has blinded and in-
toxicated that man; how the neglect of
divine inltitutions has, in another, gra-
dually paved the way for open profliga-
cy; much salutary inltrudcion is con-
veyed to the virtuous. Tracing the dan-
gerous and slippery paths by which so
many have been insensibly betrayed in-
to ruin, their views of human nature are
enlarged; the sense of their own imbe-

cility

ER M. cility is tfrongly impressed upon them
IV.
,-v, accompanied with the conviction of the

neccffity of a conflant dependence on the
grace and afflifance of heaven. All the
crimes which they behold disturbing so-
ciety around them, fcrve as signals hung
out to them, beacons planted in their
view, to prevent their making shipwreck
among those rocks on which others have
split. It has been justly said, that not
only from the advices of his friends, but
firom the reproaches of his enemies, a wife
man may draw infirulion. In the fame
manner, it is not only by the examples
of good men, but likewise by those of
the wicked, that an attentive mind may
be confirmed in virtue.

Next, TIIESE examples of bad men,

while they admonish the virtuous of the
dangers against which they are to guard,
are farther profitable by the views which
they exhibit of the evil and the defor-
mity of fin. Its odious nature never ap-
Iwars in so firong a light as when dif-

played

played in the crimes of the wicked. ft is SERM.

1V.

true that, when vice is carried only to a j
certain degree, and disguised by plausible
colours, it may pass unreprpved, and e-
ven for a while seem popular in the
world. But it is no less true that, when
it becomes open and flagrant, and is de-
prived of the shadow of virtue, it never
fails to incur general reproach, and to
become the object either of contempt or
of hatred. How often, for instance, have
the greatest abilities, which once drew e-
fteem and admiration, funk, in a short
time, into the most humiliating degrada-
tion, merely through the ascendant which
corrupted inclinations and low habits had
acquired over their possessor? How of-
ten have the rising honours of the young
been blalted, by their forsaking the path
of honour on which they had once enter-
ed, for the blind and crooked tracs of
depravity and folly? Such fpe'tacles of
the infamy of vice, such memorials of
the disgrace attending it, are permitted
by Providence ftr general inftrudion;

and

SERM. and assuredly are edifying to the world.

IV.
^X It was necessary, for moral improvement,

that the beauty and excellence of virtue,
and the deformity of vice, ihould be
firongly impressed on every intelligent
mind. This could never be done with
so great advantage as by the striking con-
trails of both which are produced by the
living examples of evil men intermixed
with the good. It is in this mirror that
we clearly contemplate how much the
rigbteous it mare excellent than bit neigh.
bour.

THE fame purpose of important in-

firuc.ion is farther promoted by the in-
fiances of misery which the slate of wic-
ked men on earth affords. I admit that
the worldly success, which sometimes at-
tends them, may blind and seduce the
unwary; but a little more reflection ena-
bles men to diflinguifh between apparent
success and real happiness. The condi-
tion of worthless men, whatever fplen-
dor riches may throw around them, is

easily

easily discerned to be a refilefs and mi- SERM.

IV.

ferable one; and the misery which they V
susser, to be 'derived from their vices. In
that great corrupted crowd which fur-
rounds us, what incessant buflle and stir,
what agitation and tumult take place ?
What envy and jealousy of one another ?
How much bitterness of rcfentment do
we behold among them; mutually de-
ceiving and deceived; supplanting and
supplanted; ever pursuing, but never la-
tisfied ? These are not matters of rare ob-
servation, or which require nice scrutiny
to discover them. We need only open
our eyes to behold the wicked tormented
by their pailions, and far removed from
that fanluary of calmners and tranquil-
lity which is the abode of real happiness.
Nay, when we appeal to bad men them-
selves, after they have run the whole
round of vicious pleasures, we will often
find them obliged to confess, that the
wretched result of their pursuits has been
vanity and vexation of spirit; and that the
happiest days they have enjoyed were in

the

SERM. the times of innocence; before criminal

'v' desires and guilty passions had taken

poffflion of their breasts. Such pradi-
cal demonstrations as these of the infe-
licity of Iin are yielded by the exam-
ples of evil doers whom we fee around
us. By attending to their Situation, the
misery, as well as infamy of guilt is rcali-
fed, and rendered fcnfible to our appre-
henfion.

THUS, upon a fair inquiry, you be-

hold how the ways of God may, in this
remarkable cafe, bejuftified to man. You
behold what important ends are advan-
ced, by permitting the tares at present
to grow together with the wheat. The
intermixture of evil men in human so-
ciety serves to exercise the fuffcring gra-
ces and virtues of the good; by the di-
verfity of characters among those with
whom they have intercourse, it serves to
bring forth and improve their active
powers and virtues, and to enlarge the
circle of useful occupations; it serves to

inilrut

inflrul them in the temptations against SER M.
which they are to guard, to reveal to lj
them all the deformity of vice, and to
make its miseries pass conspicuously be-
fore their eyes. When we confider them
as adors on the theatre of the world, they
are thereby improved in the part they
have to perform. When we confider
them as fpedators of what is pasing
on that theatre, their minds are thereby
inftruded; their views rectified and en-
larged by the objets that are set before
them.

FROM these important truths, several
reflecions no less important arise.

We are naturally taught, in the first

place, never to be hasty in finding fault
with any of the arrangements of Provi-
dence. The present permifion of moral
evil on the earth feenmed, on the first
view, to furnilh a thlong objedion againift
either the wisdom or the goodness of
the Author of nature. After beholding
the uleful purpofcs which are answered

.VoL. IV. F by

SERM. by that permiltion, how- cautious should

I w,
we be in advancing any of our rafl fpe-

culations against his governmlent and con-
duc! To our confined and humble ita-
tion it belongs not to censure, but to sub-
mit, trult, and adore; satisficd that the
farther we inquire, the rectitude of his
ways will appear the more; thankful for
the discoveries of them which have been
imparted to us; and persuaded that, where
our discoveries fail, it is not becaufc there
is no more wisdom or goodness to be seen,
but because our prcefnt condition allows
us not to fee more.

IN the second place, let us be taught

with what eye we are to look upon those
bad men whom we find around us in the
world. Not surely with an eve of envy.
Whatever prosperity they may seem to
enjoy, they are Pill no more than tares,
the weeds of the field; contemptible in
the fight of God; tolerated by his pro-
videncc for a while on account of the righ-
teous, to whose improvement they are

rendered

rendered subservient. The parable in- SERM.
forms us that, in the end, they are to be i'
galtherJ tcgettler and burnt. In this life
only they have their good things. Bat
their prosperity is transitory. 'They ure
brought into dejolation in a moment, and ut-
terly conJinmtd wtith terrors. i/i a dieam
u'hen one a!aketh, jo, 0 God, when thou
awake/s, thou /halt Jepi/e their imare *.-
When we confider their unhappy state, it
becomes us to behold thnm with the eye
of pity. Let us remember that, in the
midst of their errors, they are by nature
still our brethren. Let us not behave to
them in the spirit of bitterness. Insult
not their follies. Pride not yourselves
on superior virtue. Remember that, as
bad men are mixed with the good, so, in
the best men, vices are at present mixed
with virtues. Your own characher, good
as you may esteem it, is not free from e-
very evil taint; and in the characers of

F X thofc
PfaLbn. Ixxiii. 19; 2-.

S E R M. thofc whom you reprobate as vitious,

IV.
.-e there arc always some good qualities mix-

ed with the bad ones. Study, as far as
you can, to reclaim and amend them;
and if, in any degree, you have been pro-
fited by their failings, endeavour, in re-
turn, to profit tlhen, by good counsel and
advice; by advice, not administered with
officious zcal, or felf-conceited superiority,
but with the tenderness of compaffioa
and real friendship.

In the third place, in whatever pro-

portion the admixture of vice may seem
to take place in the world, let us never
despair of the prevalence of virtue on the
whole. Let us not exaggerate, beyond
measure, the quantity of vice that is found
in the mixture. It is proper to observe,
that in the parable now before us, after
the owner of the field had sown bit good
feed, no reason is given us to think, that
the good feed was entirely chocked up by
tares. On the contrary, we are told that
tbe bla:lefprung up, and brorght forth fruit;

I and,

and, though the tares also arose, yet,- in SE R M.
the end there was a harvf/l, when the
wheat was reaped and gatlherd into the
barn. In the molt corrupted times, God
never leaves himself without many wit.
neffls on earth. He is always attentive
to the cause of goodness; and frequent-
ly supports and advances it by means
which we are unable to trace. He nou-
riflies much piety and virtue in hearts
that are unknown to us; and beholds re-
pentance ready to spring up among ma-
ny whom we confider as reprobates.-I
know that it has always been common
for persons to represent the age in which
they live as the worlt that ever appeared;
and religion and virtue as jutl on the
point of vaniflhing from among men.
This is the language sometimes of the fc-
rious; often of the hypocritical, or of
the narrow-minded. Bnt true religion
gives no sanction to such fcverc censures,
or such gloomy views. Though the tares
mulf be at all times springing up, there is
no reason for believing that they shall

F 3 ever

SERM. ever overspread the whole field. The

Iv. nature of the weeds that spring up may

vary, according to the nature of the foil.
Different modes of iniquity may diftin-
guifh different ages of the world; while
the fum of corruption is nearly the fame.
Let not our judgements of men, and of
the times in which we live, be hasty and
presumptuous. Let us trust in the grace
of God; and hope the belt of mankind.

IrN the fourth and last place, let us keep

our .-cs ever fixcd on that important pec
riou, which is alluded to in the text, as
the conclusion of all. Let both grow to-
gether until the ha vcJf. The great fpiri?
tual year is to be closed by a harvefi,
when the householder is to gather the wheat
into his barn; when, at the end of the
world, the final diflinclion of men and
tharaders is to take place. The confused
mixture of good and evil, which now pre-
vails, is only a temporary dispensation of
Providence, accommodated to man's fal-
len and imperfet state. Let it not tempt

IlS

us for a moment to diflrufi the reality of SERM.
the divine governnent; or to entertain ,
the remotcft suspicion that moral good
and evil are to be on the fame terms for-
ever. The fiailties of our nature fitted
us for no more at present than the enjoy-
ment of a very mixed and imperfect so-
ciety. But when our nature, purified and
refined, shall become ripe for higher ad-
vancement, then hiall the spirits of the
just, disengaged fiom any polluted mix-
ture, undisturbed by fin or by finners,
be united in one divine assembly, and re-
joice forever in the prefcnce of him who
made them. Looking forward to this glo-
rious iffuc with tfcdfaft faith, let no crofj
appearances ever difconifit our hopes, or
icad us to futpeA that we have been
fcrving God in vain. If we continue
faithjul to the deatb, we may tell assured,
that in due time we shall receive the crown

F4 SERMION

# SERMON V. On the RELIEF which the GOSPEL affords to the DISTRESSED. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. MATTH. xi. 28. Come unto me, all ye that labour, and are heavy ...

SERM ON V.
On the REI.IEF which the GOSPEL affords

to the DISTRESSED.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacra-

nient of the Lord's Supper.

MATTII. X.

x S.
Come unto me, all ye that labour, andare

heavy laden, and I will give you refi.
8 R M.T H E life of man on earth is doomed

v.j T to be clouded with various evils.

Throughout all ranks, the affliced form
a considerable proportion of the human
race; and even they who have a title to
be called prosperous, are always, in some
periods of their life, obliged to drink
from the cup of bitterness. The Chris-

tian

tian religion is particularly entitled to our s E R M.
regard, by accommodating itself with v
great tenderness to this diftrefled condi-
tion of mankind. It is not to be confi-
dered as merely an authoritative fyflem of
precepts. Important precepts it indeed
delivers for the wife and proper re-
gulation of life. But the fame voice
which enjoins our duty, utters the words
of consolation. The gospel deserves to
be held a dispensation of relief to man-
kind under both the temporal and fpiri-
tual distresses of their state.

This amiable and compassionate spirit

of our religion conspicuously appears in
the charater of its great Author. It
shone in all his actions while he lived on
earth. It breathed in all his discourses;
and, in the words of the text, is expressed
with much energy. In the preceding
verse, he had given a high account of his
own person and dignity. All things are
delivered unto me of my Father; and no
man knoweth the Son but the Father; nei-
ther knoweth any man the Father, save

the

S E R M. the Son, and he to uwhomfoever the Son will

V.
~V rreveallhim. But least any of his Iearcrs

ihould Ilc discouraged by this mysterious
representation of his greatness, he infiant-
ly tempers it with the most gracious be-
nignity; declaring, in the text, the mer-
ciful intention of his miflion to the
world, Come unto me, all )e that labour,
and are /cavy7 laden, and I will give you
re/.

TIIE first thing which claims our at-

tention in thcle words is, what we are to
underhtand by coming unto Chryl. This
is a phrase which has often given occa-
sion to controversy. By theological wri-
ters it has been involved in much nced-
less mystery, while the meaning is in it-
self plain and easy. The very metaphor
that is here used fcrvcs to explain it. In
the ancient world, dilciples flocked round
their difFercnt teachers, and attended them
wherever they went; in order both to
teflify their attachment, and to imbibe
more fully the doctrinc of their matiers.

Coming

Coming unto Chrjif, therefore, is the fame SERM-

V.

with resorting to him as our declared ,v-
Malter; acknowledging ourielves his dif-
ciplcs, believers in his doctrine, and fol-
lowers of his precepts. As Christ is made
known to us undlr the character both of
a Teacher and a Saviour, our coming to
him imports not only fubmiflion to his
infirudions, but confidence alfb in his
power to save. It imports that, forsaking
the corruptions of fin and the world, we
follow that courfc of virtue and obe-
dience which he points out to us; rely-
ing on his mediation for pardon of our
offences, and acceptance with heaven.
This is what is implied in the scripture
term Faith; which includes both the as-
sent of the underfianding to the truth of
the Chriflian religion, and the concurrence
of the will in receiving it.

WHAT next occurs in the text to at-

traA our notice is the de!iription of those
to whom the invitation is addrefhcd. All
those who labcur and are heaiy lader,

that

bERM. that is, who, in one wayor other, feel

V.
Acje themselves grieved and di(treffed, are

here invited to come to Chrift.-Now,
from two sources chiefly our distresses a-
rife; from moral, or from natural causes.

FirsI, TiEY may arice fiom inward

moral causes; from certain feelings and
reflexions of the mind, which occasion
uncafincfs and pain. A course of fin
and vice always proves ruinous and de-
flrutfive in the issue. But its tendency
to ruin is often not perceived, while that
tendency is advancing. For as fin is the
reign of paflion and pleasure, it forms
men to a thoughtless inconsiderate tfate.
Circumstances, however, may occur, and
frequently, in the course of life, do occur,
which disclose to a vicious man the ruin
which he is bringing on himself, as an
offender against the God who made him.
When ofme occasional confinement to so-
litude, or some turn of adverse fortune,
directs his attention immediately upon

his

his own character; or when, drawing to- SERM.

V.

wards the close of life, his passions sub- v
fide, his pleasures withdraw, and a future
rfate comes forward to his view; in such
situations it often happens, that the past
follies and crimes of such a man appear to
him in a light most odious and flhocking;
and not odious only, but terrifying to his
heart. He confiders that he is undoubt-
edly placed under the government of a just
God, who did not fend him into this world
for nought; that he has neglected the part
ailigned to him; has contemned the laws
of heaven; has degraded his own nature;
and inflead of being useful, having been
hurtful and pernicious to those among
whom he lived, is about to leave a detel-
table memory behind him.-What ac-
count shall he give of himself to his Ma-
ker ? Self condemned, polluted by so many
crimes, how can he expec to find mercy
in his fight ?-Hence, an overwhelmed
and dejected mind; hence, dilmal forebo-
dings of punishment; hence, that wound-
edfpirit, which, when it is deeply pierced,

becomes

SERM. becomes the forest of all human evils,

V.
-.. and has sometimes rendered cxiltcncc a

burden which could not be endured.

Such distresses as these, arising from

moral internal causes, may be made light
of by the giddy and the vain; and re-
presented as confined to a few persons on-
ly of diltempered imagination. But to
those whose professions give them occasion
to fee men under various circumstances
of afflition, they are known to be far
from being unfrequent in the world; and,
on many more occasions than is commonly
imagined, to throw over the human mind
the blackest gloom of which it is iufcepti-
ble. Religious feelings, be assured, have a
deep root in the nature of man. They form
a part of the human conflitution. They
are interwoven with many of those fears
and hopes which acuate us in the chang-
ing situations of fortune. During the gay
and ative periods of life, they may be
smothered; but with moll men, they are
smothered rather than totally obliterated:
And if any crisis of our condition {hall as

waken

wakcn, and bring them furth, in their SERM.
full force, upon a conscious guilty heart, v
woe to the man, who, in iome dilcon-
solate feaifn, is doomed to susser their
extreme vengeance !

BUT, while under such di0rcefles of

the mind not a few may, be laid to la-
bour and to be heavy laMdn, greater still is
the multitude of those who, from natural
external causes, from the calamities and
evils of life, undergo much suffering and
misery. The life of man is not indeed
wholly composed of misery. It admits
of many pleasing scenes. On the whole,
there is reason to believe that it affords
more joy than grief. At the famune time,
the unfortunate, as I before obfcrved,
form always a numerous class of man-
kind ; and it may be said with truth, that
lCre travel ii ordained fr the fins Js men.
Fhough the burden is not equally laid on
all; iome there always are, on whom it
ialls with oppressive veight.-Unexpect-
ed disappointments have crufl:ed their

3 hopes,

SERM. hopes, and blasted the plans which they

V. had formed for comfort in the world.

The world had, perhaps, smiled upon
them once, only to give them a sharper
feeling of its miseries at the last. Strug-
gling with poverty, unable to support
their families whom they fee languishing
around them, they, at the fame time, are
obliged by their situation in society to
conceal their necessities; and under the
forced appearance of cheerfulness, to hide
from the world a broken heart. They
are stung, perhaps, by the unkindness of
friends; cast off by those in whom they
had trusted; or torn by untimely death
from real friends, in connexion with
whom they might have flourifled and
been happy; at the fame time borne
down, it may be, with the infirmities of
a sickly body, and left to drag a painful
life without afliftance or relief.-How
many fad scenes of this nature, on which
it were painful to insist, does the world
afford

When

When we turn to those who are ac- SERM.

counted prosperous men, we iiall always Bo
find many sorrows mingled with their
pleasures; many hours of care and vexa-
tion, wlhrein they acknowledge them-
selves clifl(d with those who l.ibouur and
are heavy laden. In entering into some
gay festive assembly, we behold affe&ed
chearfulnefs displayed on every counte-
nance; and might fancy that we had ar-
rived at the temple of unmixed pleasure
and gladness of heart. Yet, even there,
could we look into the bosoms of there
apparently happy perfcns, how often
would we find them inwardly prey-
ed upon by ibme tormenting fuipicions,
ofme anxious fears, fomc fecrct griefs,
which either they dare not disclose to
the world, or from which, if discloscd,
they can look for no relief ?-In fllort,
amidst that great company of pilgrims,
who are journeying through life, many
there are whose journey lies through a
valley of tears; and many to whom that
VOL. IV. G valley

SER M. valley is only cheated by tranficnt gliimp

V. ,-,i fes ofjoy.

To these classes of mankind is addref-

fed the invitation of the text. To them,
it is in a particular manner uadrellecd
overlooking the giddy anwl ditipatcd mul-
titude. Come wnto me all ye th.lt labour,
and atr heavy lot'n. Not as if our Sa-
viour werc always rcaly to acc(l;t that
fort of piety which i- micrcly the conie-
quence of diltrcfs; or made all thofc
welcome, who arc driven by nothing but
fear or danger to have recourse to him.
His words are to be undcrflood as inti-
mating, that the heart which is humbled
and oftienc( by afllioion, is the ol}ji of
his complallionate regard ; that he will
not rejed us merely because we have been
cast off by the world ; but that, if with
proper diipcfitions and fentiincits we apply
to him in tlic evil day, we iall be furc of
mecting with a gracious reception. It now
remains to Ihow, whlat that reception is
which we may look for; xxhat that re','t

is

is which Christ hath promised to confer SER M.
on those who cgme to himn; whether their -
diltrefs arise from moral or from natu-
ral causes. Cone uito lme, and I vill giveC
you reJf.

1. CIRIST affords refl to the disturb.

ed mind that labours under apprclen-
sions and fears of guilt. Let thofc who
susser distress of this nature cole to Ch1 f,
that is, with contrition and repentance,
have recourse to hin as their Saviour,
and they fiall regain quietncf, and pcacc.
Foolifl and guilty they have been, and
justly lie under dread ofpuniflment; but
the penitent sorrow which they now feel,
implies their disposition to be changed. It
implies, as far as it is genuine, that, sensible
of their folly, they now defirc to become
good and wife; and are determined for
the future to hold a virtuous course, could
they only hope to obtain pardon for the
past. In this situation of mind, let them
not be cast down and despair. Christ has
brought with him from heaven the olive

G 2 branch,

SERbM. branch. lie carries in his hand the fig-

V. kv.j nal of forgivcnc£f. The declaration which

he publishes is, Let the wIcicked forfle his
way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts;
and let him trturn to the Lord, and be
will have mei cy upon himn; and to our
God, for he will abundantly pardon *. In-
sufficient though our own repentance
be, to procure pardon from heaven, we
are informed, that an all-fufficient atone-
ment has been made by Christ. Neither
the nuinlir ior the atrocity of offences
excludes, from forgivencfs, the penitent
who returns to his duty. To all who
come under this description, the offer of
mercy extends, without exception. lie
that Spared not his own Sn, but delivered
him up for us all, bow Jhall he not with
him aso freely give us all things t ?

This discovery of divine government,

afforded by the Gofpei, is perfealy cal-
culated to scatter the gloom which had

overcast
Ifaiab Iv. 7. 1 Rom. viii. 32.

overcast the defpondling heart. The at- SERM.

V.

mofphere clears up on every fide; and is v
illuminated by chearing rays of celeflial
mercy. Not only is hope given to the
penitent, but it is rendered sinful not to
indulge that hope. We are not only al-
lowed and encouraged, but we are com-
manded to trust in the divine clemency.
We are commanded to believe that n:ne
who come unto Cbrift he will in any wuie
cast out *. As I live, faith the Lord God,
I have no pleaJure in the death of the uic-
ked, but that the wicked turn from his way
and live; turn )e, turn ye from your evil
'ways; for why will r'e die, 0 house of If-
rael - ? - Such is the relief which the
religion of Chritt brings to them who
labour and are heaty laden under the im-
preflions of guilt and divine displeasure;
a relief which nothing can render ineffec-
tual to the heart, except the most gloomy
fuperflition, founded on gross mifconcep-

G 3 tions
IThn i. 7. i Ezek. xxx'ii. r.

s E R Mh. tions of the nature and attributes of God,

V' Let us now,

II. Confider what rifl the religion of

Christ gives to them whole diltrefs arises
not from inward and moral, but from
natural and external causes; from ad-
verse fortune, or any of thole numerous
calamities to which we arc at present ex-
pofd. To such persons, it may seem
more difficult to promise any efleclual
relief. In the former cafe, the distress
lay entirely in the mind. As soon as its
views are rectified, and its apprehensions
quie:cd, the evil is removed, and the cure
effected. Here, the diflrefs arises from
without; and the religion of Christ as-
ferls not the course of external events.
But though it removes not all the evils
of life, though it promises no continuance
of undiflurbed) prosperity, (which indeed
it were not ialutary fur man always to
enjoy) yet, if it mitigates the evils which
necctfarily belong to our state, and sup-
ports us under thQll, it may jullly be

2 said

siid to give rcR to them ,wIho labour and SERM.

V.

are he:avy ,'Jl n. Wlhen much that is j
material and imiportant is clfeded, we
have no caufc to complain, though all
that we desire be not accompliflled.-In
this part of the dilcourfe, I am to be con-
sidered as addrciflng mytclf not merely to
such as are at prefcnt Zliffi ing any revere
calamity. I now f;licak to many, who,
in the inidft of health and affluence, en-
joy the various comforts of life. But I
mufi desire such persons to look forward
to what may one day he their Itate. Let
them reflcct how important it is to pre-
pare thcmfclvcs for the future unknown
vicilitudcs of the world. For, i/ a man
live n113a y'ears, an. rtji,ice in them all, yet
let lm remem;ber the d,,s of d.irknt/, for
th.y l/alll be iniy *-.-Now, either in the
proipec't of future distress, or under prc-
sint fhflr;ing, I lla, that the religion of
Christ gives re/J to the heart, by the for-

G 4 titude
' Ecdtlf. xi. 8.

s ER M. titude which it inlitires, and by the con-

v. folations which it affords.

Fit/i, Ir inspires fortitude. It disco-

vers a fuprcme adminiltration, so friend-
ly to the interetfs of goodnef,, as never
to allow the followers of Christ to dread,
that, in any situation of fortune, they
lhall be neglected by lleaven. From the
abfiract conlideration of the divine per-
fedions, men had always some ground to
believe, that the general order of the uni-
vtrfe was consulted by its great Ruler.
But how far the intereit of individuals
might be obliged to yield, or, in many ca-
fes might be facrifictd, to this general or-
der, they were left altogether in the dark.
Here the gospel of Clrift comes to our
aid, by the explicit aflurance which it
gives, that, in the great fytemn of Provi-
dence, the vcliflle of every single good
man is particularly included. /11l things,
wc are txprefsly told, arc made to wurk
tractlhr, not mc-cely for the oreler and per-
fcaioln ot tla \vhole,C but also Jorgood ti

i,) ,*~~
~them

thim whs~ love God*. The life of every SERM.
person, who comes under this (itifription, Vi
forms a system complete within itself;
where every event that happens to him
possesses its deflined place, and forms a
link in that great chain of causes, which
was appointed, from the beginning of
things, for carrying on his improvement
and felicity. Such an arrangement of
the affairs of the world, may appear atto-
nifhing to our narrow capacities; yet
surely implies no effort beyond the reach
of infinite power, joined with infinite wis-
dom and goodness.

Hence arises a degree of fortitude and

constancy to good men, which call upon
no other grounds be attained. Faith, in
these principles of the gofpcl, crects tor
them a fortress, impregnable to the al:
faults of the world, into which they can
at all times retreat. Sitting under the
shelter of divine protection, they calmly

hear
*Rom. viii. 29.

SERM. hear the storm, when it blows with it;

. utmloft violence around them. The Jl9od(

bave lifted up tLheir voice; they have lifted
up all their waves. But the Lord on high
it migltier than the noise of many waters;
yea, than th.e nmi/,hty t,Iates of the sea *.
(f the man who polleies such principles,
it is jufly f(id, lii heart is e/i a'liJheJ; he
Jhall not Ibe a/fiid of vil ti.iti s; his heart
is fixed, truflin? in the Lr.l t. Tranquil-
lity, order, and magnanimnity, dwell with
him; while all is confulion and trepida-
tion among tholc, who have nothing to
look to but the apparent disorders of the
world.

Ti F. doctrine of Chrifl not onlyarms us,

in this manner, with fortitude againlt the
approach of evil; but, li1 poling evils to fall
upon us with their heaviell pressure, it
lightens the load by many consolations to
which others are {Irangers. While bad men

trace,

3*
I 'a. Yxiii. 34'. t rl.cl. c 7, 8.

trace, in the calamities with which they SE RM.
are rifited, the hand of an offcnded tl- v-.
vereign, (Chiiltians are taught to view
them as the well-intended chaftifcments
of a merciful Father. They hear amidit
them, that still voice which a good con-
science brings to their ear: Fear not, for
I am with thee; be not difnaiied, for I am
thy God *. They apply to themselves
the comfortable promises with which the
gospel abounds. They discover in these
the happy issue decreed to their troubles;
and wait with patience till Irovidence
fliall have accompliiled its great and good
designs. In the mean time, devotion o-
pens to them its bclfed and ho!y lailc'ua-
ry: That fancuary in which the wound-
ed heart is healed, and the weary mind
is at reft; where the cares of the world
are forgotten, where its tumults are hush-
ed, and its miseries disappear; where
greater objects open to our view than

whau
' Isaiah xli. 10.

SERM. what the world preIents; where a more
V fferene fl;y flii.es, and a fwecter and

calmer light beams on the afflicled heart.
In those moments of devotion, a piou0'
man, pouring out his wants and sorrows
to an almighty Supporter, fiels that he is
not left fblitary and forfakcn in a vale
of woe. (;od is with him; C'hrill and
the Holy Glhot are with him; and, though
he llould be bereaved of every earthly
friend, he can look up in heaven toa Friend
who will never die.

To tlhle prelent coifulations, the re-

ligion of C(ililt adds the joyful proisec
of that future llare, where eternal re/I re-
Mnlznelbi /r the co[,le (,/ (Go. This life
they arc t.iuhlt to conlider as only the
I.ou/c J tht;I p:r, tnomage; the temporary
malnfitn (ot p.ilnful though inecellary ditf
ciplinc. lIntt t them endure for a little,
and thle piilgiiminage flall end, the difci-
pline llhall he finillhed; and all the vir-
tuous be a!lii.!:led in thiof; blisful re-
gions which are prreparcd ser their re-
ward. Sucli a proliccl clhears the dark-

ell

cil hours of ife ; .nd alTails a remedy . E RM.
to evry trouble. Tl.e i' zt:s < .'s
prelrnt time are' l;t t :;'c1't; ;- : ;: -;r,,arc.
.with the glory uwhbch Jhall be reCalcd .
They appear in this comparative view,
as no more than a diflrefling dream of
the night, froml which one awakes into
health, and light, and joy.-Peculiar is
this high consolation to the religion of
Christ. It is what all nations had eager-
ly wishcd for; what all philosophy had
anxiously lought to discover; but what
no refarch, no philosophy were able to
ascertain to mankind, till Chrill brought
the assurance us life and immortality fiom
heaven; and conferrcd on his disciples
this noble and inestimable gift.

Tlus, on the whole, the Chriflian doc-

trine is found to he the great Medicine of
life. It is the balm of human l)orrows and
cares. In our prefcnt slate, whler so ma-

n

i
Rom. viii. i1

F RM. ny are suffering aR(ual difircfs, of one kind
V. ,-,j or othcr, andi wllrc all luave rcafol to

dread the approach ofdiflrefs, it i:, religion
only that can alleviate the burdens of life,
and finooth our ,alll;ge throu;llh this cvil
worl(l.--Lt this view of rcligion pcr-
fuadc us to improvc the sacred ordinance
of our Lord's fippp'r for coming unto Clhrfl,
in the way before explained: that is, join-
ing ourfelvcs to hilil as his diriples; his
difciplcs, not in wor(ld and p1rofcfions on-
ly, but in heart, and in truth; tilig upon
Us his yoke, as is added( in the words imme-
diately following the text; an,! /eaonitn of
him who is meek and I c /l), in Ieart. ILct
those who labour under the einfe of re-
membered follies andl crimles, c.me unto
Chbri/ with penitent difl ofitions, ard thcy
shall obtain pardon. Iet tliof who la-
bour under the fuflcroing of preclint, or
the apprchenfion of futilre sorrows, comc
unto Chrifl, and they f1lhll rcccive confo-
lation. All who arc in any fcni hc/evy
laden, coming unto him, Iliall find reJI to
their ifuls.

B.rop.E

1Br. roRV, (oi: Iid Iini ti di(i.ourf', lio'rc SE R M.

is another let of men, not vet nirnrio'ncl, j
to whoui 1 Inultt allo) addrel- the (xlilol-
tation in the x text; tol)C I inlan, \whi.i1 -
boIring uni(der n.one of the (lih itli4li bur-

'dens ot lite, arc lurtitcld olt its p)llilrc<;
who labl)our undelr the burden oilv of( ; I-

uidl c.scb, an. the load of infipi 1 pr,)lp!'i-
lt. You (Irir, iv tmy cn(l, lbit a ililb'rahl)e
(Xiltciicc. ()ilrpplledl lv o tlirrow, you
lcel vacuity andil liltisLt;tion witlhii;
vou arc oftenc wearv of life ; andl in yoiur
folit.arv liours, are (Iiliol,.ld to c.mllfcl. lt
all vou havc cxplriellccd is vanity. \\hcre-
lore ilhould you any loilngtl.' I//It iit r tim-
r:cv /or th;t iih ih Is 1Jt l, cai, and 1imur In-
Iour fcr btht t'tct l. /z jl./;tlh r:9t ? Come
13 the cnaters wl .ic- arc nr w (ffcrcl. to
,oa, n.i drin:k. Hear, and ) ou r Jouls fi/all
live. Rctreat fiom the corrupting valli-
ticb of the world, to (Chrlil, to religion,
and to virtue. New loirccs of enjoy-
ment Iliall then )e opcnecl to you. A
world )yt untried ihall di'lilay itself to
your view. You all be formcd t o a rc-

lifl

sl' R . lili for the quiet and innocent pleasures

V.

of piety and devotion; of fiiendfhip, and
good affieflions; of useful knowledge, and
virtuous activity; of calm society, and
fcafonable retirement; pleasures of which
at present you have no conception; but
which, upon trial, you Ihall find superior
to the trifling, or turbulent amusements,
in which )ou have hitherto passed your
days.-The true fatisfaclion of the hu-
man mind is only to be found in religion
and goodness; in a purified heart, and a
virtuous life. All other plans of happi-
ness are fallacious, and pregnant with
disappointment. It is only by acquji)ting
ourjelves uith God that we can findpeace:
And those who are weary and heavy lalen
now, lhall be weary snd heavy l.den to
the cnd, unless they come to him who on-
ly can gite tIbm refl,

S E R M 0 N

# SERMON VI. On LUXURY and LICENTIOUSNESS. ISAIAH v. 12. The harp and the viol, the tabret and pipe and wine are in their feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation

S E R M 0 N VI.
On LuxuRY and LICENTIOUSNESS.

ISAIAH v. 12.
Th7i: hrp and the viol, the labret and pipe

and wine are in their /er!/ts; but they re-
gard nst the wvrk cf the Lord, neither
confider the operation of his hands.
T appears from many pailages in the SERlM.

writings of this prophet, that in his v

days great corruption of manners had be-
gun to take place among the people of
Israel. Originally a lfber and a religious
nation, accuflomed to a simple and pas-
toral life, after they had enlarged their

VOL. IV. H territories

sr.RM. territories by conquest, and acquired
V wealth by commerce, they gradually con-

traCed: habit3 of luxury; and luxury
soon introduced its usual train of attcnd-
ing evils. In the hiltory of all nations,
the fame circulation of manners has been
found; and the age in which we live re-
fembles, in this refpec, the ages which
have gone before it. Forms of iniquity
may vary; but the corrupt propensitics
of men remain at all times much the
f;nne; and revolutions from primitive
simplicity to the refinements of criminal
luxury have been often exhibited on the
tfage of the world. The reproof direc-
ed in the text to the Jews of that an-
tient age, will be found equally appli-
cable to the manners of many, in mo-
dern times. In discoursing from it, I
lhall first confider the charader of those
who are described in the text, and shows
the guilt that is involved in it. I flalt
next confider the duties which persons
of that charactcr are supposed to have

1 neglece

s.ge.t1ed ; to reward the 'ork of the Lord, SE R M
tr.l 1 coSJfiJer the olrratisn oJ hlis hands . j

I. W\'iEN we take iniro view the cha-

rate(r pointed at in the text, it is evident
that what the pioplet means to reprove
is, the tiirit of inconfidcratc diliipation,
,t' intemperate indulgence, and irrcligious
luxury. It is not lthic ,ifi and the winr, the
harp anl the vill, whicl he means to
condelnn. i\lfic and wine are, in them-
IclVes, things of innocent nature : Nay,
whlen temperately enjoyed, they may be
emtiloe)cd for ui; ful purp(oIs ; for as-
fordi:g rti axation froml the oppressive
cares of life, anl for promoting fiiendly
intercourse among men. Tle opulent
are not prohibited fiom enjoying the
good things of this world, which Pro-
vidence has bellowed upon them. Re-
ligion neither aboliTies the diftincion of
ranks, (as the vain philofoplly of some
would teach us to do), nor interferes
with a modest and decent indulgence of
pleafure.-It is the criminal abuse of

t ai pleafuru

SERM. plcafr:e which is here censured; that
VI.

, tthoulghtlifs and intcmplerate eCnjoment

of it v:hiih holl abl lrbs the tinme and
attention cf mnc ; which ob!iteratcs eve-
ry serious tlihugl;t of tle iprop;r l;ufinels
of life ; and ecfiltees the fcnlic of religion
and of Cod.

It may be proper to remark, that it is

not open anid lirecc impiety, which is
laid to the chlirgel of the pcrfons here
characlcrifed. It is not said, that in their
seas.s they scoffed at rligion, or lafplic-
med thl namie cf God. To this fuimmir
of wickcdncfs these pcrfons had not yet
arrived; perhaps, the age in which they
lived gave not its countenance to this
wartonnrfs of impiety. It is merely a
negative crime of which they are accu-
fed ; th:it they ,e.ai' dled nct the work of
the Lord, ntitter itofidrel tlie operation e/
bis h.:rns. But tlis labfitce of all religious
impreflions is here pointed our, as luffi-
cient to flignmatife their charaCers with
guilt. As soon as the fenfic of a Supreme
Bcin, is loft, the great check is taken

ofi;

ofl whlich keeps under refraint the pas- SE R M.
sions of nien. Mean dlcircs, and low v
plcalfhrcs, take place of the greatcr and
nobler entimcnts hichl reaflbn and re-
ligion inspire. Amidll the tumult of the
ti,:l;: and the fial/, all proper views of hu-
man life arc forgotten. The lduties which,
as men, they have to perform, the part
tlicy have to acd in the world, and the
diltreffcs to which they arc cxpofing them-
felvcs, are banilhed fiom their thoughts.
To-morrow //hall be ar this Jda, azd mre
abun.hantly, is the only voice. Inflamed
by focictv, and circulated fi-om one loose
companion to another, the spirit of riot
grows and fwvelis, tiil it end in brutal
excels.

Were such disorders rare and occasion-

al merely, they might pcrhaps be for-
gotten and forgiven. But, nourished by
repetition and habit, they grow up among
too many, to become t!he bulincls and oc-
cupation of life. By thelic unfortunate
votaries of pleasure, they are accounted
cfTcmnil! t: happini!s. Life appears to

II 3 stagnate

SERM. flagnate without them. IIaving no re-
VI. YNL,, source within themfelve·, their fipirits

fink, and their very being feiems annihi-
lated, till the return of their favourite
plcaflrcs awaken within them fbine tran-
fient fparklcs of jov.-ldiie ess, ease, and
profpcrity, have too natural a tendency
to gencrate the follies and vices now de-
Icribcd. Icafrcll I/!r k ave no changes,
taid the Pfalmitl, therefore they fea-r not
God *. They are the lark and filitary
hours of life, which recal men to recol-
lecion and willom. They flow to the
unthilking what this world really is, and
what may be expeceld from it. But the
lay that is always briglt and unclouded,
is not made for men. It flatters them
with the (dangerous illusion, that it is in
their power to render life one Icene of
pleasure; and that they liave no other
bufine:s on earth, but to fprcad the fc,7J,
and call the harp and the viol to found.

Bur
rfalm. IT. 19,

But the examples are so frequent, of the SERM.

VI.

dangers and( the crimes which ayiic from an t>
intemperate abuse of pleasure, that on this
part of the subjet it seems needlcfs to in-
iift anylonger. I proceed, therefore,

II. To confider the duties which men

are accuscd of having neglected; and
which, it is here supposed, if duly at-
tended to, would have accd as the cor-
rcclivcs of dilTolute and irreligious lux-
ury; these are, to regard the work of the
Lord, and to confider tbe oreration of his
Lands.-By recommending iuch duties, I
do not mean to reprefcnt it as requifitc
that the feast fliould be turned into an
adt of worhip ; that the countenances of
men fliould be always gr. c; or that,
in the hours of amufemcnt and of social
ifltivity, no subjet may employ their
thoughts and their discourse, except God
and a future slate. All extremes in re-
ligion are dangerous; and, by carrying
auftcrity too far, we are in hazard of
only promoting hypocrif!. But though

11 4 fomc,

SERM. some, in the last age, milght he prone to

> this extreme; yet, at the prcf!it day,

there is not much occasion for warn-
ing men againflt it.--\hat I now il-
sift upon is, that all our pleafircs ought
to be tempered with a lerious fenlie ot
God; that fcencs of gaicty and cnj;y-
mcnt flioull never make us fbrrct that
we are fubjecls of his governmcnt, and
have a part allotted us to adC in his world;
that on no occasion they Ihould be pro-
longed so much, repeated so often, or sus-
sered to transport us so far, as to lead us
to break any of the divine laws, or to ad
inconfillently with the characer of men
and Chriflians. A prevailing sense of
God on the mind is to be evcr hell the
surest guard of innocence and virtue, a-
midst the allurements of plealure. It is
the salutary mixture which mull be in-
suited into the cup of joy, in order to ren-
dcr it late and innoxious.

This lense of God thould lead us, in

the language of the prophet, to rc',ard the
u'aork js tle Lird, and to ccifidcr tie ;pce-

s.;::'.

ralti.n of l:s 1.:rnds; which exprfcflons may SZRM.

Vs.

1)c un(ldcrloic as rcqr(iilii us to h\c ^ i
(;od( upon our thlougiht, unJi r two views;
t93 ifrard his -wcrL, as the Authror of na-
ture; and t) cnfi,!':r ire c':, t!l:n 6f h,:s
baIds, as the Governor of the wo: d.
L.t us artctnd more particulirly to ca il
of thlcli views of the Supreime B I:ii

;I the rfirt place, we are to Vi;ew G'):

as the Author of nature, cr tA r tis'.irj,!
work of the Losrd. \'it"h lis work' we
are in every place furl:oundd. \\e c,,ai
cans our eyes no where, withlot (di;c;n-
ing the hand of Him rwho formed them,
if the grossness of our minds 'will o::l-
allow us to behold Him. I.t ,giddv an..
thoug'itllfs men turn afdle a little f:,:n
the hilunts of riot. Let them fland tIil,
a;nd contemplate the l wondrous wvrl;s of
Godl; and make trial of the ts;e't wh!ich
such contemplation woo:uld. pro:luce.--c
were goo, for them that, cven ildcenp-
dently of the Author, they were more
acquainted with his vwo!; s; good lor

them

S E R bI. them, that from the focicties of loose and
VI.

diflilute men, they would retreat to the
fccnes of nature; would oftener dwell
among them, and enjoy their beauties.
This would form them to the reliflh of
uncorrupted, innocent pleasures; and
make them feel the value of calm enjoy-
ments, as superior to the noise and tur-
bulcncc of licentious gaiety. From the
harmony of nature, and of nature's
works, they would learn to hear sweeter
founds than what arise fiom the viol, the
tabi et, and the pipe.

But to higher and more serious thoughts

these works of nature give occasion, when
confidered in conjunction with the Creator
vho made them.-Let me call on you,
my friends, to catch some interval of
reflcction, some serious moment, for look-
ing with thoughtful eye on the world a-
round you. Lift your view to that im-
mense arch of heaven which encompaf-
fes you above. Behold the fun in all
his splendor rolling over your head by
day; and the moon, by night, in mild

and

and fcrene majcfty, surrounded with that SE R M.

V .

holt of flars which present to vour ima- *j
gination an innumerable multitude of
worlds. Liftcn to the awful voice of
thunder. Liflen to the roar of the tcm-
pelt and the ocean. Survey the wonders
that fill the earth which you inhabit.
Contemplate a steady and powerful Hand,
bringing round lpring and summer, au-
tumn and winter, in regular courle ; de-
corating this earth with innumerable
beauties, diversifying it with innumerable
inhabitants; pouring forth comforts ou
all that live ; and, at the fame time, over-
awing the nations with the violence of
the elements, when it pleases the Creator
to let them forth.-After you have view-
ed yourfclves as surrounded with su;ch a
Icene of wonders; after you have Lchel.l
on every hand, such an aftonilhing dit-
play of majefly united with wisdom and
goodness; are you not seized wi:h so-
lemn and serious awe ? Is there not some-
thing which whifpcrs you within, that to
this great Creator reverence and homage

aVQ

SE R M. are due by all the rational beings whom

vl.
L- he has made ? Admitted to be fpedators of

his works, placed in the midlft of fb ma-
ny great and interelling objccs, can you
believe that you were brought hither for
no purpose, but to immerse yourselves in
gross and brutal, or, at best, in trifling
pleasures; loft to all sense of the wonders
you behold; lolt to all reverence of that
Got who gave you being, and who has
erewfed this amazing fabric of nature, on
which you look only with flupid and un-
meaning eyes ?--No: Let the scenes which
you behold prompt correspondent feel-
ings. Let them awaken you from the
degrading intoxication of licentiousness,
into nobler emotions. Every objict which
you view in nature, whether great or
finall, fcrves to instruct you. The fiar
and the infcl, the fiery meteor and the
flower of firing, the verdant field and the
lofty mountain, all exhibit a supreme
Power, before which you ought to trem-
ble and adore; all preach the doltrine,
all inlfpire the 1yirit, of devotion, and reve-

rence.

rence. Regarding, then, the work of the SERM.

VI.

Lrd, let riling emotions of awe and gra- v
titude call forth from your fouls such
sentiments as these:-" Lord, wherever
"I am, and whatever I enjoy, may I ne-
"ver forget thee, as the Author of na-

ture! May I never forget that I am

"thy creature and thy subjec ! In this
"magnificent temple of the universe,
" where thou haft placed me, may I ever
"be thy faithful worihipper; and may
" the reverence and the fear of God be
"the first sentiments of my heart !"-
It is to such consideration of God I would
now recal your thoughts, from the wine
and the fea/t, as proper to check the spirit
of levity and folly; and to inspire manly
and becoming sentiments, in the place of
criminal dissipation. But,

IN the frcond place, there is a confide-

ration of a nature till more serious, to be
employed for the fame purpose; the con-
fideration of God as not only the Author
es nature, but the Governor of his crea-

tures.

SE R M. tures. While we regard the work of the

VI.
X-~ Lord, we are also to confidcr the never- ceaf-

ing operation of his hands. We are to look
up to an awful and irrefiflible Providence,
firetching its arm over our heads; di-
reCing the fate of men, and dispensing at
its pleasure happiness or misery. In the
giddy moments of jollity, the wanton and
thoughtless arc apt to fay: " Let us eat and
" drink, for to-mrrow we die. Nothing
" is better for man, than to rejoice as
" much as he can all the days of his vain
"life; and to keep himself unditfurbed
"by superstitious terrors. He who fit-
"teth in the heavens bestows no minute
" attention on the sons of earth. He per-
" mits all things to come alike to all; one

e 'vent to happen to the righteous and to the

" w.i'ked."-- e assured, my brethren, it
is not so. You greatly deceive your-
lelvcs, by imagining that your Creator
and Governor is indifferent to the part
tyou are now agting; or that the difiri-
bution of good and evil, which now takes

place,

place, has no relation to your moral con- S ER t.
dud. In some inltances, that relation v
may not be apparent, because the moral
government of God is not completed in
this world. But a multitude of proofs
show government to be already begun;
and point out to you the train in which
you may expet it to proceed.

In the history of all ages and nations,

you cannot but have observed a thousand
instances, in which the opeiatiou of the divine
band has been displayed; overtaking evil
doers sooner or later with puniflhment, and
bringing on their own heads the ruin they
had devised for others. You are not to i.
magine that this displeasure of Providence
is exerted only against the ambitious, the
treacherous, and the cruel, who are the au-
thors ofextenfive miferyto the world. Un-
der this idea, perhaps, you may be desirous
to flelter yourselves, that your excefles are
of a harmless kind; that you seek nothing
more than the enjoyment of your own plea-
fures; that your frafl and your wine

interfere

IERM. interfere not with the order of the world;
VL Vlr~ and that therefore you have done nothing

which lhould awaken the sleeping thun-
der, and bring it down from heaven on
your heads. Though not Rained with
the blackest colours of guilt, your con-
duct may nevertheless be highly offen-
five to the Ruler of the world. His go-
vernment is not of that indolent inatten-
tive kind, which allows impunity to eve.
ry lesser c-imir.ial. He beholds with dif-
p!eafure the behaviour of those who de-
grade their nature by vitious disorders;
and contaminate, by their example, every
society with which they are connected.
His measures are taken, that in one way
or other, they filall susser.

Look around the circle of your ac-

quaintance, and observe, whether they
are not the fober, the industrious, and the
virtuous, who visibly prosper in the world,
and rife into reputation and influence; ob-
serve whether the licentious and intem-
perate are not confiantly humbled and

checked

checked by some (lark reverse either in SE R M.
their health or their fortune; whether VI.
the irreligious and profligate are ever
suffered to escape long, without being
marked with infamy, and becoming ob-
jects of contempt.-I aik, to what cause
this is to be ascribed, but to that opera-
tion of the hand of God, which 1 am now
calling you to confider Does it not obvi-
oufly carry the marks of a plan, a fyltem
of things, contrived and fore-ordained by
Providence, for rewarding virtue, and pu-
nifling vice in every form of its difor-
ders ?-TheG.overnor of the world need
not for this purpose ftep from his throne,
or put forth his hand from the clouds.
With admirable wisdom he hath so or-
dered the train of human affairs, that, in
their natural course, mens own wickednefJ
Jhall reprove them, and their baickfling
correct them; that they /all be made to eat
the fruit of their dongs, and to fall into the
pit vwhich thenfilves had digged.

VOL. IV. * I These

SERM. These things have been always so ap-
\^^ parent to observation, that though a man

may have been seduced into irregular
and evil courses during his life, yet, at
the close of it, it seldom happens but he
diferns their pernicious nature, and con-
demns himself for them. Never, per-
haps, was there a father, who, after he
had spent his days in idleness, diflipation,
and luxury, did not, when dying, admo-
nifh the children whom he loved, to hold
a more honourable course, to follow the
paths of virtue, to fear God, and to fulfil
properly the duties of their ftation.-To
yourselves, indeed, I can confidently ap-
peal, whether what I am now faying, be
not confirmed by your own testimony.
After you have been guilty of some cri-
minal aCs, in the course of those riotous
pleasures which you indulge, have you
not, at certain times, felt the flings of
remorse? Were you not obliged to con-
fess to yourselves that a fad prospect of
misery was opening before you, if such
cxcefles were to continue? Did you not

hear

hear an inward voice upbraiding you for SE RM.
having funk and degraded your charac- .vL
ter so far below that of many of your
equals around you?-My friends, what
was this but the voice of God, speaking,
as the Governor of his creatures, within
your heart; testifying loudly that your
course of life was displeasing to him;
and warning you of punishments that
were to follow ? If his displeasure against
you is already begun to be testified, can
you tell where it is to stop, or how long it
may continue to pursue you throughout
future stages of your existence ? Who
knoweth the power of his wrath ?-To
this awful, this warning voice, will you
not be persuaded reverently to liften? Im-
pressed by the dread authority which it
carries, ihall you not fall down on your
knees before your Maker, imploring his
mercy to pardon your past offences, and
his grace to recify your future way ?

SUCH ought to be the effects of the
consideration of God as the Governor of

I2 td

SERMb the world. It leads to thoughts of a ve-

ry serious nature. W'hen we regard the
work of the Lord, and contemplate him
as the Author of the universe, such con-
templation prompts devotion. But when
we confider the operation of his hands in
providence, and contemplate him as the
Governor of mankind, such contempla-
tion prompts humiliation before him for
offences committed. The former ad-
dresses itself to the ingenuous sentiments
that are left in the heart; and awakens a
sense of our unworthiness, in neglecting
the Author of nature, amidst our riotous
pleafurea. The latter addresses itself to
our regard for safety and happiness; and
awakenr fear and dread, from conscious-
icfs of the guilt we have contracted.
-Hence springs up in every thoughtful
mind, an anxious concern to avert the
displeasure, and regain the favour of that
Supreme .tig to whoma we are all
subjed. This, among unenlightened na-
tions, gave rife, to sacrifices, expiations,
and all the rites of humble, though super-

ftitious

flitious worfliip. Among nations, who SERM.
have been inflructed in true religion, fen- V.
timents of the fame nature pave the way
for prayer, repentance, faith, and all those
duties, by means of which we may hope,
through a divine Mediator and Intercef-
for, to be reconciled to heaven. Natural
and revealed religion here appear in con-
cord. We behold the original dic'ates of
the human heart laying a foundation for
the glad reception of the comfortable tid-
ings of the goflel.

I IIAVE thus endeavoured to flow in

what mduner, by regarding the ,sork of the
Lord, and confidering the operation of his
hands, we may prevent the dangers arilf
ing from a thoughtless indulgence of
pleasure; we may be furniflmed with an
antidote to the poison which is too often
mixed in that intoxicating cup.-Human
life is full of troubles. We are all tempt-
ed to alleviate them as much as we can,
by frcely enjoying the pleasurable mo-
ments which Providence thinks fit to al-

13 low

SERM. low us. Enjoy them we may: But, if
VI.

_ we would enjoy them safely, and enjoy

them long, let us temper them with the
fear of God. As soon as this is forgotten
and obliterated, the found of the harp
and the viol is changed into the signal of
death. The serpent comes forth from
the roles where it had lain in ambush,
and gives the fatal fling. Pleasure in
moderation is the cordial, in exccfs it is
the bane, of life.

SERMION

# SERMON VII. On the PRESENCE of GOD in a Future State. PSALM xvi. 11. Thou wilt shew me the path of life: In thy presence is fulness of joy: at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

S E R M O N VII.
On the PREsENCE of GOD in a Future

State.

PSALM xvi. 11.
Thou wilt shew me the path of lif/: In

thy prfence is fulness of joy: at thy right
hand there are pleafuret for evermore.
T HE apostle Peter, in a discourse SERM.

which he held to the Jews, ap- VII.

plies this passage, in a mystical and pro-
phetical sense, to the Mefliah *. But, in
its literal and primitive meaning, it ex-
preires the exalted hopes by which the

I 4 Pfalmif

Aa Ai. S
u t-23.

SERM. Pfalmint David supported liimfclf amiditl

V11.
s.&v. the changes and revolutions, of which

his life was full. l;y tl.clc hopcs, when
flying before Saul, when driven from his
throne, and perflcuted by an unnatural
son, he was enabled to preserve his vir-
tue, and to maintain unihaken trufit in
God.-In that cally age of the world,
those explicit difcovelies of a state of im-
mortality, which we enjoy, had not yet
been given to mankind. . ut thougl
the Sun of righteoufinef/ wvas not arisen, the
dawn had appeared of that glorious day
which he was to introduce. Even in
those antient times, holy men, as the a-
poftle writes to the Hebrews, ]aw the
promnifes (far fs, and were petjiaidd /1' /JIhe
and embraced them; and cotenjeti -that tIhey
uwere Jlrangers and piljrims on earth, de-
ilured that thry fought i/ter al bte r coun-
tiy, that is an heavenly *. Indeed, in eve-
ry age, God permitted such hopes to as-
ford support and consolation to tho:c

.11ho
* HeL. xi. 13,-I6.

who served him. The full effcR of them SERM.
we behold in thole triumphant cxpref- v>
sions of the text, which arc to be the sub-
jet of this difcourie. They lead us to
confider; first, The hope of the l'almift
in his present state; 7hu cl ilt Jrhew me
the path of life. And, secondly, the ter-
mination of his hope in that future state,
where in the presence of God is Jfhle/} of
joy, and at his right band there are plea-
fres for evermore.

I. Thou wilt Jlew me the path of life.

This plainly imports that there are dif-
ferent paths or courses of conduct, which
may be pursued by men in this world;
a path which leads to life or happineL,
and a path which iflues in death or de-
firudion. These opposite lines of con.
duC are determined by the choice which
men make of virtue or of vice; and hence
men are divided into two great classes,
according as their inclinations lead them
to good or to evil. The path of life is of-
ten a rough and difficult path, followed

only

SERM. only by a few. The opposite one is the
<vn. broad way, in which the multitude walk;

seemingly smooth, and firewed with flow-
ers; but leading in the end to death and
misery. The path of life conducts us up a
flecp ascent. The palace of virtue has, in
all ages, been represented as placed on the
summit of a hill; in the ascent of which
labour is requisite, and difficulties are to
Ihe surmounted; and where a conducor
is needed, to direa our way, and to aid
our Reps.

Now, the hope which good men en-

tertain is, that this path of life shall be
ihewn them by God; that, when their
intentions are upright, God will both in-
firuC them concerning the road which
leads to true happiness, and will assist
them to pursue it successfully. Among
nations where any suitable ideas of God
or of virtue began to be formed, hopes
of this nature also began to be entertain-
ed. It was consonant to the nature of
man, to think that the Supreme Being
was favourable to virtue. Accordingly,

in

in the writings of some of the ancient phi- s r l hM.

VI1.

lofophers, we find various obscure traces _
of this belief, that there was a benign hea-
venly spirit, who illuminated the minds
of the virtuous, and affilted their endea-
vours to obtain wisdom and happiness.
They even asserted, that no man became
great or good without some inspiration of
heaven.

But what they indiflinctly conceived,

and could not with confidence rely upon,
the doctrine of Chriltianity hath clearly
explained and fully confirmed; express-
]y and frequently teaching that, not only
by the external discoveries of revelation,
but by the inward operations of his Spi-
rit, he Ibows to the humble and virtu-
ous the path of lift. While, by his word,
he inftrucls them in their duty, by
the influence of his grace he aflills them
in the performance of it. In all revela-
tion there is certainly no docArine more
comfortable than this. It is to good men
a noble and pleasing thought, that they
are pursuing a path which God has diif

covered

SERM. covered and pointed out to them. For

VII
.--. they know that every path, in which he

is their con(luaor, imul be honourable,
mufl be safe, must bring them in the end
to felicity. They follow that Shepherd
o1 Israel, who always leads his flock into
green pflrures, and nmaes them lie down be-
Jile the flill v(lters. At the fame time,
they know that, if there be truth in re-
ligion at all, on this principle they may
lecurely reft, that the Divine Being will
never desert those who are endeavouring
to follow out, as they can, the path which
he has fliewn them. He beholds them
here in a slate of great imbecillity; fur-
rounded with much darkness; exposed to
numbcrlefs dangers, from the temptations
that atlault them without, and the feduc-
tion of misguided and disorderly passions
within. In this situation, can they ever
fufped that the IFther of mercies will
leave his fcrvants, alone and unbefriended,
to struggle up the hill of virtue, without
firetching forth a compaflionate arm to aid
their frailty, and to guide them through

the

the bewildering paths of life? Where were E RM.
then the GodJ f lve' ' \Where, those infi- VII.
nite compaflions of his nature, in which Y
all his worlhippers have been encouraged
to trust ?-No: He will find Jorth hit
light and his truth to bring them to his holy
hill. For the righteous Lord loveth right-
eoufneff, and his countenance beboldeth the
upright. With him there is no oblique
purpose, to turn him aside from favouring
the cause of goodness. No undertaking
to which he has given his countenance
fllall prove abortive. No promise that he
has made fliall be allowed to fail. Whom
he lovcth, he loveth to the end. The secret
of the Lord is with them that fear him, and
he will Jlaew them his covenant. The meek
will he e

u in judgement, and them will

he teach his way. His grace liall be sus-
ficient for them, and his Jlrength be made
perfec7 in their weakness. They go from
flrelngth to Jlrength; every one of them ap-
peareth before God in Zion *.-Such are

the
Ph'il. xxr. 14,9. 2 Cor. xii. 9. PfL. l:;xiv. 7.

s E R M. the hopes with which good men in a pre-
VII.

- lent lii fe t forth on a courlic of piety and
virtue. 7jhou vwili /hIc me the i path of
lfe. Let us now proceed,

II. To confider the termination of these

hopes in a future fIatc. In thy pre/cncc is
furlefj oJ j oy; at tly right hand there are
pleflures for evermore. All happiness as-
furedly dwells with God. rTle fountain
of life is justly said to be w$ith him. That
supreme and indepndent Being must nc-
cefrarily poflcfs within himfclf every prin-
ciple of beatitude; and no caulc from
without can poflibly afleti his untroubled
felicity. Among created dependent be-
ili.g, happiness flows in scattered and fee-
ble ftrcams; fireams that are often tinged
with the blackness of misery. But from
before the throne of God iffucs the river
of life, full, unmixed, and pure; and the
plcafures which now in scanty portions
we arc permitted to tate, are all derived
from that source. Whatever gladdens

I the

the hearts of men or angels, with any real E R NI.
and fatisfiaCory joy, comes fiom heaven. VII.
It is a portion of the pure in/lucnce Iw- .v-
ing from the glory of the Almightr; a ray
ifuing from the brigbiftc/ of the cc lajing
life. It is manifcfl, therefore, that every
approach to God mnuft be an approach to
felicity. The enjoyment of his imme-
diate presence mutt be the confumma-
tion of felicity; and it is to this presence
that the l'falmift here exprefics his hope
that the path oflife was to conduct him.

The whole of what is implied in ar-

riving at the presence of the Divinity, we
cannot exped to comprehend. Such ex-
pressions as thcfe of scripture, beholding
the face of God; being made glad wzith the
light of his countenance, and Jatisfid with
his likenefi; feeing light in hi, li ht; secing
no longer darkly as through a glafi, but face
to face; feeing him as he is; are expreflions
altogether myfierious, conveying sublime
though obscure ideas of the molt perse&
happioefs and highest exaltation of human
nature. This we know, that the abifnce

of

SERM. of Cod, the ditance at which we are now

VII.
,t^ placed from any communication with our

Creator, is one great source of our infeli-
city. Faith exerts its endeavours, but of-
ten ineffectually, to raile our fouls to him.
He is a God that hiitth himJtif. His ways
fecm intricate and perplexed. We fre-
quently cannot reconcile them to the con-
ceptions which we had formed of his na-
ture; and with many a suspicion and
doubt they perplex the inquiring mind.
His works we survey with aftonifhmcnt.
We wonder and adore. But while we
clearly trace the footlteps of their great
Author, his presence we can never dif.
cern. If'e go jorward, but he is not there;
and backwtard, but we cannot perceive him:
on the le/t hand, where he worl eth, but we
canwita behold hb hi e hideth him/ell/ on the
rigt hand, that we ca::not fee him *. Hence
amidst the various sorrows and difcou-
ragements of the prcfent ftatc, that excla-

mation
' u'o xliii. 8, i)

mation of Job's is often drawn forth from SE R M.
the pious heart, 0 that I knew where I vii.
might find him, that I might come even to hit
feat *!

Surrounded by such distressing obfcu-

rity, no hope more transporting can be
opened to a good man, than that a period
is to come, when he fiall be allowed to
draw nearer to the Author of his exist-
ence, and to enjoy the sense of his presence.
In order to convey some faint idea of that
future bliss, by such an image as we can
now employ, let the image be taken from
the most glorious representative of the Su-
preme Being, with which we are acquaint-
ed in this world, the Sun in the heavens. As
that resplendent luminary chears and re-
vives the universe, when, after the dark-
ness of a tempestuous night, it comes
forth in the morning with its brightest
lustre, and inspires every heart with glad-
ness; as ascending gradually through the
heavens, it converts that whole vast ex-

VOL. IV. K tent

Job xxiii. 3.

SERM. tent, over which its beams are diffused,
vll into a region of light; and thus changes

entirely the slate of objtds, by arraying
all nature in beauty, and transforming it
into the image of its own brightness:-
Some such change as this, though in a de-
gree infinitely fuilerior, we may conceive
the revelation of the Divine Irefence to
produce upon the human foul. 1 will
behold thy face in righteotfnef; I Jhall be
Jatisfed, when I awake, with thy likcne/s:-
But without endeavouring farther to un-
fold myflcries which we cannot explore,
there are two sublime and expressive views
of the Divine Essence given us in scrip-
ture, on which it may be edifying that
our thoughts fiould reft for a little, in or-
der to aid our conceptions of the blessed-
ness of good men hereafter, in the pre-
fence of God. It is said, ;oJ is light *;
God is love t. Let us confider what Jul-
nerJ of joy must arise from such mani-

feftations
* I John i.. . I John iv. 8.

feflations of the Divine Efilnce to the blef- s r. R M.
fed. v

God is I St. The rcvelatiin of his prc-

fence, infers of c; urlc, a crmplete diftu-
sion of light and knowlede among all
who partake of that preicncc. This un-
queflionaLly forms a primary ingredient
of happincfs. Ignorance, or the want of
light, is the source of all our prefcnt mif-
condu't, and all our misfortunes. Tt;e
heart of man is dark; and in the dark-
ness of his heart is the fLat of his corrup-
tion. He is unable to discern what is
truly good. Perpetually employed in
search of happinels, he is perpetually mif-
led by falle appearances of it. The er-
rors of his upderflanding impose upon
his palTions; and, in consequence of the
wrong direcion which his passions take,
he is bctrayed into a thousand disorders.
Hence sensuality, covetousness, and all the
violent contests with others about trifles,
which occasion so much mifcry, and so
many crimes in the world. He fec'cth o'

K2 Jljes:

SERM. asheJ: a deceived heart hath turned him

VII.
V i iaftde, that he cannot deliver hilJoul, norfay,

Is there not a lie in nmy right hand *?-
Once open to him the perfec sources of
knowledge and truth; suppose him pla-
ced in the presence of that God who is
Light; suppose him illuminated by light
derived immediately from the Supreme
Being; presently all his former errors
would fly away, as mitls are dispelled by
the rising fun. His whole nature would
be changed and reformed. The prejudices
which obscured his understanding would
be removed. The feduaions of his paflions
would disappear. Rectitude and virtue,
having nothing now to obltruCt their en-
trance, would take entire poffeflion of his
heart. Angels are happier than men, be-
cause they enjoy more enlarged knowledge
and views; because they labour under none
of our unhappy deceptions; but fee the
truth as it is in itfclf; fee it, as it is in

God.
p Isaiah xliv. is.

God. Sharing the fame light which il- SERM.
luminates them, good men in a future J
state will liare in their felicity.

Moreover, the light that flows from the

presence of Him who is the original
source of light, not only banishes miseries
which were the effecs of former darkness,
but also confers the molt exquisite enjoy-
ment. The knowledge afforded us at
present serves to supply our most pressing
wants; but it does no more. It is al-
ways imperfect and unfatisfacory; nay,
much painful anxiety it often leaves. Nar-
row is the sphere within which the mind
can fee at all; and even there it can fee
only darkly as througb a glafi. But when
it ihall be enlarged beyond this dusky
territory, let loole from this earthly pri-
son, and in God's light permitted to fee
light, the most magnificent and glorious
fpedtacles must open to the view of the
purified spirit. What muff it be to be-
hold the whole flupendous scene of na-
ture unveiled, and its hidden myfleries
disclosed! To trace the wife and just go-

K 3 vernment

SE RI. vcrnment of the Almighty, through all
v_. those intricacies which lhad so lung per-

p!cxed us! To behold his h;ind conduct-
ing ten thousand worlds, which are now
unknown to us; and throughout all the
regions of boundlcfs space, to view wis-
dom and goodnels pcrpetually acing, and
divcrfifying its operations in forms of
endless variety! Well may such difcove-
ries inspire that Ibog of the blessed, wlhich
the apofile John heard as the voice oJ'many
wuaters, and as the voice of mighty thunder-
ings, faitng, Allrlial ! or the Lord God
omnipotent reigneth. Great and marvellous
are thy tor kt, Lord God /l/mighty; jaf
and true are thy ways, thou King offaints !
As God is Light, so also it is said in scrip-
ture,

God is Love. His presence must of

course diffule love, among all who are per-
mitted to dwell in it. He that loveth

not,
Rev. xi. 6. xv. 3.

zot,, kni,-cth nit Go.!. 1: that dw-lleth SE R M.
in live, wdclletb in Gsd, ani God i. him t.

t rj,

\ere man a tingle, solitary being, the
full enjoyment of light might suffice for
his happincfs; as the perfetion of know-
ledge would rectify and improve to the
Iighellc all his faculties. But, both here
and hereafter, he is connected with other
beings. Heaven implies a lociety; and
the felicity of that society is conlfituted
by the perfcfion of love and goodlnes,
flowing fiom the presence of the God of
love.

Hence follows the entire purification of

human nature from all those malevolent
passions, which have so long rendered our
abode on earth the abode of misery. We
greatly deceive ourselves, when we charge
our chief diftrefics merely to the account
of our external condition in the world.
From the disadvantages attending it, I ad-
mit, that we may often have been exposed

K4 to
* John iv. 8, i(.

SERM. to susser. We may have met with dif-
vIL appointments in our pursuits. By the

arrows of misfortune we may have
been wounded. Under infirmities of
body we may have languiflied. But on
this we may depend, that the worlt evils
of our present condition arise from the
want of goodness and love; from the dif-
orders of fclfifh passions; from the irrita-
tion which these occasion when working
within ourselves, and the diflrefs which
they produce when breaking out upon
us from others; in a word, from that
-corrupted slate of temper, and that reci-
procation of jealousies, iufpicions, and in-
juries, which is ever taking place among
the societies of men. Could you banish
diltruft, craft, and uncharitableness, from
the earth, and form all mankind into an
assembly of the just and the benevolent;
could you inspire every heart with kind
*affecions, and render every one friendly
and generous to his neighbour; you would
banith at once the moil aflicAive tribe of
human evils. Seldom would the voice of

3 complaint

complaint be heard. All nature would SER M.
assume a different aspeA. Cheerfulness 'v'
would be fecn on every countenance. Pa-
radife would return. The wilderness
would finile; the defart rejoice and bloffm
as the rofe.-Now such are the effects
which the pretence of the God of love
mull produce on the inhabitants above.
Beholding his glory, they are changed into
the Jame image. In that temple of eternal
love, which his presence has hallowed and
consecrated, no found but the voice of
harmony is ever heard; no appearances
ever present themselves but those of peace
and joy.

THus, confidering God under there two

illustrious characters which are given of
him in scripture, as Light, and as Love, it
follows that in his presence there muff be
fulnels ofjoy. But I am far from faying that
the few imperfct hints I have now given,
exhaust, or even approach to, the fum of
those pleai/its Jor evermore vh;ch are at
God's right hand. Tea thousand plea-

fures

SERM. furcs are there, which now we have nei-
..3J ther faculties to comprchcad, nor powers

toenjoy. Behind that nmyferlous cloud,
which covers the habitation of eternity,
the view of mortals cannot penetrate.
Content with our humble and dillant si-
tuation, we mutt as yet remain. Faith
can only look to thole glolies from afar.
In patient silence, it muit wait, trust, and
adore.

Supposing the ideas which I have set

before you, in this discourse, to be no
more than the speculations of a contem-
plative mind, such as were wont of old
to be indulged by the philosophers of the
Platonic school, 1till they would deserve
attention, on account of their tendency to
purify and elevate the mind. But when
they are confidered in connection with a
revelation, which, upon grounds the moQt
urqueftionable, we believe to be divine,
they are entitled to command, not atten-
tion only, but reverence and faith.-They
prcfent to us such high expeitations as
are fuficient to determine every reason-

able

able man to the choice of virtue; to sip- SE R M.
port him undcr al its preicnt diicourage- -
mcnts, anl to confo t him in thec h ur of
death. Jtflly nmay they exci:e in our
hearts that ardent atl:ira:io of the P.a-
mifl: t My foul th.:fl.th fir Gs., /or the
living God; () wl,'.n / ill I cSn.e ar;iJ ,-
pear before him.'-l:ut, with this with in
our hearts, never, I beicech you, let us
forget what was set forth in the fir part of
this discourse ; that, in order to arrive at
the pretence of God, the path of li/ mult
previouly be fllewn to us by him, andl
that in this path we mull perlivere to the
end. There two things cannot be dif-
joined, a virtuous life and a happy eter-
nity. IWh JJa/l ascend unto the hill of the
Lord? and who Jfall fiand in his holy
place ? He only who bath clean hands and
a pure heart. Between a corrupted heart
and the God of light and love, there
never can be any conneclion. But of
this we may reft allured, that the path of
piety and virtue, purlued with a firm and

constant

SERM. constant spirit, will, in the end, through
wVi the merits of our blessed Redeemer, bring

us to that presence, where is Julnefs of
joy, and where are pleasures for evermore.

SERMON

# SERMON VIII. On CURIOSITY concerning the AFFAIRS of others. JOHN xxi. 21, 22. Peter seeing him, faith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do? Jesus faith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I ...

S E R M 0 N VIII.
On CURIOSITY concerning the AFFAIRS

of others.

JOHN XXi. 21, 22.
Peter feeing him, faith to Jesus, Lord, and

what J7aall this man do ? ejus faith unto
him, If 1 will that he tarry till I come,
what is that to thee ? Follow thou me.
T HESE words occurred in a confe- SERM.

rence which our Lord held with V!j

Simon Peter, after his rclurreftion from
the dead. Conscious of the disgrace which
he had incurred by his late denial of his
Master, Peter must at this time have ap-
peared before him with shame. Our Lord,

after

s r. R M after a tacit rcliuke, implied in the qucflioi

wh.lich he repeatedly puts to him, Simon
Jfir otf ..ra, I tfi to'n me ? restores him,
mwith great beniifnlr, to his office as an a-
poflle, by giving the commandmint to
.l/cd his J/1eit ; and intimates also that it
fl'oull hle his lot to fuLffr death in the
cause of his .after. The .poftle Joln,
di<lilnuiflhcd here by the denomination
of the ,'ipiple -,whom Jrclus I,ve,/, bcing pre-
flnt at this convcrfition, Peter, who was
always eager and forward, looking to John,
puts this question to our Saviour, Lord,
and w-hat J;ill this nman ,:o " \\'hat flall
" be his employment ? what his rank and
" flation in thy kingdom? what his future
" fate in life ?"-By what principle Peter
was moved to put this unutaiunable and
improper qudtlion to his Master ; whether
it arole from mere curiosity, or from some
emotion of riva!flip and jealousy, does
rot appear; but it is plain that our Lord
was dillatisfied with the inquiry which
he made; and prcfently le checks Peter's
curiofitr, by a. severe reply; I1What is that

I to

to thee? "What is it to thee what this S ERM.
" man /ljall do; what fliall be his rank; or v.,'
" what the circumllances of his life or his
" death : Attend thou to thine own duty.
" Mlind thy proper concerns. Fulfil the
" part which I have allotted to thee. Fol-
" low thou me."-The inflrulion which
aiifcs from this conversation of our Lord's
with Peter, is, That all prying inqui-
ries into the slate, circumflanccs, or cha-
racder of others, are rcprehenfible and im-
proper; that to every man a particular
charge is afligned by his Lord and Maf-
ter, the fulfillment of which ought to be
the primary objccd of his attention, without
officiously thrulling himself into the con-
cerns of others. The ill!tllration of these
points fliall make the fultjcd ot the prcfltnt
discourse.

TIH.T idle curiosity, that inquisitive

and meddling fpirir, which leads men to
pry il'to the affairs of their neighbours,
is reprehensible on three accounts. It in- '~.
terrupts the good order, and breaks the

peace

S F R M. peace of ficiety. it brings forward and
2vmj nourishes fevcral bad paflions. It draws

men aside from a proper attention to the
discharge of their own duty.

IT interrupts, I fay, the order, and

breaks the peace offociety. In this world
we are linked together by many ties. We
are bound by duty, and we are prompted
by interest, to give mutual assistance, and
to perform friendly offices to each other.
But those friendly oflices are performed
to moll advantage, when we avoid to in-
terfere unneccffarily in the concerns of
our neighbour. Every man has his own
part to act, has his own interest to consult,
has affairs of his own to manage, which
his neighbour has no call to scrutinize.
Human life then proceeds in its moit na-
tural and orderly train, when every one
keeps within the bounds of his proper
province; when, as long as his pursuits
are fair and lawful, he is allowed, with-
out dillurbance, to conduct them in his
own way. ?hat ye fjudy to be quiet, and

to

to do your own busies *, is the apoftoli- SERM.
cal rule, and indeed the great rule, for vj
preservation of harmony and order. But
so it is, that, in every age, a set of men
have existed, who, driven by an unhappy
adivity of spirit, oftener perhaps than by
any fettled design of doing ill, or any mo-
tives of ambition or interest, love to in-
termeddle where they have no concern,
to inquire into the private affairs of others,
and from the imperfec information which
they collect, to form conclusions concern.
ing their circumstances and charader.
These are they who, in scripture, are cha-
raterifed as tatlers, and busy bodies in other
mcns matters, and from whom we are cal-
led to turn away.

Though persons of this description

should be prompted by nothing but vain
curiosity, they are, neverthclefs, dangerous
troublers of the world. While they con-
ceive themselves to be inoffensive, they are

VOL. IV. J1 sowing

Tneft iv. iv .

SE R . sowing dissension and feuds. Crofling the

j lines in which others move, they create

confusion, and awaken resentment. For
every man conceives himfelfto be inju-
red, when he finds another intruding in-
to his affairs, and, without any title, taking
upon him to examine his conduc. Being
improperly and unnecessarily disturbed,
he claims the right of disturbing in his
turn those who wantonly have troubled
him. Hence, many a friendship has been
broken; the peace cf many a family has
been overthrown; and much bitter and last-
ing discord has been propagated through
society.

WhrI LE this spirit of meddling curio-

fity injures so confidcrably the peace and
good order of the world, it also nourishes,
among individuals who are addiCted to it,
a multitude of bad paFlions. Its most
frequent source is mere idleness, which, in
itself a vice, never fails to engender many
vices more. The mind of man cannot be
bngwithout some food to nourifi the ac-

tivity

ivity of its thoughts. The idle, who have SS RM.
no nourishment of this fort within them- .-
selves, feed their thoughts with inquiries
into the conduct of their neighbours.
The inquisitive and curious are always
talkative. What they learn, or fancy
themselves to have learned, concerning o-
thers, they are generally in haste to di-
vulge. A tale which the malicious have
invented, and the credulous have pro-
pagated; a rumour whichl, arising among
the multitude, and tranfinitted by one to.
another, has, in every itcp of its progress,
gained fresh additions. beconmes in the
end the foundation es confident aflertion,
and of rall and fevc'ejudgemcnt.

It is often by a fpirir ofjealoufy and ri-

valry, that the refcarchcs of such persons
are prompted. They wish to discover some.
thing that will bring down their neigh-
bour's character, circumflances, or reputa-
tion, to the level of their own; or that will
flatter them with an opinion of their own
superiority A secret malignity lies at
the bottom of their inquiries. It may be

L 2 concealed

S r. M. concealed by an affccled flow of candonr
\v and impartiality. It may even be veiled

with the appear2nce of a fricndly concern
for the interefis of others, ant with as-
sected apologies for their failings. But
the hidden rancour is easily discovered.-
While, therefore, perfbns of this defcrip-
tion trouble the peace of society, they at
the fame time poilbn their own i inds
with malignant passions. Their difpofi.
tion is entirely the reverse of that amiable
spirit of charity, on which our religion
lays so great a stress. Charity covereth
the multitude of fins; but this prying and
meddling spirit seeks to discover and di-
vulge them. Charity ihbnke;b no evil; but
this temper inclines us always to fufpe&
the worst. Charity rejoiceth not in iniqui-
ty; this temper triumphs in the discovery
of errors and failings. Charity, like the
fun, brightens every object on which it
shines; a censorious disposition catls e-
very character into the darkest ihade it
will bear.

3 IT

IT is to be farther observed, that all im- s E RM.

pertinent curiosity about the affairs of o- HI.V
thers tends greatly to obftruC personal
reformation; as it draws mens thoughts
aside from what ought to be the chief ob-
ject of attention, the improvement of their
own heart and life. They who are so of-
ficioufly occupied about their neighbours,
have little leisure, and less inclination, to
ohberve their-own defects, or to mind their
own duty. From their inquisitive re-
searches, they find, or imagine they find,
in the behaviour of others, an apology
*for their own failings: And the favourite
result of their inquiries generally is, to reft
satisfied with themselves. They are at
least as good, they think, as others around
them. The condemnation which they
pats on the vices of their neighbours, they
interpret to be a sentiment of virtue in
themselves. They become those hypo-
crites described by our Lord, who fee
clearly the mote that is in their neighbour's
eye, while they d fcern not the beam that it
in their own.

L3 IN

S E R M. IN opposition to fiuch a charader as this,

VIII.
i.,vll the ldoctinc plainly inculcated by the text

is, that to every man a particular charge
is given by his Lord and Master, a part is
afligned hini by Providence to ad; that to
this he ought to bend his chief attention;
and, inftcad of icrutinifiig the character
or Irate of others, ought to think of him-
self, and leave them to itand or fall by
their cwn matter. I hat flJall this man o9,'
said Peter. I'hat, replies our Lord, is that
to thee ? Follow thou me.

WHERE persons possess any important

station, or diftinguiflied rank, in the world,
the application of this docdrine to them is
manifest. If they have any candour, they
cannot refuse to acknowledge that God
and the world have a title to expec from
them a diligent attention to their proper
part in life; and that to wafle their time
in idle inquiries about others, with whom
they have nothing to do, is reprehensible
and sinful. But there are multitudes of
mankind, to whom this appears in a very

different

diffcrent light. They are humble and pri- SEEM.
vate men, who arc willing to conceive j
themselves as of little importance in the
world. Having no extenlive influence,
and no call, as they think, to diltinguifh
lhemfelvos by active exertions in any
sphere, they imagine that they may inno.
cently lead an idle life, and indulge their
curiosity, by canvassing at plealure the
character and the behaviour of those a-
round them. With persons of this de-
scription every society too much abounds.
-My brethren, no one ought to conlider
himself as insignificant in the fight of God.
In our several llations we are all sent forth
to be labourers in God's vineyard. Every
man has his work allotted, his talent com-
mitted to him; by the due improvement
of which he might, in one way or other,
fcrve God, promote virtue, and be ule-
ful in the world. Occupy till I co;me, is
the charge given to all Chrifiians without
exception. To be entirely unemployed
and idle is the prerogative of no one, in
any rank of life.

L 4 Evea

BERM. Even that sex, whose task is not to

vo mingle in the labours of public and ac-

tive business, have their own part assigned
them to at. In the quiet of domestic
Ihade, there are a variety of virtues to be
exercised, and of important duties to be
discharged. Much depends on them for
the maintenance of private oeconomy and
order, for the education of the young, and
for the relief and comfort of those whose
functions engage them in the toils of the
world. Even where no such female du-
ties occur to be performed, the care of
preparing for future usefulness, and of at-
taining such accomplishments as procure
just eftcem, is laudable. In such duties
and cares, how far better is time employ-
ed, than in that search into private con-
cerns, that circulation of rumours, those
discussions of the conduct, and descants
on the character of others, which engross
conversation ob much, and which end,
for the most part, in severity of censure !

In whatever condition we are placed,
to at always in character should be our

constant

constant rule. He who ads in charac- SE Rl.
ter is above contempt, though his flation Gs
be low. He who ads out of charater
is despicable, though his station be ever
so high. Fihat is that to thee, what this
man or that man does? Think of what
thou oughteft to do thyself; of what is fui-
table to thy charader and place; of what
the world has a title to expect from thee.
Every excursion of vain curiosity about
others, is a fubtradion from that time and
thought which was due to ourselves and
due to God. Having gifts, fays the Apofile
Paul, differtng according to the grace that is
given us, whether miniflry, let us uait on our
miniJiring; or he that teacheth, on teaching;
or he that exhorteth, on exhortation. He
that giveth, let him do it with fJmplicity ;
he that ruleth, with diligence; he that
Jheweth mercy, with cheetfulnefs *.

In the great circle of human affairs
there is room for every one to be busy

and
Rom. sii. 6,-9,

IERM. and well employed in his own province,

l/I without encroaching upon that of others.

It is the province of iuperiors to direct;
of inferiors, to obey ; of the learned to be
inltrudive; of the ignorant, to be docile;
of the old to be communicative; of the
young to be advifeable and diligent. Art
thou poor? Show thylilf active and in-
dlutrious, peaceable and contented. Art
thou wealthy ? Show thyself beneficent
and charitable, condescending and liu-
mane. If thou livest much in the world,
it is thy duty to make the light of a good
example shine conlpicuoufly before others.
If thou livci private and retired, it is thy
business to improve thine pvon mind, and
to add, if thou canst do no more, one
faithful subjed to the Mcffiah's kingdom.
There is indeed no man so sequestered
from acive life, but within his own nar-
row sphere he may find some opportuni-
ties of doing good; of cultivating friend-
Ihip, promoting peace, and discharging
many of these Icffcr offices of humanity
and kindness, which are within the reach

of

of every one, and which we all owe to SERM.
one another. In all the various relations
which subsist among us in life, as hus-
band and wife, matter and servants, pa-
rents and children, relations and friends,
rulers and fubjeds, innumerable duties
fland ready to be performed; innumera-
ble calls to virtuous activity present them-
selves on every hand, sufficient to fill up
with advantage and honour the whole
time of man.

THERE is, in particular, one great and

comprehensive object of attention, which,
in the text, is placed in direcd opposition to
that idle curiosity reprehended by cur
Lord; that is, to follow Christ. Follow
thou me. What this man or that man
does; how he employs his time; what
uie he makes of his talents; how he fuc-
ceeds in the world; are matters, concern-
ing which the information we receive can
never be of great importance to us; of-
ten, is of no importance at all. But how
our Saviour behaved while he was on

earth,

ER lM. earth, or how, in our situation, he would
VIII. ^vJ have behaved, are matters of the highest

moment to every Christian.

The commandment given in the text,

to follow him, includes both observance
of his words, and imitation of his exam-
ple. The words of Christ contain, as we
all know, the flanding rule of our life.
His example exhibits the great model on
which our conduct ought to be formed;
and it is to this that the precept here deliver-
ed direcly refers.-Examples have great
influence on all. But by all human exam-
ples, we are in danger of being occasion-
ally miffled. We are ever obliged to be on
our guard, left the admiration of what is
etimable, betray us into a reiemblance of
what is blemiflled and faulty. For the
most perfect human characters, in the
midst of their brightness and beauty, are
always marked with some of those dark
spots which stain the nature of man.
But our Lord possessed all the virtues of
the greatelt and belt inen, without par-
taking any of their defects. In him, all

was

was light without a fhadc, and beauty SERM.

VIII.

without a ltain.-At the fame time, his j
example is attended with this singular ad-
vantage, of being more accommodated
than any other to general imitation. It
was diftinguiflled by no unnatural aulte-
rides, no affected singularities; but exhi.
bits the plain and simple tenor of all those
virtues for which we have most frequent
occasion in ordinary life. In order to
render it of more universal benefit, our
Lord fixed his residence in no particular
place; he tied himself down to no parti-
cular calling or way of living; but givea
us the opportunity of viewing his beha-
viour, in that variety of lights which e-
qually and indifferently regard all man-
kind. His life was divided between the
retired and the active state. Devotion and
business equally fliared it. In the dif-
charge of that high office with which
he was vcfted, we behold the perfec mo-
del of a public character; and we behold
the molt beautiful example of private life,
when we contemplate him among his dif-

ciples,

Si.R M. ciplcs, ;as a l tithcr in tle mniidfl of llids :,-
vil. nilily.-Bly f1ichl mican lic hIa exlhilbitrd

before ius pcaillclls of cvcr'y kildl (f'
virtue; and to all r;aiiks andl clail' rs
men hlias a ;lirlcld a lpattcrn afteir wshin
they inliy coyy. llardly is thcrr any c-
incrgcncy whichl c;an occur ill life, lut
frolll ( l cille incient in ol Savi ((Is con-
(duIt, frotl {il lic tc;tllluc (liflil.iycd iln his
charadcr, we arr cnahlcd to i;ly to our-
flvcs, " Thus ( hrilt would h;lvc Ijiokcn,
" thus he would ha;ve atcld, thus he
" would hiavc lhilllrcd, if hc hald Icn cir-
" culil(tanccd as we arc now."

Inllcad, thcrcforc, of thinlki'lg of thy

ncip,hl)ours ;ioutnd thcc, and of iniquiring
how thcy behave, kccp Chrill in thinc eye,
aiin in thy whole cend(ll follow him.
'ollo'uw him ill his Icady and con;fcicntious
diliarrgc of duty, ainidlt oplpofitiol fromn
evil mcn, and a corruptcd world. Follow
him in his patient fiumiflion to his Fa-
ther's will, and the calmnlncf of his fliirit
under all trials. Follow him in his aRfs
of difintcrcilcd bcncvolcnce, in his corn

I pallion

palTon to thlr nIIII.Iiv, iil his rcdlrlincrfs S .RM.

VIII.

to ob)lig, to llillt, and1l to n lic. Iclita tc j
tlie 1ll illnics .1rllid ll li; I o, f hlis mn. l-
nclrs. I il.iate tllhe llebtil ) ,) 111]d ( ,m (lf(cn-
lion wIhli a;iplc;'lel iln his lli;ivioiir.
Imitate hle icnnOnrlplrrl (ihill1icl(y an;
purity which li lilnigill(rl Iis whlole litv.

TiirsEr arc nmuch wortlhicr an(l nol)ler

obd, iq of ymonr attention, th ai ally of thoftl
trilling vari(ties wliichl youl (;ci (l)lorc
and (lii'ovcr in the (hlia-;tlctlrs ot tlhori
aiongl whol i you live. ly liftinlg our
vicw to so high a fla(lnarl, you will bc
prcfcrvctl from dlcf:citlint to thlic futile
;idl c(trruptinig einliployicnts; of' thoighlt,
whiichi occuyily the idlle, the vain, tanl the
malign; nt. It is incrcdiblc, how inuirl
tilm anti attcntion arc thrown away )y
men, in cxamining thle alliirs of othicrs,
andl dlilufling their condiult. Were their
time anti attention thrown away only, tic
evil would, in blone degrec, be Icfs. But
they are woric tlhan thrown away; they
arc not merely fruitllsM, but producive of

Imuuc

S iK. much mischief. Such a habit of thought
VI.s is conneced with a thousand vices. It is

the constant source of rath and revere cen.
sure. It arises from envy and jealousy.
It foments ill nature and pride. It pro-
pagates misunderstanding and discord. All
those evils would be prevented, if the re-
proof which our Lord administers in the
text came oftener home, with proper au-
thority, to the reflexion of men: WVhat i
that to thee ? Each of us have more mate-
rial and important business of our own to
fulfil. Our talk is afligned; our part al-
lotted. Did we suitably examine how
that part was performed, we flould be less
disposed to busy ourselves about the con-
cerns of others. We would discover ma-
ny a disorder to be corrected at home;
many a weed to be pulled out from our
own grounds; much remaining to be done,
in order to render ourselves useful in this
world, and fit for a world to come.-
Wherefore, instead of being critics on
others, let us employ our criticism on

ourselves.

ourselves. Leaving others to be judged SERM.
by Him who searcheth the heart, let us ~,-
implore his affiflance for enabling us to
ad well our own part, and to follow
Christ.

VOL.IV. M SERMON

# SERMON IX. On our Present IGNORANCE of the WAYS of GOD. JOHN xiii. 7. Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do, thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter.

S E R M ( N IX.
On our Present IGNORANCE of the WAYS

of GOD.

JOHN Xiii. 7.
Jesus an/wered and /aid unto him, What I

do, thou knoweft not now; but thouJhalt
know hereafter.
SERM. T HESE words of our Lord were oc-

x . cafioned by a circumitance in his

behaviour which appeared mysterious to
his disciples. When about to celebrate
his last passover, he meant to give them
an inftrutive lesson of condescension and
humility. The mode which he chose for

delivering

delivering this inftrudion, was the em- SER M
blematical acion of waffling their feet. lXj
When Simon Peter saw his Mafier addref-
sing himielf to the performance of so me-
nial an orlice, he exclaims with the great-
eft surprise, Lord, doll thou wajsj my fret?
Our Lord replies, in the words of the
text, lWhat I do thuu knoweft not now, but
thou jhalt know hereafter. " My behaviour
" in this instance, may seem unaccount-
" able to you at present; but you lhall
" afterwards receive a fatisfadory expli-
" cation of the intent of that symbol
" which I now employ."

The expressions of a divine person, on

this occasion, can very naturally and
properly be applied to various inflances,
where the conduc of Providence, in the
\ admiuiltration of human affairs, remains

dark and mytferious to us. II hat I do,
thou knouwel not now. We must for a
while be kept in ignorance of the de-
signs of heaven. But this ignorance,
though neceifary at present, is not al-
ways to continue. . tine ifall come

M a when

ERM. when a commentary flall be afforded or
Ix all that is now obscure; when the veil of

mystery shall be removed; and full fa-
tisfaAion be given to every rational mind.
Thou flJalt know hereafter. This is the
docrine which I purpose to illuitrate in
the following difcourfc.

I. OUR Saviour's words lead us to ob-

serve, that many things in the conduct
of Providence are at present mysterious
and unintelligible. The truth of this
observation will not be called in question.
It is indeed very readily admitted by all;
and ever since the beginning of the world
has been the foundation of many a com-
plaint, and of much scepticism concern-
ing the government of Heaven.-That
human affairs are not left to roll on ac-
cording to mere chance, and that Provi-
dence interposes in them to a certain de-
gree, is made evident by various tokens
to every candid mind. But the perplexi-
ty and trouble of the thoughtful inqui-
rer arises front obfcrving that Providence

R appears

appears not to purfuc any regular or con- SERM.

Ix.

fiftent plan. An unaccountable mixture W,.j
of light and darkness presents itself to us,
when we attempt to trace the aftfirs of
the world up to any wife and righteous
adminifiration. We fee justice arTn order
begun; but on many occasions they seem
to be deferred The ray of light which
we had traced for a while, suddenly for-
fakes us; and, where we had looked for
the continuance of order, we meet with
confusion and difappointment.-For in-
fiance; when we examine the conftitu-
tion of the human mind, we discern evi-
dent marks of its being framed with a
view to favour and reward virtue. Con-
science is endowed with signal authori-
ty to check vice. It brings home un-
easiness and raenorfe to the bad; and it
sooths and supports the righteous with
felf-approbation and peace. The ordi-
nary course of human things is made to
coincide in some degree with this confti-
tution of our nature. The worthy and
the good are, in general, honoured and

M 3 citeemed.

SERM. esteemed. He that walketh uprightly, is,
I. for the most part, found to walk Jiurely.

The chief misfortunes that befal us in life
can be traced to some vices or follies
which we have committed; and it almost
never happens but the finner's own vwic-
kednefs is made, sooner or later, to reprove
him, and his backflidings to correct bim.

All this carries the impress of a just

Providence, of a wife and a benevolent
administration of the universe, We can-
not avoid perceiving that the Almighty
hath fit his throne for judgement. At
the fame time, when we pursue our in-
quiries, the Almighty appears to hold back
the face of his throne, and toJpread his cloud
upon it *. For in looking abroad into the
world, how many scenes do we behold,
which are far from corresponding with
any ideas we could form of the govern-
ment of Heaven? Many nations of the
earth we fee lying in a state of barbarity

and
* Job xxvi. 9.

and misery; funk in such gross igno- SE R M.
rance as degrades them below the rank of Ix-
rational beings; or abandoned to be the
prey of cruel oppression and tyranny.
When we look to the state of individuals
around us, we hear the lamentations of
the unhappy on every hand. We meet with
weeping parents, and mourning friends.
We behold the young cut off in the flower
of their days, and the aged left desolate
in the midst of sorrows. The useful and
virtuous are swept away, and the worth-
less left to flourish. The lives of the best
men are often filled with discouragements
and disappointed hopes. Merit languish-
es in neglected solitude; and vanity and
presumption gain the admiration of the
world. From the scourge of calumny,
and from the hand of violence, the inju-
red look up to God as the Avenger of
their cause; but often they look up in
vain. He is a God that hideth himself.
He dwelleth, as to them, in the secret
place of darkness; or, if he dwelleth in

M 4 light,

SERM. light, it is in light to which no man can
As_, approach. Resignation may feal up their

lips; but in silence they drop the tear,
and mourn while the) adore.

SucHi, it must not be dissembled, are

the difficulties which encounter us when
we attempt to trace the present ways of
God. At the fame time, upon reflecion,
we may be ftisfied that causes can be as-
signed for things appearing in this un-
favourable light; and that there is no
rcafon to be surprised at the divine con-
ducl being myflerious at prefcnt.

The monarchy of the universe is a great

and complicated system. It comprehends
numberless generations of men, who are
brought forth to ad their parts for pur-
poses unknown to us. It includes two
worlds at once; the world that now is,
and which is only a finall. portion of
existence; and a world that is to come,
which endures for eternity. To us, no
more than the beginnings of things are
visible. We fee only some broken parts

of

of a great whole. We trace but a few SERM.
links of that chaii of being, which, .
by secret conned'ids, binds together
the prelent and the future Such know-
ledge is aftlrded us as is fulti:icnt for
supplying the exigencies and wants of
our prelent ltate; but it does no more.
Peeping abroad from a dark corner of the
univerlj, we attempt in vain to explore
the counlels that govern the world. It is
an attempt to found an unfaihomable deep
with a scanty line; and with a feeble
wing to ascend above the flars. In any
complicated work, even of human art, it
is found necessary to be acquainted with
the design of the whole, in order to judge
of the fitness of its parts. In a icheme
so complex as the administration of the
world, where all the parts refer to one
another, and vwecre what is seen is often
Subordinate to what is invisible, how is it
polTible but our judgements muit be of-
ten erroneous, and our complaints ill-
founded? If a peasant or a cottager be
incapable of judging of the govern-

mnt^- ,

SE R M. ment of a mighty empire, is it surprising
Ix that we flould be at a loss concerning the

conduct of the Almighty towards his crea-
tures ? Wlha! 1 do thou knowejl not now.

BUT, on this argument still more can

be said for our fitisfaclion. We are to
observe, that complete information re-
speding the ways of God, not only was
not to be expeced here; but, moreover,
that it would have been hurtful, if grant-
ed to us in our preftnt Rlate. It would
have proved inconfiltent with that state;
with the acions which we have to per-
form in it, and the duties we have to ful-
fil. It would indeed have overthrown
the whole design of our being placed
in this world. We are placed here un-
der the trial of our virtue. Ignorance
of the events that are ordained to befal
us, ignorance of the plans and the decrees
of heaven, enter necessarily into a state
of trial. In order to exercise both our
intellectual and moral powers, and to car-
ry. tem forward to improvement, we must

be

be left to find our way in the midst of SERM.
difficulties and doubts, of hardflhips, and IJ
sufferings. We must be taught to ad our
part with contfancy, though the reward
of our constancy be distant. \VW mutt
learn to bear with patience whatever our
Creator judges proper to lay upon us,
though we fee not the reason of the hard-
ships he inflics. If we were let into the
secret of the whole plan of Providence;
if the justice of Heaven were, in every
ftep of its procedure, made manifest to
our view, man would no longer be the
creature he now is, nor would his present
state answer any purpole of discipline or
trial.

Mystery and darkness, therefore, must

of necessity now take place in the courfl
of things. Our present slate can be no
other than a fiate of twilight or dawn,
where dubious forms shall often present
thcmfelves to us, and where we Ihall find
ourselves in a middle condition between
complete light and total darkness. Had
we enjoyed no evidence of a just Ju.ge

ruling

SE RM. ruling the earth, and of his providence
Jwvz. interposing in our affairs, virtue would

have been altogether deprived of its en-
couragement and support. Had the evi-
dence, on the other hand, been so strong
as to place the hand of the Almighty con-
ftantly before our eyes, the intention of our
present existence would have been defeated,
and no trial of virtue have remained. In-
stead, therefore, of complaining of the ob-
fcurity which at present covers the con-
duct of Providence, we fee that, on the
whole, we have reason to submit and a-
dore.

II. T ur text suggests that, though what

God is doing, or what lie intends to do,
we know not now, yet there is ground to
believe, that at some future period we
shall receive information. Il'hat I do thou
knoweft not now, but thou /halt know here-
after. The quellion here arises, what that
herealter is to which we are to look for
the solution of our present doubts.?

IN

IN the first place, hetreafter may, on SERM.

some occasions, refer to the subsequent jx.
course of events in this world. It often
happens that the conlequences of things
throw light on the design, of God. The
history of Providence, in proportion as it
advances, disembroils itself. Though our
present condition forbids extensive and
complete information, yet as much is
sometimes allowed to appear as gives us
favourable openings into the righteous and
benevolent counsels of heaven.-Thus, in
the public affairs of the world, it has been
frequently seen, that from the molt un-
promising causes important and benefi-
cent effects have, in the sequel, arifcn. In
our own country, at one period, the vio-
lent palfions of a prince gave beginning to
the Reformation. At another period, ar-
bitrary attempts against religion and li-
berty occasioned that happy Revolution
which has formed the xera of national
prosperity. In many infiances, the ,rath
of man has been made to praise God. Those
wars and commotions that shake the mo-

ral

S E RI . ral world have answered similar purposes

v with tcmpeats in the natural world, of

purging the air from noxious vapours, and
rcftoring it to a temperature more found
and wholefomc. From the midit of con-
fusion order has been made to spring, and
from temporary mischiefs, lafling advan-
tages to arise.-- n all cafes of this na-
ture, with which sacred and civil history
abounds, secret designs of heaven were
going on, which were unfolded in the
end. The wheel was always in motion.
The hand of the clock was advancing with
unperceived progress, till the moment came
of its striking the appointed hour.

In like manner, with respect to indivi-

duals, there is often a hereafter in the
cuurfe of their lives, which discloses and
justifies the ways of God. Not to mention
the good effects which misfortunes are
found to produce on the minds of men,
by checking their vices, and correcting
their errors, innumerable exemplifications
can be given, of misfortunes paving their
way to future advancement in the world.

We

We are always querulous and impatient SERM.

Ix.

when designs succeed not according to
our wish. Ignorant of what futurity is to
bring forward, occupied with nothing but
the present, we exclaim, Where is God?
Where the sceptre of righteousness ? Halt
hefo'gotten to be gracious ? or doth he in-
deed fee, and is there knowledge in the
Most High ?-God Jketh not as manfethb:
He looketh not merely to what )ou sus-
ser, but to what the effect of these sus-
ferings is to be. Confider only in how
different a light the Patriarch Joseph would
view the events of his life after he had
seen in what they had terminated, from
the light in which he saw them, when led
away by the Immaelites as a save, or when
thrown by Potiphar into the Egyptian
prison. We murmur against Providence,
just as the impetuous youth frets against
his inftruAors and tutors, who are keep-
ing him under a ftriq, and as he thinks
a needless, discipline. He knows not
that, by their inftru6fion and discipline,
they are laying the foundation of his fu-

3 ture

SERM. ture fortunes; of the wealth which he is
-v-, to acquire, and of the advancement to

which he is to rife in the world. What
may juflly he said to him by his tutors
and inftrudors, is equally applicable to
us all under our present slate of educati-
on; What I do, thou knoweft not now, but
thou Jsalt know hereafter.- Regarding,
then, the unknown issue of all worldly
events in this life, let us never despair;
let us never think dishonourably of the
government of God; but have patience
till his providence accompliih its designs
in its own way, and at its own time. Al-
though thoufJaejl thou Jijalt not fee him, yet
judgement is before him; therefore trufi thou
m him *.

IN the second place, the expression of

hereafter in the text must be underflood
to refer, in its full extent, not to future
events in this life, but to a subsequent

fltate
*Job xxv. 14.

tfate of being. For this life is no more SERM.

ix.

than the beginning of the mighty and -
extensive plans of Providence. The feeds
are only now sown, of what is to ripen
and come forth, at the harvest of the
world; when the revolution of the great
niord! year fliall be finilhed, and the go.
,crminent of God Ihall obtain its full com-
pletion. It is the chief scope of religion
to diret our view to this period; and it
hath often taught us that the knowledge
of the ways of God, then enjoyed by the
blessed, liall constitute a chief article of
their felicity. No'ow we e through a
glafi darkly; but then face to Jace. Now
we know in part; but then we Jlhall know
even as we are kngwn. IWhen that which
is perfec? is come, then that which is in part
Jflall be done away. In God's light wejhall
fee light*. The reasons that required ob-
fcurity to remain for a while on the ways
of God no longer subsist. The education

VOL. IV. N of

Cor. lii. 10, 12. Psalm xxxvi. 9.

SERM. of good men is coniplet(d; and the inten-
^v-^ tion of those ftcps of education, which

once they could not comprehend. now be-
comes apparent-Why this man was pre-
maturely carried away from the world in
the beginning of a promising course; why
that deserving family were left overwhelm-
ed with grief and despair, by the loss of
one who was their sole benefactor and
fuipport; why friendships cemented by
tender ties were suddenly torn asunder
by death: Thefc are inquiries to which
we can now make no reply; and which
throw a dark gloom over the conduct of
the Almighty. But the spirits of the just
above, who are admitted to a larger view
of the ways of Cod, fee the reasons of
such counsels. They fee that one man
was seasonably taken away from dangers
and evils to come, which, unknown to
him, were hovering over his head. They
sec that Providence was in secret prepa-
ring unexpected blessings fir the family
who appeared to be left (4fconfolate and
hopeless. 1 hey fee thatit was time for

' friendships

friendships to he dilTolved, when their SERM.
longer continuance would to tome of the
parties have proved a filare. Where we
behold nothliin lbut the rod of power
stretched forth, they (iifcern an n:erpofi-
tion of the hand of inci r.

Let us wait till this promised hereafter

arrive, and we liall in like manner be fa-
tisfied concerning the events that now
disturb and perplcx us. We flall then
know why so much darkness and misery
have been so long permitted to remain on
the earth, and so much oppreflion and
tyranny to prevail among the nations.
We flall fee rising, as from the ashes
of the old world, a new and beautiful
ftruclure; new- heavens and a new earth,
wh.'rein dwelklth rigbhtro/nef/s As wide
as is the difference between the appearance
of the world, when it lay in its primitive
chaos, without form: ard void, and the ap-
pearance it has 'now assumed, when re-
splendent `th the light of the fun, and
decked wit hhe beauties of nature; such
is the diflereie between the divine plans

N2 in

5ERM. in their beginnings, and in their fits
IX. xZj completion. At the conclusion, and not

till then, the glory of the Lord fliall be-
come maniftlt to all; and, as it is de-
fcribed in the book of the Revelation, a
voice fliall he heard from every creature
·which is in heaven and on the earth, and un-
der the earth, laying, B/esing, and honour,
and power, and glsrl', be to him that Jittell
on the throne. Great and marvellous are
thy workl, Lord God Almighty; juji and
true are thy wa) s, thou King of jaints *.

APPLICATION of the doctrines that

have been illuflrated may be made to
two clailcs of men.

firfl, To Iccptics; who, from the pre-

sent mysterious conduct of Providence,
hafily draw the conclusion, that no go-
vernment is exercised over human affairs,
but that all things are fuffcrcd indifcri-
minatcly to come alike to all men.-I

have
'Rc. v. 13.-xv. 3.

have fiown that from the inadequate SERM.

Ix.

views which we are at present able to I-V
take of the general ftflem, fucl myfte-
rious appearances of Providence mull be
expected to take place. Not only so, but
I have albo flown it to be fit and neceffa-
ry that this mixture of obscurity should
now remain; as a full display of regular
juflice and order would be inconsistent
with the moral improvement of men in
this life.-Let me desire the sceptic to look
to the slate of the natural world. When
he thinks of the order and magnificence
that prevail in it, he will, perhaps, be un-
wvilling to pronounce it the mere produc-
tion of chance. He cannot but recog-
nife the hand of Intelligence, and acknow-
ledge it to have proceeded from a design-
ing Cause. I ask him, Whether in the
natural world he discerns not as many
mytferious and puzzling appearances as
are to be found in the moral world?
Are not deftru'tive florms, burning
mountains, uninhabitable deserts, as dif-

N 3 ficult

SERM ficult t) be reconciled to his pre-con-

IX.
~v^- conceived ideas of supreme wisdom and

goodness in the Creator, as the iuflerings
and afiluions which in the course of Pro-
vidence befal the just ? The natural and
moral world are, in this rcfpec, counter-
parts to one another. Both are marked
with the fame characters, and carry.the
imprcfs of the fame powerful and gracious
hand. In both, it is evidently the intention
of the first Author not to render every
thing level to our capacity; but in the
midst of high dcfign and order, to al-
low certain objects to appear, which con-
tradict the ideas we had formed, and
mock our vain researches. Now, if we
are obliged to admit that the order
and beauty of the natural world fuffici-
ently prove it to be the work of a wife
Crteator, notwithstanding the seeming
dcfori::ities which it exhibits; are we
not led, by the fame train of reaboning,
to conclude that the moral world is un-
der the direction of a wife Governor,

3 though

though much of what he now does we S ERM.
cannot fatisfacorily explain ? IX

Secondly, THE doctrine of the text is

to be applied r-ot only tor silencing fccp-
tics but for comforting the pious. Ne-
ver let them be dcjecled by the darkness
which now covers the ways of the Al-
mighty. If he withdraws himself fiom
their view, it is not )bcaulc he neglecds
them; but because they are incapable of
comprehending his dcligns; bccaufe it
were not for their good that all his de-
signs were revealed to them -Inflead of
perplexing themselves about what is ob-
fcure, let them reft on the clear and au-
thentic discoveries that have been given of
the divine goodnlfs. Let them relt on those
great and signal fads that prove it; par-
ticularly on that illullrious fact, the re-
demption of the world by Jefuis (hrift,
He that sparcd not his own Son, but gave
him up for ui all, will aillredly not always
conceal hirclf from those who serve him.
Though what he does they know not now,

N 4 the

S E R M. the time approaches when they f/nall know
sYtJ k hereafter. Till that time come, let them

believe and trult; let them hope and a-
dore. From this conclusion let them ne-
ver depart, that to fear God and ktp his
commandments is in every situation the
trueit wisdom ; that, if there be govern-
mcnt in the universe at all, the virtuous
and the worthy arc loved and proteced
by Heaven; that in due Jeninj they /7fall
reap if they /fit nct; for the care of them
is wth the Lord, and their ic-.ard with
tht MofR Hih.

SER ON

# SERMON X. On the SLAVERY of VICE. 2 PETER ii. 19. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage.

SERMON X.
On the SLAVERY of VICE.

2 PETER ii. 19.

IJ'hile they promise them liberty, they them-

Jelves are the servants of col ruption ; for
cf whom a man is overcome, of the Jame
is he brought in bondage.
BONDAGE and fulbjcdion are difa- SERM.

greeable founds to the ear, difagrce- X.

able ideas to the mind. The advo-
cates of vice, taking advantage of those
natural impreflions, have in cvcry age
employed them for discrediting religion.
They represent it as the bondage and con-

finement

SE R M. finernmnt of the free-born foul of man;

x as a Itate of' perpltutal conllraint, formed

by a iyltem of lcvere rules, which dcfign-
ing nicn have coLtrived to impose as set-
ters on the multitude. On the other hand,
they paint a licentious course to them-
Ifcves, and hold it out to the world, as
the gay and pleafirable enjoyment of
life; where, having turmounted the pre-
judices of education, and the timorous
liruples of c.nf:icncc, men can think and
act at p!calurc, ;::l give full Icopc to
every wilh of the heart.-iBt wlat if
thoic pretended Ions of freedom be them-
silvcs held in miserable lbl)jecion, and
their boalt of liberty be no more than
the J:,c!'hiw wtc L of vanmt ? The Apostle
tall!ets in the text, that while they pr mz/e
l:i;'r:; to others, they are the Jcrvallts, or
Ilav.L, of crii/,ltll , overcn;Ce, and bt siz'ht
iu.t l1o::lac ,y it. This assertion of the
Ai\:':!' I purptic to illustrate. I Ihall en-
(ravo;,r to nmake it appear, that no true
libertv .::; ariit! fiom vice; that bad men

undergo

undergo the worlt servitude; and that no S ER M.
one is free, Lut he who is virtuous and good. .,

IT is necessary to begin with removing

false ideas of liberty, and ihowving in what
it truly consists. \\e are not to imagine
that to be free imports our being tet loolf:
from rcltraint or rule of every kind. No
man, in any conditicn of life, is at liberty
to aA always as he pllcafcs, and to gratify
every wis lie folllns. The nature of the
human itate neccfflriy i:npofes on all
men various rettraints. The laws of so-
ciety allow no o:e to indulge hiinc-lf in
pursuits or pleafurcs that are injurious to
his neighbour. Even cur own nature
limits our pleasures within certain bounds.
All our dclires cannoL be gratified toge-
ther. They frequently interfere, and re-
quire him who would indulge one favour-
ite paiTion, to dicnv hir.fclf in another.
Diftinnions, therefore, must bL made,
preferences be given, and some i cner;al
regulation of conduct be oblervd.l, )y
every one who consults his own WLclfr,'.

1:'

SE RM. If there be any regrlation which eifuire,

X.
N llnus of ltafery :i;(l li,'il.etls, to be difen-

gaged froml the oblc'rvalce of that regn-
lation is no article of liberty; at caf. oif
lilch liberty as a wife man would willh to
enjoy. It is in cJ1i :t to be turned loose
to our own ruiln. It is fucll liberty as a
l)lild man cnjoys, of' wiandering at ran-
dom, and fQriking into every devious path,
without a guide to dirett his fites, and
lave him from d(cfru(iion.

That un;bunded licentioufincfs, there-

fore, which finncrs t'refer to every regu-
latill of cer.ldu, is altogether different
fiom tru fieeccdom. It is in moral beha-
xionr tlhe ianei as anarchy is in a slate,
wliere law and order are extinlA. An-
archy, surely, is no leIs incompatil)le
xvith true liberty than al)bflute dcli'otifin;
;ind of tile two it is hard to fly which is
tiet Icaft eligible, or the mot inifirable
ilate. liberty by no means flippofes the
al)bcnce of all government. It only fili-
poles that the government under which
we are placed is wife; and that tle re-

1Irainti

firaints to which we voluntarily fibmit SERM.
ourselves have been contrived for tle ge-
ncral interelt.

To be siee, therefore, imports, in gene-

ral, our being placed in fiich circumilan-
ces, that within the bounds ofjutlice and
good order, we can act according to our
own deliberate choice, and take iuch mca-
fures for our conduct as we have realon
to believe arc conducive to our welfare;
without being oblrucRed either by ex-
ternal force, or by violent internal impulse.
This is that happy and dignified slate
which every wife man earnestly wishes to
enjoy. The advantages which result from
it are chiefly there three; freedom of choice;
independence of mind boidnefs and fe-
curity. In oppolition to there diftin-
guilhing characters of liberty, I now pro-
ceed to Ihow that, in the firlt place, vice
deprives bad men of free choice in their
aclions; that, in the second place, it
brings them under a flavifl dependence
on external circumltances; and that, in
the third place, it reduces them to that

1X»~~ aeabjet,

gE RM. abjcc, cowardly, and disquieted fta:c

XJ i whichi is ellentially characedriltic of bon-

dage.

1. Vic ic in:con:liter with liberty, aq it

deprives finners of the power of siee choice,
by bringing them under the (lominion
of pallions and habits. Religion and virtue
address thcmfelves to realbn. They call
us to look round on every fide ; to think
well of the confequcnces of our actions;
and, before we take any flep of importance,
to compare the good with the evil that
may ensue fiom it. Ile therefore who fol-
lows their dictates, ads the part of a man
who freely consults, and chulis, for his own
intcrcft. But vice caa make no preten-
sions of this kind. It awaits not the test of
deliberate comparifbn and choice; but o-
verpowers us at once by lome striking im-
prellion of present advantage or enjoyment.
It hurries us with the violence of passion;
captivates us by the allurements of plea-
sure; or dazzles us by the glare of riches.
The finner yields to the impulse, merely

bccaule

bccaufc he cannot refilt it. heafon re- SERM.

X.

monftrates; confcicnce cndeavours to -
check him ; but all in vain. Having once
allowed some strong pallion to gain the
ascendant, he has thrown himnelf into
the middle of a torrent, against which he
may sometimes faintly llruggle, hut the
impetuosity of the ptream bears him along.
In this situation he is so far fiomi being
free, that he is not master of himself.
He does not go, but is driven; tofled, a-
gitated, and impelled; passive, like a lhip
to the violence of the waves.

After paflion has for a while exercised

its tyrannical sway, its vehemence may by
degrees subside. But when by long in-
dulgence, it has established habits of gra-
tification, the finner's bondage becomes
then more confirmed, and more miserable.
For during the heat of pursuit he is little
capable of reflection. But, when his ar-
dour is abated, and nevertheless, a vitious
habit rooted, he has full leiiure to per-
ceive the heavy yoke he has brought upon
himself. How many slaves do we fee in

the

SERM. the world to intemperance, and all kinds
X. x- of criminal plcatlre, merely through the

influence of cultomsi which they had al-
lowed to become lo inveterate that it was
not in their power to alter them ? Are
they not often reduced to a condition so
wretched, that when their licentious plea-
fures have become utterly insipid, they
are fill forced to continue them, solely be-
cause they cannot refrain; not because
the indulgence gives them pleasure, but
because abstinence would give them pain;
and this too, even when they are obliged
at las to condemn their habits of life, as
injuring their fortune, impairing their
constitution, or disgracing their charac-
ter ? Vice is not of such a nature that we
can fly to it, Hithcrto /Jalt thou come and
no lurther. 1laving once entered into its
territories, it is not in our power to make
a retreat when we please. He that coni-
wilteth fin is the Jervant offin. No man
who has once yielded up the government
of his mind, and given loose rein to his
desires and passions, can tell how far there

may

may carry him. He may be brought into s E RM.
such a desperate ftatc, that nothing ihall x
remain for him but to look back with
regret upon the forsaken path of inno-
cence and liberty; and, severely conscious
of the thraldom he suffers, to groan under
fetters which he despairs of throwing of.
Can the tbhiopian change his Jkin, or the
leopard his /pots? then may ye alJf do good
who are accu/lomed to ds evil -

Vice confirms its dominion, and ex-

tends it still farther over the foul, by com-
pelling the finner to support one crime by
means of another. Not only is he enflav-
ed to those vices which take their rife
from his own inclination, but they render
others necessary, to which, against his in-
clination, he ocufit ubmit; and thereby
strengthen the commanding power of ini-
quity within him. The immoderate love
of pleasure, for instance, leads him into
expence beyond his fortune. In order to

O . support
' Jcremiah xii. 23.

SERM. support that expencc, lie is obliged to

IX.
J3 have recourse to low and diflionourable

methods of gain, which originally he de-
spifcd. To cover these, he is forced upon
arts ofdiflimulation and fraud. One in-
fiance of fraud obliges him to fulpport
it by another; till, in the end, there a-
rifes a charaaer of complicated vice; of
luxury slooting forth into baseness, dii-
honcfly, injuflice, and perhaps cruelty.
It is thus that one favourite paflion brings
in a tribe of auxiliaries to complete the
dominion of fin. Among all our corrupt
passions there is a strong and intimate con-
nection. When any one of them is a-
dopted into our family, it never quits us
until it has fathered upon us all its kind-
red.-By such means as these, by the
violence of passions, by the power of ha-
bits, and by the connecfion of one vice
with another, fin establishes that servitude
over the will, which deprives bad men of
all power of free choice in their adions.

11. THE slavery produced by vice ap-

pears

pears in the dependence under which it SERM.
brings the finner, to circumstances of exter-
nal fortune. One of the favourite charac-
ters of liberty, is the independence it be-
flows. He who is truly a freeman is above all
servile compliances, and abjec fibjection.
He is able to reft upon himself; and while
he regards his superiors with proper de-
ference, neither debases himself by cring-
ing to them, nor is tempted to purchale
their favour by diflonourable means.
But the finner has forfeited every privi-
ledge of this nature. Ilis paflions and
habits render him an aboblute dependant
on the world, and the world's favour; on
the uncertain goods of fortune, and the
fickle humours of men. For it is by
there he subsists, and among these his
happiness is fought; according as his
paflions determine him to pursue plea-
fures, riches, or preferments. Having no
fund within himself whence to draw enjoy-
ment, his only resource is in things with-
out. His hopes and fears all hang upon
the world. He partakes in all its viciffi-
tudes; and is moved and fliaken by eve-

0 2 ry

SERM. ry wind of fortune. This is to be in the

x.
x ftrideft sense a slave to the world.

Religion and virtue, on the other

hand,'confer on the mind principles of
noble independence. The upright man is
fatificedfrom himsef. He despises not the
advantages of fortune; but he centers
not his happiness in them. With a mo-
derate share of them he can be contented;
and contentment is felicity. Happy in
his own integrity, conscious of the eleem
of good men, reposing firm trust in the
providence, and the promises of God, he
is exempted from servile dependence on
other things. He can wrap himself up
in a good conscience, and look forward,
without terror, to the change of the world.
Let all things shift around him as they
please, he believes that, by the divine or-
dination, they ihall be made to work to-
gether in the il'ue for his good: And
therefore, having much to hope from
God, and little to fear fiom the world,
he can be easy in every slate. One who
possesses within himself fich an establish-

ment

ment of mind, is truly free.-But shall SERM.
I call that man free, who has nothing that x
is his own, no property assured; whose
very heart is not his own, but rendered
the appendage of external things, and the
sport of fortune? Is that man free, let
his outward condition be ever so splendid,
whom his imperious paflions detain at
their call, whom they fend forth at their
pleasure, to drudge and toil, and to beg
his only enjoyment from the casualties of
the world? Is he free, who muff flatter
and lie to compass his ends; who must
bear with this man's caprice, and that
man's scorn; must profess friendship where
he hates, and refpeA where he contemns;
who is not at liberty to appear in his own
colours, nor to speak his own ientiments;
who dares not be honest, left he should
be poor ?- Believe it, no chains bind
so hard, no fetters are so heavy, as those
which fasten the corrupted heart to this
treacherous world; no dependence is
more contemptible than that under which
the voluptuous, the covetous, or the am-

0 3 bitiou-

SE R M. bitious man lies to the means of pleasure,

xPJj gain, or power. Yet this is the boasted li-

berty, which vice promises, as the recom-
pence of setting us free from the salutary
restraints of virtue.

III. ANOTHER charader of the save-

ry of vice, is that mean, cowardly, and dif-
quieted state, to which it reduces the finner.
Boldness and magnanimity have ever been
accounted the native effets of liberty.
He who enjoys it, having nothing to ap-
prehend from oppressive power, performs
the offices, and enjoys the comforts of
life, with a manly and undiflurbed mind,
Hence his behaviour is dignified, and his
sentiments are honourable; while he who
is accustomed to bend under servile subjec-
tion, has always been found mean-fpirited,
timorous, and bafe.-Compare, in these
refptls, the virtuous and the vicious man,
and you will easily fee to which of thenm
the characeriftics of freedom molt justly
belong. The man of virtue, relying on
a good conscience and the protetion of

I Heaven,

Heaven, aCs with firmness and courage; SERM.
and in the discharge of his duty, fears x
not the face of man. The man of vice,
conscious of his low and corrupt aims,
flirinks before the ftedfafl and piercing
eye of integrity; is ever looking around
him with anxious and fearful circumfpec-
tion, and thinking of subterfuges, by
which he may escape fiom danger. The
one is bold al a lion; the other flieth when
no man pur/uth. To the one, nothing ap-
pears contemptible, by which he can pro-
cure any present advantage. The other
looks with disdain on whatever would de-
grade his character. " I will not," fays
he, " so demean myfclf, as to catch the
"favour of the greatest man, by this or
" that low art. It lhall not be said or
" thought of me, that I did what was base
" in order to make my fortune. Let o-
"thers Stoop so low, who cannot be with-
"out the favours of the world. But I

can want them, and therefore at Iuch a
" price I will not purchase them." This

04 is

SERM is the voice of true liberty; and speaks
.r, that greatness of mind which it is formed

to inspire.

Corresponding to that abjeC disposition

which charaderifes a bad man, are the
fears that haunt him. The terrors of a
slave dwell on his mind, and often appear
in his behaviour. For guilt is never free
from fufpiclon and alarm. The finner
is afraid, sometimes, of the partners of his
crimes, left they betray him; fonctimes,
of those who have suffered by his crimes,
left they revenge themlelves; frequently,
of the world around him, left it detet
him; and what is worlt of all, he is re-
duced to be afraid of himself There is
a witness within him that teflifies against
his mifdecds; and threatens him in fe-
cret, when other alarms leave him. Con-
science holds up to his view the image of
his past crimes, with this inscription en-
graved upon it, " God will bring every
" u,;vk intojudgement." How opposite is
such a slate as this, to the peaceful fecu-
rity arising from the liberty enjoyed by

the

the virtuous ?-- Were there nothing SERM.

X.

more in the circumflances of finners to x
affix upon them the marks of servitude,
this alone would be sufficient, that, as the
scripture expresses it, through fear of death
they are all their hfetime subject to bondage*.
Death sets all other captives free. The
slave who digs in the mine, or labours
at the oar, can rejoice in the profpeA of
laying down his burden together with
his life; and taftes the hope of being at
last on equal terms with his cruel oppref-
for. But to the slave of guilt there arises
no hope from death. On the contrary,
he is obliged to look forward with con-
ftant terror to this most certain of all
events, as the conclusion of all his hopes
and the commencement of his greatest
miseries.

I HAVE thus set before you such clear
and unequivocal marks of the fervit'de

undergone
·Hcb. ii. xS.

SERM. undergone by finners, as fully verify the

x. aflertion in the text, that a state of vice

and corruption is a slate of bondage. In
order to perceive how severe a bondage
it is, let us attend to some peculiar cir-
cumftanccs of aggravation which belong to
it.

First, It is a bondage to which the mind

itfclf, the native feat of liberty, is subjed.
ed. In other cafes, a biave man can
comfort himself with reflecting that, let
tyrants do their worfl, let prisons or set-
ters be his lot, his mind remains uncon-
quercd and free. Of this liberty they
cannot rob him; here he moves in a high-
er sphere, above the reach of oppression or
confinement. But what avails the show
of external liberty, to one who has loft
the government of himself? As our Sa-
viour reasons, in another cafe, If the light
that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness ? So we may reason here, if that
part of thy nature, thy mind, thy will,
by which only thou canst enjoy and re-
lifl liberty, be itfclf in bondage to evil

paflions

passions and habits, how miserable must SERM.
be that bondage?

Next, It is aggravated by this confide-

ration, that it is a bondage which we have
brought upon ourselves. To have been
forced into slavery, is misfortune and mi-
fery. But to have renounced our liberty
and chosen to be slaves, is the greatelt re-
proach added to the greatelt micry. Mo-
ments there frequently mull be, when a
finner is sensible of the degradation of his
slate; when he feels with pain the Ilavill
dependence under which he is brought to
fortune and the world, to violent passions
and fettled habits, and to fears and ap-
prehensions arising from conscious guilt.
In such moments, how cruel is the reflec-
tion, that of all this disgrace and misery
he has been the author to himself; that
by voluntary compliance, he has given to
his panlions that haughty ascendant which
they now exercise over him; has forged
the chains with which he is bound; and
fold himself to do iniquity!

Lastly,

SERM. Lastly, The fcrvitudc of vice is accom-

x. _.,.. panied with this farther aggravation, that

it is fubjechioi to our own firvants. Those
desires and paflions, which the finner has
raised to lawless rule, were given us as
inftrumcnts of felf-prefervation ; but were
plainly designed to be under the direcion
of a higher power. Of themselves, they
are headltrong and blind; they bear all
the marks of intended subordination; and
conscience is invested with every en-
sign of authority and supremacy. But
fin inverts the whole frame of human na-
ture. It compels reason to bow down
before those pafflons which it was formed
to command; and leads it, as it were in
triumph, to grace the Ihameful conquest
of its minifers and servants. It has been
always observed that none are so inlolent
in power, as they who have usurped an
authority to which they had no right;
and so it is found to hold in this inltance.
The desires and paflions of a vitious man,
having once obtained an unlimited sway,
trample him under their feet. They

3 make

make him feel that he is subject to diers, SERM.
and contradictory as well as imperious x
masters, who often pull him different
ways. His foul is rendered the recep-
tacle of many repugnant and jarring dif-
poftions; and resembles tome barbar-
ous country, cantoned out into different
principalities, who are continually waging
war on one another.- Such is the state
into which finners have brought them-
selves, in order to be free from the fuppof-
ed confinement of virtue. Where they
had promised themselves nothing but ease
and pleasure, they are made to experience
restraints more revere, and mortifications
more painful than any which they would
have undergone under the discipline of
religion.

It will perhaps be contended by rome,

that although the representation which
has now been given of the slavery of fin
holds true in certain instances, yet that
it is applicable only to those who come
under the description of atrocious finners.
They imagine that a certain moderate

course

SERM. courfc may be held in vice, by means of

xk~ which, men, without throwing altogether

anide the rellraints of reason, may enjoy
an easy and plciafiurable lifc.- By rea-
soning thus, my friends, you flatter and
deceive yourfclves to your own deltruc-
tion. Be aflurcd, that, by every vitious
indulgence, you arc making an approach
to a state of complete slavery; you are
forfeiting a certain lhare of your liber-
ty; how soon the whole of it may be for-
feited, you are not aware. It is true that
all which has now been said of the fervi-
tude of fin, applies only to a charactcr cor-
rupted in the extreme. But, remember
that to this extreme no man ever arrives
at once. He passes through many of
thofc intermediate flages, in one of which
you are now perhaps found. Vice al-
ways creeps by degrees; and insensibly
twines around us those concealed fetters
by which we are at last completely bound.
-As you value therefore your liberty
and your happinei',.avoid every approach
to evil. Confider all vitious pleasures as

enchanted

enchanted ground, by entering on which, SE R M.
you will be farther and farther ensnared x
within the magic circle, till at length you
are precluded from all retreat. The most
pure and virtuous man is always the
freet. The religion of Christ is justly
entitled the perfec7 law of liberty *. it is
only when the S9n makes us free, that we
are free indeed: and it was with reason
the Pfalmifl said, I will walk at liberty,
for I seek thy precepts -.

' James i. 25. Psalm cxix. 45.

SERMON

# SERMON XI. On the IMPORTANCE of PUBLIC WORSHIP. PSALM xxvi. 8. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth.

SERMON Xl.
On the IMPORTANCE of PUBLIC WOx-

SHIP.

PSALM xxVi. 8.
Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy

horife, and the place where thine honour
dwelleth.

SERM. GOD is a Spirit, and they that wor/hip
^x[s vhim. mu/fl woJhip him in spirit and in

truth. That religion chiefly confilts in
an inward principle of goodness, is be-
yond dispute, and that its value and efli-
cacy are derived from its effefts in puri-
fying the heart, and reforming the life.

All

All external services, which have not this S E RM.

XI.

tendency, are entirely insignificant. They J
degenerate into mere superstition, equally
unacceptable to God, and unprofitable to
man. Hence they are so often treated in
crilpture with high contempt, when sub-
ftituted in the room of the important du-
ties of a virtuous life.

Notwithflanding this, it is certain that

external fcrvices have their own place,
and a considerable one too, in the fylten
of religion. What their proper place is no
one can be at a loss to discern, who will
only make a just liltincAion between the
means, and the end, in religion. It is
evident there is danger of mens erring
here, either on one fide or other; and it
is certain that they have erred on both.
After it was observcd, that mankind were
prone to lay too much weight on the ex-
ternal parts of religion, it began to be
thought, that no weight was to be allowed
to them at all. The time was, when aal
religion centered in attending the duties
of the church, and paying veneration to

VOL. IV. P whatever

S ER M. whatever was accounted sacred. This alont

XI.
kr fanftified the characer, and compensated

every blemilh in moral conduCt. From
this extreme, the spirit of the age seems to
be running fast into the opposite extreme, of
holding every thing light that belongs to
public worship. But if fuperlition be an
evil, and a very great one it undoubtedly
is, irreligion is not a smaller evil: And
though the form of godlinefi may often
remain, when The power of it is wanting;
yet the power cannot well subsist where
the Jorm is altogether gone.-The holy
Psalmist, whose words are now before us,
discovers much better principles. Ex-
pressing always the highest regard for the
laws of God, and the precepts of virtue,
he breathes, at the fame time, a spirit of
pure devotion. Though loaded with the
cares of royalty, and encircled with the
splendor of a court, he thought it well be-
came him to lhow refpec to the great
Lord of nature; and on many occasions
expreffcs, as he does in the text, his dc-
light in the public service of the templc.

LcrJ,

Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy s E R .
hou/b , and the place uhere thine honour r x
dwelleth. In discoursing from which words
I purpose to show the importance of the
public worship of God, and the benefits
resulting from it. I shall confider it in
three lights; as it refpeds God; as it re-
speds the world ; as it refpeas ourselves,

I. LET us confider it with respect to

God. If there exist a Supreme Being,
the Creator of the world, no consequence
appears more natural and dire& than this,
that he ought to be woribipped by his crea-
tures, with every outward expreflion of
fubmiflion and honour. We need only
appeal to every man's heart, whether this
be not a principle which carries along
with it its own obligation, that to Him
who is the Fountain of our life,. and the
Father of our mercies; to Him who has
raised up that beautiful -ftruclure of the
universe in which we dwell, and where
we are surrounded with so -many blef-
sings and comforts; solemn acknowledge-

P 2 ments

SE R M. ments of gratitude flould be made, prai-

fes and prayers fllould be offered, and all
suitable marks of dependance on him be ex-
preffed.-This obligation extends beyond
the silent and secret sentiments of our
hearts. Besides private devotion, it na-
turally leads to associations for public wor-
ship; to open and declared profeflions of
refped for the Deity. Where bleflings
are received in common; an obligation
lies upon the community, jointly to ac-
knowledge them. Sincere gratitude is al-
ways of open and diffusive nature. It
loves to pour itself forth; to give free vent
to its emotions; and, before the world,
to acknowledge and honour a BenefaAor.

So consonant is this to the natural fen-

timents of mankind, that all the nations
of the earth have, as with one consent,
agreed to inflitute some forms of worship;
to hold meetings, at certain times, in ho-
nour of their deities. Survey the focie-
ties of men in their rudest state; explore
the African defarts, the wilds of America,

or

oi the distant islands of the ocean; and SE R M.
you will find that over all the earth some

r j

religious ceremonies have obtained. You
will every where trace, it one form or o-
ther, the temple, the priest, and the offer-
ing. The prevalence of the most absurd
superstitions furnishes this teltimony to
the truth, that in the hearts of all men
the principle is engraved, of worship being
due to that invisible Power who rules the
world.-Herein consists the great excel-
lency of Christian religion, that it hath
inftruted us in the simple and spiritual
nature of that worship. Disencumbered
of idle and unmeaning ceremonies, its ri-
tual is pure, and worthy of a divine 'Au-
thor. Its positive institutions are few in
number, most significant of spiritual
things, and direcly conducive to good
life and practice How inexcusable then
are we, if, placed in such happy circum-
stances, the fcnfe of those obligations to
the public worflhip of God fliall be oblite-
rated among us, which the light of nature

P inculcated

SERM. inculcated, in some measure, on the most
xl- wild and barbarous nations ?

The refinements of false philosophy

have indeed suggested this shadow of ob-
jecqion, that God is too great to fland in
need of any external service from his crea-
tures; that our expreflions of praise and
honour are mifjplaced with refpeC. to him,
who is above all honour and all praise;
that in his fight the homage we seek to
pay must appear contemptible; and is
therefore in itself superfluous and tris-
ling.- But who hath taught those vain
reasoners, that all expressions of gratitude
and honour towards a superior become
unsuitable, merely because that superior
needs not any returns ? Were they ever
indebted to one whose favours they had
it not in their power to repay; and, did
they, An that account, feel themselves set
loose from every obligation to acknow-
ledge, and to praise their benefator ? On
the contrary, the more disinterested his
beneficence was, did not gratitude, in any
ingenuous mind, burn with the greater

~~~2 z~ ~ardour,

ardour, and prompt them the more eager- SE RM
ly to seize every opportunity of publicly xl
testifying the feelings of their hearts ?
Almighty God, it is true, is too great to
need our firvice or homage. But he is
also too good not to accept it, when it is
the native expreflion of a grateful and ge-
nerous mind. If pride and felf-fufficien-
cy fliffle all sentiments of dependance on
our Creator; if levity, and attachment to
worldly pleasures, render us totally ne-
glectful of exprefling our thankfulness to
Him for his bleflings; do we not hereby
discover such a want of proper feeling,
such a degree of hardness and corruption
in our affetlions, as ihows us to be im-
moral and unworthy; and muf justly ex-
pose us to the high displeasure of heaven?
On the contrary, according to every no-
tion which we can form of the Father of
the universe, must it not be acceptable
to him to behold his creatures properly
affected in heart towards their great bene-
factor; assembling together to exprefl, in
ads of worship, that gratitude, love, and

P 4 reverence

SERM. reverence which they owe him; and thus

XL.

, j
x nourilhing and promoting in one another

an affectionate sense of his goodness ? Are
not such dispositions, and such a behavi-
our as this, intimately connected with all
virtue ?

0 Come, let us worJflip and bow down;

let us kneel before the Lord our maker. For
he is our God; and we are the fitck of his
pa/lure. Enter into his gates with thank/-
giving and his courts with praifr. The pray-
er of the upright is his delight. It comcth be-
fore him as incenje, and the uplifting of their
hands as the evening jacrifice.- Having
thus shown the reasonableness of public
worfiip with respect to God, let us now,

II. CONSIDER its importance in another

view, as it rcfpets the world. When we
survey the general state of mankind, we
find them continually immersed in world-
ly affairs; busied about providing the ne-
ceffaries of life, occupied in the pursuits
of their pleasures, or eagerly prosecuting
the advancement of their interests. In

such

such a situation of things, a finall mea- SERM,

XI.

sure of reflexion might convince any one, -
that without some returns of sacred days,
and some solemn calls to public worship,
it were impossible to preserve in the
world any sense of objecAs, so foreign to
the general current of thought as an in-
visible Governor, and a future ftatc. If it
be of importance to the peace and good
order of society, that there should prevail
among men the belief of One in the hea-
vens, who is the protector of righteousness
and the avenger of crimes; if it be of im-
portance that they be taught to look for-
ward to a day of judgement, when they
are to be brought to account for their
most secret aAions, and eternally reward-
ed or punished, according as their con-
duct has been good or evil; if such prin-
ciples as these, I fay, be of consequence
to the public weifare, they certainly en-
force the authority of public worship,
and prove the ncceffity of religious in-
firucion.

ER M. I speak now particularly with a view
XI.
1~> to the multitude, the great mass and body

of the people. We all know, how seldom
from education, or private inftrucion,
they have the advantage of deriving fen-
timents of religion or morality. Early
obliged to labour for their bread, they
would remain all their days in gross igno-
rance of every moral or sacred principle,
were it not for those public assemblies in
.which they hear of God, and Christ, and
judgement, and heaven and hell. Shut
up those temples to which they resort
with reverence; exclude them from the
opportunities they now possess of receiv-
ing religious inftrudion, and imbibing
religious ideas; and what can you expec
them to become? no other than a feroci-
ous rabble, who let free from checks of
conscience, and fears of divine vengeance,
would be prone to every outrage which
they could commit with impunity. It is
well known that, in the early ages of the
world, fages and legislators who endea-
voured to tame and to afluciate the bar-

barous

barous hordes of men, found it necessary SERM.
for this purpose, to have recourse to reli- xl
gion. By bringing the rude multitudes to
worihip together, and at flated times and
places, to join in hymns and songs to their
deities, they gradually refrained them from
violence, and trained them to fubordina-
tion and civilized life.

During the progress of society in after

periods, religious assemblies at church con-
tinue, I am persuaded, to have a very con-
fiderable influence on the civilization and
improvement of the people. Even inde-
pendent of effeft upon their moral princi-
ples, by leading numbers of them to meet to-
gether in an orderly way, and in their most
decent appearance, they tend to humanize
and polish their manners. They strength-
en the social connedions, and promote
friendly intercourse among those who are
in the fame neighbourhood, and in the
fame lines of life. It must at the fame
time, be agreeable to every humane mind
to think, that one day in seven is allotted
for reft to the poor from their daily la-

bours.

SER . bours, and for filch enjoyments of cafe
Xlj and comfort as their flation affords.

It is the only (lay which gives them oc-
cafion to feel themselves as belonging
to the fame class of beings with their fu-
periors; when joining with them in the
fame ads of worflip, and recognizing
a common Lord. Amidst those dif-
tindions which the difference of ranks
necessarily introduces into human society,
it is surely fit that there be some occasions
when man can meet with man as a bro-
ther, in order that the pride of the great
may be checked; and the low may be
taught that, if they discharge properly
their appointed part, they have reafbn to
expet, from the I ord of the universe, the
fame rewards with the rich and the
mighty.

It will, I believe, be generally admit-

ted that forms of public worship, and
means of religious inllruclion, are impor-
tant, on several accounts, for the body of
the people, and belong to the maintenance
of public lafety and order. But many

who

who admit this are apt to think, that to SERM.

Xl.

the common people alone they may be
left. To perlbns of liberal education and
enlarged minds, what benefit can arise
from hearing what they already know;
and what, perhaps, is to be inculcated on
them by those who are of inferior capaci-
ty to themselves ?- Admitting this plea
of fuperiorirt which their vanity forms,
and letting aside for the present any per-
fonal obligation they are under to wor-
filip God, I must ask ficlh pcrfons, how
they can expecd that religious aflemblies
will be long repieded by the lower ranks
of men, if by men of rank and education
they are difcountenanced and forsaken?
Do not they know, that those lower ranks
are ready to copy the manners, and to
follow the example of their filperiors in
all things; but alliredly in nothing more,
than in what appears to set them free
from reltraint, and to gratify licentious-
ness? While they acknowledge the impor-
tance, and even the necessity, of public re-
ligion to certain clafds of men, do they,

nevertheless

SE R . neverthelcfs, contribute by their bella-

XL.
J,~t .viour to defeat the end of public religion,

and to annihilate that importance which
they ascribe to it ?- They are employ-
ed in framing laws and flatures for pre-
venting crimes, and keeping the disorder-
ly multitude within bounds; and at the
fame time, by personally difcountenan-
cing public worship, they are weakening,
they are even abolishing, atmong the mul-
titude, that moral rcftraint, which is of
more general influence upon manners
than all the laws they frame. In vain
they complain of the diihonefty of
fcrvants, of the insolence of mobs,
of the attacks of the highwayman.
To all thefc disorders they have them-
ielves been accessory. By their open dif-
regard of sacred inflitutions, they have
dilleminatcd profligacy among the peo-
. pie. They hac; b;okcn down the flood-
,ates which ferved'to restrain the torrent;
they have let it loose to overflow the land;
and by the growing deluge may them-
fclves be (wept away.-But I must next ar-
gue upon a different ground; and proceed.

III. To

III. To set forth the importance of the SE RI

Xl.

public worflhip of God to every individu- _
al, in every rank of life. Whatever his
ftltion be, he is tfill a man; and has the
duties of a man to perform. Were his
attendance on divine worship of no other
effet, than to add countenance to a falu-
tary inffitution, this alone would render
it his duty. But moreover, we assert it to
be his duty on his own account; if it be
the duty of every man to use the proper
means of preserving and fortifying his
virtue. All the Chriflian institutions have
a dire&t tendency to this end. They all
serve to give warmth to piety, and to add
solemnity to moral virtue. A very high
opinion, indeed, that man muff.have of
his own character, who imagines that, a-
midst all the follies and corruptions of the
world, he stands in need of no affllance
for enabling him to aft his part with pro-
priety and dignity.

The question is not, whether persons of

rank and education are to learn any thing
that is new to them, by frequenting the

places

s E R M. places of public worihip. The great prin-
xl. <_>J ciples of piety and morality are obvious

and easily known; and we thall readily
admit, that there are many to whom no
new inftrudion is communicated in the
house of God. But, my friends, the pur-
pose of your going there is to have known
truths recalled to your mind, and their
dormant influence awakened; is to have
serious meditations fuggelted; to have
good dispositions raised; to have the heart
adjusted to a conpofed and tranquil
frame. Is there any man of rcafon and
reflection, who will not acknowledge such
effects, as far as they follow from attend-
ance on religious ordinances, to be of the
molt beneficial nature? These occasional
cessations from the cares and anxieties of
life, these interruptions to the bustle and
the passions of the world, in order to think
and hear of eternity, are both a relief and
an improvement to the mind. By this re-
treat from its ordinary circle of thoughts,
it is enabled to return, with more clearnef3

and

and nore vigour, to the buinefs of the SERM.
vorld, after a serious and proper pause. X

But I mull ask the persons with whom

I now reason, whether there be no other
call to come to God's house, than to hear
instruCtion there? Is not the devout ado-
ration of the God of heaven the principal
objec of our religious assemblies; and is
this what any man of reflection, and of
fober mind, dare to make light of? In the
temple of the Lord, the rich and the poor,
the prince and the peasant, appear as sup-
pliants alike for the protection and favour
of the Almighty.-Great and flourishing
as thou mayst think thyself, know that
thou flandeft as much in need of that
protection, as the meanest of the crowd
whom thou beholdeft worshipping, with
lowly reverence, the God of their fathers,
The fun of prosperity Ihines at present on
thy head, and the favourable gale carries
thee softly along the stream of life. But
the Almighty needs only to give the word,\
and instantly the tempest ihall rife; and
thy frail bark shall be driven into the o-

VOL.IV. Q cean,

s E R . cean, and whelmed in the deep. In my

x. pro/perity I Jaid I Jfiall never be moved.

Thou, Lard, didJf hide thy face, and I was
troubled.-Look up, with dread, to that aw-
ful hand of providence which is firetched
over your heads. Remember the inftabi-
lity of all human things; Remember it,
and tremble, ye who despise the devout
acknowledgement of Him who disposes of
the human fate! Though ye live many years
and rejoice in them all, remember the days of
darkness; for theyJhall be many *.

But after all that has been urged on this

subjed, I am sensible it may be objected,
that many who make conscience of pay-
ing stria regard to the institutions of re-
ligion, do not appear to have derived much
benefit from them. They are not, it will
be said, more improved in moral condut,
and in the proper discharge of the several
duties of life, than others who have been
apparently negligent of the services of the

church.
E-clc. ii. 8.

church. On the contrary, a formal re- SERM.

XI.

gard to thele appears to be ulbftituted by x--
many, in the room of the weightier mat-
ters of the law.- Though this Ihould be
admitted, it goes no farther than to thow
that human weakness, or corruption, may
defeat the purpose of the most promiling
means of moral improvement. That a
fuperltitious attention to external worflip,
has too often usurped the character, and
supplanted the place of real virtue, will
not be denied. Admonitions against so
dangerous an error cannot be given too
often. But because the belt things have
been often misapplied and abused, no ar-
gument thence ariles for their being un-
dervalued, and thrown aside. So also rea-
inl, intlruAion, and discipline of every
kind, have been frequently perverted to
bad ends; and yet their intrinsic worth
and uiefulncli remain untouched and ac-
knowledged .- Besides this, it cannot be
admitted that, becautf religious inflitu-
tions produce not all the good that might
be wifled, and hoped for, they therefore

Q^z d0o

S E R M. do no good at all. This were a rash and

xI. x~l ill-founded conclusion. If the morals of

men are not always amended by them as
they ought to have been, there is reason,
however, to think that they would have
been worse without them. Some check
is always given by them to open profliga-
cy. Some assistance is furnished to good
dispositions of heart; at leat, to decency
of manners. Even momentary impref:
lions of seriousness made on the thoughtless
by the folemnities of religion, are not
without their fruit. They leave general-
ly some trace behind them; and when the
traces are often renewed, they may be
hoped, through the divine blessing, to
form at last a deep imprefion on the
mind.

At the fame time, I do not fay that re-

ligious institutions work upon the mind
like a charm; and that mere bodily at-
tendance on them will always ensure us
of some profitable effect. Let the means
that are employed, for the improvement
of rational beings, be ever so powerful in

themfelvc.

themselves, much of their success will al- S E R M.
ways depend on the manner in which xl.
they are received and applied. I ihall
therefore conclude my reasonings on this
subjec, with a few observations concerning
the dispositions requisite on our part, for
deriving benefit from the public ordinan-
ces of religion.

THE ends for which we assemble in the
house of God are two; to worship God,
and to liften to religious inftruaions.

The public worship of God is the chief

and most sacred purpose of every religious
assembly of Christians. Let it here be re-
membered, that it is not the uttering, or
the hearing of certain words, that confti-
tutes the worship of the Almighty. It is
the heart that praises, or prays. If the
heart accompany not the words that are
spoken or heard, we offer the facrifce of
fools. By the inattentive thought, and the
giddy and wandering eye, we profane the
temple of the Lord, and turn the appear-
ance of devotion into insult and mockery.

Q,3 With

SERM. With regard to religious inflruclion, at-

tention and reverence are unqueflionably
due. All religious and moral knowledge
comes from God. It is a light from hea-
ven, firit transmitted to man by the ori-
ginal constitution of his nature, and after-
wards made to shine with fairer and fuller
luflrc by the revelation of the gospel in
Jesus Christ. Its brightness may some-
times be fli)nger, and sometimes weaker,
according to the mediums by which it is
conveyed. But fll!, as far as the inftruc.
tions delivered from the pulpit are illu-
minated by the ray from heaven, they
are the truths of God, and ought to be re-
ceived as such. Refinements of vain phi-
lofophy, or intricate fubtilitics of theologi-
cal controversy, are undoubtedly not en-
titled to such regard. But when the great
principles of natural or revealed religion
are cdifcffed; when the important doc-
trines of the gofpcl concerning the life,
and sufferings, and death of our blessed Re-
deemer are displayed; or useful inftruc-
tions regarding the regulation of life, and

the

the proper discharge of our several duties, SE RM.

XLi

are the fubjeAs brought into view; it is x
not then the human speaker, but the di-
vine authority that is to be regarded.

In the speaker, many imperfections and

infirmities may be discovered. The diCco-
veries of the gospel are represented in
scripture, as a hidden treasure brought to
light; but, by the appointment of God,
we bhave this treasure in earthen vtfels *.
It is not the spirit of curiosity that ought
to bring us to church. Too often, it is to
be feared, we assemble there merely as
critics on the preacher; critics on his fen-
timents, his language, and his delivery.
But, such are not the dispositions which
become us on so serious an occasion. It
is with humility, with fairness, and can-
dour, with an intention to improve our-
selves in piety and virtue, with a view to
make personal application to our own cha-
racaer, that we ought to hear the word of

VQ4 God.
2 Corinth. 4. 7.

SERM. God.- When we enter the sacred tcmn

XI.
As_ pie, let us ever confider ourselves as crea-

tures surrounded with darkness, seeking
illumination from heaven; as guilty crea-
tures, imploring forgiveness from our
judge; as frail and mortal creatures, pre-
paring for that eternal habitation into
which we know not how soon we are to
pass.

IF, with such sentiments and impref-

sions we join in the worship of God, and
the ordinances of religion, we may justly
hope that they {hall be accompanied to us
with the divine bletling. It is the express
precept of God, not toforfake the a.fmbling
ofourjclves together *. Gather together the
people, men, 'women, and children, that they
may hear, and that they may learn, and fear
the Lord your God, and objerve to do all
the words of this law t. Enter his gates

. witl

Hcb. 1n. 25.
t Deut. xxxi. 12.

wvith thanksgiving, and his courts with SERM.
praif. Give unto the Lord the glory due to x
his name.- Thus hath God commanded,
and he never commanded his people to
seek his name in vain. For, where two or
three are gathered together in his name, our
Lord hath told us that he is in the midfl of
them *. God hath Jaid that he loveth the
gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of
Jacob t. The prayer of the upright is his
delight. Both in their temporal and fpi-
ritual concerns, they may be most expected
to prosper, who can fay with the Psalmist
in the text, Lord I have loved the habita-
tion of thy houfr, and the place where thine
honour dwelleth.

* Matth. xiii. 2o.
t PL lxxxvii. 2.

SERMON

# SERMON XII. On the FASHION of the WORLD passing away. 1 COR. vii. 31. — The fashion of this world passeth away.

S E R M 0 N XII.
On the FASHION of the WORLD pafling

away.

I COR. vii. 31.

-The fajfion of this world pafetb away.

SE.TM. T O use tbis world so as not to abuse it,
JEit m
- is one of the most important, and at

the fame time one of the most difficult
lessons which religion teaches. By so ma-
ny desires and passions we are connected
with the objects around us, that our at-
tachment to them is always in hazard of
becoming excessive and sinful. Hence re-
ligion is often employed in moderating

this

this attachment, by reclifying our errone- SERM.

XIL

ous opinions, and infirucding us in the x-
proper value we ought to set on worldly
things. Such was particularly the scope
of the Apostle in this context. He is put-
ting the Corinthians in mind that their
time isjtJort; that every thing here is tran-
fitory; and therefore, that in all the diffe-
rent occupations of human life, in weep-
ing and rejoicing, and buying and po/lfing,
they were ever to keep in view this con-
fideration, that the faflion of this world pas-
feth away. The original expression im-
ports, the figure or form under which the
world presents itself to us. The meaning
is, All that belongs to this visible state is
continually changing. Nothing in hu-
man affairs is fixed or stable. All is in
motion and fluctuation; altering its ap-
pearance every moment, and passing into
some new form. Let us meditate for a
little on the feriaus view which is here
given us of the world, in order that we
may attend to the improvements which
it suggests,

I. The

E RM. I. 7he faJhion of the world paetlh away,
xLv. as the opinions, ideas, and manners of

men are always changing. We look in
vain for a standard to ascertain and fix
any of these; in vain expe& that what
has been approved and established for a
while, is always to endure. Principles
which were of high authority among our
ancestors are now exploded. Syltems of
philosophy which were once universally
received, and taught as infallible truths,
are now obliterated and forgotten. Modes
of living, behaving, and employing time,
the pursuits of the busy, and the enter-
tainments of the gay, have been entirely
changed. They were the offspring of
falhion, the children of a day. When
they had run their course, they expired;
and were succeeded by other modes of
living, and thinking, and acing, which
the gloss of novelty recommended for a
while to the public taste.

When we read an account of the man-

ners and occupations, of the studies and
opinions, even of our own countrymen,

in

in some remote age, we seem to be read- SERM.
ing the history of a different world from Xtl
what we now inhabit. Coming down-
wards through some generations, a new
face of things appears. Men begin to
think, and ad, in a different train; and
what we call refinement gradually opens.
Arriving at our own times, we confider
ourselves as having widely enlarged the
sphere of knowledge on every fide, hav-
ing formed just ideas on every sub-
jecd; having attained the proper standard
of manners and behaviour; and wonder
at the ignorance, the uncouthness, and
rusticity of our forefathers. But, alas!
what appears to us so perfec shall in its
turn pass away. The next race, while
they shove us off the stage, will introduce
their favourite discoveries and innova-
tions; and what we now admire as the
height of improvement, may in a few ages
hence be confidered as altogether rude and
imperfect. As one wave effaces the ridge
which the former had made on the sand
by the sea shore, so every succeeding age

obliterates

SE RI. obliterates the opinions and modes of the
tfj age which had gone before it. hcefa/hion

of the world is ever pafling away.

Let us only think of the changes which

our own ideas and opinions undergo in
the progress of life. One man differs not
more from another, than the fame man
varies from himself in different periods
of his age, and in different situations of
fortune. In youth, and in opulence, eve-
ry thing appears smiling and gay. We
fly as on the wings of fancy; and survey
beauties wherever we cast our eye. But
let some more years have passed over our
heads, or let disappointments in the world
have depressed our spirits; and what a
change takes place? The pleasing illusions
that once shone before us; the splendid
fabrics that imagination had reared; the
enchanting maze in which we once wan-
dered with delight, all vanilh and are for-
gotten. The world itself remains the
fame. But its form, its appearance, and
asped, is changed to our view; itsfa/hion,
as to us, hath palcd away.

II. WHILE

II. WHILE our opinions and ideas are SERM.

thus changing within, the condition of xlU
all external things is, at the fame time,
ever changing without us, and around us.
Wherever we call our eyes over the face
of nature, or the monuments of art, we
discern the marks of alteration and viciffi-
tude. We cannot travel far upon the
earth, without being presented with many
a firiking memorial of the changes made
by time. What was once a flourishing
city, is now a neglected village. Where
castles and palaces stood, fallen towers
and ruined walls appear. Where the mag-
nificence of the great shone, and the mirth
of the gay resounded, there, as the prophet
Isaiah describes, the owl and the raven now
dwell, thorns come up, and the nettle and the
bramble grow in the courts.--When we
read the history of nations, what do we
read but the history of incessant revolution
and change? We behold kingdoms alter-
nately rising and falling; peace and war
taking place by turns; princes, heroes,
and statesmen, coming forth in succession

3 on

BERM. on the ltage, attracting our attention for
JXlJ a little by the splendid figure they make,

and then disappearing and forgotten. We
fee thefa/hion of the world assuming all its
different forms, and in all of them, paffng
away.

But to historical annals there is no oc-

cafion for our having recourse. Let any
one, who has made some progress in life,
recollec only what he has beheld passing
before him, in his own time. We have
seen our country rife triumphant among
the nations; and we have seen it als)
humbled in its turn. We have seen in
one hemisphere of the globe new do-
nions acquired, and in another hemi-
sphere, our old dominions loft. At
home, we have seen facions and par-
ties flift through all their different
forms; and administrations, in succession,
rife and fall. What were once the great
themes of eager difcuflion, and politicai
contest, are now forgotten. Fathers re-
count them to their children as the talcs
of other times. New actors have come

~;3~~, ~ forth

forth on the stage of the world. New ob- s E R M.
jeds have attraced the attention, and new
intrigues engaged the passions of men.
New members fill the feats ofjuftice; new
ministers the temples of religion; and a
new world, in flort, in the courle of a
few years, has gradually and insensibly
risen around us.

When from the public scene we turn

our eye to our own private connedions,
the changes which have taken place in the
faJhion of the vs'orld, muff touch every
refleding mind with a more tender fenfi-
bility. Y.or where are now, many of the
companions of our early years; many
of those with whom we first began the
race of life; and whose hopes and pro-
fpedts were once the fame with our
own? In recollecling our old acquaintance
and friends, what devalPations have been
made by the hand of time? On the ru-
ins of our former connections, new ones
have arisen; new relations have been
formed; and the circle of those among
whom we live is altogether changed fiom

VOL. IV. R hat

SERM what it once was. Comparing our prc-

X1I.
xll sent situation with our former condition

of life; looking back to our father's house,
and to the scenes of youth; remembering
the friends by whom we were trained,
and the family in which we grew up; who,
hut with inward emotion, rccolleAs those
days of former years, and is disposed to
drop the silent tear, when he views the
falJion of the world thus always paftng a.
wuay.!

III. NOT only our connefcions with all

things around us change, but our own
life, through all its stages and conditions,
is ever passing away. How just, and how
affecting is that image, employed in the
iacred writings to describe the state of
man, we spend our years as a tale that is
told * It is not to any thing great or
lasting that human life is compared; not
to a monument that is built, or to an in-

scription
Pfal. xc. 9.

fcrip:ion that is engraved ; not even to a SER I.
book that is written, or t.) a hillcrv that is L.
rncorded; lut to a tal:, which is lilrncd
to for a little; where the words arc si-
gitive and p:irTmg, and where one incident
ficcceds and hangs on another, till. bv in-
finlible tra.fitions, we are brougiht to the
close; a tale, which in lbme paflTgcs may
he ainufing, in othlrs. tedious; but whe-
ther it amnures or :;tigues, is soon told,
and sion forgttrcn. 'Thu, year fe.als up-
on us after year. I,ife is never fIanding
lill for a momenit; but continu.ily, though
infenlibly, fiiding into a new itrm. Infincy
riles up salt to childhlood ; childhood t)
youth; youth pal.rs qt' ickl! into manhood;
and the grey hair and the fa(ded look are not
long of adinonilling us, that old age is at
hand. In this courle all generations run.
The world is made up of unceasing rounds
of transitory exiltence. Some generations
are coming forward into being, and others
iaftening to leave it. The stream which
carries us all along is ever flowing with a

R 2 quick

S ERM. quick current, though witil a lill ait
xu. noifclcfs courie. The ldwelling place o,

man is continually emptying, and b

.'d

frelh fucccflion cf inlhalbitnts, contil.::lih
filling anew. 7Tle memo'y ?/ man fi[Jan,,
wtitl)', /Ile tl.,' tmnI:[r;l.ncCe /1 a g'iCejl 'i
hath tarried bult one ni:!l't.

As the life of minn, confidered in it (L;:.

ration, thus fleets and patles away, 1o (lu-
ring the time it laifs, its condition ib Iltr-
petually changing. It af;-rds u:; nohilil,
on which we can set up our rcll; no e-
joyment or poilUffion which we can pro-
perly call our own. When we have be.
gun to be placed in such circumilan.ces
as we desired, and wifli our lives to pro-
ceed in the fame agreeable tenor, how o:
ten comes some unexpected event acrufs,
to (lifconcert all our schemes of happinitf!
Our health declines; our friends die; our
fatmilies are scattered ; oimething or other
is not long of occurring, to fIhow us that
the wheel must turn round ; the fijylon I
tJe vr otld nmul pail aaru. Is there any
n;.an who dares to look to futurity with

an eye of confident hoipe; and to i:ly, that sE R M.
against a ycar hence, l;e can promise be- XI.
ing in the imile condition of health or for-
tu:ne, as he is at prefc!ut ? The fclds of
chanmc are every where IoLvn in our i:.tc;
antl the very C0caul that tecmcd to pro-
n:ifi uc ficurilty, ..re oftcn ikcrctl) under-
.;sining it. Cicat fame provokes the at-
tacks of envy and reproach. High health
ives occasion to iintcmilrance and difafe.
The elevation of the mighty never fails
to render their condition tottering; and
that obfcuritv whiclh fIclrers the mean,
txpofcs them, at the funce time, to )bconme
the prey of oppreflion. So completely
is the fflion tothis iztorl/ made by Provi-
dencc for change, and prepared for a;.i/tr
awa'r. In the midst of this inflability, it
were some comfort, did human prosperity
':!cay as slowly as it rii.s. Ly flow de-
grees, ;:!id by many intervening flcps, it
rifes. Put one day is fiufficient to scat-
ter, and Lring it to nolght. I might

add,3

R 3 IV. THAT

SS. R tI 1V. 7 hat the world itfeif in lwhkh

l :.
xI. dwlell, the lhafs of all our prre'nt cnio,-

mcnts, is it!lif contrived for change, at:,
dcfigned to pal's away. \hile the

gn..

rations of menl come forth in thcir ti;l.,
like troops of succeeding pilgrims, to ,.
their part on this globe, the globe c
which they act is tottering under thcil f.,
It was once overflowed by a deluge. It i,
ihaken by earthquakes ; it is undcrnilr.;
by 'uttcrr-ancous fires; it ca;rics n; my
a mark of lhaving lilffcrtd violent c i.-
vulfions, and of tending to ditl'lutiuL.
Revelation informs us, that there is a '!..
approa;ching, in which the heavencs j!.,!
p.7i a-way with a great 1ioje ; tle tlc/l:.;
Jfall melt with fel vcnt heat; ann! th e e,n,')
and the 'wi',s tlhetinJtlja'l be b.i't ti,
W'hcn this destincd Ihour arrive, the ,
J7ion of the w'o;,d liall have finally /
awlay. Immortal spirits flall then l'<
back upon this world, as we do at prde.nt C
cities and empires, which were once mir:';:
and flourifiing, but now are fvwept 'n,:'

~~I cxin~~~i-"

exiftcnce, and their placc is no more to be s E R M.
found. xI.

I SHALL insist no longer on this repre-

fentation of thins? . Lnough has ben
said, to lhow that the j/1ioln of the ,71.o 1,
in every sense, p.'s away. Opinions and
manners, public afflairs and private con-
cerns, the life of man, the conditions of
fortune, and t!-e carth itftlf on which we
dwell, are all changing around us-Is
every thing, then, with which we are
connected, paring and transitory ? Is the
whole tfate of man no more than a drcam
or fleeting vision ? Is lie brought forth, to
be only the child of a day ? Are we thrown
into a river, where all flows, and nothing
stays; where we have no means of rcfit,-
ing the current; nor can reach any firmi
ground, on which to reft our foot ?-No,
my brethren; man was not doomed to be
io unhappy; nor inade by his Creator so
much in vain. There are Ilree fixed and
permanent objeAs, to which I niuft now
call your attention, as the great supports

R4 of

SERM. of human conflancy amidflt this fugitive
xll. flatc. Though this world changes and

paflfs awa.y, virtue and goodness never
change; God never changes; heaven and
immortality pass not away.

1],ijl, VIR'rvU and goodness never

change. I.ct opinions and manners, con-
ditions and situations, in public and in
private life, alter as they will, virtue is
ever the lame. It refis on the immovc-
able basis of Etcriial Truth. Among all
the revoiuticns of Ihuman things it main-
tains its ground; ever possessing the vene-
ration and fitcem of mankind, and con-
ferring on the heart, which enjoys it, fa-
tisfaction and peace. Consult the most
remote antiquity. Look to the most fa-
vagc nations of the earth. How wild,
and h(w fiuc.uating toever the ideas of
men may have been, this opinion you will
find to l;ave always prevailed, that probi-
ty, truth, and beneficence, form the honour
and the excclicncy ot ian. In this, the
philololblcr and tihe Iavage, the warrior

anc(

and the hermit, join. At this altar all SERM.

XII.

have worllipped. I heir offerings may _
have been unseemly. Their notions of
virtue may have been rude, and occasion-
ally tainted by ignorance and fupcrtition;
but the fundamental ideas of moral worth
have ever remained the fame.

Here then is one point of tlability, as-

fcded by no viciflitudcs of time and life,
on which we may reft. Our fortunes
may change, and our friends may die;
but virtue may still be our own; and as
long as this remains, we are never mifcra-
ble. Till I die 1 will not remove .my inte-
grity frmn me. My rightetficfs 1 hol fafl,
and will not let it go. lly heat t Jlall not re-
preach mefo long as I live *. He who, with
the hol, man of old, can hold this language,
may with undisturbed mind survey time
flying away, life decaying, and the yWhole
fashion of the world changing around him.
He hath within himself, a source of con-
folation and hope, independent of all earth-

ly
'jib xx ii. 5, 6.

SERM. ly objecq. Every terrcitrial glory spar-
Xli.

i e

kles only for a little, with transient bright-
ness. But virtue fiincs with eternal and
unalterable splendour. It derives its ori-
gin from heaven; and partakes both of the
luitre, and the stability, of celestial objects.
It is the br'igtntJs of the everlajlinig light;
the unspotted mirt-or of CoJ, and the image
of his goodness.

IN the second place, Go(l never changes,

Amidllt the unceasing vicissitude of eaith-
ly things, there remains at the lhead of
the univcrfe an eternal protedtor of vir-
tue, whole throne is eflalbleled Jor ever.
With him there is no variablenei/, neither
an y/afldow of turning; no inconllancy of
purpofc, anl no tlecay of wifidom or of
power. We know that he loved rightc-
oufiiefs from the beginning of days, and
that he will continue to love it unaltera-
blv to the las. Forelcen by him was eve-
ry rcvolution which the courfc of ages
has produced. All the changes which
happen in the flare of nature, or the li'f

of

of men, were comprehended in his decree. s E R .
H-ow much foevtr worldly tlhings may "
change in themfilves, they are all united
in his plan; they constitute one great i3yf-
tern or whole, of which he is the Author;
and which, at its final completion, fliall
appear to be perfece. His dominion
holds together, in a continued chain, the
fucceilive variety of human events; gives
flability to things that in thenlc:ives are
flucduating; gives conilancy even to the
J.;Jfljon cf t/e tor Id while it is pai7n; awany
\Vhereforc, though all things change on
earth, and we ourfelvcs be involved in the
general mutability, yet as long aq, with
trust and hoile, we look up to this Supreme
Being, we crit- on the rc.l of ages, and are
safe amidic every change. \Ve poirfcs a
fortrces to which we can have recourse in
all dangers; a refuge under all flormns
a duwciing plae in all gcnc-,;iois,

IN the third and lafI place, heaven and

immortality pass not away. The fleeting
scenes of this life are to be confidered as
r.o more than an introlducion to a nobler

and

SER R . and more pcrnnancnt order of things,
XlI. ij vlvwhen man fliall have attained the matu-

rity of his being. lThis is what reason
gave lome ground to expect; what reve-
lation has fully confirmed; and in con-
firming it, has agreed with tle Ifntiments
and anticipations of the good and wife in
evcry age. We are taught to believe, that
what we n.ow behold, is only the first flage
of the life of man. We are arrived no
farther than the threlhold; we dwell as in
the outer courts rs cxillence. I 'cre, tents
only are pitched; tabernacles crcceed for
the fojourncrs of a day. 13ut in the re-
gion of eternity, all is great, flable, and un-
changing. There, the mninr.s of the jult
are prepared: there, the cit; w;!.,iI h,!b
oun,lations is built; therc is cltahlilhed,
the kingdom 1,:i il h ca:,;a Ibe -verd. IHere,
cvery thing is in stir and flictLuation;
bccaule here go, d mcn contr:uc;e nor, but
])ass onward in the courilf of being.
There, all is ftercnc, flc:dl and orderly;
because there re:niineth the final er/l of
the pcef!c of Go'. Here, all is corrupted

by

by our folly and guirlt; and of course SF.RM.
mufi be trannent and ~ain. But there,
purchased by the death, and xf.cured by the
rcfurrcdion of the Son of God, is an in.l-
,itance ncorruptible, unJefile:., and th.it /ilJth
not away. There reigns that tranquillity
which is never troubled. There flines that
fun which never sets. There llows that ri-
Ycr of pleasures, which is always unrulHled
and pure. Looking forward to those di-
vine habitations, the changes of the pre-
sent world disappear to the eye of faith;
and a good man becomes ashamed of sus-
fering himself to be dejcEted by what is
so soon to pass away.

Sucli are the objects you ought to op-

pose to the transient /ifJh;sn of the wvrlJ;
Virtue, and God, and Ieaven. Fixing
your regard on thele, you will have no
rcafon to complain of the lot of man, or
the world's mutability.-- The design of
the preceding representation whichl I gave
of the world, was not to indulge vain de-
clamation; to raise fiuitlefs melancholy.
o01 to throw an unnccdlar cloud over Ilu-

M?.,

ISER M. nman life. lBut to show the moderation
~,J^_ rcquilite in our attachmcnt to the wolld;

pnd at the faune time, to point cut the
hizhcr objects both of attention and con-
folation which religion alL)rds--Pair-
ing and changeable as all human things,
are, among them, however, we must at
prelent ad our part; to them we must
return from religious meditation. They
are not below the regard of any Chriltian;
for they form the scene which providence
has appointed at present fur his activity,
and his duty. Trials and dangers they
may often present to him; but amidIt
thefl he w ill lt:fily hold his course, if,
when engaged in worldly affairs, he keep
in view those divine objects which I have
been setting before him. Let him ever
retain conineion with Virtue, and God,
and Heaven. By them let his conduct be
regulated, and his constancy supported.
.o fll;ll lie /Ce Ilir u , ld without abzfi'
it. Ie sI hall ncither droop under its inlf-
fortunes, nor be vainly elated by its ad-
vantages; but through all its changes

ilhall

fliall carry an equal and ftcady mind; SS R M.

XII.

and in the end shall receive the accom- ,
pifihment of the promise of scripture, that
though the wtorld p/e nth a''ay, ann tke lujf
thereof, he that doth the will of God Jfall
abide for ever *.

x John ii. 17.

SERMON

# SERMON XIII. On TRANQUILLITY of MIND. PSALM xv. 5. — He that doth these things shall never be moved.

S E R M 0 N XIII.
On TRANQUILLITY of MIND.

PSALM XV. 5.
-He that doth these things fJhall never Ic

moved.

SERM. T RANQUILLITY of mind, or, in the
XII. J words of the text, a mind not

moved or disquieted by the accidents of
life, is undoubtedly one of the greatest
blessings that we can possess on earth.
It is here mentioned as the reward of the
man, whose character had been described
in this psalm, as leading a virtuous life,
and discharging his duty towards God

and

and his neighbour. It is indeed the ulti- SERM.

XIII.

mate aim, to which the wifles of the wife
and reflecing have ever been direced,
that with a mind unditfurbed by anxieties,
cares, and fears, they might pass their
days in a pleasing serenity. They justly
concluded that, by enjoying themselves
in peace, they would enjoy, to the greatest
advantage, all the comforts of life that
came within their reach.

This happy tranquillity, the multitude

conceive to be most readily attainable by
means of wealth, or, at leads, of an easy
fortune; which they imagine would set
them above all the ordinary disturbances
of life. That it has some effec for this
purpose, cannot be denied. Poverty and
straitened circumstances are often incon-
fiftent with tranquillity. To be deflitute
of those conveniencies that suit our rank
in the world; to be burdened with an-
xiety about making provision for every
day which passes over our head; instead of
bringing comfort to a family who look
up to us for aid, to behold ourselves fur-

VOL. IV. S rounded

SF.RM. surrounded with their wants and comr
XlI!. plaints, are circumtfances which cannot

fail to give much uneasiness to every feel-
ing mind. To take measures, therefore,
for attaining a competent fortune, by lau-
dable means, is wife and proper. Entire
negligence of our affairs, and indifference
about our worldly circumstances, is, for
the molt part, the consequence of some
vice, or some folly.-At the fame time, I
must observe, that the attainment of opu-
lence is no certain method of attaining
tranquillity. Embaraffinents and vexa-
tions often attend it; and long experience
has fliown, that tranquillity is far from be-
ing always found among the rich. Nay,
the higher that men rile in the world, the
greater degrees of power and diltintion
which they acquire, they are often the far-
ther removed from internal peace. The
world affords so many inltances of miseries
abounding in the higher ranks of life,
that it were needless to enlarge on a topic
so generally known and admitted.

AI AfugAffuming

Assuming it, therefore, for a. undoubt- S E R M.

XIII.

ed truth, that the mere poffl1lion of the
goods of fortune may be confillent with
the want of inward tranquillity, we mult
look around for other more certain grounds
of it. We must inquire whether any line
of conduct can be pointed out, which, in-
dependent of external situation in the
world, /hall tend to make us easy in mind;
shall either bestow, or aid, that tranquilli-
ty which all men desire. The remaining
part of this discourse fhal' be employed in
suggesting, with great plainness of speech,
such directions as appear to me most mate-
rial on this important lubjed.

THE firfl direction, which I have to fug-

gelt, is, that we imitate the character of the
man who is dcfcribed in this psalm at
'walking uprightly, working rtgbteouJhefr,
and speaking the truth, as be thinketh in bit
hrart; that we fludy to preserve a clear
conscience, and to lead a virtuous and ho-
nourable, at lealt an innoffenfive and in-
nocent, life. Of such a man only it can

S3 he

SE RI. be said, that doing fhefi things he Jfall ;:e-

X e
ver be mnvd. So great is the power of

conscience over every human being, that
the remembrance of crime., never fails to
overthrow tranquillity of mind. Be as-
fured, that he who defrauds his neighbour,
who has enflared the innocent, has viola-
ted his trust, or betrayed his friend, fliall
never enjoy within himself undilturbed
quiet. His evil deeds will at times recur
to his thoughts, like gholts rising up
in black array before him to haunt his
couch. Even the sense of a foolilh and
trifling condut, of a life palt in idleness
and dissipation; by which, though a man
has not been guilty of great crimes, he
has however wafted his substance, mifpent
his time, and brought upon himself jult
reproach; even this, I fay, is sufficient to
create much uneasiness and disquiet to the
heart. Let him, therefore, who wifles to
enjoy tranquillity, fludy, above all things,
to act an irreproachable part. With com-
fort he will reft his head on his pillow at
night, when he is conscious that through-

o0'u;

out the day he has been doing his duty SERM.
towards God and man; when none of the Ix
tranfacions of that day come back, in
painful remembrance, to upbraid him.
To this testimony of a good conscience, let
him be able,

IN the/econd place, to join humble trust

in the favour of God. As, after the best
endeavours we can use, no man's beha-
viour will be entirely faultless, it is effen-
tial to peace of mind, that we have some
ground for hope in the Divine mercy,
that, through the merits of Jesus Christ,
our defecs shall be forgiven, and grace
be shewn us by Heaven. This includes
all the duties of faith and repentance that
are required by the Gospel; the faithful
discharge of which duties is absolutely ne-
ceffary for delivering us from those fears
of another world, which, if not allayed,
are sufficient to banish all tranquilli:y from
the heart. Our religious principles muff
at the fame time be found and pure; and
carefully preserved from the taint of fu-

S 3 perdition

SF.RM. perfition, whose gloomy horrors, taking
XlJ pofeffioni of weak and ill informed minds,

convert what they mistake for religion, in-
to a source of mifery.--\loreover, it is ne-
ceffary, that we be able to place trust in
God, not only as our future Judge, but as
the present Governor of human affairs.
So uncertain is the continuance of every
earthly comfort, that he, who reposes no
confidence in the Supreme Disposer of e-
vents, must be often disquieted and de-
jeced. He alone poffcffes firm tranquil-
lity, who, amidst all human viciffitudcs,
looks up, with fettled trult, to an almighty
Ruler, as to one under whose conduel he
is safe. To him alone belongs that hap-
py privilege, dcfcribed by the Pfalmiflt:
I-e f7all not be afraid of evil ltiings; his
heart is fixed ; truflling in the Lord *.

I have pointed out the primary and es-

fential foundations of tranquillity; virtuous
condut, good principles, and pious dif-

positions.
* Palm cxii. .

poftions. At the fame time, a man may E R M.
be both pious and virtuous, and yet,
through some defects in the management
of his mind and temper, may not poffcfs
that happy serenity and felf-enjoyment,
which ought to be the portion of virtue
and piety. Inllances of this will occur to
every one who is acquainted with the world.
We too often behold persons, whose prin-
ciples, and whose moral conduc, are in the
main unexceptionable, leading an uncom-
sortable life; through fretfulness of temper,
peevishness of manners, or sullenness of
disposition. There is, therefore, some dif-
cipline to be fludied ; there are some fubfi-
diary parts of characler to be attended to,
in order to give piety and virtue their full
effec for conferring tranquillity. To the
consideration of these secondary means I
now proceed. Let me then advise you,

In the third place, to attend to the cul-

ture and improvement of your minds.
A fund of useful knowledge, and a flock
of ideas, afford much advantage for the

S 4 enjoyment

S E R M. enjoyment of tranquillity. I do not mean,
xLc^ that every man mutt study to become

deeply learned The situation of many
would not allow it. The talle, and the
habits of others, prevent it. But what I
mean is, that every man who wishes to
lead a comfortable life should provide for
himself, as much as he can, by means of
observation, reading, and refecting, a
large field of uleful thoughts. In a mind
absolutely vacant, tranquillity is seldom
found. The vacancy too often will be
filled up by bad desires and passions.
Whereas, the mind of a wife man is a
kingdom to itself. In his lonely, or me-
lancholy hours, he finds always resources
within himlelf, lo which he can tirn for
relief. As there are many occasions when
external objects afford no pleasure, it is
only by being able to reft on the enter-
tainments afforded to himself by his
mind, that any one can pass his days with
fclf-enjoyment. Let me recommend for
the fame purpose,

In

In the fourth place, that we be always SERM.

careful to provide proper employment for xll
our time. Regular indultry and labour,
with intervals of ease, is perhaps the slate
most conducive of any to tranquillity. If
our flation give no call to indullry, it will
be profitable that we fludy to have inme
end or object in view, to which our atten-
tion flhall be directed. Relaxation from
intense, or incessant pursuit, is requisite for
comfort. But if relaxation degenerate
into total idleness, it becomes in a high
degreee adverse to tranquillity. Every
man by his nature, is formed, more
or less, for ation. In a mind that is en-
tirely quiescent, and that has no objeA to
put it into motion, inltead of fclf-enjoy-
ment, there will be conflant languor, te-
dioufnefs, and misery. Life flagnates in
such a situation, like a pool of deadwaters;
and the man becomes a burden to him-
self. Violent and dangerous pursuits,
which diflrad and embroil those who are
engaged in them, I cannot be underflood
to recommend. Every one fees how so-

reio n

BERM. reign these are to a slate of tranquillity.
.-LJ But in the ordinary tenor of calm and

easy life, I would advise every one to have
fonne end before him; some objeat which
flall bring the mind into aFtion, and fill
up the vacuities es time. Provided the
obticA be innocent, and of no unsuitable
or degrading nature, it may answer this
purpose, though it flould not be in itself
of high importance. It is better for the
mind to have some determinate diredion
given it, than to be always left floating, as
it were, in empty fpace.-But about what-
Lvcr objects we are cmployed, it is flill
more material to tranquillity that, in the

Fifth place, we learn to govern our pas-

s!ons. Tlhefc are the most frequent dif-
rurbers of our peace. Necessary as their
impulse is to give acivity to the mind,
yet if they are not kept in subordination
to reason, they speedily throw all things
into confusion. Such of them as belong
to the malignant and unsocial class, evi-
dently tend to produce vexation and dif-
ouict. Against suffering these to gain

possession

poll'llion of the heart, admonition is SERM.
Icarcely necessary. But I must admonish i-
you, that even those which are accounted
of innocent nature, and which therefore
may lay hold of virtuous minds, if they
obtain the entire mastery, are sufficient to
overthrow the tranquillity of life. Let
every one, therefore, who values that tran-
quillity, study to retain moderation and
telf-command, even in the midfl of pas-
sions which have a fair and bland appear-
ance. He will find that the gratification
of any one of them, compensates not that
perpetual slavery to which it will reduce
him, when it becomes inordinate.

I have farther to admonifl you, that

this fclf-command is particularly neceffa-
ry in all that relates to habitual temper.
Even where firong passions are out of the
quellion, those flighter emotions which
ruffle or four the temper, are sufficient, by
their frequent recurrence, to poifoa all
felf-enjoyment. He who would possess a
tranquil slate, must, above all things, cul-
tivate calmness and gentleness of difpofi-

tion,

BE RM. tion. He ought especially to cultivate it in

that society, x hetherdomeftic orfocial,with
wl.ih he has most frequent intercourfc.
We all know, that there are thousands who
in public, and in formal companies, appear
to be all gentleness and sweetness, but
who, at home, and among their nearest
relations, give vent, with freedom, to the
most harfl and peevish difpnfitions. Such
persons are not likely to enjoy much real
comfort. For it is in the daily and fami-
liar intercourfc of life, that temper chief-
ly exerts its power, either for promoting
or for diflurbing, the tranquillity of our
days. On occasions when men come clof-
eft together. if, instead of meeting in
finooth contact, they rub and grate on
one another, the feelings produced on
both fides are of the most offensive and
displeasing kind. Nothing can be affum-
ed as a more certain axiom, than that he
who allows either inordinate passions, or
a cross temper, to govern him, mufl,
though he fliould poffels all that flouriih-

ing

ing fortune can bestow, be a stranger to S ER M.
tranquillity. XI.

In the fixtb place, let me advise you ne-

ver to expeft too much from the world.
High hopes, and florid' views, are great e-
nemies to tranquillity. When rashly in-
dulged, they are constantly producing
disappointments. Their indulgence, in the
mean time, occasions discontent with our
present situation; and he who is difcon-
tented cannot be happy. One of the firIt
lessons, both of religion and of wisdom, is,
to moderate our expectarions and hopes;
and not to set forth on the voyage of life
like men who expec to be always carried
forward with a favourable gale. Let vour
views be suited to your rank and station
in the world; and never soar fantastical-
ly beyond them. Content yourselves with
fober pleasures, and form your relifli to
them. Be thankful when you are free
from pain, though you be not in the
midst of high enjoyment. Be satisfied if
the path you tread be easy and finooth,

though

SERM. though it be not strewed with flowers.
XIII W.o Hiuman life admits not of continued plea-

sure; nor is it always rendered happy by
great exaltation. Remember, that it is a
middle region which is the native Rtation
of tranquillity. It neither aspires to those
heights of the atmosphere where the thun-
der is formed; nor creeps always on the
ground. Affect not, on every occasion, to
put yourselves forward. Be content to
retire sometimes into the shade; and al-
low others to take their proper place.-
It will be easily seen, that I speak not now
to the ambitious and aspiring; but to
those who value tranquillity more than
splendid appearance in the world.

Such persons I also advise, while they

expect not too much from the world,
neither, also, to form too high expeca-
tions from the characters of those on
whose friendship they reft, and with
whom ic is their lot to be conneCted, ei-
'tiher in social or domestic relations. If
you have looked for perfection any where,
you will find'yourfelf disappointed; and

the

the consequence of this disappointment SERM.
will be, that friendship will cool, and dif- j
gulf succeed. If you wifl to enjoy com-
fort in any of your conncction;, take
your fellow-creatures as they are, and
look for their imperfections to appear.
You know you have your own; bear with
those of others, as you expeA that they
are to bear with you. As no one is with-
out his failings, few also are void of ami-
able qualities. Selec for your compa-
nions, those who have the greatest ihare
of such qualities; and value them accord-
ingly.-In a word, make the best of this
world as you find it. Reckon both on
the slate of human life, and on the society
of men, as mixed, and checquered with
good and evil. Carrying always in your
eye such views of things, you will be belt
formed to those equal spirits, and that
reasonable difpolition of mind, which
make the basis of tranquillity. 1 ihall
only add as my

Sevntb, and last advice on the subjet,

10

RERM. to mix retreat with the asive bufinef.
Xl.L of the world, and to cultivate habits of

serious thought and recolleclion. 1 before
advised thole who are not particularly en-
gaged in aclive life, to form to themselves
Ibme object of pursuit, in order to fur-
nifh proper employment to time and
thought. But the great multitude of men
are in a different situation. Indufiry is re.
quired of them; business and cares nreis;
and acfive pursuits occupy their closest at-
tention. He, who, in this situation, pours
himself forth incessantly on the world, can-
not escape partaking much of its disturb-
ance and trouble. Amidst bustle, in-
trigue. and dissension, he must pass many
an uneasy hour. Here an enemy en-
counters him; there, a rival meets him.
A suspicious friend alarms him one hour;
an ungrateful one provokes him the next.
I do not recommend, that for there rea-
sons, he who studics tranquillity fliould
retire from all public bulinefs, and for-
fake the haunts of men. This were the
retreat of a monk, not of a good and a

'wis

wife man. Tranquillity were too dearly SERM.
purchased by the neglect of those duties N!
which belong to a man, and a Christian.
Nor indeed in absolute seclusion from the
world is tranquillity ever found. On the
contrary, when the human mind is cut off
from those employments for which it was
designed by nature and Providence, it
preys on itself, and engenders its own mi-
fery. Tranquillity is always most likely
to be attained, when the bufinels of the
world is tempered with thoughtful and
serious retreat. Commune with your hearts
on your be,, and be till. Leaving this world
to itself, let there be seasons which you
devote to yourselves, and to God. Reflec-
tion and meditation allay the workings of
many unquiet passions; and place us at a
distance from the tumults of the world.
When the mind has either been ruffled or
cast down, in intercourse with God and
heaven we find a fanduary to which we
can retreat. In the hours of contempla.
tion and devotion, a good man enjoys
himself in peace. He beholds nobler ob-

VOL. IV. T jecs

BF.RM. jec.s than what worldly men can bcIhol:.
xJl lie affunies a highcr character. Ic i:l-

tens to the voice of nature and of Godl;
and from this holy fanchiary comes fort'i
with a mind fortified againit the little dil-
turbances of tile world. Such habit',
therefore, cannlot be too much recommcned-
cd to the loveis of tranquillity, as power-
ful fubfidiiary means for attaining thlt
happy slate.

I HAVE thus pointed out what appearl

to me the dilcipline of religion and v-it
dom for tranquillity of mind. lie tl.;t
d,bth tie/ tlhing J7lall

s never be move','.-

During the early periods of life, vivid Lni-
fations of pleasure are the sole objc2.
thought worthy of purfuiit. Mere ealc and
calmness are dcfpifed, as the portion ct
the aged only and the feeble. Some loi:g-
cr acquaintance with the world, with i;:
disappointed hopes and fallacious p!.-
ilres, teaches almost all men, by degrecs,
to wifl for tranquillity and peace. But
you mufR not imagine, that these are blet-

1 sing:s

sings which will drop on men of their own E R M.
accord, as soen as they begin to desire Xi
them. No: The thoughtlels, and the
profligate, will ever remain tirangers to
them. They will remain the sport of every
accident that occurs to derange their minds,
and to dillurb thcir life---The three
great enemies to tranquillity are, Vice,
Superflition, and Idleness : Vice, which
poisons and dilturbs the mind with bad
passions; Superltition, which fills it with
imaginary terrors; Illenes, which loads
it with tcdioufnefs and disgust. It is only
by following the path which Eternal Wis-
dom has pointed out, that we can arrive
at the blesscd temple of Tranquillity, and
obtain a station there: By (loing, or at
leat endeavouring to do, our duty to God
and man; by acquiring a humble trust
in the mercy and favour of God through
Jcfus Christ; by cultivating our minds,
and properly employing our time and
thoughts; by governing our passions and
our temper; by correcting all unreason-
able expectations from the world, and from

T 2 men;

SER M. men; and, in the midfl of worldl] 1,:.-

vI11.
Xlevy ness, habituating ouriclves to c.aili retrc:,:

nndl Icrious recollction.-1 'v i.ch lc;!els
as thlec, it imav l)e hoIpcd, that, thiroutiL
the divine )lcflini7, our (days Ihall llow in
a lire;am as unruffled as the human Itrc
admits. TlTe Wtick(cd are like the ttoub!d!
sea, 'tken it cannot rejI. But the cwork oj
riglhteortJiie is p,).;,'e : ani the ejeeti o' rigljt-
touJnejl is uijctnejs an!,i ij;j'wancefcr ever *.

Isaiah xxxii. i;.

S l R ,0)N

# SERMON XIV. On the MISFORTUNES of MEN being chargeable on themselves. PROVERBS xix. 3. The foolishness of man perverseth his way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord.

S E R M () N XIV.
On the MISFORTU'NES of MEN beinll

chargeable on themselves.

FROVERBS xix. 3.
The foolfi;z:zrs cf mann p:rvrtrtbh 5his way,

and his hkart Jrtcctch aaiftl tle Lord.
H OW\ many complaints do we hear S. R M.

from every quarter, of the inifery XV.

and (difhclis that fill the worldi! in these
the high and the low, the young and the
aged, join; and since the begirnni:n of
time, no topic has been more t rtile of
declamation, than the vai.try in(: vxatil
which man is appointed to fufler. But

T 3 are

SE R M. are we certain that this vexation, and thli

vanity,is altogethcr to be ascribed to the ap-
pointment of heaven ? Is there no ground
to fu fpea that man lhimftlf is the chief and
immediate author of his own sufferings?
M\ hat the text plainly fiuggcfs is, that it is
common for men to complain ground-
lely of Providence; that they are prone
to accuse Cod for the evils of life, when
in reason they ought to accuse them-
selves; and that after their foolijnefs
hath perverted their way, and made
them undergo the confcquences of their
own milconduCt, they impiously fret
in heart againfl the Lord. This is the doc-
trine which I now purpose to illustrate, in
order to silence the sceptic, and to check
a repiinng and irreligious spirit. I Ilhall
for this end make tbme obfcrvations, firlt,
on the external, and next, upon the inter-
nal, condition of man; and then conclude
with such fcrious and ufcful improvement
as the fulje S will naturally suggest.

I. Let

I. LET US confider the external condi- SERM.

XIV.

tion of in n. We find him placed in a Xl
world, where he has by no means the dif-
pofal of the events that happen. Calami-
ties sometimes befal the worthielt and the
bcft, which it is not in their power to pre-
vent, and where nothing is loft them, but
to acknowledge and to submit to the high
hand of Heaven. For such visitations of
trial, many good and wife reasons can be
afligned, which the present subject leads
me not to difcuLs. But though thofc una-
voidable calamities make a part, yet they
make not the chief part, of the vexations
and sorrows that diltrels human life. A
multitude of evils beset us, for the source
of which we mult look to another quar-
ter.--No sooner has any thing in the
health, or in the circumfiances of men,
gone cross to their wilh, than they begin
to talk of the unequal diliribution of the
good things of this life; they envy the
condition of others; they repine at their
own lot, and fret againit the Ruler of the
world,

T 4 Full

SERM. Full of there sentiments, one man pinc;

under a broken constitution. But let u,
alk him, whether he can, fairly and ho-
nefily, align no cause for this but the
unknown decree of heaven ? Has he du-
ly valued the blessing of health, and al-
ways observcd the rules of virtue and so-
briety ? Has he been moderate in his life,
and temperate in all his pleafires ? If now
he be only paying the price of his former,
perhaps his forgotten, indulgences, has
he any title to complain, as if he were
fulifring unjustly? Were you to survey
the chambers of sickness and distress, you
would find them peopled with the victims
of intemperance and sensuality, and with
the children of vitious indolence and
sloth. Among the thousands who lan-
guillh therc, you would find the propor-
tion of innocent fuflrers to be fmai!.
You would ee faded youth, premature
old age, and the profpet of an untimely
grave, to be the portion of multitudes
who, in one way or other, have brought
thr , evils on thenfelvce; while yet thcf:

mal tv;,

martyrs of vice and folly have the affur- SERM.
ance t, arraign the hard fate of man, and xiv
to fret ,l taiinjl the loria.

But you, perhaps. complain of hard-

ships of another kind; of the injullice of
the world; of the poverty which you sus-
ser, and the discouragements under which
you labour; of the crosses and difap-
pointments of which your life has been
doomed to be full.- Before you give
too much scope to your discontent, let
me desire you to reflect impartially upon
your palt train of life. Have net sloth,
or pride, or ill temper, or sinful passions,
misled you often from the path of found
and wife conduc? Ilave you not been
wanting to yourselves iri improving those
opportunities which Providence offered
you, for bettering and advancing your
tate ? If you have chosen to indulge your
humour, or your taste, in the gratifica-
tions of indolence or plealure, can you
complain because others, in preference to
you, have obtained tholt advantages
which naturally belong to useful labours,

anl

SERM. and honourable pursuits ? Have not the

XIV.
Vv^/ confcqucnces of Ibme f.lle ftcps, into

which your palhions, or your p'cafire3,
have betrayed you, purlued you through
much of your life; tainted, perhaps, your
characer, involved you in embaraffilcnts,
or funk you into neglect ?- It is an old
laying, that every man is the artificer of
his own fortune in the world. It is cer-
tain, that the world seldom turns wholly
against a man, unless through his own
fault. Godlinefi is, in general, profitable
unto all things. Virtue, diligence and in-
dutfry, joined with good temper and pru-
dence, have ever been found the surest
road to prosperity; and where men fail
of attaining it, their want of success is
far oftener owing to their having deviat-
ed from that road, than to their hav-
ing encountered insuperable bars in it.
Some, by being too artful, forfeit the re-
putation of probity. Some, by being too
open, are accounted to fail in piudence.
Others, by being fickle and changeable,
are distrusted by all.-The cafe com-

morliy

anonly is, that men seek to ascribe their SERM.

XIV.

.ifappointments to any cause, rather than v
to their own mifcondut; and when they
can devise no other cause, they lay them
to the charge of Providence. Their folly
leads them into vices; their vices into
misfortunes; and in their misfortunes
they fret agail the Lord. They are
doubly unjust towards God. In their pro-
fperity, they are apt to ascribe their fuc-
cess to their own diligence, rather than to
God's blefling ; and in their adversity,
they impute their difreffes to his provi-
dence, not to their own misbehaviour.
Whereas, the truth is the very reverse of
this. Every good and every perfec7 gift
cometh/rom above; and of evil and mise-
ry, man is the author to himself.

When from the condition of indivi-

duals, we look abroad to the public slate
of the world, we meet with more proofs
of the truth of this assertion. We fee
great societies of men torn in pieces by
intefline difknfions, tumults, and civil
commotions. We fee mighty armies go-

ing

SERM. ing forth, in formidable array, againfl
XIV. \Xl-i each other, to cover the earth with bloo'l,

and to fill the air with the cries of widlov;
and orphans. Sad evils thcfe are, to
which this mifrable world is cxpofed.
---lut are thcle evils, I beseech you,
to be imputed to Cod? \Vas it he who
fcnt forth flaughtcring armies into the
field, or who filled the peaccful city with
manflcres and blood ? Are these miferiec;
any other, than the bitter fruit of men,
violent and difbrderly pafior.s ? Arc they
not clearly to be traced to the ambition
and vices of princes, to the quarrels of
the preat, and to the turbulence of the
people ?--Lct us lay them entirely out
of the account, in thinking of Providencc;
and let us think only of the /ooi'Jhncri ol
nitn. Did mi'n controul his laflions, an(t
form his conducl according to the dic.
tates of wvidiom, humansity anl virtue,
the earth would rno longer be defollated
1,y cruelty; and human fucicties would
live in order, harmolny and peace. In
thofc Iccncs of ni:iLhiif and violence

vhi. !

which fill the world, let man behold, with SE R.
flhaie, the pidure of his vices, his igno- x v
rance, and folly. Let him be humbled
by the mortifying view I

of hii own ?-r-

Lerc'gII /; but let not lns heart ret agit ;,'
the LcrJ.--From the external condition,
let us procced,

11. To confider the internal fate of

man. It is certain that much ]dif(uict
and misery may be found there, althougli
his outward condition appear undilturh-
ed, and easy. As far as this inward dif-
ouietude arises fiomn the flings of con-
icience, and the horrors of guilr, there
can be no doubt of its being felf-created
rr.ifry; which it is altogether impollible
to impute to Heaven. But even, when
great crimes, and deep remorie, are not
the occasions of torment, how o'ten is
poison infused into the most flouriffling
conditions of fortune, by the foliics and
the passions of the profierlo ? \\e fee
them pcevilil and refliclf; corrupted with
klxury, and enervated by cafe ; impaticnt

of

SE R I. of the .fnalleft disappointment; oppreflTl
xlv with low ipirits, and complaining of eve-

ry thing around them. How many -1a-
ains, IHaaels, and Herods, are thele in
the world, who, from what they suser
within, pass their days in more vexation
and misery, than they who undergo the
hardfliips of poverty ? Dare such men, in
their molf dilfontcnted moments, charge
the providence of Heaven with miseries
of their own procuring ? Providence had
put into their hands the fairest opportu-
nity of palling their life with comfort.
But they themselves blalted every com-
fort that was offered ; and verified the
prediction, that the pro/perity of fools jall
dleJqro them *.

As it is man's own foolfbnefi which

ruins his prolierity, we mult not omit to
remark, that it is the fame cause which
aggravates and embitters his adversity.
That you susser from the external as-

fliCtions
Prov. i. 32.

fliclions of the world, may often be ow- S ER M.

XIV.

ing to God's appointment; but when, in x
the midlt of these, you also luffer from
the disorders of your mind and pallions,
this is owing to yourselves; and they are
tholf inward disorders which add the fe-
verefl fling to external afltiiions. Many
are the resources of a good and a wife man,
under all the difaflers of life. In the midst
of them, it is always in his power to en-
joy peace of mind, and hope in God. He
may fistser; but under flllering he will
not fink, as long as all is found within.
But when the spirit has been wounded by
guilt and folly, its wounds open, and bleed
afrellh, upon every blow that is received
from the world. The mind becomc,
sensible and fore to the fl;ghtefl injuries of
fortune; and a finall reverie is felt as an
insupportable calamity.
On the whole; the farther you search into
human life, and the more you observe the
manners and the conduc of men, you will
be th,' more convinced of this great truth,
that of the distresses which abound in the

world,

SERM Swrld, we are the chief authors. Amon,
Xiv.
_vJ tlthe IulU;li(te who are, at this day, bewail-

ing their condition and lot, it will be found
to hold of far the greater part, that they
are reaping the frult of their otwn doings;
their In,'uitiles are re1p,-oing tlhem, and their
bclJlrlng's correclirir them. Unattainable
objects foolifliy pursued, intemperate pal-
sions nouriflied, vicious pleafurea and de-
fires indulged, Codand God's holylaws for-
gotten; these, thefc are the great scourges
of the world(; the great caufcs of the life
of man being so embroiled and unhappy.
Cod hath ordaincd our slate on earth to
be a mixed and imperfcd Rlate. We have
ourlfives to blame for its becoming an in-
lupportal!c one. If it bring forth nothing
to us but vexation and vanity, we have
i.'v:n the fecis of that vanity and vexa-
tiont; and as we have sown, we must reap.
-I now proceed to make improvement of
t'cf. truths which we have been confider-

IN thic frj 'l Ilce, let us be taught, to

?^2~~~ 0look

look upon fin as the source of all our mi' SiRM.
series. It may fonltimes assume the gent-
ler names of folly, irregularity, or levity;
but under whatever form it appears, it
always imports a deviation from that fa-
cred law which ought to regulate our
conduct It is still the root that beareth
gall and wortnwogd *; and in exat pro-
portion to the quantity of this poisonous
weed, which we ourfelvcs have infused in-
to our cup, we uiuft expect to drink the
waters of bitterness. If the fol!/hnc/s of
man did not pervert kis *'iy,, his heart
would have no o :cdiloiL to fret a ain/l the
Lord. HI would enjoy competent satis-
faction in every situation of life; and un-
der its unavoidabie evils, would derive
consolation from religion and virtue.-
Indeed, of every evil which we now en-
dure, of thote evils which m e look upon
to be the appointment of providence, as
well as of others, fin is ultimately the
cause; as it was man's revolt from God,
VOL. IV. U which

' Dcl;t. (txix. 18.

SERM. which gave rife originally to those evils,
'IV.
v_^ and which rendered the chaltilements we

undergo, in this date of discipline, necefla-
ry, even for the /bns of Go/.- But at
present, we confine our obfcrvation to
those mifcries of which men are the im-
mediate procurers to themfclvcs; and
from them alone, we find sufficient
reason to confider fin as the capital foe
to man; as the great troubler and dif-
turber of his life. To Providence, then,
let us look up with reverence. On fin let
our indignation be vented; and, what is
of more consequence, against fin and all
its approaches, let our utmost caution be
employed. As we proceed through the
different paths of life, let us accustom our-
selves to beware of fin, as the hidden
fioake lurking among the grass, from
whose fatal touch we mutt fly in haste,
if we would not experience its fting.-
Too many have no jult apprehensions of
this danger. Fools, said the wife man,
make a mock atfin. A fool indeed he must
be, who dares to think lightly of it. lie
lows not only the depravity of his heart,

but,

but, what perhaps he will be more aflam- s E R M.

XIV.

ed to be charged with, he flows his ig- j2
norance of the world. IHe fiows that he
knows not, he understands not, even his
worldly interell, nor the interest and hap-
piness of human society.

IN the second place, let us learn from

what haR been set forth, one of the most
awful and important of all truths, the re-
ality of a divine government exercised o-
ver the world. Blind mull that man, be
who discerns not the most striking marks
of it, in the dodrine which has been un-
der our review. If there be a sceptic, who
contends, that unrestrained liberty in the
gratification of desire is given to man;
that in the fight of his Creator, all adions
are equal; and that no rule of moral con-
duct hath been prescribed, or by any pe-
nalty enforced; in order to confute such
a man, we have not recourse to reason-
ing.a, but finply appeal to plain and ob-
vious facts. We bid him look only to
the life of man; and take notice how e-
very vice, is by the conflitution of things,

U 2 connectd

SERM. connceted with misery. We bid hinl
^xl trace the hillory of any one, with whose

conduct he had particular occasion to be
acquainted; and obferve,wwhethcr the chief
misfortunes which pursued him were not
brought upoli him by his own mifleha-
viour. We bid him remark in the hifto-
ry of nations, whether public virtue has
not always exalted them; and whether
licentiousness and crimes have not paved
the way for their ruin. These are telti-
monies to the truth of religion, which can-
not by any fophillry be evaded. This
is a voice, which speaks its warnings loud
and firong to every heart.

The fyflem upon which the divine go-

vernment at prelent proceeds, plainly is,
that mens oGWi wickelnej's fliould be ap-
pointed to cortred themn; that finners
ihould be /ia e;. in the waork cf their hands,
ald Junk in the pit which tbemjltves had
digged; that the baJ-kJli ker in heart Jlsuld
be filled zwith his own ways.- Of all the
plans which could have been devised for
the government of the world, this ap-

proves

proves itself to reason, as the wifelt and SERM.

XIV.

most worthy of God; so to frame the ,
contitution of things, that the divine laws
should in a manner execute themselves,
and carry their fmnclions in their own bo-
fom. When the vices of men require pu-
nifhment to be infliced, the Almighty is
at no loss for miniflers of juflice. A
thouland infirurr.cts of vengeance are at
his command; innumerable arrows are
always in his quiver. But such is the
profound wisdom of his plan, that no pe-
culiar interpofals of power are requisite.
He has no occasion to flep from his throne,
and to interrupt the order of nature.
With that MajeRy and solemnity which
befits omnipotence, He pronounces, Eph-
raim is joined to his il.l; let Ihm an/ne *;
lie leaves transgressors to their own guilt,
and puniflment follows ofcourfe. Their
fins do the work ofjuftice. They lift the
scourge; and with every stroke which

U 3 they
Hosea iv. 17.

SE RM. they inflict on the criminal, they mix this
xV. severe admonition, that as he is only reap-

ing the fruit of his own actions, he de-
serves all that he suffers.-- rom what
has been Laid, I might take occasion,

IN the third place, to fllow the injustice

of our charging Providence with a pro-
mifcuous and unequal diltribution of its
favours, among the good. and the bad.
That unequal diltribution takes'place in
appearance only, not in reality. The
whole conduct of Providence fufficientiy
marks, which of those classes of men it
blefres and protets. The proflerity of
finners is no more than a deceitful show.
The great materials of happiness are pro-
vided for the virtuous' and evil never
fails to pursue the uc,iked. 1 ihall close the
discourse with observing,

IN the fourth and last place, the neceffi-

ty which plainly arises from our present
condition, of looking up to God for direc-
tion and aid, in the conduCt of life. The

result

result of the whole doctrine I have now SER M.
delivered is, that man's happiness or mise- xlv.
ry is, in a great incafure, put into his own
hands. In vain he complains of Provi-
dence. If his heaert fret ilgain! the Lord, it
is only because his foJflnejs h,::h perverted
his way: for on hinfelf, and his own be-
haviour, it depends, to be siee of those mi-
leries which harrals the wicked.-But a-
las! when we fay, that this depends upon
man, on what uncertain ground do we
place his security ? Is man, when left to
himself, equal to this high trust that is re-
pofid in him, this important charge that
is committed to him, of attaining happi-
ness, by wife and irreproachable condu d?
Inconstant as he is in virtue, variable in
his resolutions, boft and yielding in his
nature to a thousand temptations; how
{hall he guide himself through such flip-
pery and dangerous paths as those of hu-
man life; where many hidden precipices
surround him; many false lights lead him
affray; and where the consequence of eve-
ry flep he takes may be dctlrudion and

U ruin?

SERM. ruin?-Thankful let us be to heaven,

XIV.
tYJ that in this situation, a merciful guide

tfretches out his hand to aid us; that a
celeltial light flines upon us from above;
that a divine Spirit is promised to illuni-
nate and firengthen us. Let us humbly re-
quest of Heaven, that this Spirit of the Al-
mighty may ever be our guide; never pre-
fumptuoully trusting in our own wifidom;
but lifleningattentivcly to the voice of God;
and in all cur ways acknowledging Him who
only can dirt 3 our fleps -Upon the whole,
let us hold fast the persuasion of these
fundamental truths;-that in all his dif-
penfations, God isjullt and good ; that the
cause of all the troubles we susser is in
ourselves, not in him ; that virtue is the
surest guide to a happy life; that he who
forfakcs this guide, enters upon the path
of death; but that he who uIalketh up-
rightly, walketh fureiy; and that he who
keepeth the commandment, keepeth his own
foul.

SERMON

# SERMON XV. On INTEGRITY as the GUIDE of LIFE. PROVERBS xi. 3. The integrity of the upright shall guide them. —

S E R M 0 N XV.
On INTEGRITY as the GUIDE of LIFE.

PROVERBS xi. 3.
The integrity of the upright /flall guide

them.-
R IGHTEOUSNESS and fin are, in this SERM.

book of Proverbs, frequently con- xv

trafted with each other, and the advanta-
ges of the former displayed. The righ-
teous man is shown to be more excellent
than his neighbour, as the uwars in which he
walks are ways of plea/antnefs, while the
way of tranlgrefors is hard. Honour is re-
presented as attending the one, while

flame

SERM. shame is the portion of the other. Tlhe

xv.
x-Y' path of the one leads to life; that of the

other to destruction. In the text, an ad-
vantage of righteousness is specified,
which is not commonly attended to, and
which some will not readily allow that it
poffcffes. We are told by the wife man,
that it affords light and direction to con-
dut, and will prove our best guide
through all the intricacies of life. The
integrity of the upright hall guide them; or,
as it is added, to the fame purpose, in a fol-
lowing verse, the righuteoufnefs of the pererii
Jhall direif his way. There are many who
will admit, that integrity is an amiable qua-
lity; that it is entitled to much refped, and
in most cafes ought to influence our beha-
viour; who ncverthelcfs are unwilling to
allow it the chief place in the diretion of
their worldly conduCt. They hold, that
a certain artful sagacity, founded upon
knowledge of the world, is the belt con-
ducor of every one, who would be a fuc-
cefsful adventurer in life; and that a ftrid
attention to integrity, as his only guide,

would

would often lead him into danger and dif- s ER M
trefs. In opposition to tenets of this Xv.
kind, I now purpose to flow, that amidst
all perplexities and dangers, there is no
guide we can chufe so safe, and so success-
ful on the whole, as the integrity of an
upright mind; and that upon every try-
ing occasion, principles of probity and ho-
nour will conduct a good man through
life with more advantage, than if he were
to aa upon the moit refined fyflem of
wordly wisdom.

IT will not take much time to delineate

the character of the man of integrity, as
by its nature it is a plain one, and easily
underflood. He is one, who makes it his
conltant rule to follow the road of duty,
according as the word of God, and the
voice of his conscience, point it out to him.
He is not guided merely by affections,
which may sometimes give the colout of
virtue to a loose and unstable character.
The upright man is guided by a fixed
principle of mind, which determines him

to

SERM. to efleem nothing but what is honour-
XV. Xvt able; and to abhor whatever is bale and

unworthy, in moral conduct. Hence you
find him ever the fame; at all times, the
trufly friend, the affectionate relation, the
confcicntious man of business, the pious
worshipper, the public spirited citizen.
He assumes no borrowed appearance. He
seeks no mask to cover him; for he acts
no fludied part; but he is in truth what
he appears to be, full of truth, candour,
and humanity. In all his pursuits, he
knows no path but the fair and direct
one; and would much rather fail of fuc-
cess, than attain it by reproachful means.
He never shows you a smiling counte-
nance, while he meditates evil againfl
you in his heart. He never praises you
among your friends; and then joins in
traducing you among your enemies. You
will never find one part of his character
at variance with another. In his man-
ners, he is simple and unaffeded; in all his
proceedings, open and confiftent.-Such is
the man of integrity spoken of in the

3 text.

text. Let us now proceed to flow, in what S E RM.
manner, and with what etfec, integrity xv
serves for the guide of his life.

EVERY one, who has begun to make

any progress in the world, will be sensible,
that to condud himself in human affairs
with wisdom and propriety, is often a mat-
ter of no small ditliculty, Amidst that
variety of charaders, of jarring difpofi-
tions, and of interfering interests, which
take place among those with whom we
have intercourse, we are frequently at a
stand, as to the part most prudent for us
to chufe. Ignorant of what is palting
in the breasts of those around us, we can
form no more than doubtful conjetures
concerning the events that are likely to
happen. They may take some turn alto-
gether different firom the course in which
we had imagined they were to run, and
according to which we had formed our
plans. The flightedt incident cften !hoots
out into import.ut conf:quencec;, of which
we were not aware. The labyrinth be-

co.nes

SE R M. comes so intricate, that the most sagacious
- v- can lay hold on no clue to guide him

through it: He finds himself embarrasscd,
and at a loss how to ad.-In public and
in private life, in managing our own con-
cerns, and in directing those of others,
the doubt flarted by the Wife man fre-
quently occurs; WI ho knowueth what is
good for man in this life ?-While thus fa-
tigued with conjcaurc, we remain per-
plexed and undetermined in our choicc;
we are at the fame time pulled to diffe-
rent fides, by the various emotions which
belong to our nature. On one hand, plea-
sure allures us to what is agreeable; on
the other, interest weighs us down to-
wards what seems gainful. Honour at-
tracs us towards what is splendid; and
indolence inclines us to what is easy. In
the consultations which we hold with our
own mind, concerning our conduct, how
often are we thus divided within ourselves;
puzzled by the uncertainty of future e-
vents, and diftraced by the contest of
different inclinations

I It

It is in such Gtuations as there, that the SERM.

principle of integrity interposes to give Xj
light and direction. While worldly men
fluctuate in the nfidft of those perplexi-
ties which I have described, the virtuous
man has one Oracle, to which he resorts in
every dubious cafe, and whose decisions
he holds to be infallible: He consults his
conscience. He listens to the voice of
God. Were it only on a few occasions
that this Oracle could be consulted, its
value would be leis. But it is a mistake
to imagine, that its Responses are seldom
given. Hardly is there any material tranf-
adion whatever in human life, any im-
portant question, that holds us in fufpencc
as to practice, lut the difference between
right and v rong will lhow itself; and the
principle of integrity will, if we liflen to
it impartially, give a clear decision.
Whenever the mind is divided within it-
self, conscience is seldom or never neutral.
There is always one fide or other to which
it leans. There is always one scale of the
balance, into which it throws the weight

of

SE R M. of some virtue; orfome praifc; of fomc-
xJ thing that isjufl and true, lovely, honoe, and

oJgood report. These arc the forms, which
rife to the observation of the upright
man. By others they may be unseen, or
overlooked; but in his eye, the lustre of
virtue outshines all other brightnes.
Wherever this pole lar directs him, he
feadily holds his course.- Let the if-
sue of that course be ever so uncertain;
let his friends differ from him in opi-
nion; let his enemies clamour; he is not
moved; his purpose is fixed. He asks
but one queltion of his heart, what is the
most worthy and honourable part; what
is the part most becoming the station
which he possesses, the character which
he wishes to bear, the expecations which
good men entertain of him ? Being once
decided as to this, he hesitates no more.
He {huts his ears against every folicita-
tion. He pursues the diret line of inte-
grity, without turning either to the rg/.ht
hand or to the left. " It is the Lord who
"calleth. Him I follow. Let him or-

c der

" der what feemeth good in his fight." SERM.
- It is in this manner that the inlegrity xv

io th/e tpri;, t acds as their guiic.

But as, upon a superficial view, it may

appear hazardous to place ourselves en-
tirely under such a guile, let us now pro-
cced to confider what can be said in de-
fence of this p:!a: of conduct, and what
advantages ierve to recommend it.

In thefiyfi place, I affirm, tiat the guid-

ance of intcgrity is the fafelt under which
we can be placed; that the road in which
it leads us is, upon the whole, the freest
friom dangers. Perfecl immunity from
danger is not to be expected in this life.
We can chufe no path, in which we may
not meet with disappointments and mir-
fortunes. Our life, at the best, is a pil-
grimage, and perils surround it. Against
these perils, the men of the world imagine
that craft and dexterity furnilh the beil
defence; and if, in any inflance, they o-
vcr-reach the upright, they confider it as
a manifest dccifion in favour of their

VOL. IV. X plan.

8ERM. plan. But instead of refting on a few
xjv instances, let us take an extensive survey

of the course of human affairs. Let us
enquire who the persons are that, in all
the different lines of life, have gone
through the world with moil success;
and we shall find, that the men of probity
and honour form by far the most con-
fiderable part of the lift; we ihall find
that men of plain understanding, acting
upon fair !nd direct views, have much
oftener prospered, than men of the deep-
eRf policy, who were devoid of principle.
How few are the instances of persons who
by fidelity, worth, and stedfast adherence
to their duty, have either loft their for-
tunes, or incurred general displeasure, in
times when human affairs were proceed-
ing in their ordinary train? But how nu-
merous and frequent are the examples of
those whose profpecs have been blasted,
whose circumfiances have been ruined,
and their names funk into contempt by
vice and dishonesty ?

The man of the world aims at higher

3 things

things, and more rapid success, than tile SERM.

Xv.

man of moderation and virtue. But, at W
the fame time, he incurs greater rifques
and dangers. No calculation of proba-
bilities can ensure safety to him who is
acing a deceitful part. Amidst the un-
foreseen viciflitudes of the world, he has
to dread, not only disappointment to his
plans, but the miseries also which detet-
ed fallacies may bring on his head. He
walks on the edge of precipices, where a
single false ftcp may be fatal. He fol-
lows a wandering light, which, if it fail
of guiding him by a short path to the Pa-
lace of ambition, lands him in the pit, or
the lake. Whereas he who follows the
guidance of integrity, walks in the high
road on which the light of the fun Iliines.
He fees before him the lhabitation of peace
to which his Iteps are directed; and if he
be longer of arriving at it, he is sure of
neither wandering far afray, nor of meet-
ing on his road with any forms of unu-
fual terror.- Let it be always remem-
bered that the principle of integrity which

X 2 direct

S r RM.. direcqs a good man, is far from cxcludin:-

XV prudence in the conducl of life. It im-

plies no improvident or thoughtless fni-
plicity. On the contrary, it is clolicly
conneced with true wi(fom. A man of
enlargcd capacity, and extensive views, is
always upright. Craft is merely the sup-
plemcnt of inferior abilities. It charac-
terizes a narrow comprehension, and .
little mind.-As the path of integrity is
on the whole the fafllc path of con-
dul ; so,

I the eccond place, it is unquestionably

the moR honourable. Integrity is the
foundation of all that is high in charaeccr
among mankind. Other qualities may ad!
to its lplendor; but if this essential rcquifitc
he wanting, all their lufire fades. Were 1
('rawing the character of one who claiucd
the admiration of the world; and after I
had aifribcd to him eloquence, valour,
n(nd every endowment that is molt fin-
ing and captivating, did I add, that he was
a man of too much art to be trusted, I ap-

pcal

peal to every one, wuh(tlr, by this fingie SERiM.
1lroke, the whole cla:rairqcr would not be x^.
slink and degraded? .An i nteLriflcd iani
crafty man may I'.'ii::p riie i::to inllt.
ence and high tlation ; lie may be a rich
and a powerftul, but will never be a great,
man. He may be felared, and extrna.lly
honoured and courted ; but in the lt'cr-t
thoughts of men lie finds no rcitcl.
W,'e all feel, that magnanimous fcntilnnits
cannot dwell in the lame brealt with iJ!-
filhnefs and deceit.

He who refts upon an internal principle

of virtue and honour, will act with a dig-
nity and a boldnef, of which they arc in-
capable who are wholly guided by intc;c1: .
He is above thufe timid suspicions, and
cautious refaraints, which fetter and c;n-
barrafs their conducl. That firmness
which the consciousness of rectitude in-
spires, gives vigour and force to his exer-
tions on every great occasion. It adds dou-
ble weight to all the abilities of which l:e is
poffeft. It even supplies the place of tClofC
abilities in which he is dcfecive. They

X 3 w'lit)

S E R M. who oppose him are obliged to honour him.
xv. They look up to him with a secret awe, as

to one who moves above them in a superior
sphere ; regardless of their good or ill opi-
nion, of their promises or their threaten-
ings; like one of thole celestial luminaries
which holds its course through its orbit,
without being affeeed by any commo-
tions among the elements below. Such a
man is trufled, and relied upon, as well as
eftcemcd, bccause all know where to find
him, and upon what fyflem he ads. He
attaches fli inls and followers to himself,
witiout courting them; and though his
progrelf towards fame Ihould be flow,
and interrupted at first by crooked arts,
it is nevertheless certain and sure. The
public may be misled for a while, in judg-
ing of real merit; but it is seldom unjust
at the last. As persons continue to come
forward to view, and to ad their part in
trying circumllances, their characters are
at length fully ascertained; and, almost
always, rated as they deserve. How cor-
rupt soever the world may be, they can-

not

not with-hold approbation from him, SERM.

xYV.

whose condud is marked by uniform , v
integrity and honour. Enemies he will
have; but the public favours him; the
multitude of men wish him success; and
destine him, in their thoughts, to every ftep
of his preferment, before he arrives at it.

IN the third place, the plan of condut,

on which the man of integrity proceeds
is the most comfortable; that is, attended
with the greatest fatisfacion in a man's
own mind. Amidfl the various and per-
plexing events of life, it is of singular ad-
vantage to be kept free from doubt, as to
the part mot proper to be chosen. He
who consults nothing but worldly inte-
reft mufi, upon every turn of fortune. un-
dergo much painful fuiicr.ce. He is o-
bliged to liften with anxious ear to every
whisper of report; and upon every new
asped which the face of affairs assumes,
must study how to place himself in a new
poflure of defence. But the man of prin-
ciple is a firanger to these inward trou-

X 4 bles.

SERM. bles. -His time is not loft; nor his tcin-

xv.
kvyv per fretted by long and anxious coiii.l[,i-

tions. One light always Ilincs upoln hiil
firom above. One path, the path of inte-
grity, alway.s opens clear and (lillinc to
his t'iew.-But this is not his only advan-
tage, to be frted from cmbaraffnicnts, by
having placed himself under the chargc ot
one conltant guide. IIe is allo iewarled
with the fienle of lavin choiien his guid,
well ;and vwilfly. Ile is delivered fiiol all
inwarid uplbraidings, fiomu all niltiivinlls
of mind, Irom all allarms fO'iib(dcd on the
dread of ldil'ovcry and dil'r;ace. A good
confcicnce enables hili to lu1k l;ack on
the part whichl he has a'cd v with latis-
faclion; and to look forward to the illile
which it may bring, witlout conccrn. It
is in the cafe of one illue only, that the
man who acls from worldly interest can
cnjoy fatisflaion; that is, when his dc-
iigns have succeeded according to his will.
But it is the felicity of the man, wjio ads
under the direclion of integrity, that in
every ilile, he has ibnmctrlin to conifort

I :i! ,.

him. Though fuccf;b lias ft:iled him, the S E R M.

COSIlt)IationI 1(l11 X;I1S

(,' IlaS II;S V.

conlolation remains of having done his

l

duty, and ltudicd to aplrove hiilllf to
God.

T!his reference of all his ,Kions to di-

ville ap)roL;tion, furniillcs arnother I:urce
of iatisl.ieion and peace. lie looks up,
with plcafing hope, to a Protceor in the
heavens, who Ijveih "b htieouneji, and ul bj
countinance b t.oleldh ihe upright. The man
of worldly wil!inom is coifcious of having
no title to the favour of that high adciini-
firation wL.ich ru!es the univcrfe. By
quitting tile path of rightcouficfs, hz IhIA
Icllt that fira;ir;ht road, in which God ladl
appointed him to walk. He hIas taken the
dlilecliora of his way to hinmlilf ; and clio-
len to be his own guide and uial',er. To
his own ahiliies, therefore, fich as tlhey
are, lie mult trult; and is bccome wholly
reftioliiLle fri the ifiue of his coniui.
But the Inl.ii of viltue hat; cs.:.;::,..l hlis

,way to t1, Lcri. lie fil!ows the divine
signal. lie co-cw-crl.tcs wi:h the divine
purpurf. Thie wpo.e: \v!ich sways the u-

n'ivc;-ii

SE RM. niverfe is engaged on his fide. By natu-
.-J ral consequence, he has ground to expel,

that any seeming disappointments which
he may now incur, fliall be over-ruled at
the end to some salutary effcct. Hence,
that peace c/ God keeping the heart, to which
worldly men are firangers. Hence a de-
gree of firmness and relolution in conduct,
which it is impossible for them to possess.
Especially when we add,

IN the fourth and Lift place, that he who

thus purfies a course of integrity, has al-
ways in his view the profpec of imminor-
tal rewards. That surely is the wifelt di-
redion of conduc, which is molt amply
recompenfed at last. But what recom-
pence can worldly wisdom bellow, com-
parable to what is promised by the gof-
pel to them who, by patient continuance in
wcell d oi,~, l ork lbror y, hJnourr, and immor-
tality ?-Therccompence indeed is distant;
but the hope of it is present; and hope is
one of the noft powerful principles of hu-
man a ion. L.et a man be firm in the

belief

belief that he is acling under the inl- SERM.

xv

mediate protecion of Heaven, and that -
through all eternity he llall bc rewarded
for what he now pcrtorms; a:nil, as far
as this belief is prevalent, lls coinduca will
be fleadv and determined. Wherever re-
ligion directs him to ihldl his courle, he
will advance with intrepidity. He will
submit to restraints without rcluclance.
He will meet dangers without fear. To
every motive which reatob lugge!ls in fa-
vour of virtue, the hope of life eternal
adds supernatural lrelgth.-Accordingly,
in the behaviour of many holy mcn, un-
ler the most trying circumtianccs otf dif-
trefs, we behold this (tlcti cnlinentlv ex-
emplified. it appearu, wvith much luire,
in the spirited and lii:ign::linnus filnti-
ments of the Apflle P'aul, heni h! Iad
the prolplecl of deatl; l):;ore lhiii. 1;i ;d
1 go bound in the s', it to 7.'cu/l,/.:. . ot
Inl owing the things that JiJll bl/ t : ' /: , ifec,
Jfve that the 1'oly Gholi ,;:tr,:j/;h l:.at
b;n,!s aid l cicri', r anb.hdi :e. Blt !"''' o/'
iee this mve
tl e ; neitler ct:i I ntV

lIft:

S. R M. life dear rl;to nl 2/, Jo that I may jfin/;.j 1.y
x ce'rtli, illt jy '.---I am now r'icad'

be o/iereJ, an.id the ti:,e o myn departure i
a! /i,'.d. 1 h;.:c sO't, ht a 1.5oJ fight ; I
Iha'l Jii/i'd Iry cra'/s ; I have kept the
.laith. , cnccf/rtr th cre is !,i.d ,ip for mne a
crown oif ril:'tlc/h!'rI, zilwhich the Lord, tle
t; I.tci our '.'Jge, jhll s ive mc ae t that day 'i.

'liHUS IIhve endeavourC(l to fllow in

what mnner the intrlty of the upri.'i.
guildes them; and what the advantagl: s
are of p!acillz onurflvcs under its guid-
ance. If it be the line of fiatty, or tl:c
line of honour, which we chufe to pur-
iuc; if we confillt our present comfort,
or look forward to future rewards; in all
thcfe rclieCts, the course whicl integrity
points out is by far the niolt eligible.

It is a great recommendation of the guil-

an.cc offered to us by integrity, that it ia
e;.ily underflood by all men. Plans of

2 rlT!ly
* \O,~ x:. . ' 2. izo.'- i. i.

worlly policy are (dcep antd intricate; sr.r,,
and e:;pericnce lhows how often the a- J
blell perons are miil.fken in the me;:furcs
which they ad:lpt for carrying tlemn on.
But when men's intentions are fjil and
upright, it will be found, that a moderate
fliare of undcrflanding and attention is
aU that is requisite, for condulding them-
Iflvcs with safety and propric;y. Provi-
dence never intended, that the art of liv-
ing happily in this world Ihould depend
on that deep penetration, that acute saga-
city, and thole refinements of thought,
which few possess. It has dealt more
graciously with us; and made hapi.nefs
to depend on uprighitnefs of intention,
much more than on extent of capacity.
For the mofR part, the firfl fentiienc
which ftrikcs a good man, conccrnirng
what he ought, or ought not to do, is the
foupdeft, and suggests tle bcft and wisest
counsel. \Vhenlc heefitates, and begils
to deliierate how far his duty, or his ho-
nour, can be rccG;'cilld to what seems hil
intcrcft, he is on the point of dcviating

Iitio

SERM. into a dangerous path.- At the fame
xv time, it is of great consequence, that hc

who seeks to furrcnder his conduet to the
diretion of integrity, flhould be well ap-
prized of what true integrity requires.
Let him guard againIf burdening contci-
ence unnecessarily; left a superstitious re-
gard to trifles lead him to relax in mat-
ters of higher obligation. Let him avoid
minute scrupulosity, on the one hand.
ILet him keep at a distance from loose ca-
fuiflry, on the other. But when he is fa-
tisfied that his conicience has been well
informed, let him, without wavering, ad-
here to its didates in the whole of his
condut. This will prove the truet wis-
donm both for this world and the next.
For he ,who walkcth uprightly walklbh sure-
ly. 7he path o/ the jull is as the fli)ing
light: And it shall f/imnc more and more unto
the perjcc7 day.

SER MON

# SERMON XVI. On SUBMISSION to the DIVINE WILL. JOB ii. 10. — Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?

S E R M O N XVI.
On SUBMISSION to the DIVINE WILL.

JOB ii. 10.
-Shall we receive good at the hand of

God, and Jfall we not receive evil ?
F E W fubjeds of religious exhorta- SE R M.

tion are of more general concern

than those which refpecR the diltref-
fes incident to human life. For no so-
ciery, no family, no person, can ex-
pedt to be long exempted from them;
and when we speak of the prosperous,
we can only mean thufe who are more

rarely

SE R M. rarcly frbjcct to them than others. No.w,

J^,
X under tllof diftreies, religion performs

two offices: It teaches us how we ouglih
to bear them; an(l it aflifts us in thin,
bearing them. Materials for both are
found in the words of the text, which
contain a sentiment so natural anti juil,
as to c..n / conviction to every reafoitnic
mind. They were the words of Job, at
a timn when, to his other calamities, this
(dom^nic alfliCion was added, that on:,
who ought to have aflhaged anti soothed
his sorrows, provoked his indignation by
an impious speech. Thmu Jpeakjef, Job rc-
plies, as one of the foolflih women Jpcaketh :
lf'hat? Jhlall we receive gooJ at the han.!
of God, and /hall we not receive evil ?-
Three inftruaions naturally arise from thi
text: First, That this life is a mixed flatc
of good and evil: Secondly, That both
the goods and the evils in it proceed from
God: And, thirdly, That there are jull
reasons for our receiving with patience
the evils of life, from the fame hand
which bestows its goods.

I. TLilm

T. Tils life is a mixed (tate of goo(d SE M.

and evil. This it a :atter of fad, which xvi.
will be denied )by nowe, and on which it
is not necitllry to bellow much illuftra-
tion. It is evident to the slightest infpec-
tion, that nothing here is unallayed and
pure. Every man's state is checquredt
with a'ternate oriefs and jo-s, difippoint-
ment and fiiccef. No condition is alto-
gether tfable. No life preserves always
the ftme tenor. The vici;litudes of the
world Ibmetimcs bring forward the as-
flicted into more comfortable circumfan-
ces; and often trouble the joy of the pro-
1perou.' This is the train in which hu-
man affairs have ever been found to pro-
ceed ; and in which we may exped them
always to go on.

But though this be universally admit-

ted in speculation, and otten confcrfld in
discourse, the misfortune is, that few think
of applying it to their own cafe. The
bulk of Imanki;id dilcover as much confi-
dence in prof:eerity, and as much impa-
tience under the lealt reverse, as if Pro-
VOL. IV. Y vidence

SERM. vidence had first given them aflurance
xvl that their prosperity was never to change,

and afterwards had cheated their hopes.
Whereas, what reason ought to teach us,
is, to adjust our mind to the mixed late
in which we find ourselves placed; never
to presume, never to despair; to be thank-
ful for the goods which at present we en-
joy, and to expeA the evils that may fuc-
ceed.-Thou has been admitted to partake
of the feast of life. Its good things are
difiributed, in various portions, among the
guests. Thou haft had thine allotted
share. Complain not, when thy portion
is removed. It is not permitted to any
one, to remain always at the banquet.

II. WE are taught by the text, that both

the goods and the evils which compose
this mixed state, come from the hand of
God. A little reflection may convince
us, that, in God's world, neither good nor
evil can happen by chance. If there were
any one moment, in which God quitted
the reins of the universe,, and suffered any

power

power to interfere with his admiiiftrai SERM./
tion, it is evident, that, from that moment,
the measures of his government must be-
come disjointed and incomplete. He
who governs all things, must govern con-
tinually; and govern the least things as
well as the greatest. He never Jfumbers
norcfleep. There are no void spaces, no
broken plans, in his administration; no
blelings that drop upon us without his
intention; nor any crosses that visit us,
unsent by him. I am the Lord, and there
is none else. I form the lig h, and create
darknec/. I make peace, and create evil. I
the Lord do all these thing: *.

How it has come to pass, that this life

Ihould contain such a mixture of goods
and evils, and that the mixture too mhould
be of God's appointment, gives rife to a
difficult inquiry. For how can any thing
but what is good proceed from the God
of love! Can darkness issue from the

Y 2 source

SERM. source of light? or can it be any satis-
xv. faclion to the Fatber of mercies, to behold

the sorrows of creatures whom he has
made?-Here there was room for much
perplexity, till revelation informed us, that
the mixture of evils in man's eltate is ow-:
ing to man himself. Had he continued
as God originally made him, he would
have received nothing hut good friom his
Creator. His apoilafy and corruption o-
pencd the gates of the tabernacle of dark-
ness. Nilery iliued forth, aid has ever
since pursued him, In the,prefent condi-
tion of his nature, that milcty is partly
punifliment, partly trial. Hie is become
incapable of bearing uninterrupted pro-
fperity; and by the mixture of evils in
his lot, merciful dcligns are carried on for
his, improvement and refloration.

What the text leads us at preient to con-

fider is, the effcct that will follow ,from
imitating the example of Job, and refer-
ring to the hand of the Almighty, the evils
which we fuifer, as well as the goods vwhicl
we enjoy. auch a reference of. e di-

flrclstLfu

itreful events of our life to the appoint- SERRM.
ment of Heaven, not only is a duty which x
siety requires, but tendis also to mitigate
diltrefs, and to suggest conbolation. For
to dwell, as is too commonly done, upon
the inftrnmcnts and subordinate means of
our trouble, is frequently the calfe of
much grief, and much fin. Whcn we
view our sufferings as proceeding merely
from our fc!low-creattires, the part which
they have acted in bringing them upon
us, is often more grating than the susser-
ing itself. The unrealbnablenefs, perhaps,
of an enemy, the treachery of a friend,
the ingratitude or insolence of one whom
we had much obliged, add weight to a
load laid upon us by means so provoking.
The thoughts of their malignity, or of our
own negleC in guarding against it, serve
to poison the fore. Whereas, if instead of
looking to men, we beheld the cross as
coming from God, there aggravating cir-
cumftances would affttt us less; we would
feel no more than our proper burden;

Y3 we

ERM. we would submit to it more patiently;

,j and many resources would open to us,as

shall in a little ie fihown, from thinking
of the hand that lays it on. Had Job,
when despoiled of all his fubQtance, thought
of nothing but the Chaldeans and Sabeans
who robbed him, with what violent pas-
sions would he have been transported, and
with what eager desires of revenge tor-
mented? Whereas, confidering them as
rods and instruments only in the divine
hand, and receiving the correction as from
the Almighty himnelf, the tumult of his
mind subsided; and with respectful com-
pofure he could fay, The Lord gave; and
the Lord bath taken away: Ble/ed be tbe
rame of the Lord. This leads me,

III. To confider the last, and most im-

portant inftrucion, arising from the text;
namely, that there are many reasons why
we, who receive good from the hand of
God, {hould receive with patience the
evils which he is pleated to inflit. This
i firongly conveyed by that interroga-

tory

tory form offpeech, in which the senti- SERtM.
ment of Job is exprefted: W7hat ? Jhall we XVI
receive rood at the hand of God, and Jhall
we not receive evil? In order to unfold all
that is contained in this appeal made to eve-
ry man's conscience, let us confider,

IN the firfl place, that the good things

which God has beflowed, afford sufficient
evidence for our believing, that the evils
which he fends, are not cat. felefsly or wan-
tonly inflicted. Did we live in a world
which bore the marks of a malicious or
cruel governor, there might be reason for
distrusting every ftep of his conduct. But
in the world which we inhabit, we behold,
on the contrary, plain marks of predomi.
nant goodness. We behold the ftrudure of
the universe, the order of nature, the gene-
ral course of Providence, obviously arranged
with a benevolent regard to the welfare of
men. All the art and contrivance of which
the divine works are full, point to this
end; and the more they are explored,
create the firmer belief, that the good;

Y 4 ness

E R M. nets of the Deity gave rile to 1the f\t
xv'. Ye} tern of creation. What is the ccnull-

sion to be thence drawn, but that in fucll
parts of the divine adminiiiration as ap-
pear to us haiih and icvc;e, the lame good-
nels continues to prelide, though extrci-
fed in a hidden and iny)-Oriols manner ?

Let me desire you to confider, whether,

if ibme powerful friend had placed you
in an opulent and comfortable flation,
and, in the general conduct of your affiairs,
had discovered the molt disinterested kind-
ncfs, you would not ascribe any occafioual
discouragements you received, to fume un-
known realbn or cause, rather than to his
unfaithfulness or cruelty ? Ought not the
experience which we have had, and the
discovery which all nature affords, of. the
(livine,goodnefs, lead us to put a like con-
firuction on the evils which we susser
from a hand that hath so frequently load-
ed us with good ?- Have we forgotten,
in the midit of our complaints, who
brought us unto the light of day; who
watched over our helpless infancy; who

reared

reared our growing childhood; and SERM.

XVI.

through ten thousand furroundling dan-
gers, has been our protector and guardian
until this day? How often has he refcu-
ed us from sickness and death, and made
our hearts glad with unexpectcd com-
forts ? Now, that some cloud is thrown o-
ver our prosperity, or some blessing with-
drawn, in which for a time we had rejoi-
ced, can we imagine that there is no good
caule for this change of his proceeding?
Shall we fufpiL' that his nature is entilc-
ly altered ? Hath GoJ jdoro:ten to be ra-
Cos? Hath he in anier Jliit up his t·J rr
tmtitic ? No, let us Idy will the Pfallnill,
'btJ is my ifirmnit; but 1 will rtmcr,.btr
th' works of the Lord. I uwill remermber the
yers fs the right hand of the mnol Hi, *'.
-_ One signal work of the most High,
at least, let us remember, and rejoice in
the remembrance of it; even that final
rem edy which, he has provided for all the

evils
* Ps. xxvii. ix. 1o.

SE R M. evils occasioned by fin, in the redemption
XVl.

of the world accompliihed by Jesus Christ.
He who pared not his cu'n Son, but deliver-
ed him up for us all, will he, in any cafe,
wantonly afflid the children of men with
superfluous and unnecessary sorrows? Is
not this a proof so satisfactory, to express
and demonfirative, of the gracious pur-
pofcs of God, as fliould dispose us to take
in good part, every thing which proceeds
from him ? Confider,

I N the second place, that the good things

we receive from God are undeserved, the
evils we fuffcr are jully merited. Every
reasonable person mull feel the weight ot
this consideration, for producing patience
and submission. For, though to susser at
any rate be grievous, yet to susser unjust-
ly, is doubly galling. Whereas, when
one receives a mixed portion, whereof the
goods are above his deserts, and the evils
below his deserts, to complain, in such a
cafe, is unreasonable; there is more
ground for being thankful.-- All, it is

3 true,

true, have not deserved evil equally. Yet SERM.
all of us deserve it more or less; and to j
merit good at the hand of the Lord, is
what none of us can pretend. At the best
we are but unprofitable/tvants. Even this is
more than we are entitled to claim. For
if God were to enter into judgenmnt with
us, who could fland before him? who
could juflify himself in his fight ? When
the most inoffensive compare their con-
due with God's holy law; when they re-
fled upon the duties they have omitted,
and the aAual guilt they have contraded,
they will find more reason to accuse them-
selves, than to complain of the divine
chaltifement. Whatever innocence any
of us may plead, nay, whatever merit we
may claim, with refped to men and the
world, we susser no more than what we
deserve from the Governor of the world;
and of his displeasure, we know that the
wrath of man is no other than the inltru-
fnent.

Not only all of us have done evil, but,
what ought to be particularly attended

to,

SE R M, to, Cod has a just title to punifl us for it.

Althollgh a man know. that he deserves
punilhmcnt, yet he will not allow every
one to inflid it. A chi!d will submit to his
parents, a servant to his maflcr, a subje&t to
the imaginrate, when he would not bear
corrcoion from another hand. Bnt no pa-
rent c.ai have so complete a right to'authlo-
rity over his children, no master over his
fervlnts, no magiftrr.re over his fuljecas, as
the Almighty hatll over uc. NWhen we
were born, we brought nothing with us
into God's world. During our conti-
nuance in it, we have lived on the good
things which God was pleased to lend
us; and of which, God and our own con-
fcilnce know that we have made but a
sorry iimprovemuent. When he thinks
proper to take any of them away, no
ewrong is done us; for they were not
ours. To have enjoyedthem so long, wvls
a favour. To enjoy them always, was
*vl;:t we neither dcferved, nor had any
title to c:vpect.

IN

,ilP' t¢ bthird place, the good tl.ings S RM.
wiichl at diierent times.we have received .XVL
a"td, enjoyed, are much greater than the
wiM w.hich we laliTr. Of this f it. I am
finob.le it.;wj be difieult to persua'le' the
afflited, ;Bil; would they weigh, in a fair

llance, tle whole of their circuinftlce^,

gy.wlwuld find it tri.. .\VhateueC'ixlr-
fois feel at the rreftnt, makes so ltrong
tr impreilion upon them, as very. comr
nmpnlytq..(bliteratc the'tngmory of, all t.jq
pai \1lhen one is opprcfied *itdh iome
painful disa&e in his body, or wruog wiiti
some sod lfiltrufs of. mind, -every farler
comfort, at that nmor.ent, ges for norhin!.
Lifeis. beheld in all its ODom. Adark
cloud seems to hang over it.; and k i s re-
.iled, as no other than a scene of wretcli-
edlne's and, sorr-ow. But this is to be un-
juft'to htman life, as .well as ufgriatefu
to its auhot.- Let me only delire yort
to think how many (lays, how manV
months, how many years, you have pa!i(l
it, health, and ease, and comfort;- how
miany .piafurable feelings you have.had;

how

SE RM. how many friends you have enjoyed;
XV. how many bleflings, in short, of diffe-

rent kinds you have tatied; and you will
be forced to acknowledge, that more ma-
terials of thanksgiving present themselves
than of lamentation and complaint.-
These blessings, you will fay, are past.
But though palt, ought they to be gone
from your remembrance ? Do they merit
no place, in the comparative eflimate of
the goods and evils of your tRate? Did
you, could you, expeA, that in this muta-
ble world, any temporal joy was to last
for ever ? Has gratitude no influence to
form your minds to a calm acquiefcerice
in your Benefacor's appointments? What
can be more reasonable than to fay, " Hay-
" ing in former times received so many
"good things from the hand of God,

{hall I not now, without murmuring,

" receive the few evils which it pleases
" him to fend?"

IN the furtb place, not only the goods
of life are upon the whole greater than

its

its evils; but the evils which we susser SERM.

XVI.

are seldom, or never, without some mix- -r
ture of good. As there is no condition
on earth of pure unmixed felicity, lo there
is none so milerable, as to be deflitute of
every comfort. Entire and complete mi-
fery, if ever it take place, is of our own
procuring, not of God's fending. None
but the most gross and atrocious finners
can be in such a situation, as to discover
no ray of relief or hope. In the ordina-
ry distresses of life, it is generally our
own folly and infirmity which, upon the
loss of some one blefling that we had
highly prized, deprives us of fatisfation
in all other things. Many of our cala-
mities are purely imaginary, and felf-cre-
ated arising from rivallhip or competi-
tion with others, and fiom false opinions
of the importance of objeAs, to which
custom and fashion have annexed an ideal
value. Were there mistaken opinions
once corrected by reason, the evil would
disappear, and contentment would relume
its place. With refped to those calami-

ties

SFR M. ties which arc inflictd by God, his Pro-

XVI.
j>j vidence has made' this wife and merciful

conflitution, that, after the first flock, the
burden by degrees is lightened. Time
brings a gentle and powerful opiate to all
misfortunes. What is very violent can-
not las long; and what lares long we be-
come raxultomcd to bear. Every situation
that is permanent, at length is 'felt to be
tolerable The mind accommodates it-
self to it; and by degrees regains its u-
fual tranqciillity. -Hence the greatell part
of the evils of life are more terrible in the
previons apprthenfion, than in the atual
feeltrng; and it seldom happens but, in
cne c6rner or other, something is found
on which the mind can lay hold for its
relief.

How many, for inflance, do we behold

around us, firaitened in their worldly
circumflances, and yet finding the means
to live chearfully,. with poverty and peace
in the fame habitation ? If we are depriv-
ed of friends whom we tenderly loved,
are there not Rill some remaining, from

l1t~ whom

whom we may expec much comfort ? If SE R M.
our bodies are afflicted witl fore disease, iV
have we not reason to be thankful that
our mind continues vigorous and entire;
that we are in a situation to look around
us for whatever can afford us ease; and
that after the decay of this frail and moul-
dering tabernacle, we can look forward to
a bouje not made with h.m.ls, eternal in th
heavens ?-In the midit of all distresses,
there remains to every sincere Chriflian,
that mixture of pure and genuine confo-
lation, which springs from the promises
and hopes of the gospel. Confider, I be-
feech you, what a singularly happy dif-
tinetion this makes in your situation, be-
yond the slate of those who, under the va-
rious troubles of life, are left without hope,
and withlout God in tbe world; without
any thing to look to, but a train of un-
known causes and accidents, in which
they fee no light nor comfort.-Thank
the Father of mercies, that into all the e-
vils he fends, he infuses this joyful hope,
that the sufferings of the pre/ent time are

VOL. 1V. Z. t

SE R M. not worthy to be compared with the glory
XVI. Am~ that Jfall be eevealed in the end, to the

virtuous and good.

IN the sith and last place, as the evils

which we fuffcr are thus alleviated by a
mixture of good; fb we have reason to be-
lieve, that the evils themselves are, in ma-
ny reflpeds, good. When borne with pa-
tience and dignity, they improve and e-
noble our character. They bring into
exercise several of the manly and heroic
virtues; and by the conltancy and fide-
lity with which we support our trials on
earth, prepare us for the highest rewards
in heaven.-It has always been found,
that the prefen. conflitution of human na-
ture cannot bear uninterrupted profperi-
ty, without being corrupted by it. The
poisonous weeds which spring up in that
too luxuriant foil, require the hand of ad-
verfity to extirpate them. It is the expe-
rience of Ifrrow and distress that subdues
the arrogance of pride, tames the violence
of paflion, ioftens the hardness of the fel-

3 fifll

fish heart, and humanizes the temper to SERM.

XVI.

feel for thz woes of others. Many have v
had reason to fay, that it was good for them
to be qfflit7ei *. Il/hen men take the tim-
brel and the harp, and r.joice at the fund of
tbe organ, they are apt to JaY unto God,
Departfrom us,for we desire not the know-
ledge of thy ways. IFhat is the Almighty
that we /houldferve him ? But when they
are holden in cords of afflction, then heJew.
eth them their work, and their tranfgreffins
that they have exceeded. He openeth also
their ear to dfcipline. and commandeth that
they return from iniquity t. Is his cafe to
be deplored as highly calamitous, who, by
forfeiting some transient enjoyments of the
world, purchases lasting improvement in
piety and virtue, and exchanges a few of
the good things of this life for the better
things of another ?

INFLUENCED by such considerations as
there, let us look up with reverence to the

Z 2 great
Pfalr cxix. 7.1. f Job xxi. 12---YXXVi. 8.

SFERM. great Difiofcr of events; alnd under any
X&, cdiltrcfs with whichL he is p,leated to vilit

us, let us utter no other voice but this;
S.hall ,Ce receive good at the brnd o/ Gol,
4nd Jfl(il vwe not receive evil ?--Mcn ale
too often ingenious in making tlhcmflvcs
miserable, by aggravating to their own
fancy, beyond bounds, all the evils which
they endure. They compare themflvc:s
with none but thole whom they imagine
to be more happy ; and complain that up-
on them alone has fallen the whole load of
human sorrows. Would they look with
a more impartial eye on the world, they
would fee themselves surrounded with
fifferers; and find that they are ol:iy
drinking out of that mixed cup, wliich
Providence has prepared for all.-' I will
"reflore your daughter again to life,'
said the Eallerin fige, to a prince who
grieved immodcrately for the loss of a be-
loved child, " provided, you are able to
"engrave on her tomb the names of three
" persons who have never mourned." The
prince made inquiry after such persons;

but

but fn;und the inquiry vain, and was si. SER M.
lcnt.-T'o every reasonable pecrfon who XtV
retains the belicf of religious principles,
Iman:i al!cvi iing circumiilances. and many
ar:ulincnts for patience, will occur under
every (lilrtfs. If we reft on this firm
}pr!utfi'"n, that tlire is a wife and jult
I'rovijcncc lwhich difpofcs of all cvents,
we flla!! ha, e reason to conclude, that
nothling ha;ppen; to us here without some
good (lelign. Trufling that a happy rcrini-
nation iha!l at lalt arrive to the dilbrdcrs
ns onr prcent flatc, we lhall be enabled,
amndill all the varictics of fortune, to pre-
ftrve that cquanimnity which befits Chris-
tians; and unlder evcrv trial to sAv, It is
the Lord; let bhnji d; -;hat Jec:eil good in
hi, fiSR bt.'O

Z3 SERMON

# SERMON XVII. On FRIENDSHIP. PROVERBS xxvii. 10. Thine own friend, and thy father's friend, forsake not. —

S E R M () N XVI.

On FRIENDSHIP.

PROVERBS xxvii. 1o.
Thine own friend, and thy father's friend,

forsake not.-

SE RM. W HATEVER relates to the behavi-
XVII. V our of men in their fbcial cha-

racter, is of great importance in religion.
The duties which spring from that charac-
ter, form many branches of the great law
of charity, which is the favourite precept
of Christianity. They, therefore, who
would separate such duties fiom a religious
spirit, or who at molt treat them as only

the

the inferior parts of it (1d a real injury to S E RM;
religion. 1hey are niifakin friends of xv\,
piety, who, under the uotion of exalting
it, place it ui a fort of Insulated cor-
ner, disjoined from the ordinary ad.a:rs
of the world, and the conneai.m)ns of
men with one another. On the contra-
ry, true piety influences them all It
ats as a vivifying spirit, which animates
and enlivens, which reelifies and conducts
them. It is no less frienlly to men than
zealous for the honour of God ; and by
the generous affeclions which it nourish-
es, and the beneficent influence which it
exerts on the whole of conduct, is fu!ly
vindicated from every reproach which
the infidel would throw upon it.-In this
view, I am now to discourse on the na-
ture and duties of virtuous frien'fluip, as
closely conneted with the true spirit of
religion. It is a fubjcct which the infpi-
red philosopher, who is the author of this
book of Proverbs, has thought wor.hv of
his repeated notice; and in many plFages
has bestowed the higheff elogiums on

Z 4 friendlhip

SERM. frien(fllip among good men. As cintmentt
XVII.

1v0. and perJmnie tjsr.ue the heart, Jo doth th:

fweetntjs of a nan's friend by hearty counflj.
As iron fJiarpene! iron, so a man Jharpeneth
the countenance of his Jriend. IAakc jure of
thy friend; fir f/ith/ul are the wounds cf a
friend. A fritnd loveth at all times; and
a brother is bs n for adveflty. There is a
friend that jlicketh clcjer than a brother.-
Thine otun f, -en:, and tlhy ather's fricnd,
it is said in the text, Jor/ake nzt.

I Mt'ST begin the fubjce., by obfcrving,

that there are among mankind fricnd-
Ihips of different kinds, or, at lealt, con-
nexions which assume that name. When
they are no more than confederacics of
bad men, they ought to be called confpi-
racies, rather than friendilhips. Some bond
of common interest, some league against
the innocent and unfufpecing, may have
united them for a time. But they are
held together only by a rope of sand.
At bottom they are all rivals, and hostile
to one another. Their friendlffip can

fubfif

subsist no longer than interest cemncts SERM.
them. Every one looks with a jealous XVi.
eye on his supposed fiiend ; and watches
the firll favourable opportunity to desert,
or to betray.

Friendlhips too there are of a diffe-

rent kind, and of a more refpcclable na-
ture, formed by the connetion of politi-
cal parties. It is no;, perhaps, on fclfiill
or crooked deGgns that such fricndfliips
are originally founded. Men have been
aflociated together by some public interest,
or general caufc, or for defence againit
some real or imagined danger; and con-
nexions thus formed, often draw men into
close union, and inspire for a season no
small degree of cordial attachment. When
upon jult and honourable principles this
union is founded, it has proved, on va-
rious occasions, favourable to the cause of
liberty and good order among mankind.
At the fame time, nothing is more ready
to be abused than the name of public fpi-
rit, and a public cause. It is a name, un-
der which private interest is often flelter-

ed,

SERM..ed, and felfifli designs are carried on.

l The unwary are allured by a specious ap-

pearance; and the heat of faction ufiurps
the place of the generous warmth of
friendlkip.

IT is not of such friendihips, whether

of the laudable or the suspicious kind,
that I am now to discourse; but of pri-
vate friendships, which grow neither out
of interclted designs, nor party zeal: but
which flow from that similarity of difpo-
fitions, that corrcfponding harmony of
minds, which endears some person to our
heart, and makes us take as much part in
his circumstance%, fortunes, and fate, as if
they were our own. 'The loul of Jonathan
·was knit with the fdl rof David; and .7o-
nathan uved him as his ouwn foul *. Such
friendships certainly are not unreal; and
for the honour of human nature, it is to
be hoped are not altogether unfrequent

among
* Samuel xviii, I.

among mankind.-- Happy it is, when SERhM.

XVII.

they take root in our early years; and ,v
are engrafted on the ingenucus sensibility
of youth. Fricndfllips then contracded, re-
tain to the las a tenderness and warmth,
seldom poffeined by friendflips that are
formed in the riper periods of life. The
remembrance of antient and youthful con-
nections melts every human heart; and
the dissolution of them is, perhaps, the
mofl painful feeling to which we are ex-
posed here below.- But at whatever pe-
riod of life friendships are formed, as long
as they continue sincere and affccdionate,
they form, undoubtedly, one of the great-
eft bieflings we can enjoy. By the pleas-
ing communication of all our sentiments
which they prompt, they are juilly said
to double our pleasures, and to divide our
sorrows. They give a brighter funfline
to the gay incidents of life; and they en-
lighten the gloom of its darker hours. A
.laithfil friend, it is juflly and beautifully
siud, by one of tbe Apocryphal writers,

SE R M. il the nmelicine of li/e *. A variety of oc-
C~/ calfons happen, when to pour forth the

heart to one wh:om we love and trui, ii
the chief comfort, pcrhaps the only relifct
we can enjoy. Miserable is lie who, flint
up within the narrow inclolure of lcliilh
interel, has no person to whom he can
at all timnes, with full confidencc, cxpand
his foul.

SINCE cordial fiicn(lfliip is so great a

blcffing to human life, let us proceed to
confider what duties it requires, and by
what methods it may be cultivated to
molt advantage. The fundamental (lua-
litics of true friend(flip are, conflancy and
fidelity. Without thcfe material ingre-
dients, it is of no value. An inconflant
man is not capable of friendflhip. I-e
may perhaps have affflions which bcca-
fionally glow in his heart; which excite
fondness for amiable qualities; or conned

him
* EcicdSaificus vi. 16.

him with seeming attachment to one S R M.
whom he esteems, or to whom he has xV
been obliged. But after these feelings
have lasted for a little, either fancied in-
tercti alienates him, or some new object
attracts Limn; and he is no longer the
fame perlon to those whom he once loved.
A man of this incontlant mind cannot be
said to have any mind at all. For where
there is no fixedness of moral principle,
occasional feelings are of no value; mind
is of no efliect; and with such persons it
is never dcirable to have any connexion.
Where conllallcy is wanting, there can be
no fidelity, which is the other basis of
friendihip. For all friendlhip fuppoles
entire confidence and trult; fuppo'es the
fcal of secrecy to be inviolable; fuppofies
promises and engagements to be sacred;
and no advantage of our own to be pur-
sued, at the expence of our friend's honour.
An inconstant man, is dellicable. A faith-
lels man, is base.

But supposing neither conftancv nor si-
delity to be altogether wanting, fill how-

ever

BERM. ever friendlfip is in hazard of fiffering

from the follics, and unrcalbnable hu-
mourR, to which all of us are liable. It
is to be regarded as a tender plant in an
unfavourable ffil, which, in order to its
flourishing, requires to be reared and
nursed with care The following direc-
tions may be of use for promoting its cul-
tivation, and prelerving it from whatever
might be apt to blahl and wither it.

IN the firfl place, let me advise you not

to expect perfection in any with whom
you contract friendship. It holds in ge-
neral, with rcfpec to all worldly pursuits,
that the more moderate our expectations
are, they are likely to be the more success-
ful. If, in any situation of life, we hope
to pofIr:s complete happiness, we may de-
pend on receiving mortifications. If, in
any person, we trust to find nothing but
perfecti.)n. we may be allured that, on
longer acquaintance, we liall meet with
difalpo;ntiments. In the cafe of friend-
thip, thi ::'Jmoniio!l is the more necifa-

ry

ry to be given, as a certain warmth and SERM.
enthufialin belong to it, which are apt to Xvj
tarry us beyond the bounds of nature.
In young minds, especially, a disposition
of this kind is often found to take place.
They formn to themselves romantic ideas,
gathered perhaps from fictitious histories,
of the high and heroic qualities which be-
long to human nature. All those qua-
lities, they alcribe, without reserve or li-
mitation, to the person with whom they
with to enter into intimate friendihip;
and on the least failure appearing, aliena-
tion inflantly follows. Hence many a
friendship, haflily perhaps contraced, is
as hastily dillolved, and disgust succeeds
to violent attachment.-Remember, my
friends, that a faultless character on earth
is a mere chimera. Many failings you
experience in yourselves. Be not furpri-
fed, when you discover the like in others,
of whom you had formed the highetl o-
pinion. The belt and most ellimable
persons are they, in whom the fewetl ma-
terial defets are found; and whole great

and

SERM. and solid qualities counterbalance the

x common infirmities of men. It is to

theef qualities you are to look in forming
friendlhips; to good fclnie and prudence,
which conflitute the balis of every relpec-
table charaecrl; to virtue, to good t- -
per, to (leadinefs of affelcton; and accord-
ing to the union of thole dilpofitions,
cllecm yourselves happy in the frieln
whom you chufe.

IN the fecnJ place, I muff admonifl

you not to be hurt by differncces of opi-
nion arising in intercourlf with your
friends. It is impossible for there not to
occur. Perhaps no two persons were e-
ver cast so exactly in the fame mould, as
to thi.k a:lways in the fame manner, on
every fubjcct. It was wifely contrived by
Providence, that diversity of sentiment
Ihould take place among men, on purpole
to cxcrcife our faculties, and to give varic-
ty to human life. Perpetual uniformity
of thought would become monotonous
and insipid.-- ,hca it is with regard to

utrifles

trifles that diversity or contrariety of opi. sE M.
nions fllows itself, it is childilh in the last xvl
degree, if this become the ground of e.
ftranged affecion. When from such a
cause there arises any breach of friend-
flip, human weakness is then discovered
in a mortifying light. In matters of fe-
rious moment, the sentiments of the best
and worthiell may vary from those of
their fiiends, according as their lines tf
life diverge, or as their temper, and habits
of thought, present objects under different
points of view. But among candid and
liberal minds, unity of aficclion will (till
be preserved. No man has any title to
ered his own opinions into an universal
and infallible flandard: And the more en-
larged that any man's mind is, the more
readily he will overlook difference in fen-
timents, as long as he is perfladed that
the mind of his friend is upright, and that
he follows the dicates of conlcience and
integrity.

VOL. IV. A a IN

SERM. IN the third place, It is material to the
XVI. preservation of fricniillhip, that opcnnefs

of temper and manncrs, on both lands,
be cultivated. Nothing more certai:vly
dissolves friendihip, than the jealousy
which ariles fionl darlkiclfs and conceal-
ment. If your situation oblige you to
take a ditferent fide from your friend, do
it openly. Avow your conduc ; avow
your motives; as far as honour allows,
diiclofe yourflves frankly; fcek no cover
fiom unnecefl'lry and myllerious secrecy.
Mutual confidence is the foul of friend-
flsip. As soon as that is deflroyed, or
even impaired, it is only a show of fiiend-
flip that remains. What was once cor-
dial intimacy, degenerates firfl into formal
civility. Conflraint on both fides next
fuccceds; and difgult or hatred soon fol-
low.-The maxim that has been laid
down by certain crooked politicians, to
behave to a friend with the fame guarded
caution as we would do to an enemy, be-
cause it is possible that he may one day
become such, discovers a mind which never

was

was made for the enjoyments of friendflip. SE RM.

XVII.

It is a maxim which, not unrcafonably I x
admit, may find place in those political
and party friendflips, of which I before
spoke, where personal advancement is al-
ways in view. But it is altogether incon-
filtent with the spirit of those fricndfllips,
which are formed, and underflood to be
nourilled, by the heart.

Tire fourth advice which I give is, To

cultivate, in all intercourfc among friends,
gentle and obliging manners. It is a com-
mon error to suppose, that familiar intima-
cy fupcrfcdcs attention to the lkfer duties
of behaviour; and that, under the notion
of freedom, it may cxcule a careless, or
even a rough, demeanour. On the con-
trary, an intimate connection can only be
kept up, by a conlarnt wish to be pleasing
and agreeable. The nearer and closer that
men are brought together, the more fre-
quent that the points of contad between
them become, there is the greater necciflty
for the surface being finooth, and every

A a thing

SE R M. thing being removed that can grate or of-

Xj fend.-Let no harlhnefs. no alppearance of

neglec, no supercilious affectation ot fu-
periority, occur in the intcrcourfe of
friends. A tart reply, a proneness to re-
buke, a captious and contradidious spirit,
are often known to embitter domellic life,
and to set friends at variance. In those
finaller articles of behaviour, where men are
too apt to be carelels, and to indulge their
humour without refiraint, the real cha-
rader is often undcrilocd to break forth,
and Ihew itftlf. It is by no means e-
nough,.that, in all uatters of serious in-
terell, we thiink ourfelveb ready to prove
the sincerity of our fii i, 'hip. Thtfe
occur more rarely. The oic!nary tenlor
of life is compoled of finall dutie: id its-
sices, which men have occasion d4ily to
perform; ard it is only by rendering dai-
ly behaviour agreeable, that we can luoig
preserve the comforts of friendship.

IN the filth place, let me caution you
not to lifen rashly to evil reports against

your

your friends. When upon proper grounds SERM.
you have formed a connecion, be flow of x
believing any thing against the friend whom
you have chosen. Remcmber, that there
is among mankind a spirit of malignity,
which too often takes pleasure in disturb-
ing the society of those who appear to en-
joy one another. The scripture hath warn-
ed us, that there is a whl/perer who l/pa-
rateth chie/ ftiends; there is a fl/d/ witnc/s
vwho /tteth di/cord among brethren. Give
not therefore a ready ear to the officious
insinuations of those who, under the guise
of friendly concern, come to admonish
you, that you ought to fIand on your guard
against those whom they fee you disposed
to trut. Confider, whether, under this fair
appearance, there may not lurk rome fe-
cret envy and rivalry, or rome concealed
interest. Chafe not every flying report.
Suffer not the poison of jealousy easily to
taint your mind, and break your peace.
A wide difference there is between that
weak credulity which allows itself to be
imposed upon blindly, and that dark and

A a 3 suspicious

SERM. suspicious spirit which is always inclined
XVII.
· ,WJ to the evil lide. It forms part of the cha-

raiser of a wife and good man, that he is
not prone to lake up a reproach againfl his
neigJbour.

IN thefixth and last place, let me exhort

you noc to desert your fiiend in danger
or diltrefs. Too many there are in the
world, whose attachment to those they
call their friends is confined to the day of
their prosperity. As long as that conti-
nues, they are, or appear to be, affeclion-
ate and cordial. But as soon as their
friend is under a cloud, they begin to
withdraw, and to separate their interests
from his. In friendships of this fort, the
heart, assuredly, has never had much con-
cern. For the great test of true friendship,
is conflancy in the hour of danger, adhec
rence in the season of diflrefs.-When
your friend is calumniated, then is the
time, openly and boldly to espouse his
cause. When his situation is changed, or
his fortunes are falling, then is the time of

affording

affording prompt and zealous aid. When SERM.

XVII.

sickness or infirmity occasion hiin to be x\
neglccred by others, that is the opportu-
nity which every real friend will seize, of
redoubling all the affeclionate attentions
which love fuggelts. 'ThePc are the im-
portant duties, the sacred claims of friend-
ship, which religion and virtue enforce oi
every worthy mind.-To show yourselves
warm, after this manner, in the cause of
your friend, commands esteem, even from
those who have personal interest in oppof-
ing him. This honourable ze-.l of friend-
ship, has, in every age, attracted the vene-
ration of mankind. It has confccrated
to th: lateit posterity the names of those
who have given up their fortunes, and
have even exposcd their lives, in behalf
of the friends whom they loved; while
ignominy and disgrace have ever been the
portion of them, who decerted their friends
in the evil day. 1Thine on Jfriend orfake rot.

BEFORE concluding, it must not be
forgotten, that the injuncrion of the Wife

A a 4 Man

E R M. Man in the text, is accompanied with this
XVII. *v^ remarkable expression; not only thine

own friend, but also, thy father's friend
for/ake not. These words bring back to our
remembrance the days of former years;
and suggest a sentiment, which cannot but
touch every feeling heart. Thine own
friend may be dear; thy father's friend
ought to be sacred. As long as life re-
mains in any human breast, the memory
of those antient ties should remain, which
connected us once with our father, and
our father's houfe.-Thy father has per-
haps, long ago, gone down to the dust.
But when you recal the innocent days of
childhood and youth; when you think of
thofc family tranfacaions which once glad-
dened your hearts; your father's friend, in
the midst of these, will rife to your re-
membrance. There was a time when you
accosted him with refpec, or looked up to
him with fondness, and was made happy
by his kindly notice. Does such a one
now survive, and ihall he not receive

from

from you some portion of filial reverence s E R M.
and honour? To disregard and ncglect \.-rj
him, is to spurn your father's memory;
is to insult the afles of him who now
sleeps in the grave; is to tranfinit your-
selves to those who fliall succeed you, as
unfeeling and base. Thine 'own friend,
and thy Jather'sjriend, fo/ake not.

I HAVE pointed out some of the chief

duties which belong to virtuous friend-
lhip; and some of the principal means
by which this sacred bond should be pre-
served unbroken; this holy flame flould
be kept alive in the human breast. The
spirit, and sentiments, which I have flu-
died to inspire, are such as virtue breathes,
and such as true piety should increase.
It is thus we fulfil that great law of love,
which our divine Master taught. It is
thus we prepare ourselves for those happy
regions, where charitr never faileth; where,
in the pretence of the God of love, eternal
and invariable friendfhlips unite together

all

SF.RM. all the blessed; friendlhips, which, by no
xvo human infirmity diflturbcd, by death ne-

ver fcparated, liall conflitute throughout
endlels ages, a great and diftinguilicd
portion of the celestial felicity.

S E R ON

# SERMON XVIII. On the CONDUCT to be held with regard to Future EVENTS. PROVERBS xxvii. 1. Boast not thyself of to-morrow; for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth.

SERMON XVIII.
On the CONDUCT to be held with regard

to Future EVENTS.

PROVERBS xxvii.' .
Boa/t not thTyfef of to morrow; for thou

knoweft not what a day may bring forth.
FROM these words I purpose to dif- SERM.

course of the proper conduct which xv1I[.

we onght to hold with regard to futuri-
ty, amidst the present uncertainties of life.
Time and life are always going on, and
to each of us are preparing changes in our
state. What these may be, whether for
the better or for the worse, we cannot tell;

as

8ERM. as it hath pleased the wisdom of Provi-
x~ dence, to cover futurity with a veil which

no mortal can lift up. In the mean time,
none of us can avoid forming dcfigns,
and laying plans, for the time to come.
The present moment is never iufficient
to give full employment to the activc
mind of man, without some cxcurfions in-
to futurity; and in there excursions, the
present is often wholly spent. It is there-
fore of the highest consequence, that a pro-
per diecdion be given to the mind, in its
employments of thought relating to fu-
turity. Otherwise, in the profpeds which
we take of that unknown region, false
hopes, or ill-grounded fears, llall flattcr
or torment us in vain. t

i ki;;w not, as

the Wife Man tells us, what a day may
bring ortl,. It may, very probably, pro-
duce something that we had not looked
for; and therefore, iuflead of boafling our-
felvs of to ror, ow, as the multitude are
apt to do, it becomes us to be disciplined
and prepared, for whatever it may bring.

IT

IT is needless to spend much time in SERM

confirming the truth, which is the foun- x i.
dation of the admonition in the text; in
proving, either that change and mutability
belong to our prelent itate, or that the
changes of it cannot be foreseen by us.
These are truths so obvious and consef-
fed, that an attempt to confirm them is
like proving, that all men are to die. At
the fame time, obvious as they are, it were
to be wiihed, that the thoughts of men
dwelt upon them more. For, by a atrange
but prevailing deception, it would seem,
from the general conducd of mankind,
that almost every one thinks his own cafe
an exception from the general law; and
that he may build plans with as much
confidence on his present situation, as if
some assurance had been given him that
it were never to change Hence it has
been often observed by ifeious persons,
that there is no nmore Teneral caufc to
which the vices of men can he ascribed,
their rgcrful o God aml their ne-
gled of duty, than to their prefumllmg

3 upon

SER M. upon the continuance of life, of pleasure,

xu and prosperity.

Look but a little way, my friends, into

your own ftatc; and you must unavoid-
ably perceive that, from the beginning, it
has been so contrived by Providence, that
there should be no permanent stability to
man's condition on earth. The feeds of
alteration are every where sown. In your
health, life, poffeflions, connecions, plea-
lures, there are causes of decay impercep-
tibly working; secretly undermining the
foundations of what appears to you the
most flable; continually tending, to abo-
lilh the present form of things, and to
bring forward new appearances, and new
objects in their order: So that nothing is
or can be, Stationary on earth. All chan-
ges, and paffcs. It is a fiream which is
ever flowing; a wheel which is ever turn-
ing round. When you behold the tree
covered with blossoms in the spring, or
loaded with fruit in the autumn, as well
may you imagine, that those blossoms, or
that fruit, are to remain in their place

I through

through the whole year, as believe that SE R M.
human affairs are to continue, for to-day ,vl"
and to-morrow, for this year and the next,
proceeding in the fame tenor.-To render
this reflection still more serious, think, I
pray you, on what finall and inconfidcra-
ble causes those changes depend, which
affect the fortunes of men, throughout
their whole lives. How soon is evil done!
There needs no great bustle or stir, no long
preparation of events, to overturn what
leems most fccure, and to blast what ap-
pears most flourifliing. A gale of wind
rifes on the ocean; and the vessel which
carried our fiiends, or our fortunes, is o-
verwhelmed in the deep. A spark of a
candle falls by night in fume negledcd
corner; and the whole fulftancc of fami-
lies is consumcd in flames before the
morning. A casual blow, or a fuddcn
fall, deranges some of our internal parts;
and the reft of life is diflreis and milerv.
It is awful to think, at the mercy of how
mliny seeming contingencies we perpe-

t.ually

SERM tually lie, for what we call happiness in
xvlsU this world.

In the midst, however, of all these ap-

parent contingencies, plans and designs
for the future are every day formed; pur-
suits are undertaken; and life proceeds in
its ufuil train. Fit and proper it is, that
life should thus proceed. For the uncer-
tainty of to-morrow was never designed
by Providence, to deter us from aAing or
planning to day; but only to admonish
us, that we ought to plan, and to ad, fober-
ly and wifely.-What that wife and fober
conduc is which becomes us, what the
rules and precautions are, which, in such
a fiate as ours, refped futurity, I now pro-
ceed to show. They may be compre-
hended in the following direcions. Loaft
not thyfclf of to-morrow; Despair not of
to-morrow; Delay not till to-morrow what
is proper to be done to day; Prepare thy-
self for whatever to-morrow may bring
forth; Build thy hopes of happiness on
something more solid and lalting than

what

what either to.day or to-morrow will pro- S E R M.

xVIII.
duce. v

I. I the words of the text, Boa/I not

thy/clf of to-morrow; that is, never pre-
fume arrogantly on futurity; in the most
fair and promising state of forrune beware
of pride and vanity; beware of refting
wholly upon yourselves, and forgetting
Him who direcs the changes of this mu-
table state. If there be any virtues, which
the uncertain condition of the world in-
culcate on man, they are, affuredlv, mo-
deration and humility Man was, for
this end, placed in a world, where he
knows so little of what i6 before him, that
he might be impressed with a sense of his
dependence on the Ruler of the world;
that he might feel the importance of ac-
quiring favour and protection from Hea-
ven, by a life of piety and virtue; and
that, not knowing how soon his own con-
dition may be the fame with that of the
molt wretched, he might be prompted to
at towards all his brethren the humane

VOL. IV. B b and

SE R M and friendly part.-The favours which
XVIII.
xvly Providence bestows upon him at prefenr,

he ought to receive with thankfulnefe,
and may enjoy with chearfulnefs. Though
commanded not to boaJf himlelf ofto-morrow,
the meaning of the precept is not, that he
must be fad to day. Rejoice he may il
the day of prosperity; but certainly, Re-
joice ,tbh trembling, is the inscription that
fiould be written on all human pleasures.

As for them who, intoxicated with those

pleasures, become giddy and insolent;
who, flattered by the illusions of profpe-
rity, make light of every serious admoni-
tion which the changes of the world give
them, what can I fay too strong to alarm
them of their 'danger ?-They have said
to themselves, My mountain flands firong,
and /flall never be moved. To-morrow flafi
be as this dey, and more abundantly. IJhall
never fee adverjity.-Rali and wretched
men ! are you sensible how impious such
words are? To the world, perhaps you
dare not utter them; but they speak the
secret language of your hearts. Know,

you

you are usurping upon Providence; you SERM.
are setting Heaven at defiance; you are xvx1.
not only preparing iharper flings for your-
felvcs, when the changes of life shall come,
but you arc accelerating those changes;
you are fast bringing ruin upon your own
heads. For God will not fuffcr pride in
man; and the experience of all ages hath
flown, how careful he is to check it. In
a thousand memorable instances, the course
of his government has been visibly point.
ed against it. He Jheweth Jlrength with
his arm, and fcattereth the proud in the ima-
ginations of their hearts. bhe day of the
Lord is upon every one that is proud and
lfted up ; to humble the loJty looks of man,
and to flan the pride of all glry *. Some
of the ministers of divine displeasure are
commissioned to go forth; and to hum.
ble, without delay, the boa/ierJ of to-mor-
row.

Bb2 II. As
'Luke i. ij. Isaiah ii. 1l. uxii 9

SER M. 11. As we are not to boast, so neither
XVIII.

are we to lefpair, of to-morrow. The
former admonition was directed to those
whom proflerity hadl el.ted with vain
hopes. This is designed for thole whom
a more adverle situation in life has filled
with fears and alarms of what is to come.
The reason of both admonitions is the
fame; thou knowetl not Iwhat a day may
bring forth. It may bring forth some un-
expected misfortune; and therefore thou
ihouldft be humble in prosperity. It may
bring forth some unforeseen relief; and
therefore thou fhouldlt hope under dif-
trefs.-It is too common with mankind,
to be totally engrossed, and overcome, by
preftct events. Their present condition,
whatever it is, they are apt to imagine,
will never change; and hence by profpe-
rity they are lifted up, and by adversity are
dejeded and broken; prone, in the one
cafe, to forget God, in the other, to re-
pine against him. Whereas, the doctrine,
which the changes of the world pepetually

3 inculcate

culcate is, that no slate of external things SE R M.
flould appear so important, or Ihould so xviI.
assed and agitate our lpirits, as to deprive
us of a calm, an equal, and a fleady mind.
Man knoweth neither the good, nor the
evil which is before him. In your patience,
there/ore, olffis your J',l : truiting, in the
day of sorrow, that God hath not forgot-
ten to be gracious; and that though weep-
ing may endure for a niht, joy comneth to
the upright in the morning.

Distress not yourselves, then, with an-

xious fears about to-morrow. Let me
exhort you todifmiifs all folicitudc, which
goes beyond the bounds of prudent pre-
caution. Anxiety, when it seizes the
heart is a dangerous disease, productive
both of much fin, and much milery. It
ads as a corrosive of the mind. It eats
out our present enjoyments, and fubfli-
tutes, in their place. many an acute pain.
-The Wife Man, in the text, has advised
us not to boafl of to-morrow; and our Sa-
viour has inftruded us to take no thought

Bb3 for

$ERM' for to-morrow *. Both these dirccions,
XVIII.

oJi pproperly understood, are entirely confilt-

ent; and the great rule of conduct, re-
specting futurity, is compounded of them
both; requiring us, neither arrogantly
to presume on to-morrow, nor to be an.
xioufly, and fearfully solicitous about it.
Thc morrow, fays our Saviour, flall take
thought for the things of it/elf. We flall
be better able to judge of the course most
proper for us to hold, when events have be-
gun to come forward in their order. Their
presence often suggests wiser counsels, and
more successful expedients, than it is pof-
fible for us to contrive at a difRance. By
excess of solicitude before hand, we fie-
quently introduce that confusion of mind,
and that hurry and disorder of spirits,
which bring us into the molt unfavour-
able slate for judging foundly.-Where-
fore, never indulge either anxiety, or de-
fpair, about futurity. Affright not your-

selves
Matth. vi. 33.

selves with imaginary terrors. Antici- SE RM.
pate not evils, which perhaps may never \XVII
come. Make the best which you can of
this day, in the fear of God, and in the
pradice of your duty; and, having done
so, leave to-morrow to itself. Suffcient
for the day, when it comes, will be the evil
thereof.

III. DE LAY not till to-morrow any thing

which is fit and proper to be done to-day.
Remember, that thou art not the lord of
to-morrow. Thou art so far from having
any title to dispose of it, that thou art ig-
norant of the mofl material circumstances
relating to it; not only of what it shall
bring forth, but whether thou shalt live to
fee it.-Notwithflanding the uncontrover-
tible evidence of this truth, procrastination
has, throughout every age, been the ruin
of mankind. Dwelling amidst endless
projecs of what they are hereafter to do,
they cannot so properly be said to live, as
to be always about to live; and the fu-
ture has ever been the gulph in which the

B b 4 prefCnt

SER M. present is swallowed up and loft.-I- nce
XVIII. Xv arise many of those misfortunes which be-

fal, men in their worldly concerns What
might at present be arranged in their cir-
cumflances with advantage, being delay-
ed to another opportunity, cannot be ar-
ranged at all. To-morrow being loaded
with the concerns of to-day, in addition to
its ovwM, is clogged and embarrassed. As-
fairs, which had been pofiponed, multi-
ply and crowd upon one another; till, at
'ifi, they prove so intricate and perplexed,
and the pressure of business becomes so
great, that nothing is left, but to fink un-
dSr the burden. Of him, therefore, who
indulges this lingering and delaying fpi-
rit in worldly matters, it is easy to prog-
nofticate that the ruin is not far off.

Evils of the lame kind, arising fiom the

fame cause, overtake men, in their moral
and spiritual intercfts. I here are few,
but who are sensible of some things in
their characler and behaviour, which
ought to be corrected, and which, at one
time or other-, they intend to corre;

fomc

some headstrong paflion, which they de- SE R M.
sign to subdue; bfme bad habit, which they j
purpose to reform; some dangerous con-
nection, which they are retolved to break
off. But the convenient season for these
reformations is not yet come. Certain
obll, des are in the way, which they cx-
ped by and by to furmounlt; and th1ie-
fore they go on in peace for the'prelent,
in their usual courses, truflin'r, at a future
day. to begin their designed improvement.
In the mean time the angel ot death de-
scends; and in the midst of their distant
plans, executes his commission, and carries
them away.-Guard against delusions of
this kind, which have been fatal to so ma-
ny.-Thou art now in tranquillity, in
health, in poffflion of a calm mind. Im-
prove thef: advantages, for performing all
that becomes thee, as a man, and as a
Christian; for who can tell how long thou
lhalt be permitted to enjoy them ? New
alteratio:s of fortune may be just coming
forward; new troubles in public, or in
private life, about to arise; new exigencies

ready

SERM. ready to throw thee into some condition,
XVIII.

which hall; leave thee neither leisure nor
opportunity, to execute any of the good
purposes thou halt at prefenL in thy mindl.
Whereforc, trifle no longer with what is
bo fcrious, and what may be so critical;
but to day, while it is called to day, liften
to the voice of Cod, and do his works.
Do now, as the Wife Man advises, with
thy might whatfever thy hand findeth to
do; Jor there is no wor k, nor device, nor
.wiJdom, in the grave whether thou goejl %.
- Instead of delaying till to-morrow
what ought to be done to-day, let me ex-
hort you,

IV. To be every day prepared for what-

ever to-morrow may bring forth. There
is a certain preparation for the vicissitudes
of life, in which the multitude are fuffi-
ciently busied; providing, as they think, a-
gainft whatever may happen, by increasing

their
* Eccdef. ix. o0.

their riches, and flrengthening themfUlvcs SERM.

XVIII.

by friends, conncclions, and worldly ho-
nours. But thele bulwarks which they
erect, are totally infufficie:it against the
dreaded storm. It is to some other quar-
ter we mufl look for our defence; for
when it is the world itfflf, whole changes
we have reason to dread, the world, and
the things of it, cannot afford us protec-
tion. The best preparation for all the
uncertainties of futurity consists, in a well
ordered mind, a good conscience, and a
chearful submission to the will of Heaven.
You know not what lhall be on to-mor-
row. But there is One who knows it well;
for his decree hath fixed it. To him
look up with reverence; and fay, " Not
" my will, but thine be done; what thou ap-
" pointeft is ever wife, and jult, and good."
Seek to fulfil the part which he hath as-
signed you; to do the things which he hath
commanded you to do; and leave all the
reft to him. Whatever to-morrow brings
forth, let it find you employed in doing

I ljsly,

SE R M. jrsily, loving mercy, and walking humbly
XVIII. .x it
'tlth your CGod; and then you lhall meet

to-morrow without fear, when you meet
it without the upbraidings of guilt.

If it shall bring forth to you any unex-

peced good, prepare to receive it with
gratitude, temperance, and modefly. If
it shall bring forth evil, prepare to receive
it with manly fortitude. Let no events
of ally kind, derange your equanimity, or
thake your conflancy. Contrad your de-
fires, and moderate your hopes. ExpeCt
not more from the world than it is able to
afford you. Take it for granted that what
is naturally mutable, will one day change;
that what was designed to be transient,
will pass away.-Look forward to futu-
rity without impatience. Be not desirous
to know it. It belongs to God. Let him
bring forward the events of the world, in
his own way. Imagine that you conti-
nually hear those words, which our Lord
once addressed to Peter, when he was in-
quiring about what was to happen to a
fellow difciplc, It'hat is that to thee? Fol-

low

low thou me. Amidst all the uncertainty SERM.
of future events, this road of clear and XVl
plain duty lies before you; follow Christ,
and inquire no farther. Seek no crooked
path, in order to avoid impending dan-
gers. Turn not to the right hand, nor to
the left; but commit thy war unto the Lord;
trufl al/o in him, and he Jflall bring to paJs
the desires of thy heart.

V. BUILD your hopes of happincfs on

somewhat more solid and lasting, than
what either to-day or to-morrow are like-
ly to produce. From what has been said,
you may clearly perceive, that he who
refts wholly upon this world, builds his
house upon the sand. This life, by means
of wifdon and virtue, may be rendered to
a good man, a tolerable, nay a comfort-
able, state. But he who expct1s complete
happiness from it, will be greatly deceived.
Man, in his molt flourilhing condition,
were much to be pitied, if he was (dcti-
tute of any higher hope. Rolling from

change

E R M. change to change, throughout all the dayo
^^J of his life, with a dark and unknown

prolpeC' always before him in futurity,
what would avail a few fliort interrupted
glimpses of happincfs, which, from time to
time, lie was permitted to enjoy ? Can we
believe, that only for ilch a tate as this,
man was dlfigned by his great and good
Creator?-No : Let us b!ejs the God and
i ather of our Lord eJfus Chrf/l, who, accord-
iig to his abundant mercy, hath begotten us
qagain into a lively hope, by the rejurreftion of
Chritl fron the dead, to an inheritance incor-
ruptible, unwdefiled, and that fadeth not away.
Here is the Rock on which the mind, howe-
ver toft by the lorms of life, can lecurely
reit. Ilere is the object to which a wile

.an will bend his chief attention, that, at-

ter having acted his part on earth with
fidelity and honour, he may be enabled,
through the nmcrits of his Saviour, to look
for a place in the mansions of eternal
and untroubled peace. This prospect is
the great correclive of the prefcnt vanity
of human life. It gives significancy and

importance

niportance to its most transitory fcencs; R R
and, in the midst of its mutability, discovers xv
one fixed point of relt. Ile who is habi-
tually influenced by the hope of immorta-
lity, will be able to lo,:k without lifinay
on the changes of the world. lie wxll
neither boast of to-morrow, nor be afraid
of it; but will pass through the varieties
of life with a manly and unbroken mind;
with a noble fuperioriry to those fears and
expectations, those cares and sorrows,
which agitate the multitude.-Such arc
the native effects of Chrillian faith and
hope. To them alone it belongs, to fur-
mount all the discouragements to %which
we are now exposed; to render our life
comfortable, and our death bleflcd; nay,
to make the day of our death bltter than tnhe
day of our birth.

SER MON

# SERMON XIX. On following the MULTITUDE to do EVIL. EXODUS xxiii. 2. Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil. —

S 1 R ?M 0 N XIX.
On following the MULTITUDE to do

EVIL.

EXODUS xxiii. 2.

ThouJhalt not follow a multitude to do evil.-

SERM. N this world, we are placed as compa-
xlx. I nions and afliltants to one another.

Depending, for nmof of the comforts of
life, on liutual intercourse and aid, it was
necessary, that we (hould be formed to de-
fire the company, and to take pleasure in
the good will of our fellows. But this
sociability of man, though essential to his

prelenl

present condition, has, like many other SERM.
good principles, been unhappily warped Xtx
from its original purpose; and, in the pre-
sent state of the world, has proved the
cause of much evil. For, as vice has a-
bounded in every age, it hath propaga-
ted itself much more eafly by the aflift-
ance of this social lifpofition. We natu-
rally mould ourselves on the pattern of
prevailing manners; and corruption is
communicated from one to another. By
mutually giving, and taking, the cxample
of sinful liberties, licentioufncfs spreads
and grows; each jultifies himself by his
neighbour; and the multitude of finners
strengthen one another's hands to commit
iniquity. In all ages of the world, cuf-
tom has had more power than reason.
Few take the trouble of inquiring what
is the right path; the greater part con-
tent thcmfelves with following that in
which the multitude have gone before
them. No exhortation, therefore, is more
necessary to be frequently given, and to
be seriously enforced, than that which we

VOL. IV. C c receive

:;: I M. receive from the text; Tbou fl3alt sotfol-
as_ low a multitude to do evil.

-To acquire a full view of any danger
to which we are exposed, is the first mnca-
sure to be taken, in order to our fafcty.
Let us then begin the subjed, with confi-
dering how much we are in hazard of be-
ing misled into vice by the general man-
ners which we behold around us.-No
virtue is more necessary to a Christian,
but scarcely is there any more difficult
to be put in practice, than that firmness
of mind which can enable a man to main-
tain his principles, and to stand his ground
againit the torrent of cuflom, falhion and
example. Example has upon all minds a
secret and insinuating influence, even
when we ourselves are insensible of its ope-
ration. We imperceptibly fide into some
resemblance of the manners of those with
whom we have frequent intercourse. This
often shows itself, in the most indifferent
things. But the resemblance is fill more
readily contracted, when there is fomrn

thing

thing within ourselves, that leans to the SFT R

XIx.

fame fide which is countenanced by the k-
practice of others. W'e are always glad
to find any apology for indulging our
inclinations and paffons; and the exam-
ple of the multitude too readily fuggefis
that apology. Even before corruption
has made great progress in our hearts,
sometimes, mere complaisance and good
nature incline us to fall in with the ways
of others. Sometimes, timidity and false
shame prevent our differing from them:
Frequently, expecation and interest impel
us strongly to comply. How great is the
danger we incur, when, in times of pre-
vailing vice, all these principles of imita-
tion and compliance unite together a-
gainft our virtue?

The world is too justly said by scrip-

ture, to lie in wickedness. It is a school
wherein every vice is taught, and too ea-
fily learned. Even from our earliest child-
hood, false sentiments are inltilled into
our minds. We are bred up in admira-
tion of the external show of life. We are
accustomed, as soon as we can underhand

Cc 2 any

SFRM. ariy thing, to hear riches and honours
wVV spoken of as the chief goods of men, and

proposed to us as the objects to which our
future pursuits are to be directed. We
fee the measures of outward refpec and
deference taken fron thele alone. Reli-
gion and virtue are recommended to us,
in a formal manner, by our teachers and
inflrunors; but all improvements of the
mind and heart, are visibly placed by
the world, in an inferior rank to the ad-
vantages of fortune Vices, that chance
to be fashionable, are treated as flight fail-
ings; and coloured over, in common dif.
courle, with those soft and gentle names
which express no condemnation. We en-
ter, perhaps, on the world, with good
principles, and an aversion to downright
vice. But when, as we advance in life,
we become initiated in that mystery of ini-
quity, which is called, the way of the
world; when we meet with deceit and
artifice in all ranks of men; when we be-
hold iniquity authorised by great name,
and often rewarded with success and ad-

vancement,

vancement, our original good imprefflons SE R M.
too soon decay. The practice of the multi -
tude renders vice familiar to our thoughts;
and gradually wears off the abhorrence
with which we once beheld it. We begin
to think. that what is so very general, can-
not be highly criminal. The malignity
of fin appears diminished, by so many be-
ing sharers in the reproach; and instead
of mens vices detracting, as they ought
to do, from our good opinion of the men,
our attachment to the men oftener recon-
ciles us to the vices of which they are
guilty.

The countenance which fin receives

from the practice of the multitude, not
only removes the reflraints which are im-
posed by modesty and hanme; but, such
is the degeneracy of the world, that {hatne
is too often employed against the cause of
religion and virtue. The ridicule of the
giddy and unthinking bears down 'he
conviction of the fober and modest,
Againlt their own belief, they appear to
adopt the notions of the infidel; and a-

C c 3 -gainft

SERM., gainft their own choice, they join in the
Xlx.
*, vices of the libertine; that they may not

be reproached as persons of a narrow
mind, and fill enslaved to the prejudices
of education. How much reason is there
to believe that, merely from this timidity
of temper, many, whose principles are on
the fide of religion and virtue, are never-
thelefs found walking in the way offinners,
and fitting in the chair. of the fiornful ?-
Interest, too, often coincides with this
weakness of disposition, in tempting such
persons to follow the multitude. To tall
in with the prevailing talle, to suit them-
selves to the pafions of the great, or to
the humours of the low, with whom they
chance to be connected, appears the rea-
dieft way to rife in the world. Hence
they are naturally led to relinquish the
firmness of an upright character, for that
supple and verfable turn, which accommo-
dates itfelfto the times, and assumes what-
ever appearance seems most convenient
for intereft.-Such are the dangers to
which we are exposed, in times of corrup-

1 tioo,.

tion, of following the multitude to do evil; S E R M.
dangers which require our most serious aj
attention and care, in order to guard our-
selves against them.-I proceed to lay such
considerations before you as may be useful
for that purpose.

IN the firfl place, Let us remember that

the multitude are very bad guides; are so
far from having a title to implicit regard,
that he who blindly follows them, may be
presumed to err. For prejudice, and pas-
son, are known to sway the crowd. They
are struck by the outside of things; they
inquire superficially, admire false appear-
ances, and pursue false goods. Their o-
pinions are for the most part hastily form-
ed, and of course are variable, floating,
and inconsistent. In every age, how small
is the number of those who are guided
by reason, and calm inquiry ? How few
do we find, who have the wisdom to think
and judge for themselves, and have flea-
diness to follow out their own judgement?

C c 4 Ignorance

BERM. Ignorance, and low education, darken the
XIX.

views of the vulgar. Fashion and pre-
judice, vanity and pleasure, corrupt the
sentiments of the great. The example of
neither, affords any flandard of what is
right and wife. If the philosopher, when
employed in the pursuit of truth. finds it
necessary to disregard cftabliflied preju-
dices and popular opinion, shall we, in the
more important inquiry after the rule of
life, submit to such blind guidance as the
pracice of the many; esteeming whatever
they admire, and following wherever they
lead ? Be assured, that he who sets up the
general opinion as the flandard of truth,
or the general practice as the measure of
right, is likely, upon such a foundation,
to build no other fuperftrudure except
vice and folly.-If the pracdice of the mul-
titude be a good pattern for our imitation,
their opinions surely lhould be as good a
rule for our belief Upon this principle,
we must exchange Chriflianitv for Paga-
nifin or Mahometanifm, and the light of
the Reformation for the fuperllitions of Po-

pery;

pery; for these latter have ever had, and SER M.
still have, the numbers and the multitude x..
on their fide.-Our Saviour has fuffcient-
ly characlerifed the way of the world,
when he describes the broad oaJ in which
the multitudes go, as the road C7hich leads
to delItuc7;on; and the path which leads to
happiness, as a nat,,ow path, which fewer
find. From which it is an easy interence,
that to have the multitude on our fide, is
so far from affording any presumption
of our being safe, that it should lead us
to fufped that we are holding the course
of danger.

IN the second place, as the practice of

the multitude is no argument of a good
pratfice, so it cannot afford us either jutl
tification, or safety, in what is evil.-It as-
fords us, I fay, no justification. Truth
and error, virtue and vice, are things of
immutable nature. The diffeence be-
tween them is grounded on that basis of
eternal reason, which no opinions or cuf-
toms of men can affect or alter. Whether

virtue

SERM. virtue be esteemed, or not, in the world,
xlx.

this makes it neither more nor less eflima-
ble in itftlf. It carries always a divine
authority. which men cannot impair. It
shines with an essential lustre, which
praise cannot brighten, nor reproach tar-
nifh. It has a right to regulate the opi-
nions of men; but by their opinions can-
not be controlled. Its nature continues
invariably the fame, though all the mul-
titude of fools fliould concur in endea-
vouring to turn it into ridicule. Wo un-
to them, fays the prophet Isaiah, that
call evil, good, and good, evil; that put
darknefi Jor light, and light for darkness;
that put bitter for sweet, andJweet Jor bit-
ter -Their root jhall be as rottenness, and
their blo/omfhallgo up as dufJ; bccaufe they
have call away the law of the Lord of ho/ll,
and de/pifed the word of the holy one of If-
rael *.

As the practice of the multitude fur-

nifles
* Ifiah v. to, 24.

nihes no justification to the finner, so SEK M

Xt~.

neither does it afford him any safety. Re- r
ligion is altogether a matter of personal
concern. God hath delivered to every
man the rule of life; and every man must
think and at for himself; because for
himself he is to answer. If others be wic-
ked, it will be the worse for them; but
it will not, on that account, be the better
for us, if we shall be evil also. Let vice
be ever so prevalent, it is still that evil
thug which the Lord abhorreth; and,
though hand join in hand, the wicked shall
not escape unpunished. So far is the num-
ber of offenders from furnilhing any
ground of safety, that it calls 'more loudly
for dvine justice to interpose. It is as
easy for the Almighty arm to crush a
whole guilty society, as to punish a single
individual; and when the disobedient
fubjecs of God countenance and strength.
en one another in licentiousness, by tranf-
greffing in troops and bands, it becomes
high time for his government to exert
tfelf, and let its vengeance forth.-One

could

SE R M. could scarcely think that any professor of
XX. CChriftian faith would fancy to himself

any apology from the way of the world,
when he knows that the declared design
of his religion was, to diflinguifh him
from the world, which is said to he infin;
and that Christ came to call out for him-
self a peculiar people, whose character it
ihould be, not to be conformed to the world,
but traniformed by the renewing of their
minds.-So little, indeed, can the practice
of the world either justify or extenuate
vice, that it deserves our serious confidera-
tion,

IN the third place, whether there be

not several circumstances, which peculiar-
ly aggravate the guilt of those who follovw
the multitude in evil. Do you not, there-
by, fIrengthcn the power of fin, and per-
petuate the pernicious influence of bad
example? By striking off from the cor-
rupted crowd, you might be eminently
useful. You might animate and recover
many, whom weakness and timidity keep

under

under bondage to the customs of the SERnM.

XIX.

world; whereas, by tamely yielding to the xl
current of vice, you render that current
stronger for carrying others along; you
add weight and (lability to the bad caule;
you lend to the multitude all the force of
your example, for drawing others after
them, to the commission of evil.--While
you are thus accessory to the ruin of o-
thers, you are, at the fame time, flamping
your own character with the foulest and
deeper impressions of corruption. Bly fur-
rendering your judgement, and your con-
science, to the multitude, you betray the
rights, and degrade the honour, of the ra-
tional nature. Nothing great or worthy
can be expeced of him, who, inftcad of
confidering what is right in itself, and
what part it is fittest for one in his tfation
to ac, is only confidering what the world
will think, or fay of him; what fort of
behaviour will pass with the fairest flow,
and be molt calculated to please the ma-
ny. When a man has thus given up the

liberty

E R M. liberty and independence of his mind, we
ysj can no longer reckon upon him in any

thing. We cannot tell how far he may be
carried in vice. There is too much ground
to dread, that he will lie, dissemble, and be-
tray; changing himself, without scruple,
into every shape that will find favour a-
mong those whom he seeks to gain.-
While this servility to the world infers
baseness towards men, it involves also the
highest impiety towards God. It shows
that we yield to the world that reverence
and submission, which is only due to the
divine law. We treat the government of
the Almighty with scorn; as if his pre-
cepts deserved to be obeyed, only when they
suited the caprice and the follies of the
multitude; and were entitled to no regard,
as soon as they contradiced the reigning
cuRoms and fashions of the world.-
While such conduct carries in it so much
wicktdnefs and folly, let us observe,

IN thefourth place, that the most excel-
lent and honourable claracfer which can a-

dorn

dorn a man and a Christian, is acquired, SE RM.

XIX.

by resitting the torrent of vice, and adhe- XI.
ring to the cause of God and virtue a-
gainft a corrupted multitude. It will be
found to hold in general, that all those,
who, in any of the great lines of life, have
diftinguiffed themselves for thinking pro-
soundly, and acting nobly, have despised
popular prejudices, and departed, in several
things, from the common ways of the
world. On no occasion is this more re-
quifite for true honour, than where reli-
gion and morality are concerned. In times
of prevailing licentiousness, to maintain
unblemished virtue, and uncorrupted in-
tegrity; in a public or a private cause, to
stand firm by what is fair and just, amidst
discouragements and oppoGtion; delpifing
groundless censure and reproach; dildain-
ing all compliance with public manners,
when they are vicious and unlawful; and
never aihamed of the punctual discharge of
every duty towards God and man ;-this
is what ihows true greatness of spirit, and
will force approbation even from the degc-

nerate

SERM. nerate multitude themselves. "This is

x " the man," their conscience will oblige

them to acknowledge, " whom we are un-
" able to bend to mean condescensions.
"We fee it in vain either to flatter or to
" threaten him; he refts on a principle
" within, which we cannot shake. To this
"mai. nu may, on any occasion, safely
" connit -our cause. He is incapable
" oftraying his trust, or deserting his
" t:cnd, or denying his faith." Thus
his igl:eoufuef ctrnes Joilh as the light,
anm iJ judgcrent as the noon-day.

It is, accordingly, this steady inflexible

viilue, this regard to principle, superior to
all custom and opinion, which peculiarly
marked the characters of those, in any
age, who have shone as faints or heroes;
and has consecrated their memory to all
poftcrity. It was this that obtained to
ancient Enoch the most singular teftimo-
ny of honour from heaven. He conti-
nued to walk Vwith God, when the world
apoflltif.ed from him. He plcafed God,
:and was beloved of him; so that, living

3 among

living among finners, he was translated to SERM.

LIX.

heaven without feeing death; Yea, peedily .
was be taken away, les wzckedne/ should
have altered his underianding, or deceit be-
gutled his /ld**. When Sodom could not
furnish ten righteous men to save it, Lot
remained unspotted amidst the contagion.
He lived like an angel among spirits of
darkness; and the destroying flame was not
permitted to go forth, till the good man
was called away by a heavenly messenger
from his devoted city. When allUf* had
corrulted their way upon the earth, then li-
ved Noab, a righteous man, and a preach.
er of righteoufuefs. He Rood alone, and
was scoffed by the profane crew. But
they by the deluge were swept away;
while on him, Providence conferred the
immortal honour, of being the restorer of
a better race, and the father of a new
world. Such examples as there, and such
honours conferred by God on them who
withstood the multitude of evil doers,

VOL. IV. Dd should
* Wisdom of Solomn iv. it.

ERM. should often be present to our minds.
xjlx Let us oppose them to the numbers of

low and corrupt examples, which we be-
hold around us; and when we are in ha-
zard of being swayed by such, let us for-
tify our virtue, by thinking of those who,
in former times, shone like stars in the
midst of surrounding darkness, and are
now shining in the kingdom of heaven, as
the brightnels of thefirmament, for ever and
ever.-As our honour is thus deeply con-
cerned in our acting a stedfast and virtu-
ous part, let us also confider,

IN the fifth place, How little, in point

of interest, can begained by the favour of
the multitude, and how much will cer-
tainly be loft, by following them to do e-
vil We may, thereby, render ourselves
more agreeable to some with whom we
are connected; and by artful complian-
ces, may please ourselves with the profped
of promoting our fortune. But these ad-
vantages, such as they are, remain doubt-
ful and uncertain. .The wind of popular
opinion is ever ihifting. It will often

2n3~~~ leave

!eave us at a loss what course to steer; SERM

XIX.

and, after all our trouble and anxiety to ,
catch the favourable gale, it may on a fud-
den forsake us. For the versatility of cha-
raaer, the meanness and inconsistency of
conduc, into which a dependent on the
multitude is betrayed, frequently ren-
der him, in the end, an objecA of con-
tempt to those whom he fought to please.
But supposing him successful in his views,
no worldly advantages, which are pur-
chased by dishonourable means, can be
either solid or lasting. They bring no ge-
nuine fatisfadion to a man, who is con-
Icious to himself of having given up his
principles to serve the world. As long as
hd could be satisfied with his own conduc,
he might bear up under undeserved dif-
couragement; but when he becomes def-
picable in his own eyes, worldly honours
lose their luftre.-What can the multitude
do for you, after you have followed them
in evil? They cannot restore to you the
peace of an innocent mind, nor heal the
sorrows of a wounded spirit, nor lhield
you from the displeasure of God. They

D d z can

SERM. Can do little to support you in the hour of
lxj aafflicion, and nothing to deliver your

fouls in the day of dath. Forsaken and
disconsolate, the world, for the most part,
casts off its votaries in the end ; and when
you compute the final amount, it will
prove a very finall consolation, that, as you
have had iharers in guilt, you fliall have
companions also in punifinment.

Look forward to the issue of things.

The multitude of men possess now, in a
great measure, the distribution of praise
and censure, of success and disappoint-
ment, according to their caprice. But this
confused and promiscuous distribution is
not always to subsist The day cometh,
when we all are to appear before a more
discerning Judge, and a more impartial
tribunal. The day cometh, when our
Lord Jesus Christ, flall defucnd from hea-
ven in all the glory of his Father, to un-
veil every characer, and to render to every
man according to his wrkl. At that day,
how shall he lift up his head, who hath
been all his life the slave cf the world's

3 opinion;

opinion; who hath moulded his principles, s E R M.
and his practice, folly to please the mul.-
titude; who hath been ajlzed o/l bis Sa-
viour and his u'ords; and to gain favour
with men, hath apofiatifcd from the na-
tive sentiments and dictates of his heart ?
-To fay all in one word; there is a con-
test now between God and the world.
These form the opposite fides which di-
vide mankind. Confider well, to which of
there you will chufe to adhere. On the one
fide, lie your allegiance, your honour, and
your interef ; on the other, lie your
guilt and your shamc. For the one, con-
science and rcafon, for the other paflion,
and inclination, plead. On the one hand,
are the approbation of God, immortal ho-
nour, and divine rewards; on the other,
-remember and beware,-are the flings
of conscience, endless punishment, and
endless infamy.

Dd3 SERMON

# SERMON XX. On the WISDOM of GOD *. 1 TIMOTHY i. 17. Now unto the King Eternal, immortal, invisible, the only Wise God, be honour and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

S E R M O N XX.
On the WISDOM of GOD *.

I TlAiOT'rii i. 17.
Now unto the King Eternal, immortal, in.

vfble, the only sJlic God, be honour and
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
SERM. IT is of the highest importance to reli-

xx gious condua, that our minds be fill-
ed with suitable conceptions of the attri-

butes

* This concluding discourse is chiefly intended, to br

a general recapitulation of inllances of the wifdlom o.
Providence, fcveral of which have been more fully i'
lustrated in other discourses, contained in thi, ir ;
some of the preceding volumes.

J .

butes of God. They are the foundations s E R M.
of our reverence for him; and reverence is xx.
the foundation of religion. All the di-
vine perfections are interesting to man.
Almighty power, in conjunclion with E-
ternity and Omnipresence, naturally in-
spires solemn awe. Infinite Goodness re-
lieves the mind from that oppreflion which
Power alone would produce; and, from
our experience of present benefits, and our
remembrance of the past, creates love, gra-
titude, and trust. In the middle between
there, stands the contemplation of divine
Wisdom, which conjoins impressions of
awe with those of comfort; and while it
humbles us into profound fubmiflion, en-
courages, at the fame time our reliance on
that King eternal, immortal, and inAtfible,
who is justly ftiled in the text, the only wife
God.

Among men, wisdom is a quality en-

tirely different from cunning or craft.
It always supposes good and fair inten-
tion in the person who possesses it; and

D d 4 imports,

SERM. imports, that laudable ends are pursued
^XY by proper and juflifiable means. In like

manner, w;lilom in the Supreme Being
cannot be separated from the retitude of
his nature. It is, in him, an exertion of
benevolence; and imports, that the pnr-
poses of justice and goodness are carried
on and accomplished, by means the most
effectual. To meditate on tome of those
inflances in which this divine wisdom is
displayed, cannot but be highly favour-
able to the inipreflions both of piety, and
of virtue.

IT is difficult to fay, whether the natu-

ral, or the moral, world, afford the mofl
conspicuous and firiking displays of the
wisdom of God. Not one, nor many dif-
courses, nor indeed the study and labour of
a whole life, were, in any degree, sufficient
to explore them. Of the proofs of wis-
dom which the natural world affords, I
cannot attempt now to discourse. Any
illuflration of these would lead to discus-
sions of a scientific kind, which more

properly

properly belong to the philosopher; and SE R M.
on which philolbphy has often emplioyedt t
itielf, with nuch utility anl honour. 1
(hall only take notice that, in proportion
as human knowledge hath enlarged its
iphere of relcarch and diflovcry, in the
fame proportion, hath the wifdoom of the
Creator struck the minds of ail inquirers
antd observers, with the highefl admiration.
All nature is in truth a skene of wonders.
In the disposition of the heavenly bodies,
and the general arrangement of the tyltem
of the universe; in the firudure of the
earth; in the endless variety of living
creatures that fill it; and in the provilion
made for them all, to enable them to fulfil
the ends of their being, it is not cafy to
determine, whether power, wifldon, or
goodncfs be moit conlpicuous. It belongs
not only to the heaven s toa.lare tlc Yiry
óJ Go0,, and to thefirmrament to Jhewi' jo,tli
hi hann. :-'oik; in the linalleft and molft
inconliderable, as well as in the molt il-
luftrious works of God, equal mnaiks ap-
pear of profound delign and conlmillnate

art.

SERM. art. It has been jufly said, that there is
xx. ,y>_J not a vegetable that grows, nor an iniec

that moves, but what is sufficient to con.
found the atheist, and to afford the candid
observer endless materials of devout ado-
ration and praile.

WHEN we turn to the moral world,

the field of admiration which opens to us
is no less extensive and firiking. I can
only mention a few inrfances of that ex-
quifite wisdom which everywhere meet
us.

In the fir/ place, let us attend to the

conflitution of human nature. Though we
are taught by revelation, to confider it as
now impaired by the fall, yet, as it stands,
we behold the traces of a noble ftrucure,
planned and executed with the highest skill.
All the powers and faculties bestowed on
man are such, as perfedly suit his condition,
and adapt him to the purposes for which
he was defigned-Senfes were given him,
that he might distinguish what is neceffa-
ry for the preservation and welfare of his

body.

body. Now, suppose that any one of SERM.

xX.

those senses, the fight, for inftancc, or the xj
hearing, or the touch, had been in a con-
fiderable degree either more blunt, or
more acute, than it is at present, what an
unhappy change would this have made
upon our slate ? On the one hand, greater
imperfection of the organs, would have
deprived us of all the comfort and advan-
tage which we now enjoy from such
powers. On the other hand, a greater de-
gree of exquisite sensibility in them, would
have rendered life a burden to us. Our
senses, instead of being inlets to know-
ledge and pleasure, would then have be-
come constant avenues to uneasiness and
pain. Their powers, therefore, are fkil-
fully adjusted to that measure of flrength,
which allows them to anfler the purpoles
of health, safety, and comfort; without
either falling hiort of this line of useful-
ness, or improperly, and hurtfully, firetch-
ing beyond it.

In the mind, appetites and passions
were placed, as the moving powers of the

foul,

SER M. foul, to impel its afivity. But as their
XX. xxj impulse required regulation and reflraint,

reason was, at the fame time, conferred as
the direcling power.-Of all our passions,
felf-love, and the desire of felf-prefervation,
were, with the utmost propriety, made the
firongeft, for a reason which the meanest
capacity may comprehend. Every man
is most immediately committed by Provi-
dence to his own care and charge. He
knows his own situation best; and has
more opportunties of promoting his own
happiness, than he can have of advan-
cing the happiness of any other person.
It was therefore fit and wife, that, by
the strongest inftind, he should be prompt-
ed to attend to himfelf.-At the fame
time, as no man flanding alone is sus-
ficicnt for his own welfare, it was ne-
ceffary that, by mutual sympathy and
flcial inftincas, we should be drawn to
give aid to one another. Here it deserves
our particular notice, that the force of
those social instincts is, with admirable
propriety, proportioned by Providence to

the

the degree of their usefulness and impor- SE R .
tance *. Thus, that parental affedion,
which the helpless itate of infancy and
childhood renders so needful, is made the
strongest of them all. Next, come those ties
of blood, which prompt mutual kindness a-
mong those who are intimately joined to-
gether by brotherhood, and other family
connections. To these succeeds that va-
luable inftina of pity, which impels us to
aflift the difltreffed, wherever we behold
them. To take part with others in their
good fortune belongs to man's social na-
ture, and increases the fum of hlppinefs.
At the fame time, to take part with the
prosperous is less necessary than to sym-.
pathife with the unhappy; and therefore
the principle which prompts us to tejuice
.with them that rejoice, is made not to be
tb firong, as that which impels us to weep
with them that weep.

But they are not only the laudable and
important parts of our difpfition, which

discover
X See Sermn. I. Vol. iii.

SERM. discover the wisdom of the Author of our

xx.
-^j frame; even our imperfections and fol-

lies, are by him rendered subservient to
useful ends.-Amidft those inequalities
of condition, for instance, which the state
of human life required, where it was ne-
celErry that some thould be rich, and o-
thers poor, that some flould be eminent
and diltinguiflied, and others obscure and
mean, how seasonable is that good opinion
which every one entertains of himself;
that felf-complacency with which he com-
pares hilmfclf to others; and that fond
hope, which is ever pleasing him with the
prospect of future pleasures and advanta-
ges in life ? Without those flattering fen-
lations, vain as they often are, how totally
insupportable would this world become, to
many of its inhabitants? Whereas, by
means of them, Providence hath contrived
to balance, in a great measure, the inequa-
lities of condition among mankind. It hath
contrived to diffuse pleasure through all
ranks; and to bring the high and the low
nearer to a level with each other, than might

at

at first be supposed. It hath smoothed the sE RM.
most rugged tracts of human life; and xx
hath gilded with rays of borrowed light
its most dreary scenes.

One instance of Divine wisdom, in

framing our nature, is so remarkable as
to demand particular attention; that is,
the measure according to which, God hath
dispensed knowledge and ignorance to
man. There is nothing of which we are
more ready to complain, than of our nar-
row and confined views of nature, ahd of
Providence, and of all things around us:
And yet, upon examination, it will be
found, that our views extend, on every fide,
just as far as they ought; and that, to
fee and know more than is allowed us, in-
stead of bringing any advantage, would
produce certain misery *.-- We pry, for
instance, with impatient curiosity, into
future events. Happily for us, they are
veiled and covered up; and one peep be-

hind
See Serm. IV. Vol. i. and Serm. IX. Vol. iv.

SERM hind that veil, were it permitted, would

be luiffic;ent to poison the whole comfort
of our days. by the anticipation of sorrows
to come.-In like manner, we often with
with eagerness to penetrate into the secrets
of nature, to look into the invisible world,
and to be made acquainted with the whole
deltiny or man. Our with is denied;
we are environed on all hands with my-
fiery; and that mystery is our happiness.
For were those great invisible objects fully
dilloled, the fight of them would con-
found and overwhelm us. It would ei-
ther totally derange our feeble faculties,
or would engross our attention to such
a degree, as to lay us afie from the bufi-
nels, and concerns of this world It would
have the fame fffecl, as if we were carried
away from the earth, and mingled among
the inhabitants of some other planet.-
The knowledge that is allowed to us, was
defigred to fit ub for adting our part in
our )prcfut ltate. At the exa& point
sheretore, where usefulness ends, know-
ledge flops, and ignorance commences.

Light

.tight Iliines upon us, as long as it rerves SE M.

XX.

to guide our path ; but forsakes ug, as soon J
as it becomes noxious to the eye; and
salutary darkness is appointed to close the
fcene.-Thoughtlefs and stupid must that
man be, who, in all this furniture of the
human mind, in this cxact adjufsmcnt of
its fevcral powers to the great purposes of
life, discerns not the hand of adorable
Wisdom, as well as of infinite Coodnefs.

IN the fEon I place, Let us contemplate

the fame wisdom, as exhibiting i'fclf to
us in the moral government of the world.
We are informed by revelation, that this
life is designed by Providence to be an in-
troduaory part of existence to incelligent
beings; a slate of education and difci-
pline, where creatures fallen from their
original rank, may gradually recover their
recaitude and virtue. Under this view,
which is in itself perfecly consonant to
all that reason discovers, we shall find the
general course of human affairs, confused
as it may sometimes appear, to have been

VOL. IV. E e been

SERM. been ordered with exquisite wifdom.-It
Xx.

was necefEary to such a slate, that all the
active powers of man flould be brought
forth into exercise, and completely triel.
It became proper, therefore, that there
should be a mixture of charactrs in the
world; and that men should be llhewn in
a variety of situations *. Hence that dli-
verfity of tempers and dispositions which
are found in society; those inequalities in
rank and flation, which we fee taking
place; and thoie different talents and in-
clinations, which prompt men to dilferent
pursuits. By these means, every depart-
ment in bfciety is filled up; and every mnaa
has fbnoe fi)licre prepared fur him, in
which he can act. le is brought forth
as on a busy flage. where opportunity
is given for lIis charatdLqr to d(isplay itcilf
fulyv.-Ilis lii i, with great proprilty,
varied by intcrchangcs of prulicity all
ialvcrlfity. Always proielp rous, he would

becomi
S,. Sul'. IV \.'.;1 v.

become dissipated, indolent, and giddy: SERM.
Always affliced, he would be fretful, de- xx.
jeted, and fullen. There are few persons,
therefore, or none, whose lot Ihares not of
both thelfc fates; in order that every difl
position of the heart may be explored,
and every mean of improvement afforded.
-As man is ultimately designed for a
higher fiate of existence than the present,
it was not proper that this world fliould
prove a paradise to him, or should afford
him that complete fatisfaclion which he
incefantly pursues. Disappointments,
therefore, are often made to blast his
f-opes; and, tven while the comforts of
lifi lali, they are always mixed with onme
troubles; in order that an excefive at-
talhmcnt to this world may gradually be
loolened. The course of things is evi-
dently so ordered by Providence, that oc-
curences 1Lall be always happening, to
bring down the mofi prosperous to a lc-
vel with the relt of his brethren, and to
raile up, in their turn, th: low and the
di'trcfi d.

Fe In

S ER M. In the midst of those vicissitudes, which

are so obviously conducive to improve-
ment, both wisdom and goodness required,
that the supreme Governor of the world
should be seen to protee the interests, and
favour the fide of virtue. But in the de-
gree of evidence, with which this was to
be shown, it was no less requiiite, that a
proper temperament fliould be observed.
Had virtue been always completely re-
warded, and made happy on earth, men
would no longer have had a motive for
aspiring to a more blessed state. In the
cafe of every crime, had divine justice
interposed to bring complete punishment
on the head of the criminal; or had aU
the felicity which is prepared for the jult
in a future world, and all the misery which
there awaits the wicked, been already dil
played ,to the view, and rendered sensible
to the feelings of men, there would havc
been an end of that state of trial, for which
our whole condition on earth was intenl-
td. It was necessary, therefore, that, at
present, we ihould fie through a gljs

X dai kl>.

daikly. A certain degree of myltcrv and SERM.

XX.

obscurity was, with perfcCl wisdom, left _
on the condud of the Almighty *.-But,
amidst that obfcuiiity, sufficient encou-
ragement and support is in the mean time
given to virtue ; fuficient ground is afford-
ed for the full belief, that it is what the
Deity loves, and will finally reward. His
approbation of it is signified to every man
by the voice of confcicnce. Inward satis-
falion and peace are made always to be-
long to it; and general esteem and ho-
nour, for the most part, to attend it. On
the other hand, the wicked, in no fitua-
tion of life, are allowed to be truly happy.
Their vices and their pailions are made to
trouble their prosperity; and their pu-
nifhmcnt to grow out of their crimes.
Let any one attentively recolled the ma-
terial incidents of his life; and he will,
for the most part, be able to trace the
chief misfortunes which have befallen

E e j him,
* See Scrm. IV. Vol, i

SERM. him, to some guilt he has contracted, or
f., faome folly he has committed *. Such

is the profound wisdom with which Pro-
vidence conducts its counsels, that, al-
though it does not appear to interpose,
men are made to reap from their actions,
the fruits which they had deserved; their
iniquities to correl thrm, and their back-
Jlidings to reprcove them; and while they
susser, they are forced to acknowledge the
juflice of their punifhiment.-Thefe are
not matters of rare or occasional obferva-
tion; but deeply interwoven with the
texture of human affairs. They discover
a regular plan, a formed system, according
to which the whole train of Providence
proceeds; and which manifests to every
serious obfervcr the consummate wisdom
of its Author.-As thus, i;, the conltitu-
tion of human nature, and in the moral
government of the world, divine wisdom
so remarkably appears, 1 must observe,

In
* See Serm. XIII. Vol. iv.

IN the third place, That in the redemp- SERM.

tion of the world, and in the ceconomy x
of grace, it illines no less conspicuously,
The fubjccl which opens to us here is too
extensive to be fully illustrated at present;
but the great lines of it are obvious '.-
In carrying on a plan, by which forgive-
ness was to be difienfed to an offending
race, wisdom required that the authority
of the legislator flould be fully preserved,
and no such relaxation be introduced in-
to government, as might give licence or
encouragement to offenders. According-
ly, the molt admirable provision was
made for these important purpofcs, by the
interposition of the Son of God suffering
and dying fur finners. The sovereign
awe of justice is maintained, while jus-
tice is tempered with mercy. Men are
bound to righteousness, under the highelt
fandcions; and ample security and con-

E e 4 folation

*See Serm. V. Vol. i.-Serm. V. Vol. ii.-Serm.
XV. Vol. iii.-Serm. V. Vol. iv.

E R M. folation are, at tlhe fame time, afforded to
xx. XX- tlhe penitent. ]y the infrruclions, and

example, of their ';aviour, they are in-
firuclcd in their duty; and through a
lcdliator and IntcrccfFor, tlcy are en-
couraged to offcr thcir wolfip and pray-
ers to tile Almighty. ThLey are assured
that, in whatever is too arduous for hu.
man nature to perform, they fliall be as-
fifled by a Iivine Spirit; and under all
trials and diillicdties, they are supportcd
)y tlhe cxprcft lroinif of tiat ctcinal lifc,
which is brouglit to light by the gofpcl.
-It is not pofiljle for the urdcrflanding
to conceive any nmcthod of lilvation, plan-
ned with more goodncefs, and executed
with more -i'iloin, tl:an what is flowvn
in the gospel of Crilt. Thle confidera-
tion of this (onflitutien alone, gives us
full reason to j,)in in that exclamation of
tle Apoillc : ( the c'cph of the riches both
cf the wióC Jlcm ai.l tte rnot ledge cf God.'
jlotw unfiarchable are /i. j:i.lgencnts, an.l
Lis cwla's paflfindng out ' *

FROI.
I Rom. ii. 3.3.

FROM this flort survey which we have SERM.

xx.

taken of Divine wisdom, as discovering X
itself, in the whole complex frame of the
moral world; in the conltitution of hu-
man nature; in the government of hu-
man affairs; and in the redemption of
the human race; we cannot but perceive
how much reason we have to proflrate
ourselves before God, and with all humi-
lity to worship and adore.-When we
view that immense ftruture of the uni-
verfc in which we dwell; when we think
of Him, whose wisdom has planned the
whole system of being; whose mind com-
prehends, whose counsels dired, the whole
course of events, from the beginning to the
end of time; by whom nothing is so in-
considerable as to be overlooked, or so
transient as to be forgotten; who attends
to the concerns of the poor man in his
cottage, while he is fleering the fun and
the moon in their course through the
heavens; into what aftonifliment and
felf-annihilation do we fall! Before him
gll our boasted knowledge is ignorance,

and

SERM. and our wisdom is folly. Wherever we

XX.
\YJ ccaft our eyes on his works and ways, we

find all things adjustcd in number, weight,
and mnceawre; and after all that we can
survey, Lo! these are but a part of his
ways; and how finall a portion i heard of
him !

It is the power of God, which produces

among the multitude of men any impref-
sions of religion. When thunder roars
in the heavens, or an earthquake shakes
the ground, they are itruck with awe, and
disposed to worship an invisible power.
But such impressions of Deity are occa-
fional, and transitory. The lafling reve-
rence of a Supreme Being arises, in a well
informed mind, from the display of that
infinite wisdom which all the universe
presents. Its operations are constantly,
though silently, going on around us.
We may view it in the peaceful and fe-
date fiate of the universe, as well as in its
greatest commotions; we behold it in e-
very infect that moves on the ground, at
the fame time that we admire it in the

3 revolutions

revolutions of the celestial bodies. Hap- SERM.
py for us, if the contemplation fliall nou- x~
rifh that temper of habitual devotion,
which so well becomes dependent beings,
and is so intimately conneced with all
virtue *!

But the chief effect that ought to be

produced by meditation on the divine
wisdom, is perfec resignation to the Go.
vernor of the universe, and entire trust
in his administration. Our private mif-
fortunes and dilappointmcnts are too often
the fubjedt of querulous complaints, and
even of unjust suspicions of Providence.
But when in the whole natural and mo-
ral world, we behold an arrangement of
things which plainly discovers the most
consummate wisdom, can we believe, that
in the arrangement of our petty concerns,
this wisdom is dormant and negledful?
How much more reason is there to think,
that our ignorance of the divine plans
plifleads our judgement, than that the

wisdom
Se* Serm. xix. vol. iii.

:; E R M. wisdom of the Almighty has erred in di.

Xx.
_ j rAring our private affairs ?- Divine

wisdom, as I observed in the beginning,
is an exertion of divine benevolence. It
has, it can have, no other scope than to
accomplifli the belt ends, by the mos
proper means. Let the Wisdom, there-
fore, and the Goodncfs, of the deity, be
ever conjoined in our idea. Let every
new discovery of divine wisdom, be a
new ground of hope, of joy, and of cor-
dial fubmiflion, to every virtuous man.
Let him be thankful that he lives in a
world, where nothing happens to him by
chance, or at random; but where a great,
a wife, and beneficent Mind continually
superintends (very event.

Under the faith of this great principle

of religion, let us proceed in the course
of our duty, with stedfast and undifmay-
ed mind. Let us retain faithful allegi-
ance to our Creator and our Redeemer;
and then we may always hope the best;
and cafl our care upon him who careth for
us. Wait on the Lord; be of good courage,

and

and He fjall Jlrengthen your heart. Al- SE RI.
though thou Jfefil, thou canfl not /ce him, yet x
judgement is before him; therefore trufl thou
in him.- Let us begin every undertak-
ing, with humble dependence on his as-
fiflance for enabling us to prosecute it to
the end. When our undertakings are si-
nifhed, and the close of life approaches,
with praise to him let ui conclude all our
labours.

Unto the King Eternal, immortal, invf-

ble, the only Iftif God, be honour and glory
for ever and ever. Amen.

F I N IS.
