Your Letter Astonished me beyond measure. How or about what should Rousseau have had the Occasion to show Malignity towards you, his Guide and his Benefactor? [. . .] He must be a very sad fellow; and it gives me great pain that he should turn out so. But for Gods sake do not be in a haste in publishing any thing about him. Nothing but Necessity should oblige you to this. You know the ill natured pleasure the world enjoys in a Paper war between two persons of such fame and eminence as you & him. Both parties often suffer in such personal Contests; & how clear soever the right may be on your Side, yet Envy to you will raise Partizans for him. You will see many reasons for deliberating very cooly concerning this Step; and perhaps too you may in part have been imposed upon by reports which may have aggravated some thing in his Conduct [. . .] .

Edinb. 10 July 1766

Edinburgh 4 June

. . . I have been favoured with both your Letters which gave us as Complete an Account as could be desired of Rousseau. There seems to me no small Affinity betwixt that Wild philosopher & your correspondent whom you mention immediately after him, Mass D. Dickson. Both of them in the midst of all their madness & outrage have always some Squint regard to their own Interest. D. Dickson has played several cunning tricks to avoid Deposition & retain his stipend; & Rousseau will rather renounce his Memoirs than quit his pension. He is now I think fairly finished; & with respect to yourself, you need neither mind him nor his productions any more. He is a curiosity; but a humbling one for human genius. The most Eloquent writer of the Age, But one of the most contemptible men in it. . . .

March 24

. . . Rousseau is a sad and contemptible Creature. When he hears how much depended on you & what part you have acted in the affair of his Pension, I am perswaded he will have recourse to his Pills. He has nothing else left him. I shall be glad to know what you hear about him; Whether he is preparing any sort of War against you, or will sit down patient & contented under the Load of Infamy you have justly thrown upon him, or rather, which he has brought upon himself. . . .

My Dear Sir

Your Letter Astonished me beyond measure. How or about what should Rousseau have had the Occasion to show Malignity towards you, his Guide and his Benefactor?  I have bewilder'd my Self in Conjectures. It could surely be nothing about opinions; it could not I think be any thing relating to Mony; I can Conjecture nothing, unless he has told some lies concerning your political Conduct in France. Whatever the Matter be, it must have been something extremely gross on his part, I am sure, that could overcome not only your natural Philanthropy, but your Strong prepossessions in his favour. He must be a very sad fellow; and it gives me great pain that he should turn out so. But for Gods sake do not be in a haste in publishing any thing about him. Nothing but Necessity should oblige you to this. You know the ill natured pleasure the world enjoys in a Paper war between two persons of Such fame and eminence as you & him. Both parties often Suffer in such personal Contests; & how clear soever the right may be on your Side, yet Envy to you will raise Partizans for him. You will see many reasons for deliberating very Cooly concerning this Step; and perhaps too you may in part have been imposed upon by reports which may have aggravated Some thing in his Conduct.

 As to your Letters to me I cannot think these need give you the least Uneasiness. Though they were all published, they would only Serve to show your Attachment, & regard to him & would justify you the more to the World, if he has acted Unworthily to you. They were only shown to the Circle of your Acquaintances here; & except your letter from Paris which Mrs Cockburn got into her hands for a day or two, they were never out of my possession. I do not believe Mrs Cockburn took any Copy; she is in the Country at present; but when she comes to Town I shall make Enquiry, & if she has any Copy I can certainly recover it. I beseech you in the mean time give me some hints of what the matter is betwixt this Apostate Philosopher & you; & in what Subject it is that he has injured you; as I have an extreme anxiety to hear, and am very much distressed about it. You are still Silent as to the time of our Seeing you in this Country. [. . .]

I ever am with the most perfect regard

My Dear Sir 
Your Faithful & affectionate 
HUGH BLAIR





Edinb. 10 July 1766

Dear Sir,

I Received both your letters: and am exceedingly indebted to you for the many curious and entertaining Anecdotes you gave me Concerning Rousseau. They bestowed upon me Somewhat of the same Importance which you say your Connection with Rousseau himself bestowed upon you in Paris; by having so much information to give my friends, from You, concerning so extraordinary a personnage. Your Accounts pleased me the more that they coincided very much with the idea I have always formed of the man. Amiable, but Whimsical; Strong Sensibilities joined with an oddly arranged Understanding. He is a proof of what I always thought to be a possible mixture in human Nature, one being a Sceptic from the turn of their mind, & yet an Enthusiast from the turn of their heart: for this I take to be his real character, a man floating betwixt doubts & feelings, betwixt Scepticism & Enthusiasm, leaning more to the latter than the former; his Understanding strangely tinctured by both. I do think his Heloise the most Eloquent book, ancient or modern that ever was written; There he was in his fort; Sentiment was predominant; and I never felt my Self, so impress'd and affected by any thing I ever read, as by some parts of that Book. I Reverence Rousseau more for that than any other of his Productions. You would do me a very great favour if you would Enquire of him, or if you know already would inform me whether there be not foundation in his own History for some of the capital Scenes & adventures of the Heloise. I have always had a Notion there was; I hardly believe it possible for any man to describe & relate So ardently without some foundation in fact. It would be very obliging if you would remember this & give me, if you can, some Satisfaction about this point, as I have been long curious to know it. [. . .]

H. Blair

Edinburgh 24 Feby 1766.
