1 . 2~~~~~~

-,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A->i

'K\, 'pi· ·

~~. ~ ...

'·
G~~ki,-- 7jc~p-A"~~~~~"

SERMO NS,

HUGH. BLAIR, D.D.
One of the MINISTERS of the HIGH CHURCH,

AND
PROFESSOR of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTRES

in the UNIVERSITY, of EDINBURGH.
VOLUME THE SECOND.

THE TWELFTI EDITION.

--- _-- w --.

L O N D 0 N:
printed so? A. STRAHAN; and T. CADELL, in the Strand;

and W. CREECH, Edinburgh.

MDCCLXXXIX.

# THE CONTENTS.

C O N T E N T S.

S E R M O N .

On the Importance of Order in ConduCt
i CORINTH. xiv. 40. Let all things be

done-in order. Page f

S E RMON II.

On the Government of the Heart.
PROVERBS, iv. 23. Keep thy heart with

all diligence: for out of it are the
#iues of lIfe. 29

S E R M ON IIT.

The fame Subject continued.
PROVERBS, iv. 23. Keep trh heart with

all diligence :for out of it are the izues
of lfe. 54

A 2

S E R M O N IV.
On the Unchangeablenefs of the Di-

vine Nature.
JAMES, i. 17. Every good and every

perfecE g/ft is from above, and conz-
et/h dow fri0om7 the Father of Lights,
with whomz is no variableneSs, eci-
therJ1.adow of turning . Page 85

S E R hM 0 N V.

On the Compailon of Christ.
HEBREWS, iv. 15. IS. 1rae havenot a

highl pries1 w-hich cannot be toichied'
wcith the feeling of ouzr ifrnmities;
but was in all points tempted like as
we are, yet without fn. I 1 7

S E R i 0 N VI.

On the Lo-e of Prale.
JOHE, xii. 43-. For !,fey lAved the

p'raiJ: of .en mIore t,',L n th.e

. pra i of
God. 148

S E R M ON VII.
On the proper Estimate of Human

Life.
ECCLESIASTES, xii. 8. Vanity of va-

nities, faith the preacher, all is va-
nity ! Page 178

S E R MI O N VIII.

On Death.
PS ALI xxiii. 4. Yea, though I walk

through the valley of the fJhadow of
death, I wiillfear no evil; for thoz
art with me; thy rod and thy Jfia
they comfjrt me. 2 3

SER MO N IX.

On the Happiness of a Future State.
REVELAT. vii. f. ser this I beheld,

and, lo ! agreat multitude, Ewhich no
man could number, of all nations, and
kindreds, and people, and tongure,

food before the throne, zazd before
the Lamb, clothed with white robes,
and pralizs in their hands. Page 246

SERMON X.

On Candour.
1 CORINTH. xiii. 5. Charity-think-

eth no evil. 277

SERMON XI.

On the Character of Joseph.
GENESIS, xlv. 5' 8. N8. ow therefore be

not grieved nor angry with youtyfelves
that ye fold me hither; for God did
fend me before you to preserve lfe. -
So now it was not you that sent me
hither, but God. 309

SERMON XII.

On the Chara&er of Hazael.
2 KINGS, Viii. I2, 13. And H]azael

said, Wlhy wcepeth my Lord? A4nd

he anJwered, Becaiife I know the evil
that thou wilt do unto the children of
ffrael. TiacirJlrong holds wilt thou.
Jft on fire, and their young 'men wilt
thou Jlay with the jfword, and wilt
dlaj7 their childreiz, and rip up their
zcoimenz witb child. And Hfazael
JlsidC, But what, is th, fervaint a dog,
that he .Jlhould do this great thing ?
Ai>d El:J!Ja anzf mercd, 'the Lord
1hah jcL'-cd m7e that thou shalt be
Xiug over S'ria. Page 335

S E R M O N XITI.
On the Benefits to be derived from

the House of rMourning.
ECCLESIASTES, 'ii. 2, 3, 4. f is bet-

ter to go to th.e hoe of i'nzouriing,
thaniz to g0o t the

Lhoic, (.u f fclt/sin ;

2ri t/hat is C

dj '

,: r // ;Z,':., a;id/ ihe

livinr zci/ ,, i t o his hea rt. (Sr -

.roC 1 clscy.7 ' ceit : li/:l-.,:,'t; f/rc y

jJi fadne fs oji'h Cbz

c /cnc-.'n- rth eaiir

is made bettcr. The heart j'/i.

'ic,/

iJs in the ibozfe Gs rii 1P/.ir' ; *ut the
heart of fols i i:nh t.he. hs': oJf mir/t. 366

SER M O N XIV.
On the divine Government of the

Passions of Men.
PSALM Ixxvi. 10. Surely the wrath

of manz jlall pra~ie thee; the remain-
der of vwrathfl/alt thou reifrain. Page 396

SERMON XV.
On the Importance of Religious Know-

ledge to Mankind.
ISArAH, xi. 9. TJhey fiall not hurt nor

deifroy in all my holy mountain; for
the earth Jhall be full of the know-
ledge of the Lord, as the waters
cover thefea. 427

SER-

# SERMON I. On the IMPORTANCE of ORDER in CONDUCT. 1 CORINTH. xiv. 40. Let all things be done — in order.

~i - x" < -:..X.-IX-. ·..x- : ..X-

r, : s- :X-. 4~ ~X-^X-t l.·

SE RMON I.
On the IMPORTANCE of ORDER in

CONDUCT.

T CORINT H xiv. 40.

Let all things be done-in order,
FS ' E L I G I 0 N, like every regular and s £ R M.

R >5 well-connetAed system, is compo- 0

bitC 3. fed of a variety of parts; each of
which poffefles its separate importance, and
contributes to the perfecion of the whole.
Some graces are essential to it; such as faith
and repentance, the love of God, and the
love of our neighbour ; which, for that rea-

VOL. II. B foi,

S E R M. fonl, 1uft be often inculcated' on' men,.

^ » ~There are other dispositions and habits,.

which, though they hold not so high a rank,
yet are necessary to the. introduaion and
flupport of- the former;, and: therefore, in:
religious exhortations, there alfojuftly claim
a place. Of this nature is that regard to
order, method, and regularity, which the
apoPtie enjoins us in the text to carry thro7
the whole of life. Whether you confider
it as, in itself, a moral duty, or not, yet I
hope soon to convince you that it is essential
to the proper discharge of almost all duties,.
and merits, upon that account,. a greater de-
gree of attention than is commonly paid to>
it in a religious view.

If you look abroad into the world, you'

may be satisfied at the' first glance, that a.
vicious and libertine life is always a life of'
confusion. Thence it is natural: to infer,,
that order is friendly to- religion. As the'
neglec of it coincides with vice, so the
preservation of it must assist virtue. By the'
appointment of Providence, it is indifpen-
fably requisite to worldly prosperity. Thence,

arif's,

arlfes a presumption, that It is conneaed S E R M.
also with spiritual improvement. When ,
you behold a man's affairs, through ne-
gligence and mifcondudc involved in dif-
order, you naturally conclude that his ruin
approaches. You may at the fame time
justly fufpe&,E that the causes which affect
his temporal welfare, operate also to the
prejudice of his moral interests. The apo-
file teaches us in this chapter, that God is
not the author of confiufon '. He is a lover
of order: and all his works are full of order.
But where co7ofion is, there is, its close
attendant, every evil work r. In the fe-
quel of this discourse I shall point out some
of those parts of condut wherein it is moRt
material to virtue that order take place; and
then shall conclude with shewing the high
advantages which attend it. Allow me to
recommend to you order in the conduct
of your affairs; order in the distribution of
your time; order in the management of
your fortune; order in the regulation of

Ver. 33. -f James, iii. 16.

B 2 your

SEIR M. your amusements; order in the arrange-
»-,_ nment of your society. Thus let all things

be done in order.

I. MAINTAIN order in the conduJ of

your worldly affairs. Every man, in every
station of life, has rome concerns, private,
domestic, or public, which require fuccef-
five attention; he is placed in some sphere
of acive duty. Let the employments
which belong to that sphere be so arranged,
that each may keep its place, without just-
ling another; and that what regards the
world may not interfere with what is due
to God. In proportion to the multiplicity
of affairs, the observance of order becomes
more indispensable. But scarcely is there
any train of life so simple and uniform but
what will susser through the neglec of it.
I speak not now of suffering in point
of worldly interest. I call upon you to
attend to higher interests; to remember
that the orderly conduCt of your temporal
affairs forms a great part of your duty as
Christians.

Mlany,

Many, indeed, can hardly be persuaded S E M.

of this truth. A strong propensity has, in
every age, appeared among men, to feque-
firate religion from the commerce of the
world. Seasons of retreat and devotion
they are willing to appropriate to God.
But the world they confider as their own
province. They carry on a fort of fepa-
rate interest there. Nay, by the refpe&
which, on particular occasions, they pay to
religion, they too often imagine that they
have acquired the liberty of ating in
worldly matters, according to what plan
they chufe. How entirely do such persons
mistake the design of Christianity !-In this
world you were placed by Providence as on
a great field of trial. By the neceflities of
your nature you are called forth to differ-
ent employments. By many ties you are
conneded with human Society. From fu-
periours and inferiours, from neighbours
and equals, from friends and enemies,
demands arise, and obligations circulate
through all the ranks of life. This active
fene was contrived by the wisdom of H.ea-

B 3 Yen,

SER M, ven, on purpose that it might bring into
---v--a exercise all the virtues of the Christian cha-

rader; your juflice, candour, and veracity
in dealing with one another; your fidelity
to every trust, and your conscientious dif-
.charge of every office, which is committed
to you; your affetion for your friends;
your forgiveness of enemies; your charity
to the difRrefled; your attention to the
interests of your family. It is by fulfilling
all these obligations, in proper succession, that
you ihew your conversation to be Jich as
becomnet the gospel of ChriAt. It is thus you
make your light Jo to 7fline before men, that
they maySfee your good works, and glorifyyour
Father which is in heaven. It is thus you
are rendered meet for the inheritance of the
Jfints in liZght.-But how can those various
duties be discharged by persons who are
ever in that hurry and perplexity which
disorder creates ? You wish, perhaps, to
perform what your characer and fation
require. But from the confusion in which
you have allowed yourselves to be involved,
you find it to have become impossible.

What

'What was negleced to be done in its pro- s E R M.
per place, thrusts itself forward at an incon- A
-venient season. A multitude of affairs
crowd upon you together. Different obli-
gations diftrac you; and this ,diftracioIn
is .fomein-mes the cause, sometimes the pre-
tence, of equally negle&ing them all, or,
at least, of sacrificing the, greater to the
eeffer.

Hence arise so many inconsistent charac-

ters, and such frequent instances of partial
and divided goodness, as we find in the
world; appearances of generosity without
justice, honour without truth, probity to
men without reverence of God. He who
conduCts his affairs with method and regu-
larity, meets every duty in its proper place,
and afligns it its doue rank. But where there
is no order in conduct, there can be no uni-
.formity in characer. The natural connec-
tion and arrangement of duties are loft. If
virtue appear at all, it will be only in fits
and fiarts. The authority of conscience
.may occasionally operate, when our fitua-
:tion affords it room for exertion. But in

B3 4 other

SER M. other circumstances of equal importance,
I _
- every moral sentiment will be overpowered

by the tumultuous bustle of worldly affairs.
Fretfulness of temper, too, will generally
characterize those who are negligent of or-
der. The hurry in which they live, and
the embarrassments with which they are
surrounded, keep their spirits in perpetual
ferment. Confliaing with difficulties which
they are unable to overcome, conscious of
their own misconduCt, but ashamed to con-
fess it, they are engaged in many a secret
firuggle; and the uneasiness which they
:susser within, recoils in bad humour on all
who are around them. Hence the wretched
resources to which, at last, they are obliged
to fly, in order to quiet their cares. In
despair of being able to unravel what they
have suffered to become so perplexed, they
sometimes fink into supine indolence, some-
times throw themselves into the arms of
intemperance and loose pleasure; by either
of which they aggravate their guilt, and ac-
celerate their ruin. To the end that order
may be maintained in your affairs, it is
necessary,

!I. THAT

IT. THAT you attend to order in the dif- SE R M.

tribution of your time. Time you ought to
confider as a sacred trust committed to you
by God, of which you are now the depo-
fitaries, and are to render account at the
last. That portion of it which he has 0
allotted you is intended partly for the con-
cerns of this world, partly for those of the
next. Let each of these occupy, in the dif-
tribution of your time, that space which
properly belongs to it. Let not the hours
of hospitality and pleasure interfere- with
the discharge of your necessary affairs; and
let not what you- call neceflary affairs en-
croach upon the time which is due to devo-
tion. To every thing there is afafoifo, and
a timze for every pnripoJfi under /he heaveen '.
If you delay till to-morrow what ought to
be done to-day, you over-charge the mor-
row with a burden which belongs not to it.
You load the wheels of time, and prevent
it from carrying you along finoothly. He
who every morning plans the tranfadions

-l Eccles. iii. 1.

of

S E R M. of the day, and follows out that plan, carries
{- ->on a thread which will guide him through

the labyrinth of the most busy life. The or-
derly arrangement of his time is like a ray of
light which darts itself th;ough all his affairs.
But where no plan is laid, where the difpo-
fal of time is surrendered merely to the
chance of incidents, all things lie huddled
together in one chaos, which admits neither
of distribution nor review.

The first requisite for introducing order

into the management of time, is to be im-
pressed with a just sense of its value. Con-
aider well how much depends upon it, and
how fast it flies away. The bulk of men
are in nothing more capricious and incon-
fiftent than in their appretiation of time.
When they think of it as the measure of
their continuance on earth, they highly
prize it, and with the greatest anxiety seek
to lengthen it out. But when they view
it in separate parcels, they appear to hold it
in contempt, and squander it with incon-
fiderate profusion. While they complain
that life is short, they are often wishing its

different

different periods at an end. Covetous of S E R M,
every other poffeflion, of time only they are
prodigal. They allow every idle man to be
master of this property, and make every
frivolous occupation welcome that can help
them to consume it. Among those who are
so careless of time, it is not to be expected
that order should be observed in its diftri-
bution. But, by this fatal neglect, how
many materials of severe and lasting regret
are they laying up in store for themselves!
The time which they fiffer to pass away in
the midst of confusion, bitter repentance
seeks afterwards in vain to recal. What
was omitted to be done at its proper mo-
ment, arises to be the torment of some fu-
ture season. Manhood is disgraced by the
consequences of neglected youth. Old age,
oppressed by cares that belonged to a former
period, labours under a burden not its own.
At the close of life, the dying man be-
holds with anguish that his days are finih-
ing, when his preparation for eternity is
hardly commenced. Such are the effects
of a disorderly waste of time, through not

attending

S E R M. attending to its value. Every thing in the
,__' life of such persons is misplaced. Nothing

is performed aright, from not being per-
formed in due season.

But he who is orderly in the distribution

of his time, takes the proper method of
escaping those manifold evils. He is jufily
said to redeem the time. By proper manage-
ment, he prolongs it. He lives much in
little space; more in a few years than
others do in many. He can live to God
and his own foul, and at the ifame time at-
tend to all the lawful interests of the present
world. He looks back on the past, and
provides for the future. He catches and
arrests the hours as they fly. They are
marked down for useful purposes, and their
memory remains. Whereas those hours
fleet by the man of confusion. like a shadow.
His days and years are either blanks of
which he has no remembrance, or they are
filled up with such a confused and irregular
succession of unfinished transactions, that
though he remembers he has been busy,
yet he can give no account of the business

~I
-·~ 1vwhich

which has employed him. Of him, more SERM.
than of any other, it may.with justice be
pronounced, that he walketh in a vain Jsew;
he is diqzuieted in vain.

III. INTRODUCE order into the manage-

ment of your fortune. Whatever it be, let
the administration of it proceed with me-
thod and ceconomy. From time to time
examine your situation; and proportion
your expence to your'growing or diminish-
ing rc venu. Provide what is necessary,
before you indulge in what is superfluous.
Study to do justice to all with whom you
deal, before. you affect the praise of libera-
lity. In a word, fix such a plan of living
as you find that your circumstances will
fairly admit, .and- adhere to. it invariably
against every..temptation to improper ex-
cess.

No admonition refpedting morals is more

neceTfary than this to the age in which we
live; an age manife-fdy distinguished by a
propensity to thoughtless profusion; where-
in all the different ranks of men are obferv-

ed

SE R M. ed to press with forward vanity on thoft

_
--- who are above them; to vie with their fu-

periours in every mode of luxury and often-
tatiori; and to seek no farther argument for
justifying extravagance, than the fashion of
the times, and the supposed necessity of
living like others around them. This turn
of mind begets contempt for fober and or-
derly plans of life. It overthrows all re-
gard to domestic concerns and duties. It
pushes men on to hazardous and visionary
schemes of gain; and unfortunately unites
the two extremes, of grasping with rapaci-
oufnefs, and of squandering with profusion.
In the midst of such disorder, no prosperity
can be of long continuance. While con-
fusion grows upon men's affairs, and pro-
digality at the fame time waftes their sub-
fiance, poverty makes its advances like an
aromed man. They tremble at the view of
the approaching evil; but have loft the
force of mind to make provision against it.
Accustomed to move in a round of society
and pleasures disproportioned to their con-
dition, they are unable to break through

4 the

the enchantments of habit; and with their S E R M
eyes open fink into the gulph which is be- As
fore them. Poverty enforces dependance;
and dependance increases corruption. Ne-
ceffity firif betrays them into mean com-
pliances; next, impels them to open crimes;
and beginning with ostentation and extra-
vagance, they end in infamy and guilt.
Such are the consequences of neglecting
order in our worldly circumstances. Such
is the circle in which the profuse and the
dissolute daily run.- To what cause, so
much as to the want of order, can we attri-
bute those scenes of distress which so fre-
quently excite our pity; families that once
were flourishing reduced to ruin; and the
melancholy widow and negleaed orphan
thrown forth, friendless, upon the world?
What cause has been more fruitful in en-
gendering those atrocious crimes which fill
society with disquiet and terrour; in training
the gamester to fraud, the robber to violence,
and even the aflaffin to blood ?

Be assured, then, that order, frugality'
and oxconomy, are the necessary fiupports of

every

E M every personal and private virtue. t ow

humble soever these qualities may appear to
some, they are, nevertheless, the bails on
which liberty, independence, and true ho-
nour, must rife. He who has the steadiness
to arrange his affairs with method and re-
gularity, and to condud his train of life
agreeably to his circumstances, can be maf-
ter of himself in every situation into which
he may be thrown. He is under no necef-
fity to flatter or to lie, to stoop to what is
mean, or to commit what is criminal. But
he who wants that firmness of mind which
the observance of order requires, is held in
bondage to the world; he can neither ac
his part with courage as a man, nor with
fidelity as a Christian. From the moment
you have allowed yourselves to pass the line
of ceconomy, and to live beyond your for-
tune, you have entered on the path of
danger. Precipices surround you on all
fides. Every ftep which you take may
lead to mischiefs, that, as yet, lie hidden;
and to crimes that will end in your ever-
lasting perdition.

IV. OBSERVE

IV. OBSERVE order in your amusements; s E R M.

that is, allow them no more than their pro- _
per place; study to keep them within due
bounds; mingle them in a temperate fuc-'
cefflon with serious duties, and the higher
business of life. Human life cannot pro-
ceed to advantage without some neafure of
relaxation and entertainment. We require
relief from care. We are not formed for a
perpetual stretch of serious thought. By
too intense and continued application, our
feeble powers would soon be worn out. At
the fame time, from our propensity to ease
and pleasure, amusement proves, among all
ranks of men, the most dangerous foe to
order. For it tends incessantly to usurp and
encroach, to widen its territories, to thrust
itfeif into the place of more important
concerns, and thereby to disturb and coun-
teraQ the natural course of things. One
frivolous amusement indulged out of season,
will often carry perplexity and confilion
through a long succession of affairs.

Amusements, therefore, though they be
of an innocent kind, require fReady go-

VOLt I. C vernment,

E R M. vernment, to keep them within a due and

limited province. But such as are of an
irregular and vicious nature, are not to be
governed, but to be banished from every
orderly society. As soon as a man seeks
his happiness fromn the gaming-table, the
midnight revel, and the other haunts of li-
centioufiefs, confusion seizes upon him as
its own. There will no longer be order in
his family, nor order in his affairs, nor or-
der in his time. The molt important con-
cerns of life are abandoned. Even the order
of nature is by such persons inverted; night
is changed into day, and day into night.
Charader, honour, and interest itself, are
trampled under foot. You may with cer-
tainty prognosticate the ruin of these men
to be just at hand. Disorder, arisen to its
height, has nearly accomplished its work.
The spots of death are upon them. Let
every one who would escape the peftilen-
tial contagion fly with haste from their
company.

V. PRESERVE

V. PRESERVE order in the arrangement S E R M.

of your society; that is, entangle not your- A
selves in a perpetual and promiscuous crowd;
seleCt with prudence and propriety those
with whom you chufe to associate; let
company and retreat succeed each other
at rleafured intervals. There can be no or-
der in his life who allots not a due share of
his time to retirement and reflecion. He
can neither prudently arrange his temporal
affairs, nor properly attend to his spiritual
interests. He lives not to himself, but to
the world. By continual dissipation, he is
rendered giddy and thoughtless. He un-
avoidably contracs from the world that
spirit of disorder and confusion which is to
prevalent in it.

It is not a sufficient preservative against:

this evil, that the circles of society in which
you are engaged are not of a libertine and
vicious kind. If they withdraw you from
that attention to yourselves, and your do-
meftic concerns, which becomes a good
man, they are subversive of order, and
inconsistent with duty. What is innocent

C 2 in

S E R M. in itself, degenerates into guilt from being
~..-v~-. carried to excess ; an idle, trifling society is

near a-kin to such as is corrupting: One
of the first principles of order is, to learn to
be happy at home. It is in domestic re-
treat that every wife and virtuous man finds
his chief fatisfaCion. It is there he forms
the plans which regulate his public conduc.
He who knows not how to enjoy himself
when alone, can never be long happy abroad.
To his vacant mind, company may afford
a temporary relief; but when forced to re-
turn to himself, he will be so much more
oppressed and languid. Whereas, by a due
mixture of public and private life, we keep
free from the snares of both, and enjoy each
to greater advantage.

WHIEN we review those different parts of

behaviour to which I have shewn that order
is essential, it must necessarily occur to you,
that they are all mutually conneced, and
hang upon each other. Throughout your
affairs, your time, your expence, your
amusements, your society, the principle of

order

order must be equally carried, if you ex- SE R M.
pet to reap any of its happy fruits. For
if into any one of those great departments
of life you susser disorder to enter, it will
spread through all the reft. In vain, for
instance, you purpose to be orderly in the
conduct of your affairs, if you be irregular
in the distribution of your time. In vain
you attempt to regulate your expence, if
into your ainufctments, or your Society, dif-
order has crept. You have admitted a
principle of confusion which will defeat all
your plans; and perplex and entangle what
you fought to arrange. Uniformity is above
all things necessary to order. If you desire
that any thing should proceed according to
method and rule, let all things, as the text
exhorts, be done in order.

I must also admonish you, that in finall,

as well as in great affairs, a due regard to
order is requisite. I mean not that you
ought to look on those minute attentions
which are apt to occupy frivolous minds,
as conneced either with virtue or wisdom.
But I exhort you to remember, that dif-

C 3 order,

S E R M. order, like other immoralities, frequently

takes rife from inconsiderable beginnings,
They who, in the lesser tranfacions of life,
are totally negligent of rule, will be in ha-
zard of extending that negligence, by de-
grees, to such affairs and duties as will ren-
der them criminal. Remissness grows on
all who study not to guard against it; and
it is only by frequent exercise that the ha-
bits of order and punctuality can be
thoroughly confirmed,

FROM what has been said, the great im-

portance of this principle to moral and reli-
gious conduc must already be evident.
Let us, however, conclude, with taking a
summary view of the advantages which
attend it.

Firit, the observance of order serves to.

corre& that negligence which makes you
omit some duties, and that hurry and pre-
cipitancy which makes you perform others
imperfetly. Your attention is thereby di-
reted to its proper objecs. You follow the
straight path which Providence has pointed

out

out to man; in the course of which all the S E R M.
different business of life presents itself regu- _
larly to him on every fide. God and man,
time and eternity, possess their proper fta-
tions, arise in succession to his view, and
attract his care. Whereas he who runs on
in a disorderly course, speedily involves
himself in a labyrinth, where he is fur-
rounded with intricacy and darkness. The
crooked paths into which he strikes, turn
him aside from the proper line of human
pursuit; hide from his fight the objects
which he ought chiefly to regard, and bring
others under his view, which serve no pur-
pose but to diftrad and mislead him.

Next, by attending to order, you avoid

idleness that rnot fruitful source of crimes
and evils. Ading upon a plan, meeting
every thing in its own place, you confiantly
fnd innocent and useful employment for
time. You are never at a lots how to dif-
pose of your hours, or to fill up life agree-
ably. In the course of human action, there
are two extremes equally dangerous to vir-
tue ; the multiplicity of affairs, and the

C - tota

SER M. total want of them. The man of order
A-m ilands in the middle between these two

extremes, and suffers from neither. He is
occupied but not oppressed. Whereas the
disorderly, overloading one part of time,
and leaving another vacant, are at one
period overwhelmed with business, and at
another, either idle through want of em-
ployment, or indolent through perplexity.
Those seasons of indolence and idleness,
which recur so often in their life, are their
most dangerous moments. The mind, un-
happy in its situation, and clinging to every
object which can occupy or amuse it, is
then apteft to throw itself into the arms of
every vice and every folly.

Farther, by the preservation of order,

you check inconstancy and levity. Fickle
by nature is the human heart. It is fond
of change; and perpetually tends to flart
aside from the straight line of conduct.
Hence arises the propriety of bringing our-
selves under fubjetion to method and
rule; which, though at first it may prove
eonftraining, yet by degrees, and from the ex-

perience

perience of its happy efflecs, becomes na- SE R M.
tural and agreeable. It recifies those irre-
gularities of temper and manners to which
we give the name of caprice; and which
are distinguishing characeriftics of a difor-
derly mind. It is the parent of steadiness
of conduct It forms consistency of cha-
racer. It is the ground of all the confi-
dence we repose in one another. For, the
diobrderly we know not where to find. In
him only can we place any trust who is
uniform and regular; who lives by prin-
ciple, not by humour; who ads upon a
plan, and not by desultory motions.

The advantages of order hitherto men-

tioned belong to recitude of conduct
Confider also how important it is to your
felfenjoyiment and felicity. Order is the
source of peace; and peace is the highef:
of all temporal bleflings. Order is indeed
the only region in which tranquillity dwells.
The very mention of confusion imports
diftutrbance and vexation. Is it polfible
for that man to be happy, who cannot look
into the state of his affairs, or the tenor of

his

SE R M. his condu&, without discerning all to be

embroiled; who is either in the midst of
remorse for what he has negleCted to do,
or in the midst of hurry to overtake what
he finds, too late, was necessary to have
been done ? Such as live according to or-
der may be compared to the celestial bodies
which move inl regular courses, and by
itated laws; whose influence is beneficent;
whose operations are quiet and tranquil.
The disorderly resemble those tumultuous
elements on earth, which, by sudden and
violent irruptions, disturb the course of
nature. By mismanagement of affairs, by
excess in expence, by irregularity in the
indulgence of company and amusement,
they are perpetually creating molestation
both to themselves and others. They de-
part from their road to seek pleasure ; and
instead of it, they every where raise up
sorrows. Being always found out of their
proper place, they of course interfere and
jar with others. The disorders which they
raise never fail to spread beyond their own
line, and to involve many in confusion

-,~~~3 ~and
3~~~~

and distress; whence they neceflarily be- SE R M.
come the authors of tumult and contention,
of discord and enmity. Whereas order is
the foundation of union. It allows every
man to carry on his own affairs without
disturbing his neighbour. It is the golden
chain, which holds together the societies of
men in friendship and peace.

In fine, the man of order is conneced

with all the higher powers and principles
in the universe. Hie is the follower of God.
He walks with him, and ads upon his plan.
His character is formed on the spirit which
religion breathes. For religion in general,
and the religion of ChriPf in particular, may
be called the great discipline of order. To
walk Jffi1dly, and to walk dafordery,, are
synonymous terms in Scripture. From
fich as walk.diforderly we arc commanded,
in the name of the Lord lefis C/hris, to
-withdraw ozrfelves''. The kingdom of
Satan is the reign of disorder and darkness.
To restore order among the works of God,

z Thefi. iii. 6.

was

S E R M. was the end for which the Son of God de-
t^_^£ scended to the earth. He requires order to

be observed in his church. His undertak-
ing is to be consummated in that perseEt
order which he flall introduce at the last
day. In the new earth and the new heavens,
undisturbed order fIall for ever prevail
among the spirits of the jutI made perfd ;
and whatever farther preparation may be
requisite for our being admitted to join their
society, it is certain that we shall never share
in it, unless we make it now our fludy to
do all things decently, and in order.

# SERMON II. ON THE GOVERNMENT of the HEART. PROVERBS, iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out of it are the issues of life.

[ 29 ]

SERMON IL,
ON the GOVERNMENT of the HEART.

PROVERBS, iv. 23.
Keep thy heart 2with all diligence: for out of

it are the iaiges of life.
A MO N G the many wife counsels SERM.

given by this inspired writer, there I

is none which deserves greater regard than
that contained in the text. Its importance,
however, is too seldom perceived by the
generality of men. They are apt to con-
fider the regulation of external conduct as
the chief objea of religion. If they can
ac: their part with decency, and maintain a
fair character, they conceive their duty to
be fulfilled. VWhat passes in the mean time
within their mind, they suppose to be of no

great

SERM. great consequence, either to themfelvesi or

I[.

to the world. In opposition to this dan--
gerous plan of morality, the wife man ex-
horts us to keep the heart; that is, to attend
not only to our ations, but to our thoughts
and desires; and to keep the heart with all
diligence, that is, with sedulous and unre-
mitting care; for which he assigns this
reason, that, out of the heart are the jiies
of lfe.-In discoursing on this fubjeEt I
purpose to confider, separately, the govern-
ment of the thoughts, of the passions, and
of the temper. But before entering on any
of these, let us begin with enquiring, in
what sense the iates of life are said to be out
of the heart that we may discern the force
of the argument which the text suggests, to
recommend this great duty of keeping the
heart.

The jijes of life are justly said to be out

of the heart, because the slate of the heart
is what determines our moral character,
and what forms our chief happiness or
misery.

Firfi,

Firfi, It is the state of the heart which SE RM;

determines our moral charaaer. The te-
nor of our acions will always correspond
to the dispositions that prevail withinl
To dissemble, or to suppress them, is a fruit-
less attempt. In spite of our efforts, they
will perpetually break forth in our beha-
viour. On whatever fide the weight of
inclination hangs, it will draw the practice
after it. In vain therefore you fsudy to
preserve your hands clean, unless you re-
solve at the fame time to keep your heart
pure. Make the tree good, as. our Saviour
direts, and then its fruits will be good alo.
For out of the heart proceed not only evil
thoughts, but nmurdes, adulteries, fornica-
tions, theft, sal/2e witnyefs blrfphemies.r If
that fountain be once poisoned, you can
never expect that salubrious flreams will
flow from it. Throughout the whole of
their course, they will carry the taint of the
parent spring.

But it is not merely from its influence on
external action that the importance of the

* MIatth. xv. 18.

heart

SEI RM. heart to our moraI character arises. Inde-
v.-Y--' pendent of all action, it is, in truth, the

tfate of the heart itself which forms our
character in the fight of God. With our
fellow-creatures, acions must ever hold the
chief rank; because, by there only we can
judge of one another; by these we effec
each other's welfare; and therefore to there
alone the regulation of human law extends.
But in the eye of that Supreme Being, to
whom our whole internal frame is uncover-
ed, dispositions hold the place of acions;
and it is not so much what we perform, as
the motive which moves us to perform-
ance, that constitutes us good or evil in
his fight. Even among men, the mora-
lity of actions is estimated by the principle
from which they are judged to proceed;
and such as the principle is, such is the
man accounted to be. One, for instance,
may spend much of his fortune in charita-
ble actions ; and yet, if he is believed to be
influenced by mere ostentation, he is deem-.
ed not charitable, but vain. He may la-
bour unweariedly to serve the public; but

9 if

if he is prompted by the desire of rising SE R M
into power, he is held not public spirited,
but ambitious; And if he bestows a bene-
fit, purely that he may receive a greater in
return, no man would reckon him gene-
rous, but selfish and interested. If reason
thus clearly teaches us to estimate the value
of aaions by the dispositions which give
them birth, it is an obvious conclusion, that,
according to those dispositions, we are all
ranked and classed by him who feeth into
every heart. The reaification of our prin-
ciples of ation is the primary object of
religious discipline; and, in proportion as
this is more or less advanced, we are more
or less religious. Accordingly the rege-
neration of the heart is every where repre-
sented in the Gospel as the most essential
requisite in the character of a Christian.

SECONDLY, The state of the heart not

only determines our moral character, but
forms our principal happiness or misery.
External situations of fortune are no far-
ther of consequence, than as they operate on

VOL. I. D the

s ER M. the heart; and their operation there is far
it- from corresponding to the degree of world-

ly prosperity or adversity. If, from any
internal cause, a man's peace of mind be
disturbed, in vain you load him with all
the honours or riches which the wvorld can
bestow. They remain without, like things
at a distance from him. They reach not
the source of enjoyment. Discomposed
thoughts, agitated paflions, and a ruffled
temper, poison every ingredient of plea-
sure which the world holds out; and over-
cast every object which presents itself, with
a melancholy gloom. In order to acquire
a capacity of happiness, it must be our first
fiudy to redify such inward disorders.
Whatever discipline tends to accomplish
this purpose, is of greater importance to
man, than the acquisition of the advantages
of fortune. These are precarious and
doubtful in their effect; internal tranquil-
lity is a ,certain good. These are only
means ; but that is the end. These are no
more than instruments of fatisfaaion; that,
is fatisfation itself.

- * 7 -- Jufily

uiftly is it said by the Wife Man, that he s E R M.

who hath no rule over hisfpirit, is like a city -
that is broken dowan and without walls %. All
is waste-; all is in disorder and ruins within
him. He poffeifes no defence against dan-
gers of any fort. He lies open to every
infurrediori of ill-humour, and every
invasion of distress. Whereas he who is
employed in regulating his mind, is making
provision against all the accidents of life.
He is erecing a fortress into which, in the
day of danger, he can retreat with safety,
And hence, amidit those endeavours to fe-
cure happiness which inceifantly employ
the life of man, the careful regulation, or
the improvident neglec of the inward
frame, forms the chief diftinaion between
wifdom.and folly.

THUS it appears with how much pro-

priety the fites of life are said to be out of
the heart. Here rife those great springs of
human conduct whence the main currents

* Prov. xxv, 28.

D 2 flow

S E R M. flow of our virtue, or our vice; of our hap-

Io. t-'g-a piness, or our misery. Besides this power-

ful argument for keeping the heart w-ith all
diligence, I mufi mention another import-
ant consideration taken from the present
state of human nature; Think what your
heart now is, and what must be the confe-
quence of remitting your vigilance in watch-
ing over it. With too much justice it is
said in Scripture, to be deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked. Its bias of
innate corruption gives it a perpetual ten-
dency downwards into vice and disorder,
To direCt and impel it upwards, requires a
constant effort. Experience may convince
you, that almost every desire has a propen-
fity to wander into an improper direCtion;
that every passion tends to excess; and that
around your imagination there perpetually
crowds a whole swarm of vain and cor-
rupting thoughts. After all the care that
can be betfowed by the best men on the
regulation of the heart, it frequently bas-
fles their efforts to keep it under proper
discipline. Into what universal tumult

then

then must it rife, if no vigilance be emr S ERM
ployed, and no government be exercised
over it? Inattention and remissness is all
that the great adversary of mankind de-
fires, in order to gain full advantage.
While you Jleep, he fJbis his tares in the
field. The house which he finds vacant
and unguarded, he presently garn/fes zwith
evziljpzrits.

Add to this, that the human temper is

to be confidered as a system, the parts of
which have a mutual dependence on each
other. Introduce disorder into any one
part, and you derange the whole. Suffer
but one passion to go out of its place, or
to acquire an unnatural force, and presently
the balance of the foul will be broken; its
powers will jar among themselves, and their
operations become difcordant.-Keep thy
heart, therefore, wis. all diligence; for all
thy diligence is here required. And though
thine own keeping alone will not avail,
unless the affiltance of a higher power con-
cur, yet of this be well assured, that no
iid from heaven is to be expeCted, if thou

D 3 flalt

S E R M. shalt neglec to exert thyfelfin performing

the part assigned thee.

HAVING now shown the importance of

exercising government over the heart, I
proceed to confider more particularly in
what that government consists, as it re-
fpeEts the thoughts, the passions, and the
temper.

I begin with the thoughts, which are the

prime movers of the whole human conduc.
All that makes a figure on the great theatre
of the world, the employments of the busy,
the enterprizes of the ambitious, and the
exploits of the warlike, the virtues which
form the happiness, and the crimes which
occasion the misery of mankind, originate
in that silent and secret recess of thought
which is hidden from every human eye.
The secrecy and silence which reign there,
favour the prejudice entertained by too
many, that thought is exempted from all
controul. Passions, they perhaps admit,
require government and refiraint, because
they are violent emotions, and disturb so-

ciety.

ciety. But with their thoughts, they plead, SE R M.
no one is concerned. By there, as long as '--
they remain in their bosom, no offence can
be given, and no injury committed. To
enjoy unrestrained the full range of imagi-
nation, appears to them the native right
and privilege of man.

HIad they to do with none but their

fellow-creatures, such reasoning might be
specious. But they ought to remember,
that, in the fight of the Supreme Being,
thoughts bear the character of good or evil,
as much as adtions; and that they are, in
especial manner, the subjeCts of divine ju-
rifdition, 'because they are cognizable. at
no other tribunal. The moral regulation
.of our thoughts, is the particular test of our
reverence for God. If we restrain our pas-
sions from breaking forth into open difor-
ders, while we abandon our imagination
in secret to corruption, we show that virtue
refis with us upon regard to men; and
that however we may at a part in public
with propriety, there is before our eyes
no fear of that God who Jeareheth the

D 4 heart,

S E R M. heart, and requireth truth in the inward
a_,_ parts.

But, even abftra&ing from this awful

consideration, the government of our
thoughts must appear to be of high con-
sequence, from their direct influence on
conduct. It is plain, that thought gives the
first impulse to every principle of aCtion.
Actions are, in truth, no other than thoughts
ripened into consistency and substance. So
certain is this, that to judge with precision
of the character of any man, and to foretell
with confidence what part he will act, no
snore were requisite, than to be rendered
capable of viewing the current of thought
which pafres most frequently within him.
Though by such a method we have no ac-
cess to judge of one another, yet thus it is
always in our power to judge ofourfelves.
Each of us, by impartially scrutinizing his
indulged and favourite thoughts, may dif-
cover the whole secret of his real character.
This consideration alone is sufficient to
ihow, of what importance the government
of thought is to the keeping of the heart.

B]UT:

BUT, supposing us convinced of its im- SE R M

portance, a question may arise, How far it --
is within our power, and in what degree
thoughts are subjea to the command of the
will? It is plain that they are not always
the offspring of choice. Often they are in-
evitably impressed upon the mind by fur-
rounding objeds. Often they flart up, as
of themselves, without any principle of in-
trodudion which we are able to trace. As
the wvind bloweth where it lifleth, and thou
ca;tfl not tell whence it cometb, nor whether
it goeth, equally rapid in its transitions, and
inscrutable in its progress, is the course of
thought. Moving along a train of connec-
tions which are too delicate for our ob-
servation, it defeats all endeavours either to
explore or to stop its path. Hence vain
and fantastic imaginations sometimes break
in upon the most fettled attention, and dif-
turb even the devout exercises of pious
minds. Instances of this fort muf. be placed
to the account of human frailty. They are
misfortunes to be deplored, rather than
crimes to be condemned; and our gracious

Creator,

S E R M. Creator, who knows ourframe, and remem-
IA_. . bers we are duJl, will not be severe in mark-

ing every such error and wandering of the
mind. But, after these allowances are made,
fill there remains much scope for the pro-
per government of thought; and a multi-
tude of cafes occur, in which we are no less
accountable for what we think, than for
what we do.

As, first, when the introduCtion of any

train of thought depends upon ourselves,
and is our voluntary aCt; by turning our
attention towards such objects, awaken-
ing such paflions, or engaging in such em-
ployments, as we know must give a pecu-
liar determination to our thoughts. Next,
when thoughts, by whatever accident they
may have been originally suggested, are in-
dulged with deliberation and complacency.
Though the mind has been passive in their
reception, and therefore free from blame;
yet, if it be active in their continuance, the
guilt becomes its own. They may have
intruded at firit, like unbidden guests; but
if, when entered, they are made welcome,

and

-nd kindly entertained, the cafe is the fame S ER M.
as if they had been invited from the begin-
ning. If we be thus accountable to God
for thoughts either voluntarily introduced,
or deliberately indulged, we are no less so,
in the last place, for those which find ad-
mittance into our hearts from supine negli-
gence, from total relaxation of attention,
from allowing our imagination to rove with
entire licence, like the eyes of the fool, to-
wards the ends of the earth. Our minds
are, in this cafe, thrown open to folly and
vanity. They are proftituted to every evil
thing which pleases to take poffeflion. The
consequences must all be charged to our ac-
count; and in vain we plead excuse from
human infirmity. Hence it appears, that
the great object at which we are to aim in
governing our thoughts, is, to take the most
effeaual measures for preventing the intro-
duaion of such as are sinful, and for haften-
ing their expulsion, if they shall have intro-
duced themselves without content of the will.

But when we descend into our breasts,
and examine how far we have studied to

keep

SE R M. keep this object in view, who can tell holw
i- i oft he hath oeffended? In no article of reli-

gion or morals are men more culpably re-
miss than in the unrestrained indulgence
they give to fancy; and that too, for most
part, without remorse. Since the time that
Reason began to exert her powers, Thought,
during our waking hours, has been active
in every breast, without a moment's sus-
pension or pause. The current of ideas
has been always flowing. The wheels of
the Spiritual engine have circulated with
perpetual motion. Let- me ask, what has
been the fruit of this incessant acivity with
the greatest part of mankind? Of the in-
numerable hours that have been employed
in thought, how few are marked with any
permanent or useful effea ? How many
have either passed away in idle dreams; or
have been abandoned to anxious difcon-
tented musings, to unsocial and malignant
passions, or to irregular and criminal de-
fires ? Had I power to lay open that store-
house of iniquity which the hearts of too
many conceal; could I draw out and read

4 t

to them a lift of all the imaginations they S E R M.
have devised, and all the passions they have A_
indulged in secret; what a picture of men
would I present to themselves! WVhat crimes
would they appear to have perpetrated in
fancy, which to their most intimate com-
panions they durst not reveal !

Even when men imagine their thoughts

to be innocently employed, they too com-
monly susser them to run out into extrava-
gant imaginations, and chimerical plans of
what they would wish to attain, or chufe to
be, if they could frame the course of things
according to their desire. Though such
employments of fancy come not under the
fame description with those which are plain-
-'y criminal, yet wholly unblameable they fel-
dom are. Besides the waste of time which
they occasion, and the misapplication which
they indicate of those intellectual powers
that were given to us for much nobler pur-
poses, such romantic Ipeculations lead us
always into the neighbourhood of forbid-
den regions. They place us on dangerous
ground. They are for the most part con-

·.~~~~. . neaed

S E R M. neaed with some one bad passion; and

they always nourish a giddy and frivolous
turn of thought. They unfit the mind for
applying with vigour to rational pursuits,
or for acquiescing in fober plans of conduAt.
From that ideal world in which it allows
itfelfto dwell, it returns, to the commerce
of men, unbent and relaxed, sickly and
tainted, averse from discharging the duties,
and Sometimes disqualified even for relish-
ing the pleasures of ordinary life. 0 Jern-
falemn! v.twa thine heart from wickednejs.
How long fJall thy vain thozghts lodge with-
in thee* ?--In order to guard against all.
such corruptions and abuses of thought as I
have mentioned, it may be profitable to ab-
tend to the following rules:

IN the first place, study to acquire the

habit of attention to thought. No study is
more important; for in proportion to the
degree in which this habit is possessed, such
commonly is the degree of intelleaual im-

* Jererm iv. 14.

provementk

provement. It is the power of attention S ERM.

IL

which in a great meafilre distinguishes the --
wife and the great from the vulgar and
trifling herd of men. The latter are ac-
customed to think, or rather to dream, with-
out knowing the subjec of their thoughts.
In their unconnelced rovings, they pursue
no end; they follow no track. Every thing
floats loose and disjointed on the surface of
their mind; like leaves scattered and blown
about on the face of the waters.

In order to lead your thoughts into any

useful direcion, your first care must be, to
acquire the power of fixing them, and of
restraining their irregular motions. Inure
yourselves to form a plan of proper medi-
tation; to pursue it iteadily; and with fe-
vere authority to keep the door shut against
intrusions of wandering fancy. Let your
mind, for this purpose, become a frequent
object to itself. Let your thoughts be made
the subjed of thought and review.-" To
" what is my attention at present directed ?
" Could I disclose it without a blush to the

world ? Were God inflantly to call me

c into

S EIR M. " into judgment, what account could I give

-, " of it to him ? Shall I be the wiser or the

"better for dwelling on such thoughts as
"now fill my mind ? Are they entirely
" onfiftent with my innocence, and with
" my present and future peace? If they
' are not, to what purpose do I indulge
C such unprofitable or dangerous musings ?"
-By frequent exercise of this inward fcru-
tiny, we might gradually bring imagination
under discipline, and turn the powers of
thought to their proper use as means of im-
provement, inflead of suffering them to be
only the instruments of vanity and guilt.

IN the second place, in order to the go-

vernment of thought, it is necessary to guard
against idleness. Idleness is the great so-
menter of all corruptions in the human
heart. In particular, it is the parent of
loose imaginations and inordinate desires.
The ever active and refflefs power ofthough t,
if not employed about what is good, will
naturally and unavoidably engender evil.
Imagine not that mere occupation, of what-

ever

ever kind it be, will exempt you from the S E R M.
blame and danger of an idle life. Perhaps ---
the worst species of idleness is a dissipated,
though seemingly bury life, spent in the
haunts of loose society, and in the chace of
perpetual amusement. Hence a giddy mind,
alternately elated and dejeaed with trifles,
occupied with no recollection of the past
but what is fruitless, and with no plans for
the future but what are either frivolous or
guilty.

As, therefore, you would govern your

thoughts, or indeed as you would have any
thoughts that are worthy of being governed,
provide honourable employment for the na-
tive activity of your minds. Keep know-
ledge, virtue, and usefulness, ever in view.
Let your life proceed in a train of such pur-
suits as are worthy of a Chfiftian, of a ra-
tional and social being. While there are
regularly carried on as the main business of
life, let amusement possess no more than its
proper place in the distribution of your time.
Take particular care that your arnufemenfs
be of an irreproachable kind, and that all

VOL. II. E your

SE R M. your society be either improving or inno-

.
_ cent. So 1hall the fiream of your thoughts

be made to run in a pure channel. Manly
occupations and virtuous principles will ex-
pel the taint, which idleness never fails to
communicate to the vacant mind.

IN the third place, when criminal thoughts

arise, attend to all the proper methods of
speedily fupprefing them. Take example
from the unhappy industry which finners
discover in banishing good ones, when a
natural sense of religion forces them on their
conscience. How anxiously do they fly
from themselves ? how studiously do they
drown the voice which upbraids them in
the noise of company or diversion ? what
numerous artifices do they employ to evade
the uneasiness which returns of refle&ion
would produce ?'-Were we to use. equal
diligence in preventing the entrance of vi-
cious suggestions, or in impelling them when
entered, why should we not be equally sue-
cefsful in a much better cause ? As soon as
you are sensible that any dangerous passion

begins

begins to ferment, inifantly call in other S E R M.
pafions, and other ideas, to your aid. Ha- ,
ften to turn your thoughts into a different
dire&ion. Summon up whatever you have
found to be of power for composing and
harmonizing your mind. Fly for assistance
to serious fludies, to prayer and devotion;
or even fly to business or innocent society,
if solitude be in hazard of favouring the fe-
ducaion. By such means you may flop the
progress of the growing evil. You may
apply an antidote, before the poison has had
time to work its full effet.

IN the fourth place, it will be particularly

ufefulto impress your minds with an habitual
sense of the presence of the Almighty. When
we reflect what a firong check the belief of
divine omniscience is calculated to give to
all criminal thoughts, we are tempted to
fufpeet, that even by Christians this article
of faith is not received with sincere convic-
tion. For who but must confers, that if he
knew a parent, a friend, or a neighbour, to
have the power of looking into his heart,

E 2 he

S E R M. he durst not allow himself that unbounded

c , scope which he now gives to his imagination

and desire ? Whence, then, comes it to pass,
that men, without fear or concern, bring into
the pretence of the awful majesty of Heaven
that folly and licentiousness of thought which
would make them blush and tremble, if one
of their own fellow-creatures could descry it ?
At the fame time, no principle is supported
by clearer evidence than the omniscience of
God. All religious feets have admitted it,
all Societies of men, in their oaths and cove-
nants, appeal to it. The Sovereign of the
universe cannot but know what pafles
throughout his dominions. He who sup-
ports all nature must needs pervade and fill
it. He who formed the heart is certainly
conscious to what passes within it.

Never let this great article of faith escape

from your view. In thinking, as well as
in. aing, accustom yourselves to look up
with reverence to that piercing eye of di-
vine observation, which neverslumbers nor
sleeps. Behold a pen always writing over
your head, and making up that great re-

8 cord

cord of your thoughts, words, and acions, SE R M.
from which at last you are to be judged. -
Think that you are never less alone than
when by yourselves; for then is He still
with you, whose infpeation is of greater
consequence than that of-all mankind. Let
these awful considerations not only check
the dissipation of corrupt fancy, but infuse
into your spirits that solemn composure
which is the parent of meditation and wis-
dom. Let them not only expel what is
evil, but introduce in its stead what is pure
and holy; elevating your thoughts to divine
and eternal objects, and acing as the coun-
terpoife to those attractions of the world,
which would draw your whole attention
downwards to sense and vanity.

E3

# SERMON III. The same SUBJECT continued. PROVERBS, iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out of it are the issues of life.

S'E R M 0 N III.
The fame SUBJECT continued,

PROVERBS, iv. 23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence: for out

of it are the jues of life.
SE R M. A V I N G treated, in the foregoing

v_ . HL Idifcourfe, of the government of the

thoughts, I proceed to confider the govern-
ment of the passions as the next great duty
included in the keeping of the heart.

Pafflons are strong emotions of the mind,

occasioned by the view of apprehending
good or evil. They are original parts of
the confticution of our nature; and there-
fore to extirpate them is a mistaken aim,
Religion requires no more of us than to

moderate

moderate and rule them. When our bless- S ERM.
ed Lord assumed the nature, without the A
corruption, of man, he was subjed to like
passions with us. On some occasions he felt
the risings of anger. He was often touched
with pity. He was grieved in spirit; he
sorrowed and he wept.

Passions, when properly direCed, may

be subservient to very useful ends. They
rouze the dormant powers of the foul.
They are even found to exalt them. They
often raise a man above himself, and ren-
der him more penetrating, vigorous, and
masterly, than he is in his calmer hours.
Acuated by some high passion, he conceives
great designs, and surmounts all difficulties
in the execution. He is inspired with more
lofty sentiments, and endowed with more
persuasive utterance, than he pofTeffes at
any other time. Passions are the acive
forces of the foul. They are its highest
powers brought into movement and exer-
tion. But, like all other great powers, they
are either useful or deftruaive, according to
their direcion and degree: as wind and

E 4 fire

S E R M. fire are initrumental in carrying on many

II[.
--- of the beneficent operations of nature; but

when they rife to undue violence, or de-
viate from their proper course, their path
is marked with ruin.

It is the present infelicity of human na-

ture, that those strong emotions of the mind
are become too powerful for the principle
which ought to regulate them. This is one
of the unhappy consequences of our apof-
tacy from God, that the influence of rea-
son is weakened, and that of passion
flrengthened within the heart. When
man revolted from his Maker, his passions
'rebelled against himself; and, from being
originally the ministers of reason, have
become the tyrants of the foul. Hence, in
treating of this subjed, two things may be
afiumed as principles: first, that through
the present weakness of the understanding,
our passions are often direted towards im-
proper objects; and next, that even when
their diretion is just, and their objecs are
innocent, they perpetually tend to run into
excess; they always hurry us towards their

gratificatior

gratification with a blind and dangerous S E R M.
impetuosity. On there two points then -__
turns the whole government of our passions:
first, to ascertain the proper objeEts of their
pursuit; and next, to restrain them in that
pursuit, when they would carry us beyond
the bounds of reason. If there be any pas-
sion which intrudes itself unseasonably into
our mind, which darkens and troubles our
judgment, or habitually discomposes -our
temper; which unfits us for properly dif-
charging the duties, or disqualifies us for
cheerfully enjoying the comforts of life,
we may certainly conclude it to have gained
a dangerous ascendant. The great obje&
which we ought to propose to ourselves is,
to acquire a firm and stedfast mind, -which
the infatuation of passion shall not reduce,
nor its violence shake; which, refting on
fixed principles, shall, in the midst of con-
tending emotions, remain free, and master
of itself; able to liften calmly to the voice
of conscience, and prepared to obey its aic-
tates without hesitation,

To

SE R M. To obtain, if possible, fach command of

II.
,_ _1 paion, is one of the highest attainments

of the rational nature. Arguments to show
its importance crowd upon us from every
quarter. If there be any fertile source o'
mischief to human life, it is, beyond doubt,
the misrule of pafion. It is this which
poisons the enjoyment of individuals, over-
turns the order of society, and strews the
path of life with so many miseries, as to
render it indeed the valley of tears. All
those great scenes of public calamity, which
we behold with aftoniflment and horrour,
have originated from the source of violent
passions. These have overspread the earth
with bloodshed. These have pointed the
assassin's dagger, and filled the poisoned
bowl. These, in every age, have fur-
nifhed too copious materials for the orator's
pathetic declamation, and for the poet's
tragical song.

When from public life we descend to pri-

vate conduct, though passion operate not
there in such a wide and deitruaive sphere,
we shall find its influence to be no less bane-

3 ful.

ful. I need not mention the black and S ERM.
fierce passions, such as envy, jealousy, and »l
revenge, whose effets are obviously no-
xious, and whose agitations are immediate
misery. But take any of the licentious and
sensual kind. Suppose it to have unlimited
scope; trace it throughout its course; and
you will find that gradually, as it rifes, it
taints the soundness, and troubles the peace
of his mind over whom it reigns; that in
its progress it engages him in pursuits which
are marked either with danger or with
shame; that in the end it waftes his for-
tune, destroys his health, or debases his
character; and aggravates all the miseries
in which it has involved him with the con-
cluding pangs of bitter remorse. Through
all the stages of this fatal course, how many
have heretofore run? What multitudes do
we daily behold pursuing it, with blind and
headlong steps ?

But, on the evils which flow from unre-

strained passions, it is needless to enlarge.
Hardly are there any so ignorant or incon-
fiderate as not to admit, that where paflion

is

s E R M. is allowed to reign, both happiness and vir-
t_»- tue must be impaired. I proceed therefore

to what is of more consequence, to fuggefl
some diretions which may be useful in
assisting us to preserve the government of
our passions.

IN the first place, we must study to ac-

quire just views of the comparative import-
ance of those objects that are most ready to
attraEt desire. The erroneous opinions
which we form concerning happiness and
misery, give rife to all the mistaken and
dangerous passions which embroil our life.
We susser ourselves to be dazzled by unreal
appearances of pleasure. We follow, with
precipitancy, whithersoever the crowd
leads. We admire, without examination,
what our predecessors have admired. We
fly from every shadow at which we fee
others tremble. Thus, agitated by vain
fears and deceitful hopes, we are hurried
into eager contests about objects which are
in themselves of no value. By rectifying
our opinions, we would itrike at the root

of

of the evil. If our vain imaginations were s E R M.
chastened, the tumult of our passions would
subside.

It is observed, that the young and the

ignorant are always the most violent in
pursuit. The knowledge which is forced
upon them by longer acquaintance with the
world, moderates their impetuosity. Study
then to anticipate, by reflexion, that know-
ledge which experience often purchases at
too dear a price. Inure yourself to fre-
quent consideration of the emptiness of
those pleasures which excite so much firife
and commotion among [mankind. Think
how much more of true enjoyment is loft
by the violence ofpaffion, than by the want
of those things which give occasion to that
pafilon. Persuade yourselves that the fa-
vour of God and the possession of virtue
form the chief happiness of the rational
nature. Let a contented mind, and a
peaceful life, hold the next place in your
estimation. These are the conclusions
which the wife and thinking part of man-
kind have always formed, To there con-

clufions,

S E R M. cluflons, after having run the race of pas-

III. ,_'_ sion, you will probably come at the laits

By forming them betimes, you would make
a seasonable escape from that tempestuous
region; through which none can pass with-
out suffering misery, contracing guilt, and
undergoing severe remorse.

IN the second place, in order to attain

the command of passion, it is requisite to
acquire the power of felf-denial. The self-
denial of a Christian consists not in perpe-
tual austerity of life, and universal renun-
ciation of the innocent comforts of the
world. Religion. requires no such unne-
ceffary sacrifices, nor is any such foe to
present enjoyment. It consists in our being
ready on proper occasions, to abstain from
pleasure, or to submit to suffering, for the
fake of duty and conscience, or from a view
to some higher and more extensive good.
If we possess not this power, we lhall be
the prey of every loose inclination that
chances to arise. Pampered by continual
indulgence, all our passions will become

mutinous

mutinous and headstrong. Desire, not rea- S ER M.
son, will be the ruling principle of our --
conduct.

As, therefore, you would keep your pas-

sions within due bounds, you mufl betimes
accustom them to know the reins. You
must not wait till some critical occasion for
the exercise of felf-denial occur. In vain
you will attempt to aC with authority, if
your first essay be made when temptation
has inflamed the mind. In cooler hours,
you must sometimes abridge your enjoy-
ment even of what is innocent. In the
midst of lawful pleasure, you mufl main-
tain moderation, abftemioufnefs, and self-
command. The observance of this difci-
pline is the only method of supporting rea-
son in its proper aicendant. For if you
allow yourselves always to stretch to the
utmolt point of innocence and safety, be-
yond that point you will infallibly be hur-
ried, when passion shall arise in its might to
lhake the heart.

IN the third place, impress your minds
deeply with this persuasion, that nothing is

what

S E R M. what it appears to be when you are under
. -,,_ the power of palfion. Be assured, that no

judgment which you then form can be in
the least depended upon as found or true.
The fumes which arise from a heart boiling
with violent pafilons, never fail to darken
and trouble the understanding. When the
gourd withered under the shade of which
the prophet Jonah reposed, his mind, al-
ready ruffled by the disappointment of his
predicions, loft, on occasion of this flight
incident, all command of itself; and in the
midst of his impatience, he wi/zhed to die ra-
ther than to live. Instead of being calmed
by that expoftulating voice, Dof/ thoz well,
0 yonah ! to be angry becazfe of the gourd?
he replied with great emotion, I do well to
be angry even unto death. But did Jonah
think so when his passion had abated ? Do
these sentiments bear the least resemblance
to that humble and devout prayer which,
on another occasion, when in his calm mind,
he put up to God' ? No two persons can
differ more from each other, than the fame

* See Jonah, ii.

person

person differs from himself, when agitated S ERM.
by passion, and when master of his reason. i.
I do well to be angry, is the language of
every man wlhen his mind is inflamed.
Every passion justifies itself. It brings in a
thousand pretences to its aid. It borrows
many a false colour to hide its deformity,
It possesses a fort of magic, by which it can
magnify or diminish objeCts atpleafure, and
transformi the appearance of every thing
within its sphere.

Let the knowledge ofthis imposture which

passion pra&ises, place you continually oi
your guard. Let the remembrance of it
be ever at hand, to check the extravagant
judgments which you are apt to pass in
those moments of delusion. Liften to no
suggestion which then arises, Form no
conclusions on which you are to a&. As-
sure yourselves that every thing is beheld
through a false medium. Have patience
for a littleF and the illhfion will vanish;
the atmosphere will clear up around you,
and objects return to be viewed in their
native colours and just dimensions.

VOL. IL, F' ID;

S E R M. IN the fourth place, oppose early the be-

, ginnings ofpaflion, Avoid particularly ali

such objects as are apt to excite- passions
which you know to predominate within
you. As soon as you find the tempepr.rifing,
have recourse to every proper method, ei-
ther of allaying its violence, or of escaping
to a calmer snore. Haften tocall up emo-
tions of an opposite nature. Study to con-
quer one passion by means of some other
which is of less dangerous tendency. Never
account any thing finall or trivial which is
in hazard of.introducing disorder into your
heart.. Never make light of any desire
wvhich you feel gaining such, progress as to,
threaten entire dominion.. Blandishing it
will appear at the firfL As a gentle and
innocent emotion, it may steal into the
heart; but as it advances, it is likely topierce
you through wit/h manyforrows. What you
indulged as a favourite amusement, will
shortly become a serious business and in
the end may prove the burden of your life.
Most of our passions flatter us in their rife.
But their beginnings are treacherous; their

growth

growth is imperceptible; and the evils which E R M.
they carry in their train lie concealed, until * -, .
their dominion is established. What Solo-
mon fays of one of them, holds true of them
all, that their beginning is as when one lettetji
sut water '. It issues from a small chink,
which once might have been easily flopped;
but being negleced, it is soon widened by
the flream; till the bank is at last totally
thrown down, and the flood is at liberty to
deluge the whole plainm

IN the fifth place, the excess of every

pafion will be moderated by frequent me-
ditation on the vanity of the world, the
short continuance of life, the approach of
death, judgment, and eternity. The ima-
ginary degree of importance which the ne-
glect of such meditation suffers us to beflow
on temporal things, is one great cause of
our vehemence in desire, and our eagerness
in pursuit. We attach ourselves to the ob-
jeQcs around us, as if we could enjoy them
for ever. Higher and more enlarged pro-

*Prov. xvii. 14.

F 2 speds

s E R M. speds of the destination of man would na-

J turally cool his miiplaced ardour. For

what can appear so considerable in human
affairs, as to discompose or agitate the mind
of him to whose view eternity lies open, and
all the greatness of the universe of God ?
How contemptible will seem to him this
hurry of spirits, this turmoil of passion,
about things which are so soon to end ?-
'Where are they who once disturbed the
world with the violence of their contests,
and filled it with the renown of their ex-
ploits ? What now remains of their designs
and enterprises, of their passions and pur-
suits, of their triumphs and their glory ?
The flood of time has pafred over them,
and swept them away, as if they had never
been. The faj7zion of the world changes
continually around us. We succeed one
another in the human course, like troops
of pilgrims on their journey. Absurdly we
spend our time in contending about the
trifles of a day, while we ought to be pre-
paring for a higher existence. Eternity is
jus at hand to close this introductory scene.

It
3

It Is fast rolling towards us, like the tide S E M.
of a vast ocean, ready to swallow up all _---
human concerns, and to leave no trace be-
hind it, except the consequences of our good
or bad deeds, which shall last for ever.-
Let such reflecions allay the heat of passion.
Let them reduce all human things to their
proper standard. From frivolous pursuits
let them recal our attention to objects of
real importance; to the proper business of
man; to the improvement of our nature,
the discharge of our duty, the rational and
religious conduct of human life.

IN the last place, to our own endeavours

for regulating our passions, let us join ear-
nest prayer to God. Here, if any where,
divine assistance is requisite. For such is
the present blindness and imperfeEtion of
human nature, that even to discover all the
disorders of our heart is become difficult;
much more, to reAify them, is beyond our
power. To that superior aid, then, which
is promised to the pious and upright, let us
look up with humble minds; beseeching

F 3 the

S E R M. the Father of mercies, that while we fludy

IIL.
'_-^ to act our own part with resolution and vi-

gilance, he would forgive our returning
weakness; would strengthen our constancy
in resisting the assaults of paffon; and enable
us by his grace so to govern our minds, that
without considerable interruptions we may
proceed in a course of piety and virtue.

IT now remains to treat of the govern-

ment of temper, as included in the keeping
of the heart. Passions are quick and strong
emotions, which by degrees subside. Tem-
per is the disposition which remains after
these emotions are past, and which forms
the habitual propensity of the foul. The pas-
sions are like the fiream when it is fwoln by
the torrent, and ruffled by the winds. The
temper resembles it when running within its
bed, with its natural velocity and force.
The influence of temper is more silent and
imperceptible than that of passion. It ope-
rates with less violence; but as its operation
is constant, it produces effets no less con-
fiderable. It is evident, therefore, that it

7 highly

ligh1y deserves to be confidered in a reli- S E R M.
gious view. I

Many, indeed, are averse to behold it in

this light. They place a good temper upon
the fame footing with a healthy conftitu-
tion of body. They confider it as a natural
felicity which iome enjoy; but for the want
of which, others are not morally culpable,
nor accountable to God; and hence the
,opinion has Sometimes prevailed, that a bad
temper might be confiptent with a fiate of
grace. If this were true, it would overturn
that whole dotrine, of which the gospel is
so full, that regeneration, or change of na-
ture, is the essential charaCteristic of a Christ-
lan. It would suppose that grace might
dwell amidst malevolence and rancour, and
that heaven might be enjoyed by such as
are rfrangers to charity and love.-It will
readily be admitted, that some, by the ori-
ginal frame of their mind, are more favour-
ably inclined than others towards certain
good dispositions and habits. But this as-
fords no jftification to those who neglec
to oppose the corruptions to which they are

F 4. prone.

S E R M. prone. Let no man imagine that the hu.

II.
1-( man heart is a foil altogether unfufceptible

of culture; or that the worfi temper may
not, through the affiitance of grace, be re-
formed by attention and discipline. Settled
depravity of temper is always owing to our
own indulgence. If, in place of checking,
we nourish that malignity of disposition to
which we are inclined, all the consequences
will be placed to our account, and every
excuse from natural constitution be rejected
at the tribunal of Heaven,

The proper regulation of temper affeds

the character of man in every relation which
he bears; and includes the whole circle of
religious and moral duties. This, therefore,
is a subjea of too great extent to be com-
prehended in one discourse. But it may be
useful to take a general view of it; and be-
fore we conclude the doctrine of keeping ihe
heart, to shew what the habitual temper of
a good man ought to be, with refped to
God, to his neighbour, and to himself.

FIRST, with refpea to God, what he
ought to cultivate is a devout temper. This

imports

imports more than the care of perform- SERM.

III.

ing the offices of religious worship. It,_ _
denotes that sensibility of heart towards
the Supreme Being, which springs from
a deep impression of his perfections on
the foul. It fiands opposed, not only
to that disregard of God which forms
the description of the impious, but to that
absence of religious affections which some-
times prevails among those who are im-
perfectly good. They acknowledge, per-
haps, the obligations of duty. They feel
tome concern to work out their salvation.
But they apply to their duty through mere
constraint; and serve God without affecion
or complacency. More liberal and gene-
rous sentiments animate the man who is of
devout temper. God dwells upon his
thoughts as a benefactor and a father, to
whose voice he hearkens with joy. Amidit
the occurrences of life, his mind naturally
opens to the admiration of his wisdom, the
reverence of his power, the love of his
franfcendent goodness. All nature appears
to his view as stamped with the impress of

these
p~~~~~~~~~~»

SERM. thefeperfeaions. Habitual gratitude to his
_v--vir Maker for mercies pals, and cheerful refig-

nation to his will in all time to come, are
the native effusions of his heart.

Such a temper as this deserves to be cul-

tivated with the utnoft attention; for it
contributes, in a high degree, both to our
improvement and our happiness. It refines,
and it exalts human nature. It softens that
hardness which our hearts are ready to con-
trad from frequent intercourse with this
rugged world. It facilitates the discharge
of every duty towards God and man. At
the fame time it is a temper peaceful and
serene, elevated and rejoicing. It forms
the current of our affections to flow in a
placid tenour. It opens pleasing profpeas
to the mind. It baniflhes harsh and bitter
paifions; and places us above the reach of
many of the annoyances of worldly life.
When the temper is truly devout, the peace
of God which pa9jeth zuderJianding keepetb
the heart andfoul. I proceed,

SECONDLY, to point out the proper slate
of our temper with refpedt to one another.

It

It is evident, in the general, that if we S EIRM
consult either public welfare or private hap- -
piness, Christian charity ought to regulate
our disposition in mutual intercourse. But
as this great principle admits of several di-
verfified appearances, let us confider some
of the chief forms under which it ought to
mhow itself in the usual tenour of life. Uni-
versal benevolence to mankind, when ic
refts in the abitra&, is a loose indeterminate
idea, rather than a principle of real effeit;
and too often floats as an useless speculation
in the head, instead of affec:ing the temper
and the heart.

What, filrt, presents itself to be recom-

mended, is a peaceable temper; a difpofi-
tion averse to give offence, and desirous of
cultivating harmony, and amicable inter-
course in society. This supposes yielding
and condescending manners, unwillingness
to contend with others about trifles, and,
in contests that are unavoidable, proper mo-
deration of spirit. Such a temper is the
first principle of felf-enjoyment. It is the
basis of all order and happiness among

mankind.

SER M. mankind. The positive and contentious,

III.

'. the rude and quarrelsome, are the bane of

society. They seem destined to blast the
finall ihare of comfort which nature has
here allotted to man. But they cannot dif-
turb the peace of others, more than they
break their own. The hurricane rages firfi
in their own bosom, before it is let forth
upon the world. In the tempests which
they raise, they are always toft; and fre-
quently it is their lot to perish.

A peaceable temper must be supported by

a candid one, or a disposition to view the
condua of others with fairness and impar-
tiality. This frands opposed to a jealous
and suspicious temper, which ascribes every
adcion to the worst motive, and throws a
black shade over every character. As you
would be happy in yourselves, or in your
connections with others, guard against this
malignant spirit. Study that charity ewhich
tbinketh no evil; that temper which, with-
out degenerating into credulity, will dispose
you to be just; and which can allow you
to observe an error, without imputing it as

a crime,

a crime. Thus you will be kept free from s E R M.
that continual irritation which imaginary
injuries raise in a suspicious breast; and will
walk among men as your brethren, not your
enemies.

But to be peaceable, and to be candid,

is not all that is required of a good man.
He must cultivate a kind, generous, and
sympathizing temper, which feels for dif-
trefs, wherever it is beheld; which enters
into the concerns of his friends with ar-
dour; and to all with whom he has inter-
course is gentle, obliging, and humane.
How amiable appears such a disposition,
when contrasted with a malicious or envi-
ous temper, which wraps itself up in its
own narrow interest, looks with an evil eye
on the success of others, and with an unna-
tural fatisfaaion feeds on their disappoint-
ments or miseries ! How little does he know
of the true happiness of life, who is a
itranger to that intercourse of good offices
and kind affecions, which, by a pleating
charm, attach men to one another, and cir-
culate joy from heart to heart!

You

S E R M. You are not to imagine, that a benevo-

r-»---' lent temper finds no exercise, unleSs when

opportunities offer of perfo-rming aeLions of
high generoiity, or of exteniive utility.
These may seldom occur. The condition
of the greater part of mankind, in a good
measure, precludes them. But in the or-
dinary round of human affairs, a thousand
occasions daily present themselves of miti-
gating the vexations which others susser,
of soothing their minds, of aiding their in-
terest, of promoting their cheerfulness, or
ease. Such occasions may relate to the
smaller incidents of life. But let us re-
member, that of small incidents the system
of human life is chiefly comnpoed. The
attentions which refpe: there, when fug-
gested by i-eal benignity of temper, are often
more material to the happiness of those
around us, than actions which carry the ap-
pearance of greater dignity and splendour.
No wife or good man ought to account
any rules of behaviour as below his regard,
which tend to cement the great brother-
hood of mankind in comfortable union.

Particularly

Particularly amidst that familiar inter- S E R M.

course which belongs to domestic life, all
the virtues of temper find an ample range.
It is very unfortunate, that within that
circle, men too often think themselves at
liberty to give unrestrained vent to the
caprice of passion and humour. Whereas
there, on the contrary, more than any
where, it concerns them to attend to the
government of their heart; to check what
is violent in their tempers, and to soften
what is harsh in their manners. For there
the temper is formed. There, the real cha-
racter displays itself. The forms of the
world disguise men when abroad. But
within his own family, every man is
known to be what he truly is.-In all our
intercourse, then, with others, particularly
in that which is closest and most intimate,
let us cultivate a peaceable, a candid, a gentle
and friendly temper. This is the temper
to which, by repeated injunctions, our holy
religion seeks to form us. This was the
temper of Christ. This is the temper of
Heaven.

$TWB

S E R M. WE are now to confider, thirdly, the'

III.

· proper state of temper, as it refpeds the

individual himself. The basis of all the
good dispositions whieh belong to this head,,
is humility. By this I underftandy not that
meanness of spirit which leads a man to
undervalue himself, and to fink below his
rank and charaater; but what the scripture
expresses with great propriety, when it ex-
horts every man, not to think of hinfclf more
highly than he ought to think, but to' think
foberly'i". He who adopts all the flattering
suggestions of felf-love, and forms. claims
upon the world proportioned to the ima--
ginary opinion which he has conceived of
his merit, is preparing for himself a thou-
sand mortifications. Whereas, by checking.
the risings of ill-founded vanity, and re-
treating within those bounds which a mo-
derate estimation of our character pre-
Icribes, we escape the miseries which always
pursue an arrogant mind, and recommend
ourselves to the favour both of God and
man.

.: Rom. xii. 3.

Hence

H-Ience will naturally arise a contented S E RM.

temper, which is one of the greatest bless- v-
ings that can be enjoyed by man, and one
of the most material requisites to the pro-
per discharge of the duties of every flation.
For a fretful and discontented temper ren-
ders one incapable of performing aright any
part in life. It is unthankful and impious
towards God; and towards men, provok-
ing and unjust. It is a gangrene which
preys on the vitals, and infeets the whole
constitution with disease and putrefaction,
Subdue pride and vanity, and you will
take the most effectual method of eradicat-
ing this distemper. You will no longer
behold the objects around you with jaun-
diced eyes. You will take in good part
the bleflings which Providence is pleased to
bestow, and the degree of favour which
your fellow-creatures are disposed to grant
you. Viewing yourselves, with all your
imperfections and failings, in a just light,
you will rather be surprised at your enjoy-
ing so many good things, than discontented,
because there are any which you want.

VOL. I. G From

S.ERM. From a humble and contented temper

III.
, ._ will spring a cheerful one. This, if not

in itself a virtue, is at least the garb in
which virtue llould be always arrayed.
Piety and goodness ought never to be mark-
ed with that dejeaion which fonetimes
takes rife from superstition, but which is
the proper portion only of guilt. At the
fame time, the- cheerfulness belonging to
virtue is to be carefully diftinguilled from
that light and giddy temper rwhich charac-
terizes folly, and is so often found among
the dissipated and vicious part of mankind,
Their gaiety is owing to a total want of
reflexion; and brings with it the usual con-
sequences of an unthinking habit, fhane,.
remorse,. and hcavinefs of heart, in the end.
The cheerfulness of a well-regulated mind
springs from a good conscience and the fa-
vour of heaven, and is bounded by tem-
perance and reason. It rnakes a man
happy in himself, and promotes the hap-
piness of all around him. It is the clear
and calm sunshine of a mind illuminated by
piety and virtue. It crowns all other good

dispositions,

d'lpofitions, and comprehends the general SE RM.
effedc which they ought to produce on the ----
heart.

SucH, on the whole, is the temper, or

habitual frame of mind, in a good man:
Devout towards God; towards men, peace-
able, candid, afFecionate, and humane;
within himself, humble, contented, and
cheerful. To the establishment of this
happy temper all the direcions which I
before suggested for the due regulation of
the thoughts, and for the government of
the passions, naturaily conduce; in this they
ought to issue; and when this temper is
thoroughly formed within us, then may
the heart be eRteemed to have been kept
with all diligence. That we may be thus
enabled to keep it, for the fake both of
present enjoyment, and of preparation for
greater happiness, let us earnestly pray to
Heaven. A greater biefling we cannot
implore of the Almighty, than that he
who made the human heart, and who
knows its frailties, would affiit us to sub-

G2 je&

S II RM. jea it to that discipline which religion re-
--y--' quires, which reason approves, but which

his grace alone can enable us to main-
tain.

# SERMON IV. On the UNCHANGEABLENESS of the DIVINE NATURE. JAMES, i. 17. Every good and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither ...

t 8; ]

SERMON IV.
On the UNCHANGEABLENESS of the

DIVINE NATURE.

JAMES, i. 17.
Every, good and every perfec gift is from

above, and cometh down from the Father
of Lights, with whom is no variablenefi,
neither shadow of turning.
T HE divine nature, in some views, SE R M.

attraCts our love; in others, com I

mands our reverence; in all, is entitled to
the highest attention from the human mind.
We never elevate our thoughts, in a pro-
per manner, towards the Supreme Being,
without returning to our own sphere with
sentiments more improved; and if, at any
time, his greatness oppresses our thoughts,

G 3 his

S E M. his moral perfections always afford us re-

I V. -__-_- lief. His almighty power, his infinite

wisdom and supreme goodness, are founds
familiar to our ears. In his immutability
we are lets accustomed to confider him;
and yet it is this perfec'ion which, perhaps,
more than any other, distinguishes the di-
vine nature from the human; gives com-
plete energy to all its other attributes, and
entitles it to the highest adoration. For,
hence are derived the regular order of na-
ture, and the ftedfaftnefs of the universe.
-lence sows the unchanging tenour of those
laws which, from age to age, regulate the
condu& of mankind. I-ience the uniform-
ity of that government, and the certainty
of.thofe promises, which are the ground of
our trust and security. Goodness could
produce no more than feeble and wavering
hopes, and power would command very
imperfec reverence, if we were left to
fufpec& that the plans which goodness had
framed might alter, or that the power of
carrying them into execution might de-
crease. The contemplation of God, there-

fore,

fore, as unchangeable in his nature and in SE R M.
all his perfecions, must undoubtedly be e--
fruitful both of initruLion and of confola-
tion to man. I shall, first, endeavour to
illustrate, in some degree, the nature of the
divine immutability; and then make ap-
plication of it to our own condut.

EVER - good and every pe/sec7 gsit

cometb dcIvin 72om the Father of Lights.
The title which in the text is given to the
Deity, carries an elegant allusion to the Sun,
the source of light, the most univerlal be-
nefactor of nature, the mofl regular and
confiant of all the great bodies with which
we are acquainted in the universe. Yet
even with the Sun there are certain degrees
of variableness. He apparently ri;-s and
sets; he seems to approach nearer to us in
summer, and to retire farther off in win-
ter ; his influence is varied by the seasons,
and his lustre is asseted by the clouds.
Whereas with him who is the lFather of
Lights, of whose everlasting brightness the
glory of the Sun is but a faint image,

G e there

S ER M. there is no Jh7adow of tzrninvg, not the most

Y distant approach to change. In his being

or essence it is plain that alteration can ne-
ver take place. For as his eriftcnce is de-
rived from no prior cause, nor dependent
on any thing without himself, his nature
can be influenced by no power, can be
affeaed by no accident, can be impaired
by no time. From everiafting to everlaft-
ing, he continues the fame. Hence it is
laid, that he only bath immorztality; that is,
he possesses it in a manner incommunicable
to all other beings. Eternity is described as
the high and hol, place in which he dwvellet ;
it is a habitation in which none but the Fa-
ther of Lights can enter. The name which
he taketh to himself is, I am. Of other
things, some have been and others shall be;
but this is he which is, which was, and
which is to come. All time is his; it is mea-
fured out by him in limited portions to the
various orders of created beings; but his own
existence ills equally every point of duration
thefirJ and the lafl, the beginning and the end,
he fame yeJerday, to-da, andfor ever.

4s

As in his essence, so in his attributes and s E R M.

perfeCions, it is impoflible there can be any ,
change. To imperfect natures only it be-
longs to improve and to decay. Every al-
teration which they undergo in their abili-
ties or dispositions, flows either from inter-
nal defet, or from the influence ofa superior
cause. But as no higher cause can bring
from without any accession to the divine
nature, so within itself it contains no prin-
ciple of decay. For the fame reason that
the felf-exiftent Being was from the begin-
ning powerful and wife, just and good, he
must continue unalterably so for ever. Hence,
wvith much propriety, the divine perfeEions
are described in scripture by allusions to
those objecs to which we ascribe the molt
permanent liability. His righteoztfnefs is
lik the thJronog mountains. His mzercy is in
the heavens; and his faithffulnefs reacheth
unto the clouds. These perfecions of the
divine nature differ widely from the human
virtues, which are their faint shadows. The
justice of men is at one time revere, at an-
other time relenting; their goodness is some-

times

SE R M. times confined to a partial fondness for a

Iv.

_, few, sometimes runs out into a blind in-

dulgence towards all. But goodness and
justice are in the Supreme Being calm and
steady principles of action, which, enlight-
ened by perfet wisdom, and never either
warped by partiality, or disturbed by passion,
persevere in one regular and constant tenor.
Among men, they may sometimes break
forth with transient splendour, like those
wandering fires which illuminate for a little
the darkness of the night. But in God, they
shine with that uniform brightness, which
we can liken to nothing so much as to the
untroubled, eternal lustre of the highest
heavens.

From this follows, what is chiefly mate-

rial for us to attend to, that in the course
of his operations towards mankind, in his
counsels and decrees, in his laws, his pro-
mises, and his threatenings, there is no va-
riableneJf nor jhadoow of turning with the
Almighty. Known 0o himz fronm the begin-
ning were all his 'works. In the divine idea
the whole system of nature existed, long

before

before the foundations of the earth were laid. s E R M.
WVhen he said, Let there be ligxht, he only
realized the great plan which, from everlaft-
ing, he had formed in his own mind. Fore-
seen by him was every revolution which
the course of ages was to produce. What-
ever the counsels of men can effeat was
comprehended in his decree. No new emer-
gency can arise to surprise him. No agita-
tions of anger or of sorrow, of fear or of
hope, can lhake his mind or influence his
conduct. He refts in the eternal poflefiionl
of that supreme beatitude, which neither
the virtues nor the crimes of men can in the
least afiel". From a motive of overflowing,
goodness, he reared up the universe. As
the eternal lover ofrighteoufnefs, he rules it.
The whole fyflem of his government is
fixed; his laws are irrevocable; and, what
he once loveth, he loveth to the end. In
scripture, indeed, he is sometimes said to
be grieved, and to repefit. But such exprel-
lions, it is obvious, are employed from ac-
commodation to common conception; irn
the faime manner as when bodily organs are,

in

s E R M. in other passages, ascribed to God. The

IV. L.,-... scripture, as a rule of life addressed to the

multitude, must make use of the language
of men. The divine nature represented in
its native sublimity, would have transcended
all human conception. When, upon the
reformation of finners, God is said to repent
ofthe/ evil which he hath threatened against
them ; this intimates no more, than that he
suits his dispensations to the alterations which
take place in the characers of men. His
disposition towards good and evil continues
the fame, but varies in its application as its
objects vary; just as the laws themselves,
-which are capable of no change of affeCtion,
bring rewards or punishments at different
times to the fame person, according as his
behaviour alters. Immutability is indeed so
closely connected with the notion of supreme
perfecion, that wherever any rational con-
ceptions of a Deity have taken place, this
attribute has been ascribed to him. Reason
taught the wife and reflecting in every age
to believe, that, as what is eternal cannot
die, so what is perfect can never vary, and

7 that

that the great Governor of the universe S ER M.

IV.

could be no other than an unchangeable _
Being.

FROM the contemplation of this obvious,

but fundamental truth, let us proceed to
the pratical improvement of it. Let us
confider what effect the serious confidera-
tion of it ought to produce on our mind
and behaviour.

It will be proper to begin this head of dif-

course by removing an objetion which the
doctrine I have illustrated may appear to
form against religious services, and in par-
ticular against the duty of prayer. To what
purpose, it may be urged, is homage ad-
dressed to a Being whose purpose is unal-
terably fixed; to whom our righteofncfs
extendeth not; whom by no arguments we
can persuade, and by no supplications we
can mollify ? The objedion would have
weight, if our religious addresses were de-
signed to work any alteration on God; ei-
ther by giving him information of what he
did not know; or by exciting affecLions

which

SERM. which he did not posiess; or by inducing

IV.

him to change meafuires which he had pre-
vioufly formed. But they are only crude
and imperfect notions of religion which can
suggest such ideas. The change which our
devotions are intended to make, is upon our-
selves, not upon the Almighty. Their chief
efficacy is derived from the good dispositions
which they raise and cherish in the human
foul. By pouring out pious sentiments and
desires before God, by adoring his perfec-
tion, and confefling our own unworthiness,
by expressing our dependence on his aid,
our gratitude for his paif favours, our sub-
inirffon to his present will, our trust in his
future mercy, we cultivate such affetions
as suit our place and station in the universe,
and are thereby prepared for becoming ob-
jets of the divine grace. Accordingly, fre-
quent assurances are given us in Scripturei
that the prayers of sincere worshippers, pre-
ferred through the great MIediator, shall be
producive of the happiest effects. When
they afj, they Jhall receive; wzhen they jeek,
they J/all find; when they knock, it Jhall be

8 o25ened

opened to them. Prayer is appointed to be S E R M.

IV.

the channel for conveying the divine grace __
to mankind, because the wisdom of Heaven
saw it to be one of the rnof powerful means
of improving the human heart.

When religious homage is confidered in

this light, as a great instrument of spiritual
and moral improvement, all the objections
which scepticism can form from the divine
immutability, conclude with no more force
against prayer, than against every other
mean of improvement which reason has
suggested to man. If prayer be superfluous,,
because God is unchangeable, we might
upon similar grounds conclude, that it is
needless to labour the earth, to nourish our
bodies, or to cultivate our minds, because
the fertility of the ground, the continuance
of our life, and the degree of our under-
itanding, depend upon an immutable So-
vereign, and were from all eternity fore-
seen by him. Such absurd conclusions rea-
son has ever repudiated. To every plain
and found understanding it has clearly dic-
tated,. that to explore the unknown purposes

of

SE R M. of I-eaven belongs not to us; but that He

IV.
- ' who decrees the end, certainly requires the

means; and that, in the diligent employment
of all the means which can advance either
our temporal or spiritual felicity, the chief
exertions of human wisdom and human
duty consist. Assuming it then for an un-
doubted principle, that religion is a reafbn-
able service, and that, though with the
Father of Lights there be no variableness, the
homage of his creatures is nevertheless, for
the wisest reasons, required by him, I pro-
ceed to shew what sentiments the contem-
plation of divine immutability should raise
in our minds, and what duties it should
chiefly enforce.

I. LET it excite us to admire and adore.

Filled with profound reverence, let us look
up to that Supreme Being who fits from
everlasting on the throne of the universe;
moving all things, but remaining immove-
able himself; directing every revolution of
the creation, but affected by no revolutions
of events or of time. He beholds the heavens

and

tnd the earth wax old as a garment, a nd R
S M.

IV.

decay like a veJtlre. At their appointed pe-
riods he raises up, or he dissolves worlds.
But amidst all the convulsions of changing
and perishing nature, his glory and felicity
remain unaltered.-The view of great and
stupendous oijects in the natural world
firikes the mind with solemn awe. What
veneration,. then, ought to be inspired by
the contemplation of an object so sublime
as the eternal and unchangeable Ruler of the
universe ! The coinpofuie and stillness of
thought introduced by such a meditation, has
a powerful tendency both to purify and to
elevate the heart. It effaces, for a time,
those trivial ideas, and extinguishes those
low passions, which arise from the circle of
vain and palling objects around us. It opens
the mind to all the sentiments of devotion ;
and accompanies devotion with that pro-
found reverence, which guards it from every
improper excess. When we confider the
Supreme Being as employed in works of
love; when we think of his condescension
to the human race in fending his Son to

VOL. II. H dwell

s E R M. dwell on the earth; encouraged by favours,

Iv.
i_ - . and warmed by gratitude, we are sometimes

in danger of presuming too much on his
goodness, and of indulging a certain fond-
ness of affetion, which is unsuitable to our
humble and dependent state. It is necef-
fary that he flioulcd frequently appear to
our minds in all that majesty with which
the immutability of his nature clothes him;
in order that reverence may be combined
with love, and that a mixture of sacred awe
may chasten the rapturous effusions of warm
devotion. Servile fear, indeed, would crush
the spirit of ingenuous and affectionate ho-
mage. But that reverence which springs
from elevated conceptions of the Divine na-
ture, has a happy effeca in checking the
forwardness of imagination, restraining our
affections within due bounds, and compo-
sing our thoughts at the fame time that it
exalts them.

When, from the adoration of the un-

changeable perfection of the Almighty, we
return to the view of our own state, the first
sentiment which ought naturally to arise, is

that

that of felf-abafetnent. We are too apt to S ER M.

IV.

be lifted up by any little diftintions which -
we possess; and to fancy ourselves great,
only because there are others whom we con-
fider as less. But what is man, with all his
advantages and boasted powers, before the
eternal Father of Lights ? With God there
is no variableness; with man there is no
Plability. Virtue and vice divide the em-
pire of his mind; and wisdom and folly
alternately rule him. Hence he is change-
able in his designs, fickle in his friendships,
fluCtuating in his whole charaCer, His
life is a series of contradiCtions. He is one
thing to-day, and another to-morrow;
sometimes obliged by experience to alter his
purpose, and often led to change it through
levity. Variable and unequal himfelfl he
is surrounded with fleeting objects. He is
placed as in the midst of a torrent, where all
things are rolling by, and nothing keeps its
place. He has hardly time to contemplate
this scene of vicifitude, before he too is
swept away. Thus circumstanced in him-
self, and in all the objeCts with which he is

H 2 conneted,

S ER M. conneaed, let him be admonished to be

IV.
V.- humble and modest. Let the contempla-

tion of the unchanging glory of his Creator
inspire him with sentiments of due fubmif-
licn. Let it teach him to know his proper
place; and check that vanity which is so
ready to betray him into guilt.

Let the fame meditation affeCt him with

a deep sense of what he owes to the good-
ness of the Deity. His goodness never ap-
pears in so striking a light, as when viewed
in connection with his greatness. The de-
cfription which is given of him in the text,
calls, in this view, for our particular atten-
tion. It presents to us the mort amiable
union ofcondefcenfion with majesty, of the
moral with the natural perfetions of God,
.which can polfibly be exhibited to the ima-
gination of man. From the Father oof Lights,
with whom there is no variableness, neither
Jfadow of turning, cometh down every good
andperfet gift, The most independent of
all Beings is represented as the most benefi-
cent.. He who is eternal and immutable,
exalted above all, and incapable of receiving

. - 9 returns

returns from any, is the liberal and un- S E R M

IV.

wearied Giver of every thing that is good.
-Let such views of the divine nature not
only call forth gratitude and praise, but
prompt us to imitate what we adore. Let
them mhew us that benevolence is divine;
that to stoop from our fancied grandeur in
order to assist and relieve one another, is so
far from being any degradation of characer,
that it is our truest honour, and our nearest
resemblance to tie Father of Lights.

II, LET the consideration of the divine

immutability convince us, that the method
of attaining the favour of Heaven is one
and invariable. WVere the Almighty a ca-
pricious and inconstant Being, like man,
we should be at a loss what tenour of con-
duct to hold. In order to conciliate his
grace, we might think of applying some-
tines to one fuppofed-principle of his incli-
nation, sometimes to another; and, bewil-
dered amidst various attempts, would be
overwhelmed with dismay. The guilty
w ould efTiy to flatter him. The timid,

H- 3 sometimes

S E R M. sometimes by austere mortifications, some-.

'V.
--..~ ttimes by coffly gifts, sometimes by obfe.

quious rites, would try to appease him.
Hence, in fad, have ariCen all the corrup-
tions of religious worship among men;
from their forming the divine chara&er
upou their own, and ascribing to the Sove-
reign of the Universe the mutability of hu-
man paflions. God is represented by the
pfalmiflt David as faying to the wicked, 2Ihoz
thoughtcfi that I was altogether ficch an one
fs thyjfelf. This continues to be the de-
scription of all the fuperflitious and enthu-
fiaflic sets, which, since the days of David,
have sprung up in the world.

It is our peculiar happiness, under the go-

fpel, to have God revealed to us in his ge-
nuine charaacer, as without variableness or
Jhadow of turning. We know that at no
time there is any change, either in his as-
fe&ions, or in the plan of his adminifira-
tion. One light always shines upon us
from above. One clear and direc path is
always pointed ott to man. The Supreme

* Psalm 1. 2z

Being.

Being is, and was, and ever will-- be, the SERM.

1V.

supporter of order and virtue; the righteous '.--.
Lord loving righteozi/nefs. The external
forms of religion may vary; but, under all
dispensations which proceed from God, its
substance is the fame. It tends continually
to one point, the purification of man's heart
and life. This was the objea of the origi-
nal law of nature. This was the scope of
the Mosaic institution amidst all its sacrifices
and rites; and this is unquestionably the
end of the gospel. So invariably constant
is God to this purpose, that the dispensation
of mercy in Christ Jesus, which admits of
the vicarious atonement and righteousness
of a Redeemer, makes no change in our
obligation to fulfil the duties of a good life.
TheRedeemer himself hath taught us, that
to the end of time the moral law continues
in its full force; and that till heaven and
earth pass away, one jot or tittle Jhall in no
wife pafJ from itn . This is the only inflitu-
tion known to men, whose authority is un-
changing and constant. Human laws rife

* Matt. v. 18.

H 4- -and

S ER M. and fall with the empires that gave them
^-»*- birth. Systems of philosophy vary with the

progress of knowledge and light. Manners,
sentiments, and opinions, alter with the
course of time. But throughout all ages,
and amidfi all revolutions, the rule of mo-
ral and religious condue is the fame. It
partakes of that immutability of the divine
nature, on which it is founded. Such as
it was delivered to the first worshippers of
God, it continues to be, at this day, to us;
and such it shall remain to our posterity for
ever,

III. LST the contemplation of this per-

fedtion of the divine nature teach us to
imitate, as far as our frailty will permit,
that constancy and ftedfaflnefs which we
adore. All the moral attributes of the Su-
preme Being, are flandards of charater
towards which we ought to aspire. But
as in all there perfeeions there are proper-
ties peculiar to the divine nature, our endea-
vours to resemble them are laid under great
reftricLions by the difimiilarity between our

nPatur

nature and the divine. With refpea to S E R M.
that attribute which we now confider, the v.
circumrfances are evident which preclude
improper imitation. To man it is fre-
quenltly neceflary to correc his errours, and
to change his conduct. An attempt, there-
fore, to continue wholly invariable, would,
in our situation, be no other than impru-
dent and criminal obflinacy. But withal,
the immutable re&itude of the Deity fliould
lead us to al}fire after fixedness of principle,
and uniformity in condu&, as the glory of
the rational nature. Impressed with the
sense of that supreme excellence which
results from unchanging goodness, faith-
fulness, and truth, let us become ashamed
of that levity which degrades the human
charaaer. Let us ponder our paths, a&
upon a well-regulated plan, and remain
consistent with ourselves. Contemplating
the glory of the Father of Lights, let us
aim at being transformed, in some degree,
Into the fame image fromn glory to glory. Si-
pally,

IV. LET

SE R M. IV. LET the divine immutability become

IV.
1_V the ground of confidence and trust to good

men, amidst all the revolutions of this un-
certain world. This is one of the chief im-
provements to be made of the fubje&, and
therefore requires full illustration. There
are three lights in which we may view the
benefit redounding to us from that attribute
of God which we now confider. It assures
us of the conflancy of Nature; of the regu-
lar administration of Providence; of the
certain accomplishment of all the divine
promises.

First, it gives us ground to depend on the

constant and uniform course of Nature. On
the unchangeablenefs of God refts the fta-
bility of the universe. What we call the
laws of nature are no other than the decrees
of the Supreme Being. It is because He is
'without variableness or Jhadow of turning,
that those laws have continued the fame
since the beginning of the world; that the
Sun so conflantly observes his time of rising
and going down; that the seasons annually
return; the tides periodically ebb and flow;

the

the earth yields its fruits at flated intervals; s E R M.

IV.

and the human body and mental powers _-
advance to maturity by a regular progress.
In all those motions and operations which
are incessantly going on throughout nature,
there is no tfop nor interruption; no change
nor innovation; no defletion from their
main scope. The fame powerful and fleady
hand which gave the first impulse to the
powers of nature, restrains them from ever
exceeding their prescribed line. Hence
arises the chief comfort of our present life.
WVe find ourselves in a regular and orderly
world. We look forward to a known fuc-
cession of events. We are enabled to form
plans of action. From the cause we calcu-
late the effet ; and from the pall, we rea-
son with confidence concerning the future.

Accustomed from our infancy to this con-

flancy in nature, we are hardly sensible of
the blessing. Familiarity has the fame es-
seCt here, as in many other enjoyments, to
efface gratitude. But let us, for a moment,
take an opposite view of things. Let us
suppose, that we had any cause to dread

capri-

sE R M. capriciousness or change in the power who
V- -- rules the course of nature; any ground to

fufpeQ that, but for one day, the Sun
might not rife, nor the current of the wa-
ters hold their usual course, nor the laws of
motion and vegetation proceed as we have
been accustomed to behold them. What
dismay would instantly fill all hearts !
what horror would seem to overspread the
whole face of Nature ! What part could we
aE, or whither could we run, in the midf:
of convulsions, which overturned all the
measures we had formed for happiness, or
for safety ? The present abode of man
would then become, as Job describes the
region of the grave, a land of da-rknlic, as
darknefi it/if, and the Jhadow of death;
wvithozut any order; and where the light is as
darknefies'. With what joy ought we then
to recognize an unvarying and stedfast Ruler,
under whose dominion we have no such
disasters to dread; but can depend on the
course of Nature continuing to proceed as

* Job, x. 22.

it has ever gone on, until the period shall SE RM-.

IV.
arrive of its final diflblution! .

BUT though the great laws of Nature be

confiant like their Author, yet in the
affairs of men there is much variety and.
change. All that regards our present pofl
feflions and enjoyments was, for wife rea-
sons, left, in a great mcafure, uncertain;
and from this uncertainty arises the diflrefs
of human life. Scnfible of the changes to
which we lie open, we look' round' with
anxious eyes, and eagerly grasp at every
object which appears to promise us fecu-
rity. But in vain is the whole circle of
human things explored with this view.
There is nothing on earth so liable as tc
afllre us of undisturbed refi-, nor so power-
ful as to afford us conitant prote&ion.
Time, death, and change, triumph over all
the labours of men. VWhat we build up,
they incessantly deRfroy. The public con-
dition of nations, and the private fortunes of
individual! , are alike fubijec to reverse.
Life never retains long the fume form. Its

whole

s E R M. whole scenery is continually shifting around

Iv.
a_._ us.- Amidst those endless vicissitudes,

what can give any firm consolation, any
satisfying reft to the heart, except the do-
minion of a wife and righteous Sovereign,
with whom there is no variableness, nor fJa-
dow of turnzing ? Though all things change,
and we ourselves be involved in the general
mutability, yet as long as there is fixed and
permanent goodness at the head of the uni-
verse, we are assured that the great interests
of all good men Shall be safe. That river
perpetually flows, theJireams whereof make
glad the city of God. We .know that the
Supreme Being loved righteousness from
the beginning of days, and that he will
Continue to love it to the last. Under his
government none of those revolutions hap-
pen which have place among the kingdoms
of the earth; where princes die, and new
sovereigns ascend the throne; new -mini-
Rers and new counsels succeed; the whole
face of affairs is changed; and former plans
fall into oblivion. But the throne of the Lord
is eiabz bliedfor ever; and the thoughts of his

heart

heart endure to all generations. We serve s ER M.
the fame God whom our fathers worihip-
ped, and whom our posterity ihall adore.
His unchanging dominion comprehends all
events and all ages; establishes a connea-
ing principle which holds together the past,
the present, and the future; gives stability
to things which in themselves are fluauat-
ing, and extraCts order from those which
appear most confused. Well may the earth
rejoice, and the multitude of fles be glad, be-
cause there reigneth over the univcrfe such
an immutable Lord.

Were you to unhinge this great article

of faith; were you either to fay with the
fool, that there is no God, or to suppose with
the superstitious, that the God who rules
is variable and capricious; you would in-
deed lay the axe to the root of the tree, and
cut down, with one blow, the hope and
security of mankind. For you would then
leave nothing in the whole compass of na-
ture, but a round of casual and transitory
being; no foundation of trust, no protec-
tion to the righteous, no stedfast principle

I to

S E R M. to uphold and to regulate the fucceflion of

Iv.
_,, existence. Instead of that magnificent spec-

tacle which the world now exhibits, when
beheld in connexion with the divine go-
vernment, it would then only present to
view a multitude of short-lived creatures
springing out of the duff, wandering on
the face of the earth without guide or pro-
teCor, struggling for a few years against
the torrent of uncertainty and change;
and then finking into utter oblivion, and
vanifhirlg like visions of the night. Myf-
terious obscurity would involve the begin-
hing of things ; disorder would mark their
progress; and the blackness of darkness
would cover their final result. Whereas,
when Faith enables us to discover an uni-
versal Sovereign, whose power never fails,
and whose wisdom and goodness liever
change, the'profpeEt clears up on every
fide. A ray from the great source of light
seems to illuminate the whole creation.
Good men discover a parent and a friend.
They attain a fortress in every danger; a
refuge amidst all storms, a dwellizg-place

-- izz

in/ av// genera/ions. They are no longer S E RM.

IV.

ajg"-,i7 of v; ; i,,~s.

Cv1ir h e a rt is s,

ae, -~_
t-ifing iln the Lord.

THI-OUGI- these reasonings, from the un-

changing tenour of Divine government,
cannot but afford much comfort to good
men, their fatisfaaion, however, becomes
still more complete, when they confider
the explicit promniles which are given them
in the word of God. The immutability of
the divine purpose afllres them molt per-
festly of those promises being fulfilled in
due time, how adverse soever circumstances
may at present appear to their accomplifil-
ment. The Jirenegth of Israel is not a man7
that he JJJould lie, nor the jon of man that he
JhozUld repent. THath he said it, and Jhall
he not do it? -ath he spoken, and Jhall he
not make it good? Men have the command
only of the present time. When that is
suffered to pass, changes may befal, either
in their own state, or in the situation of
things around them, which shall defeat their
best intentions in our behalf, and render all

VOL. II. I - their

S E R M. their promises fruitless. Hence, even set-

IV. 1.-- ting aside the danger of human inconfiancy,

the confidence which we can repose on any
earthly protector is extremely imperfet.
Man, in his highest glory, is but a reed
floating on the stream of time, and forced
to follow every new direction of the cur-
rent. But God is the rock of ages. All
time is equally in his hands. Intervening
accidents cannot embarrass him; nor any
unforeseen obstacle retard the performance
of his most distant promise. One day is with
the Lord as a thoziand years, and a thou-
sand years are as one day. There is no vi-
ciffitude of the human state in which good
men cannot take fanduary with him as a
sure and abiding friend; the safe conducor
of their pilgrimage here, as well as the eter-
nal reft of their fouls hereafter. All their
patrons may desert them; and all their
friends may die: but the Lord Jlill lives,
who is their rock; and the mofi high God,
who is their redeemer. He hath promised
that he will not leave them when they are
old, nor forsake them when their Jfrength

faileth;

fzileth ; and that even when their heart jhall S E R M.
faint, and theirJ y-'7f f ail, he wzill be theJirength __
of their heart, and ther portionjfor ever. His
immutability is not only the ground of trust
in him during their own abode on earth,
but gives them the fatisfaAcion of looking
forward to the fame wife and good admini-
ftration as continued to the end of time.
When departing hence, and bidding adieu to
life, with all its changeful scenes, they can
with comfort and peace leave their family,
their friends, and their dearest concerns, in
the hands of that God who reigneth for
ever; and whose countenance Jhfall always
behold the upright with the fame compla-
cency. 13My days are like anhadow that de-
clineth, and I am withered like the grass.
But thou, 0 Lord, Jhalt endulre for ever;
and thy remembrance to all generations. The
children of thy servants fJall continue; and
theirJfeedf Sall be eJtabli7fed before thee -.

SUCH are the benefits which good men
may derive from meditation on God as

C Psalm cii. 11, 12. 28.

I 2 witlSout

S E R M. without variablenels or JfJadow of turning.

iV.
--,-... It inspires them with sentiments of devout,

humble, and grateful adoration. It points
out to them the unvarying tenour of con-
duct which they ought to hold; checks their
fickleness and inconstancy; and, amidst all
distresses and fears, affords them comfort.
The immutability of God is the furenf basis
on which their hopes can be built. It is
indeed the pillar on which the whole uni-
verse refts.-On such serious and solemn
meditations let our thoughts often dwell, in
order to correct that folly and levity which
are so apt to take possession of the human
heart. And if our minds be overawed, and
even depressed, with so high a view of the
divine nature, let them be relieved by the
reflection, that to this unchangeable God
-we are permitted to look up through a gra-
cious Mediator, who, though possessed of
divine perfeCtion, is not unconscious of hu-
man distress and frailty.

# SERMON V. On the COMPASSION of CHRIST. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. HEBREWS, iv. 15. We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our ...

[ II7 1

S E R M ON V.

On the COMPASSION of CHRIST.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.

HIEBR EWS, iv. 15.
iHe have not an high prieAt which cannot be

touched with thefeeling of our infirmities;
but was in allpoints tenpted like as 'we are,
yet without iz.

HEN we compare the counsels of SERM.

V Providence with the plans of men, V.

we find a like difference obtain, as in the
works of nature compared with those of art.
The works of art may, at first view, appear
the molt finished and beautiful; but when

I 3 the

S E R M. the eye is afifted to pry into their contex-

_ ture, the nicest workmanship is discerned to

be rough and blemished. Whereas the works
of nature gain by the most accurate exami-
nation; and thlofe which on a fiuperficial
survey appear defective or rude, the more
intimately they are infpeced, discover the
more exaa confirudtion and consummate
beauty. In the fame manner the systems
of worldly policy, though at first they seem
plausible and profound, soon betray in their
progress the narrowness of the human un-
derftanding; while those dispensations of
Providence, which appeared to furnish ob-
jetions either against the goodness or the
wisdom of Heaven, have, upon a more
extensive view of their consequences, fre-
quently afforded the molt striking proofs of
both.

God manifeJed in the felJj was to the Cyws

a Jlnumbliig-block, and to the Gree/ks foolih-
ness. It contradicted every prepofiefiion
which their confined ideas of religion and
philosophy led them to entertain. If a fupe-
riour Being was to interpose for the refto-

ration

ration of a degenerate world, they concluded S E R M.

V.

that he would certainly appear in celeitial '-
majesty. But the thoughts of God are not
as the thoughts of men. The divine wisdom
saw it to be fit that the Saviour of mankind
lhould in all things be made like unto those
whom he came to save. By living as a man
among men, he dispensed inftruQion in the
most winning manner. He added to in-
firution the grace and the force of his own
example. He accommodated that example
to the most trying and difficult situations of
human life; and, by suffering a painful
death, he both taught men how to susser
and die; and in that nature which had of-
fended, he offered a solemn expiation to
God for human guilt.

Besides these ends, so worthy of God,

which were accomplished by the incarna-
tion of Christ, another, of high importance,
is suggested in the text. Human life is to
good men, as well as to others, a state of
suffering and distress. To supply them
with proper consolation and encouragement
during such a state, was one great purpose

I4 of

S E R M. of the undertaking of Christ. With this
L - view he assumed the office of their high

priest, or mediator with God ; and the en-
couragement which this ofice affords them,
will be proportioned to their assured belief,
first of his power, and next of his com-
passion. His power is set forth in the verse
preceding the text, and the proper argu-
ment is founded upon it. Seeing that we
have a great high prieJf who is pjed into
the heavens, fefi/s the Son of God, let us hold
fal/ our prof rjion. But though it be en-
couraging to know that our high priest
is the Son of God, and that he is pqa2ed into
the heavens, yet these faEts alone are not
sufficient to render him the full object of
our confidence. For, as the apostle after-
wards observes, it belongs to the character
of a high priest to be takenl friomn among men,
that he may have comqj7i on on the .igorant,
and them that are out of the way,, feei'cng that
he hinf'ef is con7afyncd zvi/,h iZfrmity.. Iq
order then to satisfy us of our high priest's
posSessing also the qualifications of mercy
and companion, we are told that he is

touched

touched with i/he s/ac,' C:i

oF or .firmities, and S ER M.

was in all poI./s te pl,,'d like as we are. *,--v-
The force of tiis coniii.leration I purpose
now to illufrate. I ihall first explain the
sadis -vhich arc flated in the text, and then
show how from these our Saviour's coin-
pailon is to be inferred, and in what man-
nier it may be accommodated to the cornfo-
lation and hope of good men amidst various
exigencies of life.

TilE affirtion in the text of Chrilt's be-

ing touched with the feeling of osur ii.;,';iii.s,
plainly implies that he had full experience
both of the external diftreiTes, and of the
internal sorrows of human nature. Affum-
ing a body such as ours, he fubljeldcd him-
self to all the natural confequcnces of cor-
poreal frailty. HIe did not chufe for iim-
lelf an easy and opulent condition, in order
to glide through the world with the le:af
molestation. He did not suit his mission to
the upper ranks of mankind chiefly, by
aflimilating his state to theirs: But, born
\n mearinefs, and bred up to labour, he

submittcd
/, , . ' L

S R . submitted to the inconveniences of that

V.
.__.- poor and toilsome life which falls to the

share of the most numerous part of the hu-
man race. Whatever is Ievere in the dif-
regard of relations or the ingratitude of
friends, in the scorn of the proud or the
insults of the mean, in the virulence of re-
proach or the sharpness of pain, was un-
dergone by Christ. Though his life was
mhort, he familiarized himself in it with a
wide compass of human woe; and there is
almost no distressful situation to which we
can be reduced, but what he has expe-
rienced before us. There is not the least
reason to imagine that the eminence of his
nature raised him above the sensations of
trouble and grief. Had this been the cafe,
he would have been a sufferer in appear-
ance only, not in reality; there would have
been no merit in his patience, or in the re-
fignation which he exprefTed. On the con-
trary, it appears, from many circumstances,
that the sensibility of his nature was tender
and exquisite. He affe&ced none of that
hard indifference in which some ancient

6 philo-

philosophers vainly gloried. He felt as a S E R M.

V.

man, and he sympathized with the feelings
of others. On different occasions we are
informed that he was troubled in spirit, that
he groaned, and that he wept. The relation
of his agony in the garden of Gethsemane
exhibits a striking pidure of the sensations
of innocent nature oppressed with anguish.
it discovers all the conflidt between the
dread of suffering on the one hand, and the
sense of duty on the other; the man ftrug-
gling for a while with human weakness,
and in the end recolleCed in virtue, and
rising fuperiour to the objects of difinay
which were then in his view. Father! if
it be pofible, let this czp pass from me. Ne-
verthelefs, not as I will, but as thou wilt.
1Thy will be done. Thus was our Saviour
touched with the feeling of our ifir-mities.
He was a man of Jbrrows, and acquainted
with grief.

It is added in the text, that he was in all

points tempted like as we are. To be tempt-
ed is, in the language of Scripture, to un-
dergo such trials of virtue as are accompa-

nied

S E R M. nied with diffculty and conflic. Though

V.

_ our Lord was not liable to any temptations

from depravity of nature, yet he was per-
petually exposed to such as arise from fitua-
tions the mos: adverse to virtue. His whole
life was in this refpea a course of tempta-
tion; that is, a revere trial of his conPtancy
by every dilcouragement. Hie fufered
repeated provocations both from friends
and foes. His endeavours to do good were
requited with the mos obstinate and per-
verse opposition. Sometimes by the folici-
tations of ignorant multitudes he was tempt-
ed to accept the proffers of worldly greatness.
Oftener, by the insults of multitudes, more
blind and brutal, he was tempted to desert
an office which exposed him to so much
nifery. Together with the world, the
powers of darkness alo combined their
efforts againfi him. We are informed that
he was led into the wvilderness, and, amidst
the horrors of a wild and dreary Iolitude,
was te;zyted of the devil. The great adver-
ufry of nanlind seems to have been per-
mitted to exert unusual proofs of his power

and

and malice, on purpose that the trial of our S E R M.
Saviour's confcancy might be more com-
plete, and his victory over him more illus-
trious and diitinguifled.

From all these circumstances, the conclu-

sion is obvious, that our Lord knows, from:
personal experience, all the discouragements
and temptations which virtue can susser.
Though he participated not of the corrup-
tion, yet he felt the weakness of human
nature. He felt the frength of pafion.
He is no stranger to the difturlance and
commotion, which either the attacks of the
world, or the powers of darkness, are able
to raise within the breast of man. One re-
markable difference, indeed, takes place
between our temptations and those of Chri ft.
Though he was tenipted like as we arc, yet
it was without fin. Though the conflict
was the fame, the issue was different. VWe
are often foiled; He always overcame. But
his disconformity to us in this refpea, is far
from weakening the strength of our present
argument. For fin contrats and hardens
the heart. Every degree of guilt, incurred

by

SE RM. by yielding to temptation, tends to debase
a__--- the mind, and to weaken the generous and

benevolent principles of human nature. IF
from our Lord's being tempted like as we are,
we have any ground to expeE his fympa-
thy, from his being tempted, yet without Jt,
we are entitled to hope that his sympathy,
unallayed and perfec-, will operate with
more complete energy.

FROM this view of the fa&s which are

stated in the text, I proceed to show how
juRtly we may infer our Saviour's compaf-
sion, and in what manner it is to be ac-
commodated to the consolation of good men
amidst various exigencies of life.

It has been the universal opinion of man-

kind, that personal experience of suffering
humanizes the heart. In the school of as-
fliaion, compassion is always supposed to
be most thoroughly learned; and hence, in
the laws of Moses, when the Israelites are
commanded not to oppress the stranger, this
reason is given, fir ye know the heart of a
Jlranger, feeing ye were Jirangers yourselves

in

in the land of Egypt ". The diftrefled, ac- s F R M.

V.

cordingly, fly for consolation to those who _
have been their companions in woe. They
decline the prosperous, and look up to
them with a suspicious eye. They confi-
der them as ignorant of their feelings, and
therefore regardless of their complaints.
Amidst the manifold sorrows of life, then,
how soothing is the thought that our great
IntercefTor with God was a fellow-fufferer
with ourselves, while he passed through
this valley of tears.

But was it necessary for Christ, it may

be said, to affilme our nature in order to
acquire the knowledge of its infirmity and
distress ? As a divine person, was he not
perfecly acquainted with our frame before
he descended to the earth ? Did he stand
in need of being prompted to compassion
by the experience of our sorrows ? Could
his experimental knowledge of humani weak-
ness increase the benevolence of a nature
which before was perfect ?--No: he sub-

* Exod. xxiii. 9.

mitted

S E R M. mitted to be touched wimh the /'eling of ourl

V.

i---a--i Jsrmities, and to be tem,/ted li/ k we w are;
not in order to become acquainted with our
nature, but to satisfy us that he knew it per-
fecly; not in order to acquire any new de-
gree of goodness, but to give us the firmer
confidence in the goodness which he pof-
sessed, and to convey the sense of it to our
hearts with greater force and effect:.

Diltruft is a weakness peculiarly incident

to the iiferable. They are apt to rejec
hope, to indulge fear, and to tinge, with the
dark colour of their own minds, every ob-
jed which is offered for their encourage-
ment. The representations given us of the
Deity in Scripture, afford undoubtedly much
ground for trust in his goodness. But the
perfection of an Almighty Being, who
dwelleth in the secret place of eternity,
who7m 7o man hath fen or canjee, is over-
whelming to a timid apprehension. The
goodness which it promises is a new and
unknown form of goodness. Whatever
proceeds from a nature so far fuperiour to
our own, is beheld with a degree of awe,

which

WvhicJ is ready to overpower hope. Upon s E R M
this account, under the Old Testament dif- e-- _
penfation, the Supreme Being is often de-
fcribed with the attributes of a man, in order
to give a shade and softening to his great-
nets, and to accommodate his goodness
more to our capacity. The relentings of a
friend, the pity of a parent, and the sighs
of a mourner, are ascribed to the Almighty.
But we easily perceive such attributes to be
no more than figures and allusions. The
comfort which they afford is not definite
nor precise. They leave the mind under
an anxious uncertainty, left it err in its
interpretation of those allegories of mercy.
In the person of Jesus Christ the object of
our trust is brought nearer to ourselves;
and of course adapted more effeaually to
our encouragement. Those well-known
tender afiections, which are only figura-
tively ascribed to the Divinity, are in our
great Mediator thoroughly realized. His
goodness is the goodness of human nature
exalted and rendered perfec. It is that
species of.goodnefs with which we are best
acquainted, compatfion to the unhappy;

VOL. II. K and

SE RM. and companion cultivated by that discipline

. _* which we know to be the most powerful,

the experience of sorrows.

For such reasons as these, becazife the chil-

dren are partakers of jej/ and blood, Chri/
himz/flikewife took part of the ame. In all
things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a mercifzd as well
as afaithfiul high prieS. When we confider
his assumption of our nature in this light,
what a mild and amiable aspea does it give
to the government of heaven! What at-
tentive solicitude of goodness is shewn in
carrying on the dispensation of our re-
demption upon a plan so perfectly calcu-
lated to banish all distrust, and to revive
the most timid and dejected heart F How
niaturally does that- inference follow which
the Apostle makes in the verse immediately
succeeding the text i let us therefore come
boldly to the throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to he'l in time
of need! More particularly, in consequence
of the doctrine which I have illustrated,
we are taught to hope,

8 T. THAT

I. THAT under all our infirmities and S E RM.

V.

errors, regard will be had to human im-
perfelion; that a merciful diftinaion will
be made between what is weak and what is
wilfully criminal in our condut ; and that
such measures of obedience only will be ex-
aaed as are proportioned to our circum-
stances and powers. What can more en-
courage our religious services, than to be
assured that the God whom we worship
knows our framne, and remembers we are ddtl;
and that the Mediator, through whom we
worflip him, is touched with the feeling of
our iifirmities ? the most virtuous are the
most apt to be dejected with the sense of
their frailty. While vain and superficial
men are easily flattered with favourable
views of themselves, and fond hopes of
divine acceptance, the slightest apprehen-
sion of guilt is ready to alarm the humble
and delicate mind; just as on coarse bodies
an impression is not easily made, while those
of finer contexture are soon hurt; and as
on an .exquisite polish the leafl speck is vi-
fible. But though religion promotes great

K 2 sensibility

S E R M. sensibility to all feelings of a moral nature,
._ ,- yet it gives no countenance to excefive and

iiperftitious fears. That humility which
checks presumption, and that jealousy which
inspires vigilance, are favourable to piety;
while those suspicions which lead to despond-
ency are injurious to God, hurtful to our-
selves, and repugnant to that whole system
of mercy which I have been iltufltrating.

You complain, that when you engage in

the rolemn exercises of devotion, your fbi-
rits are depref'ed by a load of cares and
.norrows ; that in your thoughts there is no
compoifure, and in your a"cOions no ele-
vation; that after your utmnoft eJTays, you
are incapable of fixing your attention siea-
dily on God, or of fending up your prayers
to him with becoming warmth and fulness
of heart. This debility and wandering of
mind you are apt to impute to some uncom-
mon degree of guilt. You confider it as
the symptom of incurable hardness of heart,
and. as a melancholy proof of your being
abandoned by God.-Such fears as these in
a great measure refute themselves. If you

7 were

were really obdurate, you would be insen- E R M.

V.

fible of guilt. Your complaints of hard- '
ness of heart are an evidence of your heart
being at that moment contrite and aCtually
relenting.-Are there any circumflances of
inward difconpofure and perplexity of
which He is unconscious, who at a critical
period of his life washeavj, andrfore amazed';
who was obliged to complain that his foul
was troubled zvcithin him ; and to acknow-
ledge, that though the spirit was willing, yet
tbe f7flJ was rweak ? To a superior nature,
untouched with human frailty, you might
in such situations look up with some degree
of terrour. But I-Ie who remembers the
lSruggles of his own foul, will not, surely,
judge yours like a hard and unfeeling ma-
fler. Acquainted with the inmost recesses
of human nature, he perceives the sincerity
.of your intentions; he fees the combat you
maintain; he knows how much of your
present confusion and disorder is to be im-
puted, not to your inclination and will, but
1o an infirm, an aged or diseased body, or

* Mark, xiv. 33.

K 3 to

SE R.M. to a weak and wounded spirit; and there-

V.
,_i>n -fore will be far from rejecting your attempts

to serve him, on account of the infirmities
which you lament. He hears the voice of
those secret aspirations which you are unable
to express in words, or to form into prayer.
Every penitential tear which your contrition
sheds, pleads your cause more powerfully
with him, than all the arguments with which
you could fill your mouth.

II. FROM our Saviour's expericnce of

human misery, we mayjuftly hope that he
will so compassionately regard our distressed
estate, as to prevent us from being loaded
with unnecessary troubles. He will not
wantonly add affliction to the afflidted; nor
willingly crush what he fees to be already
broken. In the course of that high admi-
niftration which he now exercises, he may
indeed judge certain intermixtures of ad-
verfity to be proper for our improvement.
These are trials of virtue through which all,
without exception, mufc pass. Rugged was
the road by which our divine Mediator him-

self

self went before us to glory; and by be- S E R M.
coming our companion in diftrcfs, he meant
to reconcile us to our lot. He ennobled
adversity, by sharing it with us. He raised
poverty from contempt, by assuming it for
his own condition. The severity of his
trials tends to lighten ours. When the ge-
neral of an army lies on the fame hard
ground, drinks of the fame cold fiream,
carries the fame weight of armour with the
lowest centinel, can any of his soldiers re-
pine at what they endure ?

Whatever afflicions our Lord may judge

to be necessary for us, of this we may reft
assured, that he will deal them forth, not
with harsh and imperious authority, but
with the tenderness of one, who knows from
experience how deeply the human heart is
wounded by every firoke of adversity. He
will not lay more upon us than he fees we
are able to bear. Thozigl he caife grief, yet
wvill he have compa/ifon according to the mul-
titude of his tender mercies. IHe willJtla his
-rough .wind in the day of the calJ winid:.

4 Isaiah, xxvii. 8.

K 4 For

S E R M. For it is his slate, but not his nature, which

V.
-- .J is now changed. Notwithstanding his high

exaltation, he still retains the compaflionate
sentiments of the man offorrows. Still, we
are assured by an inspired writer, he is not
afhJamed to call us his brethren '. And with
the heart of a brother he regards those few
and troubled days, such as his own once
were, which good men are doomed to pass
in this evil world.

From his compafnion, indeed, we are not

to expect that fond indulgence or unfeafon-
able relief by which the weak pity of men
frequently injures its objects. It is to the
material interef-s, more than to the present
cafe, of good men, that he attends. When
under the impatience of sorrow we exclaim,
flath he forgotten to be gracious ? hath he
in anger Jhzit zip his tender mercies ? we re-
colleCt not in whose hands we are. His
compassion is not diminished when its ope-
rations are most concealed. It continues
equally to flow, though the channels by
which it is conducted towards us lie too

* Heb. ii. xi.

deep

deep for our observation. Amidrt our pre- S E R M.

V.

lent ignorance of what is good or ill for us a_
in this life, it is iuaffcient for us to know,
that the immediate administration of uni-
versal government is placed in the hands of
the most attentive and compassionate friend
of mankind. How greatly does this confi-
deration alleviate the burden of human
woe! How happily does it connel- with the
awful dispensations of religion, the mildest
ideas of tendcrnics and humanity!

III. THE text leads us to hope, that

amidfl all the infirmities of our state, both
under the temptations and under the dii-
tresses of life, our blessed Lord will afford
us a proper measure of assistance and sup-
port. In that he hath Jfffiered being temnpled,
he is able to ficcour them who either susser,
or are tempted '; that is, he is perfecly
qualified for discharging this beneficent of-
fice; he knows exacly where the wound
bleeds, where the burden prefles, what re-
lief will prove most seasonable, and how it

Heb. ii. 18.

can

S E R M. can be most successfully applied. The man-

V.
.« ._. ner in which it is conveyed by him to the

heart we may be at a loss to explain; but
no argument can be thence drawn against
the credibility of the faet. The operations
which the power of God carries on in the
natural world, are no less mysterious than
those which we are taught to believe that
his spirit performs in the moral world. If
we can give no account of what is every day
before our eyes, how a feed becomes a tree,
or how the child rifes into a man, is it any
wonder that we should be unable to explain
how virtue is supported, and constancy
Itrengthened, by God within the heart? If
men by their counsels and suggestions can
influence the minds of one another, must
not divine suggestion and counsel produce a
much greater effet ? Surely, the Father of
Spirits muff, by a thousand ways, have ac-
cess to the spirits which he has made, so as
to give them what determination, or impart
to them what afliftance he thinks proper,
without injuring their frame, or disturbing
their rational powers.

Accordingly,

Accordingly, whenever any notions of s E R M,

religion have taken place among mankind, a.
this -belief has in some measure prevailed,
that, to the virtuous under distress, aid was
communicated from above. This senti-
ment is so congruous to our natural im-
pressions of the divine benignity, that both
among poets and philpfophers of ancient
times it was a favourite idea, and often
occurs in their writings. But what among
them was no more than loose conjecture or
feeble hope, has received full confirmation
from the Gospel of Christ. Not only is the
promise of divine assistance .expressly given
to Chriflians, but their faith in that promise
is strengthened by an argument which must
carry conviction to every heart. If. Christ
had full experience of the insufficiency of
human nature to overcome the difficulties
wherewith it is now surrounded, will he
withhold from his followers that grace
without .which he fees they must perish in
the evil day? If in the season of his tempt-
ation and distress, an angel was sent fiom

heaven

SE R M. heaven tojiregtheniz him *, shall no celefliaI

V. messenger be employed by him on the like

kind errand to those whom he styles his
brethren ? Can we believe that he who once
bore our griefs and carried our sorrows will,
from that height of glory to which he is
now exalted, look down upon us here con-
tending with the florm of adversity, la-
bouring to follow his steps through the steep
and difficult paths of virtue, exposed on
*every fide to arrows aimed against us by
the powers of darkness; and that, feeing
our distress and hearing our supplications,
he will remain an unconcerned fpeaator,
without vouchsafing us either afliftance to
support our frailty, or protecion to screen
us amidst surrounding dangers ? Where
mwere then the benevolence of a divine Na-
ture? Where, the compassion of that Medi-
ator who was trained to mercy in the school
of sorrow ? Far from us be such ungrateful
suspicions of the generous friend of human
xind !-Lct us exert ourselves as we can,

Lu.ke, .xxii. 43.

and

and we ihall be aflifted. Let us pray, and SE RM

V.

we Ihall be heard; for there is one to pre-
sent our prayers, whom the Father heareth
always. These, will he fay, are my fol-
lowers on earth, parsing through that thorny
path of temptation and borrow which I once
trode. Now I £am no mnore in the world:
but the/c are in the world. Ioly Father!
thine they were, and thou gaveJ? thenm me.
Keep them through thine own name. Sanc-
tfy them through thy truth. Keep them from
the evil one; that they may be where I am,
and may behold the glory which thouz has
given me
m .

Such is the comfort which arises to us

from our Saviour's participation of the in-
firmities of human nature; and thus it may
be applied to various situations of an;iety
and. distress.

WHEN we review what has been said,

it is necefiary that, in the first place, I
guard you against a certain misimprove-
ment which may be made of this doctrine.

- John, xvii.

The

SE R M. The amiable view which it gives of our

V.
i-v Lord's clemency may flatter some men

with unwarrantable hopes, and lead them
to imagine, that in his experience of human
weakness an apology is to be found for
every crime. Persons of this character
must be taught, that his compassion differs
widely from that undiftinguifhing and ca-
pricious indulgence which is sometimes
found among men. It is the compassion
of an impartial mind, enlightened by wis-
dom and guided by justice, extending to
the frailties of the sincere, but not to the
fins of the presumptuous, and least of all to
the crimes of those who encourage them-
selves in evil fioni the hope that they shall
meet with companion.

A course of deliberate guilt admits of no

apology from the weakness of human na-
ture. For notwithstanding all the infirmi-
ties incident to it, no man is under a ne-
ceflity of being wicked. So far is our Sa-
viour's experience of our nature from
affording any ground of hope to prefump-
tuous offenders, that it ought to fill them

with

with terrour. For it shews them how tho- SER M.

V.

roughly qualified he is to discriminate --
accurately the characers of men, and to
mark the boundaries between frailty and
perverseness. He who fi-om his own feel-
ings well knows all the workings of the hu-
man heart clearly discerns how differenr
their temper is from what was once his
own. He perceives that vice, not virtue, is
their choice; and that, instead of resiling
temptation, they resist conscience. He fees
that infirmity affords them no excuse; and
that the real cause of their acting a criminal
-part, is not because they cannot do better,
but, in truth, because they will not, Hav-
ing forfeited every title to compafion, they
are left in the hands ofjuftice; and accord-
ing as they haveJfown, they must expect to
reap.

BUT, in the next place, to such as are

sincere and upright, the dodrine which I
have illustrated affords high encouragement,
and powerfully recommends the Chriflian
Religion. It places that religion in its pro-

per

ERM. per point of view, as a medicinal plan, in-
Av- tended both for the recovery of mankind

from guilt, and for their consolation under
trouble. The law was given bb, Lirfs; bvi
grace and truth caynze by yefas Ch/Jt. The
law was a difpeniation of mere authority.
The Gospel is a dispensation, not of autho-
rity only, but of relief. If it discovers new
duties, and imposes new obligations, it opens
also sources of comfort which were before
unknown to the world.

A Mediator between God and his crea-

tures was an objet after which men in all
nations, and under all forms of religion,
had long and anxiously fought. The follies
of fuperflition have served to disclose to us,
in this instance, the sentiments of nature.
The whole religion of Paganifmr was a sys-
tem of mediation and interceifion. De-
pressed by a conscious sense of guilt, nature
lihrunk at the thought of adventuring on a
dire& approach to the Sovereign of the uni-
verse; and laboured to find out some auipi-
cious introdudor to that awful presence.
With blind and trembling eagerness, the

nations

nations fled to subordinate deities, to tute- S E R M.
lar gods, and to departed spirits, as their -
patrons and advocates above. Them they
studied to tooth with such coily gifts, ifch
pompous rites, or such humble fupplica-
tions, as they thought might incline them
to favour their cause, and to support their
interest with the Supreme Divinity. While
mankind were bewildered in this darkness,
the Gospel not only revealed the true Me--
diator, who in this view may be justly
called the desire of all nations, but placed his
character and office in a light most admi-
rably fitted, as has been shewn in this Dif-
course, to support the interest of virtue in
the world; and to encourage the humble,
without flattering the presumptuous. What
plan of religion could be more suited to the
circumstances of man, or more worthy of
the goodness of his Creator ? What more
animating to the pious worshipper, in per-
forming those solemn adQs of devotion to
which we are called by the service of this
day ?
VOL. II. L I CAN-

SERM. I CANNOT conclude without taking no-

V.
e-_ tice how remarkably this dispensation of

religion is calculated to promote a spirit of
humanity. and compaflion among men, by
those very means which it employs for in-
spiring devotion towards God. *We are
now drawing nigh to the Supreme Being
through a Mediator, for whose compassion
we pray on account of the experience which
he has had of our frailty. We trust, that
having been acquainted with distress, he
,ill not d ne for or ablor tlh-e affliEion of the
afficred. The argument by which we plead
for his compaEion, concludes flill more
firongly for mutual charity, and sympathy
with one another. He who, in the midst
of the common fulferings of life, feels not
for the distressed; he who relents not at his
neighbour's griefs, nor Icans his failings
with the eye of a brother, must be sensible
that he excludes himself from the commi-
feration of Chri-s. He makes void the ar-
gument by which he pleads for his mercy;
nay, he etabliffes a precedent againPc him-
self. Thus the Chritian religion approves

~~~~S '
S~itfelf

itself as worthy of God, by connecting de- s E R M.

V.

votion in strict union with charity. As in -
its precepts the love of God and the love of
man are joined, so in its institutions the
exercise of both is called forth; and to wor-
ship God through the mediation of a com-
passionate High Priest, necessarily supposes
in the worshippers a spirit of companion to-
wards their own brethren.

L, 2

# SERMON VI. On the LOVE of PRAISE. JOHN, xii. 43. For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.

[ 48 J

S E R M N W
SERMON VI,

On the LovE of PRArsE,

Jo IN , xii. 43.
For they loved the praise of men more than

the praae of God.
S E M. H E slate of man on earth is mani-

VI. I -feftly designed for the trial of his

virtue. Temptations every where occur;
and perpetual vigilance and attention are
required. There is no passion, or principle
of acion in his nature, which may not, if
left to itself, betray him into some criminal
excess. Corruption gains entrance, not only
by those pallions which are apparently of
dangerous tendency, such as covetousness,
and love of pleasure; but by means of those

also

also which are seemingly the most fair and s E R M.
innocent, such as the desire of esteem and
praise. Of this the text suggests a remark-
able instance. When our Lord appeared
in the land of Judsea, the purity of his doc-
trine, and the evidence of his miracles,
procured him a considerable number of fol-
lowers, chiefly among the lower clafies of
men. But the Pharisees, who were the
leading and fashionable fee, galled with
the freedom of his reproofs, decried him as
an impostor. Hence it came to pass, that
thoughfome of the rulers believed in h7im, yet,
becaife of the ]'harifees, they did not confess
him. Rulers, persons who, by their rank and
education, ought to have been fuperiour to
any popular prejudice, were so far overawed
by the opinions of others, as to stifle their
convition, to dissemble their faith, and to
join with the prevailing party in condemn-
ing one whom in their hearts they revered:
for which this reason is given, that they
loved the prafi of m7en more than the praise
of God. Since, then, the love of praise can
mislead men into such culpable and difio-

L 3 nest

S E R rr- nest conduct, let us, with some attention,
A_-c-l examine the nature of this paflion. Let us

confider how far it is an allowable principle
of action; when it begins to be criminal ;
and upon what accounts we ought to guard
against its acquiring the entire ascendant.

WE are intended by Providence to be con-

neced with.one another in society. Single
unalfifted individuals could make finall ad-
vances towards any valuable improvement.
By means of society our wants are supplied,
and our lives rendered comfortable; our
capacities are enlarged, and our virtuous
affeCtions called forth into proper exercise.
In order to confirm our mutual connection,
it was necessary that some attracting power,
which had the effe& of drawing men toge-
ther, and strengthening the social ties, should
pervade the human system. Nothing could
more happily fulfil this purpofc, than our
being so formed as to desire the esteem, and
to delight in the good opinion, of each other.
Had such a propensity been wanting, and
selfish principles left to occupy its place, so-

ciety

clety muff have proved an unharmonious s rV M.
and discordant state. Instead of mutual at-
traction, a repulsive power would have pre-
vailed. Among men who had no regard to
the approbation of one another, all inter-
course would have been jarring and opien-
five. For the wisest ends, therefore, the de-
fire of praise was made an original and
powerful principle in the human breast.

To a variety of good purposes it is sub-

servient, and on many occasions co-operates
with the principle of virtue. It awakens
us from sloth, invigorates aCtivity, and Pci-
mulates our efforts to excel. It has given
rife to most of the splendid, and to many of
the useful enterprizes of men. It has ani-
mated the patriot, and fired the hero. Mag-
nanimity, generosity, and fortitude are what
all mankind admire. Hence such as were
aCtuated by the desire of extensive fame,
have been prompted to deeds which either
participated of the spirit, or, at least, car-
ried the appearance of distinguished virtue.
The desire of praise is generally conne3tcdc
with all the finer sensibilities of human na-

L 4 ture.

S E R M. ture. It affords a ground on which exhort-

VI.
s__-^ ation, counsel, and reproof can work a pro-

per effec. Whereas to be entirely destitute
of this passion, betokens an ignoble mind,
on which no moral imprefion is easily
made. Where there is no desire of praise,
there will be als o no sense of reproach ;.
and if that be extingui.led, one of the
principal guards of virtue is removed, and
the path opened to many opprobrious
pursuits. He whose countenance never
glowed with shame, and whose heart never
beat at the found of praise, is not destined
for any honourable diftindion; is likely to
grovel in the. fordid quest of gain, or to
slumber life away in the indolence of selfish
pleasures.

AbftraAing from the sentiments which

are connected with the love of praise as a
principle of acion, che esteem of our fel-
low-creatures is an object which, on ac-
count of the advantages it brings, may be
lawfully pursued. It is necessary to our
success in every fair and 'honest undertak-
ing. Not only our private interest, but our

public

public usefulness, depends in a great measure S E R M.
upon it. The sphere of our influence is -
contracted or enlarged in proportion to the
degree in which we enjoy the good opinion
of the public. Men liften with an unwil-
ling ear to one whom they do not honour;
while a refpecaed charaCter adds weight to
example, and authority to counfeh To
desire the esteem of others for the fake of
its effects, is not only allowable, but in many
cafes is our duty; and to be totally indif-
ferent to praise or censure, is so far from
being a virtue, that it is a real defect in
charaCter.

BUT while the love of praise is admitted

to be a natural, and, in so many refpets,
an useful principle of action, we are to
observe, that it is entitled to no more than
our secondary regard. It has its boun-
dary set; by transgressing which, it is at
once transformed from an innocent into a
most dangerous pafion. More sacred and
venerable principles claim the chief direc-
tion of human conduct. All the good es-

sects

S E R M. sets which we have ascribed to the desire

VI.
-a_-v- of praise, are produced by it when remain-

ing in a subordinate fation. But when
pasting its natural line, it becomes the ru-
ling jfpring of condudt; when the regard
which we pay to the opinions of men, in-
croaches on that reverence which we owe
to the voice of conscience and the sense of
duty; the love of praise having then gone
out of its proper place, instead of improv-
ing, corrupts; and instead of elevating, de-
bases our nature. The proportion which this
passion holds to other principles of action is
what renders it either innocent or criminal.
The crime with which the Jewish rulers are
charged in the text, was not that they loved
the praise of men; but that they loved it
more than the praie of God.

Even in cafes vhere there is no direCt

competition between our duty and our
fancied honour, between the praise of men
and the praise of God, the pafion for ap-
plause may become criminal by occupying
the place of a better principle. When vain-
glory usurps the throne of virtue; when

ostentation

ostentation produces acSions which con- S E R M.

VI.

science ought to have dictated; such actions, -i
however specious, have no claim to moral
or religious praise. We know that good
deeds, done merely to be f/Icz of mzen, lose
their reward with God. If, on occasion of
ibme trying conjuncture, which makes us
hesitate concerning our line of condu&, the
first question which occurs to us be, not
whether an acion is right in itself, and such
as a good man ought to perform, but whe-
ther it is such as will find acceptance with
the world, and be favourable to our fame,
the conclusion is too evident that the desire
ofapplaufe has obtained an undue ascendant.
What a wife and good man ought to study,
is to preserve his mind free from any such
solicitude concerning praise, as may be in
hazard of overcoming his sense of duty.
The approbation of men he may wish to
obtain, as far as is confltent with the ap-
probation of God. But when both cannot
be enjoyed together, there ought to be no
suspense. He is to retire contented with
the testimony of a good conscience ; and to

Chow,

S E R M. show, by the firmness of his behaviour, that,

VI.
.. -in the cause of truth and virtue, he is fupe-

rior to all opinion.-Let us now proceed to
confider the arguments which Should sup-
port such a spirit, and guard us against the
improper influence of praise or censure in
the course of our duty.

IN the first place, the praise of men is

not an obje&t of such value in itself as
to be entitled to become the leading prin-
ciple of conduct. We degrade our charac-
ter when we allow it more than subordinate
regard. Like other wordly goods, it is
apt to dazzle us with a false lustre; but if
we would ascertain its true worth, let us
reflec both on whom it is beflowed, and
from whom it proceeds. Were the applause
of the world always the reward of merit;
were it appropriated to such alone as by real
abilities, or by worthy ations, are entitled
to rife above the crowd, we might justly
be flattered by pofrefsing a rare and valuable
diftindion. Bui how far is this from be-
ing the cafe in fact ? How often have the

defpicablc

despicable and the vile, by dexterously s E RM.

VI.

catching the favour of the multitude, soared _'
upon the wings of popular applause, while
the virtuous and the deserving have been
either buried in obscurity, or obliged to
encounter the attacks of unjust reproach ?
The laurels which human praise confers, are
withered and blasted by the unworthiness
of those who wear them. Let the man
who is vain of public favour be humbled by
the reflection that, in the midst of his fuc-
cess, he is mingled with a crowd of impof-
tors and deceivers, of hypocrites and en-
thufiafts, of ignorant pretenders and super-
ficial reasoners, who, by various arts, have
attained as high a rank as himself in tem-
porary fame.

We may easily be satisfied that applause

will be often shared by the undeferving, if
we allow ourselves to confider from whom
it proceeds. When it is the approbation of
the wife only and the good which is pur-
sued, the love of praise may then be ac-
counted to contain itself within just bounds,
and to run in its proper channel. But the

testimony

SE R M. testimony of the discerning few, modefl and

V1.
_,- - unassuming as they -commonly are, forms

but a small part of the public voice. It fel-
dom amounts to more than a whisper, which
amidst the general clamour is drowned.
When the love of praise has taken poffefiion
of the mind, it confines not itself to an ob-
je& so limited. It grows into an appetite
for indiicriminate praise. And who are
they that confer this praise ? A mixed mul-
titude of men, who in their whole conduc
are guided by humour and caprice, far more
than by reason; who admire false appear-
ances, and pursue false gods; who inquire
superficially, and judge rashly; whose senti-
meres are for the mot part erroneous, always
changeable, and often inconsistent. Nor
let any one imagine, that by looking above
the crowd, and courting the praise of the
fashionable and the great, he makes sure of
true honour. There are a great vulgar, as
well as a fimall. Rank often makes no dif-
ference in the understandings of men, or in
theirjudicious distribution ofpraife. Luxury,
pride, and vanity, have frequently as much

influence

influence in corrupting the sentiments of SE R Vr.

b

, . A i3

. VI.

the great, as ignorance, bigotry, and pre- ._,__
judice, have in misleading the opinions of
the crowd.-And is it to such judges as
these that you ifbmit the supreme direaiont
of your conduct ? Do you hloop to court
their favour as your chief diifinci'on, when
an objec of so much jufler and higher am-
bition is presented to you in the pranfe of
God? God is the only unerring Judge of
what is excellent. His approbation alone
is the substance, all otl:er praise is but the
shadow, of honour. The characer which
you bear in his fight is your only real one.
How contemptible does it render you, to be
indifferent with refped to this, and to be
Solicitous about a name alone, a fictitious,
imaginary chara&er, which has no exist-
ence except in the opinions of a few veak
and credulous men around you ? They fee
no farther than the outside of things. They
can judge of you by actions only; and not
by the comprehensive view of all your ac-
tions, but by such merely as you have had
opportunity of bringing forth to public no-

tice.

SERM. tice. But the Sovcreign of the world be-

c_ ..holds you in every light in which you can

be placed. The silent virtues of a generous
purpose and a pious heart, attrat his notice
equally with the most splendid deeds. From
him you may reap the praise of good a&ions-
which you had no opportunity of perform-
ing. For he fees them in their principle;
he judges of you by your intentions; he
knows what you would have done. You
may be in his eyes a hero or a martyr,
without Utndergoing the labours of the one,
or the sufferings of the other. His infpec-
tion, therefore, opens a much wider field
for praise, than what the world can afford
you; and for praise, too, certainly far more
illulRrious in the eye of reason. Every real
artist studies to approve himself to such as
are knowingin his art. To their judgment
he appeals. On their approbation, he refts
his charater, and not oh the praise of the
unflilled and rude. In the highest art of
all, that of life and condu&, ihall the opi-
nions of ignorant men come into the moit
distant competition with his approbation

I who

who is the searcher of all hearts, and the S R M.

VI.

standard of all perfedion ?-The testimony ,-
of his praise is not indeed, as yet, openly
bestowed. But though the voice of the Al-
mighty found not in your ears, yet by con-
science, his sacred vicegerent, it is capable
of being conveyed to your heart. The
obfteft whisper of divine approbation is
sweeter to the foul of a virtuous man, than
the loudest shouts of that tumultuary ap-
plause which proceeds from the world.

Confider, farther, how narrow and cir-

cumfcribed in its limits that fame is which
the vain-glorious man so eagerly pursues.
In order to shew him this, I shall not bid
him reflec that it is confined to a small
ditria: of the earth; and that when he looks
a little beyond the region which he inhabits,
he will find himself as much unknown as
the most obscure person around him. I
ihall not desire him to confider, that in the
gulph of oblivion, where all human me-
morials are swallowed up, his name and
fame must soon be inevitably loft. He may
imagine that ample honours remain to gra-

VOL. II. M tify

S ER M. tify ambition, though his reputation extend
.-m-«,« not over the whole globe, nor last till the

end of time. But let him calmly reflet,
that within the narrow boundaries of that
country to which he belongs, and during
that finall portion of time which his life fills
up, his reputation, great as he may fancy
it to be, occupies no more than an incon-
fiderable corner. Let him think what mul-
titudes of those among whom he dwells are
totally ignorant of his name and character;
how many imagine themselves too import-
ant to regard him; how many are too much
occupied with their own wants and pursuits
to pay him the least attention; and where
his reputation is in any degree spread, how
often it has been attacked, and how many
rivals are daily rising to abate it: Having
atitended to these circumstances, he will find
sufficient materials for humiliation in the
midfft of the highest applaufe.-Firom all
these considerations it clearly appears, that
though' the esteem of our fcllow-crcatures
be pleasing, and the pursuit of it, in a mo-
derate degree, be fair and lawful, yet that

it

it affords no such object to desires as entitles S E R M,

VI.
it to be a ruling principle. ,

IN the second place, an excefive love of

praise never fails to undermine the regard
due to conscience, and to corrupt the heart.
It turns off the eye of the mind from the
ends which it ought chiefly to keep in view;
and rets up a false light for its guide. Its
influence is the more dangerous, as the co-
lour which it aflumes is often fair; and its
garb and appearance are nearly allied to
that of virtue. The love of glory, 1 before
admitted, may give birth to actions which
are both splendid and useful. At a distance
they firike the eye with uncommon bright-
ness; but on a nearer and firicer survey,
their lufrre is often tarnished. They are.
found to want that sacred and venerable dig-
nity which charaaterifes true virtue. Little
passions and selfish interefrs entered into the
motives ofthofe who performed them. They
were jealous of a competitor. They fought
to humble a rival. They looked round fbr
speCtators to admire them. All is magna-

-M 2 nimity,

S E R M. nimity, generosity, and courage, to public

VI. A--_s view. But the ignoble source whence these

seeming virtues take their rife is hidden.
Without, appears the hero; within, is found
the man of dust and clay. Consult such as
have been intimately connected with the
followers of renown; and seldom or never
will you find that they held them in the
fame esteem with those who viewed them
fiom afar. There is nothing, except iim-
plicity of intention, and purity of principle,
that can stand the test of near approach and
firia examination.

But supposing the virtue of vain-glorious

men not to be always false, it certainly can-
not be depended upon as firm or sure. Con-
flancy and steadiness are to be looked for
from him only whose conduc is regulated
by a sense of what is right; w7hose praise is
0ot of men, but of God; whose motive to dif-
charge his duty is always the fame. Change,
as much as you please, the situation of such
a man; let applause or let censure be his
lot; let the public voice, which this day has
extolled him, to-morrow as loudly decry

him,

him; on the tenour of his behaviour there s E R M.

VI.

changes produce no effett. He moves in *-r-
a higher sphere. As the fun in his orbit is
not interrupted by the mills and storms of
the atmosphere below, so, regardless of the
opinions of men, through honour and dif-
honour, through good report and bad report,
he pursues the path which conscience has
marked out. Whereas the apparent virtues
of that man whose eye is fixed on the world,
are precarious and temporary. Supported
only by circumstances, occasions, and par-
ticular regards, they flucuate and fall with
these. Excited by public admiration, they
disappear when it is withdrawn; like those
exhalations which, raised by heat from the
earth, glitter in the air with momentary
splendour, and then fall back to the ground
from whence they sprung.

The intemperate love of praise not only

weakens the true principles of probity, by
substituting inferior motives in their flead,
but frequently also impels men to acions
which are direcly criminal. It obliges them
to follow the current of popular opinion

M 3 whither-

S E R M . whithersoever it may carry them; and hence

VI.
-..
.-- / JIip2vreck is often made both of faith and of

a good colfcieince. According as circum-
tances lead them to court the acclamations
of the multitude, or to pursue the applause
of the great, vices of different kinds will
fain their character. In one situation they
will make hypocritical professions of reli-
gion. In another, they will be ashamed of
their Redeemer, and of his words. They
will be afraid to appear in their own form,
or to utter their genuine sentiments. Their
whole character will become fictitious; opi-
nions will be assumed, speech and behaviour
modelled, and even the countenance formed,
as prevailing taste exacts. From one who
has submitted to such prostitution for the
fake of praise, you can no longer expet
fidelity or attachment on any trying occa-
lion. In private life, he will be a timorous
and treacherous friend. In public conduc,
he will be supple and versatile; ready to de-
fert the cause which he had espoused, and
to veer with every shifting wind of popular
favour. In fine, all becomes unsound and

hollow

hollow in that heart, where, ini:ead of re- S ER M.
gard to the divine approbation, there reigns .
the sovereign defre of pleating men.

IN the third place, this paiTion, when it

becomes predominant, moit commonly de-
feats its own end, and deprives men of the
honour which they are so eager to gain.
Without preserving li!eriy and independ-
ence, we can never command refpeet.
That servility of spirit which fubje(Sts us to
the opinions of others, and renders us tri-
butaries to the world for the fake of ap-
plause, is what all mankind deflife. They
look up with reverence to one who, un-
awed by their censures, ads according to
his own sense of things, and follows the free
impiife of an honourable mind. But him
who hangs totally on their judgment, they
confider as their vaflal. They even enjoy
a malignant pleasure in humbling his vanity,
and withholding that praise which he is seen
to court. By artifice and fiow he may
shine for a time in the public eye; but it is
only as long as he can support the belief of

M 4 adcing

S ERR .t aing from principle. When the incon-
4-~-. fiflencies into which he falls detea his cha-

racter, his reputation passes away like the
pageant of a day. No man ever obtained
lafling fame who did not, on several occa-
sions, contradit the prejudices of popular
opinion.

There is no course of behaviour which

will at all times please all men. That which
pleases most generally, and which only
commands durable praise, is religion and
virtue. Sincere piety towards God, kind
affetion to men, and fidelity in the dif-
charge of all the duties of life; a conscience
pure and undefiled; a heart firm to juRfice
and to truth, fuperiour to all terrours that
would shake, and insensible of all pleasures
that would betray it; unconquerable by the
opposition of the world, and resigned to
God alone; there are the qualities which
render a man truly refpecable and great.
Such a charaCer may, in evil times, incur
unjust reproach. But the clouds which envy
or prejudice has gathered around it will gra-
jually disperse; and its brightness will come

forth,

forth, in the end, as the noon day. As SERM.

VW

ibon as it is thoroughly known, it finds a .--
witness in every breast It forces appro-
bation even from the most degenerate. The
human heart is so formed as to be attuned,
if we may use the expression, to its praise.
In fat, it is this firm and inflexible virtue,
this determined regard to principle beyond
all opinion, which has crowned the charac-
ters of such as now stand highest in the rolls
of lafling fame. The truly illufcrious are
they who did not court the praise of the
world, but who performed the aCtions which
deserved it. They were perhaps traduced,
in their lifetime, by those whom they op-
posed. But posterity has done them ample
justice; and they are the men whom the
voice of ages now concurs in celebrating.
The memnorial of virtue is immortal; becaife
it is approved of God and of men. W4hen it
is present, men take example at it; and when
it is gone, they dejire it. It weareth a crown,
a3d triumnpheth for ever; having gotten the
viciory.; Jlriving for undefled rewards r .

* Wisdom of Solomon, iv. i, z.

T
4

S E R M. TN the fourth place, as an im:oderate

VI.

<A _
.. paEicon for human praise is dangerous to

virtue, and unfavourable to true honour, so
it is defrrucive of felf-enjoyment and in-
ward peace. Regard to the praise of God
prescribes a simple and confitent tenour of
conduct, which in all situations is the fame;
'which engages us in no perplexities, and
req.uires no artful refinement. i/z/lking
/rizg-ht'y, we wal/kJ' rel,, because we tread
an even and open path. But he who turns
abide from the straight road of duty in order
to gain applause, involves hinfelf in an in-
tricate labyrinth. He will be often embar-
rafied concerning the course which he ought
to hold. His mind will be always on the
firetch. He will be obliged to-lif-en with
anxious attention to every whisper of the
popular voice. The demands of those ma-
I'ers whom he has submitted to serve, will
prove frequently contradi&ory and incon-
fifent, He has prepared a yoke for his
neck which he must resolve to bear, how
much soever it may gall him.

The

The toils of virtue are honourabic. The S E R M.

TVI.

mind is supported under them by the con- _
fcioufncfs of acing a right and becoming
part. But the labours to which he is doom-
ed who is enslaved to the desire of praise,
are aggravated by reflexion both on the un-
certainty of the recompence which he pur-
files, and on the debasement to which he
submits. Conscience will, from time to
time, remind him of the improper sacrifices
which he has made, and of the forfeiture
which he has incurred, of the praise of God
for the fake of praise from nmen. . uppofe
him to receive all the rewards which the
mistaken opinion of the world can belfow,
its loudeif applause will often be unable to
drown the upbraidings of an inward voice;
and if a man is reduced to be ashamed of
himself, what avails it him to be caressed
by others?

But, in truth, the reward towvards which

he looks who propoles human praise as his
ultimate obje&, will be always flying, like
a shadow before him. So capricious and
uncertain, so fickle and mutable is the fa-

vour

S E R M. your of the multitude, that it proves the

VI.

,- n most unfatisfaatory of all pursuits in which

men can be engaged. He who sets his
heart on it, is preparing for himself perpe-
tual mortifications. If the greatest and belt
can seldom retain it long, we may easily
believe that from the vain and undeferving
it will suddenly escape. There is no cha-
racter but what on some fide is vulnerable
by censure. He who lifts himself up to the
observation and notice of the world, is, of
all men, the least likely to avoid it. For
he draws upon himself a thousand eyes that
will narrowly infped him in eyery part.
Every opportunitywill be watched of bring-
ing him down to the common level. His
errours will be more divulged, and his in-
firmities more magnified, than those of
others. In proportion to his eagerness for
praise will be his sensibility to reproach.
Nor is it reproach alone that will wound
him. He will be as much dejeded by
silence and negle&. He puts himself under
the power of every one to humble him,
by withholding expected praise. Even

when

when praise is bestowed he is mortified by s E R M.
its being either faint or trite. He pines --
when his reputation flagnates. The degree
of applause to which he has been accustom-
ed grows insipid; and to be always praised
from the fame topics, becomes at last much
the fame with not being praised at all.

All these chagrins and disquietudes are

happily avoided by him who keeps so trou-
blefome a passion within its due bounds;
who is more desirous of being truly worthy
than of being thought so; who pursues the
praise of the world with manly temperance,
and in subordination to the praise of God.
He is neither made giddy by the intoxicat-
ing vapour of applause, nor humbled and
cast down by the unmerited attacks of cen-
sure. Refting on a higher approbation, he
enjoys himself in peace, whether human
praise stays with him, or flies away. With
me it is afnzall thing to be judged of you, or
of man's judgment. He that judgeth me is
the Lord. My witness is in Heaven, and my
record is on high.

IN

S E R M. IN the fifth and last place, the advan-

VI.

- tages which redound from the praise ofmen,

are not such as can bear to be put in com-
petition with those which flow from the
praise of God. The former are necessarily
confined within the verge of our present
existence. The latter follow us beyond
the grave, and extend through all eternity.
Not only is the praise of men limited in its
effects to this life, but also to particular fitua-
tions of it. In the days of health and ease
it may brighten the funlhine of prosperity.
It may then sooth the ear with pleasing ac-
cents, and gratify the imagination with fan-
cied triumphs. But when the distressful
seasons of life arrive, it will be found alto-
gether hollow and unfubfrantial: And sure-
ly, the value of any possession is to be chiefly
estimated by the relief which it can bring
us in the time of our greatest need. When
the mind is cast down with sorrow and
grief, when sickness spreads its gloom
around us, or death rites in awful profpea
to our view, the opinions and the dif-
courses of the world will appear trifling and

infig-

inflgnificant. To one who is occupied S E R M.

VI.

with nearer and more affeaing interests, v,
the praise or the censure of the world will
seem like the noise of distant voices, in
which he has fmnall concern. But then is
the season when the praise of God r'pports
and upholds the labouring foul. Broughlt

6

-~~~~~~~~r

home-to the heart by the testimony of r
good conscience, and by the d.vine SX'iit
bearingX vitnzfis ith o0r joa inits, it in.ires
fortitude, and produces apeace which pal'th
zinderfjanding.

At present we behold an irregular and

disordered state of things. Virtue is often
deprived of its proper honours, and vice
usurps them in its stead. The charaCters of
men are mifaaken; and ignorance and folly
dispose of human applause. But the day
hastens apace which ifall close this scene of
errours, and-vindicate the rights of justice
and truth. Then Jhall be rendered to every
man according to his Zorks. Envy flall no
longer have the power of obscuring merit,
nor popular prejudices be able to support
the undeferving. Hidden worth shall be

5 brought

s E R M. brought to light, and secret crimes revealed.

VI.
a -__ Many who passed through the world in the

silent obscurity of humble, but steady good-
ness, {hall be distinguished as the favourites
of Heaven; while the proud, the ambitious,
and the vain, are left to everlasting difho-
nour. The great Judge hath declared, that
vhjofoever has been aJJhamed of him and of his
-words, of that man Jhall he be ajhamed when
he cometh in the glory of his Father, with all
the holy angels. Every departure from duty
mhall, at the period of final distribution, ter-
minate in ignominy. True honour and true
virtue fiall be seen to coincide; and when
all human fame has pafled away like smoke,
the only praise which ihall be for ever re-
membered is that divine testimony, Well
done, thou good and faithful ervant; enter
thozu into the joy of thy Lord.

THESE arguments clearly show the im-

portance of preserving the love of praise
under proper Subordination to the principle
of duty. In itself, it is an useful motive to
=tion; but when allowed to extend its

influence

influence too far, it corrupts the whole s R M.

VI.

characqer, and produces guilt, disgrace, and -
misery. To be entirely deftltute of it, is a
defeac. To be governed by it, is depravity.
The proper adjustment of the several priii-
ciples of ation in human nature, is a matter
that deserves our highest attention. For
when any one of them becomes either too
weak or too strong, it endangers both our
virtue and our happiness. Keep thy heart
therefore with all diligence; pray that God
would enable thee to keep it with success;
for out of the heart are the isiaes of life.

VOL. II. N
s' ·

# SERMON VII. On the proper ESTIMATE of HUMAN LIFE. ECCLESIASTES, xii. 8. Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher, all is vanity.

[ I78 ]

SERMON VII.
Ontheproper ESTIMATE of HUMANLF...

__

ECCLESIASTES, xii. 8.
Vanity of vanities,faith the preacher, all is

vanity.

S E R M. 0 serious maxim has been more ge-
VII. nerally adopted than that of the text.

In every age, the vanity of human life has
been the theme of declamation, and the sub-
jeac of complaint. It is a conclusion in which
men of all characers and ranks, the high
and the low, the young and the old, the
religious and the worldly, have more fre-
quently concurred than in any other. But
how just soever the conclusion may be, the
premises which lead to it are often false.

For

For it is prompted by various motives, and S E R M.

VII.

derived from very different views of things. ,_-
Sometimes the language of the text is as-
fumed by a sceptic who cavils at Providence,
and censures the constitution of the world.
Sometimes it is the complaint of a peevish
man, who is discontented with his station,
and ruffled by the disappointment of unrea-
fonable hopes. Sometimes it is the style of
the licentious, when groaning under miseries
in which their vices have involved them.
Invectives against the vanity of the world
which come from any of these quarters de-
serve no regard; as they are the diaates of
impiety, of spleen, or of folly. The only
cafe in which the sentiment of the text
claims our attention, is, when uttered, not
as an aspersion on Providence, or a reflec-
tion on human affairs in general; not as the
language of private discontent, or the result
of guilty sufferings; but as the fober con-
clufion of a wife and good man, concerning
the imperfection of that happiness which
refts solely on worldly pleasures. These, in
their fairest form, are not what they seem to

N 2 be.

S EVRM. be. They never beflow that complete' a-
-ylsr tisfaEtion which theypromife; and therefore

he who looks to nothing beyond them ihall
have frequent cause to deplore their vanity.

Nothing is of higher importance to us, as

men and as Christians, than to form a proper
estimate of human life, without either load-
ing it with imaginary evils, or expecting
from it greater advantages than it is able to
yield. It shall be my business, therefore,
in this Discourse, to distinguish a just and
religious sense of the vanity of the world,
from the unreasonable complaints of it which
we often hear. I shall endeavour, I. To
shew in what sense it is true that all earthly
pleasures are vanity. II. To inquire, how
this vanity of the world can be reconciled
with the perfections of its great Author.
III. To examine, whether there are not
some real and solid enjoyments in human
life which fall not under this general charge
of vanity. And, IV. To point out the pro-
per improvement to be made of such a state
as the life of man shall appear on the whole
to be.'

I. I AM

I. I AM to shew in what sense it is true s E RM.

VII.

that all human pleasures are vanity. This ,
is a topic which might be embellished with
the pomp of much description. But I shall
tfudioufly avoid exaggeration, and only
point out a threefold vanity in human life,
which every impartial observer cannot but
admit; disappointment in pursuit, diflatif-
falcion in enjoyment, uncertainty in pof.
feflion.

Firit, disappointment in pursuit. When

we look around us on the world, we every
where behold a busy multitude, intent on
the prosecution of various designs which
their wants or desires have fuggeited. We
behold them. employing every method which
ingenuity can devise, some the patience of
industry, some the boldness of er-rprife,
others the dexterity of stratagem, - order
to compass their ends. Of this inceifant flir
and activity, what is the fruit? In compa-
rifon of the crowd who have toiled in vain,
how small is the number of the successful ?
Or rather, where is the man who-will de-
glare, that in every point he has completed

N 3 his

SE R M. his plan, and attained his utmost wish? No

VII.

extent of human abilities has been able to
discover a path which, in any line of life,
leads unerringly to success. The race is not
always to thefwift, nor the battle to thbejirong,
nor riches to men of Zndersizndinzg. We may
form our plans with the most profound fa-
gacity, and with the most vigilant caution
may guard against dangers on every fide.
But some unforeseen occurrence comes
across, which baffles our wisdom, and lays
our labours in the dust.

Were such disappointments confit'ed to

those who aspire at engrossing the higher
departments of life, the misfortune would be
less. The humiliation of the mighty, and
the fall of ambition from its towering height,
little concern the bulk of mankind. These
are objects on which, as on distant meteors,
they gaze from afar, without drawing per-
fonal instruction from events so much above
them. But, alas! when we descend into
the regions of private life, we find difap-
pointment and blasted hope equally preva-
lent there. Neither the moderation of our

views,

views, nor the justice of our pretensions, can E R M.
ensure success. But time and chance happen -
to all. Against the stream of events both
the worthy and the undeferving are obliged
to struggle; and both are frequently over-
born alike by the current.

BESIDES disappointment in pursuit, dif-

fatisfacion in enjoyment is a farther vanity
to which the human state is subjet. This
is the severest of all mortifications, after
having been successful in the pursuit, to be
baffled in the enjoyment itself. Yet this is
found to be an evil still more general than
the former. Some may be so fortunate as
to attain what they have pursued; but none
are rendered completely happy by what they
have attained. Disappointed hope is mi-
fery; and yet successful hope is only irm-
perfec& bliss. Look through all the ranks of
mankind. Examine the condition of those
who appear most prosperous; and you
will find that they are never just what they
desire to be. If retired, they languish for
anion; if busy, they complain of fatigue.

N 4 If

S E R M. If in middle life, they are impatient for dif-

VII.

--, tinlion; if in high stations, they sigh after

freedom and ease. Something is fRiil want-
ing to that plenitude of fatisfaaion which
they expeced to acquire. Together with
every wiih that is gratified, a new demand
arises. One void opens in the heart, as
another is filled. On wishes, wishes grow;
and to the end, it is rather the expectation
of what they have not, than the enjoyment
of what they have, which occupies and in-
terests the moit successful.

This diffatisfaation, in the midst of hu-

man pleasure, springs partly from the nature
of our enjoyments themselves, and partly
from circumstances which corrupt them.
No worldly enjoyments are adequate to the
high desires and powers of an immortal
spirit. Fancy paints them at a distance with
splendid colours; but possession unveils the
fallacy. The eagerness of passion bestows
upon them at first a brisk and lively relif.
But it is their fate always to pall by fami-
liarity, and sometimes to pass from satiety
into difiguft. Happy would the poor man

think

think himfelfif he could enter on all the S E RP

V1L.

treasures of the rich; and happy for a lhort --
while he might be: But before he had long
contemplated and admired his state, his pof-
fefions would seem to lessen, and his cares
would grow.

Add to the unsatisfying nature of our

pleasures, the attending circumfiances which
never fail to corrupt them. For, such as
they are, they are at no time poffefled un-
mixed. To human lips it is. not given to
taste the cup of pure joy. When external
circumfcances show fairefi to the world, the
envied man groans in private under his own
burden. Some vexation disquiets, obme pas-
sion corrodes him; some distress, either felt
or feared, gnaws, like a worm, the root of
his felicity. When there is nothing from
without to diPsurb the pro.perous, a secret
poison operates within. For worldly hap-
piness ever tends'to dcftroy itself, by cor-
rupting the heart. It softers the loose and the
violent passions. It engenders noxious habits;
and taints the mind with a false delicacy,
,vwhich makes it feel a thofuGfnd unreal evils.

.,, . > [UT

S E R M. BUT put the cafe in the most favourable
oL1. light. Lay aside from human pleasures

both disappointment in pursuit, and deceit-
fulness in enjoyment; Iuppofe them to be
fully attainable, and completely fatisfadory;
still there remains to be confidered the va-
nity of uncertain pofleffion and short dura-
tion. Were there in worldly things any
fixed point of security which we could gain,
the mind would then have some bafls on
which t6 reft. But our condition is such,
that every thing wavers and totters around
us. Bofit not t2fe/lf of to-zmorrow ; for
thou knowefliz ot what a day may bring forth.
It is much if, during its course, thou hearest
iot of somewhat to disquiet or alarm thee.
Ior life never proceeds long in an uniform
train. It is continually varied by unex-
pected events. The feeds of alteration are
every where sown; and the sunshine of
prosperity commonly accelerates their
growth. If your enjoyments be numerous,
you lie more open on different fides to be
wounded. If you have possessed them long,
you have greater cause to dread an ap-

proaching

proaching change. By flow degrees pro- S EiM.
fperity ries ; but rapid is the progress of -
evil. It requires no preparation to bring
it forward. The edifice which it cost much
time and labour to ereac, one inauspicious
event, one sudden blow, can level with the
duff. Even supposing the accidents of life
to leave us untouched, human bliss must
still be transitory; for man changes of him-
self. No course of enjoyment can delight
us long. VWhat amused our youth loses its
charm in maturer age. As years advance,
our powers are blunted, and our pleaiurable
feelings decline. The silent lapse of time
is ever carrying somewhat from us, till at
length the period comes when all mufft be
swept away. The profpeLt of this termina-
tion of our labours and pursuits is Iufiacient
to mark our Rate with vanity. Our days
are a hand-breadth, and our age is as no-
thing. Within that little space is all our
enterprise bounded. We crowd it with
toils and cares, with contention and firife.
We project great dcfigns, entertain high
hopes, and then leave our plans unfinified,
and fink into oblivion.

This

S E R AM. This much let it fulice to have said conI

_ --~-. cerning the vanity of the world. That too

much has not been said, must appear to
every one wh.o confiders how generally
mnankind lean to the opposite fide; and how
often, by undue attachment to the present
state, they both feed the most sinful paflions,
and pzier'c / t/el7/ves throzgJh 'with man7'Jofr-
rows, Let us proceed to enquire,

IT. How this vanity of the world can be

reconciled with the perfecions of its divine
Author. This enquiry involves that great
Lifficulty which has perplexed the thought-
ful and ferrous in every age; If God be
good, whence the evil that fills the earth ?
In answer to this imterefting question, let us
observe,

In the first place, that the present con-

dition of man was not his.original or primary
state. 'We are informed by divine revela-,
tion, that it is the consequence of his volun-
tary apoftacy from God and a state of inno-
cence. By'this, his nature was corrupted;
his powers were enfeebled; and vanity and

vexation

vexation introduced into his life. All na- S ERMl
ture became involved in the condemnation ,--
of man. The earth was cursed upon his
account, and the whole creation made to
groan and travail in paiz.

How mysterious soever the account of

this fall may appear to us, many circum-
stances concur to authenticate the fa&, and
to show that human nature and the human
slate have undergone an unhappy change.
The belief of this has obtained in almost all
nations and religions. It can be traced
through all the fables of antiquity. An oh-
fcure tradition appears to have pervaded
the whole earth, that man is not now what
he was at first; but that, in consequence of
some transgression againfl his great Lord,
a state of degradation and exile succeeded
to a condition that was more flourifling and
happy. As our nature carries plain marks
of perversion and disorder, so the world
which we inhabit bears the symptoms of
having been convulsed in all its frame.
Naturalists point out to us every where the
traces of some violent change which it has

suffered.

sE R M. fi:uered. Ifands torn from the continent,

VII.
---.. burning mountains, shattered precipices, un-

inhabitable waftes, give it all the appearance
of a mighty ruin. The physical and moral
fiate of man in this world mutually sym-
pathize and correspond. They indicate not
a regular and orderly ftrucure either of
matter or of mind, but the remains of some-
what that once was more fair and magnifi-
cent. Let us observe,

IN the second place, that as this was not

the original, so it is not intended to be the
final fiate of man. Though in confe-
quence of the abuse of the human powers,
fin and vanity were introduced into this re-
gion of the universe, it was not the purpose
of the Creator that they should be permitted
to reign for ever. EHe hath made ample
provision for the recovery of the penitent
and faithful part of his fubjeds, by the
merciful undertaking of that great restorer
of the world, our Lord Jesus Christ. By
him life and immortality were both pur-
chased and brought to light. Th/e new hea-

veilns

veins and the new earth are discovered, where- S E R M
in dwelleih ri,-hteoziiefs ; where, through E
the divine grace, human nature ihall regain
its original honours, and man shall return to
be what once he was in Paradise. Through
those high discoveries of the Gospel, this
life appears to good men only in the light
of an intermediate and preparatory state.
Itsvanity and misery, in a manner, difap-
pear. They have every reason to submit
without complaint to its laws, and to wait
in patience till the appointed time come
for the reifitution of all things. Let us take
notice,

IN the third place, that a future state

being made known, we can account in a
satisfying manner for the present distress of
human life, without the smallest impeach-
ment of divine goodness. The sufferings
we here undergo are converted into difci-
pline and improvement. Through the
blessing of H-eaven, good is extracted from
apparent evil; and the very misery which
originated from fin, is rendered the means

6 of

S E R M. of correaing sinful passions, and preparing

-_----' us for felicity. There is much reason to

believe that creatures as imperfect as we
are, require some such preliminary state of
experience before they can recover the per-
fetion of their nature. It is in the midst
of disappointments and trials that we learn
the insufficiency of temporal things to hap-
piness, and are taught to seek it from God
and Virtue. By there the violence of our
passions is tamed, and our minds are form-
ed to sobriety and reflection. In the varie-
ties of life, occasioned by the vicissitude of
worldly fortune, we are inured to habits
both of the acrive and the suffering virtues.
How much soever we complain of the va-
nity of the world, faCts plainly show, that
if its vanity were less, it could not answer
the purpose of Salutary discipline. Unfa-
tisfadory as it is, its pleasures are still too
apt to corrupt our hearts. How fatal then
must the consequences have been, had it
yielded us more complete enjoyment? If,
with all its troubles, we are in danger of
being too much attached to it, how entirely

would

would it have seduced our affeitions, if no s ER M.
troubles had been mingled with its plea- _
lures ?

These observations serve in a great mea-

sure to obviate the difficulties which arise
from the apparent vanity of the human
state, by ihowing how, upon the Christian
system, that vanity may be reconciled with
the infinite goodness of the Sovereign of the
TJniverfe. The present condition of man
is not that for which he was originally de-
signed; it is not to be his final state; and
during his passage through the world, the
diftrefies which he undergoes are rendered
medicinal and improving. After having
taken this view of things, the cloud which,
in the preceding part of the discourse, ap-
peared to fit so thick upon human life, be-
gins to be diflipated. We now perceive that
man is not abandoned by his Creator. We
discern great and good designs going on in
his behalf. We are allowed to entertain
better hopes; and are encouraged to en-
quire, as was proposed for the

VOL. II. 0 TIId

SERM. IIId HEAD ofdifcourfe, Whether there

VII

. be not, in the present condition of human
life, some real and solid enjoyments which
come not under the general charge of vanity
of vanities. The dotrine of the text is to
be confidered as chiefly addressed to worldly
men. Them Solomon means to teach, that
all expectations of bliss, which reft solely on
earthly poffeflions and pleasures, ihall end
in disappointment. But surely he did not
intend to afert, that there is no material
difference in the pursuits of men, or that
no real happiness of any kind could now be
attained by the virtuous. For besides the
unanswerable objection which this would
form against the divine administration, it
would directly contradict what he elsewhere
asserts, that while God giveth fore travail to
the inner, he giveth to the man that is good
in his fight, wisdom, and knowledge, andajoy *.
It may, it must indeed be admitted, that
unmixed and complete happiness is un-
known on earth. No regulation of con-
duct can altogether prevent passions from

X Eccles. ii. 26.

disturbing

diflurbing our peace, and misfortunes from s ERM.
wounding our heart. But after this con- _
cession is made, will it follow that there is
no objec on earth which deserves our
pursuit, or that all enjoyment becomes
contemptible which is not perfect? Let
us survey our Rate with an impartial
eye, and be just to the various gifts of
Heaven. I-low vain soever this life, con-
fidered in itself, may be, the comforts
and hopes of religion are sufficient to give
solidity to the enjoyments of the right-
eous. In the exercise of good affections,
and the testimony of an approving con-
science; in the sense of peace and recon-
ciliation with God through the great Re-
deemer of mankind; in the firm confidence
of being conduced through all the trials of
life by infinite wisdom and goodness; and
in the joyful profpeEt of arriving in the end
at immortal felicity, they posiess a happiness
which, descending from a purer and more
perfect region' than this world, partakes
not of its vanity.

Besides the enjoyments peculiar to reli-
gion, there are other pleasures of our pre-

0 2 sent

S E R M. sent state, which, though of an inferiour

VII.
V _I order, mufl not be overlooked in the emi-

mate of human life. It is necefary to call
attention to these, in order to check that
repining and unthankful spirit to which
man is always too prone. Some degree of
importance muff be allowed to the com-
forts of health, to the innocent gratifications
of sense, and to the entertainment afforded
us by all the beautiful scenes of nature;
some to the pursuits and amusements of
social life; and more to the internal enjoy-
ments of thought and. reflecion, and to the
pleasures of affectionate intercourse with
those whom we love. These comforts are
often held in too low estimation, merely
because they are ordinary and common;
although that be the circumstance which
ought, in reason, to enhance their value.
They lie open, in some degree, to all; ex-
tend through every rank of life, and fill up
agreeably many of those spaces in our pre-
sent existence, which are not occupied with
higher objects, or with serious cares.

,We are in several refpeds unjust to Pro-
vidence in the computation of our pleasures

and

and our pains. We number the hours s E M.
which are spent in distress or sorrow; but I
we forget those which have passed away, if'
not in high enjoyment, yet in the midst of
those gentle fatisfadtions and placid emo-
tions which make life glide finoothly along.
We complain of the frequent disappoint-
ments which we susser in our pursuits. But
we recollec not, that it is in pursuit, more
than in attainment, that our pleasure now
consists. In the present fIate of human na-
ture, man derives more enjoyment from the
exertion of his active powers in the midst of
toils and efforts, than he could receive from
a still and uniform possession of the object
which he Rrives to gain. The solace of the
mind under all its labours, is hope; and
there are few situations which entirely ex-
clude it. Forms of expected bliss are often
gleaming upon us through a cloud, to re-
vive and exhilarate the most difireffed. If
pains be scattered through all the conditions
of life, so also are pleasures. Happiness, as
far as life affords it, can be engrossed by no
rank of men to the exclusion of the reft; on

0 3 the

SERM. the contrary, it is often found where, at

VII.
v_ first view, it would have been least exped-

ed. When the human condition appears
most depressed, the feelings of men, through
the gracious appointment of Providence,
adjust theinfelves wonderfully to their state,
and enable them to extract fatisfaaion from
sources that are totally unknown to others.
Were the great body of men fairly to com-
pute the hours which they pass in ease, and
even with some degree of pleasure, they
would be found far to exceed the number
of those which are spent in absolute pain
either of body or mind.-But in order to
make a fill more accurate estimation of
the degree of fatisfacion which, in the midst
of earthly vanity, man is permitted to enjoy,
the three following observations claim our
attention:

THE sirs is, that many of the evils which

occasion our complaints of the world are
wholly imaginary. They derive their ex-
iftence from fancy and humour, and child-
ifh fubjedion to the opinion of others.

The

The distress which they produce, I admit, SERM.

VII.

is real; but its reality arises not from the v_
nature of things, but from that disorder of
imagination which a small measure of re-
fleaion might recify. In proof of this we
may observe, that the persons who live most
simply, and follow the dieates of plain un-
adulterated nature, are most exempted from
this class of evils. It is among the higher
ranks of mankind that they chiefly abound;
where fantastic refinements, sickly delicacy,
and eager emulation, open a thousand
sources of vexation peculiar to themselves.
Life cannot but prove vain to them who
affeEt a disrelish of every pleasure that is
not both exquisite and new; who meafilre
enjoyment, not by their own feelings, but
by the standard of fashion; who think
themselves miserable if others do not ad-
mire their state. It is not from wants or
sorrows that 'their complaints arise; but,
though it may appear a paradox, from too
much freedom from sorrow and want; from
the languor of vacant life, and the irritation
Pccafioned by those stagnating humours.

0 4 which

S E R M. which ease and indulgence have bred within

VII.
A -. _ them. In their cafe, therefore, it is not the

vanity of the world, but the vanity of their
minds, which is to be accused. Fancy has
railed up the sp:eares which haunt them.
Fancy has formed the cloud which hangs
over their life. Did they allow the light
of reason to break forth, the fpedcres would
vanish, and the cloud be dispelled.

THE second observation on this head is,

that of those evils which may be called real,
because they owe not their existence to
fancy, nor can be removed by rectifying
opinion, a great proportion is brought upon
us by our own mnifconducl. Diseases, po-
verty, difappoi;-tment and shame, are far
from being, in every instance, the unavoid-
able doom. of men. They are much more
frequently the offspring of their own mif-
guided choice. Intemperance engenders
disease, sloth produces poverty, pride cre-
ates difappoiritments, and dishonesty exposes
to shame, The ungoverned passions of men
betray them into a thousand follies; their

follies

follies into crimes; and their crimes into SE R M.

VII.

misfortunes. Yet nothing is more com-
mon than for such as have been the authors
of their own misery, to make loud com-
plaints of the hard fate of man, and to take
revenge upon the human condition by ar-
raigning its supposed vanity. JThe fooliJ-
ness of man fifl perver-cth his way, and then
his heart frettelh again/i the Lord.

I do not, however, maintain, that it is

within our power to be altogether free of
those felf-procured evils. For perfetion of
any kind is beyond the reach of man.
Where is the wisdom that never errs?
Where the just man that offendeth not ?
Nevertheless, much is here left to our-
selves; and, imperfect as we are, the con-
sequences of right or of wrong conduct
make a wide difference in the happiness of
men. Experience every day shows that a
found, a well-governed, and virtuous mind
contributes greatly to smooth the path of
life; and that wwifdom excelleth folly as far
as light excelleth darkness. The way of the
wicked is as darknes ; they know not at what

they

S E R M. theyi J mble. Bzut the rigteoufijefs of the

vBs/ Pe;fc f7/ihall direct his way; and he that

walketh juprightly, walketh fiirely. The
tendency of the one is towards a plain and
safe region. The course of the other leads
him amidst snares and precipices. The
one occasionally may, the other unavoid-
ably mufl, incur much trouble. Let us not
then confound, under one general charge,
those evils of the world which belong to the
lot of humanity, and those which, through
divine afiftance, a wife and good man may,
in a great measure, escape.

THE third observation which I make re-

fpeAs those evils which are both real and
unavoidable; from which neither wisdom
nor goodness can procure our exemption.
Under these this comfort remains, that if
they cannot be prevented, there are means,
however, by which they may be much al-
leviated. Religion is the great principle
which ads, under such circumstances, as the
correcive of human vanity. It inspires
fortitude, supports patience, and by its

profpets

profpeas and promises darts a cheering ray s E R M.
into the darkest shade of human life. If it _
cannot secure the virtuous from disappoint-
ment in their pursuits, it forms them to such
a temper, as renders their disappointments
more light and easy than those of other men.
If it does not baniih diffatisfadion from
their worldly pleafurcs, it confers spiritual
pleasures in their tPead. If it ensures them
not the pofleffion of what they love, it fur-
nifhes comfort under the loss. As far as it
establishes a contented frame of mind, it
supplies the want of all that worldly men
covet to posiess. Compare the behaviour
of the sensual and corrupted with that of the
upright and holy, when both are feeling the
effecs of human vanity, and the difference
of their situation will be manifest. Among
the former you are likely to find a querulous
and dejected; among the latter, a composed
and manly, spirit. The lamentations of the
one excite a mixture of pity and contempt;
while the dignity which the other maintain
in distress, commands refpea. The susser-
ings of the former fettle into a peevish and

fretful

S E R M. fretful disposition; those of the latter soften

Vii.

the temper, and improve the heart. These
consequences extend so far as to give ground
for afterting, that a good man enjoys more
happiness in the course of a seemingly un-
prosperous life, than a bad man does in the
midst of affluence and luxury. What a
conspicuous proof of this is afforded by the
Apostle Paul, who from the very depth of
affliction could fend forth such a triumphant
voice as proclaims the 'complete victory
which he had gained over the evils of life ?
Troubled on every Jide, yet not difreed;
perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but
not foirfiaken; caJt down, but not destroyed.
For though our outward man perih, our in-
ward man is renewerd, day by day . Such,
though perhaps in an inferiour degree, will
be the influence of a genuine religious prin-
ciple upon all true Christians. It begins to
perform that office to them here, which here-
after it will more completely discharge, of
-wiping away the tearsfrom their eyes.

* z Corinth. iv. 8, 9. 16.

SUCH,

SUCH, upon the whole, is the estimate S E RM.

VII.

which we are to form of human life. Much a--
vanity will always belong to it ; though the
degree of its vanity will depend, in a great
measure, on our own charadler and con-
dua. To the vicious,' it presents nothing
but a continued scene of disappointment and
difiatisfaCtion. To the good, it is a mixed
state of things; where many real comforts
may be enjoyed; where many resources
under trouble may be obtained; but where
trouble in one form or other, is to be ex-
pecOed as the l)t of man. From this vicw
of human life,

THE first practical conclusion which we

are to draw is, that it highly concerns us
not to be unreasonable in our expectations
of worldly felicity. Let us always remem-
ber where we are; from what causes the
human state has become fubjeat to depref-
sion; and upon what accounts it must re-
main under its present law. Such is the
infatuation of felf-love, that though in the
general docrine of the vanity of the world

all

S E R M. all men agree, yet almost every one flatters

VII.
» _-« himself that his own cafe is to be an excep-

tion from the common rule. He refts on
expectations which he thinks cannot fail
him; and though the present be not altoge-
ther according to his wifli, yet with the
confidence of certain hope he anticipates
futurity. Hence the anguish of disappoint-
ment fills the world; and evils, which arc
ofthemfelves sufficiently severe, oppress with
double force the unprepared and unfufpet-
ing mind. Nothing therefore is of greater
consequence to our peace, than to have
always before our eyes such views of the
world as shall prevent our expecting more
from it than it is destined to afford. We
destroy our joys by devouring them before-
hand with too eager expectation. We ruin
the happiness of life when we attempt to
raise it too high. A tolerable and comfort-
able state is all that we can propose to our-
selves on earth. Peace and contentment,
not bliss nor transport, is the full portion of
man. Perfedc joy is reserved for heaven.

BUT
I

BUT while we repress too sanguine hopes s E R M.

VII.

formed upon human life, let us, in the fe- ,_
cond place, guard against the other extreme,
of repining and discontent. Enough has
been already'faid to shew that, notwith-
standing the vanity of the world, a confi-
derable degree of comfort is attainable in the
present state. Let the recollection of this
serve to reconcile us to our condition, and
to check the arrogance of complaints and
murmurs.-What art thou, 0 sorn of man.
who having sprung but yesterday out of the
dust, daret to lift up thy voice againf thy
Maker, and to arraign his providence, be-
cause all things are not orciderd according
to thy wifl ? What title haft thou to find
fault with the order of the universe, whose
lot is so much beyond what thy virtue or
merit gave thee ground to claim ? Is it no-
thing to thee to have been introduced into
this magnificent world; to have been ad-
mitted as a fpedator of the divine wifdotr
and works; and to have had access to all
the comforts which nature, with a bountiful
hand, has poured forth around thee? Are

ail

S E R M. all the hours forgotten which thou hafi pafied

VII.
· - .,in ease, in complacency, or joy? Is it a

small favour in thy eyes, that the hand of
divine mercy has been stretched forth to aid
thee, and, if thou reject not its proffered
assistance, is ready to conduc thee into a
happier fiate of existence? When thou corm-
pareft thy condition with thy desert, blush,
and be alhamed of thy complaints. Be silent,
be grateful, and adore. Receive with thank-
Iulnefs the blessings which are allowed thee.
Revere that government which at present
refuses thee more. Reft in this conclusion,
that though there be evils in the world, its
Creator is wife and good, and has been
bountiful to thee.

IN the third place, the view which we

have taken of human life should naturally
direct us to such pursuits as may have most
influence for correcting its vanity. There
are two great lines of conduc which offer
themselves to our choice. The one leads
towards the goods of the mind; the other
towards those of fortune. The former,

which

which is adopted only by the few, engages s E M.
us chiefly in forming our principles, regu- _
lating our dispositions, improving all our
inward powers. The latter, which in every
age has been followed by the multitude,
points at no other end but attaining the
conveniencies and pleasures of external life.
It is obvious that, in this last pursuit, the
vanity of the world will encounter us at
every ftep. For this is the region in which
it reigns, and where it chiefly displays its
power. At the fame time, to lay the world
totally out of view, is a vain attempt. The
numberless ties by which we are connected
with external things, put it out of cur power
to behold them with indiffeience. , But
though we cannot wrap. ourselves up en-
tirely in the care of the mind, yet the more
we make its welfare our chief object, the
nearer shall we approach to that happy inde-
pendence on the world, which places us be-
yond the reach of fufering from its vanity.

That discipline, therefore, which correts

the eagerness of worldly pafions, which for-
tifies the heart with virtuous principles, which

VOL. II. P enlightens

s E R M. enlightens the mind with useful knowledge,

VII.

and furnishes to it matter of enjoyment from
within itself, is of more consequence to real
felicity, than all the provision which we can
make of the goods of fortune. To this let
us bend our chief attention. Let us keep
the heart with all diligence, Jeeing out of it
are the ijaes of life. Let us account our
mind the most important province which is
committed to our care; and if we cannot rule
fortune, study at least to rule ourselves. Let
us propose for our objedt, not worldly fuc-
cess, which it depends not on us to obtain;
but that upright and honourable discharge
of our duty in every conjuncture, which,
through the divine assistance, is always
within our power. Let our happiness be
fought where our proper praise isfound; and
that be accounted our only real evil, which
is the evil of our nature; not that, which
is either the appointment of Providence, or
which arises from the evil of others.

BUT in order to carry on with success
this rational and manly plan of condut, it

is

is necefiary; in the last place, that to moral, E R M.

VII.

we join religious discipline. Under the _-I
present imperfetion of our minds, and
amidit the frequent ihocks which we receive
from human evils, much do we stand in
need of every affiflance for supporting our
constancy. Of all assistance to which we
can have recourse, none is so powerful as
what may be derived from the principles of
the Chriitian faith. He who builds on any
other foundation, will find, in the day of
trial, that he had built his house on the sand.
Man is formed by his nature to look up to a
fuperiour being, and to lean upon a strength
that is greater than his own. All the con-
fiderations which we can offer for confirm-
ing his mind, presuppose this resource, and
derive from it their principal efficacy.

Never then let us lose fight of those great

objects which religion brings under our view,
if we hope to stand firm and erea amidst the
dangers and diftrefes of our present slate.
Let us cultivate all that connection with the
great Father of Spirits which our condition
admits; by piety and prayer; by depend-

P 2 ence

SE R M. ence on his aid, and trust in his promises;

VII.
*_ ,. by a devout sense of his presence, and a

continual endeavour to acquire his grace and
favour. Let us, with humble faith and re-
verence, commit ourselves to the blessed Re-
deemer of the world; encouraged by the
discoveries which he has made to us of the
divine mercy, and by the hopes which he
has afforded us of being raised to a nobler
and happier station in the kingdom of God.
So shall virtue, grounded upon piety, attain
its full strength. Inspired with a religious
spirit, and guided by rational principles, we
shall be enabled to hold a steady course
through this mixed region of pleasure and
pain, of hopes and fears; until the period
arrive, when that cloud, which the present
vanity of the world throws over human
affairs, shall entirely disappear, and eternal
light be diffused over all the works and ways
of God.

# SERMON VIII. On DEATH. PSALM xxiii. 4. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

[ 2I3 ]
S E R M O N VIII.

On DEATH.

PSALM xx'ii. 4.

rea, thongh I walk through the valley of the

Jhadow of death, I will fear no evil; for
thou art with me; thy rod and thy JLaf
they consort me.
T HIS Psalm exhibits the pleating pic- s ERM.

VIII.

ture of a pious man rejoicing in the ,

goodness of Heaven. He looks around him
on his itate, and his heart overflows with
gratitude. When he reviews the past part
of his life, he contemplates God as his
Jhepherd, ,who hath made him lie down in
green pqIJtires, and led him betide the Jiill
wvaters. When he confiders the present,

P 3 he

SE R M. he beholds his divine benefacor plreparing

a table for him in the prefeice of his enemies,
and masking his cup run over. When he
looks forward to the future, he confides in
the fame goodness, as continuing to follow
him all the days hiss i life, anZd bringing himi
to dwell in the hojfe of the Lord for ever.
Amidst thcie images of tranquillity and hap-
piness, one object presents itself, which is
iufficient to overcait the minds and to damp
the joy of the greatest part of men; that is,
the approach of death. But on the Psalmist
it produced no such cffeat. With perfect
composure and serenity, he looks forward to
the time when he is to pass through the val-
ley of the Jfadow of death. The profped,
inflead ofdejeaing him, appears to heighten
his triumph, by that security which the pre-
fence of his almighty guardian afforded him.
r will fear no evil, for thou art with me:
and pursuing the allusion with which he
had begun, exults in the hope that the shep-
herdwhohad hitherto conducted him, would
support him with his flaf, while he pased
through that dark and perilous region, and

with

with his rod, or pafloral crook, would guard s E R M.
him from every danger. ^-

Such is the happy diftinEtion which

good men enjoy, in a situation the most
formidable to human nature. That threat-
ening fpedre which appalls others, carries
no terrour to them. While worldly men
are justly said through fear of Death to be
all their lif-time fJibjeS to bondage, to the
righteous only it belongs to look on death,
and smile. Since then it is in the power of
religion to confer upon us so high a pri-
vilege, let us adventure to contemplate
steadily this last foe whom we must all en-
counter. Let us confider what death is in
itself, and by what means good men are
enabled to meet it with fortitude. Though
the subjed may be reckoned gloomy, it
must be admitted to be interesting. The
close of life is a solemn and important
event, to which every wife man will have
regard in the general tenour of his conduct.
No one can aat his part with propriety,
who confiders not how it is to terminate;
and to exclude from our thoughts what we

P 4.. cannot

S ER M. cannot prevent from acually taking place,
VIII.

_ is the refuge of none but the timorous and

weak. We are more encouraged to enter
on this meditation, by refleting on the fu-
periour advantages which, as Christians,
we enjoy for overcoming the fear of death,
beyond that holy man whose sentiment is
now before us. Those great objects, which
he beheld through the medium of types
and figures, are clearly revealed to us. That
dispensation of grace, which in his days
began to open, is now completed. That life
and immortality, which then only dawned
on the world, have now ihone forth with
full light and splendour.

DEATH may bQ confidered in three

views: as the reparation of the foul from
the body; as the conclusion of the present
life; as the entrance into a new state of
existence. In the first view, it is regarded
as painful and agonizing. In the second,
*it is melancholy and dejecing. In the
third, it is awful and alarming. One of the
first enquiries which occurs concerning it is,

I: for

for what purposes it was clothed with all S E R M.
these terrours? Why, under the govern- j
ment of a gracious Being, the termination
of life was loaded with so much sorrow and
ditrefs ? We know that, in consequence of
the fall, death was inflicted as a punishment
upon the human race. But no unnecessary
severities are ever exercised by God; and
the wisdom and goodness of the divine plan
will be much illustrated, by observing that
all the formidable circumstances which at-
tend death are, in the present situation of
mankind, absolutely requisite to the pro-
per government of the world. The ter-
rours of death are, in fad, the great guard-
ians of life. They excite in every indivi-
dual that desire of felf-prefervation, which
is nature's first law. They reconcile him
to bear the distresses of life with patience.
They prompt him to undergo its useful
and necessary labours with alacrity; and
they restrain him from many of those evil
courses by which his safety would be en-
dangered. While they are in so many re-
fpeets beneficial to the individual, they are,

at

S ER M. at the fame time, the safeguard of society.

If death were not dreaded and abhorred as
it is by men, no public order could be pre-
served in the world. The sword of autho-
rity were lifted up in vain. The fandions
of law would lose their effec. The fcaf-
fold and the executioner would be derided;
and the violent left to trample unrestrained
on the rights of the peaceful. If, notwith-
flanding the refiraints which felf-preferva-
tion imposes, society is so often disturbed
by the crimes of the wicked, what a scene
of confusion would it become, if capital
punishments, which are the last resource
of government, were of no influence to
deter offenders ?

For such important ends the conclusion

of life has, by the appointment of Provi-
dence, been made an awful object. The
valley of death has been planted with ter-
rours to the apprehension of men. Here,
as in many other instances, what seemed
at first to arraign the goodness of the Deity,
is upon enquiry found to confirm it. But
.though, for the most salutary purposes, it

was,

was requisite that the fear of death should S E RM.
be a powerful principle in human nature,
yet, like our other propensities, it is apt,
when left to itself, to run into excess. Over
many it uflrps such an ascendant as to
debate their characer, and to defeat the
chief ends of living. To preserve it within
such bounds that it shall not interrupt us in
performing the proper offices and duties
of life, is the diftindion of the brave man
above the coward; and to surmount it in
such a degree that it shall not, even in near
profpet, dejec our spirit, or trouble our
peace, is the great preference which virtue
enjoys above guilt. It has been the study
of the wife and reflecting, in every age, to
attain this steadiness of mind. Philosophy
pursued it as its chief objet ; and professed,
that the great end of its discipline was, to
enable its votaries to conquer the fear of
death. Let us then, before we have re-
course to the more powerful aid of religion,
hearken for a little to what reason has fug-
gested on this subjet. Her assistance may,
perhaps, be not entirely despicable; and

though

SE R M. though the armour which she offers, be not

VIII. _-W_ completely of proof, it may serve, how-

ever, to turn aside, or to blunt, some of
the shafts which are aimed against us by the
last foe.

AFTER this manner she may be supposed

to address mankind, in order to reconcile
them to their fate. - Children of men!
it is well known to you, that you are a
mortal race. Death is the law of your
nature, the tribute of your being, the debt
which all are bound to pay. On these
terms you received life, that you should be
ready to give it up, when Providence calls
you to make room for others, who, in like
manner, when their time is come, shall
follow you. He who is unwilling to sub-
mit to death when Heaven decrees it, de-
serves not to have lived. You might as
reasonably complain, that you did not live
before the time appointed for your coming
into the world, as lament that you are not
to live longer, when the period of your
quitting it is arrived. What divine Provi-

dence

dence hath made necessary, human pru- S E R M.
dence ought to comply with cheerfully. -
Submit at any rate you must; and is it not
much better to follow of your own accord,
than to be dragged reluctantly, and by
force ? What privilege have you to plead,
or what reason to urge, why you should
possess an exemption from the common
doom ? All things around you are mortal
and perishing. Cities, states, and empires
have their period set. The proudest monu-
ments of human art moulder into dust.
Even the -works of nature wax old and
decay. In the midst of this universal ten-
dency to change, could you expeA thatto
your frame alone a permanent duration
should be given? All who have gone be-
fore you, have submitted to the stroke of
death. All who are to come after you,
shall undergo the fame fate. The great
and the good, the prince and the peasant,
the renowned and the obscure, travel alike
the road which leads to the grave. At
the moment when you expire, thousands
throughout the world ihall, together with

you,

S ERM. you, be yielding up their breath. Can

- -' that be held a great calamity which is corr-

mon to you with every thing that lives on
earth; which is an event as much accord-
ing to the course of nature, as it is that
leaves should fall in autumn, or that fiuit
should drop from the tree when it is fully
ripe ?

The pain of death cannot be very long,

and is probably Iefs severe than what you
have at other times experienced. The pomp
of death is more terrifying than death itself.
It is to the weakness of imagination that it
owes its chief power of dejeding your fpi-
rits; for when the- force of the mind is
rouzed, there is almost no pafion in our na-
ture but what has showed itself able to over-
come the fear of death. Honour has defied
death; love has despised it; shame has rush-
ed upon it; revenge has disregarded it; grief
,a thousand times has wished for its approach.
Is it not strange that reason and virtue can-
not give you strength to surmount that fear,
which, even in feeble minds, so many pas-
ifons have conquered ? What inconsistency

is

is there in complaining so much of the evils S E R M.
of life, and being at the fame time so afraid V.
of what is to terminate them all? Who can
tell whether his future life might not teem
with disasters and miseries, as yet unknown,
were it to be prolonged according to his
wifl ? At any rate, is it desirable to draw
life out to the last dregs, and to wait till old
age pour upon you its whole store of diseases
and sorrows? You lament that you are to
die; but did you view your situation pro-
perly, you would have much greater cause
to lament if you were chained to- this life
for two or three hundred years, without
possibility of release. Expe& therefore
calmly that which is natural in itself, and
which muff be fit, because it is the ap-
pointment of Heaven. Perform your duty
as a good subjeE: of the Deity, during the
time allotted you; and rejoice that a
period is fixed for your dismission from the
present warfare. Remember that the fla-
vifh dread of death diftroys all the comfort
of that life which you seek to preserve.
Better to undergo the stroke of death at

once,

SE R M. once, than to live in perpetual misery from

vI.
I_, the fear of dying.

SUCH discourses as these are Specious at

least, and plausible. 'The arguments are not
without strength, and ought to produce some
effec on a considerate reflecting mind. But
it is to be fufpedEed that their effec will be
chiefly felt when the mind is calm and at
ease; rather when speculating upon death
at a distance, than when beholding it at
hand. When the critical moment arrives
which places the anxious, trembling foul on
the borders of an unknown world, reason-
ings drawn from necessity and propriety
will be of small avail to quiet its alarms. In
order to afford relief, you muff give it hope;
you must promise it proteaion; you must
offer somewhat on which it can lay hold for
support, amidst the firuggles of labouring
nature. Hence the great importance of
those discoveries which revelation has made,'
and of those principlesywith which it fortifies
the heart. To the consideration of these let
us next proceed, and observe their fuperiour

efficacy

.ficacy for fiurmountirng the fear of death. s F R MS
In order to judge of their importance, it
will be proper to take a view of death in
each of those lights in which it appears most
formidable to mankind.

IT may be confidered, firri, as the ter-

mination of our present exifience; the final
period of all its joys and hopes. The con-
cluding scene of any course of action in
which we have been engaged with pleasure,
even the last fight of objecs which we have
been long accustomed to behold, seldom
fails of firiking the mind with painful re-
gret. How many circumstances will concur
to heighten that iegret, when the time comes
of our bidding an eternal adieu to the light
of day; to every pursuit which had occu-
pied our attention as citizens of the world;
and 'to every friend and relation who had
attached our hearts ? How dejeding is the
thought to the greatest part of men, that
the fun lhall rife, and the seasons fiall re-
turn to others, but no more to them and
that, while their neighbours are engaged in

VOL. I. I. the

E R M. the usual affairs of life, they Shall be shut
VIII.

J-- up in a dark lonesome mansion, for-

gotten and cut off from among men, as
though they had never been! Ifaid, in the
cutting off my days, I J/all go to the gates
of the grave. lam deprived of the ref'idie of
my years. IJhall not fee the Lord again in
the land of the living. IJhJall behold man no
more wit/ the inhabitants of the world*.

Let us now observe, that the dejection

into which we are apt to fink at such a
juncture, will bear proportion to the degree
of our attachment to the objeas which swc
leave, and to the importance of those re-
sources which remain with us when they
are gone. He who is taking farewel of a
country through which he had travelled
with fatisfaaion, and he who is driven from
his native land, with which he had con-
nected every idea of settlement and com-
fort, will have very different feelings at the
time of departure. Such is the difference
which, at the hour of death, takes place be-
tween the righteous and the ungodly. The

s Isaiah, xxxviii. o1, I .
4 latter

latter knows nothing higher or better than s I R M.
the present state of existence. His interests, '----,
his pleasures, his expecations, all centered
here. He lived solely for the enjoyments
of this world. Dreadful, therefore, and in-
supportable must be that event which fepa-
rates him from these for ever. Whereas the
culture of religion had previously formed
the mind of a christian for a calm and easy
transition from this life. It had inftruEed
him in the proper estimate of sublunary
happiness. It had set higher profpets be-
fore him. It had formed him to a more
refined taste of enjoyment, than what the
common round of worldly amusements
could gratify. It gave him connections
and alliances with spiritual objets, which
are unknown to the men of the world.
Hence, though he be attached to life by the
natural feelings of humanity, he is raised
above the weak and unmanly regret of part-
ing with it. He knew that it was intended
as preparatory only to a succeeding slate.
As soon as the season of preparation should
be finished, he expected a removal; and

Q_2 when

E R M. when Providence gives the signal, he bids
__ . adieu to the world with composed refolu-

tion and undisturbed heart.--Vhat though
death interrupt him in the middle of his
designs, and break off the plans which he
had formed, of being useful to his family
and the world ? All these he leaves witl
tranquillity in the hands of that Providence
to which he has ever been accuflomed to
look up with resignation; which governed
the world wifely and graciously before lie
existed; and which he knows will continue
to govern it with equal wisdom and benig-
nity when he thall be in it no more. The
time of his departure was not left to his
own choice; but he believes it to be the
most proper, because it is the time chosen
by Him who cannot err. INonourable age
is not that which Jaandeth in length, of time,
nor that- which is mneaflred by number
of years. But wifdopm is the grey hair to
man; and an uif/potteda lfe is old age "'
When he beholds his friends and relations
mourning around him, his heart may melt,

* Wifd. of Solomon, iv. 8, 9.

but

but will not be overpowered; for it is re- S ER M-

VII.

lieved by the thought that he is bidding A
them only a temporary, not an eternal fare-
wel. He commends them, in the mean
time, to the blefling of that God whom he
has served; and while he is parting from
them, he hears a voice which sooths his
spirit with those comforting words, Leave
thjy fatherless children; I -will prefierve then
alive; and let thy wiidow t-lfd in me z'.

BUT death is more than the conclusion

of human life. It is the gate which, at the
fame time that it closes on this world, opens
into eternity. Under this view, it has often
been the fubjeEt of terrour to the serious
and reflecting. The transition they were
about to make was awful. Before them lay
a vast undiscovered region, from whose
bourn no traveller ever returned to bring
information of the reception which he found,
or of the objedts which he met with there.
The first conception which suggests itself is,
that the disembodied spirit is to appear be-

Jerem. xlix. I ,

0Q3 fore

S ER M. fore its Creator, who is then to a& as its

VII__ Judge. The'ftri& inquisition which it must

undergo, the impartial doom which it mufft
hear pronounced, and the unalterable fiate
to which it shall be assigned, are awful
forms riling before the imagination. They
are ideas which conscience forces upon all.
Mankind can neither avoid confidering
themselves as accountable creatures, nor
avoid viewing death as the season when
their account is to be given. Such a senti-
ment is with most men the source of dread;
with all men, of anxiety. To a certain de-
gree a good conscience will convey comfort.
The reflecion on a well-fpent life makes a
wide difference between the last moments of
the righteous and the finner. But whose
conscience is so clear as to strike him with
no remorse? Whose righteousness is so un-
blemished as to abide the scrutiny of the
great searcher of hearts? Who dares reft his
everlasting fate upon his perfec conformity
to the rule of duty throughout the whole of
his life ?

We must not judge of the sentiments of
men at the approach of death by their or-

dinary

dinary train of thought in the days of health s E R M
and ease. Their views of moral conduc --
are then, too generally, superficial; flight ex-
cufes satisfy their minds, and the avocations
of life prevent their attention from dwelling
long on disagreeable fuljels. But when
altogether withdrawn from the affairs of the
world, they are left to their own refleitions
on paRt conduct; with their spirits enfeebled
by disease, and their minds imprefied with
the terrours of an invisible region; the moit
resolute are apt to despond, and even the
virtuous are in danger of finking under the
remembrance of their errours and frailties.
The trembling mind catls every where
around an anxious exploring eye after any
power that can uphold, any mercy that will
shield and save it. And accordingly we fee
how eagerly every device has been embraced
which iutperftition could invent in various,
countries, for quieting the alarms of the
departing spirit.

Here appears the great importance of

thlofe difcovcries which Christianity has made
concerning the government of the universe,

%a4 it

SE R M. It displays the ensigns of grace and cle-

-j mnmency. It reveals the Almighty not as a

creator only and a judge, but as a compaf-
fionate parent, who knows our frame, who
rezmembers we are deif, who pities us as as i-
ther pit;eth his children ; and with w1hom there.
isforgivenefs, that he may be loved as well
as feared. These general views, however,
of the divine adminirfration would not
have been lufficient to give full relief, if
they had not been confirmed by certain de-
:ifive fads to which the mind can appeal
anmidi all its doubts and fears. Two fiich
fadts the gospel holds forth to us, particu-
larly adapted to the situation of human na-
ture in its greateRt extremity; the atone-
ment, and the intercession ofChrift. There
i, no sentiment more natural to men than
this, that guilt must be expiated by susser-
ing. All government is founded en the
principle, that public justice requires com-
penIation'for crimes; and all religions pro-
ceed upon the belief, that, in order to the
pardon of the finner, atonement must be
made to the justice of heaven. Hence the.

¢ndlefs

endless variety offacrifices, vircims, and ex- S E R M.

VIII.

piations which have filled the earth. The _
great sacrifice which our Redeemer offered
for guilt, coincides with these natural fen-
timents of mankind in giving ease to the
heart. It shows us the forfeit of guilt paid
by a divine personage in our behalf; and
allows us to look up to the Governor of
the world, as merciful to the guilty in con-
{iftency with justice and order. But fill
some anxiety might remain concerning the
extension of that mercy to our own cafe in
particular. An invisible sovereign is an
awful idea; almighty, unknown power is
always formidable, and would be ready to
overwhelm the spirit of the feeble, were not
an intercessor with that sovereign revealed,
This intercessor is one who lived and aded
in our own nature; who not only knows,
but who experienced our frailty; who has
all the feelings of a brother for human in-
iirmity and diftrecf; who himself paifed
through that valley of tbe J7adow of death
which is now opening on us; to whose
powerfult mediation with his Father we have

every

S E R M. every encouragement to commit the charge
VIII, a_-« of our departing Ipirit.-Such is the provi-

sion which Christianity has made for com-
forting the last hours of man. The atone-
ment, and the interceftion of Christ, are the
refuge of the penitent finner, and the con-
folation of the faint. By their means the
throne of the universe is encircled with
mercy. The cloud which hung over the
invisible world begins to be dispersed; and
hope brightens through the gloom.

BUT what completes the triumph of good

men over death is, the profpet of eternal
felicity. This was the great object after
which all nations have sighed, as the only
complete remedy both of the miseries of life
and the fears of death. On this, the learned
and the ignorant, the civilized and the fa-
vage tribes of mankind bent their longing
eyes; eagerly grasping at every argument,
and fondly indulging every hope, that could
promise them a propitious Deity, and the
prolongation of existence in a happier frate.
But beyond wiThes and feeble expedations~,

thq

the light of nature could hardly reach. SERM.
Even the most cultivated, philosophical mind I--I
was, at the hour of dissolution, left in pain-
ful fufpence. Christianity has put an end
to all hesitation and doubt on this important
fubje&. It has drawn aside the veil through
which reason essayed to penetrate; and has
displayed to full view the future dwellings
of the spirits of the just, the mansions of
everlasting reft, the city of the living God.
Not only has it informed us that a state of
perfea felicity is prepared for the righteous,
but it has added to this information a variety
of circumstances which render that Rtate
sensible to our imagination, and encouraging
to our hopes. It represents it as fully fe-
cured by the gracious undertaking of the
Saviour of the world. It describes it as an
inheritance, to which he has given his fol-
lowers a right and title. He is said to have
taken possession of it in their name. He
rose from the grave as the irJ flruits of them
thatJieep ; and under the character of their
fore-runner, entered into the heavenly re-
gions. I anz the riJtrhreion and the life

H£;J:

S E R M. He that believeth oil nie, thozgh he weie deadt
_ . '_a ]yet l/hall he live. I give unto myJheep eter-

nal J I. I ascend to mny Father and your
lather, to m2y God and your God .

Ience, to those who have lived a vir-

tuous life, and who die in the faith of
Christ, the whole aspee of death is changed.
Death is to them no longer the tyrant who
approaches with his iron rod, but the mef-
fenger who brings the tidings of life and
liberty. The profpeacs which open to them
cheer their minds. Even in the valley of
death's shade, green pcqfires appear to rife,
They view themselves as going forth, not
to lie silent and solitary in the darkness of
the grave, not to wander forsaken in the
wide deserts of the universe, not even to
pass into a region where they are altogether
firangers and unknown; but to enter on a
land, new indeed to fight, but by faith and
hope frequented long before; where they
shall continue to be under the charge of him
who hath hitherto been their guardian, be
re-united to many of their ancient and be-

* John, xi, 25. xx. j7.

loved

loved friends, and admitted to join the zin- S E R M.

VIII.

,inmerable multitude, gathered out of all ina- ,-
lions, and tongues, and people, who J7and
bfor/e the throne of God. They leave be-
hind the dregs of their nature; and ex-
clange this confined and gloomy apartment
of the universe, for the glorious mansions
of their Father's house. Blessed surely are
the dying in this hope, and bled the dead
in this fruition, refiing from their labours,
ald fJllozwed by their weorks. Good men
are detained at present in the outer court of
the temple: Death admits them into the
holy place. As yet they sojourn in the
territories of pilgrimage and exile: Death
brings them home to the native land of
Spirits. In this world they are divided
froim one another, and mingled with the
worthless and the vile; Death unites in one
assembly all the pure and the just. In the
fight of the univeife they aeenzed to die, and
their departure twas taken for utter dejftrc-
tion. But they are in peace. Their reward
alo is with the Lord, and the care of them
swith the mnof high *.--- Death! where

* Wisdom of Solomon, iii. 2, 3.-v. 15.

1 is

S E R M. is noW thy Jsing ? 0 Grave! where is thy
_ , '_ · vi7or ? Where are the terrours with which

thou haft soo long affiighted the nations!
Where are thy dreary and desolate domains,
the haunts of lpe-tres and shades, the abhor-
red dwellings of darkness and corruption ?
At the touch of the divine rod, thy vision-
ary horrours have fled. The spell is broken.
The dawn of the celestial morning has dif-
pelled thy dismal gloom; and, instead of
the habitations of dragons, appears the para-
dife of God.

BUT supposing both the regret of quit-

ting life, and the dread of entering into a
future slate to be overcome, there is still
one circumflance which renders death for-
midable to many; that is, the shock which
nature is apprehending to sustain at the
separation of the foul from the body.
Formidable, I admit, this may justly ren-
der it to them whose languishing spirits
have no inward fund whence they can then
draw relief. Firmness and strength of
mind is peculiarly requisite for the support
of nature in its last extremity; and that

strength

ireingth is supplied by religion. The tefli- S E R M.

VIII.

mony of a good conscience, and the re- ,-
membrance of a virtuous life, a well-
grounded trust in the divine acceptance, and
a firm hope of future felicity, are principles
sufficient to give composure and fortitude
to the heart, even in the midst of agony.
In what a high degree they can fuipend or
alleviate the feelings of pain, has been fully
demonstrated by the magnanimous beha-
viour of such as have suffered death in the
cause of conscience and religion. How
often has the world beheld them advancing
to meet that supposed king of terrours, not
with calmness only, but with joy; raised
by divine prospects and hopes into an en-
tire negleCt and contempt of bodily susser-
ing ?

It is not without reason that a peculiar

assistance from heaven is looked for by good
men at the hour of death. As they are
taught to believe, that in all the emergen-
cies of their life divine goodness has watched
over them, they have ground to conclude,
that at the last it will not forsake them; but

that,

S E RM. that, at the season when its aid is mofl
c-,-' needed, it ihall be most liberally commu-

nicated. Accordingly) a persuasion so con-
gruous to the benignity and compassion of
the Father of mercies, has been the comfort
of pious men in every age. May si.7c and
Pny heart faileth ; bat God is the sJrength of
zy7 heart. In the valley of the Jhadow of
death I vjill fear no evil, for thou art with
me. When the rod andjiqff of this Shepherd
of Israel are held forth to his expiring ser-
vants, declining nature needs no other sup-
port. The secret influence of his reviving
Ipirit is sufficient for their consolation and
frength, while the painful firuggie with
mortality lasts; till at length, when the
moment arrives that the ilver cord mnizf be
loosed, and the golden bowl be broken, their
Almighty Protecor carries off the immortal
spirit unhurt by the fall of its earthly taber-
nacle, and places it in a better mansion.-
1How refpedable and happy is such a con-
clufion of human life, when one in this
manner quits the flage of time, honoured
and supported with the pretence of his

Creator,

Creatdr, and enjoying, till the last moment s ERM.
of reflection, the pleating thought, that he -_-
has not lived in vain ! I have fought a good
fght; I have finijhed my conz/e ; I have kept
the faith. Henceforth there is laid upfor me
a crown of righteofizefs, which the Lord the
righteous judge Jhjall give me at that day '

AFTER the view which wve have taken

of the advantages possessed by good men for
overcoming the fears of death, the firit fen-
timent which should arise in our minds, is
gratitude to heaven for the hopes which
we enjoy by means of the Christian reli-
gion. How depreifed and calamitous was
the human condition, as long as the terrour
of death hung, like a dark cloud, over the
inhabitants of the earth; when, after all the
toils of life, the melancholy silence of the
grave appeared finally to close the scene of
existence; or, if a future Rate opened be-
hind it, that fiate teemed with all those
forms of horrour which conscious guilt
could suggest to a terrified imagination!

2 Tim. iv. 7, 8.
VOL. II. R The

E R M. The happiest change which ever took place
VIII.

in the circumstances of the human race, is
that produced by the discoveries with which
we are blessed concerning the government
of the universe, the redemption of the world,
and the future destination of man. How
much dignity is thereby added to the hu-
man charater and fiate! What light and
cheerfulness is introduced into our abode!
What eternal praise is due to Him who,
according to his abundant mercy, hath begot-
ten us again into a lively hope, by the refur-
redion of lefits Chr1f from the dead, to an
inheritance incorruptible, uindefled, and that
Jadeth not away, reserved in heaven i

THE next effeEc which the subjea we

have confidered should produce, is an ear-
nest desire to acquire those advantages which
good men enjoy at their death. The road
which leads to them is plain and obvious.
A peaceful and happy death is, by the ap-
pointment of Heaven, conneced with a
holy and virtuous life. Let us renounce
criminal pursuits and pleasures; let us fear

God

God and keep his commandments; let us s E RM.

VIII.

holdfailh/ anda good conscience, if we hope ,
for comfort at our last hour. To prepare
for this last hour, every wife man should
confider as his most important concern.
Death may jufily be held the test of life.
Let a man have supported his characer
with esteem and applause, as long as he
aced on the busy stage of the world, if at
the end he finks into dejeEion and terrour,
all his former honour is effaced ; he departs
under the imputation of either a guilty con-
science, or a pusillanimous mind. In the
other parts of human condu&, disguise and
subtlety may impose on the world; but
seldom can artifice be supported in the hour
of death. The mask most commonly falls
off, and the genuine character appears.
When we behold the scene of life closed
with proper composure and dignity, we na-
turally infer integrity and fortitude. We
are led to believe that divine assistance sup-
ports the foul, and we presage its transition
into a happier mansion. Mark theperfeS

R 2 man,

S E R M. man, and behold the upright; for the end of
'--- that man is peace :.

THE last inftruition which our fubjedc

points out, refpeas the manner in which a
wife and good man ought to stand affected
towards life and death. He ought not to
be severely attached to the one. He has
no reason abje&tly to dread the other. Life
is the gift of God, which he may justly
cherish and hold dear. Nay, he is bound
by all fair means to guard and preserve it,
that he may continue to be useful in that
post of duty where Providence has placed
him. But there are higher principles to
which the love of life should remain sub-
ordinate. Wherever religion, virtue, or true
honour, call him forth to danger, life ought
to be hazarded without fear. There is a
generous contempt of death which should
distinguish those who live and walk by the
faith of immortality. This is the source of
courage in a Christian. His behaviour

* Psalm xxxvii. 37.

3 *ougllt

3~ ~ ~~~coi

ought to shew the elevation of his foul above s E R M.
the present world; ought to discover the li-
berty which he poffeffes--of following the
native sentiments of his mind, without any
of those restraints and fetters which the feat
of death imposes on vicious men.

At the fame time, this rational contempt

of death mufft carefully be distinguished from
that inconsiderate and thoughtless indiffer-
ence, with which some have affected to treat
it. This is what cannot be juitified on any
principle of reason. Human life is no trifle,
which men may play away at their pleasure.
Death, in every view, is an important event,
It is the most solemn crisis of the human ex-
iftence. A good man has reason to meet it
with a calm and firm mind. But no man
is entitled to treat it with ostentatious levity.
It calls for manly seriousness of thought, It
requires all the recollection of which we are
capable; that with the proper disposition of
dependent beings, when the duff is about
to return to its dzifl, we may deliver up the
spirit to Him who gave it.

R 3

# SERMON IX. On the HAPPINESS of a FUTURE STATE. Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. REVELAT. vii. 9. After this I beheld, and, lo! a great multitude, which no man could ...

[ 246 ]

SERMO N IX.

On the HAPPINESS of a FUTURE STATE.
Preached at the Celebration of the Sacrament of the

Lord's Supper.

REVELAT. Vii. 9.
4iter this I beheld, and, lo! a great multi-

tude, which no man could number, of all
nations, and kindreds, and people, and
tongues, flood before the throne, and before
the Lamzb, clothed with white robes, and
palms in their hands,
S E R M. N this mysterious book of Scripture many

IX. J revolutions are foretold, which were to

take place in the church of God. They
are not indeed so foretold as to afford clear
and precise information concerning the time

of

of their coming to pass. It would have s E R M.

Ix.

been, on many accounts, improper to have i
lifted up too far that awful veil which co-
vers futurity. The intention of the Spirit
of God, was not to gratify the curiosity of
the learned, by disclosing to them the fate of
monarchies and nations, but to satisfy the
serious concerning the general plan, and
final issue, of the divine government. Amidst
those distresses which besel Christians during
the first ages, the discoveries made in this
book were peculiarly seasonable; as they
shewed that there was an Almighty Guard-
ian, who watched with particular attention
over the interests of the church which he
had formed; who foresaw all the commo-
tions which were to happen among the
kingdoms of the earth, and would so over-
rule them as to promote in the end the
cause of truth. This is the chief scope of
those mystic visions with which the Apostle
John was favoured; of feals opened in
heaven; of trumpets founding; and vials
poured forth. The kingdom of darkness
was to maintain for a while a violent struggle,

R 4 against

SE R M. against the kingdom of light. But at the
<„, - conclusion, a voice was to be heard, as the

voice of many waters and of mig-ty thunder-
ings, , lelijina, flela, r the Lord God
omnipotent reigneth. The kingdoms of this
¢world are become the kingdoms of our Lord,
and of his Chrjl, and heJlall reign for ever *.
Such is the profpe& with which the divine
Spirit at intervals enlightens, and with which
he finally terminates, the many dark and
direful scenes that are exhibited in this book.
In closing the canon of Scripture, he, with
great propriety, leaves upon our mind deep
impressions of the triumphs of righteous-
ness, and of the blessedness of the redeemed.
.4fter this Ibeheld, and, lo ! a great multitude,
which no man could number, of all nations,
and kindreds, and people, and tongues, Jlood
before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed
with white robes, and palms in their hands.

These words present a beautiful defcrip-

tion of the happiness of faints in heaven;
a subjeCt on which it is, at all times, both

* Rev. xix. 6.-xi. 15.

comfortable

comfortable and improving to meditate. SERM.

IX.

On this day, in particular, when we are to -
commemorate the dying love of our Savi-
our, we cannot be better employed than in
contemplating what his love hath purchased;
in order both to awaken our gratitude, and
to confirm our attachment to him. The
sacrament of the supper is the oath of our
fidelity. Let us dispose ourselves for cele-
brating it, by taking a view of the rewards
which await the faithful. I shall, for this
end, in several observations from the words
of the text, taken in connection with the
context, endeavour to illustrate, in some
imperfec degree, the profped which is
here afforded us of a state of future felicity;
and then shall make practical improvement
of the subjed.

I. WHAT the words of the text mofl

obviously suggest is, that heaven is to be
confidered as a state of blessed. society. A
multitude, a numerous assembly, are here
represented as sharing together the fame
felicity and honour. Without society, it is

impossible

S E M. impossible for man to be happy, Place

him in a region where he was surrounded
with every pleasure ; yet there, if he found
himself a solitary individual, he would pine
and languish. They are not merely our
wants, and our mutual dependence, but
our native inflinas alob, which impel us to
associate together. The intercourse which
we here maintain with our fellows, is a
source of our chief enjoyments. But, alas !
how much are these allayed by a variety of
disagreeable circumstances that enter into
all our connexions! Sometimes we susser
from the distresses. of those whom we love;
and sometimes from their vices or frailties.
XWhere friendship is cordial, it is exposed to
the wounds of painful sympathy, and to
the anguish of violent separation. Where
it is so cool as not to occasion sympathetic
pains, it is never productive of much plea-
sure. The ordinary commerce of the world
confits in a circulation of frivolous inter-
course, in which the heart has no concern.
It is generally insipid, and often foured
by the slightest difference in humour, or op-

position

position of interest. We fly to company, in SEIRM.
order to be relieved from wearisome corre-
fpondence with ourselves; and the vexations
which we meet with in society drive us
back again into solitude. Even among the
virtuous, dissentions arise; and disagree-
ment in opinion too often produces aliena-
tion of heart. We form few connexions
where somewhat does not occur to difap-
point our hopes. The beginnings are often
pleasing. We flatter ourselves with having
found those who will never give us any
disgust. But weaknesses are too soon dif-
covered. Suspicions arise; and love waxes
cold. We are jealous of one another, and
accustomed to live in diiguife. A studied
civility assumes the name without the plea-
sure of friendship; and secret animosity and
envy are often concealed under the caresses
of dissembled affeCion.

Hence the pleasure of earthly society,

like all our other pleasures, is extremely im-
perfect; and can give us a very faint con-
ception of the joy that must arise from the
society of perfect spirits in a happier world.

Here,

SERM. Here, it is with difficulty that we can fe-

Ix. L-,. lea from the corrupted crowd a few with

whom we wish to associate in arit union.
There, are assembled all the wife, the holy,
and the just, who ever existed in the uni-
verse of God; without any distress to trou-
ble their mutual bliss, or any source of dif-
agreement to interrupt their perpetual
harmony. Artifice and concealment are
unknown there. There, no competitors
firuggle, no fa&ions contend; no rivals
supplant each other. The voice of discord
never rites, the whisper of suspicion never
circulates, among those innocent and be-
nevolent spirits. Each, happy in himself,
participates in the happiness of all the reft;
and by reciprocal communications of love
and friendship, at once receives from and
adds to the fum of general felicity - Re-
new the memory of the most affectionate
friends with whom you were blest in any
period of your life. Divert them of all
those infirmities which adhere to the hu-
man character. Recal the most pleasing
and tender moments which you ever en-

joyed

joyed in their society; and the remem- E RX.

IX.

brance of those en.ations may assist you <-
in conceiving that felicity which is pof-
fefled by the faints above. The happiness
of brethren dwellizng together iZn unity, is,
with great justice and beauty, compared by
the Pfalmif to such things as are mofi re-
frelhing to the heart of man; to the fra-
grancy of the richest odours, and to the
reviving influence of soft stherial dews.
It is lik e

te recious oitintenlt poured on the

head of .azron; and like the dew of Hirmzon,
even the dew lhat dl'ef;rdeih on the mouzn-
tains of Zion, where the Lord co2mmandeth
the bliefig, even life fyor evernmore :-e

Belides the felicity which springs from

perfe't love, there are two circumflances
which particularly enchance the blessedness of
that 7nmltitude who fland' before the throne;
these are, access to the most exalted society,
and renewal of the mors tender connexions.
The former is pointed out in the Scripture
byjoining the innumerable comanyz of angels,
and the general aiembly and church of the

* Psalm cxxxiii. I.

f rJ?-

S ERM. firj-born; by fitting dowsn with Abraham,

Ix.
l z
,and ISaac, and yacob, in the kingdom of

heaven *; a promise which opens the sub-
limeft profpeds to the human mind. It
allows good men to entertain the hope, that
separated from all the dregs of the human
mass, from that mixed and polluted crowd
in midst of which they now dwell, they
shall be permitted to mingle with prophets,
patriarchs, and apostles, with legislators and
heroes, with all those great and illustrious
spirits, who have shone in former ages as
the servants of God, or the benefadors of
men; whose deeds we are accustomed to
celebrate; whose Rfeps we now follow at a
distance ; and whose names we pronounce
'with veneration.

United to this high assembly, the bless-

ed at the fame time renew those ancient
connexions with virtuous friends which had
been dissolved by death. The profped of
this awakens in the heart the most pleasing
and tender sentiment which perhaps can fill
it, in this mortal Rate. For of all the for-

* Heb. xii. 22. 23. Matth. viii. xI.

2 rows

rows which we are here doomed to endure, S E R M.

IX.

none is oi bitter as that occasioned by the
fatal frolke -!ich separates us, in appear-
ance, for ever, from those to whom either
nature or friend ship had intimately joined
our hearts. MXemory, from time to time,
renews the anguifin; opens the wound
which seered once to have been closed;
and by recalling joys that are past and gone,
touches every spring of painful sensibility.
In there agonizing moments, how relieving
the thought, that the reparation is only
temporary, not eternal;. that there is a time
to come, of re-union with those with whom
our happiest days were spent; whose joys
and sorrows once were ours; and from
whom, after we fiall have landed on the
peaceful ihore where they dwell, no revo-
lutions of nature shall ever be able to part
us more!-Such is the society of the blessed
above. Of such are the multitude com-
posed who Jland before the throue. Let us
now observe,

II. THAT this is not only a blessed but a
numerous society. It is called a multitude,

a great

S E R M. agreat multitude, a great multitude which ;nz

Ix.
L-e-- man could number. These expressions convey

the most enlarged views of the kingdom
of glory. Dismay not yourfelvesrwith the
apprehension of heaven being a confined
and almofi inaccessible region, into which
it is barely possible for a small handful to
gain admiflion, after making their escape
from the general wreck of the human
race. In my Father's hozje, said our Sa-
viour, there are many nmanfioos. That city
of the living God towards which you profel'
to bend your course, is prepared for the
reception of citizens innumerable. It al-
ready abounds with inhabitants; and more
and more shall be added to it, until the end
of time. Whatever difficulties there are
in the way which leads to it, they have been
often surmounted. The path, though nar-
row, is neither impassable, nor untrodden.
Though the gate stands not so wide as that
which opens into hell, yet through the nar-
row gate multitudes have entered, and been
crowned.

It is much to be lamented, that, among all
denominations of Christians, the unchari-

table

table spirit has prevailed of unwarrantably S E RM.
circumscribing the terms of divine grace --
within a narrow circle of their own draw-
ing. The one half of the Christian world
has often doomed the other, without mercy,
to eternal perdition. Without the pale of
that church to which each fedt belongs, they
seem to hold it impossible for salvation to be
attained. But is this the genuine spirit of
the Gospel ? Can a Christian believe the
effecs of the sufferings of Christ to be no
greater than there? For this did the Son of
God descend from the highest heavens, and
pour out his foul unto the death, that only
a few, who adopt the fame modes of
expression, and join in the fame forms of
worship with us, might be brought to the
kingdom of heaven ? Is this all the deli-
verance he has wrouight zuon the earth ? He
was with child; he. was in pain ; and shall
he not fee of. the travail of his foul, and be
fatisfed? Surely, the Scripture has given
us full ground to conclude, that the trophies
of our Redeemer's grace 'shall correspond to
the greatness of his power. The Captain of

VOL. II. S our

S E R M. our salvation jhall bring many /bns with

Ix.
<I-- himself to glory. i17e pleasure of the Lord

Jjall prosper in his hand. He Jhsall fee his
feed; LHe Janll jtiZify many. MenJhJall be
blefed in himz, and all nations Jhall call him
blefed. For our farther encouragement, let
us obierve,

III. THAT the heavenly society is repre..

sented in the text, as gathered out of all the
varieties of the human race. This is inti-
mated by the remarkable expreffilons of a
multitude which no man could number, of all
nations and ki7z.d-eds andpeople and tongues;
as if designed on purpose to correc our
narrow notions of the extent and power of
divine grace. They whom distant seas and
regions now divide, whose languages and
manners are at present Itrange to one an-
other, shall then mingle in the fame assem-
bly. No situation is so remote, and no
flation so unfavourable, as to preclude access
to the heavenly felicity. A road is opened
by the Divine Spirit to those blissful habi-
tations, from all corners of the earth, and

from

from all conditions of human life; from s E R M.
the peopled city, and from the solitary de- ,
fert; from the cottages of the poor, and
from the palaces of kings; from the dwell-
ings of ignorance and simplicity, and from
the regions of science and improvement.

'heyJJall come, fays our blessed Lord him-
self, from the eqaf and from the w-eJ, ffrom
the north andfroim the south, and fit down in
the kingdomn of God *.

Such discoveries serve both to enlarge our

conceptions of the extent of divine good-
ness, and to remove those fears which are
ready to arise from particular situations in
life. Were you permitted to draw aside the
veil, and to view that divertfifed assembly
of the blessed who surround the throne, you
would behold among them numbers who
have overcome the fame difficulties which
encounter you, and which you dread as
insuperable. You would behold there, the
uninftruCed, with whom an upright inten-
tion supplied the place of knowledge; the

* Luke, xiii. 29.

S 2 feeble,

S E R M. feeble, whom divine grace had strength-s

Ix. a-_ ened; and the milled, whom it had brought

back into the right path. You would be-
hold the young who had surmounted the
allurements of youthful pleasure, and the
old who had borne the distresses of age with
undecayed constancy; many whom want
could not tempt to dishonesty, many whom
riches did not reduce into pride or impiety;
many who, in the most difficult and enfnar-
ing circumstances, in the midst of camps
and armies and corrupted courts, had pre-
served unfullied integrity. In a word,from
all kindreds anzd people, that is, from all
ranks of life, and all tribes of men, even
from among publicans -and inners, you
would behold those whom divine assistance
had conduEted to future glory.-And is
not the fame assistance, in its full extent,
offered also to us ? Encompassed, while
we run the Chriftlan race, with this cloud of
witnejes who have finished their course
with success; animated, while we jfght the
good fight, with the shouts of those who
have overcome and are crowned, ihall de-

fpair

fpair enervate or dejec our minds ? From s E R Mo
the happy multitude above, there iffiles a I
voice which ought to found perpetually in
the ear of faith. Be ye fait.fuld unto the
death, and ,e Jhall receive the crown of life;
Be Jsrong in the Lord and in the power of
his might; Be follower s

of us ho through

fitth and patience are now inheritiin the
prom2.es. Confider,

I-. THE description given in the text

of the happiness and glory of the heavenly
society. .They were beheld by the apostle
Jzanding before the throne, and before the
Lamb, clothed with white robes, andpialms
in their hands. All that these palms and
zewhite robes import, it is not given us now
to understand. We know that among all
nations they have been used as ensigns of joy
and viftory; and are undoubtedly employed
here to represent that diffinguifhed felicity
and honour to which human nature shall be
then advanced. But we must be endowed
with the faculties of the blessed, in order tp
comprehend their employments and plea-

S 3 fures;

S E R M. fures; and therefore on this part of the
, ._, fubjedt I shall not attempt to enlarge. The

silence of humble and refpedful hope bet-
ter becomes us than the indulgence of those
excursions of fancy, which degrade the sub-
ject they endeavour to exalt.

One circumstance only cannot fail to at-

traa particular attention; that the blessed
are here described as Jianding before the
throne and before the Lamb; that is, enjoy-
ing the immediate pretence of the great
Creator, and of the merciful Redeemer of
the world. The unhappy distance at which
we are now removed from God, is the
source of all our woes. Those territories
which we inhabit, are not His abode. They
are regions of exile. They are the dwell-
ings of a fallen race; and are condemned
to be inverted with clouds and darkness.
Here, God ftLndeth afar off. In vain we
often pursue his presence through his works,
his ways, and his religious institutions. He
is said to be a God that hideth hinz/elf. 1e
dwelleth, as to us, in the secret place of
thunder. He holdeth back the face of his

throne,

trone, and fpreadeth a thick cloud ipon it. S ER M.

lX.

The manifestation of his pretence shall be _
the signal for the renovation of all things.
When that Szn of righteozfiefs breaks forth
from the cloud which now conceals him,
forrowv and fin, and every evil thing, Ihall
fly away before the brightness of his face.
For neither guilt nor misery can remain
where God dwells. As the rising of the
fun transforms at once the face of nature,
and converts the vwhole extent of space,
over which his beams are spread, into a
region of light, so ihall the divine presence,
as soon as it is revealed, diffuse universal
bliss over all who behold it. It imports
fllznefs of joy, and pleafizre for evermore.
The inspired writer of this book thus de-
scribes its effets: There j7hall be no more
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, nor pain ;
for the formier things are apqfed away. He
thatJft upon tie throne said, Behold I make
all thinzgs new. Thej Jhall hunger no more,
neither thirJf any more. But the Lamb
zwhich is in the midst of the throne iallfeed
them, and Jalld lead them unto living foun-

S 4 tains

SE R M. tains Of water. God Jhall wipe away all

IX_ t !ears from their eyes. But, descending from

this too sublime theme, let us

V. TURN our attention to a circumstance

in the state of future happiness, more com-
menfurate to our present conceptions, which
is suggested by the commentary upon the
Ivords of the text given in the sequel of
the chapter. And one of the elders answered,
fayiZg unto me, What are these which are ar-
rayed in white robes; and whence came they ?
Alnd I aid unto him, Sir, tholu knoweJf. And
hefaid unto me, CTheJ are they which came
out of great tribulation *. This explanatory
circumstance may relate particularly to the
cafe of those primitive sufferers, who en-
dured revere persecution in the cause of the
gospel. 3lut, in general, it presents this na-
tural and beautiful view of the future feli-
city of good men, that it is their reft from
the troubles and toils of life. For, to all,
even to the happiest, human life is tribula-
tion and conflict. No man is thoroughly

* Rev. viii. 13, 14.

at

at ease in his condition. Pursuits succeed- S ER M.
ing to pursuits keep us in constant agitation;
while frequent returns of disappointment
break our plans, and oppress our spirits.-
Fatigued by such a variety of toils, mankind
have ever looked forward to reft as their fa-
vourite object. Throughout all their ranks,
from the highest to the lowest, they are in
perpetual chace of it; and it perpetually
flies before them. It is an object which
here they are doomed always to seek, and
never to enjoy.

The nature and laws of our present iate

admit not the gratification of this favourite
wish. For, besides the necessity of trouble in
order to fulfil the purposes of discipline and
improvement, our very happiness, such as it
is in this world, requires a circulation of la-
bours. Our enjoyment consists in pursuit,
not in attainment. Attainment is with us,
for most part, the grave of pleasure. Had
we no object to excite fresh activity, and to
impel us to new toils, human life would
quickly stagnate in melancholy indolence.

At

S-ERM. At the fame time the current of all our

Ix.
F-vyo- wishes tends to repose. Imaginary forms

float incessantly before our view, of the hap-
piness which is to be enjoyed in reft: And
from this conflict between our wishes on the
one hand, and our actual situation on the
other, arise much of the disquiet, and much
of the infelicity, of human life. It is only
in heaven that the tranquil repose, which on
earth is no more than a pleasing phantom,
shall be fully realized. There, remaineth at
last a rejf for the people of God' reft from the
disturbance of passion, the vanity of pursuit,
and the vexation of disappointment; reft
from all the fins and the sorrows of this
miserable world; reft, which shall not be
merely an indolent cessation from labour,
but a full and satisfying enjoyment. Good
men Jhall reJ/ from their labours, and their
zworks Jhall follow them. They have come
out of great tribulation, They have fulfilled,
with honour, their appointed course of trial.
The have fat down in the feat of the Con-
queror; and of past labours nothing remains

but

but the pleasing review, and the happy fruits. s E R M.

IX.
There is still to be confidered,

VI. ONE very material circumstance, de-

fcriptive both of the character, and of the
happiness, of those who enjoy the heavenly
bliss. Not only have they come out of great
tribulation, but, as the Spirit of God adds in
explaining the text, they have wajhed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of
the Lamb %. Two things are here suggested;
the fandity of the blessed, and the means
by which it is attained.

First, Their fandQity or purity is emblema-

tically described, by their being clothed in
robes which are walJied and made white.
In order to qualify human nature for the
enjoyment of such happiness as I have en-
deavoured to describe, it muff undergo a
change so great, as to receive in Scripture
the appellation of a new birth; a change to
which all the institutions of religion, and
all the operations of grace, contribute in this
life, but which is not completed till the next.

* Rev. viii. 1x4

In

S ER M. In this fanclity, or regeneration, consist not
<c__i- only the neceflary preparations for future

felicity, but, which is not so commonly at-
tended to, confifis an essential part of that
.felicity itself. For whence arises the mi-
fery ps this present world? It is not owing
to our cloudy atmosphere, our changing sea-
fEns, and inclement skies. It is not owing
to the debility of our bodies, or to the un-
equal distribution of the goods of fortune.
Amidst all disadvantages of this kind, a pure,
a fledfaft, and enlightened mind, poifefsed
of exalted virtue, could enjoy itself in peace,
and smile at the impotent aflaults of fortune
and the elements. It is within ourfelvea
that misery has fixed its feat. Our difor-
dered hearts, our guilty passions, our vio-
lent prejudices, and misplaced desires, are
the instruments of the torment which we
endure. These iharpen the darts which
adversity would otherwise point in vain
against us. These are the vials of wrath
which pour forth plagues on the inhabitants
of the earth; and make the dwellings of
nations become the abodes of woe. Thence

discontent

discontent and remorse gnaw the hearts of S E M.

IX.

individuals. Thence society is torn by open
violence, or undermined by secret treachery;
and man is transformed into a savage to
man.

But suppose fin to be banifled from the

world; suppose perfect purity and charity
to descend from heaven, and to animate
every human breast; and you would be-
hold the present habitation of men changed
into the paradise of God, The undirurbed
enjoyment of a holy mind, and of a blissful
union with one another, would scarcely al-
low us to feel those external evils, of which
we now so loudly complain. All nature
would assume a different appearance around
us. That golden age which was so long
the subjea of the philosopher's dream, and
of the poet's song, would in fact take place.
According to the beautiful language of-an-
cient prophecy, springs wZould then rilt in
the desert, and rivers be opened in the thirJly
land. The wilderness and the solitary place
would be glad. The wolf would dwell with
the lamb, and the leopard lie down with the

4 kid.

SE R M. In this fanEtity, or regeneration, conift not

-y- only the necefiary preparations for future

felicity, but, which is not so commonly at-
tended to, consists an essential part of that
.felicity itself. For whence arises the mi-
fery of this present world? It is not owing
to our cloudy atmosphere, our changing sea-
sons, and inclement Ikies. It is not owing
to-the debility of our bodies, or to the un-
equal distribution of the goods of fortune.
Amidst all disadvantages of this kind, a pure,
a fledfaft, and enlightened mind, possessed
of exalted virtue, could enjoy itself in peace,
and smile at the impotent assaults of fortune
and the elements. It is within ourselves
that misery has fixed its feat. Our difor-
dered hearts, our guilty passions, our vio-
lent prejudices, and misplaced desires, are
the instruments of the torment which we
endure. These sharpen the darts which
adversity would otherwise point in vain
against us. These are the vials of wrath
which pour forth plagues on the inhabitants
of the earth; and make the dwellings of
nations become the abodes of woe. Thence

discontent

discontent and remorse gnaw the hearts of S E I M.

IX.

individuals. Thence society is torn by open
violence, or undermined by secret treachery;
and man is transformed into a savage to
man.

But suppose fin to be banifled from the

world; suppose perseEt purity and charity
to descend from heaven, and to animate
every human breast; and you would be-
hold the present habitation of men changed
into the paradise of God. The undisturbed
enjoyment of a holy mind, and of a blissful
union with one another, would scarcely al-
low us to feel those external evils, of which
we now so loudly complain. All nature
would assume a. different appearance around
us. That golden age which was so long
the subject of the philosopher's dream, and
of the poet's song, would in fact take place.
According to the beautiful language of-an-
cient prophecy, springs would then rie in
the desert, and rivers be opened in the thirJfy
land. The wildernesS and the solitary place
would be glad. The wolf would dwell with
the lamb, and the leopard lie down zwith the

4 kid.

S E M. kid. yudgmnent would dwell in the wildel-

Ix.
- ness, and righteofitnefs remain in she fruiifuil

field. She desert would rejoice, and bloom
as the rose. If such, even in this world,
would be the effets of innocence and vir-
tue completely restored, how much greater
muff they be in that new earth, and those new
heavens, where reCtitude of nature shall be
combined with every circumstance of ex-
ternal felicity ? It is the present imperfect
state of human virtue that hinders us from
conceiving fully the influence of righteouss
ness upon happiness. The robes in which
the best men are now clothed, to use the
language of the text, are sullied with so
many stains, as to convey no adequate idea
of the original beauty which belongs to the
garb of righteousness. But when there
stains shall be washed away, when these
robes shall be made perfecly white and
pure, a lustre will flow from them, of which
we can, as yet, form no conception.

But how are the robes of the blessed thus

washed? Whence is derived that spotless
purity in which they are arrayed? The

Spirit

Spirit of God hath answered us, from the S E R AM.
blood of the Lam2b; leading our thoughts to ___
that high dispensation of mercy, to which
the faints above owe their eRftblimfinent,
fi-fr in grace, and then in glory. From
that blood which wasJjed for the remfion
offins, flow both the atonement of human
guilt, and the regeneration of human na-
ture. Human nature had fallen too low to
be capable of retrieving itself. It could not
regain its primitive innocence, and still less
was capable of raising itself so high in the
scale of existence as to mingle with angels.
We had neither sufficient knowledge to dif-
cover, nor virtue to merit, nor ability to
qualify ourselves for enjoying, celestial glory.
Heaven muit have been either covered from
our view by perpetual darkness, or only
beheld from afar as an inacceflible region,
if Christ had not interposed to openfor us a
new and living wva3, ithin the veil. The
obligations which his generous undertaking
has conferred upon the human race, will tend
highly to increase the felicity of the blessed.
The sense of being distinguished by so il-

2 luftrious

S E R M. luftrious a benefactor, and the correfpondc

Ix.
_. -J- ing returns of gratitude and love to him,

form some of the most pleating of those
emotions which shall continue to delight
them through all eternity.

FROM those views of a state of future

happiness which the text has suggested, va-
rious inftruaions relating to life and piac-
tice naturally arise. We are taught to retify
our notions of felicity; to look for it, not
in what is external, but in what relates to
the mind and heart; in good dispositions
and a purified foul; in unity and friendship
with one another, and in the divine pre-
fence and favour. If such things form the
principal articles of future bliss, they cannot
but be essential to our happiness in the more
early periods of existence; and he who
seeks his chief enjoyment from an oppoiite
quarter, errs widely from the path which
conducts to felicity.

We are farther taught whence to derive

constancy and perseverance, amidst the pre-
sent discouragements of a virtuous life. In

this

this world, we often behold good men de- S E R M.
pressed, and the wicked prospering around
us. Our best deeds meet with unjust re-
turns from an ungrateful world. Sincerity
is over-reached by craft, and innocence falls
a viaim to power. But let us not on such
occasions fay within ourselves, that in vain
we have cleansed our hearts, and waqJ:ed our
hands in innocency. Let us reft on the as-
furance, that these disorders extend not far
in the kingdom of God. They affect only
the first stage of existence. They relate to
discipline and trial, which will soon be
finished. In that permanent slate which is
about to open, a new and better order of
things shall arise. When dejected with the
evils of life, let us look upward to that happy
multitude who have come out of great tribula-
tion, and nzowiand before the throne. Un-
til the day arrive which ihall join us to that
blessed assembly, let us ihew ourselves wor-
thy of the hope that is before us, by sup-
porting, with a constant mind, the trials of
our fidelity. Be patient; Jlabli/h your hearts.
The coming of the Lord draweth nigh.
VOL. II. T From

S E R M. From the profpets which the text has

Ix. Ho^» afforded, we may likewise learn what the

spirit is which should regulate our life.
Sanaity of conduct, dignity of character,
elevation of affedcions, become those who
expeC to mingle with angels, andpiri-ts of
jift men madepeirfeE. I mean not that such
profpeas should carry away our whole at-
tention from the present world, where un-
doubtedly lies the chief scene of human ac-
tion, and human duty. But while we at
as inhabitants of the earth, we ought at the
fame time so to remember our connection
with a better world, as not to debase our-
selves with what is mean, not to defile our-
selves with what is impure, not to entangle
ourselves among what is ensnaring, in the
present state. Let neither its advantages
elate, nor its disappointments dejea us;
but with an equal spirit, with a mind full
of immortality, let us pass through all the
changes of this mortal life.

Finally, let the discoveries of future hap-

piness inspire us with suitable gratitude to
God ard Christ; to the eternal Father, who

priginally

originally decreed such rewards for the s EI M.
righteous; and to the Son, who ads in the --
high characer of the Dispenser of the divine
mercies, and the great Restorer of the fallen
race of men. Particularly, when approach-
ing to God in solemn aats of devotion, such
as we are at this day to perform, let gratitude
be alive and ardent in our heart. The com-
memoration of our Saviour's death is in a
high degree suited to awaken every emotion
of tenderness and love. It brings before us,
under one view, all the obligations which
we lie under to this great benefactor of man-
kind. When just ready to susser for our
fake, he instituted this holy sacrament, and
said, Do this in remembrance of me.-WVhom,
O blessed Jesus ! shall we ever remember, if
we are capable of forgetting Thee? Thee,
to whom we owe the forgiveness of fin, and
the restoration of divine favour; our victory
over death, and our hope of life eternal !
Thou haft enlarged our views beyond these
territories of disorders and darkness. Thou
haft discovered to us the city of the living
God. Thou fetteft open the gates of that

T 2 new

S E R M. new yerufalem; and leadeft us into the path

Ix.
I_- of lfe. Thou from age to age gathereft out

of every nation, and kindred, and people, that
multitude which Janzd before the throne. Thou
bringeft them out of great tribulation. Thine
are the white robes with which they are in-
vested; thine, the palms which they bear;
and by Thee they are placed under the light
of the divine countenance for ever.

# SERMON X. ON CANDOUR. 1 CORINTH. xiii. 5. Charity — thinketh no evil.

[ 277 ]
SERMON X.

ON CANDOUR.

I CORINTH. Xiii. 5.

Charity-thiznketh no evil.

ELIGION and Government are the SER ,.
X two great foundations of order and .

comfort among mankind. Government re-
strains the outrages and crimes which would
be subversive of society, secures the pro-
perty, and defends the lives of its fubjeds.
But the defed of government is, that hu-
man laws can extend no farther than to the
aCtions of men. Though they protec us
from external violence, they leave us open
on different fides to be wounded. By the
vices which prevail in society, our tran-

T 3 quillity

SE R M. quillity may be disturbed, and our lives in

X. A,---_ various ways embittered, while government

can give us no redress. Religion supplics
the insufficiency of law, by striking at the
root of those disorders which occasion so
much misery in the world. Its profefled
scope is to regulate, not actions alone, but
the temper and inclinations. By this means
it ascends to the sources of conduct; anti
very ineffedual would the wisest system of
legislation prove for the happiness of man-
kind, if it did not derive aid from religion,
in ibftening the dispositions of men, and
checking many of those evil passions to which
the influence of law cannot possibly reach.

We are led to this reflection by-the de-

scription given in the context of charity,
that great principle in the Christian system.
The Apoitle places it in a variety of lights,
and under each of them explains its opera-
tion by its internal effects; not by the actions
to which it gives rife, but by the.difpofitions
which it produces in the heart. He justly
supposes, that if the temper be duly regu-
lated, propriety of acion will follow, and

good

good order take place in external behaviour. S E R M.
Of those characers of charity I have chosen a_ 1-_j
one for the fubje& of this discourse, which
leads to the consideration of a virtue highly
important to us, both as Christians, and as
members of society. I lhall endeavour, first,
to explain the temper here pointed out, by
shewing what this description of charity im-
ports, that it tlinzleeth no evil; and then to
recommend such a disposition, and to dif-
play the bad effects of an opposite turn of
mind.

L. LET us confider what this description

of charity imports. You will easily perceive
that the exprefflon in the text is not to be
understood in a sense altogether unlimited;
as if there were no occasion on which we
are to think unfavourably of others. To
view all the aCions of men with the fame
degree of complacency, would be contrary
both to common understanding, and to
many express precepts of religion. In a
world where Lo much depravity abounds,
were we to think and speak equally well of

T 4 all'

S. ER M. all, we muff either be insensible of the dif-

X.
xt_ - tindion between right and wrong, or be

indifferent to that ditlindion when we per-
ceivcd it. Religion renders it our duty to
abhor that wh'ic is evil; and, on many oc-
cafions, to exprels our indigination openly
againit it. But the Apollle, with great pro-
pricty, delcribcs the temper which lie is re-
commendlling iln tich firong and general
terms, as, might guard us againlt that cx-
trem to which wc are naturally moil prone,
of rafli and unjiitl fil1picion. The virtue
which ]h meanslC to inculcate is that which
is known lby the name of Candour; a vir-
tue, which, as ioon as it is mentioned,
every one will acknowledge to be efl'ential
to the chlaradlcr of a worthy man ; a virtue
which we itlldom fail of ascribing to any
person whom we fceck to recommend to the
citcem of others; but which, I am afraid,

wwhen we examine our own condud in a

religious view, is seldom the subjec of in-
quiry.

It is neceflary to observe, that true Can-
dour is altogether different from that guard-

ed,

ed, inoffensive language, and that iludled SERM.

x.

openness of behaviour, which we so fre- -
quently meet with among men of the world.
Smiling, very often, is the afpc2-, and
finooth arc the words, of tliolf who in-
wardly are the most ready to think evil of
others. That Candour which is a Chriflian.
virtue, confiits, not il fairness of jieech,
but in fairness of heart. It may want the
blandifhmcnt of external courtesy, but ftlp-
plies its place with humane and generous
liberality of fentimcnt. Its manners arc
unafli'-ed, and its profcflions cordial.
Exempt, on one hand, from the dark jea-
lousy of a fuificious mind; it is no Icl;
removed,, on the other, from that easy cre-
dulity which is imposed on by every fpc-
cious pretence. It is perfeEtly confftent
with extensive knowledge of the world,
and with due attention to our own safety.
In that various intercourse which we are
obliged to carry on with persons of every
different character, suspicion, to a certain
degree, is. a necefary guard. It is only
when it exceeds the bounds of prudent cau-

tion,

S ER M. tion, that it degenerates into vice. There

i_
- is a proper mean between undiftinguiihing

credulity, and universal jealousy, which a
found underfianding discerns, and which the
man of candour studies to preserve.

He makes allowance for the mixture of

evil with good, which is to be found in every
human character. He expects none to be
faultless; and he is unwilling to believe that
there is any without some commendable
quality. In the midst of many defects, he
can discover a virtue. Under the influence
of personal resentment, he can be just to the
merit of an enemy. He never lends an open
ear to those defamatory reports and dark
fuggeflions, which, among the tribes of
the censorious, circulate with so much ra-
pidity, and meet with such ready acceptance,
He is not hasty to judge, and he requires
full evidence before he will condemn. As
long as an acion can be ascribed to different
motives, he holds it as no mark of sagacity
to impute it always to the worst. Where
there is just ground for doubt, he keeps his
judgment undecided; and, during the pe-

riod

riod of suspense, leans to the most chari- S.E R M

X.

table conftrudtion which an acion can bear. <-
When he must condemn, he condemns with
regret; and without thole aggravations
which the severity of others adds to the
crime. He listens calmly to the apology
of the offender, and readily admits every
extenuating circumstance which equity can
suggest. How much soever he may blame
the principles of any sea or party, he ne-
ver confounds, under one general censure,
all who belong to that party or fee. He
charges them not with such consequences
of their tenets, as they refuse and disavow.
From one wrong opinion, he does not infer
the subversion of all found principles; nor,
from one bad action, conclude that all re-
gard to conscience is overthrown. When
he beholds the mote in his brother's eye, he
remembers the beam in his own. He com-
miferates human frailty; and judges of
others according to the principles by which
he would think it reasonable that they
should judge of him. In a word, he views
men and actions in the clear sunshine of

3 charity

SERM. charity and good-nature; and not in that
.-- .. dark and fullen shade which jealousy and

party-fpirit throw over all charaEters.----
Such being in general the spirit of that
charity which thinketh no evil, I proceed,

II. To recommend, by various argu-

ments, this important branch of Christian
virtue.

Let us begin with observing what a ne-

ceflary requisite it is to the proper discharge
of all the social duties. I need not spend
time in illowing that these hold a very
high rank in the Christian system. The
encomium which the Apostle in this chap-
ter befcows upon charity, is alone sufficient
to prove it. He places this grace at the
head of all the gifts and endowments which
can be possessed by man; and assures us,
that thozugh we had all faith Jo that we
couldremove motrntains, yet if we be defti-
tute of charity, it will profit us nothing.
Accordingly, love,gentlenefi, meekness, and
long-fjiferi ng, are enumerated as diftin-
guifhingfrzuits of the sPirit of Christ *. But

* Galat. v. 22, z3.

it

it is impossible for such virtues as these to SE R M.

X.

find place in a breast, where the propensity A_
to think evil of others is predominant.
Charitable and candid thoughts of men are
the necessary introduction to all good-will
and kindness. They form, if we may
speak so, the only climate in which love
can grow up and flourifil. A fuipicious
temper checks in the bud every kind assec-
tion. It hardens the heart, and estranges
man from man. What friendship or gra-
titude can you expeC from him, who views
all your conduct with distrustful eyes, and
ascribes every benefit you confer to artifice
and stratagem? The utmost which you
can hope from one of this character, is
justice in his dealings; nor even that can
you be aifured of; as the suspicions to which
he is a prey will afford him frequent pre-
texts for departing from truth, and for de-
.fending himself with the fame arms which
he conceives to be employed against him.
Unhappy will they be who are joined with
him by any close connexion; exposed to
every malignant suspicion which arises in

· -. , ,

SE R M. his own mind, and toevery unjufl suggest.

X.
,__ ion which the malice of others may infi-

nuate against them. That store of poison
which is collected within him, frequently
throws out its venom on all who are within
its reach. As a companion, he will be fe-
vere and satirical; as a friend, captious and
dangerous; in his domestic sphere, harsh,
jealous, and irascible; in his civil capacity,
seditious and turbulent, prone to impute
the conduct of his fuperiours to improper
motives, and upon loose information to con-
demn their condut.

The contrary of all this may be expeced

from a candid temper. Whatever is ami-
able in manners, or useful in society, na-
turally and easily ingrafts itself upon it.
Gentleness, humanity, and compassion flow
from it as their native spring. Open and
cheerful in itself, it diffuses cheerfulness and
good-humour over all who are under its
influence. It is the chief ground of mu-
tual confidence and union among men.
It prevents those animofities from arising
which are the offspring of groundless prc-

judice

judice; or, by its benign interposition, al- SE R M.
lays them when arisen. In the magistrate, .
it tempers justice with lenity. Among
fubjets it promotes good order and sub-
mission. It connects humanity with piety.
For he who is not given to think evil of his
fellow-creatures, will not be ready to cen-
sure the dispensations of his Creator. Where-
as the fame turn of mind which renders one
jealous and unjust towards men, will incline
him to be querulous and impious towards
God.

IN the second place, as a suspicious, un-

charitable spirit is inconsistent with all
social virtue and happiness, so, in itself,
it is unreasonable and unjust. In order to
form found opinions concerning characters
and actions, two things are especially re-
quifite, information and impartiality. But
such as are most forward to decide unfa-
vourably, are commonly destitute of both.
Intfead of possessing, or even requiring, full
information, the grounds on which they
proceed are frequently the most flight and

frivolous.

SE RM. frivolous. -A tale, perhaps, which the idle

_,-. have invented, the inquisitive have liflened

to, and the credulous have propagated, or
a real incident which rumour, in carrying
it along, has exaggerated and disguised,
supplies them with materials of confident
assertion, and decisive judgment. From an
action they presently look into the heart,
and infer the motive. This fiuppofed mo-
tive they conclude to be the ruling prin-
ciple; and pronounce at once concerning
the whole character.

Nothing can be more contrary both to

equity and to found reason, than such pre-
cipitate judgments. Any man who attends
to what pafles within himself, may easily
discern what a complicated fyflem the hu-
mnan charadter is, and what a variety of
circumflances must be taken into the ac-
count, in order to eflimate it truly. No
single instance of condut whatever, is sus-
ficient to determine it. As from one wor-
thy ation, it were credulity, not charity,
to conclude a person to be free from all
vice; so froom one which is censurable, it

7 is

is perfectly unjust to infer that the author s E R M.
of it is without conscience, and without '-"
merit. Did you know all the attending cir-
cumrftances, it might appear in an excusable
light; nay, perhaps, under a commendable
form. The motives of the aaor may have
been entirely different from those which
you ascribe to him; and where you suppose
him impelled by bad design, he may have
been prompted by conscience and mistaken
principle. Admitting the action to have
been in every view criminal, he may have
been hurried into it through inadvertency
and surprise. I-Ie may have sincerely re- o
pented; and the virtuous principle may
have now regained its full vigour. Perhaps
this was the corner of frailty; the quarter
on which he lay'open to the incursions of
temptation; while the other avenues of his
heart were firmly guarded by conscience.

No error is more palpable than to look

for uniformity from human nature; though
it is commonly on the supposition of it that
our general conclusions concerning character
are formed. Mankind are consistent neither

VOL. IL U in

S ER M. in good, nor in evil. In the present slate

X.
t----. of fiailty, all is mixed and blended. The

firongefl contrarieties of piety and hypo-
crify, of generosity and avarice, of truth
and duplicity, often meet in one character,
The pureif human virtue is confilent with
some vice; and in the midfl of much vice
and disorder, amiable, nay refpedable, qua-
lities may be found. There are few cafes
in which we have ground to conclude that
all goodnels is lofl. At the bottom of the
character there may lie Tomne iparks of piety
and virtue, fuppreflcd, but not cxtinguifn-
ed; which, kept alive by the breath of hea-
ven, and gathering strength in fecrct fiomi
reflcaion, may, on the first favourable
opcnin-g which is afforded them, be ready
to break forth with splendour and force.-
Placed, then, in a situation of so much un-
certainty and darkness, where our know-
ledge of the hearts and characters of men is
so limited, and our judgments concerning
them are so apt to err, what a continual
call do we receive either to suspend our
judgment, or to give it on the favourable

fide ?

fide ? especially when we confider that, as s E R M
through imperfea information we are un- -
qualified for deciding soundly, so through
want of impartiality we are often tempted
to decide wrong. How much this enforces
the argument for candour, will appear by
confidering,

TN the third place, what the sources are

of those revere and uncharitable opinions
which we are so ready to form. Were the
mind altogether free fiom prepoflcffion and
bias, it might avail itself to more advan-
tage of the scanty knowledge which it pof-
fefles. But this is so far from being the
cafe, that on every fide we are encumbered
with prejudices, and warped by paflions,
which exert their influence in nothing more
than in leading us to think evil of others.
At all times we are justly said tofee throzigh
a glass, darkly; but paflion and prejudice,
looking through a glass which distorts the
form of the objecs, make us also fee falsely.

It is one of the misfortunes of our present
situation, that some of the good dispositions

U 2 of

S E R M. of human nature are apt to betray us into
---¥-. frailties and vices. Thus it often happens,

that the laudable attachment which we
contract to the country, or the church, to
which we belong, or to some political de-
nomination under which we class ourselves,
both confines our affeCtions within too nar-
row a sphere, and gives rife to violent
prejudices against such as come under an
opposite description. Not contented with
being in the right ourselves, we must find
all others in the wrong. We claim an ex-
clufive possession of goodness and wisdom;
and from approving warmly of those who
join us, we proceed to condemn, with much
acrimony, not only the principles, but the
characters of those from whom we differ.,
Hence persons of well-difpofed minds are
too often, through the strength of partial
good affecion, involved in the crime of
uncharitable judgment. They rashly extend
to every individual the severe opinion
which they have unwarrantably conceived
of a whole body.-This man is of a party
whose principles we reckon slavish; and

t 5 therefore

therefore his whole sentiments are corrupted. s E R M.
That man belongs to a religious fed, which X. _;
we are accustomed to deem bigoted; and
therefore he is incapable of any generous
or liberal thought. Another is connected
with a fee, which we have been taught to
account relaxed; and therefore he can have
no fandity.-Are these the judgments of
candour and charity ? Is true piety or
virtue so very limited in its nature, as to be
confined to such alone as fee every thing
with our eyes, and follow exactly the train
of our ideas ? Was there ever any great
community so corrupt as not to include
within it individuals of real worth ?

Betides prepossessions of this nature, which

sometimes mislead the honest mind, there
are other, and much more culpable causes
of uncharitable judgment. Pride is hurt
and wounded by every excellence in which
it can claim no share; and from eagerness
to discover a blemish, refts upon the slightest
appearance of one, as a satisfying proof.
When rivalry and competition concur with
pride, our desire to espy defecs increases;

U 3 and,

S E R M. and, by consequence, the grounds of censure

_, multiply. Whereno opposition of interests

takes place, envy has too much influence
in warping the judgment of many. Even
when none of these causes operate, the in-
ward consciousness of depravity is iufllcienlt
to fill the mind with evil thoughts of others.
Whence should a man so readily draw nis
opinion of men as from that characer with
which he is best acquainted, because it is
his own ? A person of low and base mind
naturally imputes to others the fentiilents
which he finds congenial to himself; and is
incredulous of every excellency which to
him is totally unknown. -He enjoys, be-
fides, consolation in the thought that others
are no better than himself; that his weak-
nesTes and crimes are those of all men; and
that such as appear most diftinguiflled for
virtue possess no real superiority, except
greater dexterity in concealing their vices.
Soothing themselves with this dodrine in
secret, too many fofcer and strengthen the
bad opinion which they entertain of all
mankind. Rarely, if ever, have you ground

to

to think well of that man's heart who is S E R M.
on every occasion given to think the worfl _
of others. Let us observe,

IN the fourth place, that suitable to the

sources whence a jealous and suspicious tem-
per proceeds, are the effets which it pro-
duces in the world, the crimes and milchiefs
with which it fills society. It poflefles this
unhappy diftinlion beyond the other fail-
ings of the human heart, that while it im-
pels men to violent deeds, it justifies to their
own apprehension the excesses which they
commit. Amidst the uproar of other bad
passions, conscience aas as a restraining
power. As soon as the tumult subsides, re-
morse exerts its influence, and renders the
finner sensible of the evil which he has done.
But the uncharitable man is unfortunately
set loose from any such check or controul.
Through the infatuation of prejudice, his
judgment is perverted ; conscience is miffed;
the light within him is turned into rarknefs.
Viewing the objects of his displeasure as evil
men, he thinks himself entitled to give that

U 4 displeasure

SE R M. displeasure full vent; and in committing
-~J- .the most inhuman aaionus, may sometimes

imagine that he is doing good service to
God.

The first fruits of an evil-thinking spirit

are calumny and detraction, by which so-
ciety is so often embroiled, and men are set
at variance with one another. But did it pro-
ceed no farther than censorious speech, the
mirchief would be less. Much greater and
more serious evils frequently ensue. What
direful effedts, for instance, have often flow-
ed from rafl and ill-founded jealousy in
private life ? No sooner has one allowed
that demon to take pofleflion of his mind,
than it perverts his understanding, and taints
all his faculties. Haunting him by night
and by day, bringing perpetually before
him the odious and disquieting forms which
it has raised up, it blackens every appear-
ance to his view; gives to trifles, which
are in themselves light as air, the weight of
full confirmation; till what was at first a
dubious surmise, or a flight displeasure, rifes
at length into full belief and implacable

furyr

fury. Hence, families torn with the moss s E RM.
violent convulsions; the husband armed a,
against the wife, the father against the son,
the friend against the friend; the plan of
treachery and aflaflination contrived, and
the dagger plunged into the bosom of the
innocent.-In public life, how often have
kingdoms been shaken with all the violence
of war and rebellion, from the unjust sus-
picions which fubjeas had conceived of
their rulers; or the rafll jealousy which
princes had entertained of their people ?--
But it is in religious dissensions chiefly, that
the mischievous power of uncharitable pre-
judice has displayed its full atrocity. Re-
ligion is always found to heighten every
passion on which it aas, and to render
every contest into which it enters, uncom-
monly ardent; because the objects which it
presents are of such a nature, as strongly to
fcize and engage the human mind. When
zeal for their own principles has prompted
men to view those of a different persuasion
in the odious lights which bigotry fuggcfts,
every sentiment of humanity has too often

been

SEXR M. been extinguished. The mild influence of

-u that religion, which breathes nothing but

gentleness, has proved too feeble to restrain
the violent and bloody hand of persecution;
and the uncharitable spirit, raging among
contending parties, has filled the world with
such calamities and crimes, as have brought
disgrace on the Christian name.

Lct us attend particularly to one avwful

Instance of the guilt which men may con-
trac, and of the ruin which they may bring
upon themfclves, through the want of fair-
ness and candour. The nation of the Jews
were almost noted for a narrow and un-
cihariable spirit. When John the Baptist,
and our blefed Lord, appeared among them,
because the former was austere in his tem-
per and retired in his life, they pronounced
of him that he had an cvil spirit: and bc-
cause the latter was open and sociable in his
manners, they held him to be destitute of
that fandtity which became a prophet. Their
prejudice against our Lord took its first rife
from a most fiivolous and contemptible caule.
Is not Itis fte oJn of the cacepenter ? Can an'

goo0d

goodthing come out of Nazareth W2 When his s E M.
miracles repelled this reproach, and fuffi- _
ciently proved the eminence of his charadOer,
itill they softered their prejudices by this
most futile reasoning, iHave any of the rulers
believed on him ? Obstinate in their attach-
ment to a temporal Mefliah, and continuing
to view all our Saviour's conduct with an
evil eye, when he converted with bad men
in order to reclaim them, they treated him
as a companilon of fpublicans and Jiners. Be-
cause he disallowed their groundless tradi-
tions, they held him to be a breaker of the
Sabbath, and a contemner of religion. Be-
cause he prophesied the deflrudtion of their
temple, they accused him of being an enemy
to his own nation. Till at last, through
their perpetual mifconftrudion of his ac-
tions, their paflions became so inflamed as
to make them cry out with one voice, Away
with this man to the death, andz give zfs Ba-
rabbasthe robber. --- Viewing in this dread-
ful event the consequences of want of can-
dour, let every man tremble to think evil
afhly of his brother. No one can tell how

far

S E R M. far uncharitable prejudices may carry him

X.
-._s in guilt, if lie allow them to harbour and

gather strength wvithin his breast. The
cloud which ro/f Jiom/ thef'a, nio bigger Ilb/r/
a man's 7haind, may soon swell and fprcad, till
it cover the whole horizon, and discharge
with most dcftructive violence the gathered
flormn.

IN the fifth place, as a fufplicious fpiiri

is the fourcc of lb many crimes and cala-
mities in the world, so it is the fjpring of
certain minlcry to the pcrlbo who indulges
it. His friends will be few; and inMall will
be his comfort in those whom he possesses.
l-3lieving others to be his enemies, he will
of course make them such. Let his caution
be ever so great, the asperity of his thoughts
'will often break out in his behaviour; and
in return for fuf)peting and hating, he will
incur fiuipicion and hatred. Besides the ex-
ternal evils which he draws upon himself,
arising from alienated firiendliip, broken
confidence, and open enmity; the fiufpicious
tenmper itself is one of the worst evils which

ally

any man can susser. If in all fear there be S E R M.

X.

torment, how miserable muff be his slate who, .
by living in perpetual jealousy, lives in per-
petual dread ? Looking upon himself to be
surrounded with spies, enemies, and dcfign-
ing men, he is a itranger to reliance and
trust. He knows not to whom to open him-
self. He dresses his countenance in forced
finiles, while his heart throbs within from ap-
prehensions of secret treachery. Ience fret-
fulness and ill-humour, disgust at the world,
and all the painful sensations of an irritated
and embittered mind.

So numerous and great are the evils arising

from a suspicious disposition, that of the two
extremes it is more eligible to expose our-
selves to occasional disadvantage from think-
ing too well of others, than to susser con-
tinual misery by thinking always ill of them.
It is better to be sometimes imposed upon,
than never to trust. Safety is purchased at
too dear a rate, when, in order to secure it,
we are obliged to be always clad in armour,
and to live in perpetual hostility with our
fellows. This is, for the fake of living, to-

deprive

S EXR M. deprive ourselves of the comfort of life. lhe

-»- man of candour enjoys his situation, what-

ever it is, with cheerfulness and peace. Pru-
dence diredts his intercourse with the world
but no black suspicions haunt his hours of ref.
Accustomed to view the characters of his
neighbours in the moit favourable light, he
is like one who dwells amidst those beautiful
scenes of nature, on which the eye refts with
pleasure. Whereas the suspicious man, hav-
ing his imagination filled with all the shock-
ing forms of human falsehood, deceit, and
treachery, resembles the traveller in the wil-
dernefs, who discerns no objects around him
but what are either dreary or terrible; ca-
verns that open, serpents that hiss, and beasts
of prey that howl. Hence in him are veri-
sied those descriptions which the Spirit of
God has given us of the misery of the wick-
ed. TheyJanall have no peace. They fJall
be like the troubled sea, when it cannot reif.
The LordJh iall give them a trembling heart,
andfailing of ejes, and sorro-w of mind: And
they Js al/fear day and night, and have none
ajurance of heart.---I add,

IN

IN the sixth and last place, that there is SERM.

X.

nothing which exposes men in a more mark-
ed and direC manner to the displeasure of
the Almighty, than a malignant and cenfo-
rious spirit. I insist not now on the general
:denunciations of divine wrath against malice
and hatred. Let us only confider under
.what particular description the Spirit of God
brings this crime of uncharitable judgment.
It is declared to be an impious invasion of
the prerogative of God, to whom alone it
belongs to search all hearts, and to determine
concerning all characters. This privilege
He often appropriates expressly to I-imfelf,
on purpose to restrain the rashness of cen-
sure among men; requiring us to leave the
judging of others to Him, and to attend to
our own business and duty. VWhio art thou
tbatjudgeJf another man 'sJevant ? To his oswn?
mqaler, he J2andeth orfalleth. j')dge nothing
be/ore the time; until the Loordcome, whoj7oall
make manifedi the cowy/els of the heart ®.

It deserves our most serious attention, that,
in several passages of Scripture, the great

* Rom. xiv. 4. i Corinth. iv. 5.
8 Judge

SER M. Judge of the world is represented, at the

X.
v__J day of final retribution, as proceeding upon

this principle, of rendering to men according
to the manner in which they have aded
towards their brethren. With the merciful,
thou wilt JAow th1,ieIf mercifdu; and with
thejfro ward, thou wuiltj/how thyjelffrovoard.
With what judgment ye judge, ye Jhall be
judged; and with what measure ye mete, it
Jhall be meanqtred to you again *. It is im-
possible to form an argument of more force
than this, to restrain all severity of judgment
among such as look forward to the tribunal
of God. The argument extends not in-
deed so far, as to represent our acceptance
with the Deity as entirely fuipended upon
the candour which we ihow in forming our
sentiments of others. We know that other
graces besides this are requisite in order to
fit us for heaven; and that without piety
towards God, and faith in the Lord Jesus
Chrifi, all our charity to men will be found
defecive and vain. But this we know
also, that in the heart which is destitute of

Pfaln xviUi. z, 26. Matth. vii. 2.

fairness

fairness and candour, the Spirit of God s E RM.
certainly dwells not; and that whatever ap- _
pearances of religion the uncharitable man
may afflame, on him the Sovereign of the
universe looks with no favour.-Thou
who art a man full of frailties, who ftandeft
in need, not merely of-impartiality in thy
divine Judge, but of indulgence and mercy:
Thou who imploreft daily this mercy from
Him, and prayeft that He would remember
thouJ art dztg, and not be ftrit to mark inzi-
quify againf tihee; dareft thou, with those
very prayers in thy mouth, proceed to judge
without candour of thy brethren, and upon
the slightest grounds to reprobate and con-
demn them ? 0 thou hypocrite (for by
what other name can we call thee ?) vain
are all thy pretenflons to piety. Ineffectual
is every plea which thou canst form for
mercy from heaven. The precedent which
thou haft established again'f thyself is deci-
five. Thou haft did-ated the sentence of
thine own condemnation.

ON the whole, it clearly appears that no
part of the government of temper deserves

VOL. IT. X attention

S ER M. attention more, than to keep our minds pure

X.
*-v--' from uncharitable prejudices, and open to

candour and humanity in judging of others.
The worst consequences, both to ourselves
and to society, follow from the opposite
spirit. Let us beware of encouraging a ha-
bit of suspicion, by forming too revere and
harsh opinions concerning human nature in
general. A great proportion of infirmity
and corruption, doubtless, adheres to it; yet
tempered also it is with various mixtures of
virtue and good affecion. Darkened as the
Divine image now is among mankind, it is
not wholly effaced. Much piety and good-
ness may lie hidden in hearts that are un--
known to us. Vice is glaring and loud.
The crimes of the wicked make a noise in
the world, and alarm society. True worth
is retired and modest, and requires parti-i
cular situations to bring it forth to public
notice. The prophet Elijah, in a time of
prevailing corruption, imagined that all true
religion had forsaken the land. f, even I
only, said he to the Lord, am left toferve
thee. But the Almighty, who discerned
what was concealed from his imperfeacview,

rep lied,

replied, Eet have I left me seven thozfand S R M.

X.

rmen ivi frael who have not bowed the knee to _
Baal *.

The aged, and the unfortunate, whohave

toiled through an unsuccessful life with long
experience of the falsehood and fraud of evil
men, are apt to be the moit severe in the
opinions which they entertain of others.
For such, their circumstances may be al-
lowed to form some degree of apology. But
if, in youth and prosperity, the fame hard
suspicious spirit prevail; if they who are
beginning the career of life fct out with all
the scruples of distrust; if, before they have
had reason to complain of the world, they
betray the diffidence of a jealous, and the
malignity of a censorious mind, fad is the
presage which may thence be drawn of their
future dishonour. From such, you have
nothing to look for that shall be either en-
gaging in private life, or respecable in pub-
lic character. To youth it particularly be-
longs to be generous in sentiment, candid
in opinion, undesigning in behaviour, open

* i Kings, xix. 14. 18.

X 2 to

S E R M. to the molf favourable conftruCcion of ac-

x.
-y- tions and condu&. Throughout all the

Rages of life, candour is one of the most
honourable diftin~dions of the human cha-
raaer; it is conneted with magnanimity;
it isjuftified by wisdom; it is suitable to the
relation in which we stand to one another.
But if reason and humanity be insufficient
to restrain us from rafih and uncharitable
judgments, let that awful denunciation fre.
quently resound in our ears HIe /hall have
itdgmnent wiithout nmercy who hath JhJewed no
mercy.
*

# SERMON XI. On the CHARACTER of JOSEPH. GENESIS, xlv. 5. 8. Now therefore be not grieved nor angry with yourselves that ye sold me hither; for God did send me before you to preserve life. — So now it ...

[ 339 ]

SERMON XI.
On the CHARACTER of JOSEPH.

GENESIS, xlv. 5. 8.

Nrow therefore be not grieved nor anzgry with
you;felves that ye fold me hither; for God
did fend me before you to preserve life.---
So now it was not you thatfent me hither,
but God.
N this generous manner, Joseph frames s E R M.

XI.

an apology for the unnatural behaviour v

of his brethren. He extenuates the atrocity
of their crime, by representing the happy
effecs which it had produced. He looks
beyond all second causes; and recognizes,
in the wonderful events of his life, the hand
of the Almighty. - No human character,

X 3 exhibited

S EXR M. exhibited in the records of Scripture, is more

XI.
----i remarkable or inftrucdive than that of this

patriarch. He is one whom we behold
tried in all the viciflitudes of fortune ; from
the condition of a slave, rising to be ruler of
the land of Egypt; and in every station
acquiring, by his virtue and wifdeom, favour
with God and man. When overseer of
Potiphar's house, his fidelity was proved by
firong temptations, which he honourably
refifled. When thrown into prison by the
artifice of a false woman, his integrity and
prudence soon rendered him conspicuous,
even in that dark mansion. WVhen called
into the prcfence of Pharoah, the wife and
extensive plan which he formed for saving
the kingdom from the miseries of impend-
ing famine, justly railed him to a high fta-
tion, wherein his abilities were eminently
displayed in the public service. But in his
whole history there is no circumstance so
striking and interesting, as his behaviour to
his brethren who had bold him into slavery.
The moment in which he made himself
known to them, that moment at which we

are

are now to contemplate him, was the most s E R M.

XI.

critical one of his life, and the most decisive
of his charadcer. It is such as rarely occurs
in the course of human events; and is cal-
culated to draw the higherf attention of all
who are endowed with any degree of fen-
fibility of heart. Let us confider the senti-
ment which Joseph utters in the text under
two views, each of which is very inftruLtive
to all Christians. I. As a discovery of his
cordial forgiveness of his brethen; and,
II. As an instance of his dutiful attention to
the Providence of God.

I. TEE most cordial forgiveness is here

displayed. I fiall not recapitulate all the
preceding history refpeaing Joseph and his
brethren ; as it is well known by every one
who has the leait acquaintance with the
sacred writings. From the whole tenour of
the narration it appears, that thotggh Jo-
feph, upon the arrival of his brethren in
Egypt, made himself strange to them, yet
from the beginning he intended to discover
himself; and studied so to conduct the dif-

X 4 covery

S ER M. covery as might render the surprise of joy

-'^ complete. For this end, by affected feve-

rity, he took measures for bringing down
into Egypt all his father's children. They
were now arrived there; and Benjamin
among the reft, who was his younger bro-
ther by the famie mother, and was particu-
larly beloved by Joseph. Him he threat-
ened to detain; and seemed willing to al-
low the reft to depart. This incident re--
newed their distress. They all knew their
father's extreme anxiety about the safety of
Benjamin, and with what difficulty he had
yielded to his undertaking this journey.
Should he be prevented from returning,
they dreaded that grief would overpower
the old man's spirits, and prove fatal to his
life. Judah, therefore, who had particu-
larly urged the neceflity of Benjamin's ac-
companying his brothers, and had solemnly
pledged himself to their father for his safe
return, craved, upon this occasion, an au-
dience of the governour; and gave him a
full account of the circumstances of Jacob's
family

Nothing

Nothing can be more interesting and pa- S E R M.

XI.

thetic than this discourse of Judah, as it is
recorded in the preceding chapter. Little
knowing to whomn he spoke, he paints, in
all the colours of simple and natural elo-
quence, the difireffed situation of the aged
patriarch, hafcening to the close of life;
long afflicted for the loss of a favourite son,
whom he supposed to have been torn in
pieces by a beast of prey; labouring now
under anxious concern about his youngest
son, the child of his old age, who alone
was left alive of his mother, and whom
nothing but the calamities of revere famine
could have moved a tender father to fend
from home, and expose to the dangers of a
foreign land. If we bring him not back
with Us/, we Jfall bring down the grey hairs
ofth/yfervant, ourfather, withforrow, to the
grave. I pray thee therefore let thyfervant
abide iylead of the young man, a bondman to
our lord. For how Jhlall Igo up to ,myfa-
ther, and Benjamzin not'with me ? left Ifee
the evil that Jhall come on my father.

Upon

S F. R MI. Upon this relation, Joseph could no

XI.
;__. longer restrain himself. The tender ideas

of his father and his father's house, of his
ancient home, his country and his kindred,
of the distress of his family, and his own
exaltation, all rushed too strongly upon his
mind to bear any further concealment. lIe
cried, caizfe every man to go out fromn me;
and he wept aloud. The tears which he
hed were not the tears of grief. They
were the burst of affetion. They were the
effusions of a heart overflowing with all the
tender sensibilities of nature. Formerly he
had been moved in the fame manner, when
he first saw his brethren before him. His
bowels yearned upon them; he fozughtfor a
place where to weep. He went into his
chamber; and then waJhed his face and re-
turned to them. At that period his gene-
rous plans were not completed. But now,
when there was no farther occasion for con-
firaining himself, he gave free vent to the
strong emotions of his heart. The first
mnirnifcer to the king of Egypt was not

assamed

alhamed to show, that he felt as a man, and s E R M.
a brother. lie wept aloud, and the Egyp- _
ians, and the ho.se of Pharoah heard him.

The flrif words which his swelling heart

allowed him to pronounce, are the mors
fuitablc to such an affecaing Situation which
were ever uttereed; -I am Joseph; dtoth my
father yet live ?-What could he, what
ought he, in that impassioned moment, to
have said more ? This is the voice of na-
ture herself, speaking her own language;
and it penetrates the heart: No pomp of
exprefiion; no parade of kindness; but
firong affed'tion hastening to utter what it
strongly felt. ?sis brethren could not an-
JiWer him ; for thety were troubled at his pre-
Jence. Their silence is as expressive of those
emotions of repentance and shame, which,
on this amazing discovery, filled their
breasts, and flopped their utterance, as the
few words which Joseph speaks are expref-
five of the generous agitations which ftrug-
gled for vent within him. No painter could
seize a more tiriking moment for displaying
the charaaeritical features of the human

heart,

SER M. heart, than what is here presented. Never

._. . was there a fitiation of more tender and

virtuous joy, on the one hand; nor, on
the other, of more overwhelming confusion
and conicious guilt. In the simple narra-
tion of the sacred hiflorian, it is set before
us with greater energy and higher elffed,
than if it had been wrought up with all the
c6louring of the most admired modern elo-
quence,

When Joseph -had a little recovered him-

self from the firit transports of emotion, he
proceeds to exp)lain his situation to his
brethren, and to show them the beneficent
purposes for which he conceived himself to
be raited by Providence into power. The
apology which he makes in the text for their
former cruelty is uncommon and remark-
able. NAow tJerefore be not grieved nor an-
gry -with yorf/elves that ye old ime hither;
for God did fend mfe beforeyozu to prefersveyou
a pojierity in the earth, and to save your lives
by a great deliverance. So now it was not
you t hat fnt me hither, but God; and he
hath made nme afather to Pharoah, and lord

(S

of all his hoi e, and ruler throiughoztt allthe S Ex R M.
land of Egypt. This apology was, in truth, -_----
no fatisfatory excuse for their crime. For
though the over-ruling Providence of Hca-
ven had so directed the course of events, as
to render their bad'intentions subservient to
a happy issue; yet the badness of the inten-
tion originated entirely from themselves.
The envy and jealousy which they enter-
tained against their brother, led them to
the commission of an atrocious deed. The
deed was voluntary; the crime was all their
own; and the interposition of Providence,
in making unforeseen consequences foilow
from that crime, did not, could not excul-
pate them from guilt. It were an impious
conclusion, that because God extracts good
from our evil, we are not answerable for
the evil which we perpetrate. God cannot
be tempted with evil, neither tenpteth he aziy
man *. But the sentiment in the text is to
be confidered, as a colour which the gene-
rous humanity of Joseph prompted him to
throw on the conduct of his brethren. He

v James, i. X3.

saw

S E R M. saw the confusion with which they were

XI.
Cc-i^ overwhelmed in his presence. I-e diverts

their attention from the remembrance of a
crime which was now wringing their hearts
with anguish, by representing to them tlie
happy effects which that crime had pro-
duced. He sets them free fiom all uneafi-
ness on his account. He calls upon them
to rejoice in his prosperity; and, instead of
dwelling on a painful recolletion of their
own conduct, to join with him in ac-
knowledging and adoring the hand of the
Almighty.

How different is this amiable spirit which

Jofcph discovers, from that harsh and often-
tatious superiority which too often acconi-
panies the pretended forgiveness of injuries
among those who call themselves Chriflians!
They are ready to fay, that, for their part,
they pardon the wrongs which have been
done them ; they wish that the persons who
have committed them may be able to for-
give themselves; they leave them to God
and to their own conscience. By the severe
suggestions which they throw out, they

- E~
·~I ~discover

discover the inward bitterness of their fli- s E R M.

XI.

rit; and artfully gratify resentment, at the ._-
time when they profess to exercise forgivc-
nelf. Whereas the great and good man,
whose character we now confider, efftces
all memory of the crimes which he par-
dons' I-e seeks to alleviate the remorse
of his brethren by an extenuation of their
guilt; and, while he is preparing to make
their circumstances comfortable, fludies at
the fame time to render their minds easy
and tranquil.

This was not merely a transient emotion

with Joseph, owing to the first burst of as-
feaion on discovering himself to his bre-
thren. We have a clear proof, from a re-
markable tranfaaion which passed many
years after this period, of his disposition
continuing the fame to the end of life. It
is recorded in the last chapter of this book,
that when Jacob died, his sons began to be
seized with fear concerning the treatment
which they might receive from their bro-
ther. The guilty are always suspicious.
Conscious of their own baseness, they are

incapable

S Ex M- incapable of conceiving the magnanimity of

XI.
i-- _others. They saw the bond, which held

the family together, now broken by their
father's death. They dreaded that the rc-
fentment of Joseph against them had hii-
therto been only suppressed, or concealed.
T'hey fzd among' them7flve.r, peradventuzre be
twill now hate us, andrequite all theevil zohich
we did unto him. Under this apprehension,
they first sent a humble meflage to depre-
cate his displeasure by the memory of their
common father; and then appearing in his
presence, they fell down before his facc,
profefling themselves to be his servants, and
praying him to forgive the trespass which
they had committed against him. But no
such hidden resentment as they dreaded had
ever lurked in the foul of Joseph. On tlle
contrary, when he beheld his brethren in
this affecting situation, bereaved of their
ancient protedcor, and reduced, as they
imagined, to the necessity of holding up
their hands to him for mercy, he was over-
powered by a tide of tender emotions. Jfo-
Jeph zwept, while his brethrenifpake unto him.

These

These affeaionate tears alone were fufflcient s E R M.

xr.

to have aflured them of his forgiveness. But L
hastening also by words to dispel their alarms,
he presently added, Fear not; for thorugh ye
thoztght evil againl me, God meant it unto
good. Now therefore fear ye not; I will
noui/Fh you and your little ones. Aznd he conz-
forted them and Jfake kindly znto them *.

Such was the last incident that is record-

ed in the life of this eminent personage,
than whom you will find few more diftin-
guifhed by an assemblage of illustrious vir-
tues; in the lowest adversity, patient and
faithful; in the highest prosperity, benefi-
cent and generous; dutiful and affedionate,
as a son; kind and forgiving, as a brother;
accomplished, as a flatefinan; wife and pro-
vident, as a ruler of the land. In such a
characer you behold human nature possess-
ing its highest honours. The sentiments
which it inspires tend to ennoble our minds;
and to prevent their imbibing the spirit of
those hard, interested, and felf-feeking men
with whom the world abounds.

* Genes. 1. 21,
VOL. II. Y THE

SE R M. THE firiking example of forgiveness,

XI. v.-- ' which the text displays, ought frequently

to occur to our thoughts, amidst the various
occasions of provocation and offence which
arise in our intercourse with the world. If
one so worthy and amiable, in the days too
of his youth and innocence, suffered such
cruel treatment from his brothers, ought
we to be surprised if, even from our nearest
relations, we meet with injustice or ingra-
titude? Wrongs and injuries are, more or
less, the portion of all. Like Death, they
are an evil unavoidable. No station is so
high, no power so great, no characer so
unblemished, as to exempt us from them.
In the world, ungrateful men, false friends,
and violent enemies abound. Every wife
man ought to prepare himself for what he
is to encounter in passing through this
thorny region. He is not to expeCt that
he can gather grapes from thiJtles; nor to
lose the government of his mind, because,
in the midst of evil men, he is not allowed
to remain, like a secret and inviolable per-
son, untouched and uninjured.

7 As

As this view of our situation ought to s E R M

blunt the edge of passion and impatience,
so the alleviating circumfiances which rea-
son will suggest, ought to mollify resent-
ment. Think of the various confiructions
which the acions of men will bear. Con-
fider how different the motives of him who
hath given us offence, may have been from.
those which, in the heat of passion, we ascribe
to him; how apt all men are to be reduced
by mistaken views of interest, and how
little ground we have to complain, if, upon
a supposed interfering of interests, we susser
by others preferring their own to ours,
Remember that no opinions which you form
under the power of resentment can be de-
pended upon as just; and that every one
loads the intentions of his enemy with ima-
ginary degrees of malice.

But admitting the injury you have re-

ceived to be ever so atrocious in its nature,
and aggravated in its circumstances ; sup-
posing it to be even parallel to that which
Joseph suffered; look up, like him, to that
divine government under which we are all

Y 2 placed.

SERM. placed. If forgiveness be a duty which

xI.

we know God to have required under the
most awful fandions, dare we draw upon
ourselves the merited vengeance of that Su-
perior to whose clemency we are obliged
daily to fly? When, with hard and unre-
lenting dispositions towards our brethren,
we fend up to Heaven prayers for mercy to
ourselves, those prayers return like impre-
cations upon our heads; and our very devo-
tions real our condemnation.

The most plain and natural sentiments of

equity concur with divine authority to en-
force the duty which I now recommend.
Let him who has never in his life done
wrong, be allowed the privilege of re-
maining inexorable. But let such as are
conscious of frailties and crimes, confider
-forgiveness as a debt which they owe to
others. Common failings are the strongest
lesson of mutual forbearance. Were this
virtue unknown among men, order and
comfort, peace and repose, would be ftran-
gers to human life. Injuries retaliated ac-
cording to the exorbitant measure which

8 passion

passion prescribes, would justify resentment SE R M.
in return. The injured person would be- le
come the injurer; and thus wrongs, reta-
liations, and fresh injuries, would circulate
in endless succession, till the world was
rendered a field of blood. Of all the pas-
sions which invade the human breast, re-
venge is the most direful. When allowed
to reign with full dominion, it is more than
sufficient to poison the few pleasures which
remain to man in his present slate. How
much soever a person may susser from in-
justice, he is always in hazard of suffering
more from the prosecution of revenge.
The violence of an enemy cannot inflict
what is equal to the torment he creates to
himself, by means of the fierce and de-
fperate passions which he allows to rage in
his foul.

Those evil spirits who inhabit the regions

of misery, are represented as delighting in
revenge and cruelty. But all that is great
and good in the universe, is on the fide of
plemency and mercy. The almighty Ruler
of the world, though for ages offended by

Y 3 the

S E RM. the unrighteousness, and insulted by the

XI. xl. impiety of men, is long-fJfferiog and Jlow

to anger. His Son, when he appeared in
our nature, exhibited, both in his life and
his death, the most illustrious example of
forgiveness which the world ever beheld.
If you look into the history of mankind,
you will find that, in every age, those who
have been refpeded as worthy, or admired
as great, have been distinguished for this
virtue. Revenge dwells in little minds.
A noble and magnanimous spirit is always
superior to it. It fiuffers not from the inju-
ries of men those fcvere shocks which others
feel. Colleded within itself, it flands un-
moved by their impotent aflaults; and with
generous pity, rather than with anger, looks
down on their unworthy conduct. It has
been truly said, that the greatest man on.
earth can no sooner commit an injury, than
a good man can make himself greater, by
forgiving it. Joseph, at the moment when
we now contemplate him, had entirely un-
der his power all those unnatural brethren
who had been guilty towards him of the

mofi

most cruel outrage which men could perpe- s E R M.

XL;

trate. He could have retained them for ever .-.
in that Egyptian bondage to which they had
once consigned him; and have gratified re-
venge by every accumulation of disgrace
which despotic power enabled him to inflict.
I-Iad he acded this part, he might for a while
have been soothed by the pleasures of his
high station; but remorse, in the end,
would have fRung his foul. Cruelty would
have rendered him unhappy within himself,
as well as odious to others; and his name
would have perished among the crowd of
those contemptible ftatcfmen, whose actions
ltain the annals of history. Whereas now,
his character flands among the forenoft in
the ranks of spotless fame. His memory is
blessed to all generations. His example
continues to edify the world; and he him-
self thines in the celestial regions as the
brightness of theirnamaen7zt, and as theJiars,
for ever and ever. Let us now,

II. CONSIDER the sentiment contained
in the text not only as a discovery of cor-

Y 4 dial

S EX M. dial forgiveness, but as an expreflion of

XI.
<»v_, devout attention to the conduct of Provi-

dence. So now it vwas not yon lhat sint me
hither, but God. Remark how beautifully
piety and humanity are, in this instance,
connedced together. As we arc told of
Cornelius, the good Centurion, that his
rayers and his alns, llis devotion and his
good works, came up together in memorial
before God; io here we perceive fiaternal
affection and religious reverence, mingling
in one emotion within the patriarch's hcart.
In a person of low and vulgar mind, the
sensations on filch an occasion would have
been extremely difbrcent. Looking back
on the past events of his life, lie would
have afcriled all the adversity which he had
fuifered to the perverse treatment of his
brothers; and all the prosperity which lie
afterwards attained, to his own good condue-
and wifdomi; and by consequence would
lhave remained imbittered against the inftru-
ments of the one, and filled with pride and
felf-fufliciency on account of the other.
But the elevated and noble mind of Jofoph

rejected

rejected such unworthy sentiments. Con- SE RM.
templating the hand of God in all that had v--.J
befallen him, he effaced the rctmembrance
of those evil deeds which had produced his
adversity; and for his prosperity he affctcd
no praise to himself, but ascribed it en-
tirely to the will of I-Ieaven. Let us take
notice, that this is not the rcfledion of a
private, retired man, whoie lituation might
be supposed to favour such devout medita-
tions. It is the reflecion of one, who was
leading a busy and a reducing life, in the
midst of a court; the favourite of the
greatest monarch who was then known in
the world. Yet him you behold, amidst
the fubmifion and adulation which was
paid to him, preserving the moderation and
simplicity of a virtuous mind; and, amidst
the idolatry and false philosophy of the
Egyptians, maintaining the principles of
true religion, and giving glory to the God
of Israel.

From this union of piety with humanity,

which is so conspicuous in the sentiments of
Joseph, there arises one very important in-

ftrution;

E R M. firudion; That a devout regard to the hand
XL.
tayo of God in the various events of life, tends

to promote good dilpofitions and affecaions
towards men. It will be found by those
who attend to the workings of human na-
ture, that a great proportion of those ma-
lignant passions which break out in the in-
tercourfe of men, arises from confining their
attention wholly to second causes, and over-
looking the first cause of all. Hence, they
are insolent in prosperity, because they dif-
cern nothing higher than their own abili-
ties; and in adversity they are peevish and
unforgiving, because they have no object
on which to fix their view, but the condu&
of men who have ated as their enemies,
They behold no plan of wisdom or good-
ness carried on throughout nature, which
can allay the discomposure of their mind.
As soon as their temper is ruffled, the world
appears to them to be a continued scene of
difapters and injuries, of confused events
and of unreasonable men. Whereas, to the
pious man, the contemplation of the uni-
verse exhibits a very different fpaCtacle. In

the

the midst of seeming confusion he traces a S E R M.

XI.

principle of order; and by attention to that
order, his mind is harmonized and calmed.
He beholds a wife and righteous Governour
presiding over all the commotions which
are raised by the tumult of coifliting pas-
sions and interests; guiding, with imper-
ceptible influence, the hand of the violent to
beneficent purposes; accomplishing unex-,
peeed ends by the most improbable means;
obliging the wrath of man to prafie himz;
sometimes humbling the mighty, sometimes
exalting the low; often snarin8g the wicked
in the devices which their hands have wrozght.
Refpedful acknowledgment of this divine
government, controuls the disorders of infe-
riour passions. Reverence for the decrees
of Heaven inspires patience and modera-
tion. Trust in that perfec wisdom and
goodness which directs all for the best, di-
minifhes the shock which worldly disasters
occasion. The irritation of passion and re-
fentment will always bear proportion to the
agitation which we susser from the changes
of fortune. One who conneas himficl

-with

s E R M. with nothing but second causes, partakes of

XI.
vL__V- tthe violence and irregularity of all the in-

feriour movements belonging to this great
machine. He who refers all to God, dwells,
if ve may speak so, in that higher sphere
where motion begins; he is subjeQ to fewer
shocks and concussions, and is only carried
along by the motion of the universe.

-How can mildness or forgiveness gain

place in the temper of that man, who, on
occasion of every calamity which he suffers
from the ill usage of others, has no fantuary
within his own breast to which he can make
retreat from their vexations; who is pof-
sessed of no principle which is of sufficient
power to bear down the rising tide ofpeevifh
and angry paflions? The violence of an
enemy or the ingratitude of a friend, the
injustice of one man, and the treachery of
another, perpetually dwell and rankle in
his thoughts. The part which they have
aced in bringing on his distress, is frequently
more grating to him than the distress itself.
Whereas he who in every event looks up to
God, has always in his view a great and ele-

vating

vating objec which inspires him with mag- s E R M;

XIL

nanimity. His mind lies open to every ,
relieving thought, and is inclined to every
suggestion of generosity. Fe is dipofed to
fay with Joseph, it ewas not youze th7at fnt ime
hither, but God; with David, it is the Lord;
let him do what Jfieeth good in his eyes; and
with a greater Personage then either of there,
the czp which mny Father hath given me to
drink, J/Jall I not drink it? Hence arises
Superiority to many of the ordinary provo-
cations of the world. For he looks upon
the whole of his present life as part of a
great plan which is carried on under the
diretion of Heaven. In this plan, he vievws
men as ating their several parts, and con-
tributing to his good or evil. But their
parts he confiders as subordinate ones;
which, though they may justly merit his
affeion, and may occasionally call forth
his resentment, yet afford no proper found-
ation to violent or malignant paflion. He
looks upon bad men as only the rod with
which the Almighty chastens; like the
pestilence, the earthquake, or the storm.

In

S E R M. In the midat of their injustice and violence

XI. he can pity their blindness; and imitate

our blessed Lord in praying, Father, forgive
them; for they know net what they doO

# SERMON XII. On the CHARACTER of HAZAEL. 2 KINGS, viii. 12, 13. And Hazael said, Why weepeth my Lord? And he answered, Because I know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of Israel. Their ...

[ 335 q

SE RMO 0 N XIT.
On the CHARACTER of HAZAEL.

2 KINGS, Viii. 12, 13.
Aitd Hiazaelfaid, PWhy weepeth my Lord?

And he answered, Becatne 1 know the evil
that thou ~wilt do unto the children of Israel.
TheirJIrong holds wzilt thouJet on fire, and
their young men wilt thou Jlay with the
sword, and wilt daj7h their children, and
ri p their women with child. And
HaSzaelfaid, But zehat, is thy Jervant a
dog, that he fiJould do this great thing ?

.And EliJ/a aiefwered, The Lord hath

jhjewed mze that thou Jfalt be king over
Syria.
IN the days of Joram king of Israel flou- s E R M;

rifhed the prophet Elisha. His character XII.

was so eminent, and his fame so widely
spread, that Benhadad the king of Syria,

though

S E R M. though an idolater, sent to consult him con-

X[I.

_
- cerning the issue of a distemper which

threatened his life. The messenger em-
ployed on this occasion was Hazael, who
appears to have been one of the princes, or
chief men of the Syrian court. Charged
with rich gifts from the king, he presents
himself before the prophet; and accosts him
in terms of the highest refped. During the
conference which they held together, Elisha
fixed his eye ftedfaftly on the countenance
of Hazael; and discerning, by a prophetic
spirit, his future tyranny and cruelty, he
could not contain himself from bursting into
a flood of tears. When Hazael, in surprise,
inquired into the cause of this sudden emo-
tion, the prophet plainly informs him of the
crimes and barbarities which he foresaw
that hereafter he should commit. The foul
of Hazael abhorred, at this time, the thoughts
of cruelty. Uncorrupted, as yet, by ambi-
tion or greatness, his indignation arose at
being thought capable of such savage acions
as the. prophet had mentioned; and, with
much warmth, he replies, But what, is

thy

,hy servant a dog, that he7oznld do this great S E R M.
thing ? Eliiha makes no return but to point
out a remarkable change which was to take
place in his condition; T'he Lord hath
Jhewed me that thoziuhalt be king ove'r Syria.
In course of time, all that had been pre-
diEted came to pass. Hazael ascended the
throne; and ambition took poffefion of his
heart. ie Jfnote the children of Israel in all
their coasts. He op5,reJed them duriing all the
days of King Yehoahaz '-; and, from what
is left on record of his actions, plainly ap-
pears to have proved what the prophet fore-
saw him to be, a man of violence, cruelty,
and blood.

In this paflage of history, an object is

presented which deserves our serious atten-
tion. We behold a man who, in one tPate
of life, could not look upon certain crimes
without surprise and horrour; who knew
so little ofhimfelf, as to believe it impoflible
for him ever to be concerned in commit-
ting them; that fame man, by a change of
condition, transformed in all his sentiments,

* 2 Kings, xiii. z?.
VOL. II. Z and

SE R M. and as he role in greatness rising also in
v-^V guilt; till at last he completed that whole

character of iniquity which he once de-
tested. Hence the following observations
naturally arise. I. That to a mind not en-
tirely corrupted, sentiments of abhorrence at
guilt are natural. II. That, notwithftand-
ing those sentiments, the mind may be
brought under the dominion of the vices
which it had most abhorred. III. That
this unhappy revolution is frequently owing
to a change of men's external circumfiances
and condition in the world. These obfer-
vations are to make the subjed of the pre-
sent discourse; and will lead us to such
a view of human nature, as, it is hoped,
may be of general use.

I. SENTIMENTS of abhorrence at guilt

are natural to the human mind. Hazael's
reply to the prophet {hews how firongly he
felt them. Is thy servant a dog, that he
fJozuld do this great thinzg? Is he, or can he
ever be, so base and wretched as to perpe-
trate crimes, which would render him un-

worthy

worthy of bearing the name of a man? S ERM.
This is the voice of human nature, while y
it is not as yet hardened in iniquity. Some
vices are indeed more odious to the mind
than others. Providence has wifely pointed
the sharpest edge of this natural aversion
against the crimes which are of most perni-
cious and deftruaive nature; such as trea-
chery, oppression, and cruelty. But, in ge-
neral, the diftinaion between moral good
and evil is so frongly marked, as to flamp
almost every vice with the characer of
turpitude. Present to any man, even the
most ignorant and untutored, an obvious
instance of injustice, falsehood, or im-
piety; let him view it in a cool moment,
when no paflion blinds, and no interest
warps him; and you will find that his
mind immediately revolts against it, as
shameful and base, nay, as deserving pu-
nifhment. Hence, in reasoning on the
characters of others, however men may
mistake as to facls, yet they generally praise
and blame according to the principles of
found morality.

Z 2 W-ith

S E R M. With refped to their own character, a

XII.
- notorious partiality too generally misleads

theirjudgment. But it is remarkable, that
no finner ever avows directly to himself,
that he has been guilty of gross and down-
right iniquity. Even when engaged by his
passions in the commission of the greatest
crimes, he always palliates them to his own
mind by some extenuation or apology, some
pretended necessity, or some borrowed co-
lour of innocence. Such power the unde-
niable dignity of virtue, and the acknow-
ledged turpitude of vice, possess over every
human heart. These sentiments are the re-
maining impreiflons of that law, which was
originally written on the mind of man.
They are gleams of that light which once
ihone clear and ftrongwithin us; and which,
though it be now greatly obscured, yet con-
tinues to ihoot a feeble ray athwart the
darkness of human nature.- But what-
ever sentiments of abhorrence at vice we
may at any time entertain, we have no
reason to build upon these a presumptuous
confidence of our continuance in virtue.

For

For the next inifruction which the text SE RM.

XII.
suggests, is, XII,

II. THAT such is man's ignorance of his

own characer, such the frailty of his na-
ture, that he may one day become infamous
for those very crimes which at present
he holds in detestation. This observation
is too well verified by the history of Hazael;
and a thousand other infiances might be
brought to confirm it. Though there is
nothing which every person ought to know
so thoroughly as his own heart, yet from
the conduct of men it appears, that there is
nothing with which they are less acquainted.
Always more prone to flatter themselves,
than desirous to discover the truth, they
trust to their being pofleffed of every virtue
which has not been put to the trial; and
reckon themselves secure against every vice
to which they have not hitherto been
tempted. As long as their duty hangs in
speculation, it appears so plain, and so eli-
gible, that they cannot doubt of performing
it. The suspicion never enters their mind,

Z 3 that

s E R M. that in the hour of speculation, and in the

AI,_- hour of pradcice, their sentiments may differ

widely. Their present disposition they easily
persuade themselves will ever continue the
fame; and yet that disposition is changing
with circumstances every moment.

The man who glows with the warm feel-

ings of devotion, imagines it impossible for
him to lose that fenfd of the divine good-
ners which at present melts his heart. He
whom his friend has lately saved from ruin,
is confident that, if some trying emergency
fihall put his gratitude to proof, he will ra-
ther die than abandon his benefactor. He
who lives happy and contented in frugal
industry, wonders how any man can give
himself up to dissolute pleasure. Were any
of those persons informed by a superior
spirit, that the time was shortly to come
when the one ihould prove an example of
scandalous impiety, the other of treachery
to his friend, and the third of all that ex-
travagant luxury which disgraces a growing
fortune; each of them would teftfy as much
surprise and abhorrence as Hazael did, upon

hearing

hearing the predicions of the prophet. Sin- s E R M-
cere they might very possibly be in their _
expressions of indignation; for hypocrisy
is not always to be charged on men whose
conduct is inconsistent. Hazael was in
earnest, when he resented with such ardour
the imputation of cruelty. The Apostle
Peter was sincere when he made the zealous
profession, that though he should go to
prison and to death with his master, he
would never deny him. They were fin-
cere; that is, they spoke from the fulness
of their hearts and from the warmth of the
present moment; but they did not know
themselves, as the events which followed
plainly showed. So false to its principles,
too frequently, is the heart of man; so weak
is the foundation of human virtue; so much
reason there is for what the gospel perpe-
tually inculcates concerning the necessity of
distrusting ourselves, and depending on di-
vine aid. Mortifying, I confers, is this
view of human nature; yet proper to be
attended to by all, in order to escape the
moIt fatal dangers. For, merely through un-

Z 4 guarded

S E R M. guarded conduct, and from the want of this

... prudent suspicion of their own weakness,

how many, after the most promising begin-
nings, have gradually apoflatized from every
principle of virtue ; until, at last, it has be-
comeas difficult for one to believe, that they
ever had any love of goodness, as it would
have been once to have persuaded them-
selves that they were to advance to such a
height in wickednes ?

IN such cafes as I have described, what

has become, it may be enquired, of those
sentiments of abhorrence at guilt which
were once felt so strongly ? Are they to-
tally erased? or, if in any degree they re-
main, how do such persons contrive to
satisfy themselves in acting a part which
their minds condemn ?-Here, there is a
mystery of iniquity which requires to be
unfolded. Latent and secret is the pro-
grefs of corruption within the foul; and
the more latent, the more dangerous is its
growth. No man becomes of a sudden
completely wicked. Guilt rlever Ihows its

whole

whole deformity at once; but by gradual SE R M.

XII.

acquaintance reconciles us to its appearance,
and imperceptibly diffuses its poison through
all the powers of the mind. Every man
has some darling passion, which generally
affords the first introduction to vice. The
irregular gratifications into which it occa-
fionally seduces him, appear under the form
of venial weaknesses; and are indulged in
the beginning, with scrupulousness and re-
serve. But, by longer practice, there re-
ftraints weaken, and the power of habit
grows. One vice brings in another to its
aid. By a fort of natural affinity they con-
nea and entwine themselves together; till
their roots come to be spread wide and deep
over all the foul. When guilt rites to be
glaring, conscience endeavours to remon-
firate. But conscience is a calm principle.
Passion is loud and impetuous; and creates
a tumult which drowns the voice of reason.
It joins, besides, artifice to violence; and
reduces at the fame time that it impels.
For it employs the understanding to impose
up'on the conscience, It devises reasons

and

s AFR M. and argunments to justify the corruptions of
a__ the heart. The common practice of the

world is appealed to. Nice ditfindions are
made. Men are found to be circumstanced
in so peculiar a manner, as to render cer-
tain acions excusable, if not blameless,
which, in another situation, it is confessed,
would have been criminal. By such a pro-
cess as this, there is reason to believe, that
a great part of mankind advance from ftep
to ftep in fin, partly hurried by paflion,
and partly blinded by felf-deceit, without
any jus sense of the degree of guilt which
they contrat. By inveterate habits, their
judgment is, at length, perverted, and their
moral feelings are deadened. They fee now
with other eyes; and can look without pain
on evil actions which they formerly ab-
horred.

It is proper, however, to observe, that

though our native sentiments of abhorrence
at guilt may be so borne down, or so eluded,
as to lose their influence on conduct, yet
those sentiments belonging originally to our
frame, and being never totally eradicated

9 from

fiom the foul, will still retain so much au- E R M.
thority, as if not to reform, at least, on some
occasions, to chasten the finner. It is only
during a course of prosperity, that vice is
able to carry on its delusions without dif-
turbancc. But, amidit the dark and thought-
ful situations of life, conscience regains its
rights; and pours the whole bitterness of
remorse on his heart, who has apostatized
from his original principles. We may well
believe that, before the end of his days,
Hazael's first imprefions would be made
to return. In the hour of adversity, the
remembrance of his conference with the
venerable Prophet would fting his heart.
Comparing the sentiments which, in those
his better days, he felt, with the atrocious
cruelties which he had afterwards commit-
ted, all the honours of royalty would be
unable to save him from the inward sense
of baseness and infamy.

FROM this view which has been exhi-

bited of the progress of corruption, and of
the danger to which we are exposed, of

falling

S E R M. falling from principles which once appeared

XII.
--v- firmly established, let us receive useful ad-

monition for our own conduct. Let not
him that girdeth on his harness, boaj? like him
that putteth it f. Let no man place a rash
and dangerous confidence in his virtue.
But let him that thinketh he Jandcth, take
heed les he fall. Never adventure on too
near an approach to what is evil. Fami-
liarize not yourselves with it, in the flight-
eft instances, without fear. Liften with
reverence to every reprehension of con-
science; and preserve the moif quick and
accurate sensibility to right and wrong. If
ever your moral impressions begin to de-
cay, and your natural abhorrence of guilt
to leflen, you have ground to dread that
the ruin of virtue is fast approaching.
While you employ all the circumfpedion
and vigilance which reason can suggest, let
your prayers, at the fame time, continually
ascend to God for support and aid. Re-
member that from him decezndeth every good
and perfet gift; and that to him only it
belongs to keep ,ou frnzm falling, and topre-

jent

ient you faultlefl before the pref'iece of his s ER M
glory with exceeding joy. I proceed now to '_-
the

IId. OBSERVATION from the text, That

the power which corruption acquires to
pervert the original principles of man, is
frequently owing to a change of their cir-
cumfiances and condition in the world.
How different was Hazael, the messenger
of Benhadad, from Hazael the king; he,
who flarted at the mention of cruelty, from
him who waded in blood! Of this fad
and surprising revolution, the Prophet em-
phatically afligns the cause, in there few
words; The Lord hath Jl3ewed me that thou
Jhalt be king over Syria. That crown, that
fatal crown, which is to be set upon thy
head, fiall shed a malignant influence over
thy nature; and shall produce that change
in thy characer, which now thou canst
not believe.- Whose experience of the
world is so narrow, as not to furnish him
with instances similar to this, in much
humbler conditions of life? So great is

the

.' :;C, i
-7 *'S

S E R M. the influence of a new situation of external

XII.

_ fortune; such a different turn it gives to

our temper and affecions, to our views
and desires, that no man can foretel what
his characer would prove, should Provi-
dence either raise or depress his circum-
stances in a remarkable degree, or throw
him into some sphere of ation, widely dif-
ferent from that to which he has been ac-
customed in former life.

The feeds of various qualities, good and

bad, lie in all our hearts. But until pro-
per occasions ripen and bring them for-
ward, they lie there inadcive and dead.
They are covered up and concealed within
the recesses of our nature: or, if they spring
up at all, it is under such an appearance as
is frequently mistaken, even by ourselves.
Pride, for instance, in certain situations,
has no opportunity of displaying itself, but
as magnanimity, or sense of honour. Ava-
rice appears as necessary and laudable oeco-
nomy. What in one station of life would
discover itself to be cowardice and baseness
of mind, passes in another for prudent cir-

cumfpection.

cumfpeaion. What in the fulness of power S E R M.

XII.

would prove to be cruelty and oppression, I-.
is reputed, in a subordinate rank, no more
than the exercise of proper discipline. For
a while, the man is known neither by the
world nor by himself, to be what he truly
is. But bring him into a new situation of
life, which accords with his predominant
disposition; which strikes on certain latent
qualities of his foul, and awakens them into
ation; and as the leaves of a flower gra-
dually unfold to the fun, so fiall all his true
chara&er open full to view.

This may, in one light, be accounted

not so much an alteration of character pro-
duced by a change of circumstances, as a
discovery brought forth of the realcharacter,
which formerly lay concealed. Yet, at the
fame time, it is true that the man himself
undergoes a change. For opportunity being
given for certain dispositions, which had
been dormant, to exert themselves without
restraint, they of course gather strength.,
By means of the ascendency which they
gain, other parts of the temper are borne

down;

S E R M. down; and thus an alteration is made in

XII.
a_ the whole ftruidure and system of the foul.

He is a truly wife and good man who,
through divine assistance, remains fuperi-
our to this influence of fortune on his cha-
rater; who having once imbibed worthy
sentiments, and established proper principles
of action, continues constant to these,
whatever his circumstances be; maintains,
throughout all the changes of his life, one
uniform and supported tenour of conduc;
and what he abhorred as evil and wicked in
the beginning of his days, continues to ab-
hor to the end. But how rare is it to meet
with this honourable consistency among
men, while they are paling through the
different stations and periods of life ! When
they are setting out in the world, before
their minds have been greatly milled or
debated, they glow with generous emotions,
and look with contempt on what is fordid
and guilty. But advancing farther in life,
and inured by degrees to the crooked ways
of men; pressing through the crowd, and
the bustle of the world; obliged to contend

with

with this man's craft, and that man's scorn; S E R MO

XII.

accustomed, sometimes, to conceal their
sentiments, and often to stifle their feelings,
they became at last hardened in heart, and
familiar with corruption. Who would not
drop a tear over this fad, but frequent fall of
human probity and honour? WNho is not
humbled, when he beholds the refined fen-
timents and high principles on which we
are so ready to value ourselves, brought to
such a shameful issue; and man, with all
his boasted attainments of reason, di'cover-
ed so often to be the creature of his exter-
nal fortune, moulded and formed by the
incidents of his life?

TIiE: inftanee of Hazael's degeneracy

leads us to reflct, in particular, on the dan-
gers which arise from flations of power and
greatness; especially when the elevation of
men to these has been rapid and sudden.
Few have the strength of mind which is re-
quifite for bearing such a change with tem-
perance and felf-command. The refpecl
which is paid to the great, and the scope

VOL. II. A a which

S E R M. which their condition affords for the indul-

XII.
_,-.< gence ofpleafure, are perilous circumRtances

to virtue. When men live among their
equals, and are accustomed to encounter the
hardihips of life, they are of course remind-
ed of their mutual dependence on each
other, and of the dependence of all upon
God. But when they are highly exalted
above their fellows, they meet with few
objects to awaken serious reflection, but
with many to feed and inflame their pas-
iions. They are apt to separate their in-
terest from that of all around them; to
wrap themselves up in their vain grandeur;
and in the lap of indolence and selfish plea-
sure, to acquire a cold indifference to the
concerns even of those whom they call their
friends. The fancied independence into which
they are lifted up, is adverse to sentiments
of piety, as well as of humanity, in their
'heart. Taking the timbrel and the harp, and
rejoicing at theSound of the organ, they Jay
unto God, Depart from us, for we dejire not
the knowledge of thy ways. W4/hat is the
Altmighty that weJlaouldferve him ? or what

profit

profit should we have, if we pray unto s E R M.
him? _

But we are not to imagine, that elevated

Rations in the world furnish the only formi-
dable trials to which our virtue is exposed.
It will be found, that we are liable to no
fewer nor less dangerous temptations, from
the opposite extreme of poverty and depref-
sion. When men who have known better
days, are thrown down into abject situations
of fortune, their spirits are broken and their
temper foured. Envy rankles in their
breast at such as are more successful. The
providence of Heaven is accused in secret
murmurs; and the sense of misery is ready
to push them into atrocious crimes, in order
to better their Rate. Among the inferiour
clafies of mankind, craft and dishonesty are
too often found to prevail. Low and pe-
nurious circumstances depress the human
powers. They deprive men of the proper
means of knowledge and improvement; and
where ignorance is gross, it is always in
hazard of engendering profligacy.

A a z Hence

SE R M. Hence it has been, generally, the opi-

- nion of wife men in all ages, that there is

a certain middle condition of life, equally
remote from either of those extremes of
fortune, which, though it want not also its
own dangers, yet is, on the whole, the
frate most favourable both to virtue and to
happiness. For there, luxury and pride on
the one hand, have not opportunity to ener-
vate or intoxicate the mind, nor want and
dependence on the other, to fink and de-
base it; there, all the native affecions of
the foul have the freest and fairest exercise,
the equality of men is felt, friendships are
formed, and improvements of every fort are
pursued with most success; there men are,
prompted to industry without being over-
come by toil, and their powers called forth
into exertion, without being either super-
feded by too much abundance, or baffled
by insuperable difficulties; there, a mixture
of comforts and of wants, at once awakens
their gratitude to God, and reminds them
of their dependence on his aid; and there-
fore, in this state, men seem to enjoy life to

most

most advantage, and to be least exposed to S E M.
the snares of vice. Such a condition is re- -
corded in the book of Proverbs, to have
been the wish and choice of one who was
eminent for wifdoin. Remzove far from mne
vanity and lies. Give me neither poverty nor
riches. Feed me nwith food convenient for
me. Left I be full and deny Thee, and fay,
WVho is the Lord? or left I be poor andJAeal,
and take the name of my God in vain *,

FROM the whole view which we have

now taken of the subjet, we may, in the
first place, learn the reasons for which a
variety of conditions and ranks was efta-
blifhed by Providence among mankind.
This life is obviously intended to be a fiate
of probation and trial. No trial of charac-
ters is requisite with refpea to God, who
fees what is in every heart, and perfectly
knows what part each man would a&, in all
the possible situations of fortune. But on
account of men themselves, and of the

Prov. xxx. 8, 9.

A a 3 world

S E R M. world around them, it was neceflary that

XIIL XI. trial should take place, and a discrimination

of characters be made; in order that true
virtue might be separated from false appear-
ances of it, and the justice of I-eaven be
displayed in its final retributions; in order
that the failings of men might be so dif-
covered to themselves, as to afford them
proper inftruftion, and promote their amend-
ment; and in order that their characers
might be shown to the world in every
point of view, which could furnish either
examples for imitation, or admonitions of
danger. The accomplifliment of these im-
portant purposes required, that human life
should not always proceed in one tenour;
but that it ihould both be chequered with
many revolutions, and diversified by a va-
riety of employments and ranks; in pass-
ing through which, the touchstone might
be applied to the characters of men, and
their hidden virtues or vices explored.
Ilazael might have appeared in history with
a degree of reputation to which he was not
entitled, had he continued to ad in a sub-

ordinate

ordinate station. At bottom, he was false s E R M.
and unsound. When raised higher in life, k-
the corruption of his heart discovered itself;
and he is now held forth with deserved in-
famy, as a warning to succeeding ages.

IN the second place we learn, from what

has been said, the importance of attending,
with the utmost care, to the choice which we
make of our employment and condition in
life. It has been shown, that our external
situation frequently operates powerfully on
our moral character; and by consequence
that it is strictly connected, not only with
our temporal welfare, but with our ever-
lasting happiness or misery. He who might
have passed unblamed, and upright, through
certain walks of life, by unhappily choofing
a road where he meets with temptations too
strong for his virtue, precipitates himself
into ihame here, and into endless ruin here-
after. Yet how often is the determination
of this most important article left to the
chance of accidental conneEtions, or sub-

i.tted to the option of youthful fancy and

A a 4 humour?

SERM. humour? When it is made the subjec: 6f

_ A l, £erious deliberation, how seldom have they,

on whom the decision of it depends, any
further view than so to dispose of one who
is coming out into life, as that he may the
soonest become rich, or, as it is exprefied,
make his way to most advantage in the
world? Are there no other objects than
this to be attended to, in fixing the plan of
life? Are there no more sacred and im-
portant intterefs which deserve to be con-
fulted?-You would not willingly place
one whose welfare you studied, in a fitua-
tion for which you were convinced that
his abilities were unequal. These, there-
fore, you examine with care; and on them
you reft the ground of your decision. Be
persuaded that not abilities merely, but the
turn of the temper and the heart, require
to be examined with equal attention, in
forming the plan of future establishment,
Every one has some peculiar weakness,
Iome predominant paflion, which exp6fes
him to temptations of one kind more than
ps another, Early this may be discerned

*8$ S 'to

to shoot; and from its first risings its fu- S ER M.

XII.

ture growth may be inferred. Anticipate .
its progress, Confider how it is likely to
be affered by succeeding occurrences in
life. If you bring one whom you are rear-
ing up into a situation, where all the fur-
rounding circumstances shall cherish and
mature this fatal principle in his nature,
you become, in a great measure, answer-
able for the consequences that follow. In
vain you trust to his abilities and powers.
Vice and corruption, when they have taint-
ed the heart, are sufficient to overset the
greatest abilities. Nay, too frequently they
turn them against the possessor; and render
them the instruments of his more speedy
ruin.

IN the third place, we learn from the

history which has been illustrated, never to
judge of true happiness, merely from the
degree of men's advancement in the world.
Always betrayed by appearances, the mul-
titude are caught by nothing so much as by
the llow and pomp of life. They think

every

S E R M. every one blest, who israiled far above others

in rank. From their earliest years they are
taught to fix their views upon worldly ele-
vation, as the ultimate object of their aims;
and of all the sources of error in conduct,
this is the most general.-Hazael, on the
throne of Syria, would, doubtless, be more
envied, and esteemed by the multitude a
far happier man than, when yet a fubjeQt,
he was employed by Benhadad to carry his
menfage to Eliflia. Yet, 0 ITazael! how
much better had it been for thee never to
have known the name or honour of a king,
than to have purchased it at the expence of
To much guilt; forfeiting thy first and best
character; rushing into crimes which were
once thine abhorrence; and becoming a
traitor to the native sentiments and dilates
of thy heart! How fatal to thy repose
proved that coveted purple, which was
drenched by thee in so much innocent blood !
How much more cheerful were thy days,
and how much calmer thy nights, in the
former periods of thy life, than when,
placed on a throne, thy ears were invaded

by

by day with the cries of the miserable whom s E R M.
thou hadst ruined; and thy slumbers broken --
by night with the fiocking remembrance of
thy cruelties and crimes!---Never let us
judge by the outside of things; nor con-
clude a man to be happy, solely because lhe
is encompassed with wealth or grandeur.
Much misery often lurks where it is little,
fufpeaed by the world. The material in-
quiries refpelIing felicity are, not what a
man's external condition is, but with what
difpoiition of mind he bears it; whether he
be corrupted or improved by it; whether
he conduas himself so as to be acceptable
to God, and approved of by good men.
For there are the circumstances which make
the real and important diftinQions among
the conditions of men. The effects of these
are to last for ever, when all worldly dif-
tinEtions fliall be forgotten.

IN the fourth place, from all that has

been said we should learn never to be im-
moderately anxious about our external situ-
ation, but to submit our lot with cheerful-
ness to the disposal of Heaven. To make

the

SERM. the best and most prudent arrangements

X[I. X-_. which we can, refpeding our condition in

life, is matter of high duty. But let us re-
member that all the plans that we form
are precarious and uncertain. After the
utmost precautions taken by human wis-
dom, no man can foresee the hidden dan-
gers which may await him in that path of
life on which he has pitched. Providence
chufes for us much more wifely than we
can chufe for ourselves; and, from circum-r
stances that appeared at first most unpro-
mifing and adverse, often brings forth in
the issue both temporal and spiritual felicity.
Who knowcth what is goodfor a man in this
tife, all the days of his vain life, which he
fpendeth as a Jhadow? When we confider
the darkness of our present state, the im-
becility of human nature, and the doubtful
and ambiguous value of all that we call
prosperity, the exhortation of the Psalmist
comes home with great force on every re-
flecing mind, Commit thy way unto the
Lord :. Form thy measures with prudence;

' psalm xxxvii. 5.

but

but divest thyself of anxiety about the issue. s E R M.
Instead of seeking to order thine own lot, A_
acquiesce in the appointment of Heaven, and
follow without hesitation the call of Provi-
dence, and of duty. In whatever situation
of life God shall place thee, look up devoutly
to Him for grace and assistance; and study
to at the part assigned thee with a faithful
and upright heart. Thus fihalt thou have
peace within thyself, while thy course is
going on; and when it draws towards a
close, with fatisfa&ion thou shalt review thy
condua. For, after all the toils and labours
of life, and all the vain itruggles which twe
maintain for pre-eminence and diftinlion,
we 'hall find, at the conclusion of the whole
scene, that tofear God and -keep his commzand-
mentt is the whole of mane

# SERMON XIII. On the BENEFITS to be derived from the HOUSE of MOURNING. ECCLESIASTES, vii. 2, 3, 4. It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting; for that is the end ...

[ 366 3

S E R M ON XIII.
On the BENEFITS to be derived from the

HOUSE of MOURNING.

ECCLESIASTES, Vii. 2, 3, 4.
It is better to go to the hose of mourning,

than to go to the house offeaJing; soar that
is the end of all men, and the living will
lay it to his heart. Sorrow is better than
laughter; for by the sadness of the coun-
tenance the heart is made better. The
heart of the wife is in the house of mourn-
ing; but the heart of fools is in the houft
of mirth.

SER M. M /sANY of the maxims contained in
XIII.

A J .VJ. this book of Ecclesiastes will appear

strange sayings to the men of the world.
But when they reflect on the charater of

9 him

him who delivers them, they cannot but s ERIM.
admit that his tenets deserve a serious and --'
attentive examination. For they are not
the doctrines of a pedant, who, from an
obscure retirement, declaims againit plea-
fures which he never knew. They are not
the invectives of a disappointed man, who
takes revenge upon the world, by iatirifing
those enjoyments, which he fought in vain to
obtain. They are the conclusions of a great
and prosperous prince, who had once given
full fcopeto his desires; who was thoroughly
accquainted with life in its molt flattering
scenes; and who now, reviewing all that
he had enjoyed, delivers to us the result of
long experience, and tried wisdom. None
of his principles seem, at first view, more
dubious and exceptionable than those which
the text presents. To assert that sorrow is
preferable to mirth, and the hoze of mzournz-
ing to the hozfe of feaJling; to advise men
to chufe mortification and sadness when it
is in their power to indulge in joy, may
appear harih and unreasonable doclrines.
They may, perhaps, be accounted enemies

to

SEI. M. to the innocent enjoyment of life who give

,-- countenance to so severe a system, and

thereby increase the gloom which already
fits sufficiently heavy on the condition of
man. But let this censure be suspended,
until we examine with care into the spirit
and meaning of the sentiments here de-
livered.

It is evident that the wife man does not

prefer sorrow, upon its own account, to
mirth; or represent sadness as a ifpte more
eligible than joy. He confiders it in the
light of discipline only. He views it with
reference to an end. He compares it with
certain improvements which he iiuppofes it
to produce; when the heart is made better
by the sadness of ihe cozntenance, and the
living to lay to heart what is the end of all
men. Now, if great and lafling benefits
are found to tefult from occasional sadness,
these, sure, may be capable of giving it the
preference to some fleeting sensations of joy.
Th-e means which lie recommends in order
to our obtaining those benefits, are to be ex-
plalned according to the principles of found

reason

jeafon; atid to be undei-ftood with those s ERM .

xiii.

limitations which the eastern sty!e, in de- _
livering moral precepts, frequently requires.
He bids us go to the hozfje of mournsiig; but
he does not command us to dwell there.
When he prefers sorrow to laughter, he is
not to be understood as prohibiting all mirth;
as requiring us to wear a perpetual cloud on
our brow, and to sequestrate ourselves from
every cheerful entertainment of social life.
Such an interpretation would be inconsistent
with many other exhortations in his own
writings which recommend temperate and
innocent joy. It would not suit with the
proper discharge of the duties which be-
long to us as members of society; and
would be most opposite to the goodness and
benignity of our Creator. The true scope
of his doctrine in this paflage is, that there
is a certain temper and slate of heart, which
is of far greater consequence to real happi-
ness than the habitual indulgence of giddy
and thoughtless mirth; that for the attain-
ment and cultivation of this temper, fre-
quent returns of grave reflection are necef-

VOL. II. B b fary;

S E R M. fary; that upon this account, it is profitable

to give admission to those views of human
distress, which tend to awaken su-ch reflec-
tion in the mind; and that thus, from the
vicissitudes of sorrow, which we either expe-
rience in our own lot, or sympathise with in
the lot of others, much wisdom and improve-
ment may be derived. These are the fen-
timents which I purpose at present to j.ustify
and recommend, as moit suitable to the cha-
raater of men and of Christians; and not in
die least inconfiilent with pleasure,. rightly
understood.

Among the variety of dispositions which

are to be found in the world, some indeed
require less of this discipline than others.
There are persons whose tender and deli-
cate fentibility, either derived from nature,
or brought on by repeated afflictions, ren-,
ders them too deeply susceptible of every
mournful impression; whose spirits stand
more in need of being supported and cheer-
ed, than of being faddened by the dark
views of human life. In such cafes we are
commanded to. Iift zp the hands which haang

dovwn,

down, and to confirm the feeble knees I*. But S E R M.
this is far from being the common difpofi- -
tion of men. Their minds are in general
inclined to levity, much more than to
thoughtful melancholy; aid their hearts
more apt to be contracted and hardened,
than to relent with too much facility. I
shall therefore endeavour to shew them, what
bad inclinations their compliance with So-
lomon's advice would correct; what good
dispositions with refpet to God, their neigh-
bours, and themselves, it would improve;
and how, upon the whole, his doctrine is
verified, that by the fadnzefs of the counte-
7zance the heart is made better,

I BEGIN by observing, that the temper

recommended in the text suits the present
confritution of things 'in this world. Had
man been destined for a course of undif-
turbed enjoyment, perpetual gaiety would
then have corresponded to his state; and
pensive thought have been an unnatural
intrusion. But in a slate where all is che-

w Isaiah, xxxv. 3. Heb. xii, 2z.

B b 2 quered

372 O1 the Benefts to be derived
s Er.M.- quered and mixed, where there is no profpe-
a-yr/ rity without a reverse, and nojoy without its

attending griefs; where fiom the house of
feasting all must, at one time or other, pass
into the house of mourning, it would be
equally unnatural if no admiflion were given
to grave reflection. The mind of man must
be attempered to his condition. Provi-
dence, whose wisdom is conspicuous in all
its works, has adjusted with exaa propor-
tion the inward powers to the outward rate
of every rational being. It has for this pur-
pose implanted the serious and sympathetic
feelings in our nature, that they might cor-
relfond with the viciflitudes of sorrow in
our lot. He who endeavours to repel their
influence, or to stifle them in unseasonable
mirth, aCts a violent and unnatural part.
He strives with vain effort against the cur-
rent of things; contradits the intentions
of his Maker, and counteracts the original
impulses of his own heart.

It is proper also to observe, that as the

jndite/fs of the countenzance has, in our present
iituation, a proper and natural place; so it

is

is requisite to the true enjoyment of plea- SE R M.

XIII.

lure. Worldly and sensual men often re- '--- i
mark not, till it be too late, that, by the
tfudied efforts of constant repetition, all their
pleasures fail. They draw them off so close
to the dregs, that they become insipid and
nauseous. Hence even in laughter their
heart isJforroZvwfl, and the end of their mirth
is heavineJss'. It is only the interpofal of
serious and thoughtful hours, that can give
any lively sensation to the returns of joy.
I speak not of those thoughtful hours, too
well known to finners, which proceed from
guilty remorse; and which, instead of pre-
paring for future pleasure, damp and sicken
the moment of enjoyment; but of those
which take rife from the mind retreating
into itself, and opening to the sentiments of
religion and humanity. Such hours of
virtuous sadness brighten the gleams of fuc-
ceeding joy. They give, to the temperate
enjoyments of the pious and humane, a re-
fined and delicate relish, to which the hard-
ened and insensible are entire strangers.

Prov. xiv. 13.
13 b 3 For

S ER rv. For it will be found, that in proportion as

the tender affections of the foul are kept
awake, how much soever they may some-
times distress the heart, they preserve it open
likewise to the most agreeable sensations.
He who never knew the sorrows of friend-
ship, never also knew its joys. He whose
heart cannot relent in the house of mourn-
ing, will, in the moRt social hour of the
house of feasting, partake of no more than
the lowest part of animal pleasure.---
Having premised these observations, I pro-
ceed to point out the direc effeEts of a pro,
per attention to the distresses of life upon our
moral and religious character.

IN the firfl place, the house of mourn-

ing is calculated to give a proper check to
cur natural thoughtlessness and levity. The
indolence of mankind, and their love of
pleasure, spread through all charaaers and
ranks some degree of aversion to what
is grave and serious. They grasp at any
object, either of business or amusement,
which makes the present moment pass

7 fmnoothly

smoothly away; which carries their thoughts s E R M.
abroad, and saves them from the trouble of _
reflecing on themselves. With too many,
this passes into a habit of conflant diffipa-
tion. If their fortune and rank allow them
to indulge their inclinations, they devote
themselves to the pursuit of amusement
through all its different forms. The skilful
arrangement of its successive scenes, and the
preparatory study for shining in each, are
the only exertions on which their under-
tanding is employed. Such a mode of life
may keep alive, for a while, a frivolous vi-
vacity. It may improve men in some of
those exteriour accomplishments, which
sparkle in the eyes of the giddy and the
vain; but it must fink them in the esteem
of all the wife. It renders them firangers
to themselves; and useless, if not perni-
cious, to the world. They lose every manly
principle. Their minds become relaxed and
effeminate. All that is great or refpeaable
in the human character is buried under a
mass of trifles and follies.

3 b 4 If

SE R M. If some measures ought to be taken for

i--- rescuing the mind from this disgraceful le-

vity; if some principles muff be acquired,
which may give more dignity and fteadi-
ness to condut; where, I pray you, are
these to be looked for? Not surely in the
house of feasting, where every object flat-
ters the senses, and strengthens the feduc-
tions to which we are already prone; where
the spirit of diflipation circulates from heart
to heart; and the children of folly mutually
admire and are admired. It is in the fober
and serious house of mourning that the tide
of vanity is made to turn, and a new di-
redion given to the current of thought.
When some affecting incident presents a
frong discovery of the deceitfulness of all
worldly joy, and rouses our sensibility to
human woe; when we behold those with
whom we had lately mingled in the house
of feasting, funk by some of the sudden
vicissitudes of life into the vale of misery;
or when, in fad silence, we stand by the
friend whom we had loved as our own foul,
stretched on the bed of death; then is the

3 season

season when the world begins to appear in a sEM R M
new light; when the heart opens to virtu-
ous sentiments, and is led into that train of
reflection which ought to diret life. He
who before knew not what it was to com-
mune'with his heart on any serious fubje&,
now puts the question to himself, for what
purpose he was sent forth into this mortals
transitory state; what his fate is likely to
be when it concludes; and what judgment
he ought to form of those pleasures which
amuse for a little, but which, he now fees,
cannot save the heart from anguish in the
evil day? Touched by the hand of thought-
ful melancholy, that airy edifice of bliss,
which fancy had raised up for him, vaniflhes
away. He beholds, in the place of it, the
lonely and barren desert, in which, fur-
rounded with many a disagreeable object,
he is left muting upon himself. The time
which he has mif-fpent, and the faculties
which he has misemployed, his foolish le-
vity and his criminal pursuits, all rife in
painful prospect before him. That un-
known state of existence into which, race

after

S E R M. after race, the children of men pass, strikes

XIIL his mind with solemn awe.---Is there no

course by which he can retrieve his pafl
errours ? Is there no fuperiour power to
which he can look up for aid? Is there no
plan of conduct which, if it exempt him
not from sorrow, can at leafi procure him
consolation amidst the distressful exigencies
of life?- Such meditations as there, fug-
gested by the house of mourning, fre-
quently produce a change on the whole
character. They revive those sparks of
goodness which were nigh being quite ex-
tinguifhed in the diflipated mind; and give
rife to principles of conduc more rational
in themselves, and more suitable to the hu-
man state.

IN the second place, impreflions of this

nature not only produce moral seriousness,
but awaken sentiments of piety, and bring
men into the fan&uary of religion. One
might, indeed, imagine that the blessings
of a prosperous condition would prove the
most natural incitements to devotion; and

that

that when men were happy in themselves, SERM.
and saw nothing but happiness around them, -
they could not fail gratefully to acknow-
ledge that God who giveth them all things
richly to enjoy. Yet such is their corruption,
that they are never more ready to forget
their benefator, than when loaded with his
benefits. The giver is concealed from their
careless and inattentive view, by the cloud
of his own gifts, 'When their life conti-
nues to sow in one smooth current un-
ruffled by any griefs; when they neither
receive in their own circumstances, nor al-
low themselves to receive from the circum-
fiances of others, any admonitions of hu-
man instability, they not only become
regardless of Providence, but are in hazard
of contemning it. Glorying in their strength,
and lifted up by the pride of life into sup-
posed independence, that impious senti-
ment, if not uttered by the mouth, yet too
often lurks in the hearts of many, during
their flourishing periods, What is the Al-
mnighty that weJ7J.nuld serve him, and what
profit j ould we have if'we pray unto him?

If

s ERM. If such be the tendency of the house of

I.-. -feafling, how necessary is it, that, by oime

change in their situation, men fiould be
obliged to enter into the. house of mourn-
ing, in order to recover a proper sense of
their dependent slate ? It is there, when
forsaken by the gaieties of the world, and
left alone with God, that we are made to
perceive how awful his government is; how
easily human greatness bends before him;
and how quickly all our designs and mea-
ifres, at his interpofal, vanish into no-
thing. There, when the countenance is
fad, and the affections are softened by grief;
when we fit apart, involved in serious
thought, looking down as from some emi-
nence on those dark clouds that hang over
the life of man, the arrogance of prosperity
is humbled, and the heart melts under the
impreflions of religion. Formerly we were
taught, but now we fee, we feel, how
much we stand in need of an Almighty
Protedor, amidst the changes of this vain
world. Our foul cleaves to him who de-
I/fes not, nor abhors the afflicion of the

affli7cid.

·.qi4gcd. Prayer flows forth of its own ac- SER M.

XIII.

cord from the relenting heart, that he may
be our God, and the God of our friends in
distress; that he may never forlfake us while
'we are sojourning in this land of pilgrim-
age; may strengthen us under its cala-
mities, and bring us hereafter to those ha-
bitations of reft, where we, and they whom
we love, may be delivered from the trials
which all are now doomed to endure. The
discoveries of his mercy, which he has made
in the Gospel of Christ, are viewed with
joy, as so many rays of light sent down
from above to dispel, in some degree, the
surrounding gloom. A Mediator and In-
terceffor with the sovereign of the uni-
verse, appear comfortable names; and the
resurrection of the just becomes the power-
ful cordial of grief. In such moments as
these, which we may jufdily call happy mo-
ments, the foul participates of all the plea-
filres of devotion. It feels the power of
religion to support and relieve. It is soft-
ened, without being broken. It is ful,
and it pours itself forth; pours itself forth,

it

SE R M. i fwe may be allowed to use the expreffiol,
sa_- einto the boforn of its merciful Creator.

Its the third place, filch serious senti-

ments produce the happiest effet& upon our
disposition towards our fellow-creatures, as
well as towards God. It is a common and
jufi observation, that they who have lived
always in affluence and ease, Itrangers to
the miseries of life, are liable to contrac
hardness of heart with refped to all the
concerns of others. Wrapped up in them-
selves, and their own pleasures, they be-
hold with indifference the most affecting
scenes of distress. Hiabituated to indulge
all their desires without controul, they be-
come impatient of the least provocation or
offence; and are ready to trample on their
inferiours, as if they were creatures of a
different species from themselves. Is this
an amiable temperb or such as becomes a
man ? When appearing in others, do we
not view it with much displeasure? When
imputed to ourselves, can we avoid account-
ing it a severe reproach ?

By

By the experience of distress, this arro- SE R M

gant insensibility of temper is most effec- -'
tually correded; as the remembrance of
our own sufferings naturally prompts us to
feel for others when they susser. But if
Providence has been so kind as not to sub-
jeC us to much of this discipline in our own
lot, let us draw improvement from the
harder lot of others. Let us sometimes fep
aside from the smooth and flowery paths
in which we are permitted to walk, in
order to view the toilsome march of our
fellows through the thorny desert. By vo-
luntarily going into the house of mourning;
by yielding to the sentiments which it ex-
cites, and mingling our tears with those of
the afflided, we shall acquire that humane
sensibility which is one of the highest or-
naments of the nature of man. Perceiving
how much the common distresses of life
place us all on a level, and render the high.
and the low, the rich and the poor, com-
panions in misfortune and mortality, we
shall learn to set no man at nought, and,
least of any, our affliced brother. Preju-

dices

S E R M. dices will be extinguished, and benevo-z
XIII-
XI -J lence opened and enlarged, when looking

around on the multitude of men, we cor-
rider them as a band of fellow-travellers
in the valley of woe, where it ought to be
the office of every one to alleviate, as much
as possible, the common burden.- While
the vain and the licentious are revelling in
the midst of extravagance and riot, how
little do they think of those scenes of fore
distress which are going on at that moment
throughout the world; multitudes ftrug-
gling for a poor fubfiRfence to support the
wife and the children whom they love, and
who look up to them with eager eyes for
that bread which they can hardly procure;
multitudes groaning under sickness in de-
solate cottages, untended and unmourned;
many, apparently in a better situation of
life, pining away in secret with concealed
griefs; families weeping over the beloved
friends whom they have loft, or in all the
bitterness of anguish, bidding those who
arejuft expiring the last adieu !

'May

May we not appeal to the heart of every s E R M.

good man, nay almost to the heart of every i__
man who has not divested himself of his
natural feelings, whether the admission of
such views of human life might not, some-
times at least, furnish a more worthy employ-
ment to the mind, than that mirth of fools,
which Solomon compares to the crackling
of thorns under apot -; the transient buri:
of unmeaning joy; the empty explosion
of giddiness and levity ? Those sallies of
jollity in the house of feasting are often.
forced from a troubled mind; like flashes
from the black cloud, which, after a mo-
mentary effulgence, are succeeded by thicker
darkness. Whereas compassionate assec-
tions, even at the time when they draw
tears from our eyes for human misery,
convey fatisfation to the heart. The gra-
cious appointment of Heaven has ordained
that sympathetic pains mhould always be
accompanied with a certain degree of plea-
sure; on purpose that we might be more

Eccles. vii. 6.
VOL. II. C c interested

S E R M. interested in the cafe of the distressed, and
e_.. that, by this mysterious bond, man might

be linked closer to man. The inward. satis-
fa&ion which belongs to the compassion-
ate affeaions is, at the fame time, height-
ened by the approbation which they receive
from our reason; and by the consciousness
which they afford us of feeling what men
and Christians ought to feel.

IN the fourth place, the disposition re-

commended in the text, not only improves
us in piety and humanity, but likewise
aflifts us in felf-government, and the due
moderation of our desires. The house of
mourning is the school of temperance and
sobriety. Every wife man will find it for
his interest to enter into it sometimes of his
own accord, left otherwise he be compelled
to take up his dwelling there. Seasonable in-
terruptions of our pleasures are necessary to
their prolongation. For, continued scenes
of luxury and indulgence haften to a me-
lancholy issue. The house of feasting too
often becomes an avenue to the house of

mourning.
9

mourning. Short, to the licentious, is the s E RM r
interval between them; and speedy the _-y
traniition fi'rom the one to the other.

But supposing that, by prudent manage-

ment, the men of pleasure could avoid the
pernicious effects which intemperance and
dissoluteness are likely to produce on their
health or their fortune, can they also pre-
vent. those disorders which such habits will
introduce into their minds ? Can they
escape that wrath of the Almighty, which
will infallibly pursue them for their fins
both here and hereafter ? For whence, so
much as from the unchecked pursuit of
pleasure, do all those crimes arise which
tfain the characers of men with the deepest
guilt, and expose them to the fevereftjudg-
ments of heaven ? Whence, then, is the
correcive of those mischiefs to be fought,
but from such a discipline as shall moderate
that intemperate admiration of the world
which gave rife to the evil ? By repairing
sometimes to the house of mourning, you
would chasten the looseness of fancy, abate
the eagerness of passion, and afford scope to

C c 2 reason

SE R I. reason for exerting her refiraining powers.
--X-» You would behold this world stripped of

its false colours, and reduced to its proper
level. Many an important inftrudion you
would receive from the humiliation of the
proud, the mortification of the vain, and
the fifferings of the voluptuous, which you
would fee exemplified before you, in the
chambers of sorrow, of sickness, and of
death. You would then be taught to re-
joice as though yoze rejoiced not, and to weep
as though youz weeped not; that is, neither
in joy, nor in grief, to run to excess; but
to tfe this world Jo as not to abzfe it; con-
templating the fa/hion thereof as pajfing
nzcay.

Moreover, you would there learn the

important lesson of suiting your mind, be-
fore-hand, to what you had reason to ex-
pea from the world; a lesson too seldom
studied by mankind, and to the neglec of
which, much of their misery, and much of
their guilt is to be charged. By turning
away their eyes from the dark fide of life;
by looking at the world only in one light;

4 and

and that a flattering one, they form their s ER M.
measures on a false plan, and are necefla- ,-_
rily deceived and betrayed. Hence, the
vexation of succeeding difappointnent an.d
blasted hope. Hence, their criminal impa-
tience of life, and their bitter accusations of
God and man ; when, in truth, they hav.e
reason to accuse only their own folly.-
Thou who wouldst aC like a wife man, and
b,uild thy house on the rock, and not on the
sand, contemplate human life not only in
the funfiine, but in the shade. Frequent
the house of mourning, as well as the house
of mirth. Study .the'nature of that slate in
which thou art placed; ard balance itsjoys
with its sorrows. Thou feeft that the cup
.which is held forth to the whole human
race, is mixed. Of its bitter ingredients,
expea that thou art to drink thy portion.
Thou feeft the florm hovering eyery where
in the clouds around thee. Be not fLirprifed
if on thy head it shall break. Lower, there-
fore, thy fails. Difinifs thy florid hopes;
and come forth prepared either to aa or to
susser, according as Heaven shall decree.

C c3 Thu

s E R M. Thus ihalt thou be excited to take the pro-

XII".
ci --^ pereft measures for defence, by endeavour-

ing to secure an interest in his favour, who,
in the time of trouble, can hide thee in his
pavilion. Thy mind shall adjust itself to
follow the order of his providence. Thou
shalt be enabled, with equanimity and ftea-
diness, to hold thy course through life.

IN the fifth place, by accustoming our-

selves to such serious views of life, our ex-
ceffive fondness for life itself will be mo-
derated, and our minds gradually formed
to with and to long for a better world. If
we know that our continuance here is to be
short, and that we are intended by our
M\aker for a more laiting slate, and for em-
ployments of a nature altogether different
from those which now occupy the busy, or
amuse the vain, we must surely be con-
vinced that it is of the highest consequence
to prepare ourselves for so important a
change. This view of our duty is fre-
quently held up to us in the sacred writings;
and hence religion becomes, though not a

morose,

miorofe, yet a grave and solemn principle, s EFR M-

XIII.

calling off the attention of men from light
pursuits to those which are of eternal mo-
ment. What is n mazn profited if he flJall
gain the whole world, and lose his own foul;
if he shall lead a life of thoughtless mirth
on earth, and exclude himself from eternal
felicity in heaven? Worldly affection and
sensual pleasure depress all our higherpowers.
They form an unnatural union between the
human foul and this earth, which was only
designed for its temporary abode. They
attach it too strongly to objects from which
it must shortly part. They alienate its de-
fires from God and heaven, and dejec it
with slavish and unmanly fears of death.
Whereas, by the discipline of religious fe-
rioufnefs, it is gradually loosened from the
fetters of sense. Assisted to discover the
vanity of this world, it rites above it; and
in the hours of fober thought, cultivates
connection with those divine and immor-
tal objects, among which it is designed to
dwell.

Cc 4 ENOUGH

S E R M. ENOUGH has now been said to convince

XIII.
i_ any thinking person of the justice and rea-

fonablenefs of the maxims in the text; and
to show, that, on various occasions, sorrow
may be better than laughter. Wouldst thou
acquire the habit of recollection, and fix the
principles of thy conduct; wouldst thou be
led up to thy Creator and Redeemer, and
be formed to sentiments of piety and devo-
tion; wouldst thou be acquainted with those
mild and tender affedions which delight the
compassionate and humane; wouldst thou
have the power of sensual appetites tamed
and corrected, and thy foul raised above the
ignoble love of life, and fear of death ? Go,
my brother, go-not to scenes of pleasure
and riot, not to the house of feasting and
mirth-but to the silent house of mourn-
ing; and adventure to dwell for a while
among objedts that will soften thy heart.
Contemplate the lifeless remains of what
once was fair and flourishing. Bring home
to thyself the vicissitudes of life. Recal the
remembrance of the friend, the parent, or
the child, whom thou tenderly lovedft. Look

back

back on the days of former years; and think s E R M.

XII[.

on the companions of thy youth, who now _
sleep in the dust. Let the vanity, the muta-
bility, and the sorrows of the human estate,
rife in full profpe& before thee; and though
thy cozntenance may be made Jad, thy heart
JJall be made better. This sadness, though
for the present it dejecs, yet shall in the
end fortify thy spirit; inspiring thee with
·fch sentiments, ana prompting such refo-
lutions as shall enable thee to enjoy, with
more real advantage, the reft of life. Dif-
positions of this nature form one part of
the character of those mourners whom our
Saviour hath pronounced bleZd; and of
those to whom it is promised, that fowzing
an tears they Jhall reap in joy*. A great
difference there is between being serious
and melancholy; and a melancholy too
there is of that kind which deserves to.be
sometimes indulged.

Religion hath on the whole provided

for every good man abundant materials of
consolation and relief. How dark soever

* Matth. v. 4. Psalm cxxvi. 5.

the

S E R M. the present face of nature may appear, it

.--v--. dispels the darkness, when it brings into
view the entire system of things, and ex-
tends our survey to the whole kingdom of
God. It represents what we now behold
as only a part, and a small part, of the ge-
neral order. It assures us, that though here,
for wife ends, misery and sorrow are per-
mitted to have place, these temporary evils
ihall, in the end, advance the happiness of
all who love God, and are faithful to their
duty. It shows them this mixed and con-
fused scene vanishing by degrees away, and
preparing the introducion of that tfate,
where the house of mourning ihall be ihut
up for ever; where no tears are seen, and
no groans heard; where no hopes are fruf-
trated, and no virtuous connections diffolv-
ed; but where, under the light of the divine
countenance, goodness shall flourish in per-
petual felicity. Thus, though religion may
occasionally chasten our mirth with sadness
of countenance, yet under that sadness it
allows not the heart of good men to fink.
It calls upon them to rejoice, becaf/e the

Lord

Lord reigneth whzo is their Rock, andthe moil SE R M.
high God who is their Redeemer. Reason
likewifejoins her voice with that of religion;
forbidding us to make peevish and unreason-
able complaints of human life, or injuriously
to ascribe to it more evil than it contains.
Mixed as the present slate is, she pronoun-
ces, that generally, if not always, there is
more happiness than misery, more pleasure
than pain in the condition of man.

# SERMON XIV. On the divine GOVERNMENT of the PASSIONS of MEN. PSALM lxxvi. 10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee; the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain.

[ 39.s ]

SE R M N XIV.
1On the divine GOVERNMENT of the

PASSIONS of MEN.

PSALM lxxvi. 10.
Su.rez the wrath of manJhallpra[fe thee; the

remainder of wrath /halt thou reZflrain.
1SER . r i- I S Psalm appears to have been

, JL~ . composed on occasion of some re-

markable deliverance obtained by the Jewish
nation. It is generally understood to have
been written in the reign of Hezekiah, and
to refer to the formidable invasion of Judxea
by Sennacherib; when the angel of the
Lord, in one night, discomfited the whole
Assyrian host, and smote them with sudden
deftrution. To this interposition of the

divine

divine arm, those expressions in the context s E R M,

XIV.

may naturally be applied; hzen brake he -
the arrows of the bow, theJhield, thef-word,
and the battle. 'heJfout-hearted are/poiled;
they have JZept their flcep; and none of the
men of might have found their hands. dt
thy rebuke, 0 God of Jacob, both the chariot
and the horse are caJi into a deadJfleep. In
the text we have the wife and religious
refleaion of the Psalmist upon the violent
designs which had been carried on by the
enemies of his country, and upon the issue
to which Providence had brought them.
Surely the wrath of man Jhall praie thee.
By the wrath of man, we are to understand
all that the impetuosity of human passions
can devise or execute; the projeas of am-
bition and resentment, the rage of perfecu-
tion, the fury of war ; the disorders which
violence produces in private life, and the
public commotions which it excites in the
world, All there shall praie God, not with
their intention and design, nor by their na-
tive tendency; but by those wife and good
purposes, which his providence makes them

accomplih ;

S E R M accomplish; from their poison extrading

>,_- health, and converting things, which in

themselves are pernicious, into instruments
of his glory, and of public benefit: So that,
though the wrath of man worketh not the
righteozofefsi of God, it is nevertheless forced
and compelled to minister to his praise.
The Psalmist adds, the remainder of wrath
Jhalt thou restrain; that is, God will allow
scope to the wrath of man as far as it an-
fwers his good purposes, and is subservient
to his praise; the reft of it shall be curbed
and bound up. When it would attempt to
go beyond its prescribed limit, he fays to it,
as to the waters of the ocean, ZIitherto /halt
thou come, but nofarther; and hereJhall thy
proud waves beJlayed.

All this shall be fully verified and de-

clared by the last issue of things; when we
shall be able more clearly to trace the di-
vine administration through its several Rteps,
by feeing the consummation of the whole.
In some cafes, it may be reserved for this
period to unfold the mysterious wisdom
of Heaven. But in general, as much of

the

the divine conduac is at present manifest, as s E R M.

XIV.

gives just ground for the assertion in the text. __
In the sequel of this discourse, I shall endea-
vour to illustrate and confirm it. I shall
show in what manner the wrath of man is
made to praise the power, the wisdom, the
justice, and the goodness of God.

I BEGIN with this observation, That in

order to accomplish the great purposes car-
ried on by the Government of the Universe,
it is necessary that the divine perfections be
displayed before mankind in a sensible and
striking manner. We are not to conceive
the Supreme Being as hereby seeking praise
to himself, from a principle of ostentation or
vain-glory. Independent and felf-fufficient,
he refts in the enjoyment of his own beati-
tude. His praise consists in the general
order and welfare of his creation. This
end cannot be attained, unless mankind be
made to feel the subjection under which
they are placed. They must be taught to
admire and adore their Sovereign. They

must

SERM. mull be overawed by the view of a high

. hand, which can at pleasure controul their

adtions, and render them subservient to pur-
poses which they neither foresaw norintend-
ed. Hence the propriety of God's making
the wriath of man to praiCe him. We easily
conceive in what manner the heavens and
the earth are said to praise God, as they are
flanding monuments of that supreme per-
fetion which is displayed in their creation.
The virtues of good men obviously praise
him, by exhibiting his image, and reflecting
back his glory. But when even the vices
and inordinate passions of bad men are made
to praise him, in consequence of the useful
purposes which they are compelled to ac-
complifh, this, in a particular manner, dif-
tinguifhes and signalizes a divine hand; this
opens a more wonderful profped of the ad-
ministration of Heaven, than if all its sub-
jedts had been loyal and willingly obedient,
and the course of human affairs had pro-
ceeded in a quiet and regular tenour.

I. THE

I. THE wrath of man redounds to the SERM.

praise of divine power. It brings it forth XIV.
with full and awful lustre, to the view of
mankind. To reign with sovereign com-
mand amidst the most turbulent and difor-
dered state of things, both in the natural
and moral world, is the peculiar glory of
omnipotence. Hence God is described in
Scripture as itting on theflood, riding on the
wvings of the wind, dwelling in the darkness
and the tempest; that is, making the most
violent powers in the universe minister to
his will, giving them scope, or restraining
them, according as suits the purposes of his
dominion. As heJfillr, at his pleasure, the
raging of the seas, and the noi/e of their
waves, in like manner heJqills the tnumults
of the people. When the palions of men
are most inflamed, and their designs just
ripe for burpiing intol execution, often, by
some unexpeced interposition, he calls
upon the world to observe that there is one
higher than the highest on earth, who can
frustrate their devices in a moment, and
command the earth to be Jill before him.

VOL. II. D d Proud

S E R M. Proud fleets, deflined to carry deftruQion

XIV.

_ to neighbouring kingdoms, may cover the

ocean. He blows with his wind, and they
are scattered. Mighty armies may go forth
to the field in all the glory of human
firength ; but the issues of battle are with
him. He suspends on high the invisible
balance which weighs the fate of nations.
According as the scale inclines, he gives to
some flight event the power of deciding the
contef. He clouds the sky with darkness,
or opens the windows of heaven to let
forth their flood. He dejeds the hearts of
the brave with sudden terrour, and renders
the hands of the firong weak and unper-
forming at the critical moment. A thou-
sand unseen ministers Itand ready to. be the
infiruments of his power, in humbling the
pride, and checking the efforts of the wrath
of man. Thus, in the instance of haughty
Sennacherib, and that boasted tempest of
wrath which he threatened to pour upon
all the Jewish nation; I will put mzy hook,
fays the Almighty, in thy nose, and my bridle
in thy lips, and I will lurn thee back by the

ie~ay

nway by 'which thou cainef ?. In that night S ExRM.
the defiroying angel finote the host, and -
he departed vwith AJame of face to his own
land. ilhen the hecith.n raoge, and the peo-
ple imagine a vain thing ;. when the kings of
the earth set then feives, and its rulers take
council together, He that Jitteth in the Hea-
vens /7Jall laugh; the Lord yJall hold them ife
derlionr t,

II. THE ivwath of mzan Is made to praire

the wisdom as well as the power of God.
Nothing displays more remarkably the ad-
mirable council of heaven, than its arrang-
ing the train of events in such a manner.
that the unruly paflions of the wicked shall
contribute to overthrow their own designs.
History abounds with examples of their
being rendered the unconscious ministers of
Providence, to accomplish purposes directly
opposite to those which they had in view.
Thus the cruelty of the sons of Jacob, in
pursuing the destruCtion of their brother

z Kings, xix. 28. f Psalm ii. I, 2, 3.

D d 2 Joseph

S EIRM. Joseph, became the means of effecing Ils

high advancement. Thus the wrath of
Pharaoh against the Israelites, and his un-
jufft attempts to detain them in bondage,
proved the occasion of bringing them forth
from the land of slavery, with fignaI marks
of the favour of Heaven. Thus the inhu-
man plan which Haman had formed for
ruining Mordecai,. and extirpating the
whole Jewish nation, paved the way for
Mordecai's high promotions and for the
triumph of the Jews over all their ene-
mies.

After this manner the AlmightyfJiareth

the wicked in the works of their hands; and
erects his own council upon the ruin of
theirs. Those events which, viewed apart,
appear as spots in the divine administration,
when confidered in connexion with all
their consequences, are often found to give
it additional lustre. The beauty and mag-
nificence of the universe are much height-
ened, by its being an extensive and compli-
cated system; in which a variety of springs
are made to play, and a multitude of dif-

7 ferent

ferent movements are, with most admirable E R M.
art, regulated and kept in order. Inter- XIV.
fering interests, and jarring passions, are in
such manner balanced against one another;
such proper checks are placed on the vio-
lence of human purfults; and the wrath of
man is made so to hold its course, that how
opposite soever the several motions seem to
be, yet they concur and meet at last in
one direcion. While, among the multi-
tudes that dwell on the face of the earth,
some are submissive to the divine authority;
some rife up in rebellion against it; others,
absorbed in their pleasures and pursuits, are
totally inattentive to it; they are all so
moved by an imperceptible influence from
above, that the zeal of the dutiful, the
wrath of the rebellious, and the indifference
of the careless, contribute finally to the
glory of God. All are governed in such a
way as suits their powers, and is confitent
with rational freedom, yet all are fubjeted
to the necessity of fulfilling the eternal
purposes of Heaven. This depth of di-
vine wisdom in the adminiftr-tion of the

D d 3 universe,

E R M. universe, exceeds all human comprehension,
XIV.

.
_ and affords everlasting subjea of adoration

and praise.

III. THE wrath of man praises the justice

of God, by being employed as the infiru-
ment of inflicing punishment upon finners,
Did bad men trace the course of events in
their life with attentive eye, they might
easily discover the greatest part of the dif-
afters which they fuTfer, to be brought upon
them by their own ungoverned passions.
The succession of causes and effecs is so
contrived by Providence, that the wrath
which they meant to pour forth on others,
frequently recoils, by its effects, upon them-
selves. But supposing them to escape those
external mischiefs which violent passions na-
turally occasion, they cannot evade the in-
ternal misery which they produce. The
constitution of things is framed with such
profound wisdom, that the divine laws, in
every event, execute themselves against
the finner, and carry their fandion in their
own bosom. The Supreme Being has no

3 occasion

occasion to unlock the prisons of the deep, s E R M.
or to call down the thunder from heaven, y
in order to punish the wrath of man. He
carries on the administration ofjuftice with
more simplicity and dignity. It is fuflicient
that he allow those fierce passions which
render bad men the disturbers of others, to
operate on their own hearts. He delivers
them up to themselves, and they become
their own tormentors. Before the world
they may disguise their sufferings; but it is
well known, that to be inwardly torn with
despite, revenge, and wrathful passions, is
the most intense of all misery. In thus
connecting the punishment with the crime,
making their own wickedness to reprove
them, and their back/lidings to corret them,
the avenging hand of a righteous Govern-
our is conspicuous; and thus the obferva-
tion of the Psalmist is fully verified; the
wicked have drawn out their sword and
bent their bow, to caJq down -the poor and
needy; but their sword Jhall enter into their
iown heart -.

* Psalm xxxvii. 14, 15.

D d 4 The

S E R M. The wrath of man also praises the justice

_-_ of God in the punishment of other crimi-

nals, as well as of the wrathful themselves.
Ambitious and lawless men are let loose
upon each other, that, without any super-
natural interposition, they may fulfil the
just vengeance of heaven in their mutual
deftrudion. They may occasionally be
cemented together by conspiracy against
the just; but as no firm nor lasting bond
can unite them, they become at last the
prey of mutual jealousy, firife, and fraud.
For a time they may go on, and seem to
prosper. The justice of Heaven may ap-
pear to slumber; but it is awake, and only
waits till the measure of their iniquity be
full. God represents himself in Scripture
as sometimes permitting wickedness to arise
to an overgrown height, on purpose that
its ruin may be the greater, and more exem-
plary. He fays to the tyrant of Egypt,
thatfor this cause he had raised him up, that
is, had allowed him to prosper and be ex-
alted, that he might JJew in him his power;
and that his name might be declred through-

* 42 -ht be d wred
tl gh

out di the earth . The divine adminifra- S ERM

XIV.

tion is glorified in the punishment contrived -v-
for the workers of iniquity, as well as in
the reward prepared for the righteous. This
is the purpose which the Lord hath purposed
upon all the earth; and this is the hand that
isJlretchedforth over all the nations t.

IV. The wrath of man is made to praise

the goodness of God. This is the most
unexpeCted of its effets; and therefore
requires to be the most fully illustrated.
All the operations of the government of the
Deity may be ultimately resolved into good-
ness. His power, and wisdom, and justice,
all conduce to general happiness and order.
Among the means which he uses for ac-
complifhing this end, it will be found, that
the wrath of man, through his over-ruling
direction, possesses a considerable place.

First, It is employed by God as an useful

instrument of discipline and correction to
the virtuous. The storms which ambition
and pride raise among mankind, he permits

Exod. ix. 16. f Isaiah, xiv. 26.

with

$ E R M. with'the fame intention that he fends forth
*-u- tempests among the elements; to clear the

atmosphere of noxious vapours, and to pu-
rify it from that corruption which all things
contract by too much reft. When wicked
men prevail in their designs, and exercise
the power which they have gained with a
heavy and oppressive hand, the virtuous are
apt to exclaim, in bitterness of foul, Where
is the Lord ? and where the sceptre of
righteousness and truth ? lHath Godjforgotten
to be gracious ? or doth he indeed fee, and
is there krnow-ledge in the MoJ High ?-
Their oppressors are, in truth, no more
than the miniflers of God to them for good.
He fees that they fland in need of correction,
and therefore raises up enemies against them,
in order to cure the intemperance of pro-
fperity; and to produce, in the serious
hours of afflition, proper reflections upon
their duty, and their past errours.

In this light the disturbers of the earth

are often represented in Scripture, as
scourges in the hand of God, employed to
inflilc chaflifement upon a degenerating

people,

people. They are commissioned for the SE RM.
execution of righteous and wife purposes, ,
concealed from themselves ; and when their
commission is fulfilled, they are recalled, and
destroyed. Of this we have a remarkable
example in the use which God made of the
king of Assyria, with refpea to the people
of Israel; I wil/ fend him againt an hypo-
critical nation, and against the people of my
·wrath will I give him a charge, to take the
spoil, and to take zhe prey. Hlowbeit, he
meaneth notfo; neither doth his heart think
o ; but it is in his heart to deJiroy, and cut
of? nations not a few. Wherefore it JhJall
come to pass, that when the Lord hath per-
formed his whole work zpon mount Zion and
on Jerusalem, I will pzun7ii the fruit of the
flout heart of the king of o4jtria, and the glory
of his high looks ". In vain, then, doth the
-wrath of man lift itself up against God. He
/faith, by theJfrength of my hand I have done
it, and by my wisdom, for I am prudent.
Shall the ax boaJf ifelf againjl him that hew-
eth therewith ? orJhall the sa/w zmagnizfy it-

Isaiah, x. 6, 7. i2.

./ey!

SE R M. fief againfi him that Jhaketh it ? All things,
i -_ whether they will it or not, murzj wo-rk

toge/eterfor good. to them that love God. The
wrath of zman, among the reft, fills up the
place assigned to it by the ordination of
Heaven. The violent enemy, the proud
conqueror, and the oppreflive tyrant, possess
only the fame station with the famine, the
pestilence, and the flood. Their triumphs
are no more than the accomplishment of
·God's corretion; and the remainder of their
wrath Jhall he refrain.

SECONDLY, God makes the wrath of

man contribute to the benefit of the vir-
tuous, by rendering it the means of im-
proving and signalizing their graces; and of
railing them, thereby, to higher honour and
glory. Had. human affairs proceeded in an.
orderly train, and no opposition been made
to religion and virtue by the violence of the
wicked, what room would have been left
for some of the highest and most generous
exertions of the foul of man ? How many
!hining examples of fortitude, constancy,

and

and patience, would have been loft to the S E R M.

XIV.

world ? What a field of virtues peculiar to _
a state of discipline had lain uncultivated ?
Spirits of a higher order possess a state of
eftabliffed virtue, that stands in need of no
such trials and improvements. But to us,
who are only under education for such a
state, it belongs to pass through the furnace,
that our fouls may be tried, refined, and
brightened. We must stand the conflict,
that we may be graced and crowned as con-
querors. The wrath of man opens the field
to glory; calls us forth to the most diftin-
guifhed exercise of active virtue, and forms
us to all those suffering graces which are
among the highest ornaments of the human
foul. It is thus, that the illustrious band of
true patriots and heroes, of confessors and
martyrs, have been set forth to the admira-
tion of all ages, as lights of the world;
while the rage and fury of enemies, instead
of bearing them down, have only served
to exalt and dignify them more.

THIRDLY, the wrath of man is often made
to advance the temporal profperily of the

righteous.

S E R M. righteous. The occasional diftrefles which
- -- i it brings upon them, frequentlylay the foun-

dation of their future fuccefso The vio-
lence with which wicked men pursue their
resentment, defeats its own purpose; and
engages the world on the fide of the vir-
tuous, whom they persecute. The attempts
of malice to blacken and defame them,
bring forth their charaEters with more ad-
vantage to the view of impartial beholders.
The extremities to which they are reduced
by injustice and oppression, rouze their cou-
rage and activity; and often give occasion
to such vigorous efforts in their just defence,
as overcome all opposition, and terminate
in prosperity and success. Even in cafes
where the wrath of man appears to prevail
over the peaceable and the just, it is fre-
quently, in its issue, converted into a blesT-
ing. How many have had reason to be
thankful, for being disappointed by their
enemies in designs which they earnestly
pursued, but which, if successfully accom-
plifhed, they have afterwards seen would
have occasioned their ruin? Who/o is Wvie,

and

aid will observe these things, event he Jfhall E

S R

underJand the lovitng-kizndnefs of the Lord '.
" -

While the wrath /o man thus praises God

by the advantages which it is made to bring
to good men, as individuals, the divine hand
is equally apparent in the iimilar effeCts
which it is appointed to produce to nations
and societies. When wars and commo-
tions shake the earth, when factions rage,
and intestine divisions embroil kingdoms
that before were flourishing, Providence
seems, at first view, to have abandoned
public affairs to the misrule of human pas-
sions. Yet from the midst of this confusion
order is often made to spring; and from
there mischiefs lasting advantages to arise,
By such convulsions, nations are rouzed
from that dangerous lethargy into which
flowing wealth, long peace, and growing
effeminacy of manners had funk them.
They are awakened to discern their true
interests; and taught to take proper mea-
fures for fecuirity and defence against all
their foes. Inveterate prejudices are cor-

Psalm cvii. 34.

reated;

S E R M. reded; and latent sources of'danger are
«. - jdifcovered. Public spirit is called forth;

and larger views of national happiness are
formed. The corruptions to which every
government is liable, are often recified by
a ferment in the political body, as noxious
humours in the animal frame are carried off
by the ihock of a disease. Attempts made
against a wife and well-eftablifhed civil con-
flitution tend in the issue to strengthen it;.
and the disorders of licentiousness and sac-
tion, teach men more highly to prize the
blessings of tranquillity and legal protection.

FOURTHLY, the wrath of man, when it

breaks forth in the persecution of religion,
praises the divine goodness, by being ren-
dered conducive to the advancementof truth,
and propagation of religion in the world.
The church of God, since the days of its
infancy, hath never been entirely exempted
from the yrath of the world; and in thole
ages, during which it was most exposed to
that wrath, it hath always flourished the
most. In vain the policy and the rage of

men

mten united their efforts to extinguifli this E tM.
divine light. Though all the four winds -
blew against it, it only shone brighter,
and flamed higher. Maniy waters could
not quench it, nor all the floods drown it.
The constancy and fortitude of those who
suffered for the truth, had a much greater
effec in inci-eafing the number of converts,
than all the terrour and cruelty of perfecu-
tors in diminilhing it. By this means the
wvrath of man was made to turn against it-
felfto the deftruaion of its own purpose;
like waves, which assaulting a rock with
impotent fury, discover its immovable fta-
bility, while they daffi themselves in pieces
at its feet.

I SHALL only add one other infance of

the wrath of man praising God, by accom-
plifhing ends of most extensive benefit to
mankind. Never did the rage and malice
of the wicked imagine that they had ob-
tained a more complete triumph, than in
the death of Jesus Christ. When they had
executed their purpose of making him susser

VOL. I. E e as

SE R M. as a malefactor, they were confident that

XIV.
e,-_ they had extinguished his name, and dif-

comfited his followers for ever. Behold
how feeble are the efforts of the wrath of
man against the decree of Heaven! All
that they intended to overthrow, they most
effetually established. The death of Christ
was, in the councils of Heaven, the spring
of everlasting life to the faithful. The cross
on which he suffered with apparent igno-
miny, became the standard of eternal honour
to him; the ensign under which his fol-
lowers assembled, and triumphed. He who,
at his pleasure, redrains the remainder of
'wrath, suffered the rage of our Saviour's
enemies to suggest no other things to them
than what, long before, He had determined,
and his prophets had foretold. They all
conspired to render the whole scene of
Christ's sufferings exaaly conformable to
the original prediaed plan of divine mercy
and goodness; and each of them contri-
buted his ihare to accomplish that great un-
dertaking, which none of them in the least
understood, or meant to promote.-- So

9 remarkable

remarkable an infiance as this, fully afcer- s ERM.
tained in Scripture, of the wrath of man -
ministering to the designs of Heaven, ought
to be frequently in our eye; as an exem-
plification of the condua of Providence in
many other cafes, where we have not so
much light afforded us for tracing its ways.

BY this indution of particulars, the

dotrine contained in the text is plainly and
fiully verified. We have seen, that the dif-
orders which the pride and passions of men
occasion in the world, though they take rife
from the corruption of human nature in
this fallen fiate, yet are so over-ruled by Pro-
vidence, as to redound to his honour and
glory who governs all. They illustrate be-
fore the world the divine perfelions in the
administration of the universe. They serve
the purposes of moral and religious im-
provement to the fouls of men. By a secret
tendency, they advance the welfare of those
whom they appear to threaten with evil.
Surely, 0 God! the wrath of man Jhallpraife
thee; the remainder of wrath Jhalt thou re-

E e 2 Jrain.

S EI RM. Jralz.--Irn thy haid it is; and thou never
i--r--' letteft it forth but in weight and measure.

It is wild and intractable in its nature; but
Thou tamnne it. It, is blind and headlong
in 'its impulse; but Thou direaeft it. It
firuggles continually to break its chain.; but
Thou confineft.it; Thou retrencheft all the
superfluity of its fury.- Let us now con-
fider, what improvement is to be made of
this meditation on the ways of Providence.

IN the firPt place, Let it lead us to a reli-

gious contemplation of the hand of God
in all the tranfadions of the world. In the
ordinary course of human affairs, we be-
hold a very mixed and busy scene; the
passions of men variously agitated, and new
changes daily taking place upon this stage
of time. We behold peace and war alter-
nately returning; the fortunes of private
men rifng and falling; and states and na-
tions partaking of the fame vicissitude. In
all this, if we attend only to the operation
of external causes, and to the mere rotation
of events, we view no more than the ina-

nimate

nimate part of nature; we stop at the fur- s E R M.
face of things; we contemplate the great _-v-
fpetacle which is presented to us, not with
the eyes of rational and intelligent beings.
The life and beauty of the univerfel arises
from the view of that wiifdom and goodness
which animates and conduces the whole,
and unites all the parts in one great de-
sign. There is an eterrial mind who puts
all those wheels in notion; Himself remain-
ing for ever at reft. Nothing is void of
God. Even in the passions and ragings of
men, He is to be found; and where they
imagine they guide thenmfelves, they are
guided and controuled by his hand. What
solemn thoughts and devout affecions ought
this meditation to inspire; when, in view-
ing the affairs of the world, we attcnd'"not
merely to the actings of men, but to the
ways of God; and confider ourselves, and
all our concerns, as included in his high
administration,

IN the second place, The doCtrine which
has been illufirated flhould prevent us from

E c 3 censuring

SE R M. censuring Providence, on account of any
.--- ' seeming disorders and evils which at present

take place in the world. The various in-
stances which have been pointed out in this
discourse, of human passion and wickedness
rendered filbfervient to wife and useful ends,
give us the highest reason to conclude that,
in all other cafes of seeming evil, the like
ends are carried on. This ought to satisfy
our mind, even when the profped is most
dark and discouraging. The plans of di-
vine wisdom are too large and comprehen-
five to be discerned by us in all their extent;
and where we fee only by parts, we mufl
frequently be at a loss in judging of the
whole. 7?he way of God is in the sea, and
his path in the great waters; hisfootfJeps are
not known a. But although thou fayefJ thou
canj? not fee him, yet judgment is before him;
therefore trufi thou in him t. As in the
natural world no real deformity is found,
nothing but what has either some orna-
ment, or some use ; so in the moral world,

Psalm Ixxvii. 19. - Job, xxxv. 14.

the

the most irregul.r and deformed appear- S.ERM.

XIV,

ances contribute in one way or other to the L
order of the whole. The Supreme Being,
from the most opposite and disagreeing
principles, forms universal concord; and
adapts even the most harsh and dissonant
notes to the harmony of his praise. As he
hath reared the goodly frame of nature
from various and jarring elements, and
hath fettled it in peace; so he hath formed
such an union by his providence of the
more various interests, and more jarring
passions of men, that they all conspire to
his glory, and co-operate for general good.
-How amazing is that wisdom, which
comprehends such infinite diversities, and
contrarieties, within its scheme ? How pow-
erful that hand, which bends to its own
purpose the good and the bad, the busy
and the idle, the friends and the foes of
truth; which obliges them all to hold on
their course to his glory, though divided
from one another by a multiplicity of pur-
suits, and differing often from themselves;
and while they all move at their own free-

Ee 4. dor,

S E RM dom, yet by a secret influence, winds and

_ turns them at his will ! O the depth of iJe

riche.r, both of the -, aomz and knowledge of
God! Hlow zWif archable are his judgmenzts,
anid his s wajs Jpi si dinlg out * !

IN the third place, we fee, from what
ihas been said, how much reason there is
for submission to the decrees of Heaven,
Whatever diftrefes we susser fromr the
erath of man, we have ground to believe
that they befal not in vain. In the midst
of human violence, or oppreflion, we are
not left to be the sport of fortune. Higher
counsels are concerned. Wife and good
designs are going on. God is always car-
rying forward his own purposes; and if
there terminate in his glory, which is ever
the fame with the felicity of the righteous,
is not this a fuficient reason for our calm
nnd cheerful acquiescence

Hence also, to conclude, arises the most

powerful argument for studying, with zeal-
ous assiduity, to gain the favour and pro-

C Rom. xi. 33-

tesion

tection of the Almighty. If his displeasure S ER rM.
hang over our heads, all things around us l--
may bejuft objets of terrour. For, against
him, there is no defence. The most vio-
lent powers in nature are minifiers to him.
Formidable, indeed, may prove the wrath
of man, if he be pleased to let it forth
against us. To him, but not to us, it be-
longs to restrain it at pleasure. *Whereas,
when we are placed under his proteEtion,
all human wrath is divested of its terrours.

es he be for us, -who or what can be againifl

is ? Let us pursue the measures which he
hath appointed for obtaining his grace by
faith, repentance, and a holy life, and we
shall have no reason to be afiraid of evil
tidings; ozur hearts wvill befixed, trquing in
the Lord. When the religious fear of God
posseses the heart, it expels the ignoble
fear of man; and becomes the principle of
courage and magnanimity. The Lord is
a buckler and a JhJield to them that serve
him. W/hen he arietb, his enemies Jhall be
scattered, as fJioke is driven away, and as
chaff before the wind. He giveth Jlrength

.8 and

S E R M. and victory to his people; he clotheth them

XIV.
,I__ _ with Salvation. The wrath of man stall

prai/ him; andthe remainder of wrath Jhall
he refraiz.

# SERMON XV. On the IMPORTANCE of RELIGIOUS KNOWLEDGE to MANKIND. Preached before the Society in Scotland for propagating Christian Knowledge. ISAIAH, xi. 9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my ...

[ ] 3

SERMON XV.
On the IMPORTANCE of RELIGIOUS

KNOWLEDGE to MANKIND.
Preached before the Society in Scotland for propagating

Chriflian Knowledge.

ISAIAH, Xi. 9,
TheyJhall not hurt nor deJfroy in all my holy

mountain ; for the earth Jhall be ffull of
the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters
cover thefea,

HIS paflage of Scripture is under- SE R M.
stood, by all Christian interpreters, to xv.

refer to the days of the Gospel, The Pro-
phet describes, in the context, the aufpi-
cious influence of the Mefflah's reign, as

extending

SER M. extending over all nature, and producing

XV.
._.L, universal felicity. The full accomplifhl-

ient of this prediction is yet future, and
refpeas some more advanced period of the
kingdom of God, when true religion shall
unIversally prevail, and'the native tendency
of the Gospel attain its entire effect. In
the profpe& of this event, the Prophet
seems to rife above himself, and celebrates
that happy age in the most sublime strain
of eastern poetry. He opens a beautiful
view of the state of the world, as a slate of
returning innocence. He represents all
nature flourishing in peace; difcor& and
guile abolished; the most hostile natures
reconciled, and the most savage reformed
and tamed. The 1wof fJhall dwell with the
lamb, anrd the leopard lie down -with the
kid; and the cans, and the yOghc

lion, and the

fatling together, and a little childJthall lead
them. t'he lion Jhall eat Jfraw like the ox;
and the sickling childJ'hall play. on the hole of
the asp, and the weaned childJhall put his
hand on the cockatrice den. T5he, shall not
hurt nor dejfroy in all my holy mountlain z'

s G?-

for the earth jhall be fzll of the knozAledge of sE R M.
the Lord, as the waters cov:r the sea. --

Upon reading these words we imuf im-

mediately perceive the great encouragement
which they give to all good designs for pro-
moting religion in the world. When we
engage in these, we have the comfort of
being engaged, not only in a good cause,
but also in one that shall undoubtedly be
successful. For we are here assured by the
divine promise, that truth and righteousness
shall at length prevail, and that the in-
creasing influence of religion shall introduce
general happiness. It is a pleating and ani-
mating reflection, that, in carrying on such
designs, we aCt upon the divine plan; and
co-operate with God for advancing the
kingdom of the Messiah. We have no rea-
son to be discouraged by any unfavourable
circumstances which at present oppose our
pious endeavours. Though the ignorance,
superstition, and corruption, which now fill
so great a part of the world, have a dark
and mysterious aspea, it is not beyond the
power of that Supreme Being who brings

light

S E R M. light out of darkness, to clear up those per-

xv.
,_ ', plexing appearances, and gradually to ex-

tricate mankind from the labyrinth of ig-
norance and errour. Let us confider how
improbable it seemed, when the Gospel was
firfi published, that it Should extend so far,
and overthrow so much established fuperfti-
tion,- as it has already done. There is no-
thing, in the present state of the world, to
render it more unlikely that it shall one day
be universally received, and prevail in its
full influence. At the rife of Christianity,
the disproportion was, at least, as great
between the apparent human causes, and
the effect which has actually been produced,.
as there is, in our age, between the circum-
stances of religion in the world, and the
effect which we farther expefc. fThe Sun of
righteoujnefs having already exerted its
influence in breaking through. the thickest
darkness, we may justly hope, that it is
powerful enough to dispel all remaining
obscurity; and that it will ascend by de-
grees to that perfect day, when healingJhall
-e under its. wings to all the nations. A

little

little one Jhall become a thou/and; and afrnall s E R M.

XV.

one, aJirong nation. I the Lord will haJfen
it in its time *.

BESIDES the predicion which the text

contains of the future success of religion,
it points out also a precise connetion be-
tween the increase of religious knowledge,
and the happiness of mankind. The know-
ledge of the Lordfilling the earth, is assigned
as the cause why they /hall not hurt nor de-
Jlroy in all the holy mountain of God. To
this I am now to lead your thoughts; as
a subjet both suited to the occasion of the
present meeting, and proper to be illustrated
in times, wherein total indifference to reli-
gious principles appears to gain ground.
Whether Christianity shall be propagated
farther or not, is treated as a matter of no
great concern to mankind. The opinion
prevails among many, that moral virtue
may subsist, with equal advantage, in-
dependent of religion. For moral princi-
ples, great regard is professed; but articles

* Iaiah, Ix. zz.

of

SERM. of religious belief are held to be abftrac
-y--J tenets, remote from life; points of mere

speculation and debate, the influence of
wvhich is very inconsiderable on the actions
of men. The general conduct, it is con-
tended, will always proceed upon views
and principles which have more relation to
the present state of things; and religious
knowledge can therefore fland in no necef-
fary connection with their happiness and
prosperity. -- How adverse such opinions
are both to the profession and practice of
religion, is abundantly evident. How ad-
verse they are to the general welfare and
real interells of mankind, I hope to make
appear to candid minds.

By the lnowledge of the Lord in the text,

is not to be underflood the natural know-
ledge of God only. It is plain, that thy
Prophet speaks of the age of the Messiah,
when more enlarged discoveries should be
made to mankind of the divine--perfeCtions
'and government, than iinaflifted reason
could attain. 'he know1Adge of the Lord,
therefore, comprehends tihe principles of

Chiiftianitye

Christianity, as well as of natural religion. E R M.
In order to discern the importance of such
knowledge to general happiness, we hIall
confider man, I. as an individual; It. as a
member of society.

I. CONSIDERING man as an individual,

let us enquire how rar the knowledge of true
religion is important, first, to his improve-
mient; next, to his consolation.

FIRST, With respect to the improvement

of man; the advancement of his nature in
what is valuable and useful, the acquisition
of such dispositions and habits as fit him for
acing his part with propriety on this flage,
and prepare him for a higher flateof action
hereafter; what benefit does he receive, in
theferefpeds, fromn religious knowledge and
belief? It is obvious, that all increase of
knowledge is improvement to the under-
standing. The more that its sphere is en-
larged, the greater number of objects that
are submitted to its view, especially when
these objecs are of intrinsic excellence, the

VOL. II. F f more

S E R M. more must thlofe rational powers, which are

xv.
-_..0_ the glory of man, be in the course of at-

taining their proper fi.rer.th and matu'rity,.
But were the k:nowledge of reigion erely
fecuiative, ) tlhough the speculation must be
admitted to be noble, yet less could be said
of its importance. \Ve recommend it to
mankind, as forming the heart, and direac-
ing the lie. Those pure and exalted con-
ceptions which the Christian religion has
taught us t-o entertain of the Deity, as the
universal Father and righlteous Governour
of the universe, the Standard of unspotted
perfection; anid the 4Author of every good and
ferfcc git; conducaing his whole admini-
ftration vwith an eternal regard to order,
virtue, and truth ; ever favouring the cause,
and fupportirng the intereais, of righteous
men; and applying, in this direEion, the
whole might of omnipotence, and- the whole
council of unerring wiCdom, from the be-.
ginning to the end of things; such concep-
tions both kindle devotion, and strengthen:
virtue. They give fortitude to the mind in.
the pra&ice of righteousness, and establish

a sethe
/

the persfuanon of its be ng our highef: in- S E RM,

XV.
terefL t.

All the doc'rines peculiar to the Gof-cel

are great ii-.'rOVemcnts on ._ wat thc

li(g3

of natuirc h.ad imperec'- l, c.'. Lcd". A.
high difpenlftion of Providence is made
known, particularly sh-ited to the exigencics
of man; calculated for -crcoverli.ng him fr-om
that corrupted ifatc into which experience
bears witness that h7e is fallen, and for re-
froring him tc integrity, and fa'vour with his
Creator. The method of carrying on this
great plan is such as gives us the most ftrilk-
ing views of the importance of righteous-
ness or virtue, and of the high account in
-which it stands vwith God. The Son of
God appeared on the earth, and 'fuffred as
a propitiation for the fins of the world,
with this express intention, that he might
bring in everlajling rightteofrC si; that he
miigiht purge ozr coni/clizces frcm dead works
to fcrve the living God; that he might re-
deem us fro7m all iniqziiy,, and purify znto
himnfelf a peculiar people zealouzs of good
works. Such a merciful interposition of

F f the

E R M. the Creator of the world, while it illuftri-
xv.
.._ -_ oufly displays his goodness, and signalizes

his concern for the moral interests of man-
kind, affords us, at the fame time, the most
satisfying ground of confidence and trust.
It offers an objet to the mind on which it
can lay hold for the security of its future
hopes; when, with a certainty far beyond
what any abflra&l: argument could yield, it
appeals to a diflinguifed fadc; and is
enabled to fay, He that spared not his own
Son, 3but delivered him up for us all, how
jhall he riot twitlh himn ao freely give us all
things :' ?

While the divine government is thus

placed in a light the most amiable, and moa
encouraging to every virtuous mind, there
is at the fame time something extremely
awIul and solemn in the vwhole dotrine of
redemption. It is calculated to Pcrike the
mind with reverence for the divine admini-
ftration. It points at some deep malignity
in fin, at some dreadful consequences flow-
ing from guilt, unknown inr their causes

* Rom. vii:. 32.

and

and in their whole effe&s to us, which S E R M.
moved the Sovereign of the world to de- XN.
part from the ordinary course of Providence,
and to bring about the restoration of his
fallen creatures by a method so astonishing.
M/ankind are hereby awakened to the most
serious reflecQions. Such views are opened
of the fandity of the divine laws, of the
firictnefs of the divine justice, of the im-
portance of the part which is assigned them
to act, as serve to prevent their trifling with
human life, and add dignity and solemnity
to virtue. These great purposes are farther
carried on, by the discovery which is made
of the fixed connection in which this life
stands with a future eternal state. V'e are
represented asfowving nowz, 'zhat 'we are to
reap hereafter; undergoing a course of pro-
bation and trial, which, according as it ter-
minates in our improvement, or leaves us
unreformed and corrupied, will difinifs us
to lasting abodes, either of punifimnent or
reward. Such a discovery rites far above
the dubious conjetures, and uncertain rea-
fonings, which mere natural light suggests

F f 3 conccrning

S E ,R'.I. concerning the future condition of minn-

kind. Here we find, what alone can pro-
duice any considerable influence on pra&ice,
expicit promile and threatening ; an autho-
ritative fanion given to a law ; the Cover-
nour and Judge revealed; and all the mo-
tives which can operate on hope and fear,
brcught home to the heart, with TzisJusfitl7
the Lord .f I. -'Tis. in a word, a great and
magnificent plan of divine adminiflration is
opened to us in the Gospel of Chrirt; and
nothing is omitted that can impress mankind
with the perfuao;on of their being all, in the
f:ricef2 sense, tibjecs of the moral govern-
rnent of Godo

TiiOUGH the bounds of this Discourse

allow us to take only an imperfic- view of
the principles of Christian dodrine, yet the
hints which have been given, lay a sufficient
foundation for appealing to every im-
partial mind, whether the knowledge and
belief of such principles be not intimately
conneted with the improvement, and, by
consequence, with the happiness of man ?

T reason

I reason now with such as admit, that virtue s E P M.

xv.

is the great source both of improvement --
and happiness. Let themn lay what stress
they plcafe upon the authority of conilience,
and upon the force and evidence cf its dic-
tates; can th-ey refuse to allow that the
natural tendency of the princples which 1
have mentioned, is to support those di cates,
and to confirm that authority ; to excite,
on various occaiions, the -morc ufeiul senti-
ments; to provide additional ref-raints from
vice, and additicnal motives to every virtue.?
Who. dares pronounce, that there is no cafe
in which conicience fiands in need of such
affifPcance to direQ, where there is so much
uncertainty and darkness; and to prompt,
where there is jb much feebleness and irre-
solution, and such a fatal proneness to vice
and folly ?

But how good ioever the tendency of

religious pri.ncp!cs may be, ibme will Ifill
call in question their aOiual significancy,
and influence on life. This tendency is
by various causes defeated. Between the
belief of religious principles and a corre-.

F f 4 fpondent

SE R M. fpondent pracice, it will be alleged that

xv.

frequent experience shews there is no ne-
cefiary connedion; and that therefore the
propagation of the one, cannot give us any
assurance of proportionable improvements
following in the other--This, in part, is
granted to be true; as we admit that reli-
gious knowledge and belief are susceptible
of various degrees, before they arrive at that
real Christian faith which the Scripture re-
presents as pourifing the heart. But though
the connection between principle and prac-
tice be not neceflary and invariable, it will
not, I suppose, be denied, that there is some
connection. Here then one avenue to the
heart is opened. If the tendency of reli-
gious knowledge be good, wifdomn must
direct, and duty oblige us to cultivate it.
For tendency will, at least in some cafes,
rife into effec ; and, probably, in more
cafes than are known and observed by the
world. Betides the distinguished examples
of true religion and virtue which have, more
or lets, adorned every age of the Christian
ara, what numbers may there be, in the

more

more silent and private scenes of life, over- s E M
looked by superficial observers of mankind, --
on whose hearts and lives religious prin-
ciples have the most happy influence ? Even
on loose and giddy minds, where they are
far from accomplishing their full effeEt, their
influence is, frequently, not altogether loft.
Impressions of religion often check vice in
its career. They prevent it from proceed-
ing its utmost length; and though they do
not entirely reform the offender, they serve
to maintain order in society. Persons who
are now bad, might probably have been
worse without them, and the world have
suffered more from unrestrained licentious-
ness. They often sow latent feed of good-
ness in the heart, which proper circum-
stances and occasions afterwards ripen;
though the reformation of the offender may
not be so conspicuous as his former enor-
mities have been. From the native ten-
dency of religious belief, there is reason to
conclude, that those good effeds of it are
not so rare as some would rcprefent them.
By its nature and tendency, we can better

judge

SERM. judge of its effects, than by observations

xv.

drawn from a supposed experience, which
often is narrow in its compass, and failacious
in its conclusions.

The adtual influence cf principle and be-

lief on mankind, admits of clear il!ufration
from unconteiled matter of fact. Thcy
who hold the good e-LTeSs of Christian prin-
ciples to be so inconsiderable, as to render
the propagation of them of fmail import-
ance, will be at no loss to give us infances
of corrupt principles of belief having had
the most powerful influence on the world.
Loud complaints we hear from this quarter
of the direful effecs wh'ich superstition and
enthusiasm have produced ; of their having
poisoned the tempers, and transformed the
manners of men; of their having over-
come the firongefi relftlaints of law, of rea-
ion, and humanity. Is this then the cafe,
that all principles, except good ones, are of
such mighty energy ? Strange ! that false
religion bnould be able to do fd much, and
true religion so little; that belief, so pow-
erful in the one cafe, ihould be so impo-

tent

tent in the other.-No impartial inquirer, SE R M.
surely, can entertain this opinion. The X
whole hifIory of mankind !hows that their
religious tenets and principles, of whatever
nature they be, are of great influence in
forming their charac-er, and directing their
conduc&. The mi:fhief which ialfe prin-
ciples have done, affords a good argument
to guard carefully againfL errour; but as it
is a proof of what belief can do, it gives
ground to hope the more from it, when
rightly directed. The fame torrent which,
when it is put out of its natural course,
overflows and lays waste a country, adorns
and enriches it, when running in its pro-
per channel. If it be alleged that super-
ftition is likely to be more powerful in its
effets than truth, because it agrees better
with the follies and corruptions of the world,
we may oppose to this, on the other
hand, that truth has the divine blessing and
the countenance of Heaven on its fide.
Let us always hope well of a cause that is,
good in itself, and beneficial to mankind.
Truth is mighty, and will prevail., Let us

spread

S E R M. spread the incoyrrittiblefeed as widely as we

xv.
'- - can, and trust in God that he will give the

increase. Having thus flewn the import-
ance of religious knowledge to mankind inl
the way of improvement, let us,

IN the second place, confider it in the

light of consolation; as bringing aid and
relief to us amidst the distresses of life.
H-ere religion incontestably triumphs; and
its happy effecs, in this refpet, furnish a
fhrong argument to every benevolent mind
for wishing them to be farther diffused
throughout the world. For without the
belief and hope afforded by divine Reve-
lation, the circumstances of man are ex-
tremely forlorn. He finds himself placed
here as a firanger in a vast universe, where
the powers and operations of nature are
very imperfeCly known; where both the
beginnings and the issues of things are in-
volved in mysterious darkness; where he
is unable to discover, with any certainty,
whence he sprung, or for what purpose he
was brought into this state of existence;

whether

whether he be fubjeaed to the government S E R M.

xv.

of a mild, or of a wrathful ruler ; what con-
ftruction he is.to put on many of the dif-
penfations of his providence; and what his
fate is to be when he departs hence. What
a difconoiblate situation to a serious inquir-
ing mind ! The greater degree of virtue it
possesses, its sensibility is likely to be the
more oppressed by this burden of labouring
thought. Even though it were in one's
power to banish all uneasy thought, and to
fill up the hours of life with perpetual
amusement, life so filled up would, upon
reflection, appear poor and trivial. But
these are far from being the terms upon
which man is brought into this world. He
is conscious that his being is frail and
feeble; he fees himself beset with various
dangers; and is exposed to many a me-
lancholy apprehension, from the evils
which he may have to encounter, before he
arrives at the close of life. In this difireffed
condition, to reveal to him such discoveries
of the Supreme Being as the Chrifsian reli-
gion affords, is to reveal to him a Father

and

SExRM. and a Friend; is to let in a ray of the- mos

XV.
e_-_.- cheering light upon the darkness of the hu-

man estate. ile who was before a defti-
tute orphan, wandering in the inhospitable
desert, has now gained a Shelter from the
bitter and inclement blai. He now knows
to whom to pray, and in whom to trust
where to unbosom his sorrows; and from
what hand to look for relief.

It is certain, that when the heart bleeds

from some wound of recent misfortune,
nothing is of equal efficacy with religious
comfort. It is of power to enlighten the
darkest hour, and to affwage the severest
woe, by the belief of divine favour, and
the proifecl of a blessed immortality. In
such hopes the mind expatiates with joy;
and, when bereaved of its earthly friends,
solaces itself with the thoughts of one Friendj
who will never forsake it. Refined rea-
fonings concerning the nature of the hu-
man condition, and the improvement which
philosophy teaches us to make of every
event, may entertain the mind when it is
at ease; may perhaps contribute to sooth

Ei

it -vhen slightly touched with sorrow. SERM.

· XV.

But when it is torn with any fore distress, X
they are cold and f.lble, compared with a
direc prorn if rom le

d word of God.

This is i?/z ;c.Z:cr to th/ fioui cthJ~/,r,-c and7
j.efa/fJo This has given consolation and
refuge to many a virt.ous heart, at a time
,when the mn-of' co-ent reasonings would
have proved uttr-ly unavailing.

Upon the approach of death, especially

when, if a man thinks at all, his anxiety
about his future interefs, must naturally in-
ereafe, the power of religious consolation i&
sensibly 'felt. Then appears, in the most
ftrikin. ligh-, the high value of the disco-
veries madel by the Goipel ; not oonly life
and immortality rcvealed, but a Mediator
witlh God dis,,covered; mercy prociaimed,
through him, to the frailties of the penitent
and the humble; and his pretence pro-
mifed to be with them when they are pass-
ing through the valley of th/ JsJadow of
death, in order to bring them safe into un-
seen habitations of reft and joy. Here is
ground for their leaving the world with

comfort

S E R M. comfort and peace. But in this severe and

XV.
_, trying period, this labouring hour of na-

ture, how shall the unhappy man support
limfelf, who knows not, or believes not,
the discoveries of religion ? Secretly confci-
ous to himself that he has not aded his part
as he ought to have done, the fins of his
past life arise before him in fad remem-
brance. He wishes to exist after death,
and yet dreads that existence. The Go-
vernour of the world is unknown. He can-
not tell whether every endeavour to obtain
his mercy may not be vain. All is aw-
ful obscurity around him; and in the midld
of endless doubts and perplexities, the trem-
bling, reluctant foul is forced away from
the body. As the misfortunes of life must,
to such a man, have been most oppressive,
so its end is bitter. His fun sets in a dark
cloud; and the night of death closes over
his head, full of mifery.-Having now
shewn how important the knowledge of the
Lord is, both to the improvement and the
consolation of man, confidered as an indi-
vidual, I am next to shew,

II. How

II. How important this knowledge is to S E R M.

XV.

him as a member of society. This branch x_
of the subjed is in part anticipated by what
has been said. For all the improvement
which man receives as an individual, re-
dounds to the benefit of the public. Society
reaps the fruit of the virtues of all the
members who compose it; and in propor-
tion as each, apart, is made better, the
whole muff flourish.

But besides this else&, religious know-

ledge has a direct tendency to improve the
social intercourse of men, and to assist them
in co-operating for common good. It is
the great instrument of civilizing the mul-
titude, and forming them to union. It
tames the fierceness of their paffons, and
ioftens the rudeness of their manners.
There is much reason to doubt whether
any regular society ever subsisted, or could
subsist, in the world, deffitute of all reli-
gious ideas and principles. They who, in
early times, attempted to bring the wan-
dering and scattered tribes of men from the
woods, and to unite them in cities and

VOL. II. G g comr

lip

E R M. communities, always found it necessary to
xv. begin with some institution of religion.

The wisest legislators of old, through the
whole progress of their systems of govern-
ment, confidered religion as essential to civil
polity. If even those imperfect forms of
it, loaded with so much superstition and
errour, were important to the welfare of
society, how much more that reasonable
worflip of the true God, which is taught
by the Gospel? True religion introduces
the idea of regular fubjecion, by accuf-
toming mankind to the awe of fuperiour
power in the Deity, joined with the vene-
ration of fuperiour wisdom and goodness.
It is by its nature an associating principle;
and creates new and sacred bonds of union
among men. Common assemblies for reli-
gious worihip, and joint homage offered
up to one God; the sense of being all de-
pendent on the fame protetion, and bound
to duty by the fame ties, sharers in the
fame benefits of heaven, and expectants of
the fame reward, tend to awaken the fen-
timents of friendly relation, and to con-

firn

firm and firengthen our mutual connexion. S E RM.

XV.

The doctrine of Christianity is most adverse ._
to all tyranny and oppression, but highly
favourable to the interests of good govern-
ment among men. It represses the spirit
of licentiousness and sedition. It inculcates
the duty of subordination to lawful fupe-
riours. It requires us to fear God, to ho-
nour the king, and not to meddle 'with them
that are given to change.

Religious knowledge forwards all useful

and ornamental improvements in society,
Experience shows, that, in proportion as it
diffuses its light, learning flourishes, and
liberal arts are cultivated and advanced.
Just conceptions of religion promote a free
and manly spirit. They lead men to think
for themselves; to form their principles
upon fair enquiry, and not to resign their
conscience to the diCtates of men. Hence
they naturally inspire aversion to slavery of
every kind ; and promote a tafe for liberty
and laws. Despotic governments have ge-
nerally taken the firmest root among nations
that were blinded by Mahometan or Pagar

C g, darkness ;

S E R M. darkness; where the throne of violence has

xv.
_, ~ 1been supported by ignorance and false reli-

gion. In the Christian world, during those
centuries in which gross superstition held its
reign undisturbed, oppreflion and slavery
were in its train. The cloud of ignorance
fat thick and deep over the nations; and
the world was threatened with a relapse into
ancient barbarity. As soon as the true
knowledge of the Lord revived, at the aufpi-
cious ara of the Reformation, learning, li-
berty, and arts, began to rhine forth with
it, and to resume their lustre.

But the happy influence which religion,

exerts on society, extends much farther than
to effecs of this kind. It is not only sub-
fidiary to the improvement, but necessary to
the preservation of society. It is the very
basis on which it refts. Religious prin-
ciple is what gives men the surest hold of
one another. That last and greatest pledge
of veracity, an oath, without which no so-
ciety could subsist, derives its whole autho-
rity from an established reverence of God,
to whom it is a solemn appeal. Banish re-

ligious

ligious principle, and you loosen all the SER M.
bonds which connec mankind together; ,__
you shake the fundamental pillar of mutual
confidence and trust; you render the fecu-
rity arising from laws, in a great measure,
void and ineffeucal. For human laws, and
human fanaions, cannot extend to number-
less cafes, in which the safety of mankind
is deeply concerned. They would prove
very feeble instruments of order and peace,
if there were no checks upon the conduct of
men from the sense of divine legislation; if
no belief of future rewards and punishments
were to overawe conscience, and to supply
the defects of human government.

Indeed, the belief of religion is of such

importance to public welfare, that the mos
expressive description we could give of a
society of men in the utmoef disorder, would
be to fay, that there was no fear of God
left among them. Imagination would im-
mediately conceive of them as abandoned to
rapine and violence, toperfidy and treachery;
as deceiving and deceived, oppressing and
opprefed ; consumed by intestine broils,

Gg 3 and

SER M. and ripe for becoming a prey to the firfl

xv.
,_V.- invader.. On the other hand, in order to

form the idea of a society flourishing in its
highest glory, we need only conceive the
belief of Christian principles exerting its full
influence on the hearts and lives of all the
members. Inflantly, the most amiable scene
would open to our view. We should fee
the causes of public disunion removed, when
men were animated with that noble spirit of
love and charity which our religion breathes;
and formed to the pursuit of those higher
interests, which give no occasion to compe-
tition and jealousy. We should fee families,
neighbourhoods, and communities, living in
unbroken amity, and pursuing, with one
heart and mind, the common interest; so-
briety of manners, and simplicity of life,
restored; virtuous indufiry carrying on its
useful labours, and cheerful contentment
every where reigning. Politicians may lay
down what plans they please for advancing
public prosperity; but, in truth, it is the
prevalency of such principles of religion and
-irtue, which forms the strength and glory

X of

of a nation. When these are totally want- s ER M.
ing, no measures contrived by human wis- '-
dom can supply the defec. In proportion
as they prevail, they raise the state of society
from that fad degeneracy into which it is at
present funk; and carry it forward, under
the blessing of Heaven, towards that happy
period, when nation JI7anl not lit zup their
sword again/l nation, nor learn war any
7more.

In order to prove the importance of reli-

gious knowledge to the interest of society,
one consideration more, deserving particu-
lar attention, remains to be mentioned. It
is, that if goodfeed be not sown in the field,
tares will infallibly spring up. The pro-
pension towards religion is strong in the
human heart. There is a natural prepa-
ration in our minds, for receiving some
impressions of supernatural belief. Upon
these, among ignorant and uncultivated
men, superstition or enthusiasm never fail
to graft themselves. Into what monstrous
forms these have slot forth, and what va-
rious mischiefs they have produced to so-

g. 4 ciety,

S E R M. ciety, is too well known. Nor is this the

xv.

-- whole of the danger. Designing men are

always ready to take advantage of this po-
pular weakness, and to direct the fuperfli-
tious bias of the multitude to their own am-
bitious and interested ends. Superstition,
in itself a formidable evil, threatens confe-
quences still more formidable, when it is
rendered the tool of design and craft. Hence
arises one of the most powerful arguments
for propagating with zeal, as far as our in-
fluence can extend, the pure and undefiled
doctrines of the Gospel of ChriPc; 'in order
that just and rational principles of religion
may fill up that room in tie minds of men,
which dangerous fanaticism will otherwise
usurp.

This consideration alone is sufficient to

1how the high utility of the design under-
taken by the Society for propagating Christ-
tian Knowledge. With great propriety,
they have beltowed their chief attention on
a remote quarter of our own country, where,
from a variety of causes, ignorance and fu-
perfiition had gained more ground, than in

4 any

any other corner of the land; where the SERM.

XV.

inhabitants, by their local situation, were
more imperfecly fipplied with the means
of proper education and inftruion ; and at
the fame time exposed to the fedutions of
fiach as fought to pervert them from the
truth. The laudable endeavours of this
Society in diffusing religious and useful
knowledge through this part of the country,
have already been crowned with much fuc-
cess; and more is still to be expected from
the continuance of their pious and well-
direCted attention.

VWith such good designs, it becomes all

to co-operete, who are lovers of mankind.
Thus shall they show their just sense of the
value of that blessing which they enjoy, in
the knowledge of the Gospel of Christ;
and their gratitude to Heaven for confer-
ring it upon them. Thus shall they make
the blessings of those who are now ready
toperih throzugh lack of knowledge, descend
upon their heads. Thus shall they contri-
bute their endeavours for bringing forward
that happy period foretold by ancient pro-

phecy;

sE R M. phechy; when thereJhall be one Lord over

_XV. all the earth, and his name one; when that

name Jhall be great from the ryj/ng to thefet-
ting frn; when thereJhall be nothing to hurt
nor deJfroy in all the holy mountain of God;
but judgment yJhall dwell in the wilderness,
and righteozii/efs remain in the fruitfulfeld;
the defertJhallrejoice, and blosjom as the roe ;
and the earth Jhall be fill of the knowledge
of the Lord as the waters cover thefea .

' Zechar. xiv. 9. Malachi, i. I . Isaiah, xxxii. 16,
XXxv. 1.

F I N I S,

# Just Published.

7zist Pu'tjd,
The FOURTEENTH EDITION of the FIRST VOLUME of

S E R M O N $S

BY

HUGH BLAIR, D. D.
One of the MINISTERS of the HIGH CHURCH,

AND
PROFESSOR of RHETORIC and BELLES LETTRES in the

U-NIVERSITY of EDINBURGH.

# The following BOOKS were lately published by T. CADELL, in the STRAND.

The following BOOKS were latcly pub-

liihed by T. CADELL, in the STRAND.

Uv R TO.
L EC TUR E S on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres.

By Hugh Blair, D. D. one of the Ministers of

the High Church, and Professor of Rhetoric and Belles
Lettres in the University of Edinburgh. With a Head
of the Author. 2 Vols. 21. 2s.

i** A new Edition in 3 Vols. 8vo. ISs.
The History of England, from the Invasion of

Julius Cafar to the Revolution. A new Edi-
tion, printed on fine Paper, with many Corrections
and Additions; and a complete Index, 8 Vols. Royal
Paper. 71. 7s.

-** Another Edition on small Paper. 41. los.
t-4-t Another Edition in 8 Vols. 8vo. 21. 8s.
The Hitfory of Great Britain, from the Restoration

to the Accession of the House of Hanover. By Jame.
.Macpherson, Efq; the 2d Edition; 2 Vols. with a
Hlead of the Author. 21. 5s.

Original Papers: Containing the Secret History of

Great Britain, from the Restoration to the Acceflion
of the House of Hanover: To which are prefixed,
Extrats from the Life of yames JI. as written by him-
self; and published from the Originals; 2 Vols. 21. 5S.

The History of Scotland, during the Reigns of

Queen /I'ary and of King 3James VI. till his Acceflion
to the Crown of England; with a Review of the Scot-
tiu History previous to that Period; and an Appen-
dix, containing Original Papers; 2 Vols. By Wfilliam
Robert/on, D. D. the 5th Edition. il. los.

Z, Another Edition, 2 Vols. 8vo. 12S.

The

The History of the Reign of the Emperor Charles V,
with a View of the Progress of Society in Europe
from the Subversion of the Roman Empire to the Be-
ginning of the Sixteenth Century. By William Ro-
bertfon, D. D. Embellilhed with 4 Plates, elegantly
engraved: 3 Vols. 31. 3s.

*,: Another Edition in 4 Vols. 8vo. il. 4s.
The History of America, Vols. I. and II. By the
fame Author. Illuftratedwith Maps. 21. 2s.

-* Another Edition in 3 Vols. 8vo. iSs.

The History of the Reign of Philip the Second,

Iing of Spain. By Robert Watson, LL. D. Professor
of Philosophy and Rhetoric at the University of St,
Andrews. 2d Edition; 2 Vols. 21. 2s.

i- * Another Edition in 3 Vols. 8vo. i8s.
The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman

Empire. By Edward Gibbon, Efq; 3 Vols.; which
complete a Period of History from the Age of 7r°ajan
and the Antonines, to the total DeftruAtion of the Ro-
man Empire in the WVefl. Adorned with a Head of the
Author, and Maps adapted to the Work. 31. 3s. Boards.

.?^* 'The Second and Third Volumes may be had Se-
parate to complete Sets. 21. 2s. Boards.

f4-t Another Edition in 3 Vols. 8vo. i8s.
The History of the Progress and Termination of the
Roman Republic. By Aldam Pergufon, LL. D. Pro-
feffor of Moral Philosophy in the University of EdLna
burgh. 3 Vols. 21. 12s. 6d. Boards.

Miscellaneous State Papers, from 150I to 1726, in

2 Vols. Collected from the Mufeumn, Harldwicke, and
other valuable Colleetions. 21. 2s.

Memoirs of Great Britain and Ireland, from the
Dissolution of the lact Parliament of Charles 11. until

the

the Sea Battle off La Hogue. By Sir John Dalrymple,
Bart. 2d Edition; 2 Vols. 21. 6s.

e** The Second Volume, consisting chiefly of
Letters from the French Ambassadors in England
to their Court, and from Charles II. James II.
King William and Queen Mary, &c. &c. inter-
fperfed with historical Relations neceflary to con-
nee the Papers together, may be had separate.
Price il. 2s. Boards.
The Hiffory of the Legal Polity of the Roman State;

and of the Rife, Progress, and Extent of the Roman
Laws. By Thomas Bever, LL. D. il. Is.

An Inquiryinto the Nature and Causes of the Wealth

of Nations. By Adam Smith, LL. D. F. R. S. formerly
Professor of Moral Philosophy in the University ofGlaf-
gow; 2 Vols. 21. 2S. 2d, Edition.

*e* Another Edition in 3 Vols. 8vo. i8s.
An Account of the Voyages undertaken by Order

of his present MajefRy, for making Discoveries in the
Southern Hemisphere, and fuccefiively performed by
Commodore Byron, Capt. T/allis, and Capt. Carteret,
in the Dolphin, Swallow, and the Endeavour; drawn up
from the Journals which were kept by the several
Commanders, and from the Papers of jfofeph Banks,
Efq; and Dr. Solander. By John Hawkefworth, LL. D.
Illustrated with Cuts, and a great Variety of Charts
and Maps (in all 52 Plates), relative to the Countries
now first discovered, or hitherto but imperfecly known.
Price 31. 12S. bound.

An Account of a Voyage towards the South Pole,

and round the World; performed in his Majesty's
Ships the Refolition and Adeventure, in the Years 1772,
s773, 1774, and 1775. Written by James Cook,

Commander

Commander of the Reeolution. In which is included,
Captain Furneaux's Narrative of his Proceedings in the
.4dventure during the Separation of the Ships. Ele-
gantly printed in 2 Vols. Royal. Illustrated with
Maps and Charts, and a Variety of Portraits of Per-
sons, and Views of Places, drawn during the Voyage
by Mr. Hodges, and engraved by the most eminent
Matiers. 21. I2S.

OCTA'yO and TW7ELVES.

A Philosophical and Political History of the Settle-

ments and Trade of the Europeans in the E/af and WeO?
Indies. Translated from the French of the Abbe Raynall,
by J. 7Ju/?amond, M. A. A new Edition, carefully,
revised, in 8 Vols. 8vo. and illustrated with Maps.
21. 8s.

Sketches of the History of Man, by the Author of
the Elements of Criticism. 4 Vols. 2d Edit. il. 4s.

Elements of General History, translated from the

French of the Abbe Millot, Ancient and Modern His-
tory. 5 Vols. 8vo. il. I5s.

An Ecclesiastical History, Ancient and Modern,

from the Birth of Christ to the Beginning of the pre-
sent Century. In which the Rife, Progress, and
Variations of Church Power, are confidered, in their
Connecion wirh the State of Learning and Philofo-
phy, and the political History of Europe, during that
Period. By the late learned John Lawrence MoJheim,
D. D. Translated, and accompanied with Notes and
Chronological Tables, by Archibald Maclaine, D. D.
To the whole is added an accurate Index. The 2d
Edition, correced and improved by Additional Notes.
and several Appendixes. 5 Vols. il. Ios.

Obfer-

Observations on Mount Vefvius, Mount Etna, and

other Volcanos, in a Series of Letters addressed to the
Royal Society, from Sir Yi/lliam Hamilton, Knight of
the Bath, F. R. S. To.which are added Explana-
tory Notes, by the Author, hitherto unpublished. II-
lustrated with Plates. 3d Edition. 4s. 6d.

A Tour through Sicily and Malta. In a Series of

Letters to JWilliam Beckford, Efq; of Somerly in Sus-
folk, from P. Brydone, F. R. S. 2 Vols. Illuflrated
with a Map. 3d Edition. I2s.

'A Tour through some of the Northern Parts of Eu-
rope, particularly Copenhagen, 'Stockholm, and Peters-
burgh, in a Series of Letters, by N. Y/raxall, Jun.
3d Edition. 6s.

A Journey to the Weflern Iles of Scotland. By the
Author of the Rambler. 6s.

A View of Society and Manners in France, Swit-

zcrland, and Germany, with Anecdotes relating to
tome eminent Charaters. By John Moore, M. D.
2 Vols. 5th Edition. i2s.

A View of Society and Manners in Italy, with Anec-

dotes relating to some eminent CharaEters. By the
lame Author. 2 Vols. 3d Edition. i4s.

A Journey from Gibraltar to Malaga, with a View

of the Garrison and its Environs, &c. &c. Illustrated
with a View of each Municipal Town, and a Chart,
&e.. By Francis Garter, Efq; 2 Vols. I4s.

Sermons on various SubjeCts, by the late John Far-

quhar, M. A. Minister at Nigg, carefully correced from
the Author's MSS. by George Campbell, D. D. Prin-
cipal of Marifchal College; and .Alexander Gerrard,
D. D. Professor of Divinity in King's College, Aberdeen.
2 Vols. 3d Edition. 7s.

r .^
